A BRIEF TREATISE AGAINST THE Priesthood and Sacrifice of the Church of Rome:
Wherein the simple may perceive their intolerable impiety, usurping that
office and action, which ever appertain to Christ only, By G. G.

Newly reprinted.

LONDON, Printed by W. I. for ANDREW KEMBE dweling by the Sessions House in
Long South-Warke. 1635.

A BRIEF TREATISE AGAINST THE Priesthood and Sacrifice of the Church of Rome.
THe Pope and his clergy do stiffely affirm and go about to mainetaine,
that they be Priests, and that it is an holy Priesthood which they have: even
the Priesthood of the New Testamnet Further also they boast, that the sacrifice
which they offer, is the son of God himself, even Christ Jesus, God and man,
flesh, blood, and bone, as he was borne of the blessed Virgin. We on the
contrary affirm that they be very Baalamites, and not Priests of the New
Testament: and that their sacrifice is not the son of God, but the stinking
and Idolatrous sacrifice of Antichrist. Who shall be believed? we or they? Let
neither of both for our selves have any credit at all. For what is man, that he
should have any credit? Let neither of us be our own Judge, for then there
would be partiality: But let God only strike the stroke, let him alone
pronounce the sentence, let that part be credited which has his witness and
testimony. When he speaks, let man keep silence: When he pronounces
sentence, let the mouth of all flesh be shut up: For who shall reply against
the words of his mouth, which are in perfect truth and wisdom? His testimony
has he expressly set down in the sacred Scriptures, his voice has he there
uttered, to declare his perfect mind and will: Let them be brought forth, and
heard, search them, for so are ye willed. Crave the true understanding at his
hands, who is the only teacher. If by them it be manifestly proved unto you,
that the popish Priests be not the Priests of the New Testament, nor their
sacrifice the son of God, then let men no longer doubt, but that all their
whole worship is idolatrous and Antichristian. For if their priesthood and
sacrifice, which are the two principal things be awry, what can be good in
them? Let us come to the trial of the matter. And first in general (which
they deny not) the word does teach, that the dignity, privilege, and office of
the holy Priest, is to approach into the presence of God, to offer gifts, and
sacrifice, and to make request and supplication for the people. The necessity
of this office does come from the profanesse and impurity of men. All men are
unclean sinners, God is most pure and holy, and does perfectly hate sin: And
for the same cause he does curse and reject all those which are polluted
therewith. They can not approach, nor endure his presence, before whom nothing
unclean can stand. The prayers which come from them cannot be heard, being the
prayers of sinners, and therefore not clean. No gift can be accepted at their
hands, to make any reconcilement or to get any favor, they and all theirs are
still rejected, they must either have some other to do it for them, or else for
ever remain still out of favor, and be utterly cast away in eternal
perdition. He that shall do it, must be without spot or sin, and therefore
among all the sons of Adam, only Jesus Christ is found worthy and able to
execute this office. For if we respect this great work of reconciliation
between God and men, we shall find that alone he has wrought it, and
therefore is the only Priest of God. None other can in such consideration be
called Priests. It is true in deed that Aaron and his sons were consecrated
and made Priests, and did execute the Ministry of the Priesthood in the
Temple: But yet as their sacrifices did not, nor could not take away sin,
being but shadows and the resemblance of the sacrifice of Christ, so also they
were not sacrifices in deed, but so called, for that they were the pattern of
that which is the true sacrifice. The same is to be said of the Priests, that
they were no o her Priests, but in figure, because they did resemble Christ,
who alone is a Priest in truth. Those o her Priests were separated from the
people, and consecrated to the service of the Temple. The chief of them might
enter into the most holy place, and come before the Arcke of the covenant and
the mercy seat, and there offer with blood to make reco^ciliation. They bare
the names of the tribes of Israel, and so presented them before the Lord. But
yet all was but a shadow, to direct the eyes of their faith unto Christ: for
these Priests could not wash away sin, they could not bring men into heaven,
and therefore when he came, which is the Priest indeed, and which does
accomplish that which was by them but resembled: then all those shadows did
cease and give place. He continues a Priest for ever. He has perfectly
wrought the work of reconciliation, and brought men into favor with God. For
with the sacrifice of his body he has ransomed them, and with his blood he
has purged away their sins with full satisfaction, and his prayers have
been accepted: He has received honor and power to save for ever all those
whom he does sanctify. Now the question is, whether any can be joined with him
in this office, and be partakers with him in this high dignity, as to offer up
to God the same sacrifice which he offered. For this is without all
controversy, that such as do challenge a copartnership with him in offering the
sacrifice, and gift which he did offer, do also challenge a fellowship with him
in the dignity and glory of the Priesthood by which he did offer Heb. 9. 1 4.
it. For was not the great glory of his Priesthood in this, that he offered
himself in sacrifice unto his father? shall not those then which do the same
thing receive the same honor and glory therefore? Thus we see that when as none
could be found worthy in heaven and earth, but only the Lamb, v. 6. 7.
Revelat. 5. yet every greasy shaveling will have fellowship and glory with
him, even in the highest part of his office. Lord how long will thou spare?
look down and visit the blasphemy of the wicked Beast, upon him, and upon
the heard and route of his horned shavelings. They say they be Priests,
doubtless then are they mediators of the New Testament* For the Testament and
the Priest are Christ only the Priest of the New Testament.
joined together, the Priest of the New Testament is the mediator of the New
Testament. For Christ is compared with Aaron and his sons, to have obtained a
ministry so much more excellent, as he is the Mediator of a better Testament,
Hebr. 8. 6. The excellency of the ministry of Aaron and his sons, was
according to the worthiness of the Testament, whereof they were the Mediators.
Furthermore, they could not have that honor to be Priests, or mediators of
that Testament, wherein there was but the shadow of good things to come, Heb.
10. 1. unless it had been given them of God: as it is expressed, Heb. 5.
where he speaks of that Priesthood of the law, which has now ceased. Seeing
none could have this honor to be a Priest of the old Testament, but such as
were called of God as was Aaron: then how much less shall any be partakers of
this dignity with the son of God to be the Priests and mediators of the new
covenant, but such as can show that God has given them this honor? Christ did
not take this honor to himself, Hebr. 5. but he that said, Thou art my son,
this day have I begotten thee, gave it him. The Lord swear that he should be a
priest. Let the Papists show any calling which they have of God unto this glory
of the Pristhood: Let them show any Christ ordain(...) no Priest in th(...)
New Testament.
one place out of the new Testament, where Christ did ordeine Priests: Finally,
let them show where ever Peter or Paul, or any Apostle or minister of the
Gospel, have called themselves priests, or have been so called by others,
otherwise than that which they give unto all the faithful, that being washed
and sanctified in the blood of Christ, they be made Kings and Priests unto God.
1. Pet. 2. Revel. 1. and 5. which is in another sense than this which they
challenge. No, the word of the Lord is directly against you, ye priests of
Baal. For it speaks of one Priest which should arise after the order of
Melchisedech, and not of priests. It says, there is one Mediator between God
and man, 1 Timothy 2. And therefore also it follows, that there is but one
Priest. Because the Priest of the new Testament is the mediator of the same, is
there any man so mad as to ascribe this glory to the Pope and his priests, as
to say they be mediators of the new Testament? If not, then are they no
priests. Now, although this is sufficient to prove their priesthood to be
counterfeit, that they can show no calling in the word, nor no mention that any
one of the Apostles was a priest, or that any man should have such honor: yet
to make the matter more evident, I will show by further reasons, that their
priesthood is such, that it cannot stand with the priesthood of Christ. We all
know, that the Lord swore that his son should arise up a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedech, Psalm. 110. Then if it fall out, as it shall be
manifestly showed, that the Priesthood of the Papacy is directly contrary unto
that order of Melchisedech: It must needs also follow that the same is not of
God* The order of the priesthood of Melchisedech is gathered out of that which
Moses says of him, Genesis 14. the words are these: and Melchisedech King of
Salem brought forth bread and wine, which was also a priest of the most high
God. And he blessed him, saying, Blessed be Abram of the most high God,
possessor of heaven and earth, and blessed be the most high God, which has
delivered thine adversaries into thine hand, and he gave him tithe of all. This
man was greater than the Patriarch Abraham, as it is proved by two reasons,
Hebr. 7. the one that Abraham paid him tithes: The other, that he blessed
Abraham. Then Moses writing of so great a man not mentioning father nor mother,
nor kindred, beginning, nor end of his life* although he had a father and a
mother, and kindred, and had both a beginning and an end: yet because Moses
mentions not any of these, it is said, that he was without father, without
beginning of days, and without end of life, as though he were one that had
suddenly come down from heaven. When it is said, that he was a Priest of the
most high God, no mention made of any annoynting, of any ministering garments,
of any temple, altar, or sacrifice, not yet of any that did succeed him, it is
gathered that he does continue a priest for ever. And moreover, that in his
Priesthood all things are spiritual and full of endless power. By this
argument, the holy Ghost proves Heb. 7. ver. 16. 17. 18. that the priesthood
of the Levites was abrogate, and could not stand with the Priesthood of Christ,
seeing it could give no strength nor furtherance thereto: for the one being
spiritual, and according to the power of the life that is not dissolved, the
other, as he speaks being after the law of the carnal commandment, they
could not be joined so together as that the one might be a supply unto the
defect of the other. For although the law of the carnal commandment, which is
so called, not in respect of the founder thereof, which was God, but for that
the substance of the things were bodily and carnal) did profit and benefit men
thus far, that by outward carnal things, they had the resemblance of things
spiritual to strengthen their faith. Yet when he was come, in whom was all the
spiritual and heavenly power of the Priesthood, those carnal and earthly
things were to cease. As for example: Aaron was anointed with material oil,
he was clothed with the ministering garments, he entered into a tabernacle upon
earth which was built with hands, he had the blood of calves and goats, and
slain beasts for sacrifice, he presented the names of the tribes before the
mercy seat. All these and such like are the carnal commandment, these did not
take away sin, nor restore into favor with God: But Christ alone is the
priest that wrought that. His annoynting was not with oil, but with the holy
Ghost: He needs no holy garments, for there was no spot of uncleanness in
him to be covered. He came not with the blood of slain beasts, but with his
own blood. He entered not into the Tabernacle made with hands, to appear for
us, and to present us before the Arc: but he is entered into the very heavens,
even unto the throne of God, to present us there. Thus then it follows that
the Priesthood of Aaron, being after the law of the carnal commandment, that
is to say, the consecration was with things that were earthly and of a bodily
substance, the sacrifices also of the same sort, it could do nothing. But the
Priesthood of Christ, wherein all things are heavenly and spiritual, and full
of ^e power, has fully and perfectly accomplished the work of reconciliation.
If this order then of Melchisedech, wherein there is nothing carnal, did
abolish the order of the Priesthood of Aaron, wherein all things were carnal,
because the carnal things cannot help at all to bring men to heaven, and
because the order of the one Priesthood did so differ from the other, as being
of a quite contrary nature: It must needs follow that the Priesthood of the
Papacy cannot stand with the Priesthood o^ Christ, because it is also carnal.
For was the oil upon Aaron carnal, and is not their anointing and sh^ving
carnal? Were all the ministering garments of Aaron carnal, and are not their
vestments, as the Cope, the Surplesse, the Note this.
Amiss, and other such holy and priestly robes carnal? Was the Altar in the
Temple carnal, and all the ministering vessels that did belong thereto, and
are not the Altars of these carnal? Were Aarons incense and oblations carnal:
and are not the oblations of these, and all their incense, and other things
carnal. Those former could not stand with the Priesthood of the new Testament,
because they were in substance carnal: how then shall these latter, which are
as carnal as they? Tell us O ye Baalamites of the Romish order, wherefore your
order should in any respect be called the order of Melchisedech, seeing it is
as contrary unto it as was that of Aaron? The order of Melchisedech is gathered
out of the description of Moses to be without any annoynting with oil, without
garments for the ministration, without Tabernacle, without Altar, without
sacrifice, without any earthly thing, And why? because his order is spiritual,
and therefore all things thereto belonging must be spiritual. it is eternal
and full of endless power, and therefore nothing which appertains to the
execution thereof must be transitory and weak. For shall an earthly Temple, an
Altar of stone, garments of silk, or of any corruptible thing be fit to be
joined with that pristhood which is everlasting? There is no doubt, but that
every thing for the execution of the office, must be agreeable unto the nature
of the Priesthood it self: and therefore as there is nothing mentioned in
Melchisedech that is carnal, so also we see that our Lord Jesus Christ, a
Priest after that order has executed that function without any such things
consecrated thereunto. How shall the Papists then which have their priesthood
executed altogether in such things as be transitory, challenge to be of that
order with our Savior, wherein as the Priesthood is heavenly and eternal, so
are all things thereto belonging.

But peradventure ye will say: Melchisedech was a Priest, and he offered
sacrifice to God as other priests at that time. Wherefore should it then be
gathered that there was no carnal thing in substance belonging to the execution
of his function? He had an Altar, he had beasts to offer, and no doubt did
offer.

I Answer that albeit Melchisedech did execute the priests office, after the
manner of other priests, yet that is nothing to the purpose. For the order of
his priesthood is gathered out of that description of Moses in which there is
no mention of such things. We are not to doubt but that he had father and
mother, that he was borne as an other man, and also had an end of his days:
Neverthel sse, because those things are left out, he is brought in as one which
never had beginning, and that never had end, but continues a priest for ever.
In like sort, howsoever at any time he executed the office of a priest, as
others did: yet because there is no such thing expressed, and that which is
expressed, is that wherein he is likened unto the Son of God, it is said,
that he was a priest after another order, and that there was nothing carnal in
his p iesthood. Therefore we are to conclude, that the priesthood of the new
testament having nothing in it that is carnal, the priesthood of the papacy
being and consisting altogether of things carnal, and such as were also the
inventions of men, it must needs follow, that they are not priests of any
testament of God, but he priests of Antichrist. Further, let it be considered,
that a priest must arise after the order of Melchisedech that shall so continue
for ever: For the eternal Son of God was resembled by Melchisedech in that
he is brought in without any beginning: The continuance also of his office for
ever, in that there is nothing said of his death nor of any that did succeed
him. This then being manifest, what impudent wretches are those which being
mortal men, that have an end, dare so blasphemously boast, that they be
Priests after the order of Melchisedech? how shall they ever be able to answer
unto this? The Priest of the new Testament is after the order of Melchisedech,
that is to say, a Priest for ever, without beginning, without end, without any
to succeed him: Their priesthood has a beginning, it has an end, they have
those that do succeed one after another. If this be a material point in that
order of priesthood which Christ should be after, as none unless his forehead
be of brass dare deny, that it should be for ever: What a childishnes were it
for any man to think that the priesthood of the papacy is the same when it
does fail in that which is essential? For they dye and come to an end. Are
not these contrary the one to the other, to continue a priest for ever as
Melchisedech in figure, and Christ indeed, and to be priests for certain
years, and then to cease by reason of death? Are not then the priests made at
Rome contrary to this order, yea, as contrary as light is unto darkness, or
as heaven is unto hell? And must it not still follow, that seeing they be no
priests of the old Testament, nor can not be priests of the New, unto the which
their order is contrary, that their priesthood may be as good as the priesthood
of Baal, and better it cannot be? For if it be not of God, is it not then of
the Devil? Let all true Christians therefore behold with detestation this
hellish sacrilege of the Romish bishop, who being a priest after the devils
order, yet says, he is after the order of Melchisedech. Moreover it is to be
noted, which the holy Ghost says, Heb. 7. ver. 26. that such an high priest
it became us to have, as was holy, harmless, unspotted, separate from sins,
and made higher than the heavens. This sets forth the purity, and also the
high dignity which of necessity are required in that priest, that shall deal
in our cause to bring us to God. For if he were a sinner himself, how should
he come unto God? If he were spotted with any uncleannes, how should he
purchase favor for others? seeing he should himself be out of favor. If he
were unholy, how should he sanctify and make holy those whom he does present
unto God? In like sort it is to be weighed, how great that man must be of
necessity, that is to enter ever unto the thron^ of glory and there abide, as
one able to save all that come unto God by him. For thus he must be made higher
than the heavens, and above all creatures in the heavens. For albeit the holy
and blessed angels be separate from sinners, and be also about the throne of
God, yet none of them has this glory to be made higher than the heavens, none
of them then can have the honor of the priesthood, to obtain pardon of sins
for the Church, that glory and power being reserved only to the Son who is
far above principallities and powers. Such a priest as this must bring us
that are base and sinful wretches unto God, in him we must be sanctified; in
him we must obtain favor, in him we must be heard, that is so high in favor,
that no request can be denied him. In him we must be saved who has received
all power and authority both in heaven and earth, and lives for ever. What
fouler beastliness then can there be than this, that sinful, unholy, and base
worms of the earth, should challenge unto themselves to be Priests of the New
Testament? yea, that such filly Asses, as are scarce fit to keep swine, will
yet have that office, that the glory, honor, and power of, is above the
Angels, let all men judge now of this conclusion. The Priests of the New
Testament, is pure and holy, separated from sinners, made higher than the
heavens. The POPE and all his brood are sinful whoremongers, thieves and
murderers, base and vile wretches of the earth, far off from being higher
then the heavens. Therefore their priesthood is not the priesthood of the New
Testament. There is also another notable difference between the old priesthood
and the new: that those former did minister in earth, in a Tabernacle made wi
h hands, which had no enduring substance: This latter is entered into the
Sanctuary of Heaven, and there does execute the Priests office, he does not
any thing in an earthly sanctuary. For why? His Priesthood is heavenly and
eternal; his Tabernacle must be agreeable unto the same. And it is said that
if he were one eareh, he could not be a Priest, wh^le those Priests did stand
which were after the Law, Heb. 8. 4. For although our Lord were a Priest indeed
when he was upon earth, and did offer the sacrifice of his body, yet ye see
there was no outward thing that the Priests upon earth do. His body was slain
upon earth, but was it carried into the Temple, and slain at the Altar? Was the
blood sprinkled before the Arc of the covenant? No, all things were heavenly
and spiritual in this sacrifice. If we regard the substance of his body, it
was the same that ours is. But yet all the virtue and efficacy of the same,
when it was a slain sacrifice, was from above. And so though he were in earth,
yet the whole fruit of his work was in heaven. For he being both God and man,
was a Priest even then in heaven, when he was slain upon earth. The virtue and
power of the sacrifice to purge away sin, was not of the manhood from it
self: but the manhood had it from the Godhead, in that the manhood was so
united unto the godhead, that they made one person. In this sense he says,
John 6. ver. 63. It is the spirit that qu ckeneth, the flesh profits nothing.
Howsoever the flesh of Christ has power in it to give life, as in deed it is
the bread of life, and whosoever does eat of it shall live for ever: yet it
has not this life of it self, but from the Godhead. Likewise the blood is
able to purge away sin, because it is the blood of a man which is also God.
It is also said, 1. Cor. 15. The first man was of the earth earthly. The second
m^n was the Lord from heaven heavenly. Wherefore is he called a man from heaven
heavenly? was it because his flesh was from heaven? cursed be he which so
holds. No, it was because all the virtue and efficacy which was in his
manhood to redeem the world, was from heaven. We see then that he being
sacrificed in earth, the efficacy of his Priesthood was in heaven. There is
nothing in his Priesthood, nor in the execution thereof which is earthly. But
these priests are altogether earth, and what can they do without earth? A
Temple they must have on earth, an Altar of earth, many other things of earth,
which prove that all their ministry and function is earthy. Then to
(...)rists Priest(...)od is heaven(...)
conclude, the Mediator of the New Testament is not a Priest upon earth, nor
executes not the Priests office but in the heavenly Tabernacle. The Romans
are Priests upon earth, they minister with earthly things, in earthly
Tabernacles, and upon Altars consecrated to that purpose. Who does not see
therefore, that they have no affinity at all with Christ?

Moreover, if it may be demanded, is sir John a King? Surely then have there
been many lousie Kings. Every one which is a Priest after the order of
Melchisedech is a King, for those two are joined together in his order, the
kingdom, and the priest hood. Is there any man so foolish as to take these to
be kings? They may be taken for priests, but not after the order of
Melchisedech so long as they have but shaven crowns, and not crowns of gold
nor after the order of Aaron which is ceased: but after the order of the
priests of Baal. If they object that the Pope has both swords, the spiritual,
and the civil, and therefore he is a King and a Priest, I answer, that
therein he is more unlike Christ, whose kingdom is not of this world. The
kingdom of Christ is spiritual, he meddled not with the civil sword, but lef^
it to the Magistrate: The Pope chalenging it, is not of that order which Christ
is* One Priest of (...)he New Testament.
Seeing then, as we have prooved, none can be partakers with Christ in the most
high digniry and honor of the Priesthood, seeing every Priest is a mediator of
a Testament, and of the New Testament there is but one, seeing none can have
that honor to be Priest, but they which are called of God, and the Papists
can show no calling, nor consecrating of Priests in the New Testament. Seeing
in the order of Melchisedech, all things are spiritual and full of endless
power, in the order of Popery all things carnal, Melchisedech continues for
ever, these die: Seeing also the Priest of the New Testament must be perfectly
holy and pure, without spot of sin, and higher than the heavens, the Popish
pries(...) are not of G(...)
Popish Priests are abominable sinners: Christ is a Priest in heaven, they upon
earth: He is both a King and a Priest, sir John is not a king: It does follow,
that their order of Priesthood is not of God: but they be the idolatrous
priests of Antichrist. They cannot by their ministry and Priesthood bring men
unto God, but contrariwise they carry headlong unto the devil. Such therefore
as will save their souls must not be blind and wilful, but open their eyes
and behold the claere and manifest truth of God, which he has taught in his
word.

As we have proved this one part, so let us now come to the other, that is, to
show that the sacrifice which they offer, is not the son of God, but The
popish sacrifice is abomination to God.
a wicked abbomination, no more pleasing unto God, than if men should offer a
dog in sacrifice unto him. It might suffice to satisfy a modest mind, that
all which they do is naught, because they do make themselves Priests after
the order of Melchisedech: and so do challenge to themselves greater honor
than any Angel has, even the honor that is due alone unto the only begotten
Son of God. And yet where the scripture shows that this honor was given unto
Christ with an oath, they will have part with him, being not able to bring one
sentence of the word to prove that there should be any Priest besides Christ.
He never ordained any Priest, no one of his Apostles was called a Priest, and
in every point their order is so contrary unto the order of Melchisedech, this
I say might satisfy: but yet to lay open their treachery further, we will prove
that they have abused the world, and made them worship that for God which was
but a cake of flower. I will not go far for proof hereof: for it is
manifestly and fully to be prooved by that which the holy Ghost has set down
as concerning the sacrifice of the New Testament in the Epistle to the
Hebrews. Those reasons which are there brought to prove that the sacrifices of
the law could do nothing, and therefore were to be abolished, will also serve
to throw down the abominable idol of the Papists. For if the weakness of those
former sacrifices were gathered by their nature and order which was used in
them, then shall the sacrifice of the Mass, if it be found to differ as far
and further from that of Christ's, than those, be found not to be the sacrifice
of the New Testament.

In the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 9. ver. 1* it is said, that the former
covenant had also ordinances of religion, and a worldly sanctuary, and there he
does repeat particularly sundry things, as the Candlestick, the Table, the
show bread, the Golden censure, the Arc of the Testament, the Golden pot with
Manna, Aarons Rod that had budded, and the Tables of the Testament. In this
worldly Sanctuary, with these foresaid ordinances of the same nature, did the
priests of the law exercise their office: and this is one argument to prove
that their priesthood was weak and could not bring men unto God. For the
habitation of God is in the heavens, there is his throne of glory, and most
high majesty thither must those be brought which shall come unto him, whereupon
it follows, that the Priest that shall bring men unto God, must be a minister
of the Tabernacle of Heaven. For the entering into the holy place made with
hands, and the ministering in the same with ordinances of the like nature, that
is to say, earthly and transitory, can by no means bring men eternally unto
God: For how shall earthly things compass heavenly, or things which vanish and
decay, bring that to pass which shall last for ever? Those Priests therefore,
whose priesthood was transitory, for their priesthood must needs be of the same
nature and condition that their temple and ordinances were, and can stand no
longer than they, were for to cease, when the time was come unto which they
were prefixed. Unto these is Christ opposed in the same Hebr. 9. ver. 24. where
he says that Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which
are similitudes of the true sanctuary, but is entered into heaven it self to
appear in the sight of God for us. For as the sacrifice which he offered was
heavenly and of eternal power, so also is his Tabernacle, and likewise his
Priesthood. For those three must ever be joined together. Then if the
Priesthood of Aaron, and his sacrifices could do nothing, but were to cease
because their Tabernacle and ordinances were worldly: how much less shall the
greasy popish priests be able to offer any sacrifice to appease Gods wrath,
seeing the sacrifice which must do that, is heavenly and spiritual, and cannot
be offered in a worldly sanctuary, nor with such ordinances as be of earthie
nature? For it is most manifest that all the trinkets (...)l the Popish
(...)nkets are (...)rthly.
and trash of Popish Mass mongers, wherewithal they do juggle and play with
their Mammets are earthly and transitory: so is also their Temple and Altars,
and consequently their Priesthood. And further also it is certain that the
Priesthood of Aaron (...)on was call(...)d of God.
might rather be called heavenly than theirs, because it was the pattern of the
heavenly, and he was called unto that honor of God, but they can show no
calling thereto at all. Who then is so blind but may see, that seeing the
sacrifice propitiatory The Priests (...)hite cake o(...)er his head is (...)
dead idol.
cannot be offered by an earthly Priest, nor with earthly ordinances, that the
white cake which the unclean shaveling the Baalamite does hold up over his
head, is not the Son of God, but a dead Idol.

If the blind idolatous Papists will object, that the efficacy of their
sacrifice and priesthood is heavenly, although it be executed on earth, they
are to be answered, that if the efficacy of their priest hood be heavenly, then
is it eternal, but they are mortal and do not remain Priests world without
end.

Again, the power of the sacrifice depends upon the power of the priest, and
so their sacrifice is not eternal. This thing shall be yet more manifest by a
further comparison which is made between the sacrifice of Christ, and those of
the law in the same Chapter. verse. 13. and 14. where Heb. 9. 13. (...)
it is showed, that if the blood of calves and of goats, and the ashes of a red
Heffer sprinkling those that were defiled did sanctify as touching the carnal
purging: then how much more shall the blood of Christ, which by his eternal
spirit, offered himself to God without spot, purge your conscience from dead
works to serve the living God? This comparison is brought in to prove that
Christ by entering once into the holy places, by his own blood, has found
eternal redemption: for that being the sum of the two verses going next
before, is proved by this. It was granted without controversy, that by reason
of gods ordinances, the blood of those poor beasts, and the water made with
the ashes of the Heffer, being but a dead thing had power in some manner to
purge, as namely that which he calls the carnal purging. For if a man were
polluted with any outward pollutio^, and there fore might not come unto those
holy things which were the carnal commandments, being but shadows and
ceremonies, yet if he were sprinkled with those, although he were not purged
within from sin, he was counted clean: then how much more shall the blood of
the son of God, which has the power of life in it, because it is the blood
Note this
of him that was not only a man so holy that he was without spot, but also God?
For herein lies the strength of the argument which the holy ghost uses to
prove that Christ at once by his blood has purged the conscience from sin
for ever, that this sacrifice was offered by his eternal spirit, which is his
godhead. For the godhead having eternal power of life, the flesh and blood of
the manhood joined so with the godhead that they made one person, had also the
same power, so that although the blood of Christ of it self had not power at
once to purge eternally, yet because it was the blood of God, it had that
force. Hereupo^ it follows that the power of that purging by his blood being
eternal, and that one purgation being perfect, the redemption which he has
found is eternal. Hereupon we may strongly conclude against the Papists, and
that with a double conclusion: First, that seeing no sacrifice has the virtue
to purge away sin, but because it is offered by the eternal spirit, And
secondly, that his purging once made, being that which is made by the eternal
Godhead, is perfect for ever: By the first it is manifest that they are not
able to offer a sacrifice propitiatory, because they are mortal men, by the
second, that there is no place for them, the work of purging sin being
already accomplished for ever.

If there be a new redemption to be wrought, then let them be the priests: in
the mean time they are foul idolaters, and sacrilegious wretches, destroying
the power of Christ's death, when they will take upon them to do that which he
has already perfectly finished. Come forth ye blind Papists, and prove that
ye are more than men, show also that the sacrifice of Christ once offered, has
not an eternal and perfect power to purge away sin, or else confess that
yours is Antichristian. We may join hereu^to that which is used to prove that
the sacrifices of the Leviticall priests did not purge sin: namely, that
they were so often offered. For thereby the holy Ghost does teach that they
were not able to sanctify the comers thereto, Heb. 10. 1. For then, as he
says, they should have ceased, because there should have been no more
conscience of sin in the worshippers, being once purged. The reason is
manifest, drawn from the effect of the medicine: for if it have taken away the
disease, and perfected the cure, then is it vain to add it any more. If it be
still continually, and from time to time applied to the sore as still
remaining, then it may be said truly, that the same medicine does not heal,
Wherefore he adds this proof, that notwithstanding the sacrifices were
offered, yet there remained the mention of sins yearly, when they kept that
solemn day of expiation. This disease of sin still remaining as the
continual mention and remembrance thereof does show: it follows, that those
sacrifices did nor could not purge it away. Unto these is opposed the sacrifice
of Christ, which because it has perfectly purged sin for ever, so that there
remains no more conscience thereof in those that are sanctified: it is done
but once, and never to be repeated or don again. The other which were Priests
in the law stood daily ministering, and often offering the same sacrifices, which
could never take away sin. But this man having offered one sacrifice for
sin, sits for ever at the right hand of God, from henceforth waiting
until his enemies be made his footstool, Heb. 10. ver. 11. 12. The former did
stand daily ministering as those which had not, nor could not accomplish the
work of reconciliation, although they offered never so often: But he having
once offered, cease from offering, and is set down in the highest throne of
majesty and glory, because as it is there said, he has with one oblation made
perfect for ever those which are sanctified. If his sacrifice did abolish sin
but for a time, as for a year, or certain years, then should he either bring
nothing to pass, or else return often and sundry times from his glory to
offer again. This is also confirmed in the same Chapter. ver. 18. by a
conclusion which is drawn out of the form of words which the Lord uses in
the promise which he makes of the New Testament: as namely, that he will
remember their sins and their iniquities no more. He reasons in this
manner, where God remembers not sin, there he has given pardon and
remission, for that he collecteth, and where there is pardon, there is no more
sacrifice for sin. Now therefore, when we see this to be most manifest by the
plain doctrine of Gods word, let us consider the abominable wickedness of the
Papists which by their sacrifice overturne all this. For whereas there is
remission of sins already purchased, what place can there be for their
sacrifice propitiatory? whereas that sacrifice is unperfect, and cannot take
away sin which is often offered, how is theirs the perfect sacrifice of
Christ's body, which is continually done again and again? What do they less
therefore when they teach, that in the Mass they offer Christ to his father,
to be a sacrifice to take away sin: than affirm that the promise of the
Papists deny the promise(...) the New Testament.
New Testament has failed, and that sin is yet remembered, no remission as yet
obtained? And further, when they will needs have him offered so often, is it
not as much as to deny the effect and power of the blood of Christ? Is it not
quite contrary to this, that with one oblation he has made perfect for ever
those that are sanctified? But here they take exception and say that they do
not offer any new sacrifice but the same. And moreover that their oblation is
but an application of the fruit of that which Christ offered, and that because
we see and feel in our selves that we are still guilty: all which is but a
blind cavil. For what though they say they offer the same, did not the
Priests the Sons of Aaron yearly offer still the same? does not the power of
the reason stand in this, to prove that they were not available, because then
they should have ceased? Can they deny but that they offer often? Further, he
does not place the perfect work in the sacrifice of Christ, because it was
but one, but because it was but once offered: for he says not with one
sacrifice, but with one offering Note this
has he made perfect for ever those which are sanctified. This does cut the
throat of their often offering, when his one offering had made perfect for ever:
for it leaves nothing behind for such caitives as they be. And further where
they pretend this necessity because we have still guilty consciences, therein
they are more than beasts: for the guiltiness of our consciences is not for
this, that there needs any sacrifice to be offered to satisfy and purge
sin: but through the remnants of iniquity which remain in us because of the
weakness and imperfection of our faith. for in these we are not to look to any
satisfaction yet behind, but to take hold of that perfect one which has
already satisfied. If that act of theirs be propitiatory, then is not sin
fully discharged by the other. Thus blasphemous they are not only in this
their God of dough, but also in all other their satisfactions for sin, and in
their doctrine of Purgatory. For if there remain any satisfaction or purgation
to be (...) are fully charged be(...)e God for (...).
made, then is it not true that he has made perfect for ever, neither was his
death then of full and sufficient price. True it is, that although we are by
his one oblation fully and perfectly discharged for ever before God, from the
guiltiness of our sins: yet we are not in the full possession of this
benefit, nor shall not be until the last day, for then shall his enemies be
made his footestoole. The Devil, sin and death are these enemies which he
has overcome, that they cannot reign over us: but yet we must in the mean
time wrestle with the^, not therefore esteeming the power of Christ's death to
be the less, because they be not already utterly abolished, as the wicked
unbeleeving Papists do, and therefore set up trash of their own to destroy
sin, but waiting for that appointed time, when the full power of his death
shall appear: in the mean time staying by faith, and resting our selves on
that one sacrifice once offered. To conclude then, has not the mighty spirit of
God power to apply unto us the virtue of that blood: but such silly virmin as
the Popish priests must help? The holy ghost calling upon us, and teaching us
to apply Gods spiri(...) (...)plies to us(...) death of C(...)
these benefits, wills us to draw near with a true heart, with full assurance
of faith, Heb. 10. ver. 22. we come unto him with the heart, after a spiritual
manner, because all things in him are spiritual, we are bid to approach to lay
hold of him by faith, for we can not either with the hand or with the mouth.
And seeing there is not so much as one sentence in all the book of God, which
speaks of any application of his death any other way, it must needs be
concluded again that they may be as good priests as the priests of Baal and
no^ better, and that when they hold up their idol, Christ is not between their
fingers. Let us go forward. It shall yet be more manifest by the words of the
holy Ghost, that this sacrifice of the mass is so far from being the
sacrifice of the New Testament, that it does flatly go against it. For he
says as concerning Christ, that he did not offer himself often, as the high
priest went yearly into the holy place with other blood, Heb. 9. ver. 25. and
then in the next verse he gives a reason, namely, that then he should have
suffered often since the beginning of the world. This sentence is very mighty
against the Papists, because it drives them from all their shifts, and leaves
them naked and destitute: but the force of it will not appear unless we look
upon what principles it is grounded, to prove that if Christ should have offered
himself often, then must he also have suffered death often since the beginning
of the world. Among the which this offers it self as the first to be
considered, that all the holy fathers, the Patriarchs and Prophets, from the
beginning could have no entrance unto God but by remission of sins, and that
whereas otherwise they had the door shut against them, by this they were
restored into favor and received. For it cannot be denied, but that by nature
they were sinners as we be: and that God cannot receive sinners. Being
therefore out of controversy that they obtained life, it must needs follow
that they had pardon: for if either there had been no sin, or no pardon to
be granted, what necessity could there be of a sacrifice? The second principle
without which the reason of the Apostle cannot stand is this, that there can
be no remission but only by the sacrifice of Christ: for if any other
sacrifice, or any other way or mean might obtain it, then were there not a
necessity, why he should often suffer. For although there were a necessity of
remission of sins, unless all should be damned, yet he might be set free
from the same necessity of offering himself, seeing there were other ways to
obtain it, but the holy Ghost stands upon this as a matter not to be doubted
of, that neither there is, nor never has been any thing able to destroy
sin, or to take away the guiltiness of it by making satisfaction, but only
the sacrifice of the Son of God.

For howsoever the idolatrous Infidels do ascribe unto many things the power of
purging, and satisfying for sin: yet the holy word of God, and those which
believe it do give that glory only unto Christ, and even as his great glory,
wherein he has no fellow. The third thing without which, an exception might be
justly taken against the foresaid reason is this, that there could be no
oblation of Christ, but he must suffer death: for when he says he should not
offer him self often, he adds this cause, that then he should have suffered
often. It were and easy matter, if the offering of Christ were any thing
available without suffering death, to say there were no necessity wherefore he
should suffer often, seeing he might be offered, and not be slain. But this is
strengthened by that which goes before in the same Chapter, where he has
showed that Heb. 9*
the testament is confirmed when men are dead, because it is of no force while
the Testator lives, and so he is the Mediator of the New Testament, but yet
through death. Wherefore also the former testament, in which there were but the
shadows and pattern of heavenly things, was ratified by death, as it is proved
by this, that it was not dedicated without blood. For when Moses had read the
law unto the people he took the blood of Calves and Goats, with water, and
purple Woll and Hyssop, he sprinkled both the book and the people, saying,
this is the blood of the Testament which God has commanded unto you, Likewise
also he sprinkled the Tabernacle and all the ministering vessels with blood, and
almost all things, says he, by the law are purged with blood, and without
shedding of blood, there is no remission. Here is then a manifest reason
wherefore Christ could not be offered often, but he must then also die often:
even because the testament is of no force without the death of the testator.

Here is further showed wherefore it cannot be available without death, that is
to say, there is no remission of sins without shedding of blood. Christ
therefore could not be offered often, unless it should be to no purpose, which
is most absurd, but his blood must be often shed. Then if the Papists will
uphold and maintain that their sacrifice is availeable to purge away sin,
and that it is a sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and the dead, as they do
impudenly affirm: Let them also confess that they murder again the Son of
God, and so shead his blood. For if they will stand to this, that theirs is an
unbloudy sacrifice, and though they offer him, yet they do not slay him, and
yet withal do challenge the power thereby to purge sin: let them know that
they go directly against the spirit of God which says, there is no remission
without shedding of blood. In this therefore they are after an horrible manner
blasphemous, that they will overthrow the reason and argument of the holy
ghost. For if by any manes there might be a sacrifice to take away sin
without the shedding of blood, then might Christ have been often offered and
have dyed but once. If the fathers had the fruit and benefit of that one
oblation, as namely their sins washed away with that blood once shed, and
that without any offering of such unbloudy sacrifice to apply the same: why
should not we likewise by faith obtain the same, unless some shaveling offer
him daily? Ye blind Idolaters, did the blood of Christ purge away sin before
his coming, only through faith, and shall it not now? Was there a more
perfect power in it to abolish sin, in the fathers which were long time
before his coming, than there is after it has been shed indeed? For if it
be so that the fathers had their sins washed away with Christ's blood, and
yet no offering of him to apply the same, but apprehended through faith, shall
it not destroy the virtue thereof, or at the least diminish it, when they teach
that we cannot be partakers of him, unless he be still offered? Is that
which the holy Ghost speaks, that he has been once made manifest in the end
of the world, to abolish sin, by the offering himself to be referred only to
the fathers before his coming? Does not the reason following extend it unto us
as well, yea even unto the whole Church, until his coming again at the
worlds end? for he compares it in this manner: that as it is appointed unto
men to dye once, and after comes judgment: so Christ also being once offered
to take away the sins of many, unto those that look for him shall appear
the second time without sin, unto salvation. It is the ordinance of God that
when a man has run his race and finished his course, he shall not be
permitted to turn back again to do that which he left undone, or to make
straight that which is crooked, but must hold him unto judgment for things
past, because that only remains.

In like sort he sets the perfection of the one oblation of Christ, who
being once offered to take away the sins of many, it is so perfectly done,
that when he shall appear again the second time to give the eternal
salvation, there shall be no sin to be purged, or for which he is to make
further satisfaction. For when it is said, that he shall appear without sin
the second time, it is not meant of his own person, but of those whom he has
redeemed from their sins: which is most clear and manifest in this, that the
mind of the holy Ghost, is to show a difference between his first and second
appearance, even in that point. Which if it should be understood of his own
person should make no difference, because he was without sin at his first
appearing, although he took upon him, and bare in his body the sins of his
people: But at his second appearance because he has utterly destroyed sin
for ever, there shall be none to be borne of him, and therefore none for which
he shall again offer sacrifice.

The Papists, but that they be impudent, might be ashamed to patch in their
trumpery, to give power unto the death of Christ, when they see here the
perfection of it so set forth, that it has so at once for ever destroyed
sin, that there needs no more sacrifice to be offered. For will they make
the power of it less since his coming than it was before? We may then
conclude, seeing the sacrifice of the New Testament, that should have a
spiritual, heavenly, and endless power could not be offered in a worldly
sanctuary, with worldly ordinances: the sanctuary and all the ordinances of the
Popish service and prieststood are such, as are earthly, and All the Popi(...)
service is ear(...)ly.
seeing the same sacrifice could not be offered to be available, unless it were
offered by the eternal godhead, the Popish Priests are men and not God: and
being the blood of a man which is also God, that purges away sin, it has an
eternal power to purge: and so unless the Papists will have a new redemption,
there is no place for their propitiatory sacrifice. And seeing the sacrifice
that is perfect is but once offered: that which is often offered does not take
away sin. And because the sacrifice of Christ once offered has for ever
perfectly abolished sin, the promise of the New Testament is that God will no
more remember it: and therefore no more sacrifice to be required.

The Papists contrary to that promise make satisfactions still and sacrifices
for sin. Their sacrifice is offered often. Christ could be offered but once,
because he could dye but once. The sacrifice is not available without death
because there is no remission No sacrifice available without blood
of sins without shedding of blood. The Papists do not say they slay Christ,
they say theirs is an unblody sacrifice: there is no remission of sins without
shedding of blood. The sacrifice of Popery is not the sacrifice of the New
Testament, neither can it be propitiatory, as they brag, for the quick and
the dead.

Note this, oh you Papists.
Nay it is as abominable before God, as if a man should offer a dog in
sacrifice. Then considering what injury these Priests after the order of Rome,
have done unto the Son of God, first in challenging that office and dignity,
which belongs only unto him: and secondly, in overthrowing the perfection of
the virtue and efficacy of his sacrifice. Let as many of us, as mind to cleave
unto Christ, to take part with him, and to fight under his banner, and so
attain the reward of eternal glory, remove ourselves utterly from the camp
and society of such adversaries: and armed with the spiritual armor of God,
let us sound the trumpet, and bid defiance against them, and against the
devil, and Antichrist their chief captains; for this is most certain, that
we shall never be reputed Note this.
as friends unto Christ, unless we be at enmity with his enemies, and fight
against them.

Many do suppose that they may hold friendship and familiarity with them, and
esteem of them as Christians, and match their sons with their daughters,
although they bear the same print, and be of the same stamp with their
parents: only because they do profess the name of Christ, and carry a zeal
unto him. But this does bewray a most horrible blindness, and gross
darkness in them, which cannot see, that to confess the name of Christ is
not any thing at all available, seeing they do under that pretense rob and
spoil him of his glory, and tread down his truth, an destroy his laws. The
Apostle says, Romans 10. that the Jews had the zeal of God, but yet he
says, it was not according to knowledge, and therefore that being not
spiritual, but a carnal zeal, could nothing at all clear them, but that
they were still those which as utter enemies of God did fight against him.

In like sort although it be granted that the Papists have a devotion toward
Christ, yet what does it help them, seeing it is a carnal and blind devotion?
Note.
our Savior Christ shows Mat. 23. that the Scribes and Pharisees did build the
tombs of the Prephets and garnish the sepulchers of the righteous* and said,
that if they had been in the days of their fathers they would not have been
partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets: but yet for all this their
forwardness and good will to honor the Prophets and to disalowe of their
fathers in killing them he threateneth them, that all the righteous blood shed
upon the earth, should come upon them, and why? because he would se nd
Prophets, and wise men and Scribes unto them: and of them they should kill and
crucify: and of them they should scourge in their synagogs, and persecute from
city to city. They were then gullty, Note.
and had their part in the blood of the former Pr^phets, because they murdered
those of their time. ^s wicked and bloody generation of the Papists: they have
such a zeal to the Saints of God that were of old, that they would honor them
with divine worship, when as in the Mark this y(...) generation of Papists.
mean time they persecure and murder all those which unbrace and follow the
doctrine of those holy ones. Shall not they then be guilty of all the blood of
the Martyrs whom they seem to love and honor, as the Scribes and Pharisees
did the Prophets, when as by all kind of cruel trecheries, by treasons and
perjuries, they seek to murder, and destroy all those which bear any love to
the glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that will not fall down and
worship the beast nor receive his mark?

If ever there were helhoundes that could not be satisfied with blood, these
are they which would spare neither high nor low, Prince nor subject, (...)sts
the (...)test Idola(...) that ever (...)eupon earth (...) the most (...)udy.
young nor old. If ever there were damnable heretics, and abominable idolaters
upon earth, these are they, which ground all their worship upon the divises of
men, rejecting the holy scriptures, and taking the honor due unto God and his
Son Christ, and giving it unto creatures, worshipping for God a cake made of
flower. Is it not then full time that we give ear to the voice from heaven:
Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues? Revel 18. 4. Is it not plainly said by the Angel,
Revel. 14. 9. that if any man worship the beast, and his image* and shall
receive the mark in his forehead, or in his hand, he shall also drink of the
wine of the wrath of God, even of the undelayed wine, which is powered forth
into the cup: of his wrath, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, in
the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, and the
smoke of their torment shall ascend world without end: and they shall have no
rest day nor night which worship the beast and his image, and if any receive
the print of his name. Being as clear as the Sun at noone days, unto all
those which have eyes to see, that Rome is that Babylon, and the Pope that
savage and cruel beast, ought it not to drive us as far from them as the East
is from the West, to renounce their religion, and false idolatrous, worship, to
pack up all their trash, and send it home to Rome, to abolish their laws, to
fly their fellowship and society, to be at utter enmity with them in this
respect that they be the sworn enemies of Christ? What honor is there left
unto the Son of God, when such vile caitifes shall take upon them to be
partakers with him in the office and dignity of the mediatorship? For when as
the separation and enmity between God and men was such, that there could be no
agreement nor unity, because God is most perfctly holy and pure, and can not
but hate that which is foul, and contrary unto his nature: there was none to
approach unto him to be the mediator between him and them, which was in so high
favor as that they might be accepted through him, nor of such power as to be
able to answer, and discharge whatsoever they could be charged withal: but
such an one as was also most holy and pure. While the Tabernacle did stand and
the most holy place which did represent heaven, the high Priest was the
mediator: for when the people were shut forth, he went in before the Arc to
offer and make prayer for them. But those things were but shadows, and his
consecration was carnal. He was a poor sinful man, not able to purchase
favor for himself. He was a Priest agreeable to that covenant, but no
wretched sinner can be the mediator of the new covenant, to stand between God
and the people, that he may obtain favor and remission of sins for them,
but he which is unspotted. Alas what case then are those men in, which take a
poor Popish Priest, which is an unclean swine in lechery, to be their Priest
to stand between God and them, to offer for them, that by him they may have
their sins pardoned? Does not David say, the wicked cannot stand before God?
How then shall any of them stand as a Priest before him to be a mediator? Does
not the holy Ghost say by Solomon, that the sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord? can that which the Lord does esteem as a thing
abominable, be a sacrifice propitiatory? Can that which God does curse and
hate, cleanse away sin? The Lord in mercy open the eyes of poor simple men
which have been seduced and misled, that they may see what a deceit this is,
that a man shall be made to seek life in that which is one of the greatest
sins that can be committed, as namely, to set a poor rotten worm in the
place and office of Christ, a vile filthy sinner is to come before God with a
sacrifice. Now as they be idolatrous peiests, by their cake which they worship
as God, overthrowing as much as lies in their power, the sacrifice of Christ,
and fighting under the banner of the devil against God, so also their fruits
do follow accordingly, and declare what manner of trees they be. Do they not
maintain lying and perjury, all kind of disembling, and false trecheries to
obtain their purposes, and to bring their mischievous and divelish practices
to effect? Are they not bloody murderers and traitors against their lawful
Sovereign Prince? Let them show where ever Peter, Paul, or any Apostle of
Christ has taught the like, or put it in practice. If not then, let us
conclude against them, that they be of their father the devil, who is the
author of all falsehood, and a murderer, the worker of all treasons against
Princes. And let all men which have any care to save their souls be so far
from liking of them, or consenting to them, that they can say with the holy
Prophet, do not I hate them that hate thee, O Lord, am I not irkesomely greeved
with those that rise up against thee? I hate them with a perfect hatred, I take
them as enemies to my self. This zeal ought to be for the glory of Christ in
all true Christians, this love settled in the hearts of al faithful subjects
toward their Prince. There is no testimony of any goodness in men without this:
for those men which can retain so willingly even in their bosoms these vipers,
as some do their wives, their sons, their daughters; their servants, and
their friends: although they make some show, as though they did somewhat
mislike, yet they be very Atheists, void of all true knowledge, and fear of
God.

FINIS.

