THE GLORY OF ENGLAND, OR A TRVE DESCRIPTION of many excellent prerogatives and
remarkable blessings, whereby She Triumphs over all the Nations of the World:

With a justifiable comparison between the eminent Kingdoms of the Earth, and
Herself; plainly manifesting the defects of them all in regard of her
sufficiency and fullness of happiness.

SENECA. Quicquid patimur, mortale:
Quicquid facimus, venit ab alto.
By T. G.

LONDON Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN for TH: NORTON and are to be sold at his shop
in Pauls-Church-yard at the sign of the King's Head. 1618.

TO THE WORTHILY ENOBLED, THE HIGH AND MOST HONORABLE MARQVIS OF BVCKINGHAM,
WITH ALL HIS OTHER WELL DESERVING TITLES, and attributes.
Right Honorable,

AS the divine Majesty proportioned all his attributes and works to some
special end and purpose, redacting the world out of a confused Chaos for the
use of man to a beautiful uniformity; raising man out of a heap of dust to
glorify his Creator: sending his only Son to redeem us from the curse of the
law, an expiation for our rebellious transgressions, and proposing his Mercy
and Justice with equal distribution as the mastring curbs of all humane
endeauours: with such like. So should we erect the frame of our actions upon
the foundation of prevailing effects, and not attempt any thing without a
special limitation. For even little children, that sport in the air at
random can say, they meant to exercise themselves, or in emulation to shoot
higher then their fellows. This inciteth me (right Honorable) to anticipate
their calumniation, or derision, that shall startle me with these questions,
why I presumed like a seeled dove to fly at random with such disguises, and
amongst all others firmed my self on the sun-shining beauty of your house. I
answer both with the same truth and plainness, that detruded me between the
streights of censuring imperfections: Besides the manifest reasons inserted in
the Title and Preface, An honest fame, and peradventure orderly profit to
maintain a poor liberty of life, and keep virtue unspotted from the
filthiness of corruption, were the marks of my aim. But concerning your
Honor, an earnest desire to prostrate my endeauours before you, and a mere
presaging confidence, that with undefiled vows you will charily preserve the
love of our Country, impulsed this insinuation, and extended the Argument thus
far; that as it has pleased his Majesty to ouermantle you with favor, and
support you with greatness (wherein Princes make their virtues truly eminent,
and worthily exalted) so you will remember, that the good servant augmented his
tallent; and he lives not at all, who lives only to himself. Therefore Great
Lord let me I pray you behold you like a fair moving Planet in a sufficient
Orb, from whose influence can proceed nothing but sweet presages, and if
there be any thing in these triuiall discourses, that may boast of your
acceptance, and noble construction, make me the prouder, because I come so
simply naked without palpable flattery, or cunning displaying your Fame and
merit. Besides, howeuer I am so great a stranger, that not so much as the sound
of my name has passed by your ears, so low a shrubbe, that I stand at a stay,
and keep my own greennes, and so ruinous a wall, that even bosom friends
have started away for fear of falling upon them: I must be yet contented, and
hope, you will not search me so narrowly as upon the discovery of my
imperfections to pretend my contempt, nor dismiss me vilipended, when all the
world has proclaimed your worth. In which assurance I thus cast my self into
the open mouth of the Monster of the world, Opinion: and presume to be
preserved by the Antidote of your Patronage from any dangerous infection, or
Lethal ruin.

Your Honors humble obseruant,

TH: GAINSFORD.

The Preface.
Nec Adulatori. Nec Detractori.
ALthough there is no end of writing books (as says the Preacher) and the
vexation of our very souls arises from the desire of knowledge, especially
when we step a little into vainglory, the last thing laid away of the
wisest men: yet either custom, or some particular purposes do still traduce
many in this kind, who otherwise walked with sufficient reputation, and like
the fool in the Proverbs might have been counted wise, if they had held
their peace. So that it cannot choose, but I must incur the like imputation,
yea peradventure ridiculous contempt; when I have nothing to say, but for the
glory of my Country, and seem to maintain a Position, which few Englishmen
deny, and that I do herein no more, then the Swizer or Sauoian, who prefers
his snowy hills, before the beauty All nations love their own Country best.
of Lombardy, and rages in his disceptation, if you either vilipend his barren
Mountains and dangerous passages, or prefer any other glorious nation before
him. But again, when I strive to mount a little higher, and tune out this
harmony to a reach of excellency, and prerogative over all kingdoms, and
people in such things, wherein God does bless any Nation, you now would a
little procrastinate my journey, and cannot but suppose me ouer-liberall and
ouer-partiall in my judgment, especially, if 1. either you are a stranger: 2.
Or have been a Traveler: 3. Or look no further, then on the bescarred and
deformed face of antiquity as Authors have wounded the same: 4. Or live
discontented through particular greeuances in your Country: 5. Or are wilful
and irregular by the impostures of superstition: 6. Or affrighted at the power
and greatness of other Princes: 7. Or transported with a poor opinion of our
wealth: 8. Or to conclude, are merely ignorant, and understand no more, then
is conferred upon you by relation of others: wherein you must needs resemble
certain empty trunkes in Court remoues, who only fill up a place: but
understand not, wherefore, nor by whom they are employed: yet because I would
also satisfy these, and corroborate my Hypothesis with probable reason, I will
lead them by the hand into the fair fields of this discovery, and never
desist, until they are conduced to safe harbor, and there Echo out the truth
in security; though it seem a Panegyricall applause, and carry a fantastical
burden of flattery. Only the method I would use is somewhat intricate, and
the desire I have to shun confusion, will make a greater confusion like a
true and modest Lover, who fearing to disclose her affection by her looks,
does in that restraint make the next look more passionate.

But to the purpose. If you be a stranger, which you 1 Strangers.
may be either by ignorance, or nation: then peradventure you look no further,
then what you see, or know, and not understanding the honorable secret of our
Country, suppose nothing comparable to the ostentous bravery of some few
stones, and dead things of those Cities, wherein you are reziant: but TACITUS,
and other famous Authors can tell you, that Cities are not glorious with empty
houses, and lime and stone compacted for show, and subject to ruin and
breuiary demolition; but in the wisdom, wealth, and resplendant eminence of
noble Citizens, and well ordered men: so that no man, unacquainted with the
secrets of a Kingdom, can comparatively subject it either to vilipending, or
insufficiency.

If you are a Traveler? Then carried away with present shadows, or
transported with a cursory vanity of some 2 Traveler.
stately edifices, brave Curtezans, entertainment of strangers (recommended by
some special Counselor of State) strong castles, new ramparts, convenient
harbors, well furnished Arsenalls, some pretty galleys, and hearkening after
every report to please the Hearing, or ravished with some comicke sight to move
admiration, you go no further, then present contentment, nor will once
remember, what a mother you have of your own, and how a legitimate child
ought to be loving, dutiful, and advised. 3 B^ereader:


If you search for no better secrets, then what absolute Authors have locked up
in their storehouses, who many times filled their papers with extraneall
reports, and when they were possessed with a nouelty exciting astonishment,
they then enlarged the same, setting down every thing as authentical, which
only carried the show of probability by some enforcing circumstances, howeuer
it sauoured of detraction, and calumny: Thus I confess have many written of
BRITANY, as of a strange and barbarous nation, naked people, painted, enraged,
living upon roots and herbs, eating raw flesh, and remote from the bravery of
populous Cities, and courtly pa^aces: whereby a continued impression is so
made, and lest to posterity, that in many places they suppose the same still.
Wherein I cannot compare them better, then to some poor Farmer, who living in
an old cottage, thatcht, and deformed, is compelled at last to go into another
Country, as dispossessed by some wealthy Lawyer, or Citizen, and so relates
to his new acquaintance, what a pitiful house he came from, and how
miserable he left the same, little knowing, how delicately, yea stately it is
reedified, and holds up such a contrary face of Majesty, that if he were to
return, and view it again, he could not imagine it the same, nor that any
policy of man, or worldly means had contrived the alteration.

If you live discontented at home, then out of a sullen and dogged humor you
spare not any accusation of your 4 ^me-bred discontents
country, whether for deficiency of blessings, or government; but hearken
after every report of strangers, and are contented to be cosoned with the
deceit of foreign relations, and so from a wilful neglect of our worthiness,
wilt neither believe the majesty of our honor, the magnificense of our
structures, the variety of our happiness, the decency of our Cities, the
exaltation of officers, the beauty of women, the glory of conversation, and all
other particulars tending to an absolute demonstration of our worth: but do
unkindly weigh it down with comparison, saying there are some slender
commendable things amongst us, but far inferior to other nations.

If you are superstitious, or would seem affectionate to religion, then under
a pious show of devotion, you absolutely 5 Patisis.
condemn all other things, and swear they are invaluable to the pacification
of the conscience, and settling the soul to peace, and understanding the way to
salvation; and so without either desire, or endeauours to entertain a further
truth, you not only deny those allegations which may divert you from falsehood,
but are an adversary to all commemorations of temporal matters, which may
give you light to conduct you to the acquaintance of ENGLANDS merit, and high
exalted desert.

If you are terrified with the strength and warlike preparation of foreign
Princes, because you hear of well fortified 6 (...)
places, armies on foot, treasure amassed, ships rigged, Countries
subiugated, garrisons dispersed, Princes affied, and the Pope blessing them.
Then peradventure you may suppose, that we cannot propulse such adversaries,
nor have sufficient means to rebate the insolency of so high exalted
Monarchs; because you are either faithless in heart, traitorous in loialty,
simple in apprehen^ion, of ouer-reached by cunning inferences of others, and so
remain confounded at some common wants amongst us, disabling all things, which
may tend to strengthen the hopes and love to your own Country.

If you are desirous of wealth, and corrupted with the 7 (...)
filthiness of lucre, then it may be hearing of the infinite treasures of the
GRAN SIGNIEVR, the Venetian riches, the many millions coming out of India into
Spain, so many crowns of the sun coined in France, and the annual
entradoes of diverse Countries, and Principates, and troubled at home with
strange rumors of penuries and wants, with exportation of our gold and coin
into foreign parts, and some forcible convulsions of private men to enrich
themselves: you are amazed, and cannot be settled with any opinion of our
sufficiency, and will scarce be helped with better information. uide
possessions by way of contribution to their children; reward their servants,
and endeavor to be near the Prince? would you dispute of civil
conversation, of a Land that flows with milk and honey, of eating under thy
own vineyard, of receiving the temporal blessings of increase, of solemnities
at feasts, of burials and mournings for the dead, of martial exequies, of
triumphant marriages, and private reioycings, of honest and friendly
visitations, of mutual commerces, of powerful presents? of detaining us
within the limits of natural observation, as quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri
ne feceris, and in truth of all fundamental principles of government in the
hands of the Scriptures is lifted up a mirror to look into without specke,
stain, base composure, or counterfeit foil.

Would you have directions for maintaining a magistracy, for adapting you to
reciprocal duties of releeuing the poor, succouring the fatherless and
widows, suppressing the proud, restraining the offensive, imparting of
favors, acknowledging of friendlinesse, with such like? would you be
thankful when your cup does ouerflow, reposed when necessities knock at
the door, patient when adversity deiecteth, moderate when prosperity ^lateth,
free from repining at the glory of thine adversary, sparing insulting over the
misery of inferiors, and remember, who is the distributer of all good gifts,
like the Master of a Comedy, who sorteth out his Scenes according to the
inclination of his scholars, making a poor man's child to personate a Prince,
and the son of a lord to act a meaner part? In the Scriptures shines the
light of such understanding, and lives the soul, and life of the truest
wisdom.

In a word, would you know the duty to God and man, the hope of salvation, the
mystery of religi^n, the establishments of faith, the preeminence of truth,
and (...) sanctified calling of all Gods servants; from the Scriptures arises
the fountain and swelling spring flowing into rivers, yea seas of abundance,
which in some are of bitter taste, but inward sweetness; in others pleasant in
the mouth, but wo^mewood in the belly: so that if from thence proceed all
laws, statutes, and ordinances touching the supreme godhead, the spirits
under his throne, the nature of things visible and invisible, the power of
Devils, the glory of the firmament, the division of the earth, the bonds and
limits of the sea, the secrets of hell, and the terrors of the last
dissolution: what need we more, or go any further for a marking stone to
color any kingdom with, whereby it may be known to come near and enjoy most
of those blessings, wherewith God has sealed and ratified the glory of
Countries, then out of the storehouse of the Scriptures.

To this purpose I dare be bold to advance our England Engl^nd comm^h (...)
into the highest chair, as if she were to triumph for some notorious victory;
and that I may bring up my forces together to a close encounter, and connect my
reasons with probability, I will discover at large, what I have learned out of
industrious Authors, observed by my own endeavors: ^.
known as oculatus testis in most countries of Europe, and since determined in
a combat of comparisons, not that I mean to rippe up the bowels of antiquity,
and call in question so many thousand volumes, which have consumed as many
thousand years in discovery of originals, and as it were tormented Time with
strange discourses: so that if you should take off the veil, wherewith diverse
Authors have ouermantled both Countries, Kingdoms, and Cities, you would stand
amassed at their deformed shapes, and remain confounded to veiw now their
disparity. I will therefore leave all malign circumstances of my quiet, and
show you with what countenance they look up to heaven at this instant, and in
what manner they seem proud of their establishment, whereby (...) that are
willing to be impartial, shall be the better en^ed to yield up a verdict of
truth against all adulterate sophistication.

Yet must I add with all this lesson of morality, that in (...) kingdom,
where understanding has pleasured the people with (...) of ciuility (as for
barbarous nat^s (...) only make use of their names) ^
Sol vitae est (...): ^
Antidotus vitae patientia: (...): c Vita vitae conscientia: c and glo^ ^ntia.
For with wealth your entertainment (...) ^ght with Princes; atonement made
with Tyrants; (...) ^ed amongst strangers; adoration a^ (...), and such as know
not civility will stand (...) at thy ^rauery, and flourishing: By wealth are
of^ ^gated, imperfections remitted, scandals re^ (...) pardoned, follies
excused, and the frowns (...) ^ed. For wealth, beauty yields to a (...) ^es
are in opposition, enforced (...), men transported to exorbitant (...) for
strange vndecencies, and all (...) ^ounded with contraries. But this is a pas^
(...), and (...) part of my work, or meaning; (...) for fear of longing after
that (...), a^l as the Dutchman, who on^ (...) Now to conclude: The whole (...)
into two several Books:

In the first, you shall ha^ a (...) Countries of the world, by way (...)
plana^on, as they are no^ (...)

In the (...), ^ as Drapers do (...) clot^ (...) whereby the (...) and prerog^
of (...) made appar^.

(...) 3.
Discite nunc miseri, ^.
Quid sumus, aut ^
Quis datus, aut m^ae quam m^ (...)
Quis modus arge^o? ^
U^le num^us hab^ ^
Quantum elarg^ ^
Iussit, and humana qua ^
THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST BOOK.
THe Empire of Tartaria. Fol. 1 The Monarchy of China. 10 The Monarchy of
India. 14 The Empire of Persia. 19 The Empire of the Turks. 27 The story of
the Ottomans, together with their conquests. 31 The Empire of Aethiopia. 39 The
Empire of Russia. 44 The story of the Goths and Lombards coming into Italy and
Spain. 53 The Empire of Germany. 56 The history of Coleine. 64 The glory of
the Spanyard. 69 The Description of Italy, as in times past. 78 Italy described
at this time. 83 The story of Sauoy. 93 The story of Millaine. 100 The
description of France. 111 The description of the Low Countries, 123 The
Monarchy of Great Britain. 142 The description of Ireland. 144
THE CONTENTS OF THE SECOND BOOK.
THe Majesty of Solomon, and happiness of Canaan; a full and absolute example
for all Nations. 155 Countries compared to Canaan, and Salomons glorious
happiness; and first of all the Tartars. 162 China compared, and her
deficiency manifested. 166 India compared, and her defects manifested. 170
Persia compared, with her insufficiency. 174 Turkey compared, and her
imperfections laid open. 177 The lamentable death of the principal Viceer,
when Sultan Achmat came first to the crown. 181 The famous history of
Mustapha. 185 The story of a Renegado Bashaw. 188 The indirect proceedings of
Turks against Christians, contrary to all religion or morality. 191 Their
manner of advancement, and diversity of customs, far from our example and
orderly prosperity. 198 Russia compared. 210 Aethiopia compared. 213 Germany
compared. 217 Italy compared. 221 Spain compared. 230 France compared, with a
discovery of her defects. 236 England compared, with the probable reasons, why
she is nearer the example of Canaans happiness, than any other nation. 242
Wherein the happiness of England is both perspicuous and commendable. 251
Foreign Cities compared to London, with the defects of either made apparent,
and our sufficiency manifested. 256 Diverse particulars wherein England
excels other kingdoms, and first in religion. 270 Certain particulars
concerning the Greek Church. 282 Certain particulars concerning the Latin
Church. 289 Another excellency of England, exposing the noble worth of hier
Princes beyond other nations. 294 Another excellency of England, casts up an
account of her an^quity in one united Monarchy before other nations. 299
Another excellency of England, consists in the happy life of our Country man
and common people. 3^4 Another excellency of England consists in the
goodness of our navy and shipping. 309 Another excedency of England consists
in the number, riches, en^uors, and extraordinary worth of our Merchant. 316
Another excellency of England may be drawn from this observation, that we
have had more glorious persons, and famous Kings and Princes to visit our
country, then any other nation. 320 The Conclusion. 330
THE GLORY OF ENGLAND.
The First BOOK: TOPOGRAFICALLY describing the Countries of the World, with
some historical amplification.
CHAP. I. The Empire of TARTARIA.
ACcording to the vain, popular, and indeed ridiculous error of opinion, The
fir^ Monar^ of the (...) as it is now made ^rious.
the world has invested nine several Monarchs with his glory, and from
strange disproportions given them prerogatives to command all the Nations of
the earth, interdicting any petty Prince to come near them by way of
competition or comparison. First then the Empire of Tartaria laid prostrate
under the throne of the great Cham called Dominus dominantium, and Rex regum,
spreads it self with so large embracings, that it extends from the
northren Obba, or if you will Tanais, which falls into the great Euxinum,
even to the eastern sea; sometimes surnamed the Atlanticke, whose vast lap
is almost filled with a fry of Islands, all Idolaters, and most of them enemies
to strangers, but especially Christians.

It begirteth those Countries formerly called, and many times still
collaterally named, Scithia, Sarmatia, Albania, Ieccomangall, Sumongoll,
Market, Metrit, the vast deserts of Lop, Tangut, Cathaia, and Mangia, so that
shouldring all the Northren shore of the Caspian, it runs along without
control by the high looking walls of China, and is TAVRVS has many names.
ouershaded by those formidable mountains Riphei, Hyperborei, Imaus, and
Caucasus, all incorporated into the glorious Character of Taurus, of whom Pliny
lib, 5. 27. writes almost a whole book, showing that the variety of Nations
under this great Empire, gave sundry names unto the vast body of this
high-looking, and high-spreading heap of earth and stones: as in the first
footing you have heard before: afterward in his larger body he is called
Egidis, Paropamisus, Circius, Chambudes, Pharphariades, Cho^as, Oreges, Orates
Niphates, Taurus, in his glorious ^ozen head, and snowy crown Caucasus, in his
stretching arms Sarpedon, Coracesius, Cragus, and Taurus again, with diverse
others, and some more significantly. But if you would know how it shouldreth
all other titles under (...), and looks up to heaven with the swelling eyes
of Tartaria, raised up by the supportation of three principal Commanders: you
must be contented to believe some thing which is written to this purpose; or at
least be reposed to ask no further questions, but know, that from Russia to
the North-east sea, all the Countries and people are now called Tartars: But we
will enlarge it a little.

The Story of BARKA and ALLAV.
IF you suppose Herodatus an Author meriting the fame, and good opinion
disposed toward him: in his fourth book you shall find him ouermantling
Scithia from the denomination of Scythe the son of Hercules, with his
brethren Gelo, and Agathirsis, and by a woman with much ado believed to be
half a snake: but it may be the allusion from the cruel condition of the
people extracted Amazones.
from this lineage, gave way to the fiction. For after Agathirsis had taught the
Inhabitants the use of bow and arrows, they became so expert in shooting, that
from hunting and killing of beasts, they set upon men and strangers, yea at
last grew barbarous toward one another: so that the admirable report of the
Amasons a principal Nation amongst them, is now esteemed a matter of
probability, who remembering their vows to Diana, and customs of their
Herculian Progenitors, accustomed to cut off their right pappes for the better
dexterity of this military exercise, and so their famous exploits made all the
Country reverence the Goddess for their sakes, in whose memory they performed
actions beyond credit, and for whose reverence Thoas began an Holocaust of
strangers, as by the story of Iphigenia Agamemnons daughter may appear: so
that they continued in glorious estimation, till Tomyr is conquered Cyrus, and
taught all mighty Monarchs and Tyrants this lesson, that the punishment of
sins is a judgment from heaven, and when they are in the greatest burning
heat of ambitious tumors; some ^lender cloud of revenge shall ouer-shade their
glories, and pour down showers of deuastation on their heads, as you may read
in the Scriptures, and other probable Authors of diverse great Princes brought
to ruin; yea slain by the private hands of women, which also happened to
these insulting Dames themselves, who grew so proud by reason they supposed
the Goddess Diana to protect them, or that some supernatural influence made
their prosperity immovable, that they not only conspired against their
Husbands, but had the name of man in a kind of hate, and vilipending, except
for necessity of procreation: wherein yet as diverse Authors have endeavored to
strengthen our credulity, they tied them to certain conditions of commorance
amongst them, until they were conceived, and then compulsing them to return:
so that at the time of their delivery the ^aemales were reserved, and the males
killed; or if you will believe so much for ciuilities sake, sent to their
fathers; whereupon when time was weary of such degenerating inconveniences, and
that some secret whisperers had incited the people to remember the glory of the
first Creator, or the Goddess, Nature, in man's resemblance, the better sort
conspired against the women, and by degrees ware them out of the Country with
many slaughters, teaching the obstinate the vicissitude of things, and
admitting the submissiue under the warmth of loving embraces, by which occasion
the men at last prevailed; and in time this vast Country was proud to be the
life infuser into many valiant sons: such as Scitha with his mother Araxa,
who conquered Armenia, and Scithes who married his mother in law Opaea, and
performed actions beyond credit: such as Othoman, Barka, Allau, Tamberlaine and
others, whose noble exploits made Fame fly about the world to divulge how
glorious valor and virtue was in some worthy spirits over others. But amongst
many hundreds, none obtained so much at the hands of history and report, as
Barka and Allau both named Emperors at one time. For when many battles had
filled the fields with the carcasses of as many thousands, the people weary of
such slaughters, and they themselves amazed at the cruelty, it was concluded
between them to divide the Empire, having indeed a world of ground to satisfy
ten Emperors: but some Authors are willing to maintain, that they scorned such
partition, and so in a noble combat decided the controversy themselves, till
the Controuler of men and kingdoms made Barka triumphant, who in the next
lustrum of his government had by the beautiful Tartara a son for his mothers
sake named the Author of Peace, and proclaimed besides Barka Tartarus: so that
when he leaving three sons behind him, gave them also leave to divide the
Empire. The people were proud of their new name of Tartarians, and their
Princes distinguished Tartarians a new name.
with Tartar Chrim, Tartar Market, and Tartar Cham: who many times stands for
all the rest, and drowneth the murmuring sound of inferiors with the full name
of the great Emperor, and Lord of Lords. For although the Tartar Chrim would
feign challenge affinity with the Turk, expecting if the line of Othoman
should fail the greatest share of the worlds magnificence: yet without
question it is but a covert presumption, and the fanaticall hopes of some
imposturing prediction: Otherwise he dare not but acknowledge the Emperor Cham
for his supreme; and is affrighted, when he hears of any complaints to his
prejudice: As for his further enlarging his credit, because Tamberlaine was
extracted from him, who conquered Persia, Asia minor, and Bajazet, it will
stand him in little stead to startle from his first obedience, as I said before,
and help him as little to intrude into Turkey. for all he diuulgeth, that the
sons of Tamberlaine brought with them the daughters of the Persian Sophy, and
Othoman family into Tartary, from whence he is now lineally descended. But
some will have it thus, that Barka in remembrance of the horrible confusion of
the wars, named his son Tartarus, as a very deciphering of Hell, and that
the people should be ever after affrighted at dissensions by recording the
mischief formerly acted. But to proceed:

From Scithia to the province of Tangut they live in troops called Hordas, and
remove from place to place according to the temperature of the season, plenty
of feeding, and conueniencie of accommodating one another: nor before the year
of Redemption 1212 (as I said) did we in Europe hear of the name of a Tartar:
but Scithians, Sarmatians, Albanians, and such like, who were all idolaters,
worshipping their gods in trees, hanging up their dead on nether boughs, and
by way of auguring divining their happiness or damnation, which custom is still
retained amongst the barbarous sort in the remotest places. They are generally
men of square stature, broad faces, hollow eyes, thin beards, owgly
countenances, and tie up their hair to the crown of their heads in rolls,
like a Snailes shell; to which you may add swarthnes of complexion, not that
the Sun kisseth them with that feruencie, but the air and their sluttish
customs corrupts both their blood and bodies: yet has nature prevailed over
these outward inconveniences in the distribution of valor, swiftness of
footmanship, vigilancie, and patience to endure the many encombrances of
travel, hunger, and want of sleep. They love Horses, and from that love
accustom themselves to a savage drinking of their blood, practicing a cunning
theft herein, which being unpunishable, occasioneth many pretty changes, both in
keeping their own, and purloyning from others, as if some civil Artist had
instructed them with the Lacedemonian toleration Theft lawful, and unlawful.
in this kind, for the better animating one another in the spoiling their
enemies: yet for all this, by reason they live in tents, and have small
defenses for their furniture and goods, theft of petty things is severely
punished amongst them, as also adultery, or if you will lying with another
man's wife, which is most odious unto them, because they are tied to the
trusting of one another, as I said within doors, and no man is debarred any
intercourse: it were therefore a double treachery to deceive the trust reposed,
and either purloyne the goods which lie open, or abuse the women which admit
you so friendly. They are governed in their travels and remouings by the
stars, and observing the North pole settle according to her influence: They
live free from covetousness, and are thus far happy, that the strange
corruptions of wealth, especially gold and silver breed no disorders amongst
them: yet have they a kind of traffic, and by way of exchange continue
mutual commerces, loving presents, and can be contented to be flattered even
in their barbarism: and herein I think all the Eastern people are delighted,
from a received tradition of our Patriarchs. But howsoever, I can assure you
Tartar Chrim himself, who is the most likeliest to be spoken with of all
others, as being the nearest, will not admit of any Christian without a
gratuitie, and present worthy of his favor.

You must now step a little forward toward the East, and with the Suns rising
see their glory arise: For Tangut is a wealthy Province, affording many things
befitting Europes magnificence, especially Rheubarb, a simple of R^barb.
that prerogative, as if the whole world were beholding for this distribution,
and had a saving health by virtue of the same. In Cathaia amongst many others,
the great City of Cambala will excite admiration, if you measure a quadrant of
30 mile about, and ouer-looke at every corner a Tower 40 furlongs in circuit,
erected for a Seralia or Arsenall, wherein the Emperors munition, armor, and
provision for war are secured: but he himself is sequestered to the priuacie of
another stately Palace, and is a strange Meteor amongst them seldom seen,
but for some portentous accident. In Mangia as Queen of the rest, is the City
of Quinzai, having a circumference of a 100 mile, by reason a great Lake of 30
mile divides the streets into channels, over which are numbered 1260 bridges,
some opening the arches so high and wide, that a good ship under sail has a
passage of ease, but things a far off are quickly reported; yet hardly
believed, and sometimes ouer-beleeued upon easy report, as you may perceive by
the travels of Sr John Mandeuile, the writings of Munster, and the constant
asseueration of modern Pilgrims, who all tell of so many monstrous shapes of
men in these parts, that our civil people are affrighted at the hearing, and
many times come flocking to see such Travelers, as have escaped the dangerous
passages, and savage immanitie. For my own part I would persuade you, that the
world is a stage of variety and wonders, whereon are placed more strange things
of truth, then the wit and policy of man can invent to seem fabulous: but as
at a stage the spectators only are a few in number to the infinite multitudes
for the time excluded; so in the exploration of Countries not one amongst ten
thousand either take the pains, or have the judgment to look into the
wonders of the world, and therefore I would be loath to exclude all enlargements
of histories from the closet of truth: yet concerning those fabulous reports of
Pigmies and Cranes, of men with long ears, one eye, one foot, and such like,
the Judicious take up the books to read, as if they would excite laughter; and
I dare be bold to maintain, there are no such men or people in the world: but
all Gods images are miraculous in this distinction of voice, reason, and an
erected countenance, with a proportion of shape, and what is not thus
established, is merely a monster, or a beast. But because I am sure, whether
true or false, there is nothing amongst them worthy respect, or challenging any
prerogative of happiness, or imitation, I will leave them to their vast
territories, and desist from amasing you with the almost incredible particulars
of those places, especially Cathaia, and Mangia.

CHAP. II. The Monarchy of CHINA.
ON the second step of the earths Throne is the Country of CHINA mounted, and ^
divided into eight several Kingdoms, over whom one principal Monarch
controuleth by those high and illustrious titles of MVNDI DOMINUS, and COELI
FILIVS, as if indeed their challenge to all natures immunities were a matter of
consequence, and their boasting of many things before Adam true and canonical.
The principal City is now called Faquin neighboring Tartary, out of which
the Emperor never issues, but in time of war, which is as it were an
exercise amongst them, and challenges the attendance of every nation, as if an
hereditarie duty challenged the son to the fathers obedience, and one
succession received of another, what belonged to the settling their estates by
attending their principal Commanders. For as you have read in England, that
from the Twede between (...), Westmerland, and Scotland, even to the Irish
Seas, there was a wall of a 100 mile long, called Picts (...) are at certain
spaces fortified with watch-towers, (...) hollow trunckes placed within the
curtains, received aduertisements one of another; so that (...) a moment upon
any alarm, excursion, or attempt, w^ (...) Picts, and turbulent Scots did
(...) ^ountry was up in arms, and the ordi^e (...) of their military
discipline put in pract^ (...) ^as in (...) Country from the Atlanticke sea to
mount Taurus between the Tartarians, and there (...) 8000 furlongs in length
is a wall raised ^ke a strong (...) fication, and at every miles end a ^mpart
or (...) wherein is continual garrison. But when the (...) disposes himself
to any field encounter of settled ^attaile, he seldom marches under an Army
(...) foot, and 200000 horse, and as seldom mee^ (...) uersarie without
effusion of much blood, and (...) many thousands, over whom their friends seem
(...) joyce, whether they have their dead carcasses, (...) a statua, as if some
glorious blessing were imparte^ (...) happy a thing they suppose it to die for
their Count^ and obey their Emperor: of which I am not (...) considering that
sacred truth has enlarged the ^error (...) that battle unto us, which was
fought between (...) and Jerusalem, wherein 500000 felt the smart of (...) and
tyranous dissension: And of another, wherein Zeres Emperor of Mores and
Aethiopians brought (...) pair of hands to pull down the walls of (...) and
not the God of Jacob remembered his promise to (...) and pushed them down to
the pit of destruction.

The great City of Manquin was once Capital of ^e Kingdom, in which now
only shines a g^ ^een more, insculped with the present Emperors name, and
never vnveiled, but at Festiuals: at which ^me the reverence appropriate to his
own person exciteth the ^ike ^tion. The Governors of Countries, and (...) of
Justice are called ^utant, whose (...) looks the punishment of thieves, who
(...) chiefly abound, so are they most severely (...) commonly beaten to death
with a (...) of (...) ^gers broad, and one thick: it is made of ^ewes (...)
wet in water to supple the same the sooner: so that the executioner daring not
moderate his strength, at every blow draws blood, until all their joints and
sinews are broken to pieces: and in this sort does tyranny boast of the
slaughter of 3 or 4000 every year, besides such as the prisons devour, being
sent thither half maimed, and formerly tormented.

Amongst them there are few Christians admitted, for fear of discovering the
secrets and wealth of their country: so cautelous and subtle they are in
understanding themselves and strangers, as for their commerces and uttering the
commodities of the countries, it is done in the Islands, or with certain
Brokers Indians, who traffic reciprocally between Christians and them,
receiving ready gold and silver for all, as scorning any thing which other
nations can confer, or transport unto them: nor is this done without a kind
of jealousy both toward the Indians and Christians; yea, sometimes a
treacherous policy to cut all their throats whom they can ouermaster, as Sr. Ed.
Michelborn could have testified, and many other English, surprised by
disloyalty of such as have thronged them on ship-boord, or wearied coming on
shore amongst the Islands of Moluccae and Philippinae either for water, or to
view the country: yet have some Portugals intruded themselves, and certain
Jesuits by way of insinuation got liberty of intercourse, from whom it should
seem they have learned to bless themselves with the sign of the cross,
against the assaults and temptations of the Dinell, whom they much adore in
these parts, and for fear of mischief, pacify with sacrifice and presents,
which makes me remember a reasonable honest man of my acquaintance, who having
two suspicious friends of contrary demeanours, and demanded why he observed
one before another; answered thus politikely: that the one was honest of
inclination, and would do him good for virtues sake, or at least no hurt: but
the other was more pestilent and dangerous, and therefore must be diuerted by
flattery and insinuation from the ill he might prosecute, or intend against him.

The better sort (notwithstanding these affrightings of the Devil) apprehend,
that all things, both supernall and infernal, depend upon the protection of a
greater Influence, whom by the name of Sun, Moon, and Stars they adore,
allowing a duplicity of Priests, the one in a white habit, as sequestered with
shaven crowns, like our cloistred Friars: the other in black with shag-haire
and formidable aspect, going at random, and frequenting more often their
temples, which are very sumptuous and rich, both in cities and countries: these
Priests are confederate with certain women called witches, who do make
travelers believe, they can sell them wind to sail from Island to Island, and
bring them to certain wagons for their land iourneyes over barren and sandy
places, which shall have sails, and be driven to and fro with great
swiftness: wherein as I will not betray my understanding to any vain and idle
credulity, considering that God is the only commander of his creatures: so
must I yield to this probability, that by reason of the infinite number of
Islands, and the country lying open to the sea, the wind is every way more
forcible then in other places, and by reason of mountanous blustrings, and
pressing the air into straights, seems to fight one with another, and at one
time to blow with sundry divisions.

Concerning other particulars of their wives and concubines, of their wealth
and jewels, of their odours and perfumes, of their wines and syrups, there is
no offending chaste ears with their incredible customs: so vilde and filthy
is their idolatry, so obscene and shameless their lives, so ridiculous their
incantations, so exorbitant their presenting of virgins to be deflowred of
Idols, so abominable their exorcismes, and so odious their senseless
profanation, with lamentable obstinacy not to be diuerted: I will therefore
leave them to the supreme Judge, and return to England with this caution,
that the fool has said in his heart there is no God, and I hope we attend
these discoueries with fear or contempt.

CHAP. III. The Monarchy of INDIA.
THE third part of the worlds glory is enclosed within the storehouses of rich
and The third Empire of the world.
opulent India, a country not only invested with magnificence, but arrogating
a pre-eminence over other nations, both for spaciousness of ground, and all
such blessings, wherewith the divine providence has made the ^oyes of men
exceed. For the two great rivers of Indus and Ganges water the same, and
divided into many thousand brooks, like the children of a blessed mother, and
plentiful housekeeper, bring glad tidings to the family (...) extraordinary
allowances: and thus it insulteth for two summers, temperature of air,
duplicity of increase, and that we are adventurers for such things as she
vilipendeth: not yet admitted to understand the one half of her secrets, The
men and women do now imitate a noble pomp as not encountered abroad, nisi ma^na
comitante ^terua, using many odours in their bathes and washing; nor are they
without oils and perfumes, jewels, pearls, and other ornaments, not only
befitting the bu^nesse in hand, but to please one another in matters of
incontinency: yet have they many wives, who strive with all ^cting demeanor to
be best beloved of their (...) But you have diverse books of this subject,
both an^ and modern, as Herodotus, Pliny, and other Cosmographers, who thus
relate the matter: that since the conquest of Bacchus, whom by another name
they call ^oer Pa^r they have settled in their country with magnificent eq^
page 5000. principal cities, advancing a fashion ^le government to equal the
best Commonwealths, only they adored Bacchus for a God, and Hercules for a
giant: they never intruded into any other princes territories, but have
defended their own from all innovation of strangers, as Q. Curtius relates,
adding withal a delicate commentary of their famous exploits and noble
greatness, even against the Conqueror of the world, in the time of the He^e
Porus, who with great majesty, valor, and armies of Elephants would have
maintained their freedom and glory: but that Fortune and Success had
condescended to the conditions of ratifying Alexanders prosperity. And although
the many Princes have sometimes repined one against another, and for
superiorities sake, showed the ^ety of their own glories and mightiness: yet
(...) still combined in the prop^ing of for^ (...), (...) appeasing private
encombrances, not reaching (...) civil deciding, and hating injustice and co^
(...) much as may be. They love and reverence their Kings, (amongst whom the
great Mogull, having us in some estimation before other Princes of Europe, and
with whom we have a kind of correspondency, as by reciprocal letters may
appear, is principal and of greatest reputation) making holy day when he
shaueth his head, and attending his chariot with pompous bravery, spredding the
way where he must pass, with costly ornaments and delicate perfumes. For he
is carried in great pomp on the shoulders of men, adorned with purple, gold,
and precious stones, the chair hanging with orient pearl, and all thing so
ordered, as if the best of our ceremonies should add an honor to Majesty. His
Guards for his person are many and the best of his soldiers, who suffer no
nearer approaches to his stately throne, then he himself shall command, which
is publicly known by the disrobing of his head of common ornaments, and
inuesting himself with a magnificent Diadem, then are Ambassadors admitted,
and diverse laws enacted for the good of the people.

Another book will discover, that when he disposes himself to pleasure, his
concubines are sent for to be partakers of the hunting, and then in open view
the beasts are killed, being chased before hand into certain straight
enclosures for the purpose: but if he determine a longer progress, their
chariots are drawn with Elephants, and their Diverse authors write of India,
and would include China as one Country
honorable Queens left at home: but the wantons are enstructed to make proud
incontinency swell with variety, not accustoming their wives to be partaker of
such lascivious changes, but reserving them for necessity of children, or
moderation of contentment: when he determines to sleep, or peradventure is
ouerloded with wine, that he must resettle his spirits and senses with rest and
ease, the loueliest dames bring him to bed, singing a song of invocation to the
God of silence, and the night.

Another will relate, how worthily their honest matrons live after they have
had children, how ever they yield their chastities at the first to their
lovers for the price of an Elephant, which yet never exciteth any exprobation
against them. In some places, when a virgin desires marriage, her parents
bring her to public view amongst a number of young men, where she electeth
whom she fancieth. In their mutual commerces they hate usury, disclaim
injustice, deny indentures of covenant, contracts of writing, and have many
seeming excellencies of love, confidence, and trusting one another: only they
are impatient of wrong, and think it a glory to take revenge, but will not
offer the occasion.

Another will tell you, that they once esteemed two sorts of wisemen, by the
names of Samaraei and Brachamanes, both which were charactered for
Gymnosophists: but the Samaraei for their preciseness were better esteemed of
the Kings; for living more moderate then the rest, as eating neither fish nor
flesh, it added to their reputation, that the peace of their Kingdoms was
established by their orizons, and the prosperity of the country confirmed
through their holiness.

Another will demonstrate, how St. Thomas converted them to Christianity, how
ever with the Syrians in Samaria, they have since intermingled horrible
idolatry, and until the Portugals came amongst them, would scarce reform the
most grossest abuses.

Another will enlarge the conquest of their country by the Portugals and
Spanyard, with a full description of all things, which may show you the perfect
portraiture of their kingdoms, courts, commonwealth, riches, pleasures,
civil administration, and mightiness: yet (as I take it) so far from a
conquest, as we were over France, when we had only Callis in Picardy, or
Turwin and Tornay, which cost more the re-edifying, then all the country about
it was worth. Here you shall also find how they have striued with the
Egyptians for antiquity and cunning, how many Islands are subjected unto them,
amongst whom Summatra, in times past called Taprobana, mustreth the power of
eight Kings. Iapan affoordeth our English a harbor; and at Bantam they receive
the commodities of China from the Indian Merchants, who are only admitted to
commerce amongst them: and diverse others, as are therein variated with many
particulars.

To conclude no one Country comes near it for greatness, India now
intermingled with Christians.
which without other addition lifts up her title alone, as challenging all
the territories between China and Persia; yea in times past China it self,
almost 1200. English mile, and amongst many Kings, he is principal, that
obtains by force or popularity. But of late they have ouer-exalted the high
Priest called Voo, who in spiritual matters (as I may say) has absolute power
and authority, and upon whose blessing or cursing depends the expectation of
future happiness. Yet has this idolatrous superstition acknowledgement of a
God, whom they inuest with a triple crown, not yielding any reason for the
same, but that he commands Heaven, Earth, and Hell. The Jesuits have taught
them to baptize infants in some places, and to fast, wherein they are now
tedious obseruants (as barbarous people are best maintainers of customs and
ceremonies) and they use the sign of the cross, but it is where they are
enforced by the Spanish garrisons, otherwise, what I spoke before of China: for
all their silks, clothes of gold, delicate beds, houses of canes, Serpents,
Elephants, precious stones, minerals, pearls, perfumes, drugs, spice, sweet
wood, barks of trees, shells, nuts, and other things of estimation, I may with
a Christinn-like sorrow amplify, concerning their turpitude and morosity. As
for their cities, every one would afford a story, and I am unwilling to run
into the error of fiction or miracle, considering your best Cosmographers have
only extended the relations of others, and besides the variety of
contradicting one another, would now be amazed to see so bewtifull a face of
many countries, which they left most glorious, so deformed: and so unpleasant a
countenance, as they imagined, so illustrious and exalted.

And thus much for that part of Asia, who are all Idolaters, barbarous,
inhumane, treacherous, haters of strangers, and so remote from the happiness I
would rely upon, as my joy exceeds for not being a native amongst them.

CHAP. IV. The Empire of PERSIA.
ON the fourth principal palace of the worlds majesty, attends the
expectation of the Persian, 4. The fourth part of the worlds honor.
who though he cannot boast of 128. regions, as in the time of Hahashuerosh: of
intruding into Greece, and subiecting the Islands of the Hellespont, as in those
confused Anarchies of Corinth, Athens, and Lacedemon: of re-edifying of
Babylon, and swelling with prosperity and glorious armies, as when Darius and
Alexander the great made slaughter proud to have the fields furnished with
gold, pearl, and treasure: of a since regathered and compacted mightiness,
when the Roman Crassus was subjected to the calamity of an unfortunate
overthrow: and of a strained original from Perseus, who advanced that
magnificent structure of Persepolis amongst them, and made the people proud of
their denomination, because he was the son of Jupiter, and they the
offspring of the supreme God: yet does he still command many regions of
Asia, with reputation of a principal Monarch. For the Kingdoms of Saca, with
the magnificent exployts of Tolmilanda, that glorious Queen, the Virago of her
time, and mirror of her Sex: the regions of Bactriana, Sogdiana, and many
other nations compassing the East and South of the Caspian, lie still prostrate
under the feet of this Empire: but because I find the best authors diffused
in the^ discovery, and never conferred but with certain Armenians, who had
traveled into those parts, by whom I only understood of much tyranny amongst
them, and that their greatest exercise was rapine and murdering of passengers,
with other mischeeuous practices, both on the confines of Media and India,
without form of government, or control of superiors, as flying into the
mountains, and securing themselves in the dangerous passages, in despite of
any forces to be raised against them: so that they still remain vnsubiected
and unpunished, more then a general acknowledgemet of title and willingness,
to make the Persian the arbiter of such controversies as are raised amongst
them. I desist from further dismantling their savageness, as a living misery,
without either form, or order of discipline.

I might also be affrighted from poorer relations, in regard the locuplent
history of Turkey, especially Chron^ Turcarum in Latin, the Tartarian
Tamberlaine, and valiant Scanderbegg of EVROPE, or if you will George Castriot
of Epirus with some others, have spread abroad, an open carpet of pandecticall
ampliation, concerning the conquest of these places and people, by another name
Parthians, including Media, sollemnizing the ostentation of Samerchanda, and
making Tauris with other Cities of Persia the seats of his reziance, wherein
this Tamberlaine proceeded so far, that after the victory over Bajazet, he
put a Tyara The (...) Tyara.
on his head in imitation of the ancient Cydaris, and Persian former renoune.
I will therefore be the more sparing either in exprobating them that esteemed
him at the first a theeuish robber, a base shepherd, or at the best a
barbarous Scithian: or exasperating the displeasure of credible Authors, who
have confounded one another with disparitie of opinions, concerning the
alteration of these people even in our modern times; especially since the
Emperors of Constantinople never looked back on the terrors of their
vengeance, nor forward on the preuentions of their dissolution: yet because I
must now keep a proportion in my discourses, I will gently lead you a nearer
way to the knowledge of such occurrences, as my poor endeauours have obtained.

About the year of our redemption 1360. after many ^.
mischeeuous practices, and intestine broiles amongst the Mahumetans, or
Saracens, now Persians, Turks, and Moors a worthy Conqueror amongst them, and
especially Prince named Sophy, advanced his head over the rest, and obteining
the Town of Abdenelis attempted likewise the principality over all those
factions, that strove to advance the honor of Mahomet, and gave way to the
strong receipt of his imposturing Alcaron. This Sophy from the blood and
consanguinity of Alis Muamedes in the right of his wife Musa, Cusinus
challenged the Empire, and lifted up the arms of a mighty power to ouer-awe
the turbulent spirits almost left breathless by a long and tedious dissension,
(for at that time the Calipha of Babylon was extirped, and new authority with
new names, obscured the first original of the Persian greatness, and quickly
altered both the Princes and people, teaching them other customs even in
civil and mutual conversation, with the well entertained religion.) But
Hosenus the son of Alis stomaching his Uncle Sophies proceedings, as having
twelve sons of sufficient hope, like a Hieroglyphicall resemblance of a
sheaue of arrows bound together in one quiver, proclaimed his right to the
Persian Cidaris, and well conceived opinion of his interpretation of the
Alcaron, at such time as the Turk, assisted by the Tartars, advanced a
standard of opposition, publishing, that whosoever affected their enlarging of
these religious secrets should wear a Tiara on his head of purple with a
Tulliuant: whereupon both Turks, and Persians in infinite numbers bandied
several parties, until at last great armies took upon them the deciding of
these controversies, and by many auxiliary forces both of the Northren regions,
and all the Arabians, filled the fields of Asia with tormenting The Persians
a^e.
quarrels: where by the way you must consider, that both Persians, Turks, and
Medes, with Arabians aunciently called Saracens, do in a manner adorn their
bodies and heads all alike, and may be thus worthy distinguishment and
observation, First in the Tyara, which is a round ornament of the head, in the
Turks, more formally called a Turban: in the others not so curious, but either
interwinded like a rowll; or in some places plighted, at in Munster in Ireland.
Secondly a Cidaris, which some will have a hat, or cappe of velvet, or cloth of
gold, on which they wreathed their Tiara, or linen scarffes. Thirdly, a little
swelling crown some four or five inches higher, then the wreath, or Turban
called by them a Tulliuant, and cannot be resembled better, then to your
younger You (...)
Merchants wives of LONDON in their hat-cappes. Fourthly, long coats or gowns
with halfe-wide sleeves: yet underneath they have a shorter, girt to them more
closely. Fifthly, a large girdle either of net-worke silk, or other curions
needleworke, hanging down as low, as the skirt of the inward coat. Sixthly, a
Stola, or robe of Honor particoulored of dellicate stuff, or velvet.
Seventhly, a Semiter, of a reasonable breadth and bending like a bow, or as much
as the sheath will give ease for entertainment. And last of all fine coulored
shoes plated with iron, and turning up at the toe with a peake.

After many conflicts Hosenus the immediate Heir of Alis prevailed against his
Uncle Sophy, and set the crown on his own head with remembrance yet of the
others glory so far, that he was proclaimed Hosenus Sophy (...) in the next
generation the sanctity of Guines the son of Hosenus continued with such
applause, that the (...) were reputed Heretics, and suffered that contume^s
division, as now the Papist and Puritan in EV^ but so the fortune of Guines
Sophy prevailed, that (...) lain himself took arms in his defense, and as a
principal Sectarie of Mahomet made the colorable suppreding of Heretics (for
so do Turks, and Persians reciprocally vpbraid one another) the stimulatory
cause (...) all Asia minor, until the Emperor Bajazet with (...) Turks fell
under the strokes of his warlike hand: Next unto him succeeded Secaider, as
obstinate as his father, and as successful in enlarging their Mahomets
blasphemies, of whom I will say no more, seeing they acknowledge one God, one
Prophet, and circumcision, differing only as I said in the antiquity of their
Rabby, and idle nicety, for which they have set in combustion the Countries of
the East, and with violent entercourses divided the spoils of Asia. For this
Secaider attempted the conquest of Georgia and Mengrelia on the West of the
Caspian, who being Christians according to the superstition of the Greek
Church, submitted to certain conditions, as tolleration of religion, paying
tribute, and disclaiming to assist the Turk against them: whereby they
obtained a kind of peace and protraction, until again the Persians declined
in their fortunes, and could not prevent the forwardness of the O^oman glory:
yet ever since there has been an intermixture and admittance on all sides,
especially in the interims of their truce; and when counterchangeable Embasies
have passed between them. Besides, from an absolute tradition of the East,
which that lascivious Mahomet inserted, as a tolleration and princely
prerogative from Ahasuerosh instance, or if you please Salomons Concubines, all
the beautifullest Virgins are taken up between Persian and Turk, even perforce
out of the laps of Christian mothers, and sequestered with purifying oil, and
^e fare for the Emperors pleasure: witness SIR (...) SH^S LADY, who was a
Christian ^
Georgian either living with some kindred in the freedom of religion, or taken
out of the Seralio (wherein he was exceedingly favored) before she was graced
with the (...) (...) presence; otherwise, it is death to marry a Christian, or
a Persian to be married to a Christian.

Thus you see how the name of Sophy began, and was added ^
to the Emperors titles, as the Abimelech^ to P^e Pharaoh and P^olomeus to
Egypt: yea, within our memory, the Sultan called Cairo new Babylon, and
Caesar was, and is an attribute to all Emperors, since Julius and Augustus.
But no sooner had the distinction of these people, Persians, Turks and Moors,
from an interpretation of their law, limited the several subjects within
certain bounds of strict allegiance: but time and curiosity corrupted all
their manners, and neither Herodatus* (...) nor Pliny, living now amongst them,
would suppose them the same nations, for whom they took such pains in their
descriptions: so that who viewes them now, must not look upon their riches and
glory, otherwise the^ upon mighty conquerours, and magnificent people ^yet
because there are some differences amongst them, according to a breuiary
observation, wherein my time was employed, and that as the Jews repined at the
Samaritans, the ^ritans at the Galilaeans: so here is the same discrepancy ^ut
extending to particulars of better consequence (...) ^e thought good to publish
these uses. The Persian is (...) minded, liberal, sociable, and far from
affect^on. The Turk is dogged, proud, sparing, and contemp^, ^s not knowing
either consanguinity, neighbor-hood, or any thing but the name of a ^aue. The
Persian (...) noblemen, loves such as we call hawke-^ee, from (...)
commendation of Cyrus, wears his upper ^p w^ ^g and turning mustachoes,
boasts of his (...) in propagato sanguine, is glorious in app^ (...) ^ous,
enclining to peace, and de^rous of ple^ (...) they give life unto by
solemnizing of feasts, whereat their noble wives may meet, except when they are
heated to lasciviousness, then are they sent away, and concubines invited to
make wantonness the fuller, to which they come by degrees, beginning with a
modest shamefastness, but more bold, at last set open all the doors of
petulant and luxurious variety: nor are they ashamed to produce instances of
Darius banqueting in Susa 180. days, with all his Princes: of Baltashars
solemnities, when the cups of of gold were filled, and the beds of iuory spread:
of Alexanders the Conqueror, imitating the Persian bravery, and rejecting the
barren and shuffling customs of the Grecians, and diverse others, whose
inventions and customs are remembered to set on flame the already burning fire
of their voluptuousness. The Turk contemns such formality in condition: yet
is more curious in apparel; for his Turban is delicately plighted, and when
it raines, has a hood to cover it, his upper gown is clean brusht, his
mustacho carefully preserved, his beard the grace of his countenance, and many
other delicacies maintained, while he is resident in corrupted cities, seeming
more solid, tyrannous, warlike, and knows nothing but obedience, as coniured
to raise up all the trophies of his endeauours to the glory of Othoman: yea, in
his matters of incontinency, he runs also a strange race, with a more
impudent violence then the Persian, as if the Satyr were exemplined: Dum
vitant stulti vitia, in contraria currunt: and both from that horrible
corruption of the Grecians, have admitted the defiling of males, and the better
sort do both geld and keep Eunuchs, and other to the same purpose. The Persian
loves learning, painting, exercises, and many generous qualities. The Turk
scorneth any language but his own, supposing him a right Politician, who
speaks or learneth his, cares for no quality, but riding, shooting, and
playing at chesse, contemns many superfluous customs of Europe, and has in
derision, yea in malicious contempt all the ceremonies of the Western
Churches, by reason of their images, and foolish profaning of God through
idolatry. Thus then from India to Arabia East and West, and from the Caspian to
the Persian Gulf (where the great Euphrates emptieth his streams, and under
whose shores is that famous Ormus scited, where they fish for pearl, and
travel six weeks together, from Damascus and Cairo to the same, with 6. or
700, cammels and asses in a company, to carry their provision, for fear of the
thieves of Arabia) prevails this Emperor, possessing withal diverse cities
on this side Ganges, as intermingled with the Portugals: so that in India at
this instant you have many ports and harbors of fortification lying
intricately diuiuided between Turks, Persians, Spaniards, and the Indians
themselves.

CHAP. V. The Empire of TVRKS.
THE fifth and absolutely the greatest share The fifth part of the (...) glory.
of the worlds honor for goodness of ground, as indeed throwing into his lap
the spoils of Asia, Europe, and Afric, has bedecked the Emperor of Turks
with such ornaments, that we now call him the Gran Signeur, and he
understands himself thus far, that for wealth, territories, and command of
soldiers, all other Princes come short of him, and are terrified, when he is
at peace with the Persian, and unites his Army against the ill-agreeing
Princes of Christendom: But if you please, you shall thus expose the
contention to your own arbitrament.

For countries: He possesses Asia minor, now Natolia Countries.
or Anatolia, of the Greek word signifying East, with all the Regions within
the Propontis, and Hellespont, and such places as in times past made the
Crowns of Kings to shine with gold and pearl, advancing their chaires to the
establishment of the highest Majesty, as Phrigia, Galatia, Bithinia, Pontus,
Lidia, Caria, Paphlagonia, Licia, Magnesia, Capadocia, and Comagena: then near
the Caspian now Hircanian Sea, Georgia, Mengrelia, Armenia, all Christians of
the Greek Church: To which if you add the Empire of Trebisond, you shall then
find him the great controller of the black Sea: For although Russia,
Bogdonia, Muldauia, and some Polanders keep the north and west shores; yet is
it as a man, which has notice of a thieves coming to rob him, and dares not
slack his guards, lest he be surprised unawares. Next does the pride of his
greatness send you into Assiria, Siria, Palestina, Mesopotamia, Judea, some
torn away pieces of Persia, especially the oppulent Towns of Tauris and
Babylon, the three Arabia's, and the red Sea. Thirdly, if you will walk into
Affricke, he can inuit you to the pleasures and plenty of Aegipt, the
fertility of Nilus, and all the shores of the middle land Sea, as far as the
confederation of Morocco, Barbary, and Fess: Nor desisteth he so, but in the
fourth place from the top of Alexandria he bids you look as far
Northward as you can, and all the Islands in the arches, except Candy, and some
few circumspecting the couchent lion of Venice, acknowledge him for sovereign
Lord, and King. Fifthly, the fields of Greece lie wall, and are ashamed to lift
up their deformed countenances, and worne-out necks with the iron collar of
servitude and bondage, considering that in times past Thracia, Macedonia,
Thessalia, Epyrus, and Pelopenesus set both Philosophers and Poets on work to
sing out encomions of their delightsome magnificence, and pleasures of love;
all which is now forgotten, as if the swet of a brow were wiped away with a
cloth. Last of all, his Bashawes will bring you to Buda and Belgrade, and
affright you with a relation of Hungaries troubles, assuring you, that it
knows not her first parents, but calls the Turk a conqueror in many
things. Yea the Princes of Poland, Transiluania, Sclauonia, and others, with
whom he has contracted a pacification, are yet uncertain of his dammings in,
and have a fearful care, lest he should break down his enclosures, and like
an inundation indeed burst upon them unawares.

His principal Cities are Trebisond, Amasia, Babylon: or if you will but the
ruins of confusion: Tauris gotten Cities.
from Persia: Mecha famous for the history and burial of Mahomet: Gran Cairo
in times past Memphis, of late new Babylon, exposing the ostentous works of
the Pyramides: but now you can wonder at nothing, but heat, dust, sluttishnes,
and the mortality of a 100000 in a year, when the pestilence rages amongst
them: Alexandria boasting of her Founder, and that she is the porter to let
you enter the doors of Nilus: Algier lifting up the head of a strong Castle,
and daring to publish, how the Emperor Charles the fifth lost his Navy before
her: and Tunis the Port of old Carthage, and now refuge of all the English
Pirates: Shall I come back again and tell you of Jerusalem, Tyrus, and Sidon?
alas, they are but names, and all the plagues denounced by the Prophets have
broken their bones in sunder, and bruised them like a rod of iron: Aleppo,
which would feign be old Antioch, yea dare from the mouth of some Authors
publish, the antiquities of Niniuie: The seven Churches of Asia renowned for
former election, and former desolation according to the prophecy of the
Evangelist for the removing of the candlestick: Rhodes mourning for the
pulling in pieces the Colossus of brass, which named the whole Island
Collocenses, and loaded 700 Cammels after he departed from the siege: Nicosia,
Paphos, and Famagosta, all Cities of Ciprus, and almost fretted a pieces to
think, that the Venetians lost them so carelessly, and unfortunately: The few
Cities left of Europe: the poor harbors of Asia minor: the port towns of the
Islands: the two castles of the Hellespont, reducing to your memory the
misfortunes of Hero and Leander, whom the towns of Cestos and Abidos bewailed,
and the principal place of all his reziance Constantinople, called Stanbole,
or the Beautiful; and extraordinarily graced with the denomination and
conueniencie of the sacra porta.

His riches consist in commanding the lands, bodies, Riches.
and lives of all his subjects: For first his own nation called the Musselman
labors in all business to increase his treasury, and pay him an yearly
entrado: the countryman is a drudge, and tilleth the ground to maintain his
officers, who distribute to the people, as he appoints: the Christians
maintain his Sansacks, and Timatriots; and all his Ianisaries and soldiers
being the sons of Christians are paid, and have their salary from his
Exchequer and treasury: the Merchant brings him gold from all the world, and
fills his Harbors with such commodities, as the earth affords, and the Jew
supplieth his wants in such a manner, that he neither lacks pearls,
diamonds, and precious stones, nor any thing which the earth affords to fringe
the skirts of Majesty with extraordinary pomp and bravery. But if you will
ask me in what manner Fortune attended thus to apparel, and set him on the
stage of such magnificence, as never Emperor, or Monarch could dream on
before; with all their tyrannous inventions besides? I will thus redact some
occurrences of former times to help your memory.

The story of the OTHOMANS.
ABout the year of Grace 1300. to our greater disgrace, His Conquests.
did Othomanus the son of Lichis step before other families, as if he were
adopted the darling of success, and in his fathers behalf obtained
jurisdiction over Bithinia, Cappadocia, and most part of Pontus. His successor
Orchanes conquered the great City of Prusia, and made it the City of his
Kingdom, and seat of his inheritance: but in the 22 year of his progress he
was killed by the Tartars, and left his son Amurah to succeed both in his
honor and family; who perceiving the dissension of the Greeks, and division
of the Empire against the remainder of the Romans, spent not the advantage
which he took at the same, without a great satisfaction. For with the water
that drove the mill he drowned it, and invited as a guest to this banquet of
combats became master of the feast; or rather resembled the viper, which
destroyed the mother that brought it forth: so he admitted as auxiliary for
another, at last made a conquest for himself, of Gallipolis, Chersonesus,
Peloponesus, Philipopolis, Hadrinopolis, Seruia, Bulgaria, and Misia: But after
23. years convulsion of the Grecian glory, and his own shouldring into the
throng of magnificent renown, he was stabd with a dagger, and so gave way to
his son Bajazet to fill the chair of his imperiousnes: He began well,
attaining Phocis, Macedonia, and most part of Thracia, had not fortune kept him
a little from insulting, and tript up his heels even in the race of his
triumph: For with the loss of 200000 Turks against that valiant Tamberlaine,
he also lost his freedom, and how he died, our stages have instructed
Mechanical men: Yet did Calepinus his son in the mean while take up the
colors of defiance, and forbearing the reuenges of Asia, wrecked his anger on
Sigismond of Europe, and determined to ouerrunne the other territories of
Hungary, and the Empire; but prosperity was not so attendant. For ere six
years had enlarged the branches of this strange spreading tree, the axe was
put to the root, and as in Daniels vision, Nabuchadnezar fell to the earth:
but his stump sprung again, and Mahomet his son in imitation of his fathers
progress, set forward his own journey, winning Walachia, Sclauonia, all the
borders of the Ionian sea, and made Andrianopolis the storehouse of his
honor, wherein for 14 year he heaped up such ornaments of Mars and Bellona,
that he terrified the Emperor of Germany, and all the confederate Princes of
Italy. Presently followed Amurath the second, and filled up his inventory with
Epirus, Aetolia, Achaia, Boeotia, Attica, and Thessalonica: then subject to the
Venetians, now Salenica, and the gulf of Napoli, running up by a corner of
Nigropont, in times past Eubaea. Next him Mahomet the second overthrew the
schools of Athens, and on a fatal day, a day of punishment and terror, a day
of judgment and unanswerable accounts, the 29 of May 1452. brought such a
reckning before Constantinople, that she forfeited her liberty, and was
compelled to pay the amercement, nor had she time with the politic steward
to alter the bills of the debtors, whereby he provided against future wants:
But when Corinth, Lemnos, Meteline, Capha a town belonging to the jurisdiction
of Genoa, and many other Islands understood of her araignement, and perceiving
there was no contesting with this severe judge of assise, they took a course
of prostitution, and yielded both homage and fealty; to which they were the
rather induced, because Trebisond first led the way of expectation for mercy,
and gave him leave to continue in pomp, and glorious estimation 32 years.
After him Bajazet the second obtained Naupact, Methon, and Diriachum from the
Venetians; then went he to make a contract with fortune for the most part of
Dalmatia, and thought to have bargained for Austria: but it should seem the
conditions were very intricate, and something interposed it self. For an
envious hand poisned his body, as ambition had done his mind, which was
imputed to his son Zelimus, who most unnaturally made him away with excuse of
Alexanders emulation against his father Philip, when he told him his
enterprises were so great, that he would leave him little to do: yet it fell
out to them both otherwise. For Alexander set forward the conquest of Asia: and
Zelimus of Affricke, uniting Cairo, Aegipt, Alexandria, and Damascus to the
Empire. But now you must look upon the wanton of fortune, even Solomon the
magnificent, who stepped back again into Europe, and reached at Belgrade,
Buda, and Strigonium, with so forcible a strength, that he pulld them from the
sides of a loving mother, and left the rest of Hungary mourning at the
cruelty: yet desisted he not so. For he vanquished Rhodes, pulling the Colossus
and wonder of the world in pieces; to which he added the deuastation of the
five Churches, and Iula: but coming to Zigethis was there arrested with an
imperious ^one firma from the commander of Kings, and so died. But his son
Zelimus the second, lived, and reigned, until Ciprus fell from the Venetians
1570. like a stone pulled from a ruinous wall: yet being loose before, it did
not much endanger the foundation. For presently followed the battle of
Lepanto, wherein these Italian confederates played the worke-men indeed, and a
little restored both their reputation and losses. Thus was Amurah the third
left the great Lord of Lords, ouerlooking the most part of Europe, the West of
Asia, and the North of Afric, but more proud of the old Sinan, Bashaw, and
the Cigalas: the one his Admiral at sea, the other Viceer of his army: then
the conquest of any one Kingdom, because through their industry the honor of
the Empire flourished, and yet he might follow his pleasures. But being a
corpalent man, he presumed so far, that luxury and incontinency ouergorg'd
him in the feeding. For, Nihil violen^um ^erpetuum, and so his lamp was
extinguished, leaving (...) son ^tanus Achmat the first of his name, and
fouretee^ (...) from Othoman, not above sixteen years old, to ^ge the horses
of this Phaetonticall chariot.

This Emperor is seldom seen abroad, unless he be (...) ^ted to some
Bashawes Seralio, or appoint to hawke according to the time of the year: but I
impu^ this sequestration to his sickness, of the small pox, w^ ^
which he was grievously the year before perplexed (...) when he takes his
pleasure in this kind, to ans^ (...) proportion of attendance, you shall have
300. (...) and 4000. horse in the field together, with whose (...) they spring
the game. For wanting Spaniels, the ground besides being hot and stony, they
sildome come to (...), but quickly kill whatsoever is put up, by reason (...)
multitude, both of hawks and and officers: to this they add the music of
certain half drums on horseback, and so for all our ridiculous proverb of
hunting hares with tabers, they pastime themselves in all their sports, which I
was an eye witness of, about the first of September 160^ and beheld the great
Turk in the fields of Greece, a gallant young man of nineteen years old,
somewhat fat and and well favored: yet did the pock-holes a little eclipse
the sweetness of his aspect: his countenance was stern and maiesticall, and
his apparel a plain crimsen satin gown. He wore no gloves, nor suffered
any to do so in his presence, which likewise all their women observe,
especially the Sultanesses, whom when the Lady G^ouer was admitted to visit,
they caused her to put her gloves aside: On his thumb he had a horn ring, as
all other Turks have, keeping one order for their shooting, as an artificial
device to draw their strong sinewed bows, without which a treble enforcement
cannot prevail. His Semiter was rich, and boasted of a Christian worke-man in
Dama^s, and in a delicate Turban, he had a hanging feather of diamonds, valued
at 40000. pound sterling, his company was not above 2000. horse, most of them
Capogies and Chiauses, in velvet gowns and rich saddles^ should (...) he went
not far, because 200. Gimoglans carried his repast on foot, in certain
delicate baskets covered over with rich handkerchifs: after he was past, I was
admitted into his gally, in which he came from his Caska, a delicate
banqueting house without his Seralio, close by the sea side to Porta del
Fiume, where he took horse: it was a room of great riches, yet small
capacity, set all over with inlayed work of mother of pearl, rubies, opals,
emeralds, and had the metal beaten into thin plates laid countercompony,
which with the borders answered one another in graceful proportion; within
this Cabinet, as I may say, no man comes but himself, nor on horseback were
any near him by 60. foot, except such as ran by him in their proper places, or
durst adventure to deliver petition unto him, which certain Russians did,
complaining on the borderers of Bogdonia, and daily excursions of the Rouers
and Pirates of the black sea.

Amongst other entertainements, the Ambassador Sr. Thomas Glouer had several
times invited the Bashaw of Tunis, the Polish and Persian Ambassadors, from
whom I received an extraordinary description of all the well-deseruing virtues
of our noble Queen Elizabeth, as if that Majesty alone had made all the East
to wonder, who before were never moved with any businesses of Europe, and with
whom I went to Scideret a town in Asia, just over the sea, against the City,
in whose fields about July before, the great army of 200000. Turks and Tartars
were mustered: by the way in the midst of the sea stands a watchtower, as
the guard of the passage into the black sea, which in truth is a river of
great pleasure for twenty miles to the black tower, and Pompey's pillar,
adorned on each side of the bank with delicate houses, wherein both Turks and
Greeks pastime themselves in their harvest and vintages, and sometimes retire
in the raging of a plague, yet was I in the great City, when there died 80000.
in five months: but of all other things suppose themselves graced, when the
Gran Signieur will vouchsafe to visit them, and extend his pleasure amongst
them: this tower is well guarded and erected, in such a fashion, that we may
dispute thereof, if an Island? how so small? and not washed in pieces with the
violence of some tempest; if none? how was twenty fathom deep raised to a
foundation: within two mile more particularly called the vines of Pera, the
Greeks for seven or eight days resort in famelies to their gardens, and
solemnize their vintages with music and dancing, and although the country
seems stony and hot: yet under the skirt of the hills are mantling meddowes
running in stripes, yielding hay and pasture for their greater cattle. Beyond
Constantinople Northward, are the Jews licensed to bury their dead, and
according to the greatness of the family and person, set up tents of watchet
and crimsen satin, and observe a commendable order of mourning and lamentation
in their exequies. The river runs into the sea by the vines of Pera: so that
Galata neither stands in Asia, nor is an Island, but resembles a spur of
fortification, and is joined to the Continent of Thrace with an Istmus: some
fiueteene miles from the City, those stately aquae ductus, of which there be
sixteen in several places, which feed the cesternes of Constantinople, give
notice what men and money can do. For being the works of pleasure and
ostentation, they are raised to a level from hill to hill, and the water
coming from open springs, is as it were sent to be better secured within
passages of stone, mounted upon arches 200. foot high, and a thousand in
length, from whence it posteth with gladness to a delicate abode of cesternes
and fountains, which by diverse pipes under ground pay a continual tribute to
the conduits of the great City.

The towns and villages of the country are disordered, and the people line
^luttishly on roots, fruit, garlic, onions, gourds, and such like. For they
sildome eat any flesh, and if any good thing fall to their share, as melions,
pomegranets, almonds, grapes, figs, and other delicates, they raise what profit
they can: yea, as beastly as it is, they send their butter and cheese to
Stanbole, which with a loathsome show opens the Cow-hides it is put in, and
next the filthy hair glutteth a strangers stomach without tasting at all. They
cart and plow with Buffoloes: yet have oxen, whom they feed to supply the
markets and court, as being proportioned out of their Sansacks end Timatriots
to a weekly number. About the end of November was a comet seen in the West,
near the Constellation of Andromeda, and the plague continued without fear or
repining, to which was added a lasting fire of seven days, consuming almost
4000. houses, and shaking the walls of diverse Bashawes houses: the loss
lighting upon the already broken backs of the Jews, and some Grecians, and
the repining dispersed amongst the Turks themselves, who casting up an
untoward catalogue of many accidents, and summoning altogether with diverse
reuolts, but especially the rebels of Armenia, and the distasting humors of
the S^uano of Asia, or if you will, the Bashaw of Aleppo, dared to whisper many
things against the dignity of the Empire. So that at this very instant, the
expectation of a change may embolden us all, if Christendom will acknowledge
that there is one in heaven, who disposes of earthly kingdoms, and the
Princes could admit of some principal Joshua to conduct his brethren. For
without controversy, this swelling Monarch is now at the highest mark, and
must have a cadence according to the revolution of time and governments.

CHAP. VI. The Empire of AETHIOPIA.
THe sixth part of the worlds Honor spreads The (...) W^ (...) ^me
abroad the royal mantel of Aethiopia, or if you will Abisse under the command
of Prester Iehan, to whom at this hour are so many Nations and Cities
obedient, that for my own part I want names to decipher them; and concerning
the Nauill of Afric, few Europians I am sure have seen the secret, or
searched how the compacted sinues are united yet was Meroe once the principal
City, and many famous things are recited by the Scriptures, Pliny and Ptolemy
in the description thereof: as that in Hebrew it was called Chus for the
blackness of the people, dwelling between the two tropickes, or else of Chus
the son of Cham the son of Noe; or Aetheria, afterward Atlantia; and last
of all Aethiopia of Aethiope the son of Vulcane* that they are now divided
into Arothertae, Atha^uii, Daraticae, Hesperij, and Perorsi; that Diodorus and
Volacoran^ have maintained, how the original of all Creatures first began in
this Country, and would extend Paradise to this place, when GOD caused Adam to
name them: but these Philosophers not understanding the truth, invented what
they listed to please themselves, as you may perceive by Homers fictions: that
they were the best obseruers of religious secrets, and ceremonies; and boasted
of true devotion to their gods for the example of all Nations: That they were
very warlike, and obedient to their EMPEROR in all things, and so populous,
that the Emperor seldom went without a 1000000. into the field: That they were
sold to all the Nations of the world for slaves, and seemed contented with such
servitude, as being glad to go out of their own Countries: That they were wont
to plight their hair in knots, and wind it with intricate divisions: That the
great and high mountains of the Moon ouerlooketh their territories, and
vnburtheneth Nilus from her womb, sending it abroad, as far, as the
middle-land sea 1500. mile, like a timely birth to the comfort of his mother,
and with joy to all good kinsfolk, and neighbors: That the nature of the River
Niger fluuius is so strange, that as ashamed of his imperfections, and abrupt
breakings out under sandy hills, it hides his head 60. mile together, and then
bursteth out with horrible and impetuous violence: That whole Countries have
been overwhelmed with sand, when the hills make a noise, and the Sun has
enflamed his heat, and anger against them, departing in that fury, that in
breaking the sides of Mountains the air and wind makes a rupture, and so
the dry ground first parched presently crumbleth to powder, and is quickly
tossed with forcible blasts: That the Kingdoms of Damutego and Manuongo as
far as Caput bonaespei, with all the shore, Cities, and harbors, are numbered
parcel of this Empire, and expose many stories and plentiful relations: That
infinite Islands full of drugges, mineralls, gold, precious stones, pearl,
spice, etc. are the handmaides of this Mistress, especially the great Island of
Saint Laurence in times past called Madagascar, which now compares with
Britain for magnitude, as containing 600. mile in length, but say what devises
can, ours is the greatest Island of the world. Many other particulars are
inserted by Authors with addition of their manners, and customs: but because
all absolute things are worn out of date, and that it would vex a Traveler to
read one thing, and find another, I will trouble antiquity no longer, but
content my self with some probabilities, and the best received opinions of
this Monarchy.

You must then understand, that those limited Garrisons of Aegipt under the
Turk, are here very strong to keep back the excursions of the Aethiopians,
who from Nilus The conversion of the Aethiopians.
to the South Sea make one Country, and are all reputed Christians, boasting
of their conversion from Candauce the Queen in the Acts of the Apostles, whom
by another name they call Judith, and so afterward submitted to the obedience
of one principal, to whom they afforded the significant title of Priest Iehan,
not that he is a Bishop or Priest, as some superstitiously conceive, but that
those Prester Iehan no Priest.
words signify in the Ethiopian tongue Great PRINCE, or EMPEROR. Amongst them
are many Monasteries both of men and women, but strictly prohibiting any
intercourse between them, or wanton show of profanation: their fasts are 50.
days with bread and water, and some slender fruit, as for fish they have little
store, or less skill to take them, or make use of them by way of sustenance:
they are so careful in the observation of their customs concerning this
religious fasting and prayers, that they will sleep no longer, then they hold
their heads over water, that the nodding down may give them warning to be more
vigilant: their bells are of stone for the most part; their Priests marry, and
celebrate the mass, allowing in their procession, crosses, censors, tapers,
and lamps: the retired monks maintain their hair; the common Priests shave,
and both are b^refoote, especially in the Church, wherein no man enters with
profanation; but puts off his sandalls and lays them apart, as the Turks
do, who are very careful in such devout observations, adding withal a
ceremonious washing, taken from the Jewish purifying, as in his proper place
shall appear. The Sabbaoths and Eues are festiuals and celebrated accordingly;
circumcision is added to their baptism both in men and women, unto which they
are not admitted, until 40. days, and then the three persons of the Trinity
have a reverent exaltation, and the Eucharist is administered by custom at the
same time according to the credit of the Greek Church, which they resolutely
confirm to have priority before the Latin: their names are all significant,
and the religion arises from a certain book, which they confidently
maintain was approved by the Synod of the Apostles, congregated at Jerusalem.
The very common people have plurality of wives, according to their sufficient
ability to support their estates, and content their desires, suffering diuorses
either for natural imperfections, or just causes of incontinencie: but such
men and women thus scandalized are debarred intermedling with spiritual
matters; some say not admitted into the Church at all. Their Nobility are in
great estimation, and according to actions correspondent to their professed
virtue preserve the wealth, and credit of their Ancestors. Their greatest
Cities are few in number, but such as stand by the sea shore are of good
strength and eminence with stupendous Castles and works of antiquity. The
common heap of houses are poor, sluttish, all on the ground open, without
chimnies, and suitable to the dispersed manner of their villages. In all the
Empire is no money, but pure gold: salt and pepper are excellent merchandise
through Afric: but here so richly valued, that slaves are redeemed with them:
but the commodities of the Country soon and easily exchanged, it affords
many thing* as you have heard, especially Eliphants, Tiger Linkes, Taxos, Apes,
Lions, and Hearts against an absolute opinion, that there was no Venison in
Afric; but Bears, Cunnies, Corduels, and Cuckowes are not seen amongst
them. The custom of their huntings, raising their armies, order of diet, with
ciuet and musk, washing and no^ting with precious balmes and perfumes,
feasting, burials, and superstitions, would fill several relations, either to
pacify ignorance, or strengthen their knowledge who are entered a little into
the School of experience: but because there is nothing amongst them fit for
our example, I will make my journey as cursory as I can, and study for no
commorance, but where there is possibility of thriuing. Their Cabalisticall
Arts, and secrets from certain wise men named Gymnosophists with the Indians,
called also or some the Eastern Aethiopia, would make as tedious disputation,
especially when I must name the Trogiodite, Garamaulis, Atlantides, Libera
interior, Synega, the further plains of Monte nigro, and some others, and
cannot tell you, whether they be Idolaters, or no; only I can assure you they
allow of the immortality of the soul, on which they are besotted so
diabolically, that they will murder themselves upon small enforcement, either
to honor their lords, dye with their husbands, prevent the discommodities of
old age, help their friends, or pleasure their best beloved after their
barberous credulity: But because I would feign bring you into Europe, where my
hope and purpose is to find the happiness of a kingdom, according to the
reciprocal duties between Prince and Subject, I will leave these people to be
rejected with Esau. For sure there is a Jacob, whom old Isaacke has better
blessed

CHAP. VII. The Empire of RVSSIA.
TIll now the world has opened her The seventh share of the worlds (...).
largest embraces, seeming to give Honor and Majesty a breathing time for
fear of smoothering with heat, and fulsomnesse of air: but here she will
hug it close with a contrary kindness, and keep it warm, for doubt of
catching of cold; otherwise this great Dukedom of Muscouia, or if you please
Empire of Russia will shut up renown in the dangerous passages of the frozen
sea, or pinch her blood with congealed Isicles, and snowy frosts. For all the
Country is biting, sharp, and in some places dangerous to the passengers,
especially in winter, which here lasts long: besides, it is full of woods,
and desert places Northward, and they as full of wild beasts, noisome and
unsavory in their lives; but profitable and full of contentment after they be
killed. For Bears, Martins, Sables, blacke-foxes, Ermines, and some others fill
the magnificent Courts of Europe with furs. Notwithstanding toward Poland
there is great difference both of ground and air, and in observing certain
customs against the intemperatenesse of the weather, there is reasonable
suppliment of Natures allowance either concerning food or raiment. It boasts
of four great Rivers, Olba, Volga, Duina, and Tanaies, sometimes taken one for
another, and many times confounded, as if Olba and Tanaies were all one,
sending forth many brooks, like so many servants of a thriuing Husbandman,
and Housekeeper, who are orderly employed about their business for the credit
and prosperity of the family. The Emperors progeny has given way to diverse
Histories, and is now so increased in wealth, mightiness, estimation, command
over his Subjects, and such other tumors of Majesty; that many stratagems, and
political devices have taught one another tricks to bring the proudest
Monarch on his knees: whereby sometimes his will and imperiousness upon the
least iealosie of competition, or incroaching on the Diadem, has been mixed
with a kind of tyranny, and the Subjects obedience resembled to slavish
prostitution: so that in his chiefest and best ordered Towns of Nouagrade and
Mosko, many strange and fearful executions have been practiced, and the
Subject enforced to wilful murdering one another to satisfy the Emperors
pleasure: as for his wars either foreign or domestique, how ever his many
Countries, ostentous numbers of people, and seeming resolutions of the
Soldiers, would give an affrighting shadow from some portentous body* yet is
he glad of auxiliary forces, and according to politic observations of such
confused multitudes, must have many men and few soldiers, as peradventure we
our selves have made some proof of late amongst them, when a few resolute and
well ordered English, even in the fields of Nouagrade contracted their own
conditions, in despite of that threatening Army, which both Poles and
Muscouites rallied against them.

But let us return to the best flourishes of his peace: whether it be a native
pride, or ouer-growne custom with corrupted time, he is questionles a proud
and stately Prince, and once nailed an Ambassadors hat to his head, because he
either abated him of that reverence appropriate to so great a majesty; or
contested with him over peremptorily in behalf of his master: but St Thomas
Smith was entertained with a contrary satisfaction and welcome, how ever our
merchants were terrified, when the Abbey of St Nicholay should have been
surprised by certain English, who I am persuaded would have done it indeed,
if the project had not been discovered, and peradventure interdicted by
supreme authority. If you would ask me any questions of Mosko the
Metropolitan of the Empire; I will spend my topography from unseemly
flattering, and assure you, it is compared to Gran Ca^o for spatiousnes of
ground, multitude of houses, and uncomeliness of streets: so that as the one
is patible of sun^e, corruption, and infectious air; the other is not free
from bea^linesse, smoke, and unwholesome smells: but because there be many
unacceptable relations, sauou^ng indeed of Travelers ouer-reachings, and
impossibilities, or at least absurdities, I will desist from bringing you into
any such by-waies of misdoubt, and lead you thus into the plainer fields of
knowledge and demonstration.

They follow for the most part the rites and ceremonie^ of the Greek Church,
and superstitiously maintain many idle traditions and ridiculous ceremonies:
The Priests have wives, teach the adoration of images, fast, and compel to
confession, which the common people suppose most necessary, especially for the
Nobles and Gentry, in regard of their sensual liberty in sin, and
voluptuous prostitution to all manner of filthiness, like those which were
reprehended by the Prophet for sitting down to eat and drink, and rising up
to play. Their chiefest prayers consist on the faith of this brief; Jesus thou
son of God have mercy upon me: as for the Lords prayer they have in small use
or form, because the Scriptures are prohibited them, and not suffered to be
published; yea the Priests themselves scarce have the New Testament amongst
them. At seven year old they are terrified with actual sins, and so
minister young children the sacrament, mingling bread and wine together. The
Festiuals they do rather abuse, then celebrate, gurmondizing with that
excess, that it ouer-passeth the limits of neighborhood, or friendly
conversation. The common people attend their labor, and are indeed the tired
servants of wearisomnes, rather coming near the tediousnes of slavery, then
the honest necessity of husbandry. They are all incredulous of Purgatory; yet
as the Greeks commit many absurdities for their dead, they howl about their
graves, and repair with several songs to the places of burial; and this is
customarie in (...) even amongst our selves, especially in Gallowa^, where all
the ^
summer long the younger women bedecke the g^ues w^ flowers, every family in
their several Chapels, an (...) satterday at night solemnize a kind of
mourning and ^efunctory prayers: No man gives himself holy water, but
attends the Priest; they have many wives, allow of diuorcement, and yet run
into the deceitful by-waies of filthiness and incontinency: so that as they
count it no adultery, except David lie with Bathsheba, when Vrias is living: so
it is a dangerous matter to transgress the law of wedlock, and the woman is
terribly ouer-watcht, and suspitiously restrained from walking abroad, wherein
the condition of their reputed honest women is more miserable than in Italy,
and a wife or a maid loses all reputation, if she go at random, or sit by
the high way, as Thamar did to deceive Judah.

The people are naturally cunning and dangerous: yet as I said subject to
servitude, and very slaves to the Emperor: their apparel is a long coat
without plighting, almost after the manner of Hungary, but indeed all the East
generally yield no other: they wear colored boots coming no higher then
their knees, the soles plated with iron; the better sort have them gilded,
painted, and embrodered: the women wear such too, and like the Turks are not
seen abroad barefaced: all sorts love justice, or at least the show of it.
For they punish petty thefts, how ever great robberies and manslaughters, yea
after due examination, pass without capital execution, which makes me
remember the answer of Cleonidas the Pirate to Alexander Alexander and
Cleonidas.
the Great, when he sharply reprehended him for the baseness of his life, and
intimated besides the common scandal of a rouer, the mischiefs depending, as
hindering the Merchant from filling the harbors, and resorting to the Cities,
whereby the Kings customs were enlarged, and the Commonwealth enriched: It Is
true O King says he, because I rob with one or two ships, I am condemned for a
rouer: but thou that runnest over the Hellespont, and fillest great seas with
thy Nauies art saluted a mighty Monarch, and reverenced more for the fear of
thy revenge, then beloved by the extention of thy bounty or liberality.

Their coin is both gold and silver without form, as stamped long and
unfashionable: their furs fill all the world with merchandise, making us not
only warm, but proud in Europe: yea such is the estimation of Ermines,
Sables, and black Fox from a received opinion of Priamus King of Troy, whose
mantle to the greatest show of ostentation and magnificence, was lined with
Ermines, that in the secrets of Armory (except the Prince) all persons are
limited, what and how to wear them: and amongst themselves, though the Emperor
and Nobles have gowns of cloth of gold and silver, tread upon Persian and
Turkey carpets, and are indeed adorned with great wealth both in jewels and
marks of majesty; yet has their head attires of black fox the preeminence,
wherein he thinks himself more honored, than in an imperial crown after
the manner of ancient Kings: Their great Cities are very thin, and villages
lie scattered with low houses, spacious on the ground, with stones; and the
territories which now he challenges, extends almost 1200 English mile: their
woods foster plenty of beasts, which in an extreme winter will come down to
their houses, and endanger both cattle and people: their horse are reasonable
good and many, by whom they maintain the strength of their Armies, and
practicing them in hunting have them the more serviceable in the wars: But I
purpose no further discoueries, and therefore attend the business proposed,
which is only to give you a superficial view of these countries, that when we
come to compare England unto them, we may find them the sooner, and be able to
judge the better.

Thus lives and reigns this North-east Monarch, with reputation of one of
the greatest sharers in the adventure of the worlds happiness: As for the other
Kingdoms of Norway, Sweden, Goteland, and Denmark, with the provinces of
Bothnia, Finmarck, Lapland, Finland, and such Northren regions.
like, they are only called Reges simplices, because they live and take care
of their particular Scepters, without ambitious intrusion into another
possession to make it their own hereditary. For though sometime Sweden, and
Norway is united: sometimes Denmark triumphing, and sometimes as it were
disioynted: yet happens it by several factions amongst themselves and to
revenge injuries for the present, and may resemble a throng and press of
people in a yard, who one while drive to that corner, another while shoue to
this, and suddenly stand at a stay, as wearied with the shouldring. For as
Princes are exasperated to displeasure by their own conceived opinions of a
wrong and indignity: so do they prosecute reuenges from a wrathful
indignation, and many times draw whole Armies into the field to stop further
outrages, and show the adversary, there is no end, but blood and death, yea
the countries deuastation without an honorable agreement, or satisfaction: and
thus have these people upon no other color but wilfulnes weakened one another
with counterchangeable preuailings: But yet I do not see, that the Russian
Emperor takes advantage of their disagreements, only at this instant by
reason of former troubles about the succession, and well-grounded suspicion of
the King of Polands warlike humors, he stands on his guard, and for some
private respects has bin auxiliary to the King of Swedea, to which belong so
many particulars, that a whole history might fill your ears with pleasure and
instances of worthy prosecution, which I desist from, for swelling the book
too bigg with so poor a breath of common and known relations, and will only
go forward with some slender descriptions, as the country now lies under
fortunes control.

Norway is famous upon the etymology of the word, Norway.
as it were the North-way, and yields plenty of fish, called stockfish, which
is taken in the greatest frost for lasting, and is a reasonable good country
for feeding cattle, the increase of a dairy, and many other excellent blessings
for the nourishment of life.

Swedia inviteth you to a Town in imitation of Swedia.
Venice called Stokeholme, as if she boasted only of this place, considering
the rest of her villages resemble the scattered troops of a retired Army: yet
must you not ouer-passe the famous Castle of Calmar, which is proprietory to
Goteland, and so depending on Sweden, as the principal Port, City, and
fortification of these parts, and aduanceth her reputation of strength in such
a manner, that excellent enginers, and judicious Travelers have ranked it next
the Castle of Millaine.

Denmark, and his tributes are known to every body, Denmark.
with the shipping and customs of the Sont, where at one time you shall have
5000 sail brought to the bar of payment, and defraying the Kings charges:
Their feasts and drinking customs, wherein you must not challenge their
liberal promises, nor take hold of cursory speeches upon an hereafter
remembrance, least his displeasure suppose you ouer-politicke for his
plainenes, yet dangerous humors in his rages: Their maintayning of Gentry,
though fearful for affording titles of honor by opening the enclosures of
desires to affect greatness and popularitie, so that you have no ambitious
titles amongst them: Their feminine scorn of mechanical men, trades, or
professors of Art: insomuch though a man be never so excellent a scholar, or
Musician, yet will not the Ladies of their country admit of their society, nor
entertain their wives with befitting complement, but with a primordiall
contempt of ill musico, scholastico, pedante, or such like, countermand their
intrusion: Their ouer-looking of passengers into the East Countries, and many
other things, are matters of some notice: But amongst other points of Heraldry,
the blason of the coats of these countries displaieth the profitable
distribution of masts, fur, deal, pitch, tar, rosen, cables, ropes, hemp,
flax, and such like: To which I must needs add, how from this Continent
former times detruded those Nations of Vandalls, Goths, Lombards, Getes, and
other famous people, who not only blotted out the scandal of their banishment
with more memorable actions, but made a plenary satisfaction to their endeavors
with the glorious diadems of Italy and Spain.

The story of the GOTHS and LOMBARDS coming into Italy and Spain.
IN the time of Sennio King of Goteland about the year How the Goths came into
Italy.
400. (For Norway and Denmark were but then characters of a new print) there
happened a confusion of blessedness amongst these Nations. For considering, how
he was a Prince not only of great setlednes and government, but of peace and
prosperity, his subjects likewise participated with the felicity, and lived so
long, and in such increase, that I must resemble them to certain fish in the
sea, amongst whom the great ones devour the small; yet not so fast, as they
could prevent the sudden approach of a strange famine, whereby the King and
principal Counselors of the State were as it were brought to behold the
coming forward of their misery, in regard that many thousands must perish for
lack of food, and such as had wherewithal to supply their wants, in danger
of spoiling, by the indigent multitude tied to tyrannous necessity: whereupon
to prevent the worst, as they supposed, and from the law of nature of two
evils to choose the least, and of nations to rectify the crooked lines of
threatening destruction on them: it was concluded to disburden the Realm of all
old, impotent, poor, and unnecessary people, and when the manner was likewise
demanded, the inventors were not ashamed to publish, that they must be tied
back to back and thrown into the sea: with the iollity of which devise every
man departed home, and the King himself, as glad, that his subjects were
generally appeased, seemed proud to be the reporter of the judgment: But when
the Queen understood the cruelty of that doom, and from the tenderness of her
sex began to compassionate the guiltles souls, she was not only amazed to see
such an error seduce the wisdom of Governors; but stepped a little more
forward, and in debating the matter, brought them to a hansommer path of
prevention, which was by exile to expose them to the fortune of the world, and
keep the conscience clear from shedding innocent blood, which no doubt in time
would once lie heavy upon the most obdurate heart.

Here reason and honest pity wanne the field of former wilfulnes and
resolution, and the Queen was not only proclaimed the mother of charity, but
applauded for her wisdom, and high exalted virtue: so they allowed her
directions, and without further disputing the matter, shipped forth 300000
souls, who dispersed themselves over the North-east of Europe, filling those
countries, which now are called Muldauia, Bogdonia, the borderers of the black
sea, and Russia with new names and nations, such as were afterward
distinguished by Samatae, Gothae, Longabardi, Hunni, Vandali, Getae, Swedi, and
diverse others, who raised their fortunes out of industry, and made their able
bodies the ministers of a great prosperity: For when the Emperors of
Constantinople groned under the burden of division and dissension with the
Princes of the West, and had no other way to pacify the indignation, but by
drawing maine Armies into the field; they were also compelled to entertain
these strong and barbarous people, as presidiary, and depending on their
military salary: But they quickly instructed in the discipline of Arms, and as
quickly furnished for any employment, did as quickly perceive the weakened
estate of both parties, and so understanding their own strength with
tumultuous innovation kept the best countries of Italy to their own use,
making the Grecian Emperors believe, it was in their behalf, and for the
renown of the Empire; but when it came to the casting up the account, they
denied the debt, and by force of arms sent the Grecian auditors home
unsatisfied, and so fell again and again on the weakened forces of Europe, and
at last possessed the diadems both of Lombardy and Spain.

I could here add the Islands of Freesland, and Iseland, famous for fishing,
and the wonders of mount Heda, suitable to Gibello or Aetna in Sicilia, of both
which some have submitted to a fabulous credulity concerning a local place of
Hell, about the center of the earth, and that the Devils go in and out at
these monstrous Crateres some 4000. miles under sea and land: but because it
sounds both ridiculous even to superstitious ears, and blasphemous to
religious hearts, I ouerpasse it with slightness: besides, in regard that I am
not emulous of any glory, wealth, or eminent magnificence appertaining to these
northern kingdoms, I desist from further enlarging them, or telling them any
stranger news, only I must needs say, their shipping is commendable, and the
remembrance of our conquest in those times glorious: so that as we served
France, and are contented with titles: they have served us, and still quarter
the arms of our country with their Danish triumphs.

CHAP. VIII. The Empire of GERMANY.
THE eighth prize out of this great lottery of The eighth part of the worlds
bravery.
the world, is proclaimed for the Emperor of Germany and king of the Romans, to
which the house of Austria is (as it should seem, or at least would be)
enfeoffed. For at this hour, the sons of the old Archduke have thus raised
the throne of imperiousness: Rodulphus Emperor, yet famous for nothing but
peaceable desires, and a private sequestration scarce affecting the defense of
his own territories, much less the expatiating of any military project
against the enemy of Christendom. Matthias after much repining and a great
expectation, King of Hungary, out of which he hops (if occasion serve) to
step into his brothers chair, and command Europe, or at lest so much as the
Pope and King of Spain can support him in. Maximilian, Archduke of Austria,
and powerful enough in being commander of Vienna, from whence the Turks with
200000. soldiers was valiantly repulsed. Albertus, first Archbishop of
Toledo, then Cardinal, next dispensed with, and married to the Infanta of
Spain his cozen german, and last of all Archduke of Burgundy, and Commander
of the Low Countries, or at least so many as are brought so low, that he
stands like a Colossus over them: and Ernestus called the Cardinal of
Austria, but whether filius naturalis, or no, I dispute not on; so that if the
father were now alive, to see this bundle of arrows so well, so strong, and so
gloriously bound together, he would flatter himself with an opinion, that the
Emperials either would not, or durst not startle from their resolutions of
corroborating the Diadem in his family. But although the Germans have thus
raised up the principal tree, wherein the double neckt Eagle does build her
airy: yet is it far from any royal flourishing, or Monarchall supremacy. For
neither is it hereditary, nor after inauguration can he command, as other
Kings, or like the brief of Samuels Oratory to the rebellious Israelites, show
the reciprocal duties between Prince and Subject: but by no means is he
powerful enough to overthrow the privileges of the Empire, because the
Princes be so many, so mighty, so beloved, that they attend in Court at
pleasute, raise their forces at pleasure, contest with the Emperor in many
cases at pleasure, and supply his wants and demands for impositions at
pleasure. The Towns again are so strong, so privileged, so populous, that
out of obstinate finding fault with taxes and imperious restraints, they many
times oppose against their principal lords, and in hostile manner exclude them
from the benefit of commanding, like royal Princes indeed, witness the many
contentions of Colleine with the Noble men and Bishops, and at last with the
Bishop and the people, the power of the DVKE of Saxony in maintaining of LVTHER
against both Pope and Emperor: the repining of diverse Cities, and Princes, when
the Lantsgraue of Hesse was imprisoned under Charles the 5. The last contention
between the Duke of Brunswicke and the City, and the general cause of the
Protestants protected in every place inuita fortuna, yea against
Ecclesiastical curses and temporal menaces.

Of all Europe it is the greatest Country with the best and richest store of
Cities, Towns, Castles, and religious Germany the greatest Country of Europe.
places, in that decorum, and order (for in a manner view one Town and view
all) as if there were a universal consent to raise our admiration from their
uniformity: To which is added a secret of Nature, that the people generally for
honesty of conversation, probity of manners, assurance of loyalty, and
confidence of disposition (setting apart their imperfect customs of drinking)
exceed our belief, as being vnoffensiue, conuersable, maintainers of their
honors, and families, wherein they step so far, as if true Gentry were
incorporate with them, and had his principal mansion in Germany. And although
they repine at any strangers intrusion, and will not suffer new Nations to
bring in new customs, no not artificers; and seem withal fantastique in
apparel, and gaudy with devises: yet do they hate formalitie of Courtiers,
and of all other things beware of that horrible deceit of vaparous Germans
haters of deceit.
promises, common protestations, open embraces, palpable flattery, and
hypocritical bindings of observation from inferiors: when the heart is
corrupted, yea ready to leap into his Masters mouth, and tell him, that he
lies, when it hears him swear, what he never meant: thus can they with Lucan
exclaim: Exeat aula
Qui vult esse pius, virtus and summa potestas non coeunt.
and thus do they endeavor themselves in all honest courses to live of
themselves, which questionless proceeds from some worthy caution concerning
their misery, who eat meat under the repining eyes of another, and herein no
doubt they lay a great imputation on many English, whose profession of liberty
by base and servile attendancy is overthrown: or if they seem glorious in
casting off the yoke of obedience; yet are they besmeered Errors of Courtiers.
with the frothy corruptions of verbal and vaineglorious Courtiers, who have
with the viciousness of time so abused this profession of morality, that an
honest and vnsubiected heart is afraid to come near them. For although
Liberality and Charity have equal properties to the opening, if it were
possible, the gates of heaven: although the favor of Kings must be purchased
by duty and obsequiousness, and although the majesty of a Court must not be
depressed by admitting every man at pleasure: yet has the errors of life so
traduced worthy men for swelling too big with wealth and advancement, that
their power and authority grows tedious, and the depending on another is a
very excruciation of mind, which made the Poet exclaim against the
protraction of good deeds with Gratia ab officio, quod mora tardat, abest:
which made the Italians murmr with Dono molto aspettato e venduto e non
donato: which made Berzelay say unto the King, I am old I will go a little way
over Jordan, but return to my own house, live with my people, and be buried
in the sepulcher of my fathers. In these things are the Germans worthy of all
commendation: yet me thinks wanting an hereditarie succession of Princes, and
having an Emperor sometimes by partiality of election, sometimes by factious
strength, and sometimes by the absolute command of the Pope, they should a
little abate their ostentation concerning his MAJESTY, or their own glory. As
for their formal custom of denominating all the sons of Archdukes Dukes,
Earls, and Barons, according to their fathers titles, and paternall honors,
it keeps corespondencie with the name of Caesar amongst them, and the Italians
hold it so ridiculous, that in their facetiae, as we term it, they jest it
thus: The Earls of Germany; the Dons of Spain; the Monsiers of France; the
Bishops of Italy; the Knights of Naples; the Lardes of Scotland; the Hidalgos
of Portugal; the Noblemen of Hungary; and the younger brethren of England make
a very poor company.

But if you are curious indeed, and would search in natures storehouse for the
furniture, that Germany holds, or know in what manner she distributeth her
blessings, you shall find corn, vines, rivers of fish, fruit, hot waters,
bathes, minerals, mines of all sorts, and very good cattle. If ambition
transport you to view the palace of Honor, they can bring you into well
fortified Cities, wherein you shall have munition, armor, and the very Burgers
trained with martial discipline: they can carry you into the fields of Bellona,
and delight you with a beautiful sight of 20000. horse divided into several
batalions and squadrons with cornets, penons, and sufficient equipage: they can
conduct you into the very walks of Princelines, and show stately palaces,
pleasant hunting and hawking, turniaments, iusts, riding horses, and other
exercises befitting a Gentleman. If you descend to more moderate expectations,
you shall then have notice, how most men eat under their own vines, how the
Citizen lives in quiet, how the women are blessed in their children, how
faults are pardoned, scandals removed, and every man appears like a fair
shining Planet in his own Orb without disturbance.

On the north from Callis to Dantske in Prussia lies part of the seventeen
Provinces, and Pomerania: On the East Brandenburg and Silesia, I might have
named Hungary, and Transiluania: to the South as far as the Alps, Austria,
Bauaria, Sweuia, and Heluetia: on the West ^ranconia, Hessia, and Munsterland:
as a core in the midst Westphalia, Saxonia, Brunswicke, Thuringia, Misina, the
well compacted kingdom of Bohemia, circumcepted with ^gra, Silua, and Morauia,
with many other divisions of Principats, Dukedomes, Lordships, and Clergy men,
that to number them would be more tedious, then satisfactorie; consider Munster
their own Countryman h^th ^.
described them at full, and taken so much pains there^n, as if he studied
nothing more, then to set out the honor and dignity of the Nation, wherein
he was borne. Amongst these are seven Princes sequestered to a special lifting
up the Emperor into his throne: the three Bishops of Colleine, Ments, or as
some will have it ^agunse, and Treuers: the three Seculars, Duke of Saxony,
Marqu^, of Brandenburge, and Count Pallatine of the Rhene; the binding voice is
allowed the King of Bohemia, who was once so absolute, that he triumphed in the
three^old City of Prage with repining, when the Emperor challenged either
submission or prostitution: but now the Pope and Austria have subverted such
immunities, and under the danger of fulmination, and Church discipline terrify
them all from contradicting their wilfulnes.

The Cities of this spacious Country are many, and have as many descriptions
from several Authors, whom if you find contrary to one another, you must mod^
your anger, and remember how diverse (...) with sick bodies, that although they
li^ with (...) of learned men, yet shall not any, two agree, (...) in (...)
causes, nor the remedy of the disease, le^ (...) understand the same never so
well: So fares it (...) quarians and Chronographers, they show you such faces,
as they themselves beheld, or wrote as private affection and information
induced, and so the next age enlarged her talent; and the last opposes against
the former. But if you will be contented with my manner of Cosmography, and
understand, that my meaning in this cursory journey is to run only away with
Titles, you shall then find upon the Rhene a river coming out of Heluetia,
and 800. mile together, gathering many confederates of springs and brooks to
show himself well accompanied at the Court of the maine Ocean: Constance,
Basil famous in her original upon the Serpent found in her foundation;
Strasborough beautiful in her name, and for her high steeple, Spires, Ments,
Hidelburge the Court of the Palatine, Franckfurt glorious in her Marts,
Coblents and Coleine; these be principal Cities, either supporting the chaires
of Bishops, or maintaining their own freedoms with royal jurisdiction, or
submitting to the control of some worthy Prince; as for other Towns, which
are both walled, and fortified they are infinite, and would fill up too much
room to join them here together. Upon Danubius the greatest river of Europe,
as running 1500. mile between the banks of many Countries, and changes his
name into ^er, when he comes into the pride of Greece, and pours himself,
with troops of attendance into the lap of the black-sea: you have Vlmms,
Auspurg, or if you will Augu^ta proud of her title and fortification;
Ingelstade boasting of the birth of Emperors; Regenspurg, Paslaw, Vienna,
Presburg, and Keimar; upon Weserslood, that run^eth through Brunswicke and
Westphalia, Brennen, and Ca^; upon the river Alba, which posteth out of
Bohemia, as it were with glad tidings through the midst of many flourishing
Countries into the German sea; Prag^, Dresda, East Wittenberg, Brandenberg,
Hanborough and Stood; upon Odera, whose head almost meets with the Wexell of
Poland; Neisa, Breslaw, Crossen, East Fran^furt, and Stetin; this river running
toward Brandenburg through Silesia watreth a great part of Pomerania, within
the heart of this Continent, whose veins are yet filled, and life as it were
refreshed with the moderate flowing and swelling goodness of diverse arms,
hanging as it were by the maine bodies of these rivers, and may resemble kind
messages, or entercourses strengthening the amity of unsettled families, are
situated Norremberg the greatest of the Country, Wirteberg, Erfurt,
Brunswick, Iger, Gorlitz, and so many other, that France and Italy both must a
little yield. For if a difference may tend to make a place the better,
questionless Germany has the preeminence; yet because it resembles a
Capitol of so many Princes, rather then a Parliament house, where the Subject
how great soever, acknowledges his Monarch; we will allow him Emperor, as I
have said, for good manners sake; but questionless standing at the devotion of
his imperials, and Cities; it diminishes his glory, and obscureth the shining
of his three Crowns; witness the business of Colleine it self, which amongst
many others of the same kind, is so subjected to the authority of the Bishop,
that the name of Emperor has sounded harshly to their obedience, and both
people and Clergy have still opposed against all secular Princes: the story is
briefly thus.

The History of COLLEINE.
COlleine is a famous Town, and one principal of the Vbij before CHRIST,
which questionless the ^
Romans made great account of as a receptacle for their garrisons, when they
had war against the Swedians, who ^nged then all over Germany, especially in
Saxonia. In the time of Julius Caesar there was a wodden bridge made over the
R^ene for the better transporting his army, which was after transhap't into
stone, but the miracle proceeded from the power of money, and industry of man;
but because many murders, rapes, and robberies were committed on the same,
Bruno the Bishop by the Emperor O^os commandment ruined, and quite
subverted it: so it should seem it was then called Vbiopolis, until a
commutation into Colonia Agrippina of Marcus Agrippa son in law to Augustus
Caesar, who reedified and beautified the same; yet Tacitus extracteth the title
from a daughter of Augustus borne here, and leaves it as a place of great
consequence under the jurisdiction of many worthy Commanders; but it should
seem, they entertained Christianity betimes, and quickly cast away the
authority of the Romans: For thus they record it. About the year 70.
Maternus the Disciple of Saint Peter converted the Vbij, who admitted their
spiritual salvation with such gladness, that they likewise determined the
preservation of their liberty and bodies, and so proiected to be free of
themselves, had not afterward diverse Emperors, settled the Duke of Saxony, and
Earls of the Em^ (...) established greatness both over City and Coun^, until
again the Pope wrested the supremacy over the European Princes, and confirmed
the Archbishops in the ostentation of a Count Palatine, and absolute power of
the government of all, which yet the secular Noble men not only repined at,
but sought by noble courses to prevent; and at last, when no devise could make
gentill the hard wound pullies of the Clergies ambition, they were resolute to
effectuate it by force of arms, so that many contentions arose between the
Bishop, Nobles, and Citizens, which ended not without effusion of blood, and
overthrow of whole armies drawn into the field by particeans, whereby the
City it self felt the smart of warlike scourges, and saw her walls and
houses pulled on heaps of rubbish, according to the nature of rage and fury the
end of tumultuous vprors. But at last Colleine is reedified, and in despite of
all frets and fumes, either of Saxony, the Palatine of the Empire, or
confederates of the Princes, acknowledges the Archbishop for supreme
Governor, and he still ouermantleth it with a superstitious protection, so
that the people are kept under with his blessing and cursing accordingly.

It now bends like a bow, as you see our great City from Surreies side: the
key before the wall is a place of great pleasure; the ports and ramparts worth
the observing, the Palace stately and magnificent, the houses beautiful and
comely, the streets sweet, spacious, and well ordered, the Inhabitants civil,
sociable, and superstitious. For amongst the Churches they are of opinion, that
the three Kings have a memorable monument, concerning the birth of our Savior,
when they were commanded to return another way home, but coming hither it
was the fortune and glory of this place, not only to be their refuge from the
fury of Herod in their life; but a receptacle for their bodies after death; but
how the truth would prove all this ridiculous, it were pity to dispute.
Howsoever, as I have said, the City and territories now swell with the pride
of exemption from the Emperors jurisdiction, and in the same race run many
other famous Towns, whereby you may see the disioynted government of Germany,
and the poor authority the Emperors have over the Electors, and imperial
Cities.

For although Charles the 5. had the fortune to imprison the Lantsgraue of
Hesse, and by the service of the Duke of Burbone to possess the Castle of
Saint Angelo, and punish the Pope with a terror of usurpation, even over his
spiritual authority; yet was it a sudden greatness, and like the blaze of a
bauin, lasted but a while. For the German Princes quickly repined, and the next
Pope as quickly ratified his own conditions, so that the Emperors since have
no more to do in Italy, then a Pilgrimme, who is admitted to see the wonders
of our Lady at Loretto. But if How Germany is neighbored.
you would know, how Germany is neighboured, and beloved of strangers, I answer
as if my friend should ask me my opinion concerning another love: the heart
is unsearchable, we only can discover the outward countenance, and formal
protestations: thus is it with Topographicall descriptions, we can say these
and these be the Countries and people, but whether envious, ambitious,
reuengefull, traitorous, cowardly, or such like, it must be referred to actions
and time. Toward the North lies Pomerania, Prussia, Lithuania, Silesia,
Podolia, and Poland; but Poland now stands for all, within these 300. years a
factious Dukedom, limited within her own territories, now a well compacted
kingdom of many Countries; yet wilfully resolute to have no hereditary Prince
amongst them, whereby the supreme authority is subject to the suffrages of
men, and a manner of Oligarchy of Nobles limiteth the King in his royalty, and
makes his establishment but a slavish bravery. The Country from her plains,
as spreading it self abroad without mountains, or hills, adds to the
Etymology of the word, and has only the great City of Cracow upon the
Vistula meriting discourse, but little commendation, or wonder. Toward the East
lies the noble Kingdom of Hungary; I call it noble, because whole volumes
might be writ in relating her troubles; external with her enemy of
Christendom; internal with a confused dissension: For sometimes the glory of
the Kingdom elateth them; sometimes private reuenges divides them; sometimes
the Clergy does tyrannize over them; and sometimes the general cause exciteth
compassion: then adioyneth what in times past you called Illiria now
Transiluania and Sclauonia. Toward the South, but you must first see, what snow
lies upon the Alps all along the banks of the Adriaticke sea, now Gulpho
Venetiano, are spread abroad the Provinces of Friaull in times past forum Iulij,
Histria, Croatia, Dacia, Dalmatia, as far as Ragusa once Epidaurus, all full
of pretty Towns, the shores beautified with Islands, and the sea beating on
diverse rocks serving yet for many uses, as the Venetians can tell, who are the
Commanders of these people, and places for the most part. Toward the West,
what we now nicke-name the Wallons, Loraine with the memorable Town of Mets,
and in a pretty corner Heluetia, containing the 13. Cantons of Switzerland even
amongst the Alps, which remain with freedom of both religions in despite of
Pope and other turbulent Princes, and can show Bazill, Bern, and Zuricke as
fine and delicate Towns, as any in the pride of Italy; but withal you must
understand, that both the Emperor, France, and Spain have diverse times
attempted the subjection of these people, especially Geneua, which belongs to
Sauoy: yet failed, as the Romans did with the Parthians concluding a
corroboration of friendship rather then a publication of their shame to be
propulsed, which appeared in the time of Charles the fifth, who was mightily
incensed Fools may give good counsel.
against them, had not the blunt reprehension of a fool diuerted him. For when
diverse fiery spirits had brought fuel to set on flame these guiltless people,
and that he determined to ouerrunne them as it were with one speediness. I,
I, says the fool, you all conclude well for going into the Country, but
unacquainted with the terrible passages of the Alps, you little consider the
difficulty of coming out again. Upon which pithy and compendious
obiurgation, a new debatement of matters set up another loome of retraction.

CHAP. IX. The glory of the SPANIARD.
THE ninth proportion of the earths happiness The ninth part of the earths
glory.
has so confirmed the King of Spain in a large inheritance, that he now
lifts up a head of majesty with an imperial countenance and extraordinary
titles: But if I must conduct you into the enclosures of understanding, how
this comes about, I am afraid I shall torment former times with vain
repetitions, and confused originals; yea indeed abuse your patience with
tedious and frivolous discourses, considering so many excellent histories have
explained the difficulties of these people, and the modern commentary is a
true and delicate glass to behold her form and beauty in: Otherwise I could
fill your lap with these abstracts, and make up a kind of reckning with
pleasure and contentment from a modest ampliation. That Hercules with his large
and warlike embracements clasped this country about, infusing such virtue, as
his father Jove innated in him, whereby his actions tended to reformation of
abuses, and purging the Kingdom of such monsters, as had both terrified them
with their huge bodies, and made them miserable with the confusion of rapes,
murders, and cruel oppression: so that Hesperus, Gerion, and Cacus mighty
giants were subdued, and the country calmed of all stormy blasts of rudenes,
and confused barbarism: That after such heroicke proceedings he stood like a
Colossus over the streights, naming the great mountains of Abila and Calpe his
pillars with this inscription of Non plus vltra, howeuer afterward it was Non
(...) vl^. P^s (...).
the fortunate bravery of Charles the Emperor upon the discovery of the West
Indies to write Plus vltra, quite obliterating Non; as if his new glory had
better consequence: That he erected a Temple in the Island of Gades now Cales,
and as it were enfeoffed the seas and streights with his surname: That from the
burnt ashes of Tyrus after Dido was forewarned to abandon Phoenicia by the
ghost of her husband Sichaeus, like the Phaenix sprung up a many Phoenixes, who
possessed the shores of Afric, and built an airy in Gades: that is, the
banished and discomfited people of Tyrus erected Carthage, Gades, and many
other towns in Afric, and Spain: That presently followed the dissension
between the Gaditanes, and Turditanes; between the Celtibrians and Iberians,
settled nations in Spain, to the deciding of whose controversies Marrhable and
Haldruball were called out of Carthage, which both made a conquest of Spain,
and proiected to clip the feathers of the Roman Aegle, who now began to spread
her wings over the best inhabited fields of the world: That from this
emulation, Rome stood on a better guard, and accounted these Africans a
barbarous people in respect of themselves, as foretold from the prophecy of
Daniel, and the Sibills of her strange establishment, as Queen of the world,
and at last shared the plenty of Spain: for impatient of any adventurers in
that voyage, the Carthaginians were expelled, and the royal standard of Italy
advanced: That time ouerwearied with the insulting of perpetuity, at last
incited the strange nations of Goths, Vandalls, and Lombards to labor in the
work of the god of alteration, who pulled this country from all Emperors and
Kings, and made a fearful division of the same, keeping themselves warm in
Spain, when all other countries failed: That long after Count Julian began a
new work, as if he could have powered down vengeance on the author of his
discontents. For after Rodrigo had ravished his daughter, he called in the
Mores a race of Mahumetans into Spain to be revenged on the King, by whose
assistance he not only banished the Goths, and other people into Castile, but
killed the King, usurped the country, altered the government, and so played
their parts in Granado, Valentia, and Andolozia, as if they were created of
purpose to show some wonder of heaven, when dissolution of Kingdoms, and
punishment of offenses is determined: so that they quickly made their own
conditions, and bound the country ever since to the ratifying of them,
infecting the best families of Spain with paganism, whereby our modern Kings
weeding them out by little and little, have also attempted to purge their
Churches of such filthiness, and when they could not prevail by precept, and
authority of reason, they erected the office of Inquisition, to discover who
were addicted to the adoration of Mahomet, Inquis^.
and durst contest against the blessedness of salvation in JESUS CHRIST,
whereupon the Mores have raised many innouations in the country, and even the
last year to 1609.
the number of a million fraighted their hearts with treason, and a burning
desire to set on flame the wondrous compacted peace of Spain.

Here is yet no great cause of amazement: For thus were the children of Israel
persecuted by the Aegiptians, affrighted with the Philistims, maligned by the
Edomites subjected and made slaves to Babylon, tormented and threatened by
Syrians and Graecians, and at last not only subdued, but subverted by the
Romans, who of all other, put the axe to the tree, and at one stroke laid the
same on the ground, leaving the holy City desolate as a widow, cast out as an
orphan, despised as a vagabond, and punished worse than a traitorous rebel,
until the Mahumetans by way of courtesy ridd her of her pain at once, and
utterly trampled her to pieces: so that now to see the people dispersed without
a law, commonwealth, or King: to view the country like a barren wilderness: to
behold nothing but rapes and robberies, where so many promises had bin made
from heaven, where such riches and majesty flourished, where such mightines
and state increased, and where all prosperity triumphed, would leniat an
adamantine heart, and raise a crying voice from commiseration, with Heu cadit
in quenquam tantum scelus? tanta iniquitas? And thus much for example
concerning the several alterations of Spaines government, now to the rest of
his ostentation.

The whole country retains still the ancient division of Baeticam,
Lusitaniam and Tarraconensem, and the memory of eight several Kingdoms, 1.
Gallicia, to which Asturia and Cantabria are connected: 2. Nauarra, the proper
Eight kingdoms in Spain.
inheritance of the house of Burbon in France. 3. Castiles, a coople boasting
both of antiquity and excellency. 4. Lusitania, the other day Portugal, but now
incorporated with the rest into the house of Austria. 5. Leon extinguished long
since by the greater light of Arrogon. 6. Arrogon, laying claim to Naples and
Jerusalem, and so enlarging the King of Spaines titles. 7. Valencia, mourning
for her corruption in religion: and 8. Granado, to which Andolozia or the
country of Vandalls, with the former Island of Gades are united. Amongst these
Portugal did once boast of the conquest of India, Aethiopia, Persia, and many
other places, especially Taprabona, or the Island of Saint Lawrence, between
whom and Great Britain (as I have said before) at this instant of all the
Islands in the world is comparison for circuit, and spatiousnes of ground. But
shall we let them go on with these vainglorious titles of conquest and
victory, when they are yet but poor possessors of some harbors and towns by
the sea shore, and stand on their guard with more terror to lose, than ever
they entertained comfort in getting them. I, I, let them alone a gods name: For
quarrels arise from contradiction; and there is no disputing with men resolved
in the vain promises of worldly deceit; nor must you be incredulous, when a
Portugal shall report, that these exploits were carried in the current of
success without the help of Spain at all, as though there was ever a
distinction, or rather separation between themselves, and a Castilian; yea
they proceeded further, as if there were an Antipathy in nature: For they used
to spit at the naming a Spaniard, like simple people in England after the
Devil was pronounced. But to the rest: if you would truly understand the
cause of his pride and former elation of countenance, you must then take
notice, that he detaineth all these Kingdoms within his own Continent, as a
commanding Monarch, and after many convulsions begged at fortunes hands the
ratification of the Royalty, stiling himself withal King of Naples, Sicilia,
and Jerusalem: the two former governing by Viceroies, the latter claiming by
inheritance, as unwilling to lose himsele, or forget the glory of his
ancestors, wherein he pleads imitation: For the Emperor writes King of the
Romans, not once visiting of Italy: the Denmark King of England, England of
France, and France of Navarre: then are the Islands of Sardinia, Corsica,
Maiorca, and Minorca entered his book of accounts; to which if you add the
noble Duchy of Millane, into whose demeanor Count Fuentes looks with prying
eyes for his behalf, and that the state of Genoa depends on his protection,
you will say ambition set him well on work, and as well rewarded him for his
days labor. As for the Low Countries, he would feign show them as feathers
belonging to his broken wings, and takes the house of Burgundy for his own,
hoping that the Pope, which can canonize a Saint, will make the daughter of
Spain a Queen, especially of her own inheritance.

Thus lives and rules he in Europe: but all this were rather burdensome unto
him, considering the barren hills and sandy plains of his country, if you
look not one way into the shores of Affricke, and another way over the
bottomless Ocean, and so examine the cause of his boasting indeed, which is his
storehouses of golden mines, his conquest of many nations, his reducing them
America conquered.
to Christianity, and his triumph in the fruition of possessed tranquillity:
For America is almost his own, resembling a Peninsule, and joined in the midst
with an Istmus. If you begin at the streights of Magellane, they will tell you,
that Magellanus a Spaniard first explored the passage: If you ask, what was
done a little before, an answer is ready, that Americus Vesputius gave name to
this new world, and Christophorus Columbus of Genoa about a 130 years since,
searched her entrails, discovered her maladies, and applied a Cataplasme to
her most dangerous wounds, which was irreligion and barbarous idolatry: For
although he found unlooked for glorious Cities, and well compacted governments,
yet was he feign by strong hand to overthrow their idols, and punish their
obstinacy with cruelty. The south shore, or if you please the Continent on the
left hand 10000 miles long called Psitacorum regio, is questionles inhabited,
though undiscovered, and not fully descried. The other Continent beyond the
line inuites you to the view of strange nations, whom we confound with the
general horror of Cannibals, as men or rather monsters feeding on humane
flesh, Giants: the land of Patagons, and Amazons, as supposed to fly hither,
when the Kings of Europe repined to see women the equal sharers of honor
amongst them: But for my own part, I rather suppose it the error of ignorant
Cosmographers, who when they cannot, or dare not certainly deliniate a
country, then will they fill up a place with monsters and formidable creatures
both men and women: Thus have they done with the interior parts of Afric, and
the remote countries of Mangia, and the inhabitants of Taunis, when God knows
all these places with the rest are possessed by men, and of orderly proportion,
yea such men, that though they be idolaters, believe the immortality of the
soul, and care not to dye in hope of a better life: therefore let the
judicious be persuaded, that what has not voice and reason, is a beast or
monster. From hence nearer the line or more northward looking from the
streights of Magellane, you come into the golden kingdoms of Peru, Brazill,
and Caribana, and may be pleased with the streams of two mighty rivers De la
Plata, and Maragnon, which by computation makes a winding of 5000 mile, and
have their shores stored with Cities and inhabitants, of whom and which so many
idle things are reported, that though I am not incredulous, as knowing, what
barbarous nations can afford; yet do I disclaim unnecessary discourses,
because I have further business in hand, and of better consequence. A little more
remote toward the West, begins the Istmus circumspected with the territories
of Mexico, Cusco, and Themistian, with many other Cities of such wealth and
mightines, that the people were slain by thousands, or rather millions, ere
they could savor other obedience, than idolatrous and savage liberty: On the
other side toward the North looks up to heaven the new fashioned Islands of
Cuba, Hispaniola, S. John's, and many others: the further side of the land is as
it were fringed with the countries of Virginia, Terra Florida, Noua Francia,
Norrembega, and the fishing land; I call it fringed, because as yet we have
only entered upon the skirts of the same, not daring further exploration, and
indeed not knowing what to do with the rest, much desiring the discovery of
the north-west passage into India, and resolved there is a way, if success
would lead us by the hand to prevent the tediousnes and the charge of going
about by the south Cape.

Here you see is great cause of triumph: For of all these he either challenges
the principality and confederation, or ouer-looketh with such ielous eyes, that
they dare not start from his obedience; and would not so many kingdoms, so
many nations, and such power elate any Prince to assume extraordinary titles?
But (as I said) all this were vaporous smoke, and the frothy breath of
opinion, if his treasuries at home were not yearly supplied from the tribute
of the Esterne and Western mines abroad, whereby he presumes to yield more
reason of his ostentation, than Solomon himself. For though Solomon did fetch
gold from Ophir, and that the pride of Jerusalem swelled with plenty, when gold
filled every man's purse, and silver was as common as stones: yet he made it a
journey of three years, and had no other cunning, no The true Philosophers
stone.
other wisdom, no other Philosophers stone, than the industry of Merchants,
and confederation of the Kings of Tyrus and Sidon: But the King of Spain can
make a yearly return, or at least once in 16 months, as understanding
himself thus far, that his Cities of Toledo, Madrid, Valiodolid, Leon,
Barcelona, Saragossa, Valentia, Cartagena, Malaga, Corduba, Seuilla, Lisbone,
Baione, and the rest, cannot maintain their glories without them: That the
monastery and stately Palace of the Scurial could neither invite you to her
magnificent structures, nor supply necessities of life with provision: That the
Garrisons of Millane, Naples, Sicilia, the towns of Afric, the inheritance of
Burgundy, his own Castles and frontiers towns, with diverse other remote in
many Provinces, would quickly decay, and have oftentimes mutined for want of
money, and their ordinary entertainment: That the Ports and Harbors would be
empty of shipping, yea the ships themselves unbuilt and unfurnished: that the
country commodities might be vnuttered: his soldiers disappointed: his
kingdoms many times famished, and his glory utterly eclipsed, if there wanted
but one return of his treasure, or that any disastrous encounter defeated or
disappointed his Navy. And thus much for the several principal Monarchs of
the world, as at this hour they look up to heaven with ouer-liberall titles,
and have blowed opinion bigg with some seeming reasons, and yet in comparison
of true roialtie and happiness, absolute partiality.

CHAP. X. The description of ITALY, as in times past.
WHereas you partly heard, that the house of Austria obtaining the Empire even
Italy divided.
with the Popes grudging, did also intrude it self into the pleasant fields of
Italy, whereby the King of Spain would have his head empaled indeed with one
of the Imperial Diademmes of the world: we will step thither, and see with
what fashion her countenance is made cheerful, and how her courtesy is
prepared to entertain us. I will therefore desist from any former ampliation
of absolute beginnings, least I should wrong the labors of there men, and
speak indeed their own words more imperfectly, only I must somewhat
abstrusely and abstractly to help your memory with some things, that savor of
antiquity, and shall assist your comparatiue bringing them face to face in
these modern times. Understand then, that it was the first Country inhabited
of Europe by Ianus, or Iaphet the son of Noe, whose history gives life to
many strange and fabulous relations: How presently followed the possession of
many Nations, whose love to the Country changed her name into Oenotria,
Ausonia, Hesperia, Saturnia, Italia; and some others of less consequence, some
significantly according to the goodness of the place, some metonimically either
pars pro toto, or totum pro part; some ironically for idle actions, or
Poetical fictions, and some iudicially according to the virtue of the
Inhabitants, excellency of the soil, or honor of the first explorator, or
Redacter to government, and thus it was suddenly divided into Provinces, as
Liguria, Hetruria, Vmbria, Countries.
Latium, Campania foelix, Lucania, Brutia or Magna graecia, Salentitij or
Salentini, Appuleia Peucetia, Appuleia Daunia, Samnites, Pisenum, Aemilia or
Galsia transalpina, now Lombardy; and forum Iulij or Friaul, now Venetorum
regio; Some say 15. Blondus 18. and Leander 19. parts. Cities.


How Rome became the metropolitan City of Italy, Rome.
and Queen of the world, so that the Emperors amplified the same with
magnificent structures and monuments, and in dividing, or rather translating
their seats to Constantinople left all to the Exarchat of Rauenna, and
usurpation of Bishops; who by a higher style at last made themselves Popes,
and with the cup of abomination, like the whore in the Apocalips, poisoned
the western Kingdoms.

How the Venetians began their City and State, and Venice.
about anno 700. constituted a DVKE, boasting indeed that they were the poor
remainder of the Roman Nobility, as it were sequestered into certain remote
Islands, which the Goths respected not, nor Lombards regarded: yet has Time you
see raised a glorious flame from the poor dispersed imbers, almost
extinguished, either from heat, or light.

How Millane was incorporated to a principality: First built by the Frence,
after subverted by the Vandalls, then Millane.
reedified, next made a Duchy; fifthly, strengthened with the band of Sforza;
sixthly, possessed by the French again, and now by the Spaniard.

How Genoa boasts of her antiquity from Ianus, and Genoa.
about 1237. constituted a DVKE like unto Venice, but daring not to trust her
own foundation entertained the noble assistance of the Spanish castells.

How Turine or Taurinum was an Academy, the chief Turine.
City of Piemont, and now gives so much air to Sauoy, that he breaths with
one of the noblest Dukedomes of the world.

How Papia or Pauy in times past Ticinum by reason of Pauy.
the river, that runs round about it, was united to the Duchy of Millane by
Johannes Galeazius the first Duke.

How Padoa boasts of her neighborhood to the river Padus, her University,
Antenors foundation, fertillity Padoa.
of ground, strong ramparts, and repineth at her subjection to Venice.

How Cremona is very ancient, and flourished with orderly strength and
prosperity, until it was burnt in the Cremona.
wars between Vitellius and Otho.

How Verona is pleased with the common enterpretation Verona.
of her name quasi vera vna, with the orderly access of Italians nobles, with
the ruins of her Amphitheater so goodly a structure, that I dare be bold to
say, it would contain 80000. people to behold the spectacles, presented to the
Inhabitants for triumphs of Emperors, and famous Consuls, and being once free
was subjected to the Venetians about anno. 1405.

How Mantua was first a Marquisate, but by the marriage of the only daughter
of Montisferate raised to a Duchy Mantua.
by the Emperor, and thrust warm under the mantell of Gonzaga by the Pope.

How Mirandula was fortified, besieged by the Emperor Mirandula.
and Pope, assisted only by the French, and at last united to the principate
of Parma.

How Ferrara was first subject to the Bishop of Rauenna, then under the
family of Est, made a Marquisate; Ferrara.
lastly, a Dukedom, and now usurped by the Pope, as part of Saint Peter's
patrimony.

How Parma boasts of antiquity, suffered many concussions, Parma.
fell into the blessing of the Clergy, and with the Coronet of a Duke was
presented to Alexander Fernesius.

How Bononia was once ruled by an Exarchate, as a place Bononia.
of greatness, and important conueniency for the government of the Country:
after given to the Church by King Pepin, and Carolus magnus, and has now a
famous University.

How Rauenna boasts of antiquity, was the principal Rauenna.
seat of the Vicegerents, for the Emperors of Constantinople, and after
surrendered into the Popes hands by the name of Romandiolas territories.

How Vrbine was famous for courtshippe, and made a Urbine.
Dukedom 1476. by Pope Sixtus in the family of Fredericus Vbaldinensis, who
were once citizens of Florence, but for their virtue raised to this honor, so
that the family extinguished, it is returned to the possession of the Pope
again.

How Ancona is an old walled Town and port in the Ancona.
Adriaticke sea, now Gulpho Venetiano, is known by her white cliffe, inuiteth
you to come on land, and see the wonders of our Lady at Loretto; and obeys
the Pope in his temporal jurisdiction.

How Florence suffered many alterations, increased in wealth, buildings, state,
populousness, was honored in Florence.
the house of Medices, and advanced her fame with the best through the valor
and well-deseruing of that valiant Cosimo, by the style of Magnus Dux
Hetruriae, and has since boasted of two Queens of France from her daughters,
who have filled the Courts of all the Princes in Europe with strange reports.
How Pisa was once Mistress of Maiorca, Pisa.
had an Acedemy, was sold to the Florentines, by the Vicount Johannes
Galeasius, and bought of the Emperor Charles, 1369. by Petrus Gambacurta, for
12000. pieces of gold. How Leuca was made a Seignory, and had L^uca.
many Governors, but at last obtained their freedom by donation of a
Cardinal, who distributed for the same 25000. Checkinos. How Sienna boasts
of the birth of S^a.
Aeneas Siluius, called Pope Pius, of the University of Physicians, is
delicately scited, was tossed, or rather tormented in the factions of the
Guelphs and Gibellines, submitted to the Spanyard, then to the French, next to
the Cardinal M^ndoza, and at last 1558. yielded to the Duke of Florence. How
Naples increased in glory, and raised her Naples.
dignity next to Lombardy, of all the Principats of Italy, to a Kingdom,
suffered many alterations, had Princes of several families, filled the world
with the occurrences of her troubles; and at last, by example of Sicilia,
prostituted it self to Spaines insulting. Of all which to discourse at large
were another Gordion: and with the Preacher a man may cry out, all things are
so hard to be known, that no creature can express them, the eye is not
satisfied with sight, the ear not filled with hearing, the thing that has
been, comes to pass again, and there is no new thing under the Sun: and
therefore I will desist from further tormenting my self or you, because many
worthy authors are opposite to one another, in unfolding the secrets of
antiquity, and he which strives to please all readers with satisfaction, must
transform himself into all shapes, especially with Ianus look two contrary
ways, and study the arts both of detracting and flattery: yet there is but one
truth, if a man did live in such a blessed age, that he might maintain the
same with worthy boldness, speaking what he thinks, thinking what he knows,
and knowing nothing, but honest certainties: wherein not to be corrupted, is a
glory exceeding report, and a work of wonder indeed: therefore as near as I
can, I will reject all impossible reports and authorities, and tie my self to
probabilities and truth, or at least so much, as is either received for current
in justifiable relations: or my poor experience dare warrant from mine own
endeauours: and so I will show you with what face Italy looks up to heaven at
this hour, and may with Heraclitus weep for the vanities and miseries of the
earth: yet is cheerful, and thus like a strumpet is known by the pride of
her eyes.

CHAP. XI. ITALY described at this time.
FIrst, toward the East lies the Kingdom of Naples, within whose enclosures
are The estate of Italy in t^is modern age. Naples.
detained the countries of Calabria, Brutia, and Apulia, now Abruzzo Puglia,
and separated by the cha^mpaine of Romandiola, and the large Appenini, which
be mountains rising by Ancona, and running forward to the great gulf, that
thrusts it self between Rocca Imper^all and Gallipolis. It has many towns,
but few cities: only Brindisi, Ottonto, Barletto and Naples are of some
account: the Country is rich in vines, oil, and silke-wormes, the people are
dangerous, superstitious, and the Villano lives beastly: the Gentle men are
maintainers of liberty and pleasure, scoffers at their own religion, and as
great blasphemers as the Greeks of Cyprus, insomuch that I have heard them in
their rages cry out, Iddio Beco: Puttana del Di: and swear by the absurd oath
of potta del Cielo, as in their commedy called Ruffiana, and published in
print, may appear: yet is their adoration of her so superstitious, that the
Savior of the world is accounted her inferior, her attributes make heaven
amazed, and her altars smoke with incense and profanation. And what is this:
but to cause the Prophets to exclaim against the sacrifices of the Queen of
Heaven? and what is this, but with Ahaz to make images for Baalim, and burn
children in the valley of Hinnon, after the abomination of the heathen? and
what is this? but to build high altars with Manasses, and like a Sorcerer, to
regard the crying of birds, to use enchauntments, and give way to the
imposturing art of witchcraft. As for true religion, oh God! thou laughest them
to scorn, as they have the truth in derision, which makes me remember, what is
reported in these parts of that worthy Sr. Philip Sidney, who conuersing with a
Neapolitane Count, and brought to one of their Churches, wherein he was loath to
enter at that time, was yet unwilling altogether to distaste him, but
interiected some excuses: but the Count understanding him well enough, bad him
tarry a while, and so went into his formal devotion, but quickly returning,
embraced him with an oath, by his Santa Donna, that he would renounce all the
religion of the world; yea, his part of Paradise, before he would trouble
again the conscience of so well deserving a Gentleman and companion. They
live in great pomp for outward show, and make the City, both rich and stately,
because they are not permitted to be resident in the Country, but keep here
continual intercourse, howeuer they groan under the Vice-Royes control, and
the ouerwatchings of two strong castles, which keep both town and harbor in
awe: and although the Spanish pride, and sometimes cruelty, is exercised
amongst them, as abating their native glory: yet does it little abridge them of
modern pleasures and customary wantonness: so that if the Prophets in times
past exclaimed against Tyrus and Sidon, threatened Damascus and Syria,
prophesied the desolation of Egypt and Aethiopia, lamented Judah and Samaria,
and mourned for Babylon and Assyria, they might now cry out against Italy and
Naples, which as in times past was called Parthenope, of the Sirens haunting
these shores, of the dangers of Scilla and Caribdis, and for the notorious
transhaping men into monsters by Circes, allegorically alluding to the
voluptuous sins, and abusiue pleasures of this City and Country: so still
may it retain the comparison, and men be terrified with the same dangers. For
if any place in the world keeps wickedness warm, with glorious flames and
stretcht-out sensuallity to the length and breadth: here men are not only
drunk with iniquity; but commit fornication with Idols; yea, are mad with the
rage of impiety.

The next is Romagnia, or Romandiola, called S. Peter's Rome.
patrimony; a great country under the Pope, in which are reckned the two
Dukedomes of Ferrara and Vrbine, of late days fallen into the power of the
Conclaue of Cardinals, for want of lawful succession; or else by reason of
their weakness, who peradventure have right, but are not able to contest with so
irregular an adversary, which makes them step a little aside for fear of being
trampled to pieces indeed. The chief Cities are Rome, Loretto, Rimano,
Bologna, Ferrara, Vrbine, Perugia, Viterbium, Spoletto, Ancona, and Rauenna,
all places of account, well fortified, adorned with palaces, replenished with
inhabitants, and resort of Gentills both natives and travelers, and supplied
with all manner of provision both for necessity and wantonness. But Rome is the
seat of the Pope, and keeps the Priests to the duties of the Sanctuary: For
the College of Cardinals suffer no man to depresse the glory of the Church,
and proclaims him an heretic, that intermedleth with the ordinances of the
great Bishop; so that according to their several degrees religious persons
live in great st^te, keep Curtezans, travel in Carosses with six moiles
sumptuously trapped, though but a quarter of a mile to the Conclaue, solemnize
feasts and banquets, make only show of some ridiculous ceremonies, and are in
truth of slender devotion in spiritual secrets, but foolish superstition in
absurd apparitions: so that if I were an Atheist, and a man unconscionable to
suppose, that there were not a day of account to be made with the commander of
all actions, I had rather live a religious man in Rome, than be a Nobleman of
Naples, who (as I said a little before) of all men living wash their hands in
carelesnes, and like Pollicrates the tyrant have nothing to trouble them, but
that nothing has troubled them concerning worldly encombrances; so that with
the Prophet I may well cry out, the Priests are gone astray by the means of
strong drink, and are overcome with wine, they fail in prophesying, and
stumble in judgment, their tables are full of vomit and filthiness, and no
place is clean: yea the vision of the Prophet is come unto them, as the words
of a book which is sealed up, which men deliver to one that is learned,
saying, read thou, and he replies, I cannot, for it is sealed; then it is
delivered to an ignorant with read thou, but his answer is, I am not learned:
so that with the Apostle I may say, that Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of
the Lord; and in the latter days shall be the doctrine of devils, forbidding
to marry, and eat meat, which God has sanctified: so that with the Evangelist
I may lawfully tell you of the Vision of the beast, which rose out of the sea,
having 7 heads and 10 horns, and that he opened his mouth unto blasphemy,
resembled to the woman araied in purple and rose color, decked with gold,
precious stones, and pearl, and holding a cup of gold in her hand full of
abomination and filthiness. The City yet is swelling bigger and bigger, though
nothing comparable to the ostentation of former times: For Historiographers
have confirmed it for greatness, riches, magnificence, Nobility, and famous
illustrations the admiration of the world, as containing 20 English mile in
circuit, and showing a countenance of bravery, and princely structures: But now
it only boasts of some few ancient buildings, the ruins of the
Amphitheater, certain Obelisci, the swiftnes of Tiber, new erected Palaces of
Cardinals, the Castle of St Angelo olim moles Adriani, the Popes own Palace,
and the Church of S. Peter, threatening to exceed with his high erected Cuba and
wondrous cross Isles, our London Cathedral, which is the vastest heap of
stones under the sun: the air is most pestilent, and unwholesome, so that S^
have died in a year by infection, and the uninhabited places afford such damps
and mists, that many times they effectuate suffocations, but are always
dangerous and patible of no remedy, but extraordinary fires.

The third part of Italy affords an honorable title to the Duke of Florence,
who is styled Magnus Dux Hetruriae, Florence.
and registreth in his book of renown for principal Cities Florence, Pisa,
Sienna, and Legorne a strong new haven town on the sea shore almost over
against Corsica. The City it self is one of the stateliest and richest in
Italy, the river Arnus runs in the midst, playing the wanton under the
arches of three delicate stone bridges: the Dona is a delicate and curious
Church: the state-house, Dukes palace, and treasury, with other Arsenals, and
storehouses are to be made account of, as glorious spectacles, and worthy
structures; but whereas you shall find a book of the wonders of the City,
when you come to the substance from the shadow, it will prove either
ridiculous, or not answering expectation. The Duke himself studieth nothing
but wealth, for which he lives both sparingly and basely, not caring by what
means his yearly entrado is augmented, taking the indirect profit of common
Innes: He is of the family of Medices, and his subjects (if I may so term
them, which do what they list) are fine speakers, but buggerers, and
blasphemers.

The fourth room of Italies palace is opened for the delicate state of Leuca,
a Signiory and City of that riches, Leuca.
and estimation, that in comparing it to so much ground again, you shall
easily find the difference: For being not 20 mile square, yet can they muster
3000 horse, and 15000 foot: they make much silk, and are well conditioned
Merchants: their chiefest Podesta or officer is called Confaloniero, changed
every two months: his council are of the chiefest Citizens, altered every six
months; they live altogether for the time in one Palace: they have had many
Governors, but at the last the Cardinal (as you heard) purchased their
manumition, and they as apprehensiue are resolved to maintain their
privileges.

The fifth share is taken out of Italies lap by the Venetians, who boast of
great antiquity, have a Duke during life, Venice.
chosen by the balls of the full Council, who is at this instant a Donatus,
and are proud of their great possessions, but might have gloried, if they had
not lost their first footing. Within the land they keep close Forum Iulij or
Friaull, with the territories of a large country round about Venice it self,
which is called the impossible within the impossible, scited in the sea, and
divided into such channels, that you go both by water and land to their
houses, which indeed are hansomely contrived, and belonging to the Noblemen
worthy the reputation of Palaces; yet are the streets so narrow, that they
endure neither horse nor cart, neither does their Gentlemen wear sword or
cloak; nor is any fresh water, or good air belonging to the same, more then
what is brought them, or they reserve in pargetted cesternes, as in Zeland and
Holland when it raineth. Padoa is their University, and a large town, famous
for Titus Liuius and Peter Auenons birth, who made the bathes under the
mountains some five mile beyond, where the vipers are taken; it retains a
goodly monument of a Hall, keeps Antenors toombe in the streets, and dare tell
you, that S. Lukes sepulcher is in the Church called the Santo: Palma is a fine
town, and strong in fortification: Verona a famous City, whither the Noblemen
resort, who much stomach the Venetian government: Vizenza is a delicate
Academie, and has a stately and yet hansome theater: Crema a frontier town,
and well guarded: Vdine comely and convenient enough after the Italian manner,
and superstitious alike. Treuiso has a fair Piazzo, and shows some wanton
Curtezans: and Brescia, where the language is corrupt; for belike they have
beat out the finenes with hammering their armours. On the other side of the
Adriaticke sea, they command the pleasant shores of Histria, Dacia, and
Dalmatia almost as far as Ragusa: a little further in their own Gulf, and
amongst the musters of the Greek Islands, they protect Cephalonia, once Ithaca,
or the country of Ulysses. Corfu, where the strong Castle is accounted a
principal piece of workmanship: Xante, an Island famous for the valleys
yielding 4000 tun of Corans every year: Zerigo, and many other Islands, in
every one of which they have for Governor one Prouisor, and two Conciliarij as
assistant: they had also many other fortunes, but tempus edax rerum, and the
Turks greatness has almost broken the chain of their prosperity abroad in
pieces: For they have lost Rhodes, Ciprus, and some other commands; yet do
they keep Candy in the Mediterranean sea, whose Governor is privileged with
the title of DVKE, and has potestatem vitae and necis.

Modena is the sixth step of Italies glory, and an hereditary Dukedom, full of
riches and fashionable Gentry, Modena.
newly allied to Mantua, and reasonable well fortified against his dangerous
neighbor in Millane: The country is very pleasant, and conducteth you to those
plentiful water-pooles, called Lago de Garda, and Lago de Como; the first
under the Venetian, the next belonging to the Cardinal of Trento, and both
very near 50 Italian mile in length, and 30 in breadth.

On the seventh degree of honors chair, as he is mounted Mantua.
in Italy, is Mantua placed, a new Dukedom of an old Marquisate, in the name
of Gonzaga: He lives in better fashion of Courtship than the other Princes,
with a guard of Switzers; the City is large, boasts of Virgils birth, the
delicate streams of Po, over which for all the swiftnes and breadth, a gallery
bridge transporteth both coach, cart, and horse, and under which are preserved
many courtly barges both for magnificent shows, pleasure of the water in
summer time, and necessity of the inhabitants at all times.

The eight prize of Italies lottery is proclaimed for the Parma.
Dukedom of Parma, connited to the house of Farnesius a Spaniard, and
signorising over Macentia and Mirandula, not only holds up a stately
countenance of three magnificent Cities, famous for many alterations, proud of
well contrived ramparts, boasting of hansome women, and exposing an
extraordinary profit from the vent of several country merchandice; but opens
the plentiful fields of increase, and gives cause of wonder for many
temporary blessings.

The ninth proportion of this countries happiness is distributed to the Duchy
of Millan^, a principality in times Millano.
past of such eminence, that like a fair shining planet in a conspicuous orb,
it once had a prerogative of title and goodness over other Dukedomes: and how
ever the King of Spain has charged Count Fuentes to ouer-looke the City and
country, and Don Diego de Piemontel to superuise the Castle and Garrison; yet
is the bravery of the place very little abated, nor does the Nobleman shrink
under the burden, but carries his load lightly, how ever his inward groans
are breathed, and lifts up a face of cheerefulnes, as if he drank wine, and
fed on oil indeed according to the properties of either.

On the tenth rondell of Italies ladder is Genoa mounted, a rich, proud, and
sumptuous state; yet much perplexed Genoa.
for their perfidious dealing with the French, and now depending on Spanish
protection; has a Duke by their constitution, and placed or displaced
according to the mightiness of factions, or favor of the Clergy: The City
has many buildings of eminent sumptuousnes, and is not so filed in the ranks
of reputation, but that they jest it thus with the air birdlesse, the sea
fishles, the mountains woodles, the men respectles, and the women graceles.

On the eleventh seat of this Countries Councellchamber has residence the
Province of Trent, famous Trent.
for a General Council, and lies warm under the Alps neighboring Germany:
you may pass to it through the famous lakes of Lombardy, De guarda, and De
Como, from whence arise those swelling springs, that fill the streaming river
of Padus, and strengthen the City like an Island, except it be toward the West,
where yet you shall behold a reasonable fortification, and a well murited wall
with ramparts and rauelings: It is subject to a Cardinal, who like a Count
Palatine takes all jurisdiction upon him, and with the two mastring coorbes of
the world praemium, and poena, governs the stern of this principality.

The twelfth place to make the jury the fuller, is assigned to Piemont, the
flourishingst part of Sauoy, as opening the Piemont.
gates of his chiefest palace, and City Turine, where a Citadell of Spanish
Garrisons takes account of all passengers, which come over the Alps; it sends
the river of Po through the country as far as Ferrara into the Venetian
Gulf; and having many Knights of Malta within her walls is ready for their
succor, which way soever it chance, and they again for hers, as reciprocally
depending upon one another, and howeuer they are all ielous of the Spaniard,
they yet dare not breath it aloud; but sure I am when I passed through Italy,
and that the Cardinals Aldabrandino and Caesario came with a treaty to have the
Prince of Piemont and his brother under the King of Spaines protection, the
Secretary was imprisoned by the Council of State for urging the matter in the
King of Spaines behalf: so that there is probable suspicion, that the Sauoijen
and Spaniard will not continue long friends for all their alliance: it
receives the customs of Merchants traveling over the Alps, and maintains
the office of Dacij, and could be contented to have either Millane or Naples
annexed to his Coronet. But if you will have Sauoy fly with her own wings,
you must hearken a little after some antiquity.

CHAP. XII. The story of SAVOY.
THE country of Sauoy is all mountanous even from the fields and champaine of
Sa^y descr^d.
Lions to Mount Sinese, the only passage of the Alps into Italy: It is called
Sinese, quasi nunquam sine niue, never without snow, and is indeed a dangerous,
tedious, and cold travel even in the midst of summer: but Sauoy has many
other hills, as Aguabelle, and Agabellette, and is every way full of strange
and uneven iournies, so that it shall not be amiss to derive our discourse
from the etymology of the word, which may serve to confront ignorance, and
enrich us with the knowledge of things, which is no great burden, but rather a
happiness, according to the Poet, Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas: You
must then understand, that this strange and unsavory nation, by reason of the
straight and narrow ways to travel in, was ever subject to thieves, and being
slenderly inhabited had not sufficiency to protect either themselves or
passengers from the confused rages of men addicted to spoils and murders:
whereupon it continued in the name and scandal of Maluoy, the ill or
mischeeuous way, until a worthy aduenturer of the country attempted a
reformation, and showed these disordred people the strength of a more powerful
arm, prevailing so far, that by his industry and fortune, these enormities
were not only purged, but the first causers removed, I mean the robbers and
thieves were either slaughtred outright, or publicly executed for a terrifying
example, and as a reward to his virtues, the end of his labors had a
quadruplicitie of blessings: First, the Emperor made him a DVKE, gave him part
of Italy called now Piemont, as if it would speak for it self, that it is a
country at the foot of the mountain, and invested him with iura regalia, not
to be accountable to any Prince for his actions within his own territories.
Secondly, the country it self changed her title from Maluoy into Sauoy, quasi
salua via. Thirdly, these incredible mountains erected houses, entertained
husbandmen, and cattle, and builded Chapels, where a man would imagine an
impossibility of footing. Last of all, it was stored with forts and castles,
in such a defensive manner, that some of them at this day rank themselves in
the highest form of bulwarks and and ramparts. But I must not thus pass over
their accounts, nor vilipend their glory. For they boast of antiquity of Kings,
as that Hanibal found Brunco disseised of his inheritance by his younger
brother, and so rectified that discord. That Bitultus or Bituitus, another
King, was taken prisoner by Q. Fabius Maximus, some 50. years after Hanibals
passage into Italy. And that Cotius reigned in the time of Augustus the
Emperor, so that till the Goths and Vandals dissolved all governments of the
West, these countries remained firm in their former renown, as part of Gallia
Cisalpina: but afterward mischief was added to mischief, till it was
concluded otherwise by time and worthy endeauours, as you have heard: whereupon
Chambery was the cheifest town on this side the Alps, situated in a delicate
rich valley, full of Gentle-mens houses, on the other side of the mountain
Agabella, over which the traveler spends commonly five or six hours: it has
a handsome castle now manned with Spaniards, in the behalf of the Duke, the
City is orderly ditcht and fortified, and by the favor of a pretty river, has
commodity of a reasonable water, otherwise it is snowy through the country,
and the people are Strumosae, as in Switzerland. The suburbs are not fully
recovered of her ruins, which they were subject unto in the year 1600. when
the King of France, as stomaching the cunning violence of the Duke of Sauoy's
detention, of the Marquisat of Salust, came to Grenoble by the marches, and
after good surueigh besieged Chambery, lodging in the suburbs, and commanded
Villeroy to parley with Jacob and the President Rochet, about the surrendering
the town and castle, whom at last the people compelled to a composition, as
finding it impossible to resist the French forces: thus within three days was
the town, and within six the castle surrendered, and Le Buise a Gentleman of
Daulphine left for Governor: but the success of these actions was not
comparable to the fortune of attaining mount Melian, and St. Katherines fort,
two of the strongest holds that ever I saw. For mount Melian is Mount Melian.
seated on the top of an high and rocky mountain, the ditch banks very
steep, and the defenses consist of five great bastions flanked in most warlike
manner, to which is but one passage, and that from the town. The King
(according to the condition of men) transported only with outward shows, said
it was impregnable, but understanding himself afterward a little better,
commanded to besiege it: so the Marquis Rosny, great master of the artillery,
drew up seven canons by the force of arms, and strength of men, and two
batteries were made by De Bourdes, Lieutenant General of the artillery,
against the bastions of Maiuosin and Bouillars, besides an old Tower, which had
been shaken by Francis the first.

The Fort was commanded by the Earl of Brindis, who had all provision for his
defense, and like one of David's Worthies, proved an honorable Seruitor, had
not the Duke failed, and brake his word, leaving him to such a fortune, as
extremities accustom. For he held it out four months, after many thousand
shot of forty canons, whose voices sounded out nothing, but terror; and
effects made way unto fear and mistrust: and accordingly, seeing the French
had too good footing to be removed, a composition was condescended unto, and
the castle surrendered.

The town of Aguabelle is situated at the foot of a great rock, as if it lay
asleep in the lap of security. By it Aguabelle.
runs the river of Arck, it was surprised by the good endeauours of the
Signeurs of Crequy and Morges, not giving them of the castle any leisure to
burn it. At the same time was Conflans commanding the passage of Tarentaies
and Carboniers, with all the straights of Morien in the Kings hands: but if you
would know what pleased him indeed, it was the brave surprizall of St.
Katherines Fort, a gift as if fortune should open her lap, and bid him with
cheerfulness be his own caruer. For it is scited on a high hill within six
mile of Geneua, and not only ouerlookes the Country, but raises her rocky
sides in such a manner, as if it cared neither for battery, nor bullet, but
would return them back again, as you see a man spit against the wind to his
own defiling.

Concerning Geneua, by the water it seems impregnable, Geneua.
as washed with the pleasant billows of the lake Lemanus, and yet made
inaccessable, by reason of certain marshes, over which neither horse nor cart
can travel: by the land it has all the helps of art and nature, yet not
without danger of treason and stratagems: but that I am persuaded God has
reserved it, as little Zoar was a city of refuge, when all the cities of Sodom
and Gomorrha were on a blaze round about it. So Sauoy, the King of Spain, the
Pope, and her own treasons were all disappoynted, and it still remains in the
freedom of ablessed protection, boasting of nothing more, then her 300. years
continuance in an uniformity of religion, and that it retains the true method
of the Primative Church. But to St. Katherines Fort again. It consists of
five bastions, which are not walled but ditcht. well furnished with artillery,
and had 600. men to defend it, who yet were in several distractions, when they
perceived the confidence of the Kings army, not to take all that pains without
further satisfaction; so they submitted to the clemency of Count Soysons, after
the King was departed, to go meet the Queen at Lions, and thus were these
impregnable places made the tennis-ball of fortune, and left us this
observation, that men, money, and endeauours, will overcome all disasters, and
make the very mountains yield to heroike resolutions. This is that Fort, which
was excepted in the composition between Sauoy and France. This is that Fort,
that was to keep the Country in obedience. This is that Fort, whose
government being denied to Duke Byron, startled his resolutions, and plunged
him in the irrecouerable gulf of discontented treasons. The town of Moriana
is beautified with a College, Monastery, and Churches, and took the first
name, either because the people are swartish and black; or the earth (like
some places of Aethiopia) resembles clots of pitch, and so indeed their swine
are of the same color. A little further lies Bramont, a city of that
antiquity, that Caesar fills some part of his Commentaries with her
relations. The passages to all these places are somewhat fearful to
strangers. For to ride under, and behold such mighty mountains and rocks, to
see the snow dissolve and run down with that impetuous force, making such
anfractus and ruptures, that diverse hundred mils are turned with the same, to
hear the terrible noise of the channel, whose foundation is huge stones
disseuered from the hills: to see the pine trees stand under like a carpet,
ready to receive the falling of the snow, is a thing both of admiration and
pleasure. But for mine own part, it startled me not at all, in regard I had
marched over some mountains and places in Ireland; especially Pen men mawre in
Pen men mawre in Wales.
Wales, which for the length of the passage, is the fearefullest that ever I
saw, because the stony rock hangs over so many hundred fathom high, and the
sea lies under as great a depth: so that a quarter of a mile together, the way
is not eight foot broad, and (as it were) patch up in the broken places, with
furrs and bauin, to keep both horse and man from slipping. Besides, after a
great frost you shall have an hundred load of stones fall at once from the
rock into the sea, and almost batter the fence in pieces, which in the
fearful report, and sudden viewing by a new commer, must needs be
troublesome, and indeed surmounteth any place of Sauoy, or the Alps.

Thus much for Sauoy, whose eldest son is now called Prince of Piemont,
having his court a part from the Dukes palace, with a small guard of Switzers,
and lives in reasonable eminence, knowing his father to be an absolute
Prince, himself a nephew to Spain, and nearly allied to the house of Austria.
As for the Dukes jealousy of the power of the Clergy, and the Spanish
encroachments, I am resolved (like a smoothering fire) it will one day burst
forth into flames of despite, and did he not rather fear France, as a near
neighbor, and more dangerous adversary, he would peradventure attempt further
into Italy, in despite of Spaines ouer-watching. But because it is a
thanklesse labor to gleane the fields of other folks harvest, and that you
have whole volumes of the Spanish, French, Low Countries, Hungary, Venice,
Portugal, and Turkish affairs, I will entermeddle no further: only I must
speak a little concerning Millane, and so leave Italy between the straights
of her own pleasures at home, and suspicion of foreign intrusion abroad.

CHAP. XIII. The Story of MILLANE.
ABout the year 1492. the Realm of Naples reuolting, Rhene Duke of Loraine
The occurrences of Millane.
was sent for by the Pope to be invested King, which was the first motive for
the French to be admitted into the attractiue delights of Italy. For when many
hands had (as it were) torn a pieces the peace of this Country, it seemed a
charitable and meritorious work to contriue an establishment, and redacting it
to uniformity, which the Controller of Kingdoms at that time, I mean the
Pope, determined by this course, had not the very next year his mind received
a further perturbation. For this Pope was a Spanyard, by the name of Roderick
Borgia, or Alexander the sixth, whom the Venetians, and Duke of Millane being
an usurper at that time, established in the Papacy, because they might be
assisted from him in all their demands. Whereupon the Duke, by the name of
Lodwick Sforza, and an uncle, surprizeth the Cittadle of Millane, insinuated
into the love of the principal nobility, and confederated with many Princes of
Italy, to corroborate his new gotten greatness. All this yet hindered not the
next journey of Charles the eighth, King of France, who now pretending a very
right to Naples and Sicilia, with much ado was incited to pass the Alps, and
take his pleasure in these plenteous fields, in which, that his walks might be
the more smooth, he condescended to certain articles with this Usurper
Lodwick, much about the time that John the true Duke of Millane died, leaving
behind him one son and daughter, in whose minority Lodwick, as he had before
wrested the government, now assumeth the title, had not his forwardness been
somewhat intercepted by this French visitation, whereupon he persuaded the
Venetians, who of themselves were suspicious enough, when they saw the French
Kings glorious entrance into Florence, to some interposition, and so both
Millane and Venice grew jealous of King Charles his proceedings, which yet
could not be so cunningly trauersed, but he was made acquainted with their
inconstancy, and held his peace till a fitter opportunity. For now he was to
make his pompous entrance into Rome, where the walls both of the City, and the
Castle St. Angelo fell down miraculously before him. By which occasion, as if
the sword of Iehu should kill the Priests of Baal, is prognosticated, that by
the hand of France, the enormities of the Church, and the monstrous abuses of
the Clergy, should be winnowed and thoroughly fanned: but it should seem there
was a trick of prevention put upon him, and the name of an Emperor taught him
another way to acknowledge the Popes favor. For 1495. about the 12. of May he
enters Naples in an Imperial habit, as Emperor of Constantinople, by the Popes
grant and confirmation: but he had not possessed it five months, before there
was a general revolt concluded against him, as at the same instant Millane had
done with Lodwick: whereupon the King somewhat fearful of an Italian receipt,
or other strange surprizals, returns the next year home again, with purpose
to renew the war, and reintegrate his former losses: but the Cardinal of St.
Malo hindered it at that instant, had not the Princes of Italy, perceiving how
the Venctian and Millenois triumphed for the departure of the French, incensed
the King again to punish them both 1497. which was also interceded against by
his brother the Duke of Orleance, who disclaimed in his own name or person to
disturb the peace of Millane: yet had not sufficient authority to divert the
Kings designs, and so the wars of Italy were renewed.

Now is Lodwick perplexed indeed, and compelled to prostrate himself before
the Couchant Lion of Venice, and lower then the same uses so his submission,
that the noble beast enclineth to succor him: yet in such a manner, as Israel
assisted Judah against Assyria, being fearful of extirpation her self; but as
soon as the public enemy was departed, the emulation at one another
greatness drew whole armies into the field: so played Simeon, Eleazer and
Ichoconon with the Romans, when their civil mutinies barracadoed the streets
with heaps of slaughtered carcasses, and filled the channels with the spilt-out
blood of murdered men. For Millane is now jealous of Florence, Florence of
Millane, both of Venice, Venice of both, and all three of the French: yet
Charles goes on, and leaving garrison almost over all Italy, returns home
again: but at his castle of Amboyse dies of an Apoplexy, 1498. after he had
unfortunately struck his head against a low door, going to see a set at
tennis. Lewis the 12. then succeeded, and not only claimed the Duchy of
Millane, iure millitari, but takes upon him the style by right of succession,
and a property of inheritance, as resolved to maintain, what his father had
gotten, and so gloriously purchased, to which he is adiuted by all the
supportation, wherein Pope Alexander could animate him, who to raise up his
bastard son Caesar Borgia to a Princely throne in Italy, joins with King
Lewis in his enterprises, and so contriueth the matter, that Millane mutinies
against Lodwick Sforza, and submits unto the French with Cremona and Genes.

All this while is Lewis at Lions: but who will not run to The (...) in
possession of Millane.
carry so great a King glad tidings; so that he is quickly aduertized of the
fortunate proceedings of his army, and as quickly travels over the Alps,
beating the way of Mount Sinese, entering Millane in triumph, and left for
Governor, Philip Lord of Rauestine, and Baptista Fregose his Lieutenant. The
castle was yet protected with the guard of 3000. men, and committed to the
loyalty of Bernardine of Corte borne in Pauia, who by his good beginning gave
life to their opinion, which supposed it impregnable, and not to be taken by
force. But what men cannot in the Lions, they compass with the Foxes skin, and
thus far deride both the strength of soldiers, and pride of fortifications,
that where the mind may be corrupted upon any terms of disloyalty, neither
walls, ramparts, nor manhood, can prevent the power and deceit of bribery. This
appeared in the disposition or Bernardine, and Philip of Fresques; whom the
cunning of Triuulce, and the disbursing 20000. crowns, quickly diuerted from
their first resolutions, and made a breach in the Citadle without mine or
battery.

Thus was the French possessed of this Duchy without competition, or
diffidence, and Lewis the 12 made his royal entry accordingly. But mark the
vicissitude of all things, Millane reuolts again, and Sforza recouers all as
easily, as he lost it, in which business the Swisses proved very disloyal to
the French, and the lookers on were amazed to behold fortune proud of
inconstancy, so that this use may be raised thereby: How ever men satisfy
ambition for the time, yet are they certain of nothing under the sun.
Again, when by indirect courses designs are concluded, they must stand the
better on their guard, and prepare their patience when any alteration startleth
resolution: thus fared it with Millane again. For as you see a glooing heat in
April changed on the sudden to bitter blasts and cloudy tempests, so was
Sforzas iollity reuersed, himself surprised, taken and carried prisoner to
Lions, where denied the benefit of a princely execution, and resolved nothing
can be so acceptable to a man in misery, as a noble death, worthy the name of a
Roman, he dies at once, whether for grief, or great heart, it matters not:
yet does the King of France pardon Millane, and at last keeps all in quiet. But
the wars of Naples are renewed 1501. and the kingdom is divided between
France and Aragon, so that great alteration happens in Italy, and within two
years there is a general overthrow of the French with the taking of the
Castle at Naples by the Spaniard: yet is not Benjamin discomfited, but calls
his brethren together, and with more settled courages reintegrate their estates,
and so the French make head again, attending the good hour of a better
prosperity.

About this time in August died Pope Alexander the sixth of poison, which he had
prepared for the Cardinals: but his taster by mistaking the flagons took away
both his life, and the pride of his expectation concerning Caesar Borgias
glory, or his further desires to set the fuel of Italy on a blaze: After him
to stint the strife of many Nations expecting the Papacy, old Francis
Piccolamini Cardinal of Sienna was chosen Pope, by the name of Pius the third,
in memory of Pius the second his Uncle, who made him Cardinal: but a young man
must prepare himself to dye, and an old man cannot live long: so he continues
scarce a month, leaving his room, and the glory of all Rome to the Cardinal
of S. Pierre, who was made Pope by the name of Julius the second 1504. in which
year Naples wrested her head out of the French collar, and seemed more glad to
be supported by Arragon: nor was this sufficient, but upon a supposition to
extinguish the light of the lamps of France in Italy, a new league 1511. was
corroborated by the unsteadfast Italians against the French, which when the King
perceived, and that he coniectured, how his bark must be driven to dangerous
streits by the uncertain winds of alteration, he transported his Court and
Council from Florence to Millane, and from Millane to Lions, determining to
weary them with tedious iournies and attendance, so is Italy perplexed, and the
Nobles repine without remedy; till at last the Emperor Maximilian spreads the
wings of the Aegle, and clocketh the Princes of Italy under her sides:
whereupon with the help of the Spaniard called the holy league, war is made
against Lewis, and the Duchy of Millane recovered again to the use of
Maximilian Sforza grandchilde to Lodwick, who was invested Duke by the
Cardinal of Sion about the end of December, yet by the Swizzes assistance, and
loyalty, the Castles of Millane and Cremona hold still for the French; and the
imbers are not so extinguished, but fire appears, and yields this comfort,
that if they moderately proceed, a greater heat and more quickening light may be
made.

In the midst of which convulsions of Italy, Pope Julius dies, and John
Cardinal of Medices succeeded him by the title of Leo the 10. whereby a second
truce was ratified between Lewis of France, and the King of Arragon: so that
Lewis made great benefit of this interim and cessation, confederating with the
Venetians, by whose assistance he brought a royal Army into the Duchy of
Millane: but the Pope having sent 40000 ducats amongst the Switzers, quickly
weighed down their former stedfastnes, and so when Millane and Cremona was
stored with them, they were corrupted to be traitors to their first masters,
and accordingly against all expectation, with an odious revolt encountered the
French in as cheerful a manner, as ever before they had entertained the
crowns of the sun against the Italians: so that ere the year went about,
the Castles of Millane and Cremona return to the obedience of the Duke, and
King Lewis held nothing in Italy but the lantern of Genes, which afterward the
Genouais razed to the ground, both to prevent the occasion of future tyranizing
over them, and to manifest their inveterate malice against the flower-de-luce,
though it glistered never so gloriously in an azure field. Now dies Lewis 1514.
but corruption vnius generatio alterius: For Francis the first suruiues, and
renewes the wars of Italy, passing the Alps the year following, and
surpassing considering his Royal Army into the Duchy of Millane against the
Emperor, Arrogonians, Sforza: and the Switzers contract a league, and advance a
strength to shoulder the new French King from any firmenes, nay if it may be
footing in Italy; but like a Cedar of Libanus he stands upright, enduring the
shaking of these tempestuous storms, and so proceeds to a warlike trial,
whereby the 13 of September in a gallant encounter at Marignan, he prevails
1515.
against the Switzers, besieges the new Duke Maximilian Sforza in Millane, and
coadiuted by the Duke of Burbon wrested this composition, that Maximilian shall
be the Kings pentioner in France, and the Switzers to depart with bagg and
baggage.

Thus are the French once again welcomed into the pleasures of Lombardy, and
Francis the first is Lord of this unquiet Duchy, which now is detained with a
seeming security, because the Pope applauded the success, and according to
the superstition of those times, and policy of temporizing, blessed the royal
standard of Valoies. But about the 20 of June 1519. the Emperor Maximilian
paies his tribute of life to the first enlarger of breath, and Charles of
Austria, competitor with the King of France, is preferred by the name of
Carolus Quintus, inheritor of Spain, with so many titles besides, that the
Harolds were troubled in the proclaiming them, and the style was tedious to be
divulged. Between these two great Princes so many grudges increased, and
stimulatory causes of enmity appeared, that at last open defiances proclaimed
an unappeased war, and the trumpets of Bellona ecchoed nothing but
disturbance in the fields of Europe, especially after the Pope declares
himself against France, and by way of prophecy fore-telleth the ruin of the
French government in Italy, adding withal some ominous signs of calamity to
ensue, and casting up an untoward reckning in this manner: That on S. Peter's
day at sunne-set, a lightning fell on the great tower of the Castle of Millane,
and overthrew 6 fathomes of the curtain on either side, consumed 250000 weight
of powder, 1200 fire-pots, salt for 5 years, and buried in the rubbish
Richbowrg Captain of the Castle, with 300 Gentlemen of account: upon which
advantage the 23 of November the Marquis of Pescarra with his Spanish bands,
the Marquis The Spaniard takes part with Millane against the French.
of Mantua, the Cardinal of Medices, and all the Emperors and Popes
confederates come to Millane, and once again recover it, sacking the Town
which continued 15 days, in which time the Pope dying, a new Pope called
Adrian the sixth, who was Cardinal of S. Sixtus, was elected, and admitted
Sforza into Millane, had not the French the year following attempted to
recover their losses, besieged Millane again, took Nouarra, and presumed to
establish themselves more strongly, which questionles they had done, but that
the Venetians forsaking them, made the matter somewhat difficult, and left the
Army staggering, like a tree almost tormented with the cruelty of many strokes,
and waueth in the wind ready to fall with the next violence. At last the
fatal stroke is given indeed, mischeeues throng on one another so hastily,
that the French 1522 are expelled Italy, so far from hoping to augment their
glories, that they are in despair to recover their own, formerly possessed.
For presently the Castle of Millane yielded to the conqueror, the garrison was
quickly dispersed, or rather consumed with sickness, the Spaniard insulted,
the Italians trembled, and in a word all the French particeans were eaten out
with hunger, diseases, and mutinies.

Thus was Francis Sforza invested in the Duchy of Millane, and a general
league between the Millanoies, Emperor, and Venetians concluded: but for all
this success of the confederates (with the addition of the Duke of Burbons
revolt to the Emperor) the French Army continues in Italy, and the Admiral
with new forces breaths out new malice against Millane, besieging the town,
battering the Citadle, and trampling their best fields to dirt: in which times
Pope Adrian dies, and Julius Cardinal of Medices is chosen by the name of
Clement the 7. who to insinuate with the Emperor begins a strange work, and
by the way of conniuencie permits him to usurp Millane for himself,
whereupon all the Princes of Italy The Spaniard by the Popes flattery looks
after Millane for himself.
are terrified indeed, and not only repine against the Popes proceeding, but
go the plain way to work seeking by force of arms to propulse the Spaniard,
wherein the better to prevail 1524, the French are recalled again, and by the
glorious titles of Protectors of Millane, the Marquis of Salust and Tremouile
admitted for the French: But at the last the 25 of February, the fatal
battle of Pauy determined all controversies, and the Emperor triumphed in the
captivity of the King of France, which occasioned a very dissolution of the
French government in Italy, as enforced to disclaim their interest both in the
kingdom of Naples, and Duchy of Millane.

Notwithstanding Francis Sforza is in no security of his estate, as suspecting
the Emperors demand of 1200000 ducats for his expenses, and that he intended a
plain usurpation of the whole Duchy, whereupon disabled by force to suppress
him, he flies to the succor of his wits, and tampers with the Marquis of
Pescara for the inuesture of the royal mantle of Naples, upon condition to
endeavor the spanish expulsion out of Millane; which design and project the
Pope and other Princes not only allow, but as principal agents are employed
in the negotiation: but the Emperor Charles is incensed, and taking notice of
these treasons, as he now entitleth them, raised up the dust, that made Sforza
blind, and thus punishes him, as chief delinquent. On the 24 of July 1526.
he brings his Army to the siege of Millane, and with Caesar's speediness of
Veni, vidi, vici, circumspecteth the City, obtains the conquest, and settles
the Duke of Burbon in the Duchy: nor is his anger so moderated, but seeing the
father of charity durst transgress his own principles, he marches to Rome,
and sacketh it, expulsing the Pope, not in admonitory manner, or after the
discipline of the Church to excommunicate him ad coertionem; but with violence
and terror to torment him ad ruinam, teaching him a new lesson of observing
Emperors and Kings, and as far as time had discovered to his conscience,
showing apparent signs of disanulling his authority in temporal affairs:
nor desisteth he so, but understanding of new relief from the French and
Lansguents, he hurrieth about with a full resolution to make due end of all.
Thus endured this Duchy all the plagues depending on a miserable war, till at
last 1530. the children of France are released, and a peace ratified between
the Emperor and the French King, who in the articles of agreement surrendered
his claim to all these territories in Italy, and the Emperor is proud, he
has so easy a passage into the country, which although seemed much
distasting to the Princes, and was as thorns in the sides of the Clergy, as
appeared The Spaniard absolute ly possesses Millane.
amongst the Cardinals, when they were enforced to ratify the same: yet was
the Emperor careless of their displeasure, and proceeded in what journey he
listed in despite of the Papacy; only with a colorable show of
commiseration, he restored Sforza to the Duchy of Millane, but kept the Castles
of Cremona, and it in his hands: so that presently after his death, it was
incorporated to the crown of Spain, and has ever since looked with the eyes
of jealousy and repining upon all their Governors.

CHAP. XIV. The description of FRANCE.
THE flourishing kingdom of France ever The Topography of France.
since that Charles the great did as it were spread the wings of the Cherubins
over sanctum sanctorum, and ratified the glory of the Pope of Rome by expelling
the Goths and Vandalls out of Italy, was known by the characters of the
Christian King, and eldest son of the mother Church. But long before it
suffered a division into Cisalpinam and Transalpinam: Transalpinam again into
Celticam, Belgicam, and Acquitanicam: whereby the best parts of Lombardy, the
low Countries, and all on this side the Rhene westward marched under the
standard of France, and was proud to be registered in the book of her accounts:
so that whatsoever has bin since disioynted from this French frame, may be
resembled unto children pulled out of the arms of a loving mother. But I will
quietly bring you into her own rooms, whereby you shall partly behold the
beauty and workmanship of her building: only by the way I must a little touch
the Etymology of the word, and tell you, that (...) in Greek signifies
milk, and so the people Galli of (...).
from their complexion, and resemblance to whitenes, were called Galli or
Galati. For other particulars, you have Caesar's commentaries, and well
compacted histories, which have tossed and tumbled the lodgings, yea the very
beds of her chambers, and our own acquaintance has ouer-lookt her choicest
closets. It was once the nurse of valor, and afforded her vberant paps in
those days to such men, as trampled over the fields of Greece, robbed Apollos
Temple at Delphos, fetched away the spoils of Asia, and by the assistance of
Brennus an Englishman performed actions of wonderment, and applause. It was
afterward the pride of Roman Consuls, and the greatest ambition thought it
self sufficiently recompensed with her government, when Rome had yet lessned
her room to make it provincial.

Presently followed the division of the Empire, and all the government almost
of Europe was rent asunder with the fury of very strange and savage Nations,
whose confused Chaos of barbarism the bravery and goodness of this country
redacted to uniformity. A little while after diverse families by being maiores
palatij became masters of the Kingdom, wherein some by suppression, some by
merit, some iure militari, and some by right of inheritance lifted up the
crown and maiesticall head of this country: Straightway the Eagle of Rome was
sick, and from France recovered health, how ever afterward it sought for
further cure from the Germans. Then followed the Law Salick amongst them, with
absolute interdicting the Crown of this glorious Monarchy to fall to the
distass: whereupon the three famous houses of Valois, Burbon, and Loraine
entailed the same, and made as it were a feofment of perpetuity, wherein this
Diadem still keeps her residence, and is dunged, watered, and likes her
manuring: so that whatsoever has bin long since divided amongst, many Princes,
looking upon one another with the eyes of emulation, and ambitious desires to
become greatest in the same, is now at length united under one Monarchy, and
title of France: so that howsoever some will have Loraine absolute of it self,
and no subject: some stomach, that Burgoine is revolted: some repine, that
Daulphine was united by donation: some confound Gascoigne and Guienne,
abolishing quite the name of Acquitane: some remember, that Normandy was
English: some presume of Britany, as a Principate of her own: some make Sauoy
afraid, when Geneua calls the King of France patron and protector; and some by
division and subdiuision would extenuate her greatness: yet is now all France,
and the worthy Princes are resolved to keep correspondency with strangers, but
suffer no new intrusion, nor any foreign claims to prevail at their marble
table: I will therefore desist from any further vnwinding the yarne of strange
bottomes, but spread a modern cloth, and give you some slender taste of her
present dainties, whereby you shall not depart away altogether unsatisfied.

To begin even under the mountains Pirenei, which Gascoine and Guienne.
divide Spain from France: the first part is called Gasconia, including
Guienne and Acquitane, Dukedomes once appropriate to the heir of England,
before the inuesture of the Principat of Wales. The chiefest Cities are
Bordeaux and Toulouse, washed with the plenteous waters of the Garonn, a river
not only spreading her many arms abroad to send plenty all over the fields;
but pouring out her greater streams into the sea, welcommeth store of ships
into her ports and harbors, sending them back again into many countries of
Europe with glad tidings of an abundant vintage. Bordeaux is watrishly scited,
by reason the river, and springs raises many marshes here about; yet is it
wholesome, and the heat of the climate can endure the moistnes of the air; the
City is ancient, and boasts of an University, but more properly of the
great concourse of Merchants: It is beautified with many monuments, especially
the Palace, wherein King Richard the second, the son of the black Prince
was borne; and another without the Town, a work ever since the Emperor
Galienus, and then supposed a glorious Amphitheater. The town of Toulouse is
more proud of antiquity, and tells of time before Troies devastation: yea
remembers since Deborah Judge of Israel was famous for her wisdom and
government. It has now a well disciplined school, a court of Parliament,
populous streets, and reasonable buildings, but indeed they seem very ancient,
and for some special structures may carry the credit of magnificence. The
other towns are many and very good, except country villages, which are as
rude as in other places, and the Pesant lives like a drudge, not daring scarce
drink of the wine of his own garden, lest he should not raise such profit, as
would answer the proportion of his rent. But herein our English Merchant has
somewhat ouer-reached them: For they hire the gardens themselves, and make the
best use of them, not trusting their laborers and husbandmen to handle the
presses, but as they be hired by the day, or great.

The second part is called Poictoy, a country so great, and plentiful, that
there are numbered 1200 parishes, and Poictoy.
three Bishoprics, and feign would have you reckon these principal walled
towns within her division of inferior and superior: The bishoprics are
Poictiers, Leucone, and Mailezay: The superior towns Roch sur yon, or if you
will Rochell, one of the strongest towns in Europe, and the rather because it
has not trusted her walls and ramparts, which are yet stupendous, and
magnificent, but the Lord of hosts, and his true religion, which has always
raised their spirits to an extraordinary confidence of mercy, and prevailing
against any Antichristian attempt: Talmont, Meroil, Vouuant, Meruant, Bresfure,
Lodun, Fountenay le Conte: The inferior, or towns of the lower division,
Noiart, Partenay, Touars, Moncontoul, Herenault, Meribeau, Chastelleraut, and
others of like eminence, amongst whom Poictiers is reckned the most populous of
all France next to Paris, it is watered with the ouer-flowings of Clanius, a
river filling the Loire, and sending it the faster into the sea: it boasts of
some antiquities, a Theater called the Sands; a palace of the Emperor
Galienus; an Aquaeduct, to which belong certain fountains, vulgarly called
arceux de parigne, and other memories from famous Romans, who were here ever
resident: To talk of their Churches, prisons, walls, ports, ramparts,
arsenals, towers, rivers, bridges, and such like, it were superfluous
considering they are not subjects either of admiration, or delicacie, but even
common or ordinary buildings.

The third part is Aniou, though a little Province, yet very Aniou.
fruitful, and affords such excellent vines, that the common proverb cries
out, the wine of Aniou. For the stately river of Loire coming from Orleance
posteth a pace with the glad tidings of a plentiful country, and excellent
husbandry in their gardens: The mountains yield a red stone and parget called
ardoises; the valleys plenty of grass, the rivers fish, and the barrennest
place pasture for cattle: The chief City is Angiers on the bank of the
Meduan, not far from the Loire; yet is it joined by a bridge of stone to
another on the other side, and so you may conclude, that two towns make one
City: Here you have also ruins of Theaters, vulgarly Brohan, and an Academy
enlarged, or rather founded by Lodwick the second 1389: the other towns are
Samurs, Belforce, Bange, and such like, of whose particulars my purpose is not
to make relation.

The fourth part is Britania, in times past Armorica: It boasts for sending
over such inhabitants into our country, Br^taigne.
as not only taught them a language, but peopled and possessed the same: We
again are resolved, that though France was first inhabited, yet from the
greater Britain the less received denomination, and by intercourse of people,
affinity, marriage, and politic confederation, both countries learned one
another language. For being called Armorica, it at last condiscended to be
entitled little Britain, retaining a long time an absolute Duke of her own,
and dividing her territories into low and high Britain: in both which are
numbered nine Bishoprics, Carnouaile, S. Paul, Treguires, Doll, Rheines, S.
Malo, Nants, Vannes, and Brein, amongst whom Doll has the precedence, though
Renes and Nants be the chiefest and greatest Cities: It is three parts exposed
to the sea, and has many strong ports, especially Breast, famous for sundry
warlike exploits, and the last intrusion of the Spanish leaguers.

The fifth part is Normandy, divided into the countries of Constantine, Bessin,
Maine, and Auge, in which as principal Normandy.
Cities are recorded Roan, Pontoise, Alenson, Argenni, Caen, Baieux, and some
few others: The people boast of their endeavors in spinning linen cloth,
excellent wits, and able bodies for the wars: But of all other things, they
would exceed (especially the Gentlemen) for mansuetude, courtship, and
affability in attending the affairs of peace, and quietness.

The sixth part challenges the title of the I Will of France, a country so named,
because it is in a manner environed I Will of France
with excellent rivers, which make the ground so fertile, that for number of
Towns, Gentlemen's houses, places of pleasure, conueniencie of provision, and
other particulars tending to bravery and profit, it excels all the country:
But her chiefest pride arises from the possession of Paris on the river
Sequana, or the Sein, the mistress of all Cities; and Orleans on the Loire
famous for many remarkable actions, between whom almost 40 English mile is one
cawsey of stone, or otherwise there were no traveling, especially in winter:
For all the ground is so fat and clammy, that Paris it self is called Lutetia
of luto, or the durtinesse of the soil.

The seventh part belongs to Bourges, or Berry, a country Berry.
boasting of many delicate things; but the City is quite out of patience, if
you either forget her monuments, or contradict her first founder to be Ogiges,
the grandchilde of Noe: It is enclosed with the countries of Touraine, Burbon,
and Niuernois, and on the river of Loire washing clean the fields with his
strange ouer-flowings are erected Cosme, Le Charity, the City of Neuers with
her long bridge, Molins, and many other towns, some of hansome eminence, and
some of less consequence.

The eight part is attributed to Limosin or Lemania, Limosin.
containing the County of Auernge, and yields such plenty of fenns and
marshes, that the fatnes of the soil is both bettered and augmented thereby,
howeuer the air seems not so wholesome, and the Cities and Towns are fuller
of inhabitants, by reason of natures suppliment in all things, and the easines
wherewith good husbandry dispatcheth her business: yet are they neither great,
nor extraordinarily beautified: no not Limoges, Clermont, Beurgard, Monferau,
and Goudade, which are the principal.

The ninth lot of France her renown, is taken out of fortunes lap for
Languedock, reaching to the sea as far as Languedock
Montpelier and Arles; on the other side Westward, Car^ossen and Narbon: yet
do some join Languedock to Prouence, and call all these seacoasts, with the
territories adjacent, by the title of Gallia Narbonensis.

The tenth principal room of this French palace, is Prouence.
beautified with the Parliament roabes of the several countries of Prouence,
Daulphine and Orange. For they account Arles, a town compassed with the
streams of Rhodanus, rather in Prouence then Languedock, because it stands
(as it were) at the mouth of the river, to watch how the sea and the fresh
water meets: as for Narbon, they esteem it the pride of the river Araxis, and
boast of the great lake for her denomination accordingly. Here abouts were
those excellent bathes contrived, spoken of so much in the Roman Commentaries:
and Marius celebrated his triumphs for conquering the Cimbrians, who came thus
far in those days, from that country which we now call Denmarck, to re^st
the Romans. To Daulphine they added a gracious allowance of the famous and
ancient city of Lions, whom the (...) divides, and whose walls are so
ambitious, that they ^mb up to the top of very rocks: the river plays the
wanton about the town, and runs a pace to Valence and Vienna, never leaving
until he thrust himself into the Mediterranean sea, hard by Marselles, a city
and port of great consequence: but is so separated from the river, as if it
were affrayd of his swiftness. But Lions has yet more cause of insulting, in
regard that all this part of France was called Gallia Lugdunensis, from her
own name Lugdunum and diverse monuments of water-workes, bridges, towers, and
temples, were magnificent in Caesar's time. The province of Daulphine was given
to the eldest son of France, with no other intent, but to name himself
accordingly, by which occasion all Europe knows what the Daulphine means. To
Orange is a town so named appropriate, and Grenoble with Auignion, are coniured
within this circle. For although ever since the Pope made it his seat, and
established here a Conclaue for the Cardinals, it has since rema^ed firm to
the Roman Clergy: yet is it sited in this province, and called France her
natural mother: some reckon herein the three Bishoprics of Carpentoract,
Lissa and Vaurias, with many other towns, allowing us to call it the
Principate of Orange, and will have us take notice, that the house of Nassau,
which challenges the glory of the Low Countries, as by the worthy life of the
last Prince of Orange (whose younger sons are still so famous for the Belgic
wars) may appear: was extracted from hence, and glories in her denomination
accordingly. For mine own part, I have thus bound them together within the
girdle of Prouence, and could find in my heart to make Geneua with her great
lake and plains under the mountains, a daughter of France, although she has
vrgently denied her first mother. Besides, howeuer the Rhosne or Rhodanus
comes a pace out of Burgundy; it was once known by the name of Araris, and
tells a true tale of an hundred several towns dispersed on his streams,
and supported by his banks.

The eleventh book of this noble country, opens (...).
the leaves of knowledge for Burgundy, which was once a Kingdom, as absolute
as the King of France himself; and is still a Dukedom and County graced with
such royalties, that by their own prerogatives they have brought armies into
the field, and proclaimed the absolute freedoms of their government: yea, in
the latter times of contestation with France, they held the dignity of a
Parliament: kept a full palace sequestered: and instituted the noble order of
knighthood called the golden Fleece: some would annex the Duchy of Bar unto
it, which I think more properly belongs to Loraine, and many Earledomes of
estimation. The petty rivers receive augmentation from the springs of her
fields, and the swift Araris is sent into the sea from her mountains. Her
cheifest cities are Digion and Austune, maintaining regal tribunals, exposing
ostentous edifices, boasting of great antiquity, setting out the bravery of
diverse monuments and palaces, and supporting the necessities of many people.
The towns of the Dukedom would be called Latornelle, Rochpot, Chalons,
Verdune, Seure, Argilly, Sausieu, and such like. The towns of the County
please the inhabitants with the titles of Iussy, Gray, Dole, Besanson, Quingay,
Salins, Arboies, Paligny, Bouteuant, Noseroy, Vennes, Chastillion, and diverse
others: none of which, but either boasts of one excellency or other; some for
making salt, some for fulling cloth, some for spinning linen, some for mines
and minerals, some for excellent pastures, some for vines, some for cattle, and
all for good building, plenty of Gentlemen, and concourse of people.

The twelfth door of this Countries enclosure, is unlocked Loraine.
for Loraine, howeuer the Duke repineth that he is not a King with his
ancestors, and still protests he will be as absolute within his own
territories as an Emperor: nay, sometimes adds the French King himself. For
loving both alike, he will be auxiliary to either, and sometimes enemy to
both, as being such a Prince, who aduanceth and diminishes at his pleasure the
Marquisate of Ponce, the Earledoms of Vademont, Verdune, Blamont, Demanche,
Marchen, and diverse other coronets, with the immunities of sundry Baronies; all
depending upon his praemium and poena. The towns of this country are Metts,
famous for the Emperors siege, and many warlike fortifications, Nancy, Voige,
Chaligy, Vaudmont, Dompair, Rosiers, Rumbelluillier, and such like worthy
description: but as I said in the beginning, I intend not to extenuate the
endeauours of other men, either in their travels or commentaries, nor tell any
abrupt tales, when such and so many famous Authors and Cosmographers speak so
orderly and plainly. Therefore I refer you thither for more ample
discourses, especially concerning such cities as I have ouerpassed, and yet
flourish at this hour in several countries; it shall only suffice me to name
the countries and principal places, that I may prepare you the better to
attend my comparison, when I shall set out England to the sale with her
ornaments of commendation indeed.

The thirteenth room of the palace of France her Honor, is appropriate to
Callis and Boloigne, maintaining the Boloigne.
sea-shores over against Kent, and the sweet breathing mouth of the Thames in
England: but in such emulation being so near, that either they complain to be
thus long disioynted from her government, or seem offended that we ever
possessed them, and could keep them no longer: much of this country once
belonged to Artoys, and was divided between the Emperor and France, by way of
composition. But if you would know, wherein and whereof it boasts indeed, it is
for two famous Dukes of the same, or if you will, but Earls; who by their
valors and heroik endeauours, obtained the noble Diadems of the world: the one
was Godfrey, invested King of Jerusalem, and made like another Agamemnon,
Captain General of the Christian army against the Saracens. The other was
Stephen, son of Duke Williams daughter of Normandy, raised to the dignity of
England, and maintaining the possession against Maud the Empress and her
son, during his life.

The last part of this glorious Kingdom may include Vermond and Picardy, whose
principal towns are Guise, Picardy.
La Fere, Han, St. Quintine, Tornay, Chatel, Abeuile, Amiens, Auxi, Peron, and
such like, washed with the streams of the Some and Scaldis, whose rivulets
make the fields plentiful in corn and grass, although the inhabitants are
not industrious in planting of vine-yards, which I rather impute to the
indisposition of the soil, then their negligence.

Thus you see with what a glistring crown the head of France is impaled in the
chair of Majesty, and may visit the palace of honor with more and better
attendance of Princes, Dukes, Earls, and Gentlemen, then any absolute Monarch
of the world: yet because it has some defects in mere matters of state,
according to the true prosperity of a country: and that diverse deficiencies
chance somewhat disgraciously unto her, like stains and spots to pure linen,
I cannot yield her the pride of happiness: because you shall see in my next
book of comparison, wherein her fullness of glory is ecclipsed, and how we our
selves enjoy many prerogatives before her.

CHAP. XV. The Description of the Low Countries.
BEyond all, even to the sea, which made a sea of their fields and towns, lie
the seventeen The glory of the s^uenteene Provinces, as modern times esteem
them.
Provinces, called the Low Countries, or Germania inferior. For alas, the name
and title of Gallia Belgica is long since extinguished, although (as I said)
all the Countries on this side the Rhene toward France, were reputed as France.
Of these I must use a little ampliation, because I cannot choose but wonder, how
any Prince would neglect such a benefit, as the peaceable possession of these
places, which for goodness, greatness and wealth united with the love of the
inhabitants, might have exceeded Spain it self, as by their revenues,
multitude of people, cities, shipping, traffic with all nations, and
homebred commodities, may appear. They are called Ditiones inferior is
Germaniae, divided into Dukedomes, Counties, and Lordships, and known by these
Characters: The Dukedomes, Brabant, Limburck, Luzenburg, and Gelderland. The
Counties, Flanders, Artoys, Henault, Holland, Zeland, Namurs, and Zutphen,
which is but one principal town, and some small territories adjacent. The
Marquisate of the Empire. The Lordships, Freesland: for you must take notice,
that East Freesland belongs to a Prince of her own, and ever disclaimed to
be subject either to Emperor or King, and so holds up a head of liberty
accordingly, Mechlin, Vtrech, Trans-Ysell, and Groining.

In these are numbered 228. great towns, murited with walls, ramparts, ditches,
warlike ports, bridges, and fortifications. Besides, their guards are
continual, either of their own Burgers, or Soldiers lying in garrison,
according to the proximity of the enemy, importance of the place, necessity of
affairs, or inconveniences of the time. The villages or dorps are 6300.
beautified with embattelled Churches of many several fashions, frequented with
entercourses of people, adorned with handsome markets, and privileged by
ancient immunities, faires, solemn festiuals, and neighbourly meetings;
besides granges, castles, religious houses, towers, and Yonkers mannor-places.
The air seems moist, especially of Holland and Zeland, with the seacoasts
of Brabant and Flanders; yet not prejudicial to the health of the inhabitants:
for in the champaine of Brabant men live an hundred years. The Country is
every where visited with nauigable rivers, nor come they empty handed, but
afford delicate water and excellent fish: but what talk I of fish? when the
large Ocean is so nigh, out of whose storehouse a man may take, without being
called in question, or repining. It is beautified with many woods, affoording
timber to build withal, and the pleasure of hunting. It is smally, or not at
all mountainous, except about Namurs, Luzenburg or Henault, It is fruitful of
corn, grass and herbs, fit for pasture for cattle, and medicine for health:
yet in some places of Brabant and Gelderland full of heath, which
notwithstanding is not so barren, but cattle are fatted with the same, and
their flesh has an extraordinary sweet taste: It is free from those creatures,
which are either noisome, or dangerous to man, and wants none of those
blessings, wherewith the God of all blessing marketh a Country: but a noble
Prince, unity of religion, and a quiet government.

The Country of Limburck has many names, and is a Limburck.
province full of villages, it contains part of the Dukedom of Boloigne, the
Marquisate of Franckmount, the Earldom of Haspengo and Lootes, with many
other Baronies. There are brought into the lists 24. great towns, amongst whom
we begin inprimis with Leege, situated on the Mase, as having a Bishops See, a
delicate castle, and many well-ordred edifices: the dorps are reckned 1700.
besides Abbayes and religious houses: toward the North adjoining to Brabant, it
flourishes in corn and has some vines. Toward the South, neighboring France
and Lutzenburg: it is more barren, as intermingled with hills and woods, the
remainder of that great forest of Ardenia, of which so many fabulous accidents
are recorded. It contains diverse mines of marble and cole, and in such
goodness of euerything, that a proverb raises it self, to have bread better
then bread, fire hotter then fire, and iron harder then iron.

The Dukedom of Lutzenburg is for the most part mountainous and full of wood,
in the rest well tilled, and Lutzenburg
where they have stocked up the trees, excellent ground: what neighboureth
France conserueth both their language and customs, the rest speak Dutch. The
names of the Province and principal City have one sound, but it is ill
divided, part on a hollow by the river Essa, part on a rocky mountain: so that
it proposes no great uniformity: but yet yields a graceful object, and in
retaining the authority of a Parliament, has a pre-eminence of many greater
and prouder towns. The next is Arlunum, quasi ara Lunae, as supposed, that
they here worshipped the Moon. The rest are suitable, some for strength, as
Thion on the Mosell; some for commodity, as Baston, the mart of the Country,
and adjacent to the forest; and some for contentment and orderly conueniency,
as 26. others.

The country of Henault is suitable to the rest, and marches with the same
equipage of plenty and pleasure: the Henault.
chief cities are Mons and Valenciens. To Mons is attributed the precedence,
for antiquity, strength and riches: yet is it almost near the center of the
Land, and on a little river called Trulla, whose visitation makes the common
people wealthy and industrious, especially in weauing of a stuff called Says,
which here exceed all the towns of the Low Countries. Valenciens is better
sited on the river Scaldis, and is very spacious, well walled, and full of
ancient buildings, the Citizens are great tradesmen, and gain much by the
making of fustians, the rest are brought into the account with the number of
22. Amongst whom Binchium might have shown you a goodly palace, erected by
Mary, sister to Charles the fifth, and beautified with gardens of pleasure to
these uses. To beguile idle hours, to countenance a solitary retiring from the
great encombrances of the world, to quicken meditation with a corresponcency of
time and place, and to inuit the body to a better air, then commonly populous
cities afford, it was yet destroyed, some would feign say defaced, by Henry
the second, King of France, in those times of desolation, when intestine
mutinies could not be appeased without effusion of blood, and the rage of
Princes exasperated one another to sore reuenges. Here is also the ancient
town of Ba^aies, which flourished in the time of Constantine the Emperor. The
rest are Charlimont, Manburg, and Philips town, wherein the first founders, or
rather re-edifiers, made strong defenses against the eruptions of the French,
and were resolved to divide the house of Burgundy for ever from the
Flower-de-luce. Many other towns with the villages might be spoken of; but
because there are few memorable things in them, I pass all over with such a
slightnes, as is required in a man, that makes haste out of an idle journey,
till he come to his place of rest, and better consequence.

The country of Artois did once absolutely belong to the Flower-de-luce, as by
the antiquity and situation Artois.
may appear: But afterward in the contract 1529, it was patible of division,
when the Emperor and the French King were weighed in the balance of success
to set forward the renown of eithers prevailing; so that when France was found
too light, in regard that the false hand of fortune turned the scale on the other
side, twelve pretty towns fell from the King, as stones pulled from a ruinous
wall, leaving the whole Province in hazard of falling too, had not the other
part of the country succor'd it self under the supportation of Picardy, and
now tells us of good corn, many rivers, much wood, and reports of the
raining wool by the testimony of Saint Hierome, and others, who set it in the
account of wonders.

The Province of Namurs is plentiful of all things, that Namurs.
belongs to the use of man, as if the horn of Achelous were not only
reserved here for a monument, but distributed abundance by reason of the virtue
following the possession: it has many iron and cole mines, of whose nature and
condition this is observed, that whereas other coals are extinguished with
water, and enflamed with oil; these are set on fire with water, and rebated in
their heat with oil. It has only four walled Towns, who dare thus lift up
their heads above water to keep the bodies from sinking. 1. Namurs, situated
on the two rivers Mosa and Scambra united by a well compacted bridge of stone,
retayning a Bishops sea, and keeping the solemnity of a Parliament. 2. Bouinum
on the bank of Mosa, much defaced by the wars, being of late a rich,
stately, and populous City. 3. The third is Charlemont, one of the strongest
Castles in Europe, mounted on a high looking rock, whose foundation is washed
by the river Gillet, and from the Emperor retains both glory and
denomination. 4. The last is Vallencuria, whose etimology does almost express
it self: For here are all civil causes determined, and the villages of the
Province bring their controversies to be decided.

The Dukedom of Brabant challenges a more plentiful description: For it has
26 walled towns, and at Brabant.
least 700 villages well inhabited, industrious people, and proud of their
glory in retaining the presence of the Enfanta, and the Court of State in
Brussels, where, by reason of the pleasure and conveniencie of many delicate
fountains, diverse well ordered palaces invite you to behold even objects of
magnificence, and the Noblemen boast, how they are better accommodated here,
than in other parts of the country. Antwerp is scited on the river Scaldis,
and so glorious for goodly buildings, famous marts, a beautiful Statehouse,
delicate Churches, an Exchange for Merchants, an house for Englishmen, a
wonderful Cittadle, an admirable harbor, and such like illustrations, that
not long since it strove for the Coronet of Europe, and to be the Queen of
Towns. Louaine is very populous, and graced with an University, which the
Duke of Brabant, John the 4. erected. Mechline has her estimation from the
assembly of States, and deciding of controversies. Busumduce, a town of note
for a public school, and the peoples meeting to solemnize triumphs. Tiena,
neighboring the river Geta, from whence the cheese has a particular
estimation. Leuua, famous for drink brewed there. Niuella, proud of a
monastery only of noble women. Arscot by the river Demera, in times past a
Marquisate, but by the Emperor Charles advanced to a Duchy. Berghen-op-zoome,
named so for the kisses of the river that saluteth it, and famous for the
ancient Mart, and frequentation of Merchants; yet since Antwerp flourished
utterly decayed. Megen, a place of contentment, glorying in the passages of the
river, playing the wanton with her shores, and running up and down, as if it
brought glad tidings of prosperity. Breda, a town of delicacie; yet may you
in respect of her building add the Epithet of magnificent. Steneberg upon the
sea, which once had wealth enough to invite Merchants to a banquet of
commercing. Lira, a place so sufficiently pleasant, that diverse Noblemen have
retired thither, as repining against the troubles, which debarred them from
more oftener entercourses. Vileuord raises her fame from the strength of a well
situated Castle, and the fear of a soule-terrifying prison. Gembloures can
show you a Lord Abbot, as free and imperious, as a Count Palatine in his
jurisdiction. Iudoigna boasts of her nursery of Princes, and that the
wholesomnes of her air inuiteth them to an abode of wantonness and contentment.
Hannutum maintains the credit and estimation of an Earldom, and adds
withal the blessing of a most fertile country. Landen lifts up the head of
age in such a manner, that she warranteth her self the first, though not the
best of Towns. Halen is notorious for the wars and many deuastations by
battery of the Canon, and breaches made in her walls and bulwarks. D^ist, a
town washed on both sides by the fluent river of Demeta, it is of great
receipt, and famous for woollen cloth, and the profit arising from thence, as if
it were powered by the hand of plenty into the laps of the inhabitants. Sichnum
proud of the kisses of the same stream. Herentalls full of clothiers, and of
such inhabitants, who boast of of their labor and handyworke. Endoue upon the
river ^ommela, which watreth the fields of the champaine, and makes very
seeming barren ground exuberant: and Hellmount raising her walls upon a hill,
and is both ouerlooked, and defended by the fortification of a well munited
Cittadle.

The country of Flanders is nobly divided into three parts, Teutonicam,
Gallicam, Imperatoriam, and plentifully (...).
watered with three principal rivers, Scaldis, Lisa, and Tenera; affording this
reason for Imperatoria, that it never acknowledged any superior, but their own
Earls, and therefore had also the attribute of proprietory: For as the
Dukedom of Millane boasted with a superiority before other Dukes; so the
Earldom of Flanders had the prerogative of other Counties, in regard that
with Kings the Earls style had this emphasis, Comes Flandriae Dei gratia; yet
were they afterward subject to France, and numbered amongst the 12 Peers. It
retains the estimation, and aduanceth the walls of 28 Cities, plowing the
fields of 1200 villages, whose enclosures yield plenty of grass toward the
West, and brings forth strong oxen for tillage, and horses for service, as
you may see by their beautiful mares, of whom we make such good trial, and
use in our Carosses. The blessings of milk and honey fill their cups even to
ouer-flowing, and the abundance of wheat might once have told them, that it was
no miracle, when Isaac sowed in the land of Abimelech, and received a 100 for
one, because they have reaped, and found after harvest 60 for one. The people
are gentle, and the women straight and comely: their husbandry is graced with
the sale of linen cloth, and their Semsters boast of bone-lace, and delicate
needle-workes: but concerning the Towns the principal are thus the subject of
relation. Gaunt has a wall of 9 mile circumference, but possessing much waste
ground is not very populous, nor filled with houses, although three rivers are
at strife for her partition, and making 20 Islands of her territories, challenge
one another for lifting up most land above water: but in truth the inhabitants
in her behalf complain of the misery of many sieges, and that her fortunes
have bin as it were tossed to and fro with extremities: For she has tried the
several dispositions of French, English, Dutch, and Spanish, boasting of
nothing so much, as the famous birth of John Duke of Lancaster, son of Edward
the third, and in the right of his wife King of Castile; and that memorable
retreat, wherein General Norris with a few resolute English confronted the
whole Army of the Prince of Parma. Bruges for delicacie of buildings, sweetness
of streets, frequentation of merchants, and strength of walls did once
surpass all the towns of the Low Countries, and still boasts, that howeuer
her reputation is somewhat diminished, she was yet the occasion of the credit
and glory of Flanders. Ypers raised her wealth from the endeavors and industry
of Clothiers, until the English with the help of those of Gaunt destroying
their great suburbs, overthrew likewise their traffic, and brought more ruder
hands to pull their loomes and mills a pieces, then labored in their first
building, and raised them up: the rest with the villages, castles, houses,
Churches, bridges, and such like structures of admiration, are worthy of
further enlargement: but the book fills already too fast, and I purpose
another thing, then to patch up thus an ill favored cloth out of the shreds of
other men's Cosmography, who tell you of Turwin and Tornay, and those noble
endeavors of Hen. 8. when the King of France claimed Artois and Flanders, as
well as Picardy.

The Province of Gelderland is altogether champaine, yet intermingled with
woods, and stored with every Gelderland.
thing to satiate our desire, especially if we look after plenty of corn,
and pasture, which both stuffeth full their garners, and fatteth their cattle,
insomuch that they bring them lean in great herds from the furthest part of
Denmark, to receive here, as it were a more seemly form. It is visited with
the three rivers of Rhene, Mase, and Whale: it has 22 walled towns, attended
on by the care and diligent service of 300 villages, amongst whom Numegam is
metropolis, and indeed boasts not only of antiquity, but the royalty of a
King, had not time worn out the shining brightness of his Crown, or some
boistrous hand pulled the scepter out of his arm, and shouldred him quite
aside from his Throne; or else it was as the Kings of Cities in Mesopotamia,
Reges a regendo, when nine of them made battle together, and the preuailers
spoiled Lot, and took him prisoner.

Herein is also contained the country and Earldom of Zutphen.
Zutphen, and the delicate Island of the Betto, how ever Holland would challenge
her of disobedience, if she should call another mother. For Goricum, Worchum,
and many other towns are reputed hers, only Arnham on the other bank of the
Rhene, with the sweet fields of the Vellwe, will still belong unto Gelderland,
and could tell you of a sconce builded over against it: of another on the bank
of Icell: of another before Numegen, where that valiant German Sir Martin
Skinck lost his life, and was tossed from grave to grave, until a military
ceremony laid him in an honorable place of rest: and of another at the point
of the Island, dividing the river into the Rhene and Whale, which says you can
scarce show such another, and is proud of nothing more, than her founder, and
title: For it is called still Skinck sconce, and could affright you with the
relation of many strange designs, and changes of military service, as if the
Armies chose these parts of the country to play at base in, and as it were
dance a mattachene in armor. For I my self knew the leaguer one year in
Gelderward, within two mile of Eltam; another year at Bommel; a third at
Berck; a fourth in Cleueland, etc. It flourished under Otho the third Earl of
Gelderland, who walled in Ruremond, Arnham, Harderwick, Bomell, Gooch, and
Waggenhen, and so held the title of a County until Rheinaldus the second,
whom for his valor, justice, piety, and other virtues the Emperor Lodwick
lifted up to the dignity of a Duke in the presence of the Kings of England,
France, and the Princes Electors 1339.

Zeland is a new name, and not read of in ancient histories, as if a man should
say, a country compounded both Zeland.
of land and sea: For it is every where distinguished with Islands, which are
environed with water, and known by 15 several names, against whom the sea
has much prevailed, and not long since with violent inundations swallowed 300
of their inhabited towns; so that now you may sail by the steeples of
Churches, and not knowing the reason, wonder to what purpose the Towers were so
erected. There remain now three principal, which are preserved against the
rage of the Ocean with exceeding cost, and powerful industry, namely
Walcheren, Schouen, and South-Beueland: and four inferior, Diuelant, Tolen,
North-Beuelant, and Woolfersdike; which are graced with the prerogatives of
eight walled towns, whereof six continue their Estates Deputies for the whole
County. Midelborough, Flushing, Camphere, and Armenden, which has no voice,
although it cry out never so loud, that it stands with the rest in Walcheren.
In Schouen, Sirexee, and Bucers haven, which has likewise no voice. In
South-Beueland which is the greatest and fertilest Island, the town of
Tergowse; and in the land of Tolen, the town of Tertolen, and Martins dike,
which has also no voice. These Islands are preserved by the downs, which be
certain banks of sand cast up with the tides, and where there are no sands,
as toward the south, the dikes are raised by the industry of man, and
proportioned with equal height to the rest; all so rammed with mats and casses
of fagots 6 or 7 foot long, that it not only performs the effect of their
security, but seems an artificial gracefulnes, and being so near England
is worthy the ouer-viewing. In times past the Marquis of La Vere, and Flushing
were only at the General Councels of the country, now the places are
supplied with Deputies, and new times have given way unto new orders: For these
inheritances and titles are incorporated in Prince MAVRICE of NASSAV, and the
Abbot of St Martins in the town of Midlebourgh, which at this instant is the
Court of Zeland: As for the Prince, he is the seruitor of the States, and can
do nothing absolute of himself without their direction: And for the Abbot,
his name is extinguished with his superstition, and the reformation of religion
has also reformed his very title and authority: so that the Estates make the
Democratia a princely government, and assume to themselves the power of life,
death, controuling, punishing, rewarding, and resolute ordering all their
affairs, except in cases of necessity, wherein there is no disputing, nor
interiecting any cause of imputation either of negligence, or improuidence: For
so great Princes either diminish or augment their illustrious royalty, and
Monarks whose pride at the first swelled over the banks of prevailing, have in
one age bin left bare on the sands of an ebbing fortune. The cheifest trade of
the inhabitants is navigations, fishing, and making salt: yet within the land
they employ themselves to tillage, and feeding of cattle. The people do so
multiply and increase, that they are compelled to enlarge their Towns, as well
for their own inhabitants, as frequentation of strangers, who since the
troubles of Antwerpe resort hither extraordinarily; but if I should add the
bravery of fortifications, I should do them no wrong, nay I might augment their
glory: For Flushing is one of the strongest Towns of Europe; and Midleborough
so ramparted and guarded, that a very military renown is attributed unto
them, and the Burgers themselves deserve well of all good reports.

The province of Holland is (as it were) a Peninsule, circumuironed Holland,
with water. For the sea, the Rhene, and the meeting rivers, open their doors
in such a manner, that you may go (as it were) round about the house, except
in one corner toward Gelderland. and although it contains not in circuit
above two hundred English mile: yet lifts up the walls, ramparts, and warlike
ports of thirty towns of such receipt, wealth and shipping, that the pride of
Tyrus and Sidon, exclaimed upon by so many Prophets, had not greater occasion
of raging and oftentation, howeuer they are yet blessed with moderation, and
restraint of distempered actions. The villages or dorps are four hundred,
amongst whom the stately county of the Hague aduanceth her counteuance equal
to a great city: for their court retains some show of princilnesse, and the
old palace makes demonstration of those noble customs and hospitality, which
the ancient Earls in their former power maintained; yet because it is
unwalled, neighboring a pretty park of fallow Dear, and inuiteth you to
better retired places, then the towns of hurliburly and continual commerces
accustom, it is reputed a Dorp, and seems much contented with her situation
so remote from the foreign enemy of the State. Harlem with her spaciousness
is founded most delicately; for as soon as you are entered, the pleasure of a
pretty wood inuiteth your abode, where the Citizen in the days of pastime make
their honest conversation, the strengthening of one another friendship.
Besides, for bulwarks, harbors, shipping, capacity, intercourse, and noble
meetings, it challenged the precedence of all the towns of Holland, and howeuer
Amsterdam has got the start for riches, merchants, and navigations; yet has
Harlem a greater wall, and better compacted buildings. Dort or Dordrech some
150. years since was made an Island by the inundation of the sea, which with
ungentle violence (at that time) washed away whole fields of firm ground, and
like a barren unsatiate womb, filled her paunch with above 200. villages: It
is a beautiful long town, and graced with the staple of Rhenish wine, corn
and timber, brought in great, strange and long boats called Punts, which never
go back again, but serve in these rivers as a receptacle of diverse families,
and many people who have no other dwelling then on shipboord, and if you demand
how they live the voyage ended, and maintain their estates when the first
business is determined. They spin, fish, follow the league with provision,
carry corn and turffe from town to town, and are employed for the use of
bridges, to transfer whole armies over rivers; but to tell you that some of
them are 160. foot long, and have three or four divisions or houses in one
boat, would raise a suspicion, and peradventure make you smile at the fiction,
but admire the truth. Delft is so named of a ditch, cut out between it and the
Hague, and is a sweet and pleasant town, although the inhabitants are employed
for the most part about brewing, and spinning of wool. Leyden boasts of her
antiquity, as deriuing her original from the Legions of the Roman soldiers
here resident, when the custom of war, and the coldness of winter did
enforce them to garrison, and orderly sequestration: it is now an University,
beautified with walks of pleasure and magnificence: yet cannot wash away the
imputation of many traiterous reuolts and unconstant resolutions against the
government of the States. Gouda is a populous town upon the river Isell; yet
could tell you of another of her own name, that runs into the Ocean, as if
it made haste to tell you, from whence it came. Amsterdam, besides the sea is
visited by the gentle river Tia: yet seems sorry that she cannot be affoorded
the sweetness of her waters, and is so contrived as the channels of Venice,
which direct you by boat from house to house: for shipping, it is one of the
most famous harbors in the world, and has such intercourse of Merchants and
Saylors, that I have numbered 1000. ships of all sorts to go out at one tide:
for buildings it equals the best, and for orderly watches and fortifications
the Burgers have a blessed uniformity and glorious reputation. Enchusen upon
the bank of the sea called the Zuidersea, is famous for the building of ships,
which are here yearly built and orderly rigged. Horn has the same
foundation, and in May brings together such a fair of butter and cheese, and
in such incredible manner, that almost all countries have suppliment from
thence. Alcmar likewise maintains the dairy, and encloseth such fields, that
a very few acres of ground raise a good farm. Purmerndum boasts of her first
estimation, by reason of the palace and delicate castle, which belonged to
Count Egmond, was within her walls. Edam has great store of shipping, and such
kine, that few oxen are larger: besides, here is sowed so much hemp, that most
of the netting, which either Holland or Zeland use is here made. Sconhouen is
a delicate town and place of pleasure: for indeed it is an attribute, or
significant name from the attracting delight of their gardens, and has a
staple for Salmons. Rotterdam a great city full of shipping, yet rather
boasts of the birth of Erasmus. Brill is a town of defense, and was once
causionary to England, in regard of great sums disbursed for the States, but
now of late, by the Kings Majesty, resigned into the hands of the States. Thus
for strength, fertility, wealth, and plenty of shipping, Holland exceeds any
country in the world, challenging no more circuit of ground, as may be ghessed
by the year 1587. when there was 600. ships arrested in the Sont by the King
of Denmark, and in 1588. it is well known, that in very short warning they
supplied us with an hundred men of war, as for Cales voyage, the third part
of that Navy was theirs: but if you look further, in the West and
East Indies, in the havens of Barbary and Afric, in the Arches, and
Constantinople, in the Gulf of Venice, and almost all the frequented places of
the world, the Hollander adventures, and is now a glorious Merchant and
Mariner. To conclude, Holland, Zeland, and Freesland, smile in the possession
of 2500. good ships, from 150. tun to 700. and although they have no timber, or
at least very little growing for this purpose, yet do they yearly set upright
5. or 600. of one sort or other.

Of all in the States division, the City and Lordship of Vtrech.
Vtrech is principal, as retaining an ancient Bishops See, and showing the
ruins of a castle, erected to suppress the insolency of the inhabitants, who
in a pride of their own greatness, made a continual sport of rebellion, it
is now utterly defaced, and the loyalties of their hearts seem more firm, then
the works of men's hands, assuring us that so noble a city and populous
territories would yield a very ambitious Prince reasonable satisfaction, if it
might be commanded by the authority of a Monarch, and had the unity of a
well-ordered Commonwealth and Kingdom.

The Country of Freesland would require an ample discovery Freesland.
to extract her original, and relate her stories: so would Cleeueland, the
land of Luke Munsterland, and some others reputed Neuters, that is, neither
maintaining the Spanyard in his military invasion, nor supporting the States in
their justifiable defenses. But I refer you to their own and manyother
commentaries, and content myself with a cursory travel, and what I can catch
hold of by running touches. It is divided into two parts by the river Amisia,
which comes down by Embden: East Freesland challenging a particular
pre-eminence and jurisdiction, as I said, by it self: and West Freesland
suffering this partition, Ostergo, Groining.
Westergo, Transilana, Drenta, Tuenta, the seven woods and Lordship of
Groining, a beautiful town and famous for that siege, wherein were 80000. in
the field on both sides 1594. when Prince Maurice obtained it for the States,
being before ouer-awed 1580. by the Duke of Parma. As it has more cattle and
pasture then other provinces: so more villages, and the inhabitants are more
warlike, insomuch, that commonly there is a Regiment or two of Frizons in the
army, when amongst the foot-companies there is scarce two hundred Dutchmen
besides: yet have they many troops of horse, and are distinguished by diverse
characters, although they speak all one language, either high or Low Dutch, as
Resties, Lansguents, Frizons, Switzers, High-Germans, Dutch, and Free-booters,
or Boot-halers.

I have insisted the longer on the discourse of these Provinces, The
Low Countries is lost by the Spanyard.
because you may see the errors of self will and ill counsel, even in the
government of mighty Monarchs, as I said before. For the conquest of the West
Indies, the only greatness of Spain, was not, nor is so glorious to his
ostentation, as the loss of the Low Countries (when he might with peace and
mansuetude have opened the arms of a loving father over them) grievous to his
remembrance, and a very wound to his policy. Because if these countries were
united, and altered from their Aristocratia or Democratia, choose you whether, to
the uniformity of a Monarchy, affoording to Caesar what belongs to Caesar,
raising their nobility, advancing the well-deseruers, increasing their estates,
disciplining their able men to the service of the wars, and from the
imitation of other countries endeavoring to raise their own glories, it would
surmount all the revenues of Spain, which for extent of ground measures six
times as much; nay, if I added the West Indies, computatis computandis, I might
be believed after some reasonable disceptation. For say a stirring spirit
desired glory and pompous attendancy. From hence might be obtained infinite
treasure, settled content, high magnificence, multitude of subjects, commerces
of merchants, store of shipping, stately horses, loving people, and the glory
of A general commendation.
nature, beauty it self: so that if the Archdukes fortune could raise him to
such a height, if at first he honored the Enfanta, with vshering her
bare-headed into Bruxels, he might then prostrate himself before her throne
indeed, as one of the greatest Princes of the world. For although his hopes did
depend upon other supportation, and in her own language he cries Kala, as
peradventure determining a composition with his brother Mathias, if the
peaceful Rodolphus were once discharged of his debt to nature, whereby she
might be Empress of Germany: yet cannot a mere titular dignity come near so
great a contentment, as to have the fruition of such a kingdom, and native
felicity. But if delicate life and quiet establishment of temporal happiness
were propounded, amongst these is honesty of contracts, probity of manners,
truth of word, prevention of wants, fullness of wealth, delicacy of apparel,
neatness of furniture, uniformity of building, magnificence of structures,
plenty of viands, sumptuousness of feasts, liberty of conversation, and what
else enflameth our desires to help our deficiencie: yea the very behavior of
the women enforces admiration. For being tall, beautiful, active, and
familiar, they are yet free from those peenish humors of jealousy, lightness,
and pride, which make us weary one of another: Besides all their words, and
actions tend to simplicity, and modest plainenes, retaining with all this
suppliment of wants, making of cloth, and knitting of lace and dainty works:
But when I consider their mutual entercourses, their skill in buying and
selling, their frequenting of the shops, their going from place to place
without so much as suspicion of incontinencie, and their love to their husbands
and children even in the ouerflowings of natural imperfections, or if you will
diseases of the Nation; I stand amassed, and swear, that virtue cannot be
poor, and an honest mind will not be seduced for any worldly respects to the
slavish corruption of las^iuiousnes, or dishonestie.

CHAP. XVI. The Monarchy of Great Britain.
THE last of all Countries, and as many England.
think the least, but such a least, as if a pretty spark of a pure Diamond
should triumph over a border of soft topasses, is the kingdom of ENGLAND; now
proclaimed under the royal standard of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
style enough, if the desire of man know what is enough. But alas, ^nisi ab orb
Britanni: wherein I think nature and glory played the silken Artist or
Artificer, choose you whether, who in sorting out his commodities lays the
principal aside for a friend, or his own use: so did our first mother deal
with this ISLAND, allowing it a double portion of blessings before the other
countries of the world for her own honor. But at this time you shall not
hear me stammer out my words, considering Mr Cambden has spoken so well and
distinctly, as if a Lawyers cunning had not only enlarged some excellent
matter, but doubly graced the same with good delivery, and pleasing elocution:
Besides, I must in the second book untie her bound-vp fardell, and come to
more nearer particulars, and therefore there shall be now no further disputing
of the same: yet Ireland has made me amassed to see such an impossibility to
reduce her, which me thinks cannot proceed from any innated hatred against us
particularly (though it be an unsavory truth) because in affecting Spain and
France she disclaimeth their formalitie, and would feign besprinkle the
beautiful faces of civility, government, forms of Cities, courtlines,
majesty, and state, with the untoward terms and abuses of policy, restraint
of liberty, covetousness, flattery, pride, and licentiousnes: therefore I will
be the bolder to speak a word or two of her unkindness.

CHAP. XVII. The description of IRELAND.
THE country and kingdom of IRELAND is generally for natural air, and
commodity Ireland.
of blessings, sufficient to satisfy a covetous, or curious appetite: but
withal divided into such fastnes of mountain, bogg, and wood, that it has
emboldned the inhabitants to presume on hereditary securirie, as if
disobedience had a protection. For the mountains deny any cariages, but by
great industry and strength of men (so have we drawn the Cannon over the
deepest boggs, and stoniest hills) and the passages are every way dangerous,
both for vnfirmenes of ground, and the lurking rebel, who will plash down
whole trees over the paces, and so intricately wind them, or lay them, that
they shall be a strong barracado, and then lurk in ambush amongst the standing
wood, playing upon all comers, as they intend to go along. On the bogg they
likewise presume with a naked celeritie to come as near our foot and horse,
as is possible, and then fly off again, knowing we cannot, or indeed dare not
follow them: and thus they serve us in the narrow entrances into their glins,
and stony paths, or if you will dangerous quagmires of their mountains, where
a 100 shot shall rebate the hasty approach of 500; and a few muskets (if they
durst carry any) well placed, will stagger a pretty Army, not acquainted with
the terror, or vnpreuenting the mischief.

The Province of LEMSTER is more orderly than Lemster.
the rest, as being reasonable well inhabited, and having some form of a
Commonwealth; so that I find no mislike either for delight, or profit, but
that the want of wood abridgeth their computation of happiness; yet
questionles was the principal cause of our reducing them to civility, and the
place wherein we first settled many English families. Some unite, and some
divide the kingdom of Meth from Lemster, and make it a Province of it self,
containing East-Meth, West-Meth, and Longford, wherein O Roorck is resident,
supposing himself the greatest Gentleman in the world; yea contesting many
times with Oneal, how ever with much ado he afforded him precedencie: The
country is very fruitful and pleasant, not so mountanous, but ill inhabited:
For the wars, and their own bestialitie, have not only made a separation of
all good order, but even terrified both beast and foul from commorance amongst
them in many places.

The Province of MUNSTER has some Towns well Munster.
advanced by the sea coasts, and many excellent harbors, wherein Ireland may
boast over all the countries of Europe: The grounds adjacent are very fertile,
and in many places afford cause of ostentation; but more inward they are very
barren and mountanous, full of boggs, wood, and other remote places, whose
fastnes has incited the people to ouer-great presumption: yet because of the
spatiousnes with men desiring good order, it might be reduced and reformed, as
enjoying plentiful and sweet rivers, full of fish, and some of sufficient
depth to transport reasonable boats into the land.

The Province of CONACH is divided from the rest by a Conach.
goodly river called the Shanon, being as I take it the greatest of any Island
in the world: For it fetches a course of 200 mile, and fills his channel
along the shores of Longford, Meths, Ormond, Limrick, and Kerry, yet serves
them in no great stead: For their shipping comes no further, than Limrick,
where it is five mile broad fresh water, and 60 mile from the maine sea, from
thence small cotts, as they term their boats, carry their wood, turff, fish,
and other commodities: but for fish, as Salmon, Breame, Pike, and diverse other
sorts, I shall not be believed to relate the numbers, and hugenes, by such as
are enemies to observation, or the belief of the blessings of other countries.
Within 20 mile of Limrick, as I take it, a little beyond, the praecinct of
Caher-Castle a strange rock has taken her lodging even cross the river, and
fills the room in such a manner, that almost the navigations is hindered
thereby: but what cannot men and money do? and why should not these idle
people be industriously employed to remove the same, and so free the passage to
Athlone: As for an objection of impossiblitie; the judgment of men has
yielded to survey, and many examples have confirmed the effects of more
laborious attempts. The south part, namely Tomond, (for by reason of the rivers
interposing it self I see no reason why it should be disiointed from Conach)
with Galloway and Clenricard is very stony, full of marble, alablaster, and
iett, and has better order both for number and good building in their Castles,
than other parts of Ireland: The north from Athlone to the Abbey of Aboile, and
so beyond the Curlewes as far as Slego, is of excellent temperature and
goodness: These Curlewes are mountains full of dangerous passages, especially
when the Kern take a stomach and a pride to enter into action, as they term
their rebellion and tumultuary insurrections. On the other side the County of
Maio consorteth with the pleasingest place in the Kingdom, by whose beaten
banks lie those famous Islands of life, of whom a ridiculous tale is fathered,
that nothing dies in them, so that when the inhabitants grow old, they are
carried else where, which custom they have of late superstitiously observed
both in these Islands of Aran, and some other adjoining of the same condition,
as they suppose.

The Province of VLSTER, and called the North is Ulster.
very large, and withal mountanous, full of great Loughs of fresh water,
except Lough Cone, which ebbeth and flows, as the Sea shouldreth aside the
streites at Strangford, and with that violence at the ebb, that a ship under
sail with a reasonable gale of wind cannot enter against the tide. These
lakes nature has appointed in steed of rivers, and stored with fish,
especially Trowt, and Pike, of such strange proportion, that if I should tell
you of a Trowt taken up in Tyrone 46 inches long, and presented to the L:
Montioy, then Deputy: you would demand, whether I was oculatus testis, and I
answer, I eat my part of it, and as I take it both my L: Dauers, and Sir
William Goodolphin were at the table, and worthy Sir Josias Bodley has the
portraiture depicted in plano. Here are no Towns, or at least very few, but
diverse Castles dispersed, and the inhabitants remove their cabbins, as their
cattle change pasture, somewhat like the Tartarians, except in times of war,
and troubles, then do they retire under the couett of Castles, and order their
houses wonde with rods, and covered with turffs, as well as they can, bringing
their cattle even within their houses, lying altogether in one room both to
prevent robberies of Kern, and spoil by Wolves. Amongst these every country is
subject to the Law Tanist, which is, he which is best able to maintain the
reputation of their family, is the great O, and commander.

Through the Kingdom generally the winter is neither so cold, nor the summer
so hot as in England, by reason whereof Harvest is very late, and in the North
wheat will not quickly ripen, nor have they acornes once in a dozen year:
their principal corn is oats, which are commonly burnt out of the straw, and
then trod from the husks with men's feet; of this they make their bread in
cakes, being first grownd by calliots and drudges very naked, and beastly
sitting on the ground, with the mill like our mustard quernes between their
legs, and then upon broad iron presses they bake the meal when it is kneaded;
which custom the best observe in Munster with their cheifest corn. The
continual showers and mists make the country more dangerous to our Nation,
debarring the absolute assurance of wholesome air, and the consequent health:
seldom any frost continues, or snow lies long, but on the mountains, in
which are great store of Dear both red and fallow. The abundance of Wolves
compels them to house their cattle in the bawnes of their Castles, where all
the winter nights they stand up to the bellies in dirt: another reason is, to
prevent thieves, and false-harted brethren, who have spies abroad, and will
come 30 mile out of one Province into another to practice a cunning robbery.
The people are generally haters of bondage, and beyond measure proud: so that
the younger brothers, and bastards, who are as dear as the other, scorn all
endeavors, but liberty and war. The Gentlewomen stomach, and in truth
vilipend others, who get their living by trade, merchandice, or mechanically:
yet are diverse Grauers in gold and silver, called plain tinkers, who make
their challices, harpes, buttons for their sleeves, crucifixes, and such like,
in estimation amongst them. Their Noblemen, or Lords called Dynastas, are
known by O and Mac, and every family has such as minister justice to the
people, famoused by the title of Breahans, and yet the exactions over their
tenants by way of cuttings, and other terrible impositions, have caused diverse
rebellions and insurrections amongst themselves, which when the State has
attempted to reform, then have they stood on their guard, and taken indirect
occasions to condemn our usurpation, whereby their odious and hateful
repinings, like a menstruous cloth, have made their disobedience loathsome, and
brought upon them such miseries, as a calamitous war and angry Prince
inflicteth turbulent people withal. These families have also such, as by way
of history elate them to exorbitant actions, joining withal the abuse of
Poetry, and deceit of Physic, known by the name of Bardes, on whom depend
certain harpers, rymers, and Priests, which live in a kindred, the father
instructing the son, or brother, and he his cousin, or friend. The name of
Galliglas is in a manner extinct, but of Kern in great reputation, as serving
them in their reuolts, and proving sufficient soldiers, but excellent for
skirmish. They have strong and able bodies, proud hearts, pestilent wits,
liberal of life, subject to incontinency, amorous, wherein their women are
extraordinarily pleased, patient to endure, lovers of music, and
hospitality, constant to their maintainers, whether men or women, implacable
in their hatred, light of belief, covetous of glory, impatient of reproach, or
contumely; not thinking it yet any disgrace to receive a nickname at their
christning, as Con Oneale banco, because he was lame. Besides, they are all
extremely superstitious, as indeed barbarous people are best obseruers of
ceremonies, and when any of them enters into religion, it is admirable with
what austeritie they reform themselves: Their children are nursed abroad, and
their foster-fathers and foster-mothers are as dear to them, as their own
kindred: They use incantations and spells, wearing girdles of women's hair, and
locks of their lovers; they suppose idleness a glory of nature, and by their
sluttish, or rather savage customs strive to scorn (as they say) our
superfluity: They are ready upon any inforcement by the imposturing Art of
their Bardes to innovation, as envying our first conquest, and stomaching they
were never able to expel us: They are desperate in revenge, and their Kerne
think no man dead, until his head be off: They suppose theft no great
offense, as imitating the Lacedaemonians; for they pray to prosper in their
attempts: but these be commonly the bastards of Priests, who prove notorious
villains, and the daughters either beg or become strumpets, or if you will,
beggarly strumpets. They commonly intermix oaths with their speeches, as by the
Trinity, God, his Saints, St Patrick, St Briget, faith, and troth, the Temple,
your hand, O Neales hand, and such like. Their marriages are strange; for they
are made sometimes I have known of them delivered in the morning and march
along with us the same d^.
so conditionally, that upon a slight occasion the man takes another wife, the
wife another husband: They are easily delivered of their children, and if they
have any by diverse men, at their deaths they resign them to the right father;
the new married and conceived with child gives the Barde her best clothes:
They have soft and excellent skins and hands: but the small of their legs
hangs in a manner over their brogs: Their apparel is a mantle to sleep in,
and that on the ground on some rushes or flags: a thick gathered smock with
wide sleeves graced with bracelets and crucifixes about their necks: They wear
linen rowles about their heads of diverse fashions: in Vlster carelessly wonde
about: in Conach like Bishops miters, a very stately attire, and once
prohibited by Statute: in Munster resembling a thick Chesshire cheese. Their
smocks are saffrond against vermin; for they wear them three months
together; but to be lousy is hereditarie with the best of them, and no
disgrace. Both men and women not long since accustomed a savage manner of diet,
which was raw flesh, drinking the blood, now they sees it, and quaff up the
liquor, and then take Vsquebath: not having flesh they feed on Watercresses,
Shamrocks, and Bonniclaboch, which is milk strangely put into a tub a sowring,
till it be clodded, and curded together: when the Cow wiil not let her milk
down they blow her behind very strangely, and sometimes thrust up their arms
to their elbowes, speaking words of gentleness and entreaty by way of bemoning.
The men wear trowses, mantle, and a cap of steel; they are curious about
their horses tending to witchcraft; they have no saddles, but strange fashioned
pads, their horses are for the most part unshod behind: they use axes, staves,
broad swords, and darts: In Terconnell the hair of their head grows so long
and curled, that they go bare-headed, and are called Glibs, the women
Glibbins. These and many other do the mere Irish observe with resolution and
our wonderment not to be diuerted, as if the Poet should find fault with Quo
semel est imbuta recens seruabit odorem
Testa diu.
And thus much for Topography, or superficial view of the Kingdoms of the
world.

LIBRI PRIMI FINIS.
EVRIP: ORESTES.
Io, Io, lachrimosae mortalium gentes, laboriosae,
Videtis quam praeter spem parca adveniat.
Aliae alijs atque alijs permutantur
Clades diuturnitate temporis:
Mortalium namque vniuersum instabile est aeuum.
ENGLANDS GLORY: THE SECOND BOOK.

Wherein by way of comparison you shall see, with what prerogatives she makes
her progress to the house of perfection before other NATIONS.



Imprinted at London by Edward Griffin. 1618.

(...) that every man may step into a Millaners shop, and prune himself in
another bodies glass: every Reader take a book of maps, and very near
deliniate as much; and every eye gase on the outside of a Palace to praise or
dispraise according to the transportation of humors: I will conduct you
somewhat further into more inward rooms, or at least wise such, as my fortune
or friendship admitted me into: For you must understand, that as indeed in the
Palaces of Kings, the privy chamber, bedchamber, galleries of state, gardens
of sequestration, and walks of priuacie are debarred common intruders, yea
sometimes denied to men of good eminence: so in the understanding matters of
state, conditions of kingdoms, secrets of common wealths, uses of travel, and
such like, every man has not the gift, and capacity to yield you reason, or
satisfaction: You shall therefore have no more vainglorious promises of me,
than a plain demonstration of my own endeavors, opportunity, and observations,
concluding with that excellent Seneca: Quicquid patimur mortale:
Quicquid facimus venit ab alto.
And because my first purpose and intent promised to approve that of all the
former recited countries, England had the prerogative, and enjoys most of
those blessings wherewith God ever marked any kingdom: in this book I would
feign persuade you to the same, and by reason or comparison bring you the
sooner to distinction, and knowledge, whereby you shall be the abler to conclude
with judgment, and confidence in the truth: I must therefore give you an
instance of a time, cuntry, and King, which had a prerogative in happiness over
all nations either before, or since, and then contract our sophistry thus: that
that kingdom, which comes nearest to the example, shall have the precedence.

The reign of Solomon, and country of Canaan, even the best part of
terrestiall paradise shall be the lantern to light us out of this contention.
For although Ahashuerosh prevailed from India to Aethiopia over 127 Provinces,
and made a feast in the Palace of Sushan to all his Princes, and subjects,
which lasted 180 days under a hanging of white, green, and blew cloth, the
beds of gold and silver, upon a pauement of porphyrie, marble, and alablaster,
the drinking vessels of gold with change after change; and the Queen Vashti
likewise kept the same correspondency with the women in the royal house of the
King: Although Nabuchadnezar by lifting up his eyes toward the Palace of
Babylon, elated also his heart with vain ostentation, because he not only had
triumphed over Israel, took Iehoiachim King of Judah prisoner, sacked
Jerusalem, and carried the Princes of the Tribes into captivity, but might now
establish the glory of the Chaldean Monarchy, and celebrate his magnificent
feasts in the great City: Although Beltashar banqueted with the vessels of
gold, wherein his Princes, his wives, and concubines drank before a 1000, and
with magnificent bravery was advanced on a throne to command their
prostitution, when he had cause of imperiousnes: Although another Nabuchadnezar
was invested in Nineuie, and after the conquest of Arphaxad and his Cities,
returned to that great Town, and Palace with a wondrous multitude,
celebrating a feast 120 days, and with insulting iollity appointed Holophernes
to conduct 120000 foot, and 12000 horse, with all the glory of an Emperors
army against Siria and Judea: Although Alexander the Macedonian prevailed
against the forces of Asia, conquered Darius King of Medes and Persians, and
compelled the tributary nations of the East to a slavish prostitution,
rewarding his endeauours with an assumpted reputation of a godhead, and all
the effects of wanton peace and magnificence, when he returned to Babylon to
celebrate the triumphs of his victories. Although Antiochus surnamed the Great,
established his Kingdom from India to Aethiopia, and satisfied his ambition
with the spoils of Judah, Jerusalem, and Egypt, whereby he exposed a wonder of
honorable court-ship, and illustrious government. And although Octauius, for
his happy success in all his actions, was surnamed Augustus, and had those
Halcion days, as an Emperor of peace, wherein abundance, state, and
prosperity played the wantons with one another. Yet questionless must all
instances of Emperors, Kings, majesty and government, give place to the time
and royalty of Solomon, whose prosperity ouerflowed like a swelling river, and
filled every empty place with fullness, gladness, and increase: so that if you
will examine me upon interrogatories, I thus put in mine answer, and according
to the true use of an affidauit, affirm nothing but truth and plainness.

Then was Solomon in his royalty, when the Temple was built, the Priesthood
confirmed, the Prophets set at Salomons royalty.
liberty, and the Saints of God were had in estimation: when he erected a
brazen scaffold in the midst of the court, five cubits long, five broad, and
three in height, on which he stood, and kneeled before all the congregation of
Israel, when he offered a sacrifice of 22000. bullockes, and 120000. sheep,
making a feast of seven days, and all Israel with him: when he served God
truly, and permitted Nathan the Prophet, Ahiah the Silonite, and Ieddo the
Seer, to pronounce the judgments of God against the reprobate and obstinate,
and divulge his mercy toward the penitent, and true conuertist. Then was
Solomon in his royalty, when he made a porch of fifty cubits long, and thirty
broad, in which he sat to determine the controversies of his Kingdom, whereby
all sorts had access to the throne of Justice, and very harlots leuiated in
their greeuances. Then was Solomon in his royalty, when his own palace was
finished after thirteen years labors of 160000. worke-men, to which he
brought his wife, even Pharaohs daughter: when he was advanced on a throne of
iuory and gold, and caused a seat to be placed for the Kings mother, and rose
to meet her, settling her on his right hand: when his throne had six steps, and
twelve Lions of gold, when all his drinking vessels were of gold, and silver
was nothing esteemed: when he made two hundred targets, and three hundred
shields of gold, a throne of precious stone, and covered the Ibony with the
best gold: when his provision for one day was 30. measures of fine flower, and
60. of meal, 10. fat oxen, and 20. out of the pastures, 100. sheep, besides
hearts, buckes, bugles, and fat foul. Then was Solomon in his royalty, when he
asked wisdom at the hands of God, and distributed equity to all his people,
when he spoke 3000. proverbs, and 1000. songs, when he related the nature of
trees, plants, beasts, foul, fishes, and creeping things, when he appointed
the Officers of his household, and Commanders over Provinces, first 3300. then
300. lastly 250. as Princes and principal over the other, when the Queen of
Sheba came to prove him with hard questions, and brought him odours, gold,
and precious stones: when she saw his wisdom, the house he had built, the
provision of his table, the sitting of his servants, the ordering of his
ministers, and their apparel, his drinking-vessels, and burnt offerings, when
there came of all people to hear his wisdom, when he excelled all the Kings
of the earth in riches, and administration of equity, when he blessed the
people, and praised God in public, giving the Priests and Prophets liberty to
maintain the cause of the Lord of hosts, and not permitting the corruption of
the world to transfer them beyond the limits of true devotion, and religious
piety, and when he so ouer-looked and ouer-awed all Officers of the Kingdom,
that neither the mighty made their greatness a bar to descend to the practice
of charitable actions, nor the better sort took ill example by the higher to
practice unbefitting policy, or oppressions of the poor: nor the inferior had
cause of clamorous repinings, or tumultuary insurrections against the
government, abusing the people.

Then was Solomon in his royalty, when he had built cities of store, cities of
chariots, cities for horsemen near Jerusalem, when he went in person to
Hamah Zobah, and overcame it, and re-edified Bethoran the upper, and Bethoran
the nether, cities defenced with walls, gates, and bars: when he built the
cities of store in foreign parts, and walled in all places expugned and
depopulated by the wars of Saul and his father, or if you will, the house of
Benjamin and Judah, contending for the Diadem. When he had 40000. stalls of
horses for his chariots, 12000. horsemen for his guard, and fortified diverse
places of garrison, maintaining martial discipline, and by example of David's
Princely rewarding men of merit, not permitting the virtue of well-deseruers to
mourn for want of acceptance. Then was Solomon in his royalty, when he built
a navy of ships by the red sea, when King Hiram sent him mariners, and they
were entertained for their experience, industry, and knowledge: when they went
to Ophir, and brought from thence 400. tallents of gold, when he joined the
navy of Tharsus with the navy of Hiram, which once in three years brought
gold, silver, iuory, apes, and peacocks, when he had horses out of Egypt, and
fine linen, which the Kings Merchants received at a price, when he went to the
red sea to view his navy, when he mustred his chariots and horsemen, marching
with his armies like an Emperor indeed, and making his peaceable progresses
like a magnificent Prince. Then was Solomon in his royalty, when the King of
Tyrus contracted a league with him, when the Egyptians and Moors sent him
presents, and all the neighboring Princes combined amity, and were (as it
were) either emulous of his greatness, or proud of his friendship. Then was
Solomon in his royalty, when the cities of his Kingdom were populous, opulent,
and full of delight, when Judah and Israel dwelt without fear, every man under
his vine and fig tree, when they were many as the sand of the sea, eating,
drinking, and making merry, when the people rejoiced in mutual entercourses,
living with reciprocal observations, no man repining, no man malicious, no man
jealous, no man elated, no man oppressing, no man insulting, no man ambitious,
no man an Usurer, or traduced for such raging sins, as commonly are supported
in all governments by Princes favors, conniuency of Magistrates, power of
authority, corruption of officers, and wilfulness of offenders: not that the
times were so clear, and free from abuses, as if men were Angels on earth,
without errors or imperfections: but that they lived in a more modest
fearfulness for offending God, then in these presumptuous times, and durst
embolden one another to make a pastime of iniquity, and vex the honest
neighbor with a violent prosecution of wickedness: otherwise in all ages,
times, and nations, as you endure at natures hands frosts, thunders, tempests,
unseasonable weather, barren years, and raging inundations; her hereditary
defects: so must you tolerate the vainglory and prodigality of Courtiers, the
covetousness of Magistrates, the legal dissembling of Citizens, the cunning of
Artificers, the idleness of Gentlemen, the stubbornness of Pesants, the
contumacy of Soldiers, and such like offenses, as inconveniences of life, and
sometimes national vices, or customary sins. And thus much for example.

CHAP. II. Countries compared to Canaan, and Salomons glorious happiness, and
first of all the Tartars.
NOw must we take out our other clothes to The dominion of the great Cham
compared.
the light, and by laying them together, judge of their finenesse, or at least,
how nearly they can match our example: and although to this purpose we need
not once name the countries of profanation, or fill our discourses with the
unsavory particulars of such beastly, filthy, and abominable government: so
far from the method of true majesty, and established blessedness, as their
works of men's hands, I mean their Idols, from the omnipotency of the
Creator, or blasphemous ignorance from the translucent light of inestimable
truth: yet will I not be so partial, or preiudicate, to cast them off without
reason, or sufficient cause of disparity. To begin therefore with those vast
and huge territories of the great Emperor Cham, now including infinite nations
under the name of Tartarians. Until you come to Tangut and Mangia, all the
North and Western parts are still rude and uncivil, without fashionable cities,
or any formal handsomnesse, and live in a manner as barbarously as the ancient
Scythians, who to their frozen climate and distempered air, added as frozen
hearts to morality and charitable works; nay in truth, lived in all inhumane
bestiality, under the covert of valor, and being a fierce nation to strangers,
and in battle against their enemies: so that, what with their vast deserts,
remote countries from Europes concourses, and want of such things, which we
either desire, or stand in need of: they are sildome visited by strangers but
for curiosity, and as sildome entertain such as come amongst them with
affability and orderly welcome. Besides, according to that absolute principle,
that barbarous people are best obseruers of ceremonies and customs, they will
neither reform any thing which is amiss, nor conform themselves to the
decencies of our Christian cities; nay, in a manner either out of scorn or
hate, their next neighbors the Turks are distasting unto them, and after a
strange fashion of derision they mock at their formality, although (as I said
in my first book) the Tartar Chrim challenges a kind of affinity with the
race of Ottoman, and ever since Tamberlaine conquered Persia and Bajazet, have
entermingled some of their women amongst them, whereby they keep correspondency
and confederation, so that when the Turk has occasion to supply his running
army, either against Persia or Christendom, they send him 100000. at a time:
but so rude, naked, unprovided, and undisciplined, that I speak confidently,
and out of some experience, a hundred well trained and ordered soldiers will
beat a thousand of them, especially if they can be first staggered with any
unacquainted sight, or strength; I mean our battalions of pikes, strong
squadrons of horse, firm standings of muskets, and martial cheerfulness
from trumpets and drums: for they are presumptuous of nothing, but their bows
and arrows, swiftness of horse-manship in pursuits, and running after preyes
or spoils, and clamorous noise of horse, and miserable outcries: so that at
one word, neither in war or peace, they cannot be graced with one word of our
example, or Salomons happiness. As for Tangut and Mangia, the very cause of
his pride and elated titles, if there can be any pride in bestiality, or show
of magnificence in a Princes sequestration from his people; they are mighty
provinces indeed, and extend to the circling about 1500. English mile of
ground, have many and great cities, and that part toward China, is walled 800.
mile, for fear of excursions of the common adversary: but neither is their
government tending to the true use of justice in general, nor their
conversation admitting of happy and sociable meetings in particular: for he
that is most mighty ouerswaies the weaker, and he that is most friendly, will
cut your throat upon the least susption or cause of revenge: as for their best
fortified cities, their temples, walls, storehouses, and Emperors, or Gouenors
palace, are structures to be looked upon, and only worthy of commendation: but
the rest of the houses low, unfashionable, builded most of turffe and canes,
which they buy from India and China, and in winter full of smoke and stincke,
as in other remooueable cabbins or tents of the Tartars: so that except the
Emperor himself, and his customs, which are rather tyrannous, then princely,
there is nothing amongst them worthy imitation of ruder people. For such
marchandies as pass reciprocally between them and the Chinesses, or those of
Iapan (except Rheubarb, which commonly comes (...) nearer way into Europe
through the Caspian sea, and so into Armenia) are ever in hazard to be lost, by
the most powerfullest fraud, either of the buyer or seller: so that sometimes
you shall have 20000. merchants of Iapan, China, and the other Islands, stayed at
a time in Quinzay, Camb^lu, and Tangut, whereupon the unkindness bursts out
into open hostility, and to be revenged of one another, armies of 200000. and
more of a side, fill their fields with terror and death, to which if you add
the aduantagious lying in wait on the wall raised under mount Taurus between
them, upon sudden excursions of the inhabitants, or breaches in the time of
invasion, it will add a fear and terror to your attention, from the report of
so many savage slaughters, and wilful command of the Emperors, for whose sake
whole families will not care to die, nay, strive to show their duty in this
kind: yet there is one thing most commendable amongst them, that except the
war is (at it were) publicly proclaimed between their Emperors, the people
of themselves live peaceably from offending one another, and dare not touch a
stone on either side of the wall, with a cunning purpose to weaken the same.
Amongst other things, their strife about their Emperors titles is so
ridiculous (for Cham will be called Dominus Dominantium, and he of China,
Filius Coeli, as in my first book may appear) that the least derogation is
breach of the peace, and a small comparison casts up the dust of contention
in both their eyes. For although China be not so big as Tartary by two parts,
yet being better inhabited and adorned with Towns, and Cities, it presumes
for competition of glory, and dare adventure to maintain their honorable
bestialitie, and idolatrous wretchedness both ways with force of arms. To
conclude, if you come to government, love, diet, conversation, hansom apparel,
attendancie, friendship, honest meetings, peaceable traffic, and all such
things, whereby the temporal blessings of God are manifested to men, that
look no further, nor enjoy the happiness to search for happiness more deeply,
there is not any thing otherwise, than the pride and state of their Emperor,
some herbs and drugs for physic, their northern race of horses, and certain
skins and furs, which cover their houses, and keep their bodies warm,
worthy the looking after, or indeed fit to come near the borders of the
kingdom of true felicity.

CHAP. III. CHINA compared, and her deficiency manifested.
BEfore I proceed any further in the China far short of Salomons happiness.
description of these remote countries, I must by way of Apology excuse my
poverty in knowledge and breuity in bringing either par-'ticular, or
substantial matter before the bar of examination. For first I dare not
meddle with ancient Authors, because times have altered all things, and there is
a kind of vicissitude of government and kingdoms attending the highest
providence: nor will I once read over modern writers, lest I be tempted to a
cunning theft, and can but show you indeed the countenances of other men, so
that if the first were now to view their own handy-works, and either saw, how
wars, or antiquity had ouer-mantled those delicate, strong, and magnificent
Cities and countries, with deuastation, misery, and wretched affliction, which
they had so much commended, and labored by great art and industry to
delineate, or decipher: Or could consider how peace and ingenious endeavors had
manured, and made exuberant even barren soiles, and unfashionable grounds, had
clothed naked men with royal ornaments; had enlarged poor Towns and Cities
to stately, and princely structures; had taught despised people to march arm
in arm with honorable renown, and glorious victories, with infinite such
like, they would questionles stand amassed to see now such a change and
alteration, or confounded to suppose themselves unhappy for not living in this
happiness, and these times of peace and plenty, yea such peace and plenty, as if
they had learned an art of gracefulnes, and cunning of adornation: like a
curious and expert Ieweller, who though a diamond be a diamond, and stone of
inestimable value, yet can by his skill add a bravery and extraordinary luster
to the same. As for the newer sort of Historiographers, first for my self,
they shall have no such advantage over me, as to challenge me for felony in
stealing any wealth or riches from them, or exprobrate me of ingratitude for
being beholding unto them, and not acknowledging the same: Next concerning
themselves, I wonder they are not ashamed to fill up their leaves with the
lines of falsehood, and marvel they are so little acquainted with honest
travelers, that may tell them the truth, or at least instruct them in an art
of seeming probability; as for example: in plain honesty I wonder, how
Munster that learned man, and famous Chronologer, could be so deceived or
abused to talk of Pigmeies, of men with long ears, and one foot, and such
like? I could name many others, as Sir John Mandeuill, the description of
India, diverse pamphlets of voyages, and peradventure histories of acceptance,
in which not only absurdities pass for current, but untruths and
impossibilities carry the sway of license, and approbation. Therefore (as I
said) for my own part, I disclaim them all, and either tie my self to my
poor endeavors, or adventure on such passages of civil authority, as come
near probability and religion: only in this I will play the truant with
others, that as in unknown countries they fill up the Map with giants, beasts,
monsters, and some strange battles: and in writing of Chronicles they pass
over the lives of their first Princes with only names, and peradventure
suppositions, because they would say some thing: so in these, or of these
remote Nations, I will only tell you what I have seen my self in some cursory
travels, or learned of others, with whom by an Interpreter I have of purpose
entertained communication: As when I was in Turkey I saw the Army of the
Tartars mustred by the fields of Scideret, and had the privilege of a
Ianizarie to protect me from wrong, and be my interpreter for such things, as
my wit and memory incited me to make use of. At my L: Ambassadors again I
presumed on a conference with the Persian Ambassador, and as far as my memory
and understanding was capable of instruction, made benefit of some relations:
and going to sea to Alexandria there were both Indians, Jews, Arabians, and
Armenians aboard, from whom I catched what I could, supplying my desire of
novelties with their discourses: of whom concerning the purpose in hand, I
learnt, that China was a great and oppulent country in continual wars with
the Tartars, ielous one of another, and an enemy in the highest degree to all
strangers, yea so far from hospitality, and pious inclination to
entertainment and commiseration, that they study to circumuent their
passengers, and come aboard with hypocritical desire of satisfaction in
novelties, and then at advantage either surprise the ships, or endanger the
weaker company by ouer-mastring them, as many of our English both at the
Philippines, and landing in Iapan have had cause of testification: nor amongst
themselves is there any such appearance of happiness, or plenty. For though they
boast of mines and many precious stones, yet do they vent no commodities or
merchandice, but for ready money, and we are feign to carry silver into India,
from whence we receive such things, as curious stuff, and trifling toys, as
they are disposed to utter. But if you come nearer them, and to our purpose
indeed, as by the Indians discourses may be collected; they are ielous,
malicious, want provision, take little rest, are in tumultuous vprores,
terrified with thieves, for all there is nothing so severely punished, dare not
displease their Emperor, who is in a manner adored amongst them, live on
roots, and kernels of nuts, and troubled with serpents, and many venomous
worms, distempred with strange tempests, and winds, terrified with
apparitions and illuding visions, kill their old men, if they live too long,
make no conscience of selling their virgins for money, and filthy
pr^stitutions, are careless of any orders, and glory in nothing but going to
wars with the Tartars, and keeping all Nations out of their country.
Besides, they are diverse times subject to famine of bread, and live upon herbs
and fruit, nor do they converse one with another with cheerful meetings, but
are envious, if any grow richer than themselves: as for the countryman, his
only maintenance consists in keeping a few Bees, silk worms, filling his
gardens with gowrdes and roots, and making a kind of drink of berries, and
the fruit of certain trees preserved for the same purpose: but in all things
so short of our example of happiness, as he would be of reaching heaven with a
stretched-out arm, that goes of purpose to the top of the Alps with
supposition of attaining his purpose, because the mountain seems so exalted
above the inferior ground.

CHAP. IV. INDIA compared, and her defects manifested.
ALthough (as I said before) concerning India comes short of a happy country.
these idolatrous countries, I might with Iehu cast out the Priests of Baal,
break down the altars, and overthrow the idols of the heathen, and so need
not once name them for want of true religion, and acknowledging the mystery of
salvation: yet will I ouerpasse that principal point, and come to their City
walls and plenteous fields with nearer approches of confutation: nor shall
their two summers, double increase of fruit, plentiful rivers, temperature of
air, strange wolly and tailed sheep, great foul, and unheard of worms, with
rindes of trees, silks, precious stones, canes, and many other trifling
marchandice, which they receive for the most part by commutation out of China,
terrify me from my assertions, considering, if God send temporal blessings,
and they are either not wrought upon with comfort, and orderly profit; or
abused in their use and service, it were better for a kingdom not to enjoy the
same at all. If then in India, and the many countries and kingdoms marching
under the flourishing colors of her prosperity, be as many filthy customs of
incontinency, that they prostitute their daughters for money, and are contented
to sell their chastity for reward, nay in sundry places to bring their virgins
before beastly idols, and cause them to fill their womb with the priapus of
the same, whereat, if so be the tender maid seems terrified, or ashamed, the
mother shall stand behind, and thrust her most violently forward: with diverse
other lamentable customs tending to abomination: how can it come near our
example, when adultery was punished with death in Israel, and there was not a
whore to be found (especially by toleration) amongst the daughters of Judah? If
then in India the Kings and Princes swell against one another with tyranous
ambition and reuenges, raising violent hostility against their neighbors and
confederates, and practicing horrible cruelty in their slaughters and
victories: how can it come near our example, when Solomon was denominated the
Prince of peace, and confirmed a league of amity and confederation with all
adjoining Princes? If then in India the Kings and Princes suppose it a glory to
be sequestered from their people, to terrify them with cruel looks and
imperious controuling, not to be seen abroad, but in times of fears and
terrors, to deny them orderly access for their complaints and greeuances, and
to live, as commanding obedience by tyranny, rather than love: How can it come
near our example, when Solomon made a porch before his Palace to determine
the controversies of his people in person; offered sacrifice in public upon an
Altar, and for seven days feasted all comers with cheerefulnes; admitted the
harlots to plead before him; and advanced his mother on a throne by his right
side in the open view of the congregation, and proclaimed free audience and
access for all comers, that had cause of complaint, and oppression? If then
in India theft and intrusion by strong hand be common matters, and howeuer
there is great punishment inflicted on offenders in this kind, as also in
China, yet do they live in continual fear one of another, and the rich are
hard-hearted against the poor, not only suffering them to sterue without
relief, but in a manner hastening their deaths by authority, if either they
grow aged, or impotent, and have not of their own to relieve their
necessities: How can it come near our example, when in Israel there was
neither vagabond, or beggar, no man durst remove the mark in his neighbors
field, no man oppressed his brother with usury, and even contrary families were
entertained with mutual entercourses; yea when nature came to challenge her
due, and sent her harbinger death to demand the same, they brought the body to
the grave in peace, and solemnized the exequies with a fashionable ceremony?
If then in India there is a maine want both of flesh, fish, and other provision
for the sustenance of man, especially to feed any multitude, or satisfy the
meaner sort of people, who know not, what orderly feasting, and neighbourly
meetings mean: How can it come near our example, when Solomon spent 30 oxen,
with infinite other acates every day, and the people met in abundance, eating
and drinking every man under his vine and fig tree, and sent presents and gifts
to one another with mutual conversation and reciprocal love: If then in India
neither are the Cities hansomly contrived, nor well furnished with houses, want
civil government, and administration of justice, if the country villages are
rude, and disordered, living in suspicion of one another for spoil and
robbery, if they fail in all comelines and moral fashioning themselves to
hansomnes, and good order: How can it come near our example, where Solomon
reedified the Cities of store, the Cities of fortification, the Cities of
refuge, the Cities of pleasure, when Solomon had his orderly officers of
visitation, and gave commandment to ouer-looke the manifold disturbances of the
kingdom, and redress the same with a strong hand against the mighty and
insolent, and with a supporting arm for the poor and afflicted? If then in
India they care not to visit other countries, sell their people for slaves,
make marchandice of one another, barbarously scorn to gratify other Princes,
and will in no sort practice the exploration of remote countries: How can it
come near our example, when Solomon built a Navy at the red sea, had another
to join with Hiram, and sent abroad for gold and other provision into foreign
nations; when he lived in peace and amity with Pharaoh, contracted a marriage
with his daughter, and maintained all the honorable customs to enlarge the
glory and happiness of a kingdom? And so in diverse other particulars.

senting from Salomons prosperity and happiness. So that to conclude in a
word, neither are they to defend their own glories, which so spread abroad
former estimation, not to come near our comparison in this her modern
di^unction. For in their wants they are almost unwilling to make trial of any
fortune, considering they have had such disastrous events, as both the Turks
have mightily encroached and prevailed against them. The Arabians with diverse
roads and ouer-watchings have dilacerated their government, and the other
countries adjacent to the Caspian sea stood at defiance with them: so that they
not only live in continual fear of further mischief, but are compelled to
maintain frontire garrisons, to prevent final overthrow and extirpation, and
this they do with extraordinary charge on all sides, and want indeed the
martial bravery, and forcible possibility of their former armies. In their
best peace (which is now still poisoned with the dregs of mischeeuous
insurrections) they are deficient in orderly traphique of merchants, in
well-rigged nauies for exploration of other countries, or maintaining
confederacy with remoter Princes: in pleasant and secure passages and ways to
travel in: in cities or towns of entertainment, to lodge and repose the
wearied company: in provision of the country to sustain nature, according to
the blessing exposed in that kind: in the countrey-mans honest vocation, who
is here worse then a miserable slave: in the honorable liberty of women and
conuersable meetings, who are here debarred friendly entercourses, except
wantons and strumpets, whom they inuit against festiuals, to lengthen out
their pleasure, and lascivious delight in voluptuousness: all which with
diverse other, as there are diverse others to be brought to the trial, if we
should dispute the matter more forcibly, come so far short of our example,
that they are rather mere contraries, and by reason of opposition, utterly to
be excluded from any fullness of reputation, or true example of a Kingdoms
prosperity.

CHAP. VI. TVRKY compared, and her imperfections laid open.
ALthough the Grand Signeur is the only The Ma^umetans are no way near our
example
absolute Prince in the world, as having the lives, lands, and wealth of his
subjects liable to his wilfulness, and imperious controling of whom he
please; yet comes he far short of a Kingdoms happiness, religious
administration, or general blessings of a country, especially our example,
where Solomon established his Princes and Nobles in propagato sanguine, where
the Israelites pitched every man under the tents of their fathers houses, and
arms of their family, where Israel eat and drank in mirth, and all sorts were
ouer-shaded with their vine-yards and figgtrees in quiet, where the merchant
traveled in peace, and grew rich without repining, where many merchants were
entertained from foreign countries, and well-commed with noble hospitality,
where neither witch, beggar, whore, or usurer were permitted, and where plenty
opened her lap, affoording equal distribution to all comers, who were either
marked with merit, labor, virtue, or valor, and because you shall have
pleasure in a little variety, we will thus search the wounds of this
government, and discover those defects, which must needs exempt her from
exemplary happiness, how ever she may swell with a big swollen face of
territories and conquests, and first concerning the cruelty and tyrannous
slaughters amongst themselves.

To begin with the fundamental firmness of their government The cruel
government of the Turks amongst themselves.
and greatness, and the chief cause of expatiating the Empire: it consists
all in advancing of slaves, and cutting off any one, whether brother, son,
and sometimes the fathers, who are either a bar in the pleasant walk of
their sovereignty, or give the least cause of suspicion through competition or
popularity. As for the name of slave; the greatest Viceer must acknowledge it,
as the infallible position of establishment, a law ratefied by Mahomet,
confirmed by custom, and strengthened through the obedience of all his vassals,
as you may collect by that famous history of Mustapha, the principal Bashaw
under Mustapha's story about Hyrena.
Mahomet the first, who when he saw the great Emperor effeminately overcome
with the love of Hyrena the fair Greek, and that there was suspicion of ill
success in the wars, by this retardance and ouer-passionate satisfaction of
pleasure, he adventured to reclaim him from such neglect of his army, and
took upon him by some formal advice, to divert him from vilipending the
Otthoman glory; but how he proceeded, with what prostitution, with how many
terms of slave, and miserable wretch, and how unlooked for he escaped with
life, after he lay groueling on the ground, as resolved to die, our common
stages can relate, and the story has pregnant authority from many famous
authors, who all conclude, that how ever he remembered himself, and with a
stern repining at Mustapha's audaciousnesse, with much a do pardoned him from
cruel execution: yet the beautiful Grecian shrunk under the stroke of a
savage hand, and ^e the next day (after a glorious showing her with admiration
to the whole army) struck off her head, and most barbarously, as he inferred,
to satisfy the army, delivered him and them from further suspicion of his
effeminatenesse: in which fury he approached Adrinopolis, and never desisted
till he had laid it prostrate before him. But if you would be acquainted with
the true condition of their tyranny and imperiousnes, then look upon the new
admission of their Emperors, into the sublime chair of Majesty, and you shall
hear him commanding all his brethren to be strangled before him, except one;
reserved, if the time allow it, for propagation of children, who likewise upon
the Turks suppliment that way, shall miscarry by one means or other: yea,
sometimes it happens, that when the aged father, or eldest brother is contented
to admit of his son or younger to the coparcinary of administration, or if you
will, absolute power in the Empire, by reason of impotency, age, lunacy, or
other natural defects, they are most inhumanly rewarded with death, as Zelimus
poisoned his father Bajazet, and the sons of Soliman the Magnificent
shouldred one another into the pit of destruction.

Concerning the subject; nobility they never suffer in continual discents, nor
permit any man to grow rich, mighty, or popular, otherwise then may stand with
the pleasure of the Emperor, which is apparent by the destruction of many
worthy Bashawes and Seruitours, who (when the Doctors of the Law have
concluded the matter by private conference) are commonly carried by a

confessing that Mordecai had not bin rewarded; but secret politicians supplied
the room, intimating still and still matter against him, which kindled the
fire of the Emperors jealousy to such a blaze, that nothing but his personal
appearance could quench the same.

When the Viceer perceived the danger of such ouerwatchings, and began to be
acquainted with too many princely messages, he absented himself a while, and
with dilatory excuses laid as it were open his suspicion of the Emperors
jealousy against him, whereupon followed an obstinate denial of coming, lest
the affairs of the kingdoms might be intermitted; and when that served not
the turn, he determined to stand on his guard, till at last the Gran Signeur
was advised not to regard him at all: whereupon the Mufti was called to
council, which is their principal Churchman, who together with diverse Doctors
of their law resolved, that he was too dangerous to live, and yet policy must
be used in cutting him off: When the foundation of this building was laid,
letters were contrived from the Prince unto him deceitfully importing thus
much: That he had great cause to be thankful to the great Prophet Mahomet for
his indulgent care over the house of Ottoman, even in these suspicious times to
provide, that a man of such courage, wisdom, and magnanimity governed the
stern of the ship of his affairs, and like a discreet pilot knew how to
conduce the bark of the Commonwealth to safe harbor. He accordingly assumeth
the glory to himself, with full resolution, that either the young Prince durst
not find fault, or nothing was fault-worthy, like Aesops ass, who supposed,
that the Lion would be terrified with his braying. For at last he came to the
Emperors presence into the Seralio, who was taught to entertain him with a
political acceptance, which lasted a while, and with the continuance of 14
days seemed to wipe out the print of former unkindness: But when the day of his
fatal destruction approached, (after the young Prince had bin a hawking, and
meeting with certain inhabitants of Bogdonia, and the borders of Russia, who
made petition unto Him for diverse redresses, gave them a kind of audience) he
was suddenly sent for to a private conference, which he verily supposed,
according to some special inferences, tended to that purpose: nor did he once
rebate the glory of his former iollity, but went at least with 300 Ianisaries,
and his other officers toward the gates of the Seralio, where by the way the
Haga or Captain of the Ianisaries met him to tell him, how the Prince was
retired to a Caska by the sea side, and he must go through the garden, and
enclosure of Roe-bucks unto him, which he performed accordingly, and never
seemed once staggering in his resolutions, till he came to the iron gate, and
saw his company prohibited to enter, and the gate fast barred, as soon as he
was admitted.

Here he must needs pass through a guard of Capogies, who demanded his
Semiter, which he furiously denied, and with increase of rage and choler
railed upon them all. But they being too well instructed to forbear any such
opprobrious speeches, spared a reply of words, and took an opportunity to
ouer-master him with the company, who most cruelly cut him all to pieces: yet
some would raise the Emperors jealousy from a suspicion of love to his mother,
who taking a fitting opportunity, as was imagined, came with him to admonish
her son from his pederastria, or accompanying with boys, but belike they
performed it with unseasonable wisdom; for in his fury he spurned her away,
and bad him remember, he was but a slave. Some report that the first motive of
the Emperors displeasure was occasioned by reason of his buildings, which
ouer-looking some private walks in the Seralio, was both irksome to the
majesty of the Prince, and a door to let in his everlasting hate, to which
there wanted not the several suggestions of many flatterers, and temporizers.
But let his death, and the cause be what it will, there is no gaine-saying
their wilfulnes, nor moderating their rage and tyranny, witness his fathers
killing of his elder brother, a Prince of great expectation: but coming one
day (though he did it with reverence and tears in his eyes) to put him in
remembrance of the Ottoman glory, and enlarging the Empire, which every Prince
had done saving himself, the admonition was so unsavory, or the jealousy of
his virtues so forcible, that he beat him to death with his own hands, to the
amase of all the Ianisaries and soldiers: insomuch that the grandmother, a
woman of excellent parts, who is yet living, had like to have perished in the
hurly-burly. To which may be added, this young Princes dislike of one of his
Concubines, whom he shot to death in his gardens. I could here insert many
other stories of their cruelty, and tyrannous supplanting one another,
murdering Bashawes, destroying Princes, and letting loose the streams of all
rage, wilfullnes, and distemperature: but you will say I gleane but out of
another harvest, and time is too precious to spend it in idle relations, I
will therefore leave you to the original, and only for the strangenes make a
breuiate of Mustapha's tragedy, who was so cruelly murdered by an intemperate
Prince, intoxicatedby the cunning of a malicious strumpet.

The famous history of MVSTAPHA.
SVltanus Soliman surnamed the Magnificent, amongst The lamentable tragedy of
Mustapha.
many others had one beautiful Concubine called Rozza, or Roxalana, but more
properly Hazathia, on whom he so doted in his later times, that all amarous
dalliance with the rest was neglected for her sake, as if pleasure and delight
attended her, though she were but his slave. Thus he so followed the humors of
this wanton woman, that at last the noble Prince Mustapha his eldest son was
prohibited his presence, and his former children slightly regarded, in respect
of hers: which when she had fully apprehended, and politikely entertained, the
next business was to make use of the same, yea such use, as cunning
favorites, and newly advanced officers contriue, who suspecting some sudden
alteration, and perceiving the Prince cannot last long, care not by what means
they enrich themselves, and many times run in the race of indirect courses to
establish their hopes.

Whereupon she wonde up her wilfulnes on the pestilent bottom of Rustan
Bashawes ambition, who had married her daughter, and having likewise corrupted
the principal Mufti to second her enterprise, they all combined a league of
amity, and proiected to cast the Empire on her own sons: which was no
sooner ratified, and confirmed between them, but on a sudden she became very
devout, and being rich with the favors and presents bestowed upon her,
proposed a meritorious work for her souls health by erecting some religious
monument or Mosque, which was intercepted by the high Priest, as discovering
the invaliditie of the same, because she was yet a slave, and therefore
labored in a business, whose merit and effects must tend to the good of
another. This caused such a dissimiled pensiuenes, that Soliman himself was in
a manner exanimated to behold the darling of the world in such a confusion and
heaviness: she again well lessond how to act her part, filled the scene with
tears of disconsolation, related all occurrences from the beginning, and
finely urged, how her godly zeal had certain obstacles, which must be
removed, ere her former alacrity could gain the field of this sullen
meditation and untoward sadness: whereupon the Doctors and Interpreters of the
Alcaron were sent for, and commanded to deliver the truth without
praeuarication, who thus animated, discovered the secret most plainly, and
with impudent asseuerations concluded, that she had just cause to complain,
and insist on the means to procure her redress, which made such impression
into the ouer-worne heart, and easily-perswaded disposition of the Emperor,
that he presently manumitted her, and by sound of trumpet proclaimed her
freedom, and so cheered her, that he might the better rejoice in her company.
But when she had thus raised her self upright upon the honorable steps of
liberty, she stood upon higher terms, and was not ashamed to assure him there
was another lesson to be taken out, than now to dally with her as his slave:
for being free it was against the law of Mahomet to be commanded as a strumpet,
and therefore, how ever he could dispense with religion, and ouer-awe the same,
she would not, nor durst betray her soul, as a delinquent in such impiety:
yet she prostrated her life before him, and was ready to yield her neck to the
block, if so it pleased him to enforce it. Here again were the Doctors
summoned, who maintained her cause, and with exceeding admiration at her piety
and zeal fell humbled on the ground before him, with request not to cast her
headlong to destruction, and damn her soul for ever, which so enflamed him,
as Nititur inuetitum, that without looking advisedly on the pretended
mischief, and searching too narrowly in the closet of her devises, in a
foolish passion he solemnly married her.

This is that she long expected, and raising her thoughts with her fortunes,
after much variety and infinite passages Look the Commentary, and Lettere de
principe in Italian.
in the Commonwealth, she now studied nothing but the advancement of her
family; which could not be done until the worthy Prince Mustapha his eldest
son by a former wife was thrust into a slaughter house, she quickly brought
him into the danger of suspicion (for even good Princes are jealous in points
of sovereignty) and cunningly inferred, that she affected not his popular love,
his great concurses, his strengthening of Amasia, his entertaining of Embass:
from Tartary, his taking up such beautiful virgins out of Georgia and
Mengrelia, with diverse other probabilities, that he determined a present
enlarging of his greatness: which was as quickly apprehended; as politickely
urged, and nothing could satisfy the Emperor, but the present sending for
Mustapha, who although he was forewarned of the mischief, and advised to stand
on his guard with full resolution, that the army was firm unto him: yet
remembering it was his father commanded, and how obedience was a duty befitting
a son; but principally laying a firm foundation on a clear conscience, and
an vncorrupt heart, he came to Constantinople, but was welcomed as Husbandmen
do their cattle into pleasant fields for to make them the more fit for the
Butcher. Thus followed the tragedy of this noble and worthy Prince made the
tennis ball of Fortune, the misery of a doting jealous man, the florishes of an
impudent cunning woman, the vanity of an ambitious idle Bashaw, and the
hypocrisy of a deceitful imposturing Priest. For the Father strangled his
son the jewel of the Empire, and perished after the action with untimely
grief. The villainous woman raised her sons to the dignity; but they quickly
supplanted one another, which tumbled her into the pit of destruction. The
Bashaw shrunk under the pressure of confusion: the Priest was disappointed and
strangled; and the whole government tossed with the tempestuous billows of
destruction.

The Story of a Rennegado Bashaw.
IN the reign of Amurath the third this man's father there was a certain
Rennegado Dutchman advanced to the dignity of a Bashaw; for so they call
Christians, who abjure their religion at man's estate, and are circumcised
according to the Law of Mahomet. Where by the way you must consider of that
mischievous position not to dispute of either law, government, or ceremonies of
their religion, but absolutely allow of the great Prophet, and the Alcaron as
infallible verity, wherein the Roman Bishops tread the same measures, and
interdict any man from calling their actions in question, not suffering us to
read the Canon of Gods law, nor once dispute in matters of faith, but to
confirm the power of the Church as of sufficiency to direct us in the way of
truth: a most devilish, and repugnant conclusion against God and his word, who
commaundes us to search the Scriptures, and try the spirits. But to our Story.
This Bashaw living in great pomp to the outward show, seemed yet much
excruciated in mind with meditation on the latter judgment, and the saving of
his soul, whereupon he communed with one of his principal slaves to the same
purpose, admitting all freedom of speech, and animating him so far to
deliver his opinion, that at last he attempted his patience in this sort. Sir
you know, or at leastwise should know, that God at the first did choose unto
himself a people called the Jews, giving them a law, priesthood, and Prince
named The doctrine of the Deruices or mendicant Priests of Turkey.
Moses, who questionless is the Mediator still in heaven for honest Jews
imploring his assistance on earth; but when this wretched people despised the
blessings of so great a God, falling to idolatry, and other horrible abuses,
they were cast out of favor, and vanished like smoke, or if you will,
resembled, water spilt on the ground never to be gathered up again. Then did
God select another nation called Christians, and admitted of their worthy
acknowledgement of Jesus Christ, whom they suppose God and man, and borne of a
Virgin, and in whom still the good Christian believes; this caused their
increase of wealth, majesty, and greatness, till at last growing wanton with
prosperity, they took the same or worse courses with the Jews, and by
degrees became flat Apostates, so that God was weary of them likewise, and gave
a third nation power to thrust them from their firmness, and disiointed their
established foundation of religion, and happiness: which was acted by the
hands of Turks, who succeeded them, and had likewise their Prophet Mahomet to
instruct and direct them to love the great God of heaven more religiously than
the others, from whose supportation the majesty you now behold, spreads the
wings of glory over the imperial Cities both of Jews, and Christians,
namely, Jerusalem and Constantinople: nay, if you look into Asia, we have
Tauris and Babylon; and in Egypt possess Cairo or Memphis, and Alexandria: so
that no doubt we shall multiply blessing upon blessing, if we continue
confident toward him, and his elected Prophet; otherwise some strange and
barbarous nation shall expel and extirpate us, as we have usurped over others.
Thus then you see with what success these three religions have bin carried in
the current of estimation both with God and man; namely the Jews, who have
Moses to make intercession for them: The Christians, who have JESUS their
Mediator; and Mahumetans, who depend upon the merits and exaltation of Mahomet.
But for you, that are of no religion, nay, have denied the faith, wherein you
were borne and baptized, there is sure no redemption, but the Devil himself
to fetch you away. Which answer was so distasting, although as you heard, it
went under safe conduct, that the tyrannous Lord not only commanded him to be
broken on a wheel to shiuers, but inflicted many Christian slaves in his house
with the like punishment, and thus much for their cruelty amongst themselves:
now you shall see their behavior toward Strangers.

CHAP. VII. The indirect proceedings of Turks against Christians contrary to
all religion or morality.
WHen Mr BARTON was Agent for the English in Constantinople, as he passed along
to This was in the time of Amurath the third.
the Viceers upon occasion of business, the great Empress this man's
Grandmother, (For Amurath the third his father was but a young man, when he
died) came of purpose to see him, formerly moved with a commendatory report of
his virtues and personage by diverse judicious Turks. Whereupon she promised
her fancy some satisfaction, which not to be performed without a formal
looking upon him, she was somewhat appeased, that this occasion was ministered;
but finding it far short of a fullness, another interueiw was contrived, and
the Scene acted in the house of a Jew, to whose wife she came disguised to
bargain for certain pearl, after which in the affairs of the Merchants she
countenanced him extraordinarily, and had at last private conference with him,
giving so way unto their opinion, that supposed the secret passages of
kindness between them, which was no sooner published, and entertained
amongst the Bashawes for current, but shortly after he died, not without
suspicion of poison, and our English affairs had untoward alteration, as the
hanging of our Consul at Alexandria, the imprisoning of diverse in the black
Tower, a place near Pompeis pillar at the mouth of the euxine sea, especially
Arnald and Stranguish, who lay there long for their ransom; the terrible
insulting over slaves committing all to their galleys without respect of
persons; the denying of our former right in the admitting of Merchants into the
sacra Porta under the bandiers of England, and giving the precedence to France;
the raising of customs, the office being farmed by the Jews; the abusing of
Travelers and other of our Country men by Ianisaries, and Mechanics of
Stanbole: the customary calling us Christians dogs, not daring once to
return an unsavory answer; with diverse such like exorbitant abuses.

In the time of Master Henry Lisso the Provinces of Bogdonia and Moldauia were
at strife about the establishment Prince of Moldauia.
of a Governor; but at last condescended to an usurper, which caused the
banishment and flight of the true Princes, whereby they were compelled to seek
for succor under English protection at Constantinople, being Protestants, or
at least willing to admit of our reformation; but whether fear, or corruption
prevailed, he was to the great indignity of our Nation not only discovered,
but taken away perforce even out of our Ambassadors house, and very disorderly
committed to the seven Towers prisoner, from whence by the help of Signior
Gasparo Gratiano a man for special uses entertained amongst the English, whose
brother and sister were both taken and admitted amongst the Turks, being
formerly Christians of Transiluania, or Austria; he escaped: but some
disastrous fortune returned him back again into the hands of apprehenders,
who with a more powerful restraint sent him to the castells; from whence once
again through the favor of a Turkish woman he got his liberty, and escaped
into Poland; but there he tarried not long, both in regard of their iealosie of
him to discover their proceedings, and his suspicion of them for some
treachery against his life, or at least his liberty, and so he passed to the
Emperor, where finding small relief, he came through France into ENGLAND,
and there saw the difference between other Nations concerning the entertaining
of strangers. For he was not only admitted with correspondency to his estate,
but had letters of credit to the Gran Signeur for his reestablishment, with
sufficient inducement to our merchants to lend him 10000. ducats, upon the
least hope of his better success. In his absence his mother with great expense
and gifts elaboured his restitution, but greater sums as it should seem
weighed down the other scale of his respect, or the fortune of happier men
prevailed against him. For after she had spent 20000. ducats, tasted the
misery of contempt, importuned my Lord Ambassador, I mean Sir Thomas Glouer,
in the business, and saw the affliction of Petitioners fed with dilatory
excuses, she very impatiently attended the good hour of her sons return,
and was terrified to experience with what extremities men dejected must
wrestle, especially when he came indeed, and was not only repulsed in his
suite, but entertained with scorn and contempt. Where is now the Turkish
ostentation of supporting the innocent, and distributing of justice to all
sorts of people?

When Soliman Catanea was Bashaw of Algier, Master Christopher Willoughby a
Gentleman and Merchant of Mr Christopher Willoughby.
LONDON had his ship and goods seized on most injuriously to the value of
50000. ducats, whereof many complaints were made, and diverse letters from the
Council of ENGLAND in his behalf; but still distasting answers were returned,
procrastinating the matter, and affording much suspicion of not prevailing in
his recovery: whereupon he went another way to work, and made the principal
Viceer acquainted with the same, between whom and Catanea he understood was a
little grudging: so that when he had promised him 5000. pieces of gold, and
laid open his grieuances, that they seemed unanswerable, he was removed from
his government, and by a missiue commission cited to Constantinople. But it
should seem all this was but form; for in Zio the counsel of his friends
diuerted his appearance, and the power of his presents reconciled the Viceer,
who contrary ^o expectation sent him to Tunis as Governor, not only
neglecting his former promises and prosecution of the business, but in a manner
deriding their importunity, who complained against a Turkish Bashaw. Master
Willoughby every way unsatisfied made it a new suite, and with letters both
from King and Council came himself to Constantinople, and there solicited
the cause, prevailing so far by Sir Thomas Glouers means, that the Bashaw
was at last mansuold, and condemned to pay the money, or loose his head: But
this was still the ordinary manner of satisfaction, when Christians demand
justice against Turks; for the Gentleman was only protracted with good words,
but in a manner despaired of further prevailing, and so he remained every way
discontented.

The Vineyard a ship of London, where of Harris was Master, having Turks and
Turkish goods abord, 1605. The Vinyard taken by the Maltasses.
was surprised by the Maltasses, which although it fell to the loss and
displeasure of our Merchants, yet bred it great unkindness even in
Constantinople by forcible inducements, how the ship was rather betrayed by
the treachery of the English, then surprised by inequality of fight, so that
the Emperor as young as he was, (for he was then scarce fully 16.) commanded
in a fury to set fire on all our ships in harbor, and threatened the Merchant
with further inflictings, not once admitting either of excuse or justification,
whereupon that night (for all the Viceers and Mufties opposition) one of them
was burnt indeed, whether by chance or of purpose, I may not dispute, such is
the tyranny of their government, and misery of men under their subjection.

Edward Conach a Merchant resident at Aleppo, when Edward Conach.
Master Paul Pindar was Consul joined with a Frenchman in a bargain of galls
to the value of 12000. dollers, which they bought of a Moore: the money was no
sooner paid, and the commodity ready to be housed, but a certain Turk
persuaded the Moore, that he was cousoned in the weight, who still replied to
the contrary, confessing himself much satisfied, and a great gainer in the
traphique; but at last ouer-ruled by the suggestion, and villainous instigation,
they made it a matter of complaint before the Bashaw, who with an apprehensiue
anger entertained the same, as glad of any occasion to quarrel with a
Christian, especially a Merchant, from whom money might be extorted; whereupon
he sent for the officer, that weighed the galls, and so urged the matter
against him, that whether right, or wrong, he was broken on a wheel all to
pieces, and after many words of reproach calling us dogs, and deceitful
wretches, the Consul had a terrible command to put in execution the like
exemplary justice on the Merchants. But he perceiving a treacherous conueiance
of the business, procrastinated the Sessions, had not the Ianisaries and common
Turks exclaimed against our retardance, and urged, that seeing the Officer
suffered death there should be either a commutation of lives, or full
restitution, which in the end cost 10000. dollers, 6000. for the French, and
4000. for the English, a sum that stopped the mouth of fury, and brought the
Tigre at last to more lenity.

About the 20. of October 1607. the Viceer, that came The Viceer of Arabia.
from Arabia, and had been resident before in Gran Cairo presented the
Emperor and rest of the Bashawes with many rich jewels, by which occasion the
opinion of his inestimable wealth filled very quickly the dangerous ears of
Repiners, and diverse murmured against him, as if he grew too mighty for a
subject; nay, there wanted not malicious instruments to sound out the harsh
discord of his overthrow by traducing him for many sinister actions in his
governments; for ambitious insinuating into vulgar respect; for attempting to
win the Ianisaries by vaineglorious expenses; for releasing of slaves, in
whom another man had a propriety; for repining at the former Viceers
supplantation; for complaining on the Emperors vicious loving of boys, with
such like: all which added but fuel to the fire, which at last consumed him.
For within two days he was found dead, some said of the plague, some that he
was strangled, some poisoned, and some that he entertained two unwelcome guests
grief and discontent: Howsoever, his goods, treasure, children, houses, and
all belonging unto him, were seized upon to the Gran Signeurs use, which
confirmed their opinion, that supposed him murdered for his wealth.

The ship of the John Baptist being in Zio about the beginning of November
the same year, was searched by Turks for the Cook, upon a supposition, that
he was confederate with a French slave about his escape; but he denying the
accusation was imprisoned, had his hands almost flead, and suffered great
torment to enforce a confession. At last mere hunger compelled the Offender to
discover himself, and most voluntarily to lay the guilt upon his own
shoulders, whereby the Englishman was after great suite discharged, otherwise
no doubt he had felt the effect of Turkish justice.

In the year 1605. amongst other Travelers, and searchers for novelties out
of curiosity, a French Gentleman presumed to tell the artillery, and canons
before the Tapinaw, as they lay by the sea shore, which was taken for so great
an offense, that he had a 100. blows given him on the feet according to the
manner of such reuenges, and not dismissed without great intercession of the
Ambassador. These and many other instances of their tyrannous government would
fill whole volumes, and make easy collections the discouerers of their
incongruity between Salomons magnificense, peace, plenty, administration,
wisdom, affability, uprightness, and good orders; and their pride,
contentions, wants, confusions, devilish policy, tyranny, wrested
constructions, and wilfulness: so far from the example of happiness, and
method of a well settled Commonwealth, that I will absolutely disclaim the
naming of any true goodness amongst them, not that I touch the maine point of
religion in denying the Godhead of Christ, an argument of sufficiency to
debar him from worldly and terrestrial happiness, but that many heathenish
reasons of firmly settled kingdoms disalow his usurpation, and strangely
compacted tyranny tending to nothing, but wilfulness in themselves, and
slavery over others, all proceeding from his challenges militari iure, and that
the Disposer of Kingdoms would humble us from any ostentation of a perpetuity
on earth.

CHAP. VIII. Their manner of advancement, and diversity of customs far from
our example, and orderly prosperity.
Our former allegations have maintained, The Turkish government deficient in
exemplary goodness, or happiness.
that the Turkish Empire is corroborated by the absolute will of the Prince,
and wretched duty of the subject; for he pulls down and aduanceth whom he
pleases, and without sense or reason debarreth any man from pleading in his
own behalf, or contesting with authority, if so be, he will not have it so;
otherwise, there is a certain shadow of uprightness amongst them; an
approaching to honor by degrees, and spreading the fair colors of some good
customs, though far short of our example: all which in in this Chapter shall
be for diverse reasons enlarged. You must then consider, that every second or
third year his Officers range over all his kingdoms, and territories for
slaves, Moors, and Eunuchs, but especially for the beautifullest and
handsommest children they can find, being all the sons and daughters of
Christians, who accordingly are brought into his several Seralios by 20. and
30000. at a time, and there from their infancy instructed in the Law of
Mahomet, circumcised, and disposed of without knowledge of parents, friends, or
country, except some Eunuch or Keeper out of mere commiseration discover the
same; so that all his Concubines, Wives, Officers, and soldiers are the
offsprings of Christians depending immediately on the Princes Exchequer, and
pensions, not acknowledging other God, other law, other religion, other King,
other Benefactor, or other life (except in the story of George Castriot, who
rebelled against him, after he knew his father was a Christian, and King of
Epirus, which we may briefly run over thus. When Amurath the 2. had conquered
Epirus, with many other places of Seruia, Bulgaria, and Albania, he took
prisoners The story of Scanderbeg, and why he was so called.
with him to Adrinopolis the King, and five of his sons, whom he tormented
most barbarously upon some distasting reply of the old Prince by putting out
their eyes, and at last strangling them, except the youngest named George, whom
he so fancied in his infancy, that he presently circumcised him, instructed
him in the Law of Mahomet, and kept him secure in his own palace, until a
mighty Champion of Persia made a challenge to fight with any Turk for the
honor of both Empires hand to hand, starknaked, and with single Semiters:
wherein as the motive might be honorable enough, so the manner seemed
ridiculous; yet so formidable, that for three days together he insulted round
about the Court without a daring answerer, or any man who durst take the matter
in hand; at last this George Castriot out of some divine inspiration, and
generous spirit, stepped forth in the presence of the Emperor, not fully 18.
year old, and without procrastinating the matter, stripped himself before
them, and made them as much amazed at the beautifulnes^, and comeliness of his
person, as greatness of courage, and shaking his sharp and glistring curtelax
triumphantly over his head, approached the Persian, who by this time was
prepared to the encounter, and in less then one quarter of an hours
traversing the ground, closed with him, wrastled with him, stradled over him
like a Colossus, after he had laid him on his back, and struck off his head:
for which he was presently embraced in his sweat by the great Emperor,
invested with a robe of honor, proclaimed by the sound of a trumpet
Scanderbeg, quasi Alexander Magnus, and advanced to the dignity of General of
the army: Therefore I wonder at their ignorance, or slender enformation, which
have published in print, that it was a name of scorn and derision; when we
never read of so famous an action, and so high a recompense, wherein he
proceeded more and more, with love of the army and regard of the Prince, till
indeed an Eunuch, ravished with his worthiness, discovered what he was, and
opened at large his fathers story unto him, whereat he startled, as it were
confounded, and never desisted, till he had persuaded the army to revolt, and
so obtained his Kingdom, making war against the Turk seventeen year
together, as in the larger stories may appear. But to the business in hand.

The natural Turk they call Muscellman, and he seldom comes to preferment:
but lives as a tradesman in cities, The degrees of the Turks
husbandman in the country, or mariner at sea: yet, for the most part, are all
your gally-slaues Christians, and ouerlooked by the cruel eyes of hard-hearted
masters, the rest cast up their account in this manner. At the beginning they
are called Gimoglanes, or Azamoglanes, resembling 1
poor hospitall-boyes, doing all manner of drudgery, both in court and the
houses of Bashawes, and are known by a plain habit and strange hat on their
head, which is a felt like a suger-loafe, of a maiden-haire color.

The second degree is of Ianizaries, whose Haga or Captain is a most
honorable, though dangerous place. Of 2
these be two sorts: of the court, limited in their numbers; and at large
without restraint, as always mustred for chief soldiers in the army: yea, as
(a man may say) the principal beam of the whole Empires frame. For from their
suffrages and obedience, the Gran Signeur is confirmed: from their repinings,
disorders are multiplied: from their partiality, a son deposes a father: and
from their mutinies confusion rises, and like a swelling sea casts down the
banks of all government.

The third sort are Capogies, employed as porters of gates, purseuants on
errands, attenders on the Viceers, as 3
they sit at meat in their great Dowana's, which be open hals trauersed, as
occasion shall serve with Persian hangings, and sometimes trusted with secret
murders, and such like dangerous business.

The fourth place is appropriate to the Spahyes, who are inferior horsemen,
with high feathers in their strange fashioned 4
hats, somewhat more glorious then the Ianizaries, their arming, as also the
Ianizary, keeps some correspondency with the Persian. On foot, either bow and
arrows, and a semiter, or hargabush and a semiter: on horseback the very
same, with addition of a shield made of sinews, or the bark of an Indian
tree, cast behind at their backs, with addition of a pollax, hatchet, or iron
mace, which are made like scepters: but, for the most part, none presumes to
wear them under the degree of a Chiaus, who have them in the city of silver
for show, and of steel for execution.

The fifth room is supplied by the Chiaus, a degree of 5
honorable eminence and may rank with our Barons. For they ride in velvet
gowns, siluer-plated saddles, costly stirrups, and rich turbanes: with these I
may almost equal the Captains of castles, forts, frontire towns, bands of
foot, cornets of horse, and such like Commanders, known by the name of Haga's.
Here also, though he seem to step a little higher, may be seated the Cady,
who is a Judge or Magistrate over criminal causes, over whom there is one
principal called Cadeleskier, as our Lord chief Justice, in some places they
have also Sub-Bashawes according to his Sansacks, Trimatriots, or country
divisions, either for maintaining his armies, or provision over his cities.
Then may you name with a little better reputation the Treasurer called
Testerdy, ouerseer of customs, which is an office farmed by the Jews, his
Chancellor, Doctors of the Law, and such like.

On the sixth step ofhonour is the Bashaw lifted up, who is a principal
Viceroy, or at least has been, over Kingdoms 6
and Countries, such as Arabia, Egypt, Tauris, Tunis, and diverse others, both
in Asia, Affricke, and Europe, and Beg, in Turkish is great or honorable.
according to the dignity and majesty of the place called Beglerbeg: these are
every three years mansuold, that is to say, removed. For as they be subject
to strange overseers, so they are not permitted to grow rich, and indeed seem
jealous of their lives and estates, if any extraordinary fortune or greatness
be imposed upon them, except the Bashaw of Aleppo, who either is so permitted
to have, or makes his place hereditary, daring sometimes to do actions
befitting an absolute Prince.

The last and greatest place of account is a Viceer, who commonly exceed not
five in number, besides the General 7
of the army, who is principal, these be they that govern the Empire, and to
whose trust all matters depending in controversy are committed. But you must
consider, that times have altered their first strictness, when in the
inchoation of goodness they resolved on a perseverance and steadfastness. For
amongst the best of them, abuse has bespotted that fair promising
countenance, and ouer-vailed that beauty, which showed true Justice, punished
extortion, and made adultery one of their haynousest offenses, with foul
deformity, and new fashions of impiety. And thus much for their persons. Now to
their customs, and general conditions.

The Turks, by the law of their Alcaron, should drink nothing but water, or
water mixed with honey, which they The manners of Turks, and their government.
call sherbert: yet the better sort have certain Iuliups, which be syrups of
roses, violets, and such like, of which a spoonful or two will season a pint
of water, and is not only pleasant in taste, but powerful enough in
operation: they shave all their head, saving one tuft on the crown,
superstitiously imagining to be pulled up to heaven thereby: they maintain
their beards with great formality and cost, and have them in such reputation,
that they swear by them: they sildome do any thing in vain, or speak an
idle world, but in a substantial gravity pass the time, even at their
pleasure and sports: they sit crosse-legg'd, and so commonly eat on the ground,
or higher bench: they hate profanation, and will not suffer Christ to be ill
spoken of. Their religion generally carries a reverent show, but no
substantial commendation, as allowing God Omnipotent, a father, invincible,
and creator of the world, and Jesus Christ as the Prophet of his time, as Moses
had been before, but have opinion that Mahomet was sent to them, as the last
Mediator, with promise ofreturne to consummate their eternity after 1000
years, which time is almost expired, whereupon he enrolled a book called his
Alcaron, in which he bound together, both laws touching religion, and precepts
for civil administration, with prohibition of disputing on their probability,
and warrantize of the flourishingest Commonwealth under the sun, upon their
observation; coniuring them to a strict obedience, if ever they hoped to thrive
in glory and terrestrial majesty, and attain the blessedness of an immortal
Kingdom, and a trebled felicity in the world to come: wherein he imitated
Lycurgus, who compelled the Lacedaemonians, and bound them by oath to the
resolute keeping his instructions, until his return, which they ratefied by a
solemn vow, whereupon coniecturing the subsequent good, he banished himself
for ever; or, as some suppose, threw himself from a cliffe of Olympus. The
like we read of Empedocles, but with greater suspicion of ambition, as
indeed affecting a godhead, who cast himself into the Crateres of Aetna,
after he had combined the Sicilians to the judicious allowance of his decrees.

They love their Churches, reverence the Priests, make account of Naturals,
dumb men, and Lunaticks, and must Their religion.
not enter into their Mosques, either with their shoes on, or foul hands, or
any vnreuerent gesture. Amongst these the order of Deruices or Turners are of
greatest account, as men living a contemplative life, and no way transported
with mundane affairs. They celebrate diverse religious days, especially
Friday, and have many ceremonies of preaching, music and solemn silence:
concluding their service with a strange turning about, increased by degrees
from a slow stillnes to a violent circular whirling, pa^ible of four several
divisions, lasting in all an hour, according to the modulent sound of certain
instruments, which have a primordiall solemnity, and so by little and little
increase to a swiftness, in which time they with strange gestures look up to
heaven, and when they have done thus a quarter of an hour, all in a sweat they
fall groueling to the ground, and have certain garments cast over them, to
prevent taking of cold; then after a while they begin again, and so four
times together: the looking up has relation to extraordinary visions, and that
they are ravished with high inspiration, forgetting the world, and all affairs
in the same: the prostitution on the ground would acknowledge the vileness of
man's creation, and their humility to consider of the same: they observe the
ceremony of praying for the dead, bewailing their loss, and bemoaning over
the graves; they repair to their Mosques or Temples four times a day, and on
Friday five: and they have a solemn fast and a solemn feast, called Ramdam
and Byrame, much about our Alhallow-tide, at which time their Mosques, and the
turrets, are solemnly furnished with burning lamps night and day, five weeks
together: with diverse other particulars, much like the absurd ceremonies, both
of Greek and Romish Churches, consisting all in form and outward adoration,
as you shall hear anon.

They circumcise the men, and in Arabia cut their women, they sell all things
by weight, write Bias, like the ancient Arabians and Chaldeans, read backward
as the Jews, and observe many other customs of Moses Law. For their women are
sildome or never seen abroad, except the meaner sort, who yet cover head and
face (saving their very eyes: what rich apparel soever she wears, the
outward garment is a long cloth gown with wide sleeves, breeches, boots, or
rather buskins, and an ill-fashioned tire on their heads: their hands are
without gloves, their nails and eyebrows painted, which they learnt of the
Greeks, and all outward appearance most uncomely; but within doors they are
more stately, and with a comely presence entertain those which are to be
admitted. Their marriages are somewhat strange; for they never see their wives,
until they lie with them, unless it be such as are able to buy slaves, and
keep many concubines; and then expect no dowry, either of land or money, but
vtensells and presents of apparel, which are carried in delicate baskets on
boys heads, singing of songs in the street before the Bride, until she come
to her place of abode. In which negotiation are elder women employed, and dare
not but tell the truth, until the matter be fully determined. Thus are also
their incontinences satisfied by entercourses of Pandars, yet for advantage
they have brothels and stews; yea, the very Balnea's serve for meeting places.

Thus could I run over a large field of discourses: but my purpose is only
by demonstration to bring the defects The comparison laid together.
of this Empire in question, for all their ostentation of glory, and proud
boasting of magnificent government, yet so far short of our example and
comparison, as they are from judgment and love of religion, who extol it for
the greatest, best, and richest Kingdom of the world. Solomon led the
Vantguard of royalty, and like a noble minded Landlord, let happiness to
farm amongst all his Tennants rent free. The Turk is so far from augmenting
the peace and plenty of his subjects, that as soon as any of them is but
entering into the field of thriuing and contentment, he pulls them back, and
thrusts them doggedly into the dungeon of penury and wants. Solomon was an
honorable King, and sat on a throne to decide the controversies of his people.
The Turk is an absolute Tyrant, and neither comes amongst them, but for
glorious magnificence, nor admits any to approach near him, but for
pleasure and wantonness. Solomon had Princes over the Tribes, and the sons
of Lords enjoyed their fathers immunities. The Turk has none of eminence, but
himself, and the name of slave obscureth all light of posterity. Solomon kept
an order in his cities and towns, whether they were places of harbor,
traffic, and fortification; or for concourse, sacrifice, and reposednesse.
The Turk allows none, or very few, with Decorum and glory of Citizens. In
the days of Solomon, the Countryman lived at peace under his vine, and the
Israelites without number eat, drank, and made merry. Amongst the Turks
nothing but fear and terror is threatened, like a tempestuous storm hanging
over the heads of the Inhabitants. For the cities lie deuasted, the towns
depopulated, and confusion is powered out in full measure amongst them; yea,
spread like a menstruous cloth, to make modesty and true government ashamed, so
that if you return to the ouerlooking the gallant fields of Greece, which in
times past was a subject for Philosophers and Poets to write upon, except some
few, namely Constantinople, Gratianopolis, Andrinople, Philipopolis,
Gallipolis, Salenica, and such like, and here and there a pretty town in an
Island, the rest are unwalled, the people unarmed, their goods taken by force,
their daughters reserved for incontinency, and the whole Country a true
pattern of misery, insomuch that the Inhabitants being Christians, in a manner
creep into their houses at a little door through a wall, otherwise shall a
Turk come and make a stable of his hall, ravish his daughter, abuse his wife,
and consume him like a lingering disease, which washes away the flesh, and
leaves nothing but skin and bone: besides, he dare not manure the ground to
grow rich, lest an intruder reap his harvest, and make his endeauours
fruitless: so that though this great Emperor be so mighty in people, spacious
in territories, opulent in wealth, and glorious in imperiousness: yet
receives he not the fifth commodity of his countries, by reason the fields are
vnplowed, the vineyards undressed, the meadows vnstored with cattle, and the
very trees vnpruned, all which were plentifully supplied and compassed about
with the embracings of husbandry in the time of Salomons peace. Nay, such is
the misery of corrupted times, that whereas the Turks have been ever a true
and religious people toward their Prophet, observing the laws of his Alcaron
very strictly: in these days they are all transported with prosperity, and
seduced with filthy and abominable wickedness. For they endure both sloth and
idleness, augment their desires of incontinency, maintain the extremities of
gluttony, and will be drunk, against their own prohibitions and natural
enclination.

I have insisted the longer on these Turkish particulars, because of all the
Empires of Asia, and Kingdoms of Afric, it affoordeth matter of discourse,
and mine own commorance amongst them warrants the truth of what is published,
whereby you may thus conclude, after a summary collection, that their
Commonwealth may rather be termed a coniuration of tyrannies, then method or
form of good government: their Emperors masters of a slaughterhouse, then
fathers of the country: and their Governors such as the Judges of Israel,
when every man did what was best in their own eyes, then Joshua or Samuel, who
washed their hands in innocence, either from doing wrong themselves, or winking
at others under them, witness the stories you have heard, and thousands other
vnrepeated. But if this will not yet exclude them out of our palace of
happiness, nor divert their conceits, which are only carried away with
novelties, why then let us extract these fearful particulars amongst them.
First, that fundamental 1
point of establishment, by murdering all their brethren. Next their ambitious
supplanting their fathers 2
and elder brothers, and rather then they would be disappoynted in their
proiected drifts, thrusting them into a slaughterhouse. Thirdly, the policy
and cunning of their Concubines, who have destroyed very worthy Princes for 3
degenerating persons. Fourthly, the raging cruelty and jealousy against
Bashawes, neither permitting the lawful 4
descent of the son, nor continuing long a constant opinion toward the
well-deseruing father (for even the worthy Cigala's themselves, had much a do
to keep their credit without murmuring, and repining of others. Fifthly,
against the maine position of preserving Justice, their corrupting 5
by bribes and presents, even to the perverting of manifest causes, especially
against Christians. Sixthly, the miserable estate of the countryman, and poor
communalty, 6
who are in as ill condition as their asses, fit for nothing but to have heavy
burdens laid upon them. And last of all, their confusion of diet, both for the
time and 7
plenty, wherein nothing is gracious or acceptable, nor any thing worthy the
name of a happy country, or wealthy people. Now to the rest.

CHAP. IX. RVSSIA compared.
ABout the 25. of our famous Queen ELIZABETH Albertus Alasco Vaiuod The de^cts
of Russia.
of Siradia in Poland, came over as Ambassador from the King of Poland, and
amongst other particulars concerning the estate of his own Country discovered
many secrets of Muscouia, or Russia choose you whether; since when (as before
our Merchants had begun a traphique amongst them) both Ambassadors have come
to us from them, and we have sent many Agents and gratuities to confirm a
peace and intercourse; wherein more especially then in any other Sir Thomas
Smith prevailed with honorable welcome and dispatch; so that besides the
continual travel of our Merchants, and endeauours of many Gentlemen addicted
to curiosity, we have a kind of public authority, and certainty of
collections to warrant our discourse, and make manifest the imperfect customs
of this great Empire, so contrary to our example and pattern of happiness,
that whereas we look out for a yoake-fellow with Solomon to draw along the
chariot of magnificense and terrestrial prosperity, he cannot come near the
dashings of the wheels, nor must presume of any thing more then the
commanding of his subjects as slaves, which is tyranny; and the keeping the
better sort of women honest by sequestring them from wandering abroad, which is
misery and wretchedness. First concerning religion, the maine point and
foundation of all goodness, in the days of Solomon they knew not what a grove
meant; a strange altar was odious unto them, and until his later falling away
from God, which was revenged with the falling away of 10. Tribes from his
son, there was no mention made of idolatry, and the very sound was a harsh
kind of discord. In Muscouia they are both ignorantly superstitious, and
ambitiously affected to superiority: for although in that poor knowledge they
have, they ever depended upon the authority of the Greek Church, as by their
Saints may appear, which be Saint George, Demetrius, and Nicholay, to whom is
consecrated one of the richest Abbeys of the world: yet have they presumed in
the assumpting the same to themselves, boasting of a bargain by commutation,
wherein the Patriarch of Constantinople was contented to resign to the
Metropolitan of Mosco all his authority, and supremacy for a great sum of
1588.
gold. But see the just judgment of God, as he returned into Greece, he was
robbed of the same, and most treacherously murdered. Thus yet do they presume
of the glory of the Church amongst them, and in Russia think it sufficient to
cry out IESV thou son of God: as for the Scriptures, in some places they have
the Greek Testament only, and hear of the Bible a far off. For preaching
or interpreting, they know not what it means; and the common people believe
any thing their Priests tell them, allowing of nothing but some ridiculous
ceremonies, strange fasts, and idle feasts. Concerning their Princes, oh how
far are they from the reciprocal duties between themselves and subjects, and
those excellent prescriptions which Samuel prescribed to Saul, and Solomon
practiced to his eternal honor. For such has been the confused and
disordred intrusion of these Emperors, that they have without care of
posterity, conscience, or the Commonwealth shouldred one another from their
thrones by treasons, murders, devises, and public hostility. For ever since
that old Iuan Vasellowich grew odious to his subjects, horrible stratagemmes
have succeeded, and even Poland like a neighbor has feared the burning of his
own house, when the next has been on a blaze; especially in the usurpation
of Borris Pheordiwich, who to aspire to the dignity made away Demetrius the
second son to Vasellowich, and so from other monstrous effects of policy
obtained the Diadem, wherein at the first by his bounty and worthy promising
demeanor, he in a manner blotted out the print of his former unjust
proceedings, and taught them as it were away to forget the wrongs done to their
lawful Princes, till at last growing odious to the subject, a new search was
made, and a further hurliburly about another Emperor confounded all estates,
and for many years has turmoiled the Country round about. Concerning the
government, there is only some form of justice, and punishing of adultery;
but so far from Salomons magnificense, Salomons palace, Salomons provision,
Salomons navy, Salomons Nobles, Salomons tranquillity and peace, and Salomons
worthiness in every thing, that I am ashamed to name them for Christians. For
the common people, though they lie not with other men's wives, yet they change
their own as often as they list, and howeuer the better sort mainetaine many
wives, yet do they practice nothing more then gurmondize and incontinency,
with Strumpets and Concubines, whom they resort unto in certain stoues or hot
houses, as the hotter Countries have Balnea's and washing places. Concerning
their Cities? in a word both their Cities and towns are subject to such
bestialitie and confusion, that they seem rather so many smoakie cotages, and
Irish cabbines, then hansome dwellings, or convenient places of abode; and in
Mosco it self for all her populousness, and large extension of ground, there
is not any thing worthy the admiration or imitation, more then the markets of
furs, and some rich ornaments of the skins of beasts; as for the Citizens,
or Countrymen, I rather resemble them to some scattered troops of a
discomfited army, then men orderly disposed to the managing affairs either for
mutual commerce, or noble trade of Merchants. And thus could I run over all
other particulars, but that I shall overrun my own discourse, considering
there is nothing but a mere disparity between them and our example.

CHAP. X. AETHIOPIA compared.
AS the distempered climate of cold and unseasonable weather seemed a bar of
The de^cts of Aethiopia.
separation between Muscouia and hansome Prosperity, or true happiness of a
kingdom; so is orderly plenty, and necessary provision affrighted to come
near Aethiopia, least the scorching heat, and burning sun should consume
the same, and not only turn their corn into cinders, but stifle their cattle
for want of water, sending them braying, as the Heart to the rivers up and down
after refreshing springs. For although Aegipt has bin counted the garner of
corn, and that the watrey Nilus has dispersed her rivulets over many
Countries, yea coming out of Aethiopia has taken along sundry swelling
fountains to accompany her into the Mediterranean sea; so that diverse
Historiographers have numbered 6000. Cities on the banks of the same, and
boasted of the glory of their Emperors, and mightiness of their armies: yet
(not once speaking of the barrenness of the rest) could any of these places
take upon them any glorious exaltation of a well compacted Commonwealth, or
terrestrial happiness of a Nation. For you may read, that when it flourished
in the height of prosperity (as when there was a general famine in many
Countries) there was corn in Aegipt, Saba the Queen of Aethiopia came to
visit Solomon in his roialty, and went away with admiration, when she saw the
difference between her own Country, and the blessedness of Judea, so that
the particular relation of the Court, and government, was occasioned from this
Empresses willingness to be instructed, and desire to gratify the King for his
extraordinary magnificense, and administration of the Commonwealth: whereby I
am not incredulous of their information, that report, how that many times the
Parents sell their children to Merchants for corn, and at all times send the
people to the market for slaves, which are bought up at easy rates, and
dispersed over the world: nor will I much contradict their opinion, that have
fashioned their Commonwealth out of an unfashionable government without law,
terror of disobedience, civil institution, orderly precepts, and sociable
loving of one another. For since they marched under the colors of
Christianity, it has not been much better, and except it be such as are borne
under the same Climate, no man of a temperate Country can live amongst them.
Their manners and customs I have partly described, and could here add, that
howeuer they boast of their antiquity, as being the first Country inhabited by
Chus the son of Cham, which in the Hebrew tongue signifies black, and that
afterward they changed their name from the son of Vulcane: I cannot find
either any settled government, or state worthy the imitation; or noble
enterprises befitting a story, or slender praise. Howeuer they are commended
for the first acknowledging a divine power, and entertaining a religious
Priesthood, and manner of celebration of sacrifices; I cannot see, that there
now remains any thing amongst them, but idle customs, and corrupted abuses,
believing the incarnation of Christ only, without a better progression to
sanctifying graces; and never disputing further then a barren observation of
ridiculous ceremonies. Howeuer they have some scattered Cities, and nobility
in estimation, as the Captains of their Soldiers, and Leaders of their
armies, I cannot find either orderly preservation of families, or loving
entertaining of one another, but rather thefts, rapines, murders, and spoiling
of themselves, and passengers. Howeuer their Countries are very spacious, and
have a great quantity of ground with variety of people; yet is the barrenness,
and unfrequented Cities a bar to their estimation; and as we say a little
good is worth a great deal of badde; and one corner of Canaan equalled ten
times as much ground for provision, and plenty of riches. As for their tying
their hair in knots, their odoures, perfumes, sweet wood, spices, Elliphants
teeth, almugge trees, and such like; alas, there is neither milk, nor honey,
neither good provision for back or belly, neither comeliness of rayments for
ornament, or necessity,; neither order for glory, or good neighborhood;
neither provision for hansomnes, or magnificense. To conclude in a word, it
wants many things, wherein barbarous Nations (after their account) come
nearer prosperity, and retains nothing, which either happy kingdoms stand
in need of, or desire by way of imitation. As for such blessings, wherewith
God has stored their Countries, and they have corrupted the Merchants of
Europe; I answer in one word for all, both for China, India, and themselves,
that they resemble poison thrown into a wholesome potion, which of it self
had been a The merchandise from India and Aethiopia superfluous things and
such as we need not.
preservative, but now is a dangerous receipt, and not fit for every one to
drink: or else they are like sluttish maskes, which cover more beautiful
faces, and debar one another from pleasing themselves with their own native
comeliness. But say, that both jewels, precious stones, perfumes, spices,
mineralls, metal, and other glorious riches are befitting the Majesty of
Princes, the honor of palaces, the ornaments of Kings, and the benefit of
Countries; I hope we have them in more abundance then themselves, and like the
Servant that proved better workman than his Master, make more commodious use
of them, then any Country in the world: so that our Merchant is a noble
aduenturer, and our Cities rather storehouses of blessings, then shops of
wares: and as for LONDON it self, I protest, I rather wonder at it for her
excelling prerogatives, then commend it for a thriuing Emporium.

CHAP. XI. GERMANY compared.
SHall we come nearer home, and The imperfect condition of Germany.
with prying eyes (like the Censors of Rome over offenders) look into the
Empire of Germany: or if you will, the country it self, as it might make a
glorious Kingdom indeed. You know how I have already stepped into her
enclosures, and opened the very gates of her secrets. The Princes are too
absolute, and he himself not able to reign, as Ahasuerosh did, from India to
Aethiopia, over 127. Provinces: nor does the Queen of Saba, come to hear his
wisdom, or view the ordering of his palace, the attendance of his Nobles, the
sitting of his servants, the provision of his tables, and the charity of his
devotion: nor does the Kings of Arabia send him presents, the Kings of Egypt
wives, and all the confederate Princes admire his magnificence, nor Hiram of
Tyrus contract a league, or the navy of Tharsus join with his, to fetch gold
from Ophir: nor will the Merchant bring him horses and fine linen from remote
places, or supply his wants according to the prerogative of Kings, or glorious
abundance of opulent countries: nor are the cities ordered by the appointment of
his ministers, nor can he send his charriots to this place, nor horsemen to
that, nor his army whither he list, nor fill the streets of Jerusalem, when he
would solemnize a Passover. For here the cheifest towns live in freedom, and
the Burgers boast of their wealth and policy, in manumitting themselves, and
(as it were) sealing the honor of chief commanding; yea, sometimes contesting
with the Emperor himself on their own gates. As for the country commodities
and provision tending either to necessity or pleasure; alas, the commutation
consists in enriching particular persons, and smally to the augmentation of
the Emperors Majesty, wherein all the tracts of avarice, corrupt mixtures,
ouer-reaching one another, and putting off either refuse things, or paltry
trifles, as the Italians call them Baggatini: are trod amongst them, and even
beaten smooth with continual intercourse. So that their marts and faires are
so many boothes of drunkards, and instead of ships at sea, fill the fields with
wagons of such strange creatures, who make their bellies as great devouring
gulphs as the sea, so that their eating and carowsing is far from the
moderation of mirth, which the Israelites accustomed, or the Persian banquet,
where none were compelled: but letting that pass, as an imperfection
proprietory to the country and nation. I can traduce them further, for
mangling the blessings of God bestowed upon them, by the cuttings and hackings
of many gross sins, as usury, rebellion, contumacy, profanation, swearing,
drunkenness, murders, and such like: but especially for vilipending the high
commission of the Almighty in two principal matters. The one, in murmuring and
repining at strangers, not suffering any to have any commorance, or dwelling
amongst them. For how ever in some of the cheifest towns there is a glorious
show and formal entertaining of Merchants and passengers, who come stored with
crowns to power them into the laps of Innkeepers, and houses of wantonness:
yet will they neither relieve the wants of indigent beggars, nor permit
Gentleman or Artificer to dwell amongst them, or be entertained as a free
Denizon, being a stranger of another country, except in some sparing cases,
and times of necessity, wherein a bribe or great Princes commendatory letters
prevail, by way of entreaty and insinuation. The second is, their grossness
and simplicity in refusing the right of Kings, and succession of their
Emperors, debarring so the best of governments, which is the Monarchy, from
ruling over them, and whereas they may allege, that the suffrages of men are
vncorrupt, and a Prince so chosen shall be the worthier, in regard his virtues
must be eminent, whereas the father may leave a son compounded of so many
vices, which ouerruling his virtues, shall make him odious: or otherwise he may
prove simple, tyrannous, dishonest, or irregular. First, it is merely
erroneous, because we are not to contest with the disposer of Kingdoms about
his Vicegerents, in regard, that sometimes as a fatherly correction he
permits a defective Prince, rather then folding up a sorer mantle of
vengeance, to spread it abroad to their more grievous punishment. Next they have
failed in this also amongst themselves: for many of their Emperors thus
elected, have proved doltish, lascivious, cowardly, and rather manglers of the
Empire, then provident stewards to augment the wealth and reputation of the
same: nay, the best of their Caesar's have been affrighted at the fulmination
of a tyrannous Pope, and seduced with the imposturing cunning of deceiving
Priests, and a corrupted religion, nor could they go with the wise King to
view his nauies, visit his cities, fortify the towns, erect storehouses, or
come near the six steps of gold on Salomons throne, which was most apparent,
even the other day, in one of their glorious Princes, from whom the house of
Austria has taken such firm rooting, that it hopes to spread so largely, and
so high, that no daring hand shall presume to lop a bough, or break off a
principal stem. I mean Charles the fifth, who for all his seeming corroborated
mightiness, quickly lost the love of the Princes, and for want of ceremonies
maintaining the glory of a King, was even scorned of Pesants. The story is
breefly thus. Upon the report of the loss of his galleys at Argier, he had a
purpose to re-enforce his navy, The Emperor Charles the fifth, despised for his
mean habit.
and as the Poet says, saepe premente Deo, fert Deus alter opem, to hope, that
as one misfortune had ouerclowded the fair shining sun of his glory: another
happy wind would ouer-blow the threatening storm, and make a serene element,
which caused him to come into Italy, for his better and speedier passage,
either at Ligorn or Genoa: but entering into Millane, a lean old man in a
black cape cloak, the people thronging to see a glorious Emperor, or at
least some magnificent show and pompous ceremony: they were so daunted to be
thus frustrated, and in a manner scorned to be so disesteemed, that they
neither gave him a Viue le Roy, nor scarce opened a window to look toward him:
nay more, when he set forward for Spain, indeed there scarce went a
voluntary Gentleman with him, and the very Waggoners put their thumbs between
their fingers, in contempt of his troops, which is as disgracious a thing in
Italy, both amongst themselves, and against strangers, as either the lie in
France, or Beco to the Gentleman of Venice, whereat he took such a conceit,
that he never returned into Italy or Germany again, howeuer some would impute
it unto his grief, for not prevailing against the Mahumetans: or devotion, as
desiring to give over the world, and not be entangled any further with
disaduantagious encombrances. And thus you see, why Germany cannot match our
example, especially as the Eagle flies now, with broken wings and bruized sides

CHAP. XII. ITALY compared.
SHall we venture over the Alps, and the gulf of Venice into Italy, and The
mangled prosperity of Italy.
search either the Appenine hills, the fields of Campania, the garden of the
world called Lombardy, the territories of Rome, or attractiue Naples, for an
instance of greatness and happiness, which may come near the example. I must
not now dispute, what it was in the flourishing times of Augustus and other
Emperors, sweetning contentment with the delicates of riches and pleasure, till
God sent strange and cruel Physicians to purge them for their surfeiting in
gormandize and wantonness, I mean the Goths and Vandalls: nor will take upon
me to presage what it might be, if some divine power would gather her plights
together, and make it one handsome and magnificent garment for a sole
sovereign: but show her, as she is now loose, unlaced, and has her ornaments
dilacerated, and even rent from her sides and shoulders. Alas, it is far worse
with them, then it was with the Israelites in the time of the Judges, when
every man did what he listed, and having no King (as if they had been
embracers of the Tanist law in Ireland) ran like sheep without a shepherd,
and through the presumption of their own forces, wrested the enheritance from
the true heirs. But more properly I may resemble them to the Anarchies of
Greece, who through emulation at one another greatness and credit in the
world, kept true prosperity indeed from a noble race and happy thriuing amongst
them. For as in civil wars, while diverse factions fight one by one, all are
in the end subdued; whereas if they did unite themselves with a stubborn
holding together, they might peradventure hazard and propulse the greatest
strength, and raised forces against them. So in the plenties of peace and
flourishes of happiness, the best portion divided into many parts will quickly
be spent, and a flowing river has not that bravery, when it is cut out into
small brooks, as in his own stream running in a deep and fashionable
channel. Again, as in noble families, when the manor houses, capital
messuages, and populous Lordships descend to one immediate heir, the dignity
and honor of the same, is more and more vpheld, whereas if they were divided
amongst many sons, the glory would soon be extinguished, and strength of
the first firmness rebated. So fares it with Italy, the very blessings
affoorded by nature are disioynted, and the dividing it into Principates, has
also divided her fortunes, and former credit of rauishing beauty. For in one
corner rules the Spanyard, at another end encrocheth the Sauoyan, on this side
the Venetian keeps all in awe, on that the Hetrurian Duke maintains a
jurisdiction, here the Church with the contraries of blessing and cursing
locketh up St. Peter's Patrimony, as the Pope himself in the castle of St.
Angelo, there many petty Princes are jealous of foreign trecheries, and
howeuer they do malign the common enemy, yet can they not agree amongst
themselves, but repine with an emulous hate against one another.

But would I could unite them together, and set up the walls of Rome, placing
her seven hills in such an order, that the city might boast of twenty mile
compass, and the government lift up a head, as in Daniels visions. Or that I
might in a year of Iubile settle you under the wings of the Angel on the top
of the palace, and show you the Consistory of Cardinals, the triumphs of a
Popes inauguration, his stately carrying on men's shoulders, his triple crown,
and such like ostentous and pompous ceremonies with all the glorious
celebrations of the other Princes, either at their own elections, or
entertainment of foreign Ambassadors, yet would all this come far short of
our example. For the very provision of Salomons palace would exhaust the
country, consume the commodities, and like a barren ground drinking up the
rain, devour the plenty of the land, and pull in pieces their best compacted
husbandry, of which we have had many instances in former times, when Italy
suffered diverse famines and want of corn: so that if Egypt had not been a
storehouse and garner of grain to let in a supplyment, as it were an unlooked
for way, the people had perished for lack of food, and the country been
wasted for want of husbandmen and tillage. Again, say they could drink in
vessels of gold (wherein yet I find them very sparing) and that they
determined to expose the glory of some ambitious triumph. Wherewith should
their cups ouerflow, considering their wines are not only small, but in such a
penury and scarcity, that if the women and children were not not prohibited, or
at least from the customs of modesty did not limit themselves, a stranger
should either drink water or nothing, and had not wherewithal to satisfy
their thirst. As for the Villano, he is glad of any water, and quenches his
heat from the muddy channells, which fall from the mountains of snow, and are
cleansed with much ado by the swift courses of Eridanus, which sends her
streams into the Adriatic sea, and makes a confederacy with other rivers for
the same purpose, though the places require stranger titles. Many other defects
have, and must bespot this countries face, and debar it from boasting of that
happiness, I would propose unto you. For though the Inne-keepers daughter go
in a satin gown, and that the bravery of their women is amplified from their
attire, as if the burs had golden kernels, and every corner were full of
silke-wormes; yet do they neither eat good meat, feed cleanely, nor meet
together with friendly neighbor-hood, or inuitation. As for civil government
and administration of Justice, every Province has a several method, and the
pride of one another liberty and power to defend a delinquent flying to them
for succor, raises a presumption of strange committing offenses, and
perpetrating horrible thefts, rapes and murders: so that whether they by
bandited, or no; when revenge or wicked instigation has set any man on work,
the Neapolitan flies unto Rome, the Roman to Florence, the Florentine to
Venice, the Venetian to Mantua, and so in all the rest. And for the more
peaceable Inhabitants, they sildome rejoice under a unity, and very sparingly
admit of any customs, tending to the smoothness of love and true contentment:
so that in a manner all the defects, which deforme the natural beauty of
Kingdoms, may be here looked upon with pitiful eyes, and much lamented with
passionate heart grief. As for those ostentous heaps of stone, which
transport the slight credulity of the ignorant, to believe that it surpasses
for cities, buildings, and outward magnificence, any country in Europe, when
you come to examine particulars, you shall find it only, as we deceive our
children, in sugring over a little course bread, made in the form of delicate
manchet on the outside. For what says Tacitus, cities are the men; government,
feeding; and obedience of people, subject to formal orders and handsome
ceremonies, and not houses or palaces made of lime and stone, unfurnished of
dwellers, void of hospitality, and jealous even of one another best
enclinations, when they are furnished at the best. So that besides all natural
imperfections: In Italy there is neither room in the house for thy servants,
nor litter for the cammels, especially out of their frequented high road ways,
as Rebecca promised the steward of Abraham's family: neither can you fetch the
well-fed veale from the droues to entertain the man of God with the Patriark,
dress fine venison with Esau for old Isaak, nor kill the fat calfe with the
good father, that welcomed home his penitent son, which makes me remember a
merry reason, by one of the same country, who being demanded why the muttons,
calves, and other cattle, were so few, small, and lean; replied very soberly,
because the Italians devoured the grass in sallets, and robbed the pastures to
deceive the poor cattle: but in truth the sun kisseth the ground with that
feruency, and the fields are so matted with dryness, that for the most part
the meadows are unbefitting to satisfy much store of cattle, nor can feed
oxen to any purpose. In another place, a Curtezan questioned with about the
conditions of men in her faculty, or if you will, concerning matters of
incontinency, touching the Italian (for all the worlds opinion of his
forwardness in that kind) she answered with a tush, Il Italiano pisciar
molto. Nor, if I would flatter them according to the ridiculous soothing of
Princes: could I of late days exemplefie any of their glorious exployts
abroad, or famous attempts at home, more then ruining one another, and making
of forts and fortifications, which sometimes proved like Perillus bull to the
inuentor, many times emboldned disobedience to rely on a wrong security, and
at all times raised up greater distrust and foul suspicions, even in their
best cities and governments, as you see, how Naples and Millane is curbed, and
the brave liberty of the Gentlemen, strangely fettered from the terror of
Citadels, of which the Spanyard himself is yet transferred with an imaginary
conceit, that soldiers may be corrupted, and no place is so impregnable: but
thendeauours and policy of men can subject to the fortune of alteration.

But let us search a little into their best flourishing fields, for all Naples
has a story of it self, and boasts of famous Diverse particulars concerning
Italies glory and disreputation.
Kings, and certain Queens the Viragoes of their time and Mirrors of Europe.
For all the Romans have had the advancing of Trophes to the honor of the
modern Columni, Caesarij, and many worthy families from the Guelphi Gibellini,
diverse from Florence, Ferrara, Vrbine, and some others. For all the Venetians
expose to open view the Statues of Gatto Malato at the Santo in Padoa, of
Bartholomeo Coloneo a Venetian General at Saint John and Paul in their City;
the memorable battle of Lepanto against the Turk; the donation of the
kingdom of Cyprus by the Queen, who was once a Deuotresse in their
Monasteries; the attempt against Millane, and expelling both French and
Spaniard in those days; the entertaining of Francis the third King of France,
and Poland, in despite of foreign threatenings, searches, pursuit, and the
Popes displeasure; and the last ouerdaring contesting with the Pope in matters
appertaining to their State and government. For all Florence swelled up to this
height of riches, and bravery, from the plentiful spring of a noble Medices,
and famous actions of a politic man. For all an heroike Gonzaga advanced his
Marquisate to a Duchy, as a worthy recompense of his warlike endeauours. For
all the Dukedom of Millane was incorporated into the house of Sforza a devised
name for his valor and martial proceedings; with diverse others of this kind:
yet alas you see, what is now become of Naples, and the noble man repines at
his lost liberty, nor can he be satisfied, for all he may flutter in a golden
cage, and ride through the streets in a velvet Carosse; yet you see that Rome
has been sacked, and almost trampled under feet even of late days,
insomuch, that when the Duke of Burbon entered for Charles the 5. no worthy
Roman durst show his head, and the other principates of Italy were afraid of
pulling down such a house, whose dust must needs fall into their eyes, and
smoakie rubbish stifle their breath; yet you see, how pitifully Ferrara and
Vrbine have lost their reputation of courtshippe, and offered their coronets on
the altar of a Clergy man's usurpation: yet you see, how Florence lives now,
and for all the style of Magnus dux Hertruriae, thinks of nothing but
amassing of treasure from mechanicke drudgery, and corrupted avarice: yet you
see, that Rhodes is lost, and the miraculous Colossus beaten to powder, that
diverse discomfitures have made Venice sweat in the midst of her cold bathe the
sea; that Cyprus was pulled from her sides by violence, when but a little more
strength and providence would have kept it secure, and so warm, that no
boisterous arm of Turks should have uncovered her to the catching of cold;
that they have been since enforced to contriue a treatice of pacification with
the Gran Signeur, and in truth been subject to many indignities, which a man
would not imagine so rich and politic a government could endure: but alas the
Duke is but an vnsignificant voice. For the sword is carried before the Gran
Concilij, who take order, that he neither live profusely in his expenses, nor
have any daring confidence to practice any thing prejudicial to their
government: yet you see, Mantua is now at quiet, and dare not entermeddle with
any warlike troubles, or martial affairs, except he have the cunning to
discover the advantage of a prevailing party, and the fortune to rank himself
in the strongest squadrons: yet you see, how Millane mournes like a captive,
and for all her 300. Carosses, and 500. foot-cloths, dare not lift up a
countenance suitable to their hearts, nor a hand to pull the ramparts of the
Citadle to the ground, when their wishes would feign see all thrown into the
sea. And so in diverse others of this kind.

As for the general reputation of Italy, which it has gotten by Merchants, it
is abused in the metonimia. For their silks and veluets, their merchandise and
wares, that all Europe and Turkey welcome them into their harbors and ports,
but with such errors, ouersights, and peradventure difficulties, that they
neither make use of navigations out of their middle sea and Arches: nor have any
good Saylours and Soldiers amongst them: nor will adventure as worthy men
indeed for their countries honor, nor can perform any voyage with true
judgment and expedition. For the least affrighting news of a Pirat, shall
detain them three months in harbor, and an unexpected storm drive them into
every Port and Island. Thus have I my self been witness, that an Englishman
has left two great Italian ships in the town of Xant, for fear of Ward,
supposed to houer about Sapientia an Island adjoining, being bound for
Scanderon, and sailed to Cyprus, vnladed, dispatched, and returned back
again, ere they were on their journey. Nay, thus have I known them fourteen
weeks between Constantinople and Venice, which an Englishman with a
prosperous wind has dispatched in fourteen days, although I imagine it 1700.
English mile, and in less then six weeks almost with any wind. So that
Venice it self boasting of the bravery of three hundred galleys, eight or ten
galleasses, and thirty ships for merchants, neither has sufficient men to man
twenty, nor can without time and great expenses fill up the room of that
inuentory without Greeks, who are their cheifest Saylors, and condemned
slaves, whom they spare from a death at the gallows, which must needs release
them from worldly troubles, to a living misery in the galleys, wherein to
breath in continual horror is worse then twenty deaths indeed. Thus could I
tire you with distasting particulars against the reputation of Italy: but I
mean not to ouerlooke them with any maleuolent aspect, or disparage them, to
bring my speeches within compass of defamation: but only keep my example in
practice, and conclude, that it wants many things (with Germany) to make it
proportionable with Salomons greatness, and Canaans goodness.

CHAP. XIII. SPAIN compared.
SHall we then go into Spain, where Spain wants many things to come near
our example.
the Grandes of the Kings court have golden keys of his chamber, and are
privileged by patent, to stand with covered heads before his Majesty: where
the Exchequer is full of gold from India, and the Treasurers bring in account
of 100000. soldiers in garrison and active employment, yearly paid and orderly
supplied: where the Nobleman insulteth for his Gothish blood, and will prove
a true Castilian, more ancient in gentry then the race of Othoman, and every
one, though he be but a maker of Chappinoes, wears his rapier point-blancke,
as you call it, looking as high (though not altogether so big) after an olive
an a little ruske, as a Germane, that eats and drinks more at a meal, then a
Spanyard does in a week: where so many Kingdoms are united, as you see the
seven stars in the firmament make a more perspicuous show then single planets
in their sequestered spheres: where they can without boasting, I will not say
vainglory, relate diverse histories of voyages at sea, discoueries of
Countries, plantation of Colonies, conquest of both Indies, usurpation of many
Principates, running armies, and diverse other glorious exploits: howeuer the
rest of Europe have resembled them to prying and raging wolves over silly
sheep, either with a covetous mind of intrusion, or tyrannous desire of
devouring. Shall we I say go thither, and look out a match for our example;
me thinks I am answered of every man that wears a light hat, great ruff, and
full pair of hose. If Spain do not equal him, who can do it? I am not yet
prepared for such a satisfaction, but will presume to shut Spain out of doors,
from entering into the privy chamber of one example, for all his India supply,
the only tumor of his greatness, which did not Apollo pardon the fault, would
prove but the wish of Midas, who with his golden fortunes wanted the use of
natures benefits, and could neither eat nor drink without choking. But to
particulars.

If Spain be the richest Kingdom of Europe, and that some of them boasted,
when time was, in ouerlooking the beautifullest work in the world, I mean the
Chapel at Westminster, that their King was able to make such another of
silver: where is Salomons gold amongst them, or Ierusalems plenty? when silver
had no better reputation then stones, and every man in Judea was rich indeed,
without abusing others, or others repining against them: where is their care to
store the country, which questionless money would do, from other exuberant
provinces, though nature had denied them orderly provision? How came the
Malec^ntents in Flanders and Brabant, to threaten the principal cities for
want of their salary? who incited the Garrisons of Antwerp, Gaunt, and even
Brussels it self, with diverse other towns, to mutiny? who distasted sundry
times the whole armies upon their marches and employments? who advised the
Treasurers to be so slack in discharging of Liberanca's and other souldierlike
pensions? who does every year thrust the Garrisons into penury and scarsity,
insomuch that not only in the Low Countries, but even in his government of
Millane, Naples, and Sicilia, the soldier wants, and many times is compelled
to remit one half, to purse up the other: Is not all this either for want of
treasure (the opinion whereof has made his pride swell uncontrollable) or
orderly distribution? the spring from whence the fluent plenty of Solomon had
increase. Be not therefore affrighted at this monster opinion, nor seduced with
the vanity of report. For put the best Hispaniolized English man to the
skirmish of understanding the truth, and the wealth of Spain shall prove but
false fires, if you be so near to discover their disbursements, and infinite
occasions to dispend their treasure: but if you should adventure to lay their
pieces to the light with Salomons cloth, by way of comparison, good God, how
course, how cockeld, how short, how shrinking, how faulty, and indeed
ridiculous would all appear? And thus much for their wealth. Now to the rest.

What has Spain worthy commendation, much less any prerogative of
happiness? why, Canaan flowed with milk and honey, yielding such blessings of
increase, that the King not only had his great store of provision without
repining: but Israel, as the sand of the sea, eat, drank, and made merry, and
can this be done in Spain? The burnt hills and desert places will quickly
answer the argument; the countryman hides his garlike and onions, as ashamed
of his diet; the Citizen powders his fish, and buys cheese of the Dutchman;
the Gentleman is limited what he shall eat, and how much he may carry home to
his family; the Court has much ado to be supplied, and many concussions are
practiced from the Kings prerogative, to furnish the offices with reasonable
allowance, and the whole Kingdom is sometimes affrayd to want bread; whereupon
certain agents are employed, even in remote countries, to bring in both corn
and victual, tempting both them and our selves with gold and ready payment of
money: for which purpose only is a prouiso in their acts of Parliament,
concerning exportation of coin, of which in truth though they have great cause
to boast, yet are they tied to so many inconueniencies for other wants, that in
their best cities is neither good fare, nor good lodging, nor any thing worthy
the name of a blessing. As for their silly praising of sallets, fruits, and
herbs: I remember Sr. Roger Williams answer to an idle Spanyard, boasting of
his countries citrons, orenges, olives, and such like: I, but (said he) in
England we have dainty veale, and well fed capons to eat with this sauce, and
many delicate dishes worthy the name of sustenance indeed. For God made the
beasts of the earth to live on the grass and fruits of the same; but man to
live upon them, and command all. So that Adams wisdom gave them titles, and
his superioriry prescribed subjection: but how? for man's use, man's delight,
man's necessity, man's conversation, man's triumph. Thus does oil make a
cheerful countenance, wine a gladsome heart, bread a strong body, and flesh a
fullness of blood: thus was Salomons palace and tables furnished, and David
praised God for infinite blessings: thus were odours and incense provided, and
the love of brethren compared to the deaw and balsome of Hermon, or the costly
ointment on Arons vestures: thus in Peter's vision he might kill and eat, and
the Savior of the world lived amongst Publicans, feasted at marriages, and
allowed of honest conversation: and thus had Canaan neighbourly meetings,
banquets of triumphs, and times of public and private celebrations. But in
Spain no such matter; they neither dare, nor can bid you welcome. For far
worse then in Italy, idle jealousy, filthy malice, fear of expenses, arrogant
menaces, wicked suspicion, and such like, will debar you from the pleasure of
inuitation, from the freedom of entercourses, and cannot savor the noble
liberty of mutual amity. Canaan had the temple furnished as God commanded, the
Priest obedient to the King, the Prophets in estimation, and the feasts of the
Leuiticall Law orderly celebrated. Spain is polluted with Paganism, and
invented that cruel office of Inquisition to punish the Moors, or such as
adhered to their superstition, is ouerawed by the Clergy, and is so terrified
with the thundering voice of excommunication, that he durst not but put his own
son to death, to please the Pope. Canaan was a receptacle for strangers,
loved princely solemnities, and could not endure neither beggar, nor whore of
their own nation. Spain hates all men, or at least vilipends them in respect
of themselves, commits them to fire and sword, that exclaim against their
stews and profanation, and cannot order many solemn festiuals, except at a
Kings inauguration, a Princes marriage, or a Cardinals iollity: where yet an
Italian invention shall fill a table with painted trenchers and dishes of
China: but a hungry belly may cry for meat, and not be satisfied.

Canaan had cities of refuge, cities of store, cities of strength, cities for
horses, and the Kings magnificence, to all which the highways were
convenient, and men passed to and fro without danger, or want. In Spain you
must have a Guide, yea sometimes a guard, and are so far from expecting
relief after your days endurance, that if you have not a borracho before your
saddle, and commodious provision on an Ass or Moile hired for the same
purpose, you may go supperlesse to bed, and peradventure have no other bed,
but a Stramezza, or some stinking tike filled with sedge, and shalings of
hemp. Canaan Beautiful wom^n.
had beautiful women; Abraham and Isaac were afraid of their wives, least the
Abimileckes might be enamored on their beauty: Dina was full of favor, and her
rauishment revenged in blood. Jacob served 14. years for his wives, and Rahel
was a woman of great comeliness: Ruth no doubt pleased Boaz, and the times
afforded delicate creatures, Bersabe, Abigaile, and Abisack are commended for
their beauty: Thamar was at first pleasing to Ammon, and her love molested the
young Prince: Ester and Judith were Mirrors of their time, the one pleased the
Monarch of the world, the other overcame with a double victory the great
Captain of Assiria: Susanna's beauty enflamed the Judges, and the dotards fell
into the pit of burning wantonness: Herodias was so attractiue, that she
might have commanded half a kingdom: the Queen Berenice allured Titus, and
he neglected his greatest affairs for her sake, and so in thousand other
relations, besides the general applause afforded the meaner sort, whereby the
very heathen confessed the happiness of Judea in this kind, and added
blessing to blessing, when they understood their worth, virtue, and
commendation. But Spaiue must mourn for strange disparity this way, and either
lament that the whore of Babylon has poisoned her Countries with the dregs
of abomination, or complain, that the women are painted like the images of the
groves, and sit in the highway, as Thamar when she went to deceive Judah. For
if they be honest, they are for the most part unpleasing, and swartisb: if
Curtezans, dangerous and impudent: so that for these and many other
insufficiencies I dare be bold to say, that as yet Solomon must sit
vnparralel'd, and Spain can in no sort come near the Country of Canaan, as
it was in the time of his prosperity, and administration.

CHAP. XIV. FRANCE compared with a discovery of her defects.
But what think you of France? says As the blessings of France are abused, it
cannot equal our comparison.
some judicious Traveler, is not your iourny now almost at an end, and will
not your searches be satisfied with the goodliest Kingdom of the world? The
answer shall not be a peremptory contradiction, nor derogate from the merit of
the least worth, or virtue: yet are they traduced for many defects, and I
believe will fall under our example; howsoever, I am sure, it dares not abide
the touch in the trial. For setting the wisdom of Solomon aside, whereof
France could seldom make ostentation, the Queen of Saba commended the
obedience of the Princes, the sitting of his servants, the ordering of the
palace, the furnishing of the tables, the provision for the household, and the
glory of his throne: not so much for outward majesty of the structure, and
princely magnificense in his attendants, as the advised care over his subjects,
and impartial determining of controversies. In France the Princes contest
with the King, the Clergy affront the Princes, the Gentrey murmr against the
Clergy, the Pages mock the Gentlemen, the Citizens complain of the Pages,
and all sorts of people are proud of nothing, but slouenlines familiarity, and
disorder; so that with much ado the Mechanical man stands bare to the King;
and the Nobles sit at meat, as Carriers in an hostery without any reverence,
with unmannerly noise, with impudent snatching the dishes from the table by the
Seruitors, and confused trouble of comers and goers: whereby a vild custom
having got the upper hand, the majesty of the Court and Kingdom is much
depressed, which otherwise redacted to an uniformity might indeed augment the
glory of Europe.

The Kingdom of IVDEA and government of CANAAN, as soon as ever obedience had
set in a foot amongst them, admired the wisdom of their women, as well as
admitted the policy of the men; and in no sort debarred the daughters, neither
from the princely throne, nor fathers inheritances, when the sons were
extinct, and the line failed in the males, which all men know, whose
consciences are opened with the key of understanding Gods truth. For the
daughters of Zelophaad came before Joshua, and had their portion with the rest
of the Tribes: But in France the Law salicke debarreth the woman from her
lawful inheritance, out of a wilful position, that the Flower-deluce may not
go to the distaffe, The law salicke in France against the law of ^od and
nations.
which I wonder at the rather, because we have such forcible instances both in
Scripture, and many other worthy Nations to the contrary. For to enlarge our
protasis a little: In the swelling fullness of the greatest and longest lasting
Monarchy of the world, I mean the Assyrians, S^iramis reigned sole Empress
above 20. years. When the Persians began to shrink in their estimation, the
Kingdoms of Saca, Sogdiana, and Bactriana were subject to Tamira, and
Tolmilanda two famous Queens. The barbarous Scithians admitted of Tomiris for
their Sovereign, and how she conquered Cyrus, a worthy Historiographer has
enlarged. In Canaan Debora judged Israel, and Athalia was Queen of Jerusalem.
When Solomon had advanced both the Temple and Palace, Saba came as Empress of
Aethiopia unto him, and in the time of the Apostles Candauce governed the same
Country. When Caesar presaged his own fortunes Cleopatra was sole Queen of
Egypt: and some write that Dido ouer-ruled Carthage and Afric. In Bohemia
even of late days Libussa and Velasca obtained the Diadem, and when they
supposed themselves seated in firmness, they gathered a company of Ladies,
and upon a light credulity, that the story of the Amazons was to be believed,
would have erected such a foolish Commonwealth. Amongst our selves before the
conquest we had a Gueudoline Queen of Britain, a Cordelia Vaodicea, and some
other; and since two Daughters of HENRY the 8. Amongst whom ELIZABETH was such
a Prince, that forrane report has established her for the Miracle of all ages,
howeuer some of our selves have been too sparing in her admiration, and
enlarging her greatness. In Italy we remember two Queens of Naples, who have
done such actions in the world, that they will be remembered in despite of
oblivion. In Hungary the history of diverse Queens has startled even men of
resolution to be ashamed of their pusillanimity, and incited diverse heroike
persons to worthy imitation. I might name the Queen of Cyprus taken out of the
Monastery at Venice, and so invested with the Diadem, which at last she laid
prostrate before the feet of the Senate, and they protected the same, till a
stronger arm wrested it out of their tuition. Whereby I cannot but wonder,
that neither example, nor precept can prevail with them, considering in all
kingdoms, with all sexes, and at all times such inhibitions to debar the
right of kingdoms from the true and indubitate successors did not pass
without the scandal of intrusion, tyranny, and wrong. Besides, according to
the Satyr, Dum vitant stulti vitia in contraria currunt.
from an inconvenience (as they suppose) they have fallen into a mischief, and
if I would use it by way of personating, whereas in submitting to divine
appointment in such cases, they might please both God and man, in ouer-ruling
the truth, they have made their preposterous dealing ridiculous to all the
world. For howeuer they deny their own natural daughters this prerogative, by
a contrary fashion they admit of stranger women to be more imperious over
them: as by the two late Queen mother Regents, and both Italians of the house
of Medices, is made apparent by lamentable experience: what the one contrived,
and how like a firebrand she had like to have set all France on a blase; the
History is pregnant, and the Legend of the Cardinal of Loraine composed by
that true hearted Frenchman Francis de Lisle a man of honor, is most apparent;
and how the other is suspected is now no news: But to the rest.

Solomon made diverse nauies, went in person to view his ships, had great
custom from his Merchants, loved and maintained good Mariners and pilots,
contracted leagues with foreign Princes, making the confirmation of them
honorable, and performed all good offices, that tended to the expatiating his
glory. France wants shipping, is careless of navigations, raises few
Saylors, seldom attempteth voiages, or discoueries, and has many times
incurred the imputation of perfidious breach of faith, under that diabolical
position, fides non est conseruanda cum Haereticis: as also that jesuitical
doctrine of equivocation: witness their horrible massacres, the imprisoning
the Princes of the blood, their tragical war, the inhumane murder of the
Admiral, the Guisian pride, and the terror Francis the third was put into,
when he was put into the Lovure. Solomon had that good order and obedience in
his towns and cities, that he knew his cities of store, his cities of
traphique, his cities of fortification, his cities of refuge, and his cities of
composition. But in France both cities and towns with their inhabitants, and
Merchants are unfashionable, sluttish, dangerous, rebellious, and the people
neither of wealth, nor eminence: In Paris they dare talk of a Kings
wantonness, entermeddle with tractates of Parliament, and State, call any
Prince Hugonet, that only says the Nostre Dame is but a dark melancholy
Church, and justify very monstrous and abusiue actions: Besides, to tell of
their inconstant and refractary dispositions, would be too tedious, and sooner
discover their loathsome treasons, then prevent the customary, and mischeeuous
practices of the people.

The peace of Solomon caused plenty, and that spread it self over all Israel
like a shady tree, which as a double shelter kept back the cold of winter, and
tempered the burning heat of summer: so that it is apparent with the Kings
magnificense at Court, the husbandmans peace and wealth in the Country was
enlarged, whereupon most of them were Berzalites and would go no further, then
over Jordan with David, but rerurne to their own household, sit under their
own figg-trees, and be gathered together into the graves of their ancestors.
But France knows not now what to say: For the Court is a mere mapp of
confusion, and exposes many actions more ridiculous then worthy imitation: as
for the Countryman, he is called a Pesant, disparaged in his drudgery and
servile toylsomnesse, lives poor and beastly, is treacherous at advantage,
and yet afraid of his own shadow, and cannot free the vineyards from thieves
and destroyers: yea, all the country swarmeth with rogues and vagabonds, whose
desperate wants drive them to perpetrate many horrible murders, although for
the most part the Prouosts of every division are very diligent. The wisdom of
Solomon settled his cities, that strangers were admitted at all times, except in
frontire towns, which peradventure were guarded in the night, according to
martial discipline, provided that the passages were easy and secure, admitted
of all complainants, and leuiated their greeuances, advanced himself on a
golden throne to entertain matters of Justice, allowed of the Prophets, who
yet out of zeal cried out against the abuses of the Temple and Palace, and
commanded the subject, first to remember his duty to God; then his obedience to
the Prince; and last of all, his love to his neighbor: and this he performed
by admonitory preceps to enstruct the ignorant, and princely indignation to
punish the obstinate. France refers all to Parliaments and Presidents,
excludes the reformed Churches out of the walls of the cities, has the name
of Prophet in derision, suffered the Jesuits to murder two famous Princes,
permits them still a Sanctuary, and from worldly policy excludes true
religion out of doors. In France the passages are toylesome and disordered,
dangerous for extraordinary robberies, and under officers shuffle up diverse
times most notorious abuses. To conclude, in France many particulars choke the
breath of happiness, from giving life to a glorious Kingdom indeed, if the
reciprocal duties between Prince and subject were but easily extended: so
that with these defects I cannot choose but exempt her from sitting on any hand
of Salomons throne. Whither shall we then go to match our example? or at
least to come so near, that a civil censurer will neither flatter nor
detract: you know my first purpose, and I now determine to lead you into the
sweet and orderly fields of England.

CHAP. XV. ENGLAND compared, with the probable reasons, why she is nearer the
example of CANAANS happiness, then any other nation.
WIthout preface or circumloquution, you shall find the Kingdom of England in
The glory of England both abroad and at home.
geographicall dimension equal to the country of Canaan, and the people
praising of God, in regard of their great and extraordinary blessings. For
begin where you will, we shall come so near the comparison, as a close order
in ranging a battalion. Concerning the general view of the same, did you ever
hear or read of any so well divided into shires and hundreds, with Lords,
Lieutenants, Sheriffs, Justices, and other inferior officers: insomuch, that
it has laid an imposition on the endeauours of a principal scholar, and he
(according to the secret of satisfaction) has most worthily unclasped the
records of antiquity, and with such sufficient ampliation, that our adversaries
have been silent in excepting against it. But to my first purpose: I say, that
to match all the particulars, wherewith I have stored Salomons magnificence and
the countries prosperity, there is not at this hour any Kingdom in the world,
so ready, apt, or worthy to take him by the hand, to pace out the measures of
true glory and happiness, as the Kingdom of England.

Concerning our glory abroad, what worthy voyages have we made? I hope no
people or nation ever equalled us, witness Sr. John Mandeuill into India by
land; Stafford over Europe, much about the same time; Ienkinson, Willoughby,
Borogh, and many others into Russia and Muscouia; Forbisher and Hawkins to
discover the northern passages: the Fenners, Ralph Lane, John Clarke, and
diverse into America; another voyage, where of Sr. Walter Raleigh was the
proposer; our settling in Virginia; our traffic to the West Indies, Brasill,
Peru, Caribana, and Guiana; Captain Drake round about the world, twice or
thrice; Thomas Candish the like, our travels to the East Indies, or
Philippines; the Earl of Cumberlands worthy voyages, and amongst others, that
to Santo Port-Ricco; the Portugal voyage; Cales voyage; the Island voyage, and
sundry others; as in Master Hackluits book about this subject only. Besides
modern travelers, both of Noblemen and Gentlemen, although every man is not
a free Denizon of prosperities Kingdom, nor can boast of natures bounty in the
gifts of understanding, or fortunes liberality in disposing her treasures. If
you would see how our merchants are bestowed, look into all the Ports of the
world, you shall find them settled, and our shipping in harbor? If you could
view all the countries of the earth, where men dare or can come, we are nobly
dispersed, and I believe might be pulled out of the center of the same, if such
a passage did ever excite man to explore for secrets, merchandise, or wealth.
If you were admitted into the remotest palaces of Emperors and Kings; yea
Tartary it self, Englishmen would salute you, and speak your own language:
and if you have a purpose to affright idleness with any enterprise in the
world, especially to make them believe, that the hand of profit will fill their
laps with plenty, Englishmen dare set endeauours on their best feet, and can
tell how to tumble all blocks and hindrances aside, which may either terrefie
them from such enterprises, or detain them from the glory of the actions: only
here lies a secret of traducing them, that a supposition of the wants of
others, or fear of cumbersomnesse, when they meet with an indigent
countryman abroad, has debarred free conversation, and does make the mutual
supplying the necessity of strangers, a harsh-kinde of welcome; yea, an
absolute leaving them to misery, if they have not bills of exchange or letters
of credit, to ouerbeare mischances.

But our glory abroad is truly expatiated, when you shall know how helpefull
we have been to other nations, both with purse and forces; yea, contrary to
the opinion of the world, concerning our penury, opened the enclosures of
riches, and hononrably supplied the defects of other Kingdoms. We have made
peace between Denmark and Sweden, and pacified those troubles long ago. We
have relieved the Estates of Holland with men, money, and munition,
underpropping them, as if a man should vndershore a ruinous wall, until the
foundation were repaired. We have assisted the Protestant Princes of of France
in their first civil wars, and been auxiliary to many noble houses of
Germany, we settled the last King in his greatness, and lifted him up to that
honor, that none of his Predecessors had their crowns shining with such a
luster. We played the Physician with Geneua, and administered her such an
antidote, that no aconite of Pope or Sauoy could envenom her to death, or
contriue her destruction. We brought the distressed Prince Antonio to knock at
the gates of Lisbone, and had he not found a fatal vicissitude of times and
occasions; yea, the minds of inconstant men corrupted with by-respects, and
private following the stronger side, we might questionless have prevailed in
the project, and upon the least filling the sails of our expectation with the
wind of home assistance, brought recovery to receive the fullness of life. We
have made Spain weary of the wars, and at last desire a peace, which I would
be loath to resemble to still waters, wherein are the deepest gulphs and most
dangerous places to adventure. We returned the Polish Ambassador, with
admiration at our Princes greatness and magnanimity. We have settled the good
opinion of the Muscouite. We have emboldned the Venetians in their last
dissentions against the Pope. We have accorded the Archduke, who not only
admits us into entertainment, but gives way unto such, as yet maintain the
cause of the contrary. We have welcomed the Prince of Moldauia, and as far as
policy or charity could go, brought him along into the fair fields of
expectation to regaine his enheritance. We have lately ouerlooked the fields of
Sweden and Russia; yea, thought it befitting to send a martial supply into
Denmarck, and howeuer the Polander repine, must in the end (I believe)
determine those controversies. To conclude, (though it shall be no cause of
ostentation) we have prospered in so many glorious thriuings, that the
Spanyard in his profanation has sworn JESUS CHRIST to become a Lutheran, and
railed on report, for filling the world with the sound of so many memorable
actions.

Concerning our glory at home, lay abroad our example The glory of England at
home.
and spare not, and mark the emptiest place, which we will not fill up with
comparison. First, the best manner of government from Gods own mouth, which is
monarchal; and philosophical principles, which is a King; and moral
enstructions, which is a distributer of Justice; and peoples desires, which is
an honorable preserver of Commonwealths: all united in one person, from a
continual descent of princely ancestors, gaining the love and obedience of
many nations, by excelling induments of nature, as wisdom, learning, judgment,
peaceable desires, honorable liberality, magnanimity, and such like. And did it
please him to add some glorious repairing, or rather magnificent quadrant, to
his palace at White Hall, being the principal place of entertainment, and the
eye to ouerlooke such a city, as is not in the world, it would come near our
example indeed. For the Kings house in Jerusalem was thirteen year a
building, and no one thing adds more honor to a nation, then regardable
edifices, and eminent works of Majesty, being the very fruit of peace, and (as
it were) the birthright of prosperity, whether it bring forth sumptuous
structures or adorning monuments. And (if it were not a pride and elation of
heart to number the people, look how many nations and languages are under
subjection: namely English, Scottish, Irish, Welsh, Cornish, Ments, Ilanders
both Hebrides and Orchades, and the French of Gersy and Iersy: so that if the
honor of a King consists in the multitude of his subjects, what Prince has
more, and such variety? If you look on his palaces, where are so many, and so
good, belonging to any Kingdom in the world? If you will behold his court; I
hope for state, good order, expenses, entertainment, and continual attendancy,
other places come far short? If you will view his shipping and nauies, I am
sure you pass away with astonishment, when you are enstructed in the secrets
of their service and strength? If you will behold his armours and munition,
they exceed report, and the Arsenalls of other countries have neither such
equipage nor sufficiency; but when you shall find every Nobleman and
Gentle-mans house so well furnished, every Hall and Company so well provided,
every Shire so willing to continue their preparation, every Master so
cheerful in storing himself, and every man so ready to give ear to any
martial summons, and prepare with joy to attend the service; you must needs
return, not loving us with fear and trembling, but affecting us with triumph
and well wishes, for our prevailing against the proudest adversary? If you will
number us at sea, I know there is not so many good Mariners and Saylours in
Europe, excepting the Low Countries. If you will muster us at land, who can
show such companies of foot? such troops of horse? so many worthy seruitours?
and so well appointed? Insomuch that I know diverse Gentlemen of England, who
can conduct 3000. men into the field (in their King and Countries name) of
their own tenants, servants, and friends. If you will examine our Nobility, I
confess they do not boast of factious greatness, as in France, and the
Princes of Germany: but their number, noble disposition, and willingness to be
obedient, may pass in the best items of Fames account. If you would see our
Counselors, prepare a reverence, and settle your estimation toward them for
their orderly life, probity of manners, integrity in deciding controversies,
and affability in admitting suitors: and though you come from the Grandes of
Spain, the Principalities of Italy, the Electors of Germany, the Dukes of
France, and the States of other Countries, yea, the ostentous pomp of
Cardinals: yet be not too preiudicate, nor transported with selfe-conceited
wilfulnes; for you shall see as great bravery, retinue, and observation amongst
us, as any subjects in the world dare challenge or put in practice, for outward
glorious ostentation: nay more, the order of our Garter, and the ceremonies of
enstalling, are continued with that triumph and majesty, that no one
celebration of petty Princes dare lift up a countenance of such iollity and
regardable honor. And if you will behold the other Courtiers, they are
generally so many, so handsome, so serviceable, and of their own retinues so
well provided, that I protest they so far exceed other places, both for
graceful shows and sufficient estates, that I wonder, how such a corner of
the world should have such a general confluence of all happiness and
courtship, as if a raised wind should beat the swelling sea of prosperity to
one shore.

But if you will be ravished indeed, or transported with the love of the
world, come and behold the beauty of our Ladies, and the disposing them at a
night of solemnity, to which if you add the general contentment, which our
English women afford generally, without sophisticate and adulterate additions,
either to comeliness or favor, there is no man can hold his peace, but
proclaim our preeminence. Again, if you would see Justice proud of her
entertainment, and how she presents both praemium and poena to the several
attendants on her throne of equity; look into our Star Chamber, and view the
Sun in most perspicuous splendor, without so much as the least clowdy
respect of persons. If you will enter our Gentle-mens houses, I hope, there is
no such cupbords of plate, beds of of velvet and embroidery, hangings of
tapistry, variety of rooms, duty of servants, order of housekeeping, store of
pastime, and all that man can desire in any country in the world. If you will
search our cities and towns, what they want in outward deceit of formality
(and yet I cannot so extenuate our buildings) is supplied in sweetness and
delicacy, and within door surpasses the best of them for wealth and
furniture. As for expenses, I am sure some Citizens of London are at more
annual charge of diet, then the Dukes of Venice, Florence, or Genoa, for their
own palaces. If you will examine our merchants, howeuer some great Foulker or
agent for a whole Kingdom, in Genoa, Antwerp, Brussels, or other cities may
surpass us for usury, venting commodities, or supposition of wealth: yet I am
sure, there died not two such in one year, out of one town in the world, as
Spencer and Sutton. As for the rest, they surpass for curious fare,
stateliness, following their pleasures, handsome education, comely
entertainment, and orderly contribution, Besides, they live at home in ease,
purchase land with security, bring up their children in daintiness, maintain
their families in obedience, and cannot be matched by any foreign opposition.
Would you be acquainted with the Tradesman, Artezan, and others of mannuall
occupation, look how he lives, look how he fares, look where he dwells,
look what he wears, look whether he goes to buy his meat, to such markets
and shambles, that the very sight astonisheth all strangers, and once made
acquainted with their variety and goodness, they are amazed at our blessings,
and wonder, how so much provision can be orderly devoured. Would you be
refreshed with the pleasant country air; our Yeoman and Husbandman lives in
such delight and sweetness of situation, that you may repine at his health and
prosperity: but if you consider in what comeliness and decency, in what peace
and tranquillity, in what neatnes and hospitality, in what wealth and good
condition; you will fall to praising of God, for imparting his blessings to our
nation, and wishing the like to your own deficient country in this kind: For
believe it (as you shall hear hereafter) whether he be Purchaser or Farmer,
our enemies have repined at our prerogatives in this kind, and our friends
embtaced our noble customs with desire of imitation. I could add many things
to the ampliation of our glory, as our havens and harbors, especially in
Ireland, our rivers, high ways, secure traveling, universities, castles,
bathes, mines, and honorable orders of watchings, trainings, and musters: but I
refer them to their due places, when I shall prove our excellency and
transcending prerogatives beyond other nations. And thus much for our glory.

CHAP. XVI. Wherein the happiness of ENGLAND is both perspicuous and
commendable.
COncerning the happiness of a nation, what The happiness of our country.
Kingdom has more commodities within it self, wants less, or is better
furnished from foreign parts? so that whether for profits sake, the strangers
of other countries make sale of their best things, or that there is a secret in
transportation, or that custom or cunning has taught our merchants, even
curiosity it self, in selecting the choycest things, I know not, but am sure
our England is the shop of the world, and London the Magazin of natures
dainties. But to particulars; if it be a blessing for every man to eat under
his own roof, to sit with the pleasure of conversation in his orchard or
garden, to enjoy the fruits of the earth with plenty, to live in neighbourly
gratuities: and in a manner our doors open all night, to have many children,
servants, and store of cattle, to purchase great estates, marry our daughters
beyond expectation, and strengthen one another in worthy families and
prevailing affinity: look amongst us, and tell me where is the like? If it be
a blessing not to be suppressed with superiors, not to have the Commonwealth
rent in pieces with tyranny, not to see others enjoy the fruits of our
labors, not to be tormented with intrusion, usurpation, or malicions looks of
ouer-couetous Landlords: look amongst us, and demand who can complain, or at
least, who is so wronged, but he may have satifaction or redress. If it be a
blessing to enjoy the preaching of the Gospel, to be free from corrupting and
absurd ceremonies, to rejoice in the liberty of upright consciences, to
continue in a true, perfect, and established religion (as heereaster shall be
more amply explained) to abound with reverend learned men, to have liberal
access, and dispute of our faith with moderate persuading and dissuading, and
to have all controversies tried upon the touchstone of Gods truth; come and
hear us, and tell me wherein you are unsatisfied. If it be a blessing to have
sociable conversation, and yet with honorable respect to continue the freedom
of neighbourly meetings, exempted from this intolerable yoke of jealousy and
suspicion, to love one another with those comfortable conditions of charity, to
seast without scandal, to entertain without repining, and to be merry without
lasciviousness? Examine the disposition of us all generally, and setting men's
imperfections aside, which follow life, as the shadow the sun, and tell me
where is less offense in so great fullness offelicity. If it be a blessing to
make the best use of natures blessings, to be rather helpful, then indigent of
others help, to be at peace with all the Kingdoms of the world, to have
confining Princes gratefie us by Embasie, to have the greatest Monarchs allied,
or desiring our alliance, to welcome all comers with a noble and correspondent
inuitation, and to thrive every day more and more in the propagation of our
worth, Take up the example, put us to the trial, and see whether I speak
vaine-gloriously. To conclude with the best of all blessings, if it be a
blessing to live in expectation of a royal succession, to be confident of
hopeful Princes, to have adjoining countries study our observation, to see our
own country and people flourish with all abundance, and to suspect nothing but
the corruptions of greatness, through wantonness and ease: look upon us;
pensill out our defects, if you can, and let not emulation, which sometimes
depends on virtuous deserts and desires, be turned into envy, or so attended
on by malice, that you will not yet confess our neernesse in matching our
example, when I am sure no Kingdom is so beautified with vnstainable colors.

But you will say, for all this, we neither fetch gold from Ophir, nor are our
cities and buildings of any sufficiency, to hold out against a military
expugnation, nor satisfy the high looking eyes of magnificence. To the first,
I answer directly, we may if we list, either fetch treasure where it is, or be
the cause, that it shall be brought us even to the doors of our Exchequer in
peace. For I am sure, we have not only ships and men, but such hands and
spirits, as with David's Worthies, can pull the spears out of the hands of the
Philistims, and with Sampsons riddle take meat out of the eater, and sweetness
from the strong, and who shall hinder us? I hope not Spain, if there were such
occasion, nor the galleys of the middle-land sea, nor the confederate Princes
of Italy, nor the Turkish Carmisans or galleys, nor the fortifications of
China, nor any one worldly Monarch. But see the conditions of true worthiness;
valor and a noble spirit dare do no wrong, and our excellent King (out of
true addictions to uprightness) has rolled up all ensigns of defiance, and
therefore will not infringe the honorable covenants of his compacted peace,
nor give example to his son, to stir the poole of Silo, until the Angel
descend for the good of the people.

Concerning our buildings and cities: first for the gloriousness and bravery
of them; I answer, Ars non habet inimicum nisi ignorantem, and men are too
preiudicate, that either condemn us for want of knowledge; or effeminate, that
vilipend us for defect of formality; because of mine own knowledge, I dare
say, generally there are not so many beautiful Churches, handsome castles,
glorious palaces, sweet towns, stately houses, and of great capacity, and
delicate structures, within the circular dimension of so much ground in the
world: so that if our Gentlemen (admitting the custom of living in cities, as
they do in most parts of Europe) would compact all the edefices and convenient
houses of a shire within a wall, or that we were sited in a continent, like the
through-fares of France, Germany, or Italy, we might questionless have more
glorious, great, and populous cities, then any one kingdom under heaven.
Secondly, for the strength; what care we for extraordinary fortifications
amongst our selves, the only darings of presumption, and inducements to
unnatural treasons, when times and worthy government so curbs the ambitious
subject from any dangerous attempt, that they are so far from affrighting the
Prince, or one another, with factious hostility, that they can quickly unite
themselves for the common good: as for the fear of foreign enemies, and
invasion of any enraged foe, we have the sea for our walls, the shores as
strong as brass, and such a navy for our defense, that I protest my heart
leaps for joy, when I see the channel so plentifully stored, the Kings
harbors so magnificently filled, and know that all the havens of the world
entertain us for one respect or another. But say, we do not this way put the
ambitious man in any hope ofthriuing in foul pretension offormidable actions
against the peace of our State: or the quiet man in any fear, that well
fortified places may be surprised by treasons, and maintained by power, to the
disturbance of the whole Realm, and animating foreign Princes to expect such
coadiutement by corrupted and abused men. I am sure we come nearer our example
(some frontire towns or special landing places excepted) both for hospitality
and the general blessings of the kingdom, reciprocally imparted to poor and
rich. And for our other towns and villages, such as they are, considering the
use and necessity of travel, surmount by far the Hosteries and deformed
villages of other nations, and am sure, if you let loose the Queen of cities,
as you term Paris; the Sacra Porta; or the beautiful, as Constantinople; the
impossible within the impossible, as Venice; the happy and fashionable, as
Augusta; the populous, as Norremberg; the great, as Millane; the delicate, as
Florence; the Gentle, as Naples; the spacious, as Cracow, Mosco, Cayro, and
tripartite Prage: not one of them all (as for infinite other towns, they are
not once to be named to this purpose) can look so bigg, or angerly upon our
LONDON: but she can affront them with a matching countenance; yea, ouermatch
them in many several exercises and excellencies, wherein for your better
instruction we will dispute a little.

CHAP. XVII. Foreign cities compared to LONDON, with the defects of either
made apparent, and our sufficiency manifested.
IF I begin not at first with too sullen or London and Paris com^.
concise a question; more then the new gallery of the Lovure, and the suburbs
of St. Germans, as it is now re-edified, what one thing is worthy observation
or wonder within Paris: as for London, but that you will say my particular love
transporteth me, it has many specialities of note, eminence, and amazement;
and for greatness it self, I may well maintain, that if London and the places
adjoining were circummunited in such an orbicular manner, it would equal Paris
for all the rivers winding about, and the five bridges sorting to an uniformity
of streets: and as we now behold it, the cross of London is every way longer
then you can make in Paris, or any city of Europe: but because peradventure
you will not understand what I mean by this word cross, it shall be thus
explained, that from St. Georges in Southwarke to Shoreditch South and North;
and from Westminster to St. Katherines or Ratcliff, West and East, is a cross
of streets, meeting at Leaden Hall, every way longer, with broad spaciousness,
handsome monuments, illustrious gates, comely buildings, and admirable markets,
then any you can make in Paris, or ever saw in other city, yea Constantinople
it self. Concerning multitude of people, if you take London merely as a place
composed of Merchants, Citizens, and Tradesmen, the world never had such
another: If you conioyne the suburbs, Southwarke, Westminster, St. Katherines,
and such like, it exceeds Paris even for Inhabitants, or if you will come to us
in a term time, according to our custom of resorting together, I hope you may
be encountered either with hands or swords, as for Paris, you know the better
half, even of the indwellers, are Gentlemen, Scholars, Lawyers, and
belonging to the Clergy: the Merchant living obscurely, the Tradesman
penuriously, the Crafts-man in drudgery, and altogether insolent and rebellious
upon the least distasting, unaccustomed impositions, or but affrighted with the
alteration of ridiculous ceremonies. But let us search our comparison a little
further: instead of a beastly town and dirty streets, you have in London those
that be fair, beautiful, and cleanely kept: instead of foggy mists and
clouds: ill air, flat situation, miry springs, and a kind of staining clay,
you have in London a sunne-shining and serene element for the most part, a
wholesome dwelling, stately ascension, and delicate prospect: instead of a
shallow, narrow, and sometimes dangerous river, bringing only barges and boats
with wood, coal, turff, and such country provision: you have at London a
river flowing twenty foot, and full of stately ships, that fly to us with
merchandise from all the ports of the world, the sight yielding astonishment,
and the use perpetual comfort: so that setting the unconstant reuolutions of
worldly felicity aside, who shall oppose against our navy, and if we would
descend to inferior rooms, the river westward matcheth Paris every way, and
supplieth the city with all commodities, and at easier rates: In steed of ill
favored wooden bridges, many times endangered with tempests and frosts, you
have in London such a bridge, that without ampliation of particulars, is the
admirablest monument, and fir^ erected structure in that kind of the Universe,
whether you respect the foundation, with the continual charge and orderly
endeauours to keep the arches substantial, or examine the upper buildings,
being so many, and so beautiful houses, that it is a pleasure to behold them,
and a fullness of contentment to understand their uses conferred upon them.
Instead of an old Bastill and ill-beseeming Arsenall, thrust as it were into
an outcast corner of the City, you have in London a building of the greatest
antiquity and maiesticall form, serving to most uses of any Citadle or Magazin
that ever you saw. For the Tower contains a Kings palace, a Kings prison, a
Kings armoury, a Kings mint, a Kings wardrobe, a Kings artilery, and many
other worthy offices: so that the Inhabitants within the walls have a Church,
and are a sufficient parish. Instead ofan obscure Louure, newly graced with an
extraordinary gallery, the only palace of the King near Paris. In London his
Majesty has many houses, parkes, and places of repose, and in the countries
dispersed such a number of state, receipt, and commodity, that I protest I am
driven to amaze, knowing the defects of other places, nor do I here stretch
my discourse on the tenterhookes of partiality, or seem to pull it by the
by-strings of self-conceit or opinion: but plainly denotate what all true
hearted Englishmen can auerre, that to the crown of our Kingdom are annexed
more castles, honors, forests, parkes, houses of State, and conueniency to
retire unto, from the encombrances of the hurliburly of cities, then any
Emperor or King in Europe can challenge proprio iure. Instead of an old ruinous
palace, as they term their house of Parliament, Hall of Justice, concourse of
Lawyers, or meetings of certain Tradesmen or Milleners, like an Exchange, and
as it were promiscue, confounding all together: we have in London such a Circo
for Merchants, with an upper quadrant of shops, as must needs subject it to
foreign envy, in regard of the delicacy of the building, and stateliness in
the contriuing. We have in London a second building for the ease of the Court,
profit of the Artizan, and glory of the city, which for any thing my outward
sense may judge of, can equal the proudest structure of their proudest towns,
though you should name St. Marks Piazza in Venice, for so much building. We
have in London a Guild Hall for a State-house, and Westminster for general
causes of the Kingdom; two such rooms, that without further dispute, makes
strangers demand unanswerable questions, and gently brought to the
understanding particulars, lift up their hands to heaven and exclaim, O happy
England! o happy people! o happy London! and yet I must confess, that the hall
at Padoa, and great counsellchamber in Venice, be rooms of worthy note, and
sufficient contentment. We have in London diverse palaces for resort of Lawyers
and their Clients, and other offices appropriate, all works rather of
ostentation to our selves, then imitation to others. Instead of narrow dirty
streets, neither graceful to themselves, nor beautified with any ornament, we
have spacious, large and comely streets, exposing diverse works of peace,
charity, and estimation. Instead of obscure Churches, we have first the
goodliest heap of stones in the world, namely Paul's; next the curiousest
fabric in Europe, namely Westminster chapple, and generally all our Churches
exceed for beauty, handsomnesse, and magnificent building, as framed of hard
stone and marble, and exposed with a firm and glorious spectacle, as for the
Dona of Florence, St. Marcks in Venice, St. Marcks in Millane, the Noterdame at
Paris, and some others in Germany (the steeple only at Strasborough except,
which is denominated Beautiful, for the height and handsomnesse) they are
either buildings of brick, or conceited structures like a fantastical
bird-cage of a little inlayd or mosaijcke work, worthy of applause from such
as respect new dainties, and not to be ouerpassed for curious pictures and
paintings: where yet by the way you must observe, that in those days of
superstition, and particulars of ostentation, concerning rich hangings,
imageries, statues, altar-cloths, roods, relics, plate, pictures, and
ornaments, other Churches and monasteries of Europe come far short of our
glory and Popish bravery. Instead of Gentlemen on dirty foot-clothes, and
women in the miry streets: the one with an idle Lacquey or two; the other with
no company of respect: we have fashionable attendancy, handsome and comely
going, either in Carosse, Coatch, or on horseback, and our Ladies and women of
reputation, sildome abroad without an honorable retinue. Instead of a
confusion of all sorts of people together, without discovery of quality or
persons, as Citizens, Lawyers, Scholars, Gentlemen, religious Priests, and
Mechanickes, that you can scarce know the one from the other, nor the master
from the man. In London the Citizen lives in the best order with very few
houses of Gentlemen interposed, and in our suburbs, the Nobility have so many
and stately dwellings, that one side of the river may compare with the Gran
Canale of Venice. But if you examine their receipt and capacity, Venice and all
the cities of Europe must submit to the truth. Nay' in London and the places
adjoining, you have a thousand several houses, wherein I will lodge a thousand
several men with conueniency: match us now if you can. Instead of a poor
Provost and disorderly company of Merchants and Tradesmen, we have a Podesta
or Mayor, that keeps a Princely house, we have grave Senators, comely
Citizens, several Halls, and authorized Corporations, all governed by
religious Magistracy, and made famous by triumphant solemnities: so that our
best Gentry are delighted with the spectacle, and strangers admire the bravery.

To conclude, if you look on and in our London truly, as it is composed of men
following trades and occupations, there is not such a city, such a government,
such a method of conversation, such a unity of good fellowship, such a glass
to see unity and beauty in, such a treasury of wealth, such a storehouse of
all terrestrial blessings under the sun. If you will view it without at all
times, and yet consider the customs of keeping our country houses, you will
say there are not so many Gentlemen in any place, nor gathered together to
better purpose, nor can the variety of Paris bring you into the walks of such
pleasure, with so little charge and offense, as London. For with us our riding
of horses, music, learning of all Arts and Sciences, dancing, fencing, seeing
of commedies or interludes, banquets, masks, mummeries, turnaiments, shows,
lotteries, feasts, ordinary meetings, and all the particulars of man's
invention to satiate delight, are easy expenses, and a little judgment with
experience, will manage a very mean estate to wade through the current of
pleasure, although it run to voluptuousness. But if you come to our Court, I
hope you find not such another for stately attendants, dutiful service,
plenty of fare, resort of Nobles, comeliness of Ladies, gallantrie of
Gentles, concourse of people, princely pastimes, noble entertainment, and all
things befitting the Majesty of a King, or glory of a nation: so that I may
say for London, as the King of France answered the Emperors tedious titles with
France, France, France, and nothing but France: so cry I London, London,
London, and nothing but London, to their proudest and all their cities. And
thus much for Paris: now to Constantinople.

What I have said of Paris by way of comparison, concerning Constantinople
described, and compared with London
the government and orderly managing the affairs of a city, I may well
conclude against Constantinople: but because this imperial place looks with
a more maiesticall countenance then other cities, and lifts up (as it were) a
daring head against all contradiction, for her superiority: I must needs
pensill out the line of her praises at some length, and tell you truly,
wherein her worthiness consists, and yet may deceive opinion without true
judgment. Constantinople, otherwise called Stanbole, the Beautiful, has a
handsome and formal triangle of a wall, the first part whereof reaches from
the seven towers (which is a place for suppliment of a prison, a treasury, and
wardrobe) unto the Seralio, some three English mile. The second from the
Seralio to Porta del Fieume, a little more and both toward the sea, which
runs one way between Asia and Europe into the Euxinum, and another way to
encounter a pretty fresh water river, beyond the North of Pera. And the third
ouerlooketh the fields of Thracia, with a greater compass and strength,
because it is a double wall, and opens three or four gates, as Andrinople,
Gratianople, the Tower gate, etc. into the country, which flourished when
Pausanias was contented with the title of Duke and Captain of the Spartanes,
and built this wonderful town by the name of Bizantium, in honor of his
father Bize, who was Admiral of the Grecian Navy, when Thebes, and other
cities strove for superiority. The wall is orderly beautified with square towers
of hard stone, whose equal distance makes a reasonable show, but that it
resembles a painted Curtezan of outward good becoming, yet within full of
corruption and danger. For concerning the streets, citizens, houses, or order
of a well compacted Commonwealth, it retains nothing coming near our
London, or happiness. The situation is yet a stately ascent from the sea, as
if it had a pride to mock at the swelling of any tempest: and embolden the
Merchant with the security of the Sacra Porta, being indeed the goodliest
harbor in the world, twenty fathom deep close to the shores of two cities. Thus
it contains ten English mile in circumference, having no suburbs, and showing
much waste ground in the unfrequented places toward the land, especially where
the Bashawes houses are sequestered from the hurliburly of the Tradesman.

The Seralio is the palace of the Gran Signeur, yet is a Why Seralio
name appropriate to diverse sequestered places, wherein his women are detained,
and has questionless the deriuation from our Latin word Sera, or locked up:
it is a receptacle for diverse thousands, enclosing as much ground, as St. James
park. For the courts are very large, with several guards of Ianizaries,
according to the necessity of the times, or neernesse to the Emperors person.
The gardens spacious, with embattelled walls, stored with artillery, the gates
most of them iron, kept by Capogies: the buildings are many and stately,
bearing in their front certain Dowana's or open hals, which have trauesses of
Persian stuff, and are rooms of great receipt, wherein the officers of the
palace sit in open view at their feasts and diet. The banquetting-houses,
wherein his concubines and boys are aparted from the court hurliburly, expose
diverse manner of structures, and seem indeed several palaces, amongst whom
there is one called a Caska without the wall of the Seralio close to the
seaside where he accustometh to take his gally, of the delicatest and richest
presence, that ever I beheld: for it is a quadrant of seven arches on a side
cloister wise, like the Rialto walk in Venice, in the midst rises a core of
three or four rooms with chimnies, whose mantell trees are of silver, the
windows curiously glazed, and besides protected with an iron grate all guilt
over most gloriously: the whole frame so set with opals, rubies, emeralds,
burnisht with gold, painted with flowers, and graced with inlayed work of
porphery, marble, iet, jasper, and delicate stones, that I am persuaded there
is not such a bird cage in the world. Under the walls are stables for sea
horses called Hippopotami, which is a monstrous beast taken in Nilus,
Elephants, Tygres, and Dolphines: sometimes they have Crocadiles and
Rhinoceros: within are Roebuckes, white Partridges, and Turtles, the bird of
Arabia, and many beasts and fowls of Africa and India. The walks are shaded
with Cypres, Cedars, Turpentine, and trees which we only know by their names,
amongst which, such as afford sustenance, are called figs, almonds, olives,
pomegranets, limons, orenges, and such like: but it should seem, they are
here as it were enforced, and kept in order with extraordinary diligence: for
the sun kisseth them not with that freuency, as may make them large, or ripen
in their proper kinds.

The city is very populous toward the harbor, the Besesteine, Bashawes houses,
Mosques, conduits, tombs and monuments, open as it were a storehouse of
magnificent works: yet when I read, that Constantine vnplumed Rome, and as it
were robbed all the world, making this place accessory to the theft, and cannot
find the particulars in mine inuentory, I marvel who has either dared to
purloine them, or presumed to ruinate and deface them. For the cheifest
structures and monuments are now the great Seralio, the lesser Seralio's, the
seven towers, the double wall, diverse Bashawes houses, before some of which are
spacious quadrants graced with antiquities, recording the ancient manner of
turnaiments, when the Greeks flourished: the Mosques or Temples, amongst whom
the Sophia, Solimana and Amorata, are indeed heaps of ostentation and fabrics
of great delight, the place called Jobs tomb, sequestered for the burial of
the Emperors children, who are commonly all strangled on the day of his elder
sons inauguration by Mutes, and then enclosed in coffins of Cypres, and so
received by the Mufti into chapples consecrated for that purpose; the
Patriarcks house; certain Balnea's; Aquae ductus; Constantines palace; and the
Towers on the wall. To these you may add the Besesteine, a place like our
Exchange, for variety of merchandise, market of virgins, selling of slaves,
and the vaults under ground fenced with iron gates to secure their treasure,
which especially belongs to the Jews, who farm the office of Dacij or
customs, and are (as it were) the Turks receivers, so that these places must
needs be strongly guarded, both to prevent the fury of the Ianizaries, who
are very irregular in their tumults, and the extremity of fire and
earthquakes, to whose violence the City is many times subject.

The next division is of Galata, a city over against it divided only by sea,
no broader here then our Tamisis, of great antiquity, walled about, and
retaining a particular name and renown, for holding out a year and better,
after Constantinople was surprised: it stands likewise up a hill, and equals
it both for beastliness, confusion, and uncomely streets and houses: here
live many Greeks, and the Francks, as they term the Papists (of what nation
soever) have a Church by permission; the Curtezan likewise lives at some
liberty; yet is it death for any Christian to lie with a Turkish woman or Jew.

The third part of this great city comprehends the vine of Pera, which is a
huge suburbs, compassing Galata round about, a place of quiet dwelling, good
air, and pleasant gardens: yet in regard the many thousand tombs of Turks
(for you must know, that neither Turk, Jew, nor Christian, interre any corpse
in their Mosques or city, except they build a chapple of purpose, or have the
privilege of the Franck Church) fill up a great quantity of ground, with
disordered, confused noisome, and fearful graves. On the one side toward the
north-east, you have an Arsenall for galleys, a little beyond, a handsome
Seralio, and somewhat further a pretty fresh water river, as if they lay in
sequence, by whose banks are certain houses erected of purpose, for the
pleasure and reposednes of special Bashawes. On the other side toward the
south-west, the office of artilery called Tapinaw, inuiteth you to the view of
such ordnance and munition, that for number, greatness, and use, surmount any
one city of Europe: you have likewise another Seralio, and in these suburbs are
resident the English, French, and Venetian Ambassadors: as for the Persian,
Emperors of Germany, and Polacks, they lived in the great city, and sometimes
visited one another, as either necessity of business, or pleasure of
inuitation affoorded.

The last quarter of this division affoordeth the object of a town in Asia
called Scideron, or Scideret, between which and Constantinople, the sea
runs 20. English mile in length, and only two in breadth, as far as
Pompey's pillar and the black Tower, resembling a lace fringed with spangles
and purles: for the Bashawes and Chawses houses, so stand on both sides, as if
they were made to answer a proportion of handsomnesse: but when time and a
days travel has taken away the pleasure of this spectacle, then fall you
into a larger gulf, once called Euxinum mare, now the black sea, extending a
thousand mile, as far as Trebisond: on the farther shore of the continent now
called Russia, is shouldred up close Maeotis Palus; into which the great river
of Tanais sends his streams, as if a messenger of glad tidings and business
should hasten to discharge his duty. Thus I confess, if on the towers of the
Amorata, or battlements of the Sophia, you beheld all at once, as it were one
united body, it would equal, if not surpass London, for spaciousness of
grounds, some monuments, and diverse palaces and houses: but yet come no way
near my satisfaction, as being defective in many things, which I supposed to
excel in it, and deficient in all things, wherein a happy country supplieth
the wants of her enhabitants. For here is neither good lodging, proportionable
fare, free recourse, gracious entertainment, true religion, secure abiding,
allowable pleasure, orderly government, or any thing wherein a noble city is
made glorious indeed: nor is it so populous as report has busied us, but
famarialum, and it may be, the plague having consumed 80000. and the army of
200000. deducted, diminished somewhat the glory, and left the rest of the
people to enjoy more freedom. And thus much for Constantinople. Now a word or
two for Venice.

Venice I confess is both rare in situation, and wonderful for government, as
cementing together diverse Islands with Venice described, and compared with London
small bridges, and not trusting their liberty either into the the hands of one
Prince, or judgment of inferior persons. Thus has the Duke but a binding
voice, and the sword is carried before the Senate: thus is nothing done without
the consent of the Nobility, who are very near 1500. in number, and the
tradesman is in no sort admitted amongst them, till either he purchase the
freedom, or deserve it by some heroicke employment; therefore they do them
wrong, that call the Venetians merchants. For though some of them have a
traffic at sea: yet do the better sort of the Nobility scorn to trade for
profit, and those which are adventurers, are either newly raised houses, or
licensed by the state for special purposes: but howsoever, he leaves the
managing of affairs to inferiors, and the drudging (as we say) for money,
either to the Jew as an Usurer; or to common bank for the good of the city; or
to the Shopkeeper, for the entertaining the concourse of people, sitting at
home in ease, and going abroad for some variety of delight, as the true
Gentlemen of Naples and Millane accustom, who suppose nothing worthy, which
savors of curbing liberty, and tying them to servile attendance. But yet in
all this, so far short of our London, as a dumb painted statua of a living
substance. For neither are the Noblemen permitted the eminency of other
natious, nor patible of such degrees, as our greatness looks upon one
another withal: nor can the Merchant equal the twentieth part of our
comparison for number: nor in that which they boast of, which is wealth, can
they generally match our Londoners: as for the Tradesman and Shopkeepers, as
I said before, neither for order, government, liberty of meeting, diet,
purchasing of land, delicate furniture, and all the particulars whereby a city
is made famous, worthy, or wealthy: only some few houses have a handsome show
of comeliness, and (according to the custom of their stone-buildings) seem
pretty piles for the receipt of a small company. But where are their five
hundred ships at sea; when all Venice has not above thirty merchant men, and
ten galleasses; only they boast of three hundred galleys, according to the
custom of Nauall encounters in the Leuant? where are their voyages and settled
abode in all the harbors in the world? where are their large and brave
streets, antique monuments, when their city is scarce eight hundred year old,
glorious gates, magnificent structures to lodge Princes and all their retinue,
houses of entertainment for travelers and strangers, such as our Tauernes and
Inns? where are their conduits and good waters? where are their fields and
pleasant walks? where are their exercises and heroike pastimes? where are
their triumphant shows and magnificent spectacles, with infinite other
particulars, wherein they must yield, if London had no other Commander then the
Mayor and Senators? after this manner could I run into Afric, and fetch
Cayro; into Russia, for Mosko; into Poland, for Craccow; into Germany, for
Augusta, or Norremberg; into Bohemia, for Prage; into Austria, for Vienna; into
Spain, for Leon, or Madrid; into Portugal, for Lisbone; and so in all the
rest: but if they were brought before the bar of comparison, they might be
quickly arraigned of presumption for contending with our London in any of those
things, wherein a city looks up with a justifiable countenance, to show her
comeliness, beauty, glory, bravery or antiquity. But see what it is to
embolden a forward man; I am not yet satisfied, until I tell you diverse
stranger things, and so open the enclosures of knowledge, that you shall
enfeoff her with many excellencies, wherein our England is truly imparadized
before all nations.

CHAP. XVIII. Diverse particulars wherein ENGLAND excels other Kingdoms, and
first in RELIGION.
WE will begin with the blessing of all blessings, Common places against
idolatry: yea the vain erecting of images.
and as the Logicians say, Causa sine qua non, which is RELIGION, or the true
worshipping of God, and to be found amongst us, or no where in the world: For
I hope without further disputing, as I have spoken else where, we will exclude
even out of our thoughts, heathenish profanation, and the filthiness of
idolatry, against which the sharpest arrows of Gods quiver are darted, and the
Prophets sound out his judgment, as terribly, as the Angels the trumpets to
summon the inhabitants of the earth against the day of doom. But because the
Devil before the general dissolution must appear like an Angel of light,
and has taught us cunning to deceive our own souls with false
interpretations of scripture, with the impostures of aequiuocation, with adding
and diminishing to and from the book of life, to which most formidable curses
are belonging, with quite extinguishing the second commandment, and other
dangerous pollutions infecting the Churches of Europe: I thought it not amiss
both to discover the enormities of the 1. Greek, and 2. Latin superstition,
and muster together some pretty forces out of Gods camp against the 3. pride
of the Popish Cl^rgy: 4. the worlds vilipending the true Saints of God: 5. and
that deceiuable worshipping of images under a covert praying to the Saints,
upon a supposition of being our Mediators in heaven: of all which in order, and
first against idolatry.

When Rahel stole her fathers idols, there was much ado in the search, and
Laban would feign have picked a quarrel with Jacob: but God foreseeing the
wretchedness of his mind, prevented the mischief, and laughed man's invention
to scorn, even before the Law was established: But presently so soon as the
LORD had prescribed them, what to rely upon, even twice in one chapter the
gods of silver and gold were forbidden, and a sentence pronounced, that he
which offered unto any gods save unto the LORD should be slain: whereupon by a
divine inspiration, Jacob reformed his household by putting away the idols,
termed in scripture, clensing, purging, and pleasing of God. If you come
forward to Moses government: never any temptation traduced him for impatience,
being the meekest man on earth, as at the making the golden calfe in Horeb, and
the folly of Aaron, which brought 3000 men to destruction: but look a little
further, and all fellowship with Idolaters is forbidden; and whereas the
wickedness of man's invention had so far enlarged it self, as to terrify one
another with the mischief wrought by Devils, imposturing them yet withal by a
cunning art of pacification in offering sacrifices, and vows to that purpose,
God interdicted the same, and Moses flatly prohibited such abomination: yea in
the 20 of Leuiticus it was absolute death to offer their children unto Molech,
meaning any kind of idol: nay more, such was the jealousy of Gods honor from
the beginning, that it was loss of life to blaspheme the name of the living,
mighty, and only true God.

In the 26 of Leuiticus idolatry is forbidden again, and the very making of
images reputed an unanswerable sin; and because the policy of man should be
quite defeated, the eternal providence is contented to yield reasons for the
same in the 4 of Deuteronomie 15: yea such sufficient reasons, that we may
conclude them positive laws to all Nations. First in the third verse, to
prevent Reasons why we should not commit ^iolatry.
their destruction, lest they might utterly perish, as they did, because of
Baal Peor. Secondly, because it was wisdom and understanding, wherein the
natural man delighted, to keep the ordinance of God, verse. 6. Thirdly,
because the Lord had done more for them in their deliverances, than for other
Nations, v. 7. Fourthly, because the laws of God were better, more upright,
and had a fuller justice in them than the laws of other Nations, v. 8. Fifthly,
because they saw no image in that day, wherein the Lord spoke unto them in
Horeb, and out of the fire, v. 15. Sixthly, because we must not worship either
sun, or moon, and stars, which are most glorious; therefore much less the
inferior creatures, much less idols and images the work of men's hands:
Argumentum a fortiori, or a maiore ad minus, v. 19. Seventhly, because God was
angry with Moses for speaking in their behalf, when they had worshipped the
golden calfe in Horeb, and punished him for their sakes, with debarring him
from entering into the land of Canaan, v. 21. Eighthly, and last of all, because
they might be blessed in performing the will of God, whom they knew to be the
only true God, v. 35. Whereupon when the Jews were to take possession of the
land of the Gentiles, although it might be intended, that there could not be
wrought an utter extirpation at the first; yet did the spirit of God covenant
with them, that they should not be at atonement with their abominations, but
destroy their idols utterly: yea a little further, the very places where the
idols were to be erected are to be abandoned, as if he should then say, I will
be worshipped, as I command, and not as man's fancy deludeth, whereupon followed
that great curse against the inticers, and seducers to idolatry, and the
Magistrates had a strict commandment to prevent the planting of groves and
trees, the very nurses of heathenish invention, and to hinder the occasions of
solitary sequestration, whereby were practiced Diabolical arts,
Pithonisticall incantations, Cabalisticall secrets, Hieroglyphicall
representations, imposturing devises, and all dangerous sacrifices belonging to
the formal perfecting the same.

This that is alleged might be sufficient to understanding men to affright
them from affecting either idol, image, or church-painting: But I will go a
little further, and wade in the foord of this swelling stream, which from the
springs of the Prophets ouerflow the fields of all countries: but how? even by
shouldring aside the proud cast-vp-banks of opposition, and threatening Gods
vengeance against such as dare perpetrate such ^llicit actions. So that if I
store this discourse with some collected abstracts, intimating nothing from
envy, or malice against the greatness and wealth of other Kingdoms, which are
Idolaters, I hope we shall thereby avoid in our selves the least sauouring of
those monstrous customs of India, China, or other dangerous Kingdoms, and
adulterate excuses The foolish excuse of Idolaters.
of misled Christians, who thus far agree with the grossest idolaters, that
their images are but representations of more excellent spirits, and no man is
so senseless to kneel to, or adore the dumb and dead things, but only to
resuscitate our stupide memories, either of God, or his Saints, in regard the
nature of man is so slender of it self, and the condition of the Diety so
gentle to give way to any thing, which may further the adoration of his glory,
and the confirmation of our salvation: in both which how gross and palpably
they abuse the great and wise God, and deceive ignorant and simple men, shall
here appear.

In the 17. of Deuteronomie there is as it were a solemn quest of enquiry
against the peruerters of true religion in this kind, and the conclusion
tends to the punishment of stoning to death; and because we should have no
starting hole or trick to deceive our selves, God is contented in the 28 to
establish to his people a contract of blessing, and cursing, all tending to
discover the uses and reasons of either: following it so far, that he
plainly names idolatry, or if you will, erecting of images, for any cause to
exasperate his displeasure, that plagues, punishment, and utter extirpation
must follow: to which end and purpose Iosua's exhortation for the worshipping
the only, true, and wise God, and after his own only, true, and wise way,
was so enlarged, commended, and applauded after his so many and great
victories, and established quietness. How near to utter destruction, and
desolation, were the Israelites in the time of the IVDGES, when the Angel
rebuked the people for living wickedly in the sight of the Lord, and serving
Baalam, whereupon followed a casting them away by God, and the hands of Midian
fettred them in chains seven year: nor could the Princes of Judah deliver
them, although Gedeon began well, and set up prevailing on his strongest legs,
to stand upright for their behoof. But what followed? He and all his house
fell into the pit of destruction: and wherefore? for making an ephod, wherein
he presumed yet to do well; but it was the step and staire of idolatry, and
that the cause of a following vengeance; then if you look into Micahs story,
you shall find that every man did what was good in his own eyes, whereby
ensued murders, rapes, robberies, and such like intolerable enormities, all
having their current from this spring, that his mother made him images of
silver, and he consented to the wicked work. If you ouerlooke the story of
Sampson, howeuer he lost his strength, and was inflicted with a severe
punishment, of being bereaved of his sight, and disgraceful captivity; yet you
saw, as the Eagle casts her bill to renew her youth, for the punishment of
Idolaters, God raised up another wall of fortification, and when his vigor was
restored, he pulled down the profane temple upon the heads of two thousand
souls: when the Philistines brought the ark of God into the house of Dagon,
the Idol fell down before it, and the men of Ashdod were plagued for abusing
the same. Did not Solomon rejoice in all worldly felicity, and was not the
mantle of pleasure and happiness spread before him? until he fell to idolatry,
then did his private enemies cast it out of sight, and God divided ten Tribes
from his son, which was a strange disparity, considering his father built the
Temple, consecrated the same, and blessed the people. Wherein was God so
offended with Jeroboam, that he made him the capital author of the sins of
Israel? but by reason of his golden calves, the punishment whereof was thus
far extended; His son died, his hand was dried up with leprosy, the
seduced Prophet was killed by a Lion, and the same Abiah that made him King,
confirmed the extirpation of his family, and for all his wife went to delude
him, yet she heard the judgment of terror, which she could not prevent. In
the story of Ahab, what was the cause of so many troubles in Israel, tyranny in
the Commonwealth, murdering of Gods Prophets, usurpation of other men's
inheritances, wickedness of Iezabel, witchcrafts, whoredoms, and in the end a
general defection from his obedience, and coniuration against his house, was
it not idolatry? whereupon followed the slaughter of the King, the casting the
Queen out of a window, the killing of Baals Prophets, first by Eliah, then by
Iehu, and an utter confusion in Judah and Israel.

Wherein was Iehoiada so acceptable to God, as when he destroyed the altars of
Baal, and laid his images on a heap? look amongst all the Kings of Judah, or
Israel; and whereas you find some of them murdered, some of them deposed,
some of them taken away in the pride of their years, some of them lepers, and
some of them carried into captivity: it was all by reason of idolatry, and
transfounding the adoration of the only true God, with the infectious leprosy
of men's traditions: thus Azariah of Judah became a Leper, Zacharia of Israel was
slain by Shallum, Shallum by Menahen, and Menahen purchased his peace of
Assyria by money. The wicked idolatry of Ahas, and that horrible consecration
of his son in fire, was a motive of trouble and desolation to all Jerusalem.
Hosea King of Israel was ensnared, and he and his realm caught in the net of
Assyrian policy, by reason of their confidence in Idols, and that every one
worshipped the God of his nation, contrary to Moses Law; but what ensued?
curses, plagues, utter desolatenesse, adumbration of the sunshine of
heavenly favors, and when they presumed of well-doing, in making a hotchpotch
of religion in Samaria, the Lions of the forest came into the city, and
devoured both Priests and people.

When Manasses restored idolatry, giving life to filthy profanation, which
viper-like abused the courtesy of him which warmed her, and stung him to death.
I will bring (says God) an evil upon Judah and Jerusalem, that who hears of
it, both his ears shall tingle, and I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of
Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab, and I will wipe Jerusalem, as a
man wipeth a dish, and turn it vpside down: so Ammon was slain by his
servants, and the poison of idolatry that had choked the people of God with
the dreggs of abomination, made Judah so vlcerous and deformed, that God would
not know his own handyworke, but suffered them to be led into captivity, and
brought into the school of tyrannous correction.

Look over all the prophecy of Esaias, where the desolation of Jerusalem is
denounced, where the Medes and Persians shall destroy Babel, where Moab must
look for an overthrow, where Damascus and Ephraim must come to ruin, where
the Egyptians must be dislocated by the Assyrians, where Aethiopia, Idumea,
and Arabia must groan under affliction, where Tyrus must feel the yoke of
subjection, and all superbous Monarchies come to ruin: and you shall find
that idolatry is the cause, and principal motive of Gods wrath against them.
nor desisteth he so, but exemplifieth at large, how the full cup of Gods
vengeance flows over for following the traditions of men: nay more, certain
curses are exaggerated against such, as either adhere to man's assistance, or
are seduced with worldly vanity, and in the 41. chapter, you shall find an
ironicall derision of the Inhabitants of the Islands, for making of images, and
such like bestiall traducements, especially for extenuating the power of God,
by introducing the inventions of man, and mingling worldly devices with true
religion, concluding in the 43. that there is no God but one, nor any
worshipping of him, but in spirit and holiness of life.

Look into the prophecy of Jeremy, and all his Lamentations, and you shall
find, why the Jews were destroyed, why compared to a disobedient woman to her
husband, why reprehended for crying out the temple, the temple, and relying
upon the outward ceremonies, why exprobrated for following strange Gods, after
the custom of their fathers, why threatened with such plagues, as sauoured of
bitterness and poisoning their outward prosperity, chiefly for idolatry, as
more especially 22. Then follows the word of God, like the voice of a crier
in the wilderness, against Egypt, the Philistines, Moabites, Ammonites,
Idumea, Damascus, Kedar, and Elam, all in one chapter: nor is it a bare angry
vehemency; but illustred with many excellent comparisons, not desisting till
he leave Babylon flat on the ground, yielding reasons for her desolation,
because the nations of the world were made drunk with the carowses out of that
golden cup, which she represented out of the Lords hand, and all to show the
vanity and wickedness of idolaters.

Ezekiels visions were most against Israel, and his mouth opened the fearful
indignation of the Lord against Jerusalem, because their altars were erected to
strange Gods, and that they made images of the sun, to pollute their souls
worse then the carrion of a dunghill: then proceeds he against them with
personating names, calling Samaria and Jerusalem, Aholah and Ohalibah: the end
only to discover their idolatry, and intimating Gods wrath for their notorious
wandering from the true path of knowledge, insomuch that from the parable of a
seething pot, Iuda's destruction is threatened: yet for all this, God will not
condescend to any treatise of pacification, until all the nations round about,
namely Edom, Moab, Egypt, Chaldea, Tyrus, Sidon, Gog, and Magog, taste the
bitterness of the same fruit, corrupted and made irksome by the same
transgressions.

Was not the adoration of Nebuchadnezzars statua of gold, a strange and
notable work of God against Idolaters? and the history of the Kings
humiliation, an instance of terror and revenge against the pride and ambition
of man? was not ^altashars tragedy and example of admiration? and would a man
desire a better warning to avoid the punishment of idolatry, and blaspheming
the true God? did not Daniels miraculous delivery from the Lions strike the
Heathen with amazement? and brought confusion amongst the imaginary vanities:
so that Darius himself disclaimed the worship of the sun and fire, according
to the ancient manner of the Persians, and proclaimed exaltation of the
eternal Deity indeed.

Does not Hosea threaten the people, because of idolatry, and makes Jerusalem
worse then an harlot, telling of the swift coming of their enemies, by the
comparison of an Eagle, resembling the Jews to an empty vineyard, an heart
divided in twain, and concluding, that her sorrows shall be like the travel
of a woman in childe-bearing, because of their going a whoring after false
Gods, or if you will, counterfeit Idols, and colorable images, being no other,
nor other ways used, then now the Church of Rome accustometh, Romish Idols.
by preuaricating true religion, by calling them the books of the Laity, by
excusing them with an honorable remembrance of the Saints deceased, by
corrupting them with filthy painting, and the art of the craftsman, and by a
diabolical erecting them, as if they had life and motion.

Does not Amos (as if a man should run a race for a reward) pass from one
country, city, and person to another, with prophesies and threatenings against
Moab, Judah, Israel, the Governors of Samaria, and the Princes of the Tribes,
adding withal the famine of the word of God, for their abusing true religion,
and teaching and practizing a doctrine which God never prescribed, nor had any
thought correspondent.

Was not Michahs voice raised higher and higher against Judah and Israel, only
for idolatry? and did not Zephaniah tremble at the disobedience of the Jews?
foretelling their destruction, by reason of their corruption and abomination of
Idols. Look Zechariah clean over, and where the Jews are affrighted with the
exclamation of wants, famine, and overthrows, his warrant proceeds from this
occasion, that the altars of incense smoke up a pace, but stink before the
throne of God, sending their vapors back again, to choke the Inhabitants of
the earth. All Malachies complaints are against the Priests and Seducers of the
people, who not only were wicked themselves, but permitted the rest to be
polluted with idolatry. There is scarce one chapter in the book of wisdom,
which does not pensill out the gross and palpable running a whoring after the
ridiculous adoration of images. To conclude, our Savior, the Evangelists and
Apostles preach, that the true worshipping of God consists in spiritual
devotion, not wordly or carnal circumstances, and inueigh against nothing more
then men's traditions, the observing the outward letter, the adhering to
ceremonies, and with Martha leaving the most needful thing to be encombred
with worldly vanities and beastly corruptions, to which if you add that
excellent revelation, it is a plain discovery of Antechrist, and how the
western Churches should be infected with the contagious diseases of
trumperies, idolatry, and devilish interpretation of Scriptures, I durst say a
Jewish contradiction of the truth, and Apostate falling from the maine building
of Gods Church. And thus much for Idolatry in general.

CHAP. XIX. Certain particulars concerning the Greek CHVRCH.
SOme define religion, and indeed most truly, thus: Religio est vera Wherein
the Greek Church is far from true religion.
cultura Dei, and then I refer you to Monsier de Plessis discourse, wherein
he proves with sufficiency, that all the customs of the world concerning
divine adoration come short of Christianity: but if you will convert it thus:
Religio est cultura very Dei, then may you both divide, subdiuide, and divide
again, allowing of three Religions; the Jews, Christians, and Mahumetans, all
maintaining the omnipotency of God, and pretending obedience toward the high
Creator of all things. But because we hope for our established salvation in the
merits and mercies of Jesus Christ, and know, that the excellency of the
Trinity is described in the old Testament, when God said, Let us make man, when
the great King saw the image of one like the son of man in the furnace, when
Job knew that his Redeemer lived, and when the mystery of the Trinity is
revealed in many places: let us leave the vanity of the Heathen with their
obstinacy, the abomination of Idolaters with their gross abuses, the
antiquity of the Jews with their stiffneckednesse, the innovation of the
Mahumetans with their errors and impossibilities, and be only proud of our
livery of Christians. But now we must subdiuide again, and say, that amongst
Christians there is a tripartite separation. For the Greek Church runs one
way with the title of East: the Latin Church rangeth another way with the
denomination of West: and the reformed Church spreads a modest glory with the
liberty of Protestants.

Concerning the Greek Church I will be bold to tell you, that I have heard
some of their Protopapans and Archimandritans maintain their greatness,
precedence, and trueness of Religion before the Latin, and thus they assume
the defense. For greatness it contains most parts of Armenia, Georgia,
Mengrelia near the Caspian, many places in Natolia, or Asia minor, the
Countries of The greatness of the Creek Church.
Aethiopia in Affricke, which may equal them of the West Indies, of whom the
Pope does now boast so much: In Europe all Grecia: many great Islands (except
such as are diuerted Papists, incurring the scandal of Heretics) Muscouia or
Russia: some parts of Poland, Lithuania, Bogdonia, and the shores of the
Euxinum, much more ground, then the Pope can challenge, where he is the most
offen sieve Usurper.

For Precedence it claims likewise the prerogative, both ways: First, by
priority, in regard they were first The precedence of the Greek Church.
Christians, and the Apostles planted Churches amongst them, before either Paul
preached at Rome, or Linus was appointed Bishop. Secondly, by authority, as
by translation of the Empire, from whence Rome challenges hers: For when there
was no such ambition thought upon John Patriarch of Constantinople, usurped the
title of universal Bishop, and practiced the supremacy over all other
Churchmen, by reason the Emperor Constantine had so enobled and enabled the
great City, where he would have the Bishop to be principal in regard of
the majesty of his person and the bravery of the place, and therefore not only
graced him with the elated title of Patriarch, but invested him with many
roialties, and palaces, and temporal jurisdictions, to which the Bishop of
Rome did then intercede, interposing a negative even against the very title,
disprouing it as Antichristian, and Gregory surnamed the Great.
traduced John the Patriarch, as a wicked and malicious man for practicing such
ostentation: nor desisted he so, but writ whole volumes of letters tending to a
manner of defamation: some entreating him to disclaim such elation of heart:
some disalowing the presumption, as exorbitant in a Bishop, who should rather
imitate the humility of Christ: some thundering the cursed prediction of
Antichrist by such apostasy, and all of them dissuading the true Ministers of
Gods word from poisoning their preciously redeemed souls with the venom of
pride, and vainglory: then followed the fearful history of Nauclerus a
strong papisticall writer, on whom they lay the imputation of a fable: But he
says plainly, that that very instant, in which Constantine the great
enfeoffed the Nauclerus.
Church with temporary lands, and sumptuous edifices, the heavens seemed to
frown, the air was thickened with a cloud, the earth troubled with a tempest,
and after great thunder and lightning, a voice was heard; now is poison thrown
into the pure stream of Gods truth. Upon this the matter was a while respited
with a grant only of sitting down first at general Counsels, naming in
Commissions, and the binding voice in equality of censuring; all which, if they
were privileges, enlarged first the precedence of the Patriarch of
Constantinople.

Afterward, when the sins of the Empire, like a fluent stream ouer-spread
the banks of his enclosures, and that God determined the utter subversion of
all: two wicked men contrived the most lamentable desolation, both of the
government of the Empire, and religion of the Church, which were Phocas and
Bonifacius; the one conspiring thus with the other against God and Angels,
against heaven and earth, against men and Devils, that to establish Phocas in
the Empire of Constantinople, he would be contented, that Bonifacius of Rome
should be consecrated with the title of Universal Bishop; whereupon Phocas
by the murder of his Master Mauritius and other inhumane treacheries was
invested Lord of the Eastern Monarchy, and Bonifacius by the cousoning his
Predecessor Siluester, and other religious practices obtained the papacy:
insomuch that Platina and diverse of their own writers (amongst other pasquills
and satiricall inuections) exclaim, that he came in like a fox, reigned as a
lion, and died like a dog: so that all premises considered, if there be a
necessity in any such precedence, the Roman Bishops be but usurpers. For
Constantinople had it at general Counsels, and was permitted all the favor
of titles, which the Church, and most Christian Emperor collated at that time.

Concerning the truth, it is well known, that Peter of whom they boast so much
was Bishop of Antioch The verity of the Greek Church.
20. years, and those of Asia the first reputed Christians in the world; so
that even from Scripture it self and Paul's perigrination, many plentiful
collections enlarge his history and life with warrantable knowledge of what we
must trust unto. As for his visiting of Rome, howeuer Eusebius adhereth to some
formal discoueries, and other Authors produce instances of his own death and
daughters Martyrdom under Nero, it is both fanaticall, imaginary, and
unwarrantable by Scripture: nay I will say more, neither by collected
circumstances, probable conjectures, or authentical Authors is there any
inducement to believe it: But say he did visit Rome, and conferred with Paul,
what sense, reason, or honesty can allow the translation of his own
Byshopricke out of Asia into Europe, an intrusion into another man's
jurisdiction. For Paul was constituted to be the light of the Gentiles, and
lost his head at Rome in justifying his innocence: how then could Peter be
condemned of so functory a negligence, that being appointed to the dispersed
Jews of Asia, he would vilipend them, and intrude himself into the
government of the Gentiles of Italy: so then considering Antioch and the 7.
Churches spoken of in the Apocalips, were the first receivers of the Gospel,
from whence the Greeks in Europe were the next embracers of the truth, who can
oppose against her residence and conservation rather, where it was first
published, then in Italy, and the remoter places of Europe, whereas yet some of
their Countries are not quite purged from Paganism.

Thus do they dispute, and with stomachous ardency enueigh against the pompous
and ostentous glory of the latin Church, putting them to silence, as our
Savior did the Pharisees, when he questioned their opinion of John's baptism,
and exprobrated them for advancing the Hidra's head of confusion through
enormous ceremonies, and men's traditions, wherein they saw the inconveniences
before their faces, that they were not only patible of alteration, but would
grow in time to a Congeries and mountain of deformity, as men and devises did
augment them: notwithstanding time being weary of stabilitie, and the Devil
afraid of impeachment in his kingdom, has scattered many corruptions in the
fields of Gods farms, which have ouergrowne the seeds of verity in these
parts, that it now resembles the corn sown amongst tares, which choked the
growth of the best seed, and came up with such a violent ouerspreading, that
at harvest there was little benefit to the owner. For all the Greek Churches
are very small, full of idle painting, lamps, candles, tapers, and such like:
their service and language Greek, and when they write or print it is a
reasonable good Character, though far from the atticke Dialect: and yet I
will be bold to say, a good Scholar of our grammar instruction, shall scarce
understand the phrase of their common speakers, no more then a southern man,
one borne far north, or in Scotland. Their Monasteries are poor, unhandsome,
and far from the state of the Romish Church; and surely if in any thing they
imitate the Apostles, it is in their scorn of worldly pomp, carelessness,
wants, and sometimes austerity of life, although naturally they are the
merriest and most iouiall men in the world: their chief Abbots are called
Archimandritans, but all in general submit to the Episcopo of the Dioces, who
wears colored apparel of silk with a cross over his hat, which is low
crowned, broad brimmed, and tied under his beard with long strings, he
carries a crosier in his hand, but it has a plain cross; they call him also
Protopapan the first Father of the congregation (from whence the Bishop of
Rome assumeth his Papa, or if you will the name of Pope) acknowledging the
Patriarch of Constantinople at this very instant for supreme, and absolutely
contesting against the Popes tyrannical usurpation: yea such is their hate to
the Latins, I will not name their corruptions and Church, that they had rather
live in slavery and bondage under the Turk, then either implore the aid of
Italians for their restitution, or submit to that strange ambition of that
Cleargy-man, as some of them ironically term the Pope. They observe four
lents in a year, eat flesh on Saturdaies, but on Fridaies and all the lent,
with other prohibited times, they neither eat flesh, fish, butter, cheese, or
any meat, but like the Christians of Aethiopia, are abstinent beyond reason,
the ordinary desire of man, or any prescription of Scripture, or example of the
Primative Church. They baptize with water and oil, deny purgatory, never cut
their hair, adore no pictures, nor images out of the Scriptures, and yet are
superstitious in diverse festiuals, as St. Nicholay about sea matters, and
Celestinus; St. Demetrius, a feast about the 25. of October, called their
drunken feast; and St. George, who as our Ladies Knight has obtained
sufficient reputation. Their marriages, dancings, festiuals and burials, have
the several passages of many and strange ceremonies: but because whole volumes
are written against their erroneous superstition, I refer you to such
commentaries, concluding; that although they are some way more tolerable then
the Romish abuses, yet are their best garments so plighted with errors, and
laid up unhandsomely with wrinckles, that when you come to unfold them, you
either exclaim against the negligence of the servant, or carelessness of the
Master: who should be a better ouerseer. And thus much touching the Greek
Church. Now a little concerning the Latin.

CHAP. XX. Certain particulars concerning the Latin Church.
THere are so many books and disputations concerning the enormities of
papisticall religion, that little children can in a manner The corruptions and
abuses of the Romish Church.
retort an argument, and cite you common places of Scripture, against their
absurdities and idle traditions. I will therefore refer you to the larger
dilations of matters of faith, and fundamental points of salvation: and
concerning the strength of their props, which now uphold their supremacy and
monarchall jurisdiction; in a few leaves of Sr. Edwin Sands his worthy
discourse, you shall see them turned vpside down, as if an arm of Heccate
were put into the throat to pull the entrails outward, and show you the
strange diseases both of heart and lungs: or else examine the paraphrase of the
Revelation, and you shall hear distinctly proved the seat of Antechrist, the
pride of the whore of Babylon, the persecution of the Saints, and the
enormities of this Hosean strumpet, that has broken the bands of her first
wedlock, and bedashed her self with lusts loathsome chariot. For mine own
part therefore, I will leave that common way of inuection, or mustring up the
forces of argument out of the maine battle of Gods word, and breefly sum up
the accounts of her condemnation in this manner. 1. First, concerning their
government, it is mere political, as allowing all positions of tyranny,
revenge, disloyalty, licenciousnesse, wealth, and liberty, and wherein
Euripides, Demosthenes, Isocrates, Tully, Salust, Perseus, Horace, Sigonius,
Lipsius, Machiauell, or any other absolute or modern writer opened a
schoolhouse door of devilish devices and distasting principles, to modest and
orderly governments: they have culled out the same to serve their own turns,
and with the Jesuits, repute all others simple, that cannot labor in the
work of alteration of Kingdoms, and setting Princes at variance to
corroborate their own greatness. 2. Concerning religion, it is merely
ridiculous, and a dart out of the quiver of man's invention; yea, so Diabolical
and Turkish, that it interdicteth the searching of Scriptures, disputing of
matters of faith, or any opposition of their superstitious decrees, councels,
and consistorian statutes. 3. Concerning society and conversation, it is
merely mundane, voluptuous, and sauouring nothing but delightsome liberty: so
that if there were not a God to be prayed unto and believed in, a heaven to
be expected, a salvation to be hoped after, and an account to be made upon a
dreadful summons indeed, I had rather be a Cardinal of Rome, then a Nobleman
of Naples, who of all the Gentles in the world spread the largest cloth of
vanities and voluptuousness. 4. And lastly, concerning their seeming vows to
obedience, chastity and poverty; it is like Ianus face looking two ways, and
with the Lapwigg crying farthest from her nest: for they savor not one word of
truth in the same, as you shall see in the next chapter. So that I will only
relate unto you three several stories of three several sects, in which the
absurdities of the Latin Church most plainly appear.

In Rome amongst diverse others there lived a certain The story of a converted
Jew.
Jew, who had many controversies with Christian Friars about both their
religions, alleging for himself prevailing arguments against their idolatry,
or worshipping of images, wherein they would feign distinguish with the
differences of (...) and (...), etc. praying to Saints, profaning of the
Saboth, incontinency of life, and burning candles in the day time, as it were
in scorn of the glorious light of the sun, all which though they were
unanswerable, yet the Friar pleading the calling of the Gentiles, the
destruction of the temple, the disanulling of Jewish ceremonies, the birth and
coming of Christ, as a prefixed time of another religion, the authority of the
same, and the orders of the Church, prevailed so far with the other, that he
inclined a little to be a Proselite, which the Friar rejoiced to hear,
triumphing exceedingly at the good success of his oratory: nay soft (quoth the
Jew) it is not thy persuasion has coapted me to this course, but a certain
impression, that some great and good God is protector of this place, or the
prayers of an holy Patriarch (as Abraham disputed with Iehoua about the saving
of Sodom and Gomorrha) are acceptable to heaven in the behalf of some unknown
good men; otherwise the sins of Rome are so many, the lives of Priests so
corrupt, the wickedness of men so abominable, the villainy of politics so
mischeeuous, and all things so discrepant to true religion and honesty, that I
have wondered a thousand times, how the whole country, especially the city,
has been protected and supported from sinking to hell.

At another time, a sober Turk living in Rome, and wearied with the riot of
their Carneuall or Shroue-tide, at his The story of a Turck concerning his
opinion of Rome.
return to Constantinople, being demanded his opinion of the Christians,
answerered, that they had some tolerable customs, eat good meat, wear good
clothes, or rather spoiled much stuff with fantastic slashing and cutting
it, and lived in good towns; but they were madd twice a year: For at one time
they ran like Devils in a play up and down the streets with squibs of fire,
making a noise both on horseback, and on foot, keeping a coil with Curtezans
and Bawds, sporting with scurrulous and unmanly gambols, and performing actions
of strange vndecencies, which indeed is their time of Carneuall, a time of such
sluttishnesse, unruliness, and venerious riot in all the cities of Italy, that
in Venice one Iceppo Marcello has written an inuectiue against it. Shortly
after they went howling in the streets like dogs, mourning with lamentable
gestures, and whipping themselves until the blood came, and this was on good
Friday, when the Penetenciaries are covered over with a cassocke of canuasse,
except two holes to look out at, and all to belash themselves, until the
blood run down their shoulders, whereby great Princes are so impostured,
that contrary to a maine position of Scripture, against such voluntary
humiliation and ridiculous inflictings, they have entertained the penance, and
undertaken the stripes, witness Charles the 5. who left his rod of cords, as a
jewel of his tresury to King Philip. Duke Ioieuse, called father Angelo; who
returned to his orders, which was a barefoot, or Mendicant Capuchin Friar, as
soon as the league was dissolved, and many other both men and women of noble
families, who enjoined penance by their ghostly fathers, either by punishing
their bodies, unsavory pilgrimages, fasts, abstinence, or such like
endurances, are very zealous in the execution, and upon confidence of some
meritorious act, condescend to dangerous and laborious miseries, yea, terrors
abhorring to nature. Now to my old woman.

It is well known, that in the last days of Queen Mary, The story of the old
woman at Strasborogh
those days of fiery trial, our roods and images in England were so palpably
abused, and diuellishly stored with devices, that the Priests had diverse
tricks to move either eyes, heads, or hands, yea to make them speak with
variety of voices, and palpable gesture, as if the Idols of Molech and Chemosh
were to entertain the presents of the people, and Bell had life indeed to
devour the Kings allowance: which course is continued still in many places of
Europe, insomuch that a while ago in the Froe Church at Strasborogh, when
certain old devout women came to worship our Lady, the knauish Priests caused
the child to salute them in her arms, and (as it were) courteoufly to thank
them for making such account of his mother, which they not only wondered at,
but seemed in a manner offended, that the son should be so bold in the
presence of our Lady: whereupon one more zealously angry then the rest, cried
out aloud; Peace I pray you young Gentleman, I have nothing to do with you,
let me hear what my good Lady your mother says; and so when she had no
further reply, went away discontented.

Of this sort in our own Kingdom of Ireland, in the beginning of his
Majesty's reign, when the towns were Irish devotion.
commanded to frequent the Churches, I was my self an eare-witnesse of many
strange grudgings and murmurations, amongst which I yet encountered with this
facete and indifferent devotion; while two neighbors of Dublin were disputing
about Church Matters, the one an indifferent Protestant, the other a
superstitious Papist, and yet so seeming cunning, that she durst dispute
between the Popes supremacy and the Kings authority, with a willing mind to
satisfy either; her neighbor thus advised, to go to Church a Gods name, and
for the Popes sake to say Pater noster, for the Kings Our Father, let God take
which he will: and so it was merrily concluded, and the woman went accordingly
to her devotion. And thus much concerning the Latin Church. The parelell of
which with ours would sufficiently show our happiness: And this you may see at
large delivered in the works of many learned Divines of our Country, to whom I
refer you.

CHAP. XXI. Another excellency of ENGLAND, exposing the noble worth of her
Princes beyond other Nations.
WE will not be so uncivil, as to awake the The Kings of England have exceeded
for many memorable virtues and actions other Princes.
drowsy eyes of antiquity, or call in question things done so long ago, that
either by-opinion, or the deceit of men's inventions have bin falsified against
all reason and understanding; but quietly maintain the glory of our modern
Kings, and plainly uphold this position, that we have had more famous and
illustrious Princes since the Conquest, than any government of the earth.

If you begin with William of Normandy, his actions and warlike exploits are
memorable, his travels and laborious industry extraordinary, his wisdom in the
sedation of the tumults and factions amongst us wonderful, his magnanimity in
settling his Court and Palace admirable, and his success in all designs
unmatchable.

Howeuer William Rufus was so beholding to peace and prosperity, that he
tempred his warlike spirit from affecting either foreign or domesticke
dissension; yet did he consecrate many famous works to the memory of his
quietness, and out of a swelling of princely greatness, thought Westminster Hall
(the wonder of the world for a room in a house) too little for so great a
Majesty.

Robert of Normandy went in person to Jerusalem, and for his Heroicke success
and exploits might have bin rewarded with the Diadem, howeuer he was diuerted
to return home again into the fields of peace.

Henry the first was settled in the love of his people, tamed the French,
pacified Normandy, looked after Ireland, terrified his foes, corroborated his
friends, loved learning, and was a Maecenas of all worthy conditions either in
himself, or others; and howeuer the jealousy of sovereign points intercepted
the amity of the brethren, yet was his worth many ways expatiated, and diverse
particulars of estimation extracted from his government.

Henry the second obtained the dominion of Ireland, brought to happy period
many conflicts in France, stopped the breath of gaping hostility in England,
lashed the sides of his unruly children with stripes of discomfiture, and lived
in great honor and estimation: insomuch, that he never exacted imposition of
his people, nor wanted in his wars, yet left a treasure of above 200000 pound
in ready coin, besides jewels, and plate, which was much in those days.

What think you of Richard the first? Were not his voyages, conquests, titles,
and surname of Cuer de Lion for his valor, and exceeding courage, marks of
true honor? Would not his life make a memorable story? Shall not his actions be
registered in the court of eternity? Did he not prove a worthy champion of
renown? Ciprus was won, Acon conquered, Jerusalem established, the
confederate Princes ielous of his glory, and all the country full of his
memory: so that considering his tedious iourneyes, the peril of his person,
the success of his actions, and the noble end of his atchieuements, let the
proudest of the Othoman race be compared and spare not.

The troubles of King John, the Barons wars, the plantation and buildings in
Ireland, the discovery of the Clergies corruption, the calling in of Lewis,
the dismissing the French back again, and the turbulency of those times may
rank themselves with the fame of very proud Monarks.

Henry the third subdued the Welchmen, made sundry voiages into France, had
many conflicts with his own Barons, set forward a notable expedition to
Jerusalem, showed diverse effects of an heroicke and magnanimous spirit,
reigned gloriously 56 years, and in the interims of his peace brought many
ostentous buildings to perfection.

Edward the first went diverse times into Scotland, disposed of that Crown, as
he thought good, subjected them to England; conquered the Welchmen, appeased
them with a Prince of his own son borne in Carnaruan; settled his estate, and
ended a famous life with a glorious death, to which when renown and victory
was added, the applause rang through the world.

Edward the third, and the black Prince have engrossed the fame and renown of
the universal earth, and many memorable actions are advanced up as trophies of
their inimitable glory; so that they may march to the palace of majesty with
the proudest Emperors. For what worthy atchieuements so ever have bin
perpetuated in England, Wales, Scotland, Almaigne, and Flanders, in their own
persons they have brought to pass, as if they had bin borne to show some
wonder of nature, and exposed as rare examples to succeeding times. And for his
other sons, step into the proudest house of Austria, and tell me who can
match them? John of Gaunt went twice into Spain, and conquered Castile in the
right of his wife. Lionell Duke of Clarence passed the Alps into Italy, married
the daughter of Millane, reuelled in those parts with extraordinary cost,
pomp, and attendants, and wrought both a reverence and love toward his person
from foreign people. Edmond of Langley Duke of York was so wise and reposed,
that the government of England kept it self warm under the ouer-spreading of
his embraces. Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Gloucester was so true a lover of his
country, and champion of honor, that he contested with Majesty for
degenerating from her own properties, and durst tell his nephew King, wherein
he wandered from his paternall renown.

Henry the fourth, when he was but Earl of Hertford, went into Afric, bare
his father company into Spain, and obtained the diadem through popular love,
and respect of the people.

And although King Richard the second, was an unfortunate Prince, yet did he
surpass both ancestors and successors for bravery in apparel, costly
expenses, sumptuous fare, glorious courtship, noble company, princely revels,
and magnificent estimation: For all the while Queen Anne of Bohemia lived, the
fame of England was dispersed over the world, and the King had 8 or 10000
continually in his Court, whereby his pomp and port surpassed other Princes.

But would you wonder indeed? Then look into the 9 years of Henry the fifth,
and you shall see such a unity of virtues, consent of graces, entertainment of
valor, perfection of industry, military bravery, and fulness of generous
designs, that his very enemies gave way to the report of his worthy life; and
France in his death was left as a comfortles widow, or desolate orphan.

I might recite the fame of Edward the fourth, for revenging his fathers death,
many conflicts before and after he was King, his voiages into France, his
distastings against Burgundy, his troubles at home, and other princely
dispositions.

I could also bring into your good opinion the valor of Henry the seventh, his
miraculous delivery, his noble establishment, his buildings and sumptuous
monuments, his riches and wealth, his wisdom and politic contriuing of
affairs, the stately disposing of his Palace, and many other remarkable
actions, but I am afraid, that I am too weakly furnished to enter into the
lists with judicious censurers, nor shall be able to wrestle with opinion and
severe examination, which will rather condemn me for slight extenuation in the
attempt, than entertain the discourse, as a befitting subject, or adapted
explication of princelines.

Henry the eight wan Turwin and Turnay, entertained the Emperor Maximilian,
welcomed Charles the fifth, compounded at his pleasure with France, made voyage
after voyage, conquered Bulloigne, had almost obtained the Empire, was
maiesticall in all things, and died as it were in the arms of kingly
reputation.

Queen Elizabeth deserves a whole story of her life, majesty, and government:
For the very Heathen and Mahumetans, the Persians and Idolaters, the
Aethiopians and Muscouite do name her with reverence.

CHAP. XXII. An other excellency of ENGLAND casting up an account of her
antiquity in one united Monarchy before other Nations.
AS no country in Europe did ever advance England the auntientest united
kingdom of Europe.
up so many excellent parts together toward the building the frame of
perfection: so is it apparent in nothing more lively, than in Englands
antiquity in one united Monarchy, without either claim or competition of
forreiners, usurpation of intruders, attempt of hostile invaders, and desire of
alteration amongst our selves: whereas yet all the Kingdoms of the world,
especially within the reach of European knowledge, within 400 years have had
other titles, bin subject to strange disparitie of government and religion, and
confronted many times with such Princes, or fearful subjects within their
territories, as have made them ielous of sovereign points, yea the very loss
of their cheifest crowns and dignities. If you search the wounds of the
Persian and Turkish government, as they seem now to be healed, you shall find
them badly cured, and indeed festred so dangerously, that they must be better
ouer-viewed, or their inward putrefaction will on a sudden poison the very
entrails: For they have bin tossed and tumbled with many alterations, and ever
since Tamberlaine descended out of Scithia amongst them, suffered diverse
concussions both in government and religions, so that howeuer the Persian is
more noble, yet he has permitted a mixture of many barbarous people to the
great disturbance of his former glory: As for the Turk he is merely new to
us, and a formidable intruder into such territories, as he gripeth with a
strong arm; so that what you now behold amongst these Mahumetans is only
vpheld by tyranny, a band of no greater strength, then power, forces, and
reward can tie together, wherein if any fail the government is quickly let
loose, and the subject at liberty takes hold of every innovation: and although
by tumbling and tossing like to heaps of snow rolled up and down, they have
grown greater and greater, while the frosty coldness of our Christian Princes
gave them leave to harden, whereby they are increased to that stupendous heap
you now see: yet when a thaw comes, and that rota fortunae is in Gyro, it shall
and will be subject to diminution, especially when the glorious sun of
success shines out the consent of our Kings to expulse them at least out of
Europe, if not from the usurpation of the better parts of Asia.

The Kingdom of Hungary, though but lately established, and known by a
different royalty from the Empires either of Greece, or Germany; yet as you see
a prey seized on by a hawke, or other tormenting vulture, pulled in pieces, and
cruelly rent a sunder: has suffered many dilacerations, and besides the
capital enemy of Christendom her proppes sawed a sunder by some barbarous
hands amongst themselves. The Kingdom of Poland is not 300. year old: For it
retained in times past, but the prerogative of a Dukes coronet, and was ever in
contention with Lithuania and the adjoining Princes, until the Pope undertook
the appeasing of those troubles, and added the grace of a royal inuesture to
Sigismundus, surnamed the great, who at last united both Pomerania, Prussia,
and Lithuania; yet is not so established, but the Election of the Peers
diminishes the prerogative of the King, and new Princes; new laws, new
confederacy, new government, have let confusion, and alteration loose upon the
Country.

The Emperor, Princes, Electors, and principalities in Germany are almost of
the same nature and condition, but that many liberties of Cities have been
bought out with money and diverse franchises purchased to redeem themselves from
the tyranny of wanton lords: so that in particular many families have been
chopped and changed, honorable houses transmuted, and new names and titles
have as it were thrust the old out of doors: and in general, what with the
French, Germans, and the house of Austria, there has not a thought passed for
hereditary succession, but all things have been subject to instabilitie, and
are still hurried in the current of prevailing, as either the Pope, Electorum
placitus, or militareius filling the sails full of wind, gives them leave to
drive the bark of the government forward. The Princes of Italy in worse
estate, then they. For except the Venetians, some of their Dukedomes, as
Ferrara and Vrbin are fallen to the Papacy: some of their Kingdoms, as Naples
and Sicilia possessed by the Spaniard, with Millane and Genoa: and the rest
suspitiously standing on a guard of circumspection, least they should betray
one another to the stronger side: and whereas the Venetians do boast of 700.
years continuance, I am sure they never flourished, but by the dissentions of
the rest, and in their first inchoation, these Islands were but receptacles for
banished men: yea compared to cauernus for simple beasts to shroude in, whom
the others of prey and rapine did not look after. For the Goths and Lombards,
that infested Italy, made no more account of them, then we did of the
stragglers in the mountains of Walls, or fastness in Ireland; but they have
been better coadiuted, and taken success by the hand to pace out the measures
of prosperity, as you now see their glory, riches, and augmentation. The
Kingdom of Spain is so new, that the other day there was a King of Portugali,
as absolute as himself; a King of Arragon of sufficiency to contest with
Castile; a King of Granado and Valencia within memory subject to Paganism, and
maintaining the new sect of Mahomet; a King of Navarre as fearful to him, as
the rest; and sundry other abridgments tending to the diminution of Majesty:
howeuer at this instant he is blown big with the wind of superfluity and
greatness. The Kingdom of France but a while ago compacted. For Burgundy
challenges a roialty, and had afterward a Duke maintaining his own
privileges. The Earl of Flanders writ Comes Deigratia: Normandy was another
man's: Britain in a Dukes possession: Gascoine, Guien, and Acquitane our own:
Daulphin and Province incorporated by gift, and Rhene Duke of Loraine invested
with the Toialties of Naples: and thus could I run over all the rest, if
either they were of eminence suitable to the glory of these recited, or
consequence to store us with observations and example: only England for above
600. years (I might reckon from Edgar) but that you will answer some 400.
years since the Prince of WALLS was only an Homager, and SCOTLAND in
continual opposition, had fed upon the plenty of a flourishing Monarchy, and
been fatted with the well fed dainties of an exuberant Country, diplaying
the colors of her own roialty in such a glorious manner, that she has not
only spread her fame with an uncontrollable hand, but brought the glory of
other Nations under the adumbration of her canopy: so that if I should add her
several conquests of Ireland, Walls, Scotland, France, Cyprus, Jerusalem, and
Castile it self, it would torment us with remembrance of our losses, or
augment our iealosie for hassarding our honor by negligence, and corrupted
peace, which was once so worthily established by the proppes and supportation
of merit, and virtue.

CHAP. XXIV. Another excellency of ENGLAND consists in the happy life of our
Countryman and common people.
IF you look on our example you shall find, that the chiefest part of The
Husbandmen are happier in England then in other nations.
Salomons glory extended it self from the abundance of his people, when every
man did eat under his own Vine, or fig tree, when Israel were many as the
sand of the sea, making merry one with an other; when the Husbandman plowed in
peace and reaped in content; and when the wrongs of the common sort were as
well straightened by the line of Justice, as the oppressions of the mighty
reformed by the hand of authority. In which prerogatives I dare be bold to
say, that ENGLAND excells all other nations, as the light of the Sun
inferior Planets: For in some places they are absolute slaves: in some places
denied the comfort of their own endeauours: in some places not capable of
purchases: in some places not permitted to marry above their degree, and
elsewhere not suffered to enjoy the freedom of life, or benefit of nature: as
for an instance. In Turkey he is with the rest a most poor and unfortunate
slave; for whether Mustleman or Christian, he dare not manure his ground to the
best profit of his endeauours, living so poorly with such sluttish and
drudging company, that I have pitied his fortune, and commiserated his
distress. In Hungary and those parts they resemble carrion to be preied upon
by ravens, who not only feed themselves, till their gorges be full, but call
for others to consume that which is left: thus living under the Turk he has
nothing of his own, and in the Christian government all is taken from him,
either to furnish the wars, or maintain the tribute. In Italy they are a
little better, as long as they be able to pay their rents, and husband their
grounds; yet do they seldom live of their own, or execute any thing
befitting the freedom of conversation: Besides in many places they are so
terrified with the troublesome incursions of the Banditi, who even make a prey
of their wealth and cattle, that although they know of their robberies and
murders, yet dare they neither detect them, nor deny to entertain or relieve
them. These be men proscribed Banditi.
by the Law, and banished from their own Inheritances for some heinous mulct
or other, and flying into a stranger Princes jurisdiction live by rapine and
ouer-mastering of Passengers, as they do in Arabia, and most parts of Turkey,
remote from the great City, especially in Epyrus, where both Thieves and Rouers
shelter themselves within the Mountains Assassini, but seldom perform any
robbery without murder: whereupon as we say figuratively, all inhumane and
monstrous delinquents in this kind are called assassini. But to our Italian
Countryman again: After the pride of Italy (especially the women) they will
be a little gaudy in the same apparel their mothers bestow upon them, or their
amorosos send as a gratuity, and thus I confess I have seen an Inne-keepers
daughter go to Church in a colored damask gown with Spanish sleeves laid on
with gold lace, and come home to dress our dinners: the men are very
industrious according to the goodness of ground, as having in one selfsame
field (though it be but an acre of Land) both corn, vines, and fruit trees,
and in his gardens about his house roots, sallets, Bees, and silke-wormes,
boasting how the Romans maintained their Colonies from the Countryman, and
supported the Farmer as a nursing father for Soldiers: nay they can remember
the Law Agraria, when the Gracchi lost their lives about an equal distribution
of the Roman territories, and the maintaining the immunities of the free
Italians: but they sigh to recount, how it was abrogated, and ever after they
were suppressed in their insolences, as kept from outward pomp, and pleasures
of frequented cities.

He is now called Villano (from whose character we have (...).
a contemptible tenure of land in England called villenage) serving to no other
use, but to enrich his Lord, feeding himself upon garlike and onions, and is
acquainted with no good thing but superstition, a few gaudy clothes, and the
incontinent life of curtezans.

In Spain it is far worse, and the Contadini are numbered amongst the
reproaches of their government, and almost Contadino.
esteemed as the asses, which bring their cabages, melons, and suchlike to the
market. For he neither dare atempt to cheapen any thing appropriate to the use
of Gentlemen, as flesh, fish, wheat, and excellent fruit, nor must he (though
he have of his own) but furnish the market with the best, feeding himself
with the worst and vildest stuff. Besides, as the error of Italy, or if you
will horrible abuse, if the mother have a comely daughter, she is contented
for money, with her prostitution, and many times is her Bawd, if she can happen
of a good Chapman, nor desisteth she so, but in one house you shall sometimes
have the mother a drudge, and 3. or 4. daughters mercenary strumpets.

All France over the pesant is not only beastly within doors but churlish of
condition, sauouring nothing but Pesant.
his labor either in setting forward his husbandry, or dressing his vines: yet
how? with base and servile behavior, with poor and miserable expenses, with
obscene and filthy lodging, with jealous and malicious welcome, with licentious
and ill becoming liberty of speech against both Court and Commonwealth.

In Germany the Boore is somewhat better, for he eats good meat sometimes,
though vildly dressed, will be Boore.
drunk and merry, must be always employed, and always a hungry or desirous
of drink, even when he is able to drink no more, and can apparel himself
hansomely to go to Church either on sunday or holliday: but they are dangerous
in their tumults, and rages, and not to be trusted in their reconciliation
after a wrong.

In Ireland he is called Churl, and if we nickname him in England we term
him Clown: He lives in great drudgery, Churl.
not so much for his labor, as his watches. For he is compelled to guard his
poor Cattle, as well as he can, both from Thieves and wolves: insomuch, that
although he have but one poor Cabine his cow and hog lies with him in the
same. But if he boast of larger increases, he is then compelled to bring them
all night into some bawne of a castle, or under the loop-holes of some raft, or
fortification: For the Kerne watch all advantages in times of peace, and think
their thefts justifiable in defiances of war.

But look upon us truly, as we live indeed, and you shall find our Yeoman
of England a title of estimation Yeoman.
in regard of his wealth, antiquity, and maintenance of his family in a
continued descent: so that in times past he would not alter his title of rich
Yeoman for any vaineglorious attribute of beggarly Gentlemen: you shall now see
them dwell in brave houses, Manors, Lordships, and Parkes to the annual
vallew of a thousand pounds, having sometimes their sons Knighted, their
daughters well bestowed, their other children so disperced, that Lawyers,
Citizens, and Merchants are raised through our Kingdom from sons, and kindred
of Countrymen: nay, you shall behold them invited to courtly promotion, and
knowing that the breath of Kings aduanceth or deiecteth can attend the good
hour, and beg all such graces, as a Princes favor distributeth to the
subject: yet have I read of a King in England, who importuned by a Yeoman to be
made a Gentleman, answered, he could enoble him with knighthood, or the title
of a Baron; but not confirm him a Gentleman; because true gentry had another
manner of luster from the rays of virtue, and honor in a continual descent
of Ancestors, illuminated from the sun of worthy actions, either in military
profession, or administration of civil government But thus lives our
Countreyman, by what name or title soever: only we were wont to interpose this
difference between Yeoman, and Francklin or Farmer, that the Yeoman was a
Trarcklin or Former.
landed man, either Freeholder or coppieholder: the Farmer only hired another
man's land, paying a fine or rent, and so growing rich had the denomination of
the other, and did not in times past murmr, though you called him
Good-husband, or expert Plowman: yet call him what ^man
you will, he is in some Countries able to lodge you richly, set a piece of
plate on the cupbord, five or six dishes of meat on the Table, sweet and fine
linning on your bed, cheerfully to welcome you, and is so cunning besides,
that he can tell his Lawyer a formal tale, and complain to the Justice, if a
far better man do him wrong: and in this who can come near us?

CHAP. XXV. Another excellency of ENGLAND, consists in the goodness of our
Navy and shipping.
I Hope I shall now pass without contradiction, No nation ever came near us
for so many and good ships.
especially when I bring you forward to our ports, harbors, and rivers,
showing you the glory of our shipping, whether you esteem them, as the Kings,
and only purposed for magnificence, state, and occasion of war; or the
Merchants for exploration of countries, plantation of Colonies, bringing in of
commodities, enriching of our Kingdoms, and yet withal defending our selves:
or both together for noble actions, memorable voyages, extraordinary
encounters, and ceremonious bravery, wherein we have bin so privileged, that
from the memorable fame of Edward the third, to this instant, we never met
enemy, but prevailed upon equal terms, yea great odds, and when we had
misfortunes, it was as Sampsons death amongst the Philistims, who pulld down
the Temple on their heads, and slew more at that instant than in his former
enterprises; witness many nauall battles, wherein what loss soever we
sustained, the adversary had double and treble: even when about the fourth
year of Hen: 8. the Nauies of England and France met at Britains Bay, and we
lost the Regent of England, wherein Sir Thomas Kneuet was Captain with 700
men; yet did they endure the wreck of many ships, especially the French Carick,
called then the wonder of Europe, in which Sir Piers Morgan with a 1100 men
perished: as also when Sir Richard Greenueild within our memory miscarried by a
mere disastrous chance, although I might honestly excuse it by ouer-great
advantage of both ships and galleys; yet as they themselves have confessed,
they had no great cause to boast, or let any vainglorious insulting run at
random. But how we have prevailed indeed, let these few instances suffice.

About the 14 of Edw: 3. the King gathered a Navy of 200 sail against the
French, who in those days were coadiuted with Flanders, as a Peer of France,
wherein though he was mightily ouer-matched with numbers, yet prevailed he in
execution, and had so triumphant a victory, that their own account numbered
30000 men slain, 200 ships surprised, and taken, and the rest put to an
ignominious flight. The 20 year he went into Normandy, dismantled her Towns,
spoiled Cane, and as a messenger of revenge brought fire into the Harbors
until the ships were consumed and set on a blase. Anno 24 he encountered the
power of Spain, and vnplumed their feathers of ostentation by taking 28 great
ships, and making the rest unserviceable. Anno 33 he sailed into Picardy, and
so prevailed, that the sea yielded him safe passage, and all Burgundy safe
conduct. Anno 41 with a memorable victory both at sea and land did the black
Prince resettle Peter of Spain, and in despite of all the sea forces, or
other warlike opposition passed and repassed at pleasure. In the time of Rich:
2. about the 10 year the Duke of Lancaster sailed into Spain, but how
glorious that victory was on our side, and how surmounting our Navy before
theirs, the wonderful success attested, and their own inventories record the
loss with lamentable Items. The next year following Richard Earl of
Arundell, and Thomas Earl of Notingham encountered at sea with an infinite
number of Flemmings; but victory is in the hands of God, and multitudes of men
fail in their ostentation: For in that maritime contention were taken a 100
ships and better, the success filling our Cities with commodities, and our
mouths with praises and thanksgiving. In the 5 of Henr: 4 when the French came
to the I Will of Wight, and assailed Dartmouth with a great Navy, the rusticall
people prevailed against them, and manning out but the fisher-boats of the
country, with certain Pinaces attending the service, took 16 of their best
ships, and compulsed the rest to be the messengers of their own obloquy. The
3. of Hen: 5. was a year of triumph, and a 1000 sail of ships filled the
narrow seas, cleared the passage into Normandy, amassed all men, who had notice
of our bravery, and rejoiced the rest of Europe with Encomians of our success,
which followed presently in France. In the 15 of Edw: 4. it pleased the King to
pass over to the aid of the Duke of Burgundy, but howeuer his inconstancy
proved unsavory to us at land, it matters not: I am sure the seas gave us way,
nor durst their Navy presume to intercept us. In the 5. of Hen: 8. the former
encounter, which I named at Britains bay was a day of terror, and we took,
burnt, and spoiled as many, as we mustred out of harbor. The next year
threatening Turwin and Turnay our Navy carrying all before it like a swelling
river, beating down the slender banks, there scarce appeared an opposite: for
the former losses were so great, that they halted downright in their
recovery, and France once lamed in her shipping, cannot every year bring a new
Navy into the channel with good equipage, or advantage. The 14 year the Earl
of Surrey was Admiral, and not only prevailed in all encounters at sea, but
by virtue of our shipping conquered diverse towns both in Britain and Picardy.
The 15. the Duke of Suffolk was sent into France with an army of 30000, who
passed the seas, yea the water of Some without battle, and so terrified the
French with all their coadiutors at that time (for you must understand in those
repining and murmuring days against our glory, France, Spain, the
Low Countries, and Scotland were either confederate, or entertained for wages:
so that almost all the mercenary shipping of Europe attended on the payment of
the crowns of the sun) that they thought it the best part of their security
to absent themselves. The year 35. Sir John Dudley Vicount Lisle high Admiral
of England, with a Navy of 200 sail, passed the seas into Scotland, in
despite of all the power the confederates could raise, and not only performed
actions beyond expectation, but taught them the true knowledge of English
shipping and mariners. The next year the French Navy came into Sussex; but
upon very short warning were dissipated, and in a sudden encounter felt the
smart of presumption. Presently as in diverse advantages of such petty roades
and excursions; they landed at Portsmouth, and the I Will of Wight, but with what
success or satisfaction, I cannot compare it better than to a bowl of water
spilt, irrecouerably to be gathered up again: For they never durst adventure,
when our ships looked bigg upon them, but understanding of their employment
abroad, and sequestration far off, then hurried they suddenly upon us; yet I
hope neither found us unprovided, nor returned back again with true cause of
insulting. In the 3. of Edw: 6. the French Kings galleys and Caricks invaded
Gernsey and Iersey: but with what face fortune looked upon them, the loss of a
1000 men, with the spoil of their greatest ships and galleys suddenly
discovered. Why may I not name here our journey to Newhauen in the 4. of Queen
Elizabeth, when through the power of our Navy, at which both French and
Spaniards began to repine, the Earl of Warwick made the seas wanton with
iollity, and affrighted the land with those small troops of old soldiers from
the Garrison at Barwick, united to others raised from the willing musters of our
country: and although some envious hand would stop the mouth of report from
ecchoing our applause at this time, yet I am sure Count Ringraue and his army
felt the smart of affliction, and the sorrow of many defeatures, and dare
avouch, that the seas lay open unto us in despite of opposition, or any
encounter our enemies durst or could prepare to invite us to. In the 18. year
was Forbishers first voyage, and by reason that this glorious Queen had as it
were tied the observation of all Nations to her actions and government, a peace
being generally contracted, diverse presumptuous persons took advantage of the
same, and filled the narrow seas with rouers and pirates, who ran up and down
without control, like untamed colts, scorning all enclosures and bounds',
until Captain Holstock with 4. good ships and two pinaces was appointed the
reformer of these abuses, who presently brought into the school of correction
200 rouers, 8 Flushingers, diverse Barks and Pinaces, and pacified the
outragiousnes of these petty thefts. The 19. Forbishers second voyage. The 20.
Forbishers third voyage, with many other of famous memory, amongst whom
Hawkins, Drake, Candish, and such worthy seamen (prevailing in all their
explorations) as they attempted great matters, deserve as great commendation.
About the 23. that famous business of Desmonds rebellion breathed insolency
into those people, by reason the Pope and Spaniard had fortified themselves in
Smirwick in Ireland, and with a sufficient number of ships blocked up the
haven, until certain of her Majesty's Navy, and the Deputies forces at land
(being then the forward Lord Gray) behaved themselves with such good order and
success, that all the passages of victory to us, and miserable discomfiture to
them were set open, and we triumphed with a plenary satisfaction to our
endeavors. In the 24. Monsieur returned into the Low Countries to be invested
with the Duchy of Brabant: but when he beheld our glorious fleet, and
iudiciously looked upon their strength and bravery, he burst out into a
passionate applause, and swear, that howeuer men were enemies to our peace,
they were enemies to truth, if they did not acknowledge it without comparison.
The year following Captain Borough with one ship, and a small Bark went to
sea against Rouers, and although the Council at that time suspected us
ouer-weake to withstand an united desperatenes; yet the fight continued against
7 or 8, and all men can witness our memorable success in that encounter. The
triumphs of 88 are of such renown, and worthy celebration, that the world
still remembers our illustrious Navy, and admirable victory: but this secret
was not fully revealed, that we were not provided, nor thoroughly furnished: so
that as true hearts prayed for us, the great God of heaven fought for us. The
year following the Portingall voyage, and (as it were set on degrees) Cales
voyage, the Island voyage, Sir Richard Leusons noble exploits, and his place
since supplied by Sir William Mounson, have set forward our reputation to run
the race of irresistable prevailing, and hold up our glorious countenances in
despite of any confronting look, or repining eyes. Nor do I hear reckon up
our Merchant Adventurers, and the sundry times encountering with greater and
more aduantagious forces: witness the Merchant Royal in those times, when John
King was Master, which alone encountered with 3 ships, and 10 galleys, and came
off with such iollity, as they fretted to be so disappointed, and we triumphed
to welcome home so well deserving a man. Since when, although those of Malta,
Florence, the confederates of the Arches, and many desperate Pirates, have
conspired against our traphique, and made our journey into the Leuant somewhat
dangerous: yet we have still gone forward, and could not be pulled back by
any wrenching arm whatsoever: especially in those days of trial, when we
stood on our guard, and made our warlike preparation a very pair of tarriers
to the Spaniard. For in those days the Conuoy for his western treasure was so
toilesome, troublesome, chargeable, and dangerous unto him, that one million
defraied but the charges of another, and by that time it came to distribution,
there was a strange account cast up of losses, and defatigable expenses. Thus
had our hopes still life, and our spirits grew stronger and stronger with
honorable expectation, and noble impl^t: And now it has pleased his Majesty
to shut up the brazen doors of contention, and we have reason to sound out his
excellent Motto of Beati pacifici.

CHAP. XXVI. An other excellency of ENGLAND consists in the number, riches,
endeavors, and extraordinary worth of our Merchant.
IN the ouer-looking as it were the map of the worlds business, I must needs
The Merchant of England surpasses all other Nations.
confess, that never Monarchy was established, or enlarged, but by the power
of the sword: yet alas, when I consider the inconveniences impending, the
affrightings of people, the demolition of Cities, the deuastation of Countries,
the slaughters of Armies, the rapes, murders, and terrors of the world in the
best conquests and victory; I cannot but lament the condition of man, that
does extract his glory from tyranny and curses, from confusion and turmoyle,
from blood and death. For thus do we boast of our ancestors, and the very
women do esteem no man noble or worthy, that cannot relate the victories of
his forefathers, and dare not himself set fury on work to the killing of his
enemy, nay to the murdering of his Competitor, whether for love, or
displeasure. But if you will truly consider the admirable composition of
Commonwealths, and extraordinary glory of Kingdoms, it consists in sedation
of troubles, and in the enriching of private men: yea even Salomons greatness
was raised to a stupendous mountain of amasement, from the effects of a well
compacted peace; in which his Temple was built, his Palaces were finished, his
Cities disposed of, his Soldiers maintained, and his glory spread abroad with
sufficient fullness: For horses were brought him out of Arabia, fine linen
from Aegipt, perfumes and odours from Aethiopia, spices from India, precious
stones from the Islands, gold from Ophir, beasts and strange foul from
Affricke, and many other things both for exornation and pleasure from the
remotest parts of the earth. But how? by the industry of Merchants, and worthy
endeauours of men disposed to honor their Country, and advance themselves: As
for corruptions of life, covetousness, vainglory, ambition, pride,
emulation, cunning, and infinite of this kind, they are not to be named by way
of Character, or personating any particular condition of man whatsoever. For
from a Prince to a Peasant no body lives, but may be traduced in the self same
kind, that you would lay imputation on the shoulders of the Merchant:
therefore I will absolutely conclude, that the true Merchant-aduenturer, as he
is one way the supporter of political States by commerce, conversation, and
bringing in of wealth, so is he another way the Atlas of honor and magnificent
majesty by his customs, filling the storehouses of a Court, supplying the
wants of a palace, pleasing the desires of nouelty, cooling the heates of
pride, and satiating the vanity of wishes; nay if you would

and the Islands, explored Virginia, Norrembega, Guiana, and other coasts, and
made a trade with these Indians for diverse commodities; so that from one place
or other of our Country, we have not so few as a 1000. sails of ships
abroad: nor so small a number as a 100000. persons disperced under this
acceptable title of Merchant. For so I must tell you, that except you advise
with your self for this denomination in many places of the world the excuse of
curiosity will not serve your turn: For you shall be taken for a Spy, and a
dangerous Hypocrite, such is the jealousy of Kingdoms toward wanton
Travelers, and the necessity of entertainment for well employed men. And thus
much for some special excellencies wherein England excels all other Nations.

CHAP. XXVII. Another excellency of ENGLAND may be drawn from this
observation, that we have had more glorious persons, and famous Kings, and
Princes to visit our Country, then any other Nation, etc.
AMongst other spreading boughs of prerogatives drawing sap from the tree of
Englands glory, I may not leave out this observation, that we have had since
the Conquest more several magnificent entertainments of foreign Princes, and
voluntary progresses of famous Kings, and Emperors; some for pleasant iournies,
others for necessary imploiment, then any Nation of Europe: not that I mean to
trouble you with vain or tedious repetitions of Ambassadors, Legates,
Cardinals, or other ordinary Liegers, as is customarie in all Princes Courts,
and concurses of State; but merely of extraordinary solemnities, and occasion
of resplendant shows, triumphs, and festival inuitations to delight and
contentment.

No sooner had the Normane settled his Conquests, and established his son
William Rufus in the throne of greatness, as well appeared by his ambitious
desires to fill all Europe with the report of his exaltation; especially after
his return out of Normandy, and that he found fault with the smalnesse of
Westminster Hall, being yet the remarkeablest room for State, greatness, and
capacity in the world. But Malcolme King of Scots, and the two Princes of Wales
came to do homage unto him about the third year of his reign; yea Robert
Duke of Normandy with many Princes of France acknowledged his eminent glory,
and maiesticall Kingdom; although the said Robert was his elder Brother, and
made way to his peace and amity. This likewise continued toward Henry the
first, and for addition, the Kings his adjoined neighbors assumed nothing to
themselves, but what stood with the good liking of the King of ENGLAND, for
which purpose they many times came in person to gratify him: To which if you
unite the aduantagious marriage of Henry Emperor of Rome to his daughter, I
hope it may pass for a reasonable beginning, and give life to after hopes for
the augmentation of our credits, and exaltation of our prerogatives.

Anno 1184. about the 31. of Henry 2. Heraclius Patriarch of Jerusalem came
into our Country to desire aid against the Turk. 1201. and the 3. of King
John at a solemn entertainment in Lincoln, William King of Scots and diverse
of his Nobles did homage unto him in person, to which if you add his marrying
of Lady JANE his bastard daughter to Leuelin Prince of Wales, who was in those
times a turbulent and ambitious man, you may easily judge, what reputation our
Country had got in the world, when the Pope was more affrighted at the
starting aside of little ENGLAND, then if whole Spain had at that time fallen
quite away, from his supportation, or if you will Antichristian usurpation.

Anno 1224. about the 8. year of the reign of Henry 3. John de Brennes King
of Jerusalem came into England for aid and assistance against the Saracens,
and from that inimitable example of Richard 1. called in those times the flower
of chiualry, that wunne Cyprus and Acon in person, well hoped to find the
other branches of that kingly offspring full of the sap of the same
roialtie; but when I remember, how the chiefest Potentates of Europe came to
elect Richard Earl of Cornwall his brother Emperor, and King of the Romans, I
am more then satisfied for maintaining this unanswerable position of our
excellency in this kind.

If you ouerlooke the life of Edward 1. you shall find it a very map of
honor, and be able to tell the world, that besides many foreign Potentates,
the Prince of Wales and his brother David reioiced in his acceptance of them;
and John Baliol King of Scots was glad to be named and established by him: But
come a little forward, and at the naming of Edward the 3. me thinks all
English hearts should leap for joy. For 1334. Edward Baliol King of Scots did
him homage; the Prince of Wales was glad to A glory worthy all observation.
kiss his hands; and the Electors of Germany 1348. invited him to the chair
of the Empire: nay such was our royalty that Henry Pichard Vintner and Mayor
of London feasted EDW. of England; JOHN King of France; the King of Cyprus
coming to see our worthiness; DAVID King of Scots; EDW. Prince of Wales, Duke
of Aquitane, Guien, and Cornwall, all in one day: Besides at diverse triumphs
and Iusts these foreign Princes were led as it were by the hand of amasement
to magnify, and extol the heroicke spirits of our nation. Again in the 38.
year of the King; the French King, the King of Cyprus, and the King of Scots,
came all into England, and made pleasure proud, that it had good occasion to
welcome them. Besides, 1367. Peter King of Spain was disseised by his bastard
brother Henry, but coming into England made such impression in the
compassionate soul of EDW. the black Prince, that he assisted him in person,
and reestablished him in his kingdom.

Shall I remember you of that glorious celebration of Himmeneus triumphs, when
Duke Tussus and many Princes of Boheme and Hungary brought that magnificent
Lady ANNE daughter to the King of Bohemia, and married her to King RICHARD the
2. of England, during whose life such was the royalty of our Court and State,
that in the 8. year the King of Armenia came into England for coadiutement
against the Turks. In the 12. year the Earl of Saint Paul and many Princes
out of France and other Countries came to a Iusts in Smithfield, and made a
just estimation of our invaluable glory. In the 16. year the greatest Lords of
Scotland came to our triumphs in England, and checked their own presumption
for confronting us with a supposition of equality. In the 20. year the Dukes
of Burbon and Bar brought over Isabell of France to be a Queen in England,
and glad was that Prince of Europe, that had been an eyewitness of our
glory: yea that magnificent workemanshippe concerning the exornation of the
Hall of his Palace, now Westminster (and by community and disparaged
alteration unregarded) was as it were a magnes to draw over the seas thousands
of people, and hundreds of Princes, and Noble lords to look upon the wonder of
the world.

In the 4. year of HENRY 4. King of England the Emperor of Constantinople
came of purpose as the Queen of Sheba to Solomon, to set report on the
touchstone of truth, and see whether custom had enlarged our fame or no, and
here he was entertained with all the sumptuous and attractiue shows, and
delights, that Art and expenses could devise to satiate the mind of man: But
when Dame JANE Duchess of Britain came over to marry our King HENRY, I hope
our enemies will imagine, her train and Attendants to be much augmented with
the company of many foreign Princes and Potentates: And if you step forward
to the 8. year of his reign the Earl of Mar, and the great lords of
Scotland came to solace themselves, and made their triumphs both at Tilt and
Turney acceptable to the beholders. The like was performed the 10. year, when
the Seneschall of Hennault with all those Princes reputed the Court of England
a very School of chiualry, and put in practice accordingly all the braueries
of marshall discipline. But when the Lady LVCIA the Dukes sister of Millane
came to marry EDMUND Earl of Kent, both city and palace was so furnished
with strangers, and the concurses of people so well ordered, that inferiors
were amassed at so extraordinary attraction, and the better sort gave a plaudite
to our glory.

If you ouer-looke the time of Henr: 5. surnamed the Champion of Honor, though
it was lamentable for the brevity, yet was it unmatchable for the royalty. For
after his coronation he was scarce three years in his own Kingdom, and yet in
the third of his reign he welcomed the Emperor of Almaine and King of Rome,
and presently after graced the daughter of France and all her retinue, with
many foreign Princes, who would not return, till they saw their Lady
Katherine Queen of England. To which if you add the entertainment of the Duke
of Holland, and many Princes of those countries, especially Freesland, you
cannot choose but make up a plentiful breuiary of Heroicke Majesty, and worthy
princelines.

About the year of Grace 1502. and the 17. year of the reign of Henry 7. the
expectable Prince Arthur married Katherin daughter to Ferdinando King of Spain,
and his eldest sister Margaret was affianced unto James King of Scots, at whose
inaugu^tion the concurse of strangers, and amongst them of the choicest Princes
was so great, that all other adjoining Kings as much magnified our royalty, as
feared our power, insomuch that the very report of our Kingdoms bravery drove
Philip King of Castile, and his wife into England.

About the end of August 1546. Flawd high Admiral of France was so royally
entertained in England, that the King lying at Hampton Court, the Prince of
Wales met him coming to have audience with a 1000 horse, whereof 500 were in
one livery, the coats of velvet half embrodered with gold, and one sleeue of
cloth of gold: let other Princes acknowledge this magnificence. Holinshed says
2000 horse.

In the beginning of Henry the 8. Lewis the 12. of France married Mary the Kings
youngest sister: and 1520 the great Emperor Charles the 5. came into England to
visit his Aunt, and within two year after made a second return to view
London, and be acquainted with our country, from whose example Christiern King
of Denmark, and his wife about the 15 year arrived in England, and was
welcomed to the pleasures of our country, and variety of our pastimes. The
Prince of Salerne, and diverse of Naples about the 30. etc.

Shall I name you King Philips marriage with Queen Mary? I hope then I must
trouble you with a tedious solemnity, and tell you, that many strangers knew
not the way home again into their own countries a long time; and if the peace
of their souls as they vainly imagined, might have bin added to the delight
of their bodies, the happiness of England had bin the subject of their tongues,
and the object of their eyes. In the second year of her reign Ecmondine a
Prince of Germany, and other Ambassadors were sent from the Emperor. In the
third year Emmanuel Prince of Piemont, with other Lords came into England, and
the next month the Prince of Orange landed at London.

But let me pass forward to the mirror of all times Queen Elizabeth: how
proud was the Prince of Sweden, that he was graced in England with so glorious
entertainment at the beginning of her reign. Not long after 1565 Christopher
Prince and Marquess of Baden came of purpose to have his child borne amongst
us, and rejoice in the fortune of such a godmother. About the 11. year of her
reign anno 1568 Mary Queen of Scots, though she was surprised in her flight
to France, and defeated in her maine proiects; yet for a long time misliked not
her imprisonment, and was glad to confess the prerogatives of her native soil
and country. In the 14. year Francis Duke of Memorancy, and Betrawde de
Saligniers Knights of the order of St Michael, came both into England, with
other great Princes to gratulate her Majesty, and acknowledge her worthiness.
In the 21. of her reign 1578. Cassimirus Count Palatine, and Duke of Bauaria
was entertained the better, because he came of purpose to admire her Majesty,
and commend her country. Not long after 1581. Francis Burbon Prince Daulphine
of Auergne, Arthur Cass Marshall of France, with Lusignian and others came to
make way to Monsieurs admission, who accordingly anno 24, as Duke of Aniou, the
French Kings brother, and next heir to the flower-de-luce, was welcomed
beyond expectation, and entertained with such sumptuous shows, and variety of
delight, that they know not, how to put it over with true noblenes, considering
the disparity between their customs and ours. About the year 1583. Albertus
Alasco free Baron of Lasco Vaiuode, or Palatine of Siradia in Poland, was an
eye witness of our many prerogatives, such as we may term Court bravery, Cities
excellency, countries happiness, uniformity of our Universities, strength of
our Nauies, and glorious contentation in all estates.

Anno 1596. The Duke of Bolloigne came into England, and in 1600. extraordinary
Ambassadors from Barbary and Russia, who although from a stubborn bestialitie
seemed to vilipend the managing of many affairs by outward form; yet were
driven to applaude our general happiness, and confess with admiration, that no
Kingdom was so disposed for reciprocal duties between Prince and subject.
Yea 1601. that undaunted soldier Duke Birone, who seldom gased at any meteor,
or settled planet out of his own sphere, came over amongst us with 300
attendants, and returned with this resolution, that the Queen and Court of
England under such a Queen, was the true mirror of majesty, and map of
magnificence, had not some of them misliked the broken and unsavory structures
of Whitehall, which indeed if it might hold up a head of outward uniformity
and statelines, as it does when it list of inward majesty, and greatness, I
know not then who could compare with us any way: except the gallery of Paris,
being the work of 60 years expenses, and pride of many several Princes; and
the Turks Seralio in Constantinople, a vast aedifice for many purposes, and
receptacle for 20000 people, which one way or other are lodged in and about it.
For in truth within the walls and iron gates it contains as much room or
more, than all S. James park, and Whitehall together.

When our King James was established to the admiration of all the states of
Europe; Monsieur Rosne from France; Don John de Tassis from Spain; and many
other extraordinary Princes from all the Courts of Christendom, came over to
gratify his happiness: but 1604 Don John de Velasco, Constable of Castile was
as an extraordinary Prince extraordinarily entertained: to which if you unite
the glorious welcome and admission of Prince Vlrick Duke of Holstaide: as also
of George Lodwick Lantgraue of Lutenburgh sent from the Emperor Rodulph, you
may well expose their entertainment against the greatest magnificence of other
countries. Anno 1606 Don John de Mendoza Marquisse of S. German was sent over
to his Majesty; and presently the King of Denmark came to visit his sister.
The next year 1607. Prince Ienuile second son to the Duke of Guise sported
amongst us, and much applauded our Court and customs. Then in 1608. followed
the welcome of Christianus Prince of Henault; and presently after the admission
of many great personages, besides the Leigers Ambassadors of diverse Nations. To
which if you unite the second coming in of the King of Denmark; the Duke of
Bolloignes welcome, and many others about the several treatises of our
Princely marriages, with the Lady Elizabeth's solemnities, when Prince Frederick
Count Palatine came in person to take her to his wife, I make no doubt
concerning the purpose in hand, you will all confess that England has not bin
a little graced, and the roll of our excellencies has one Item beyond other
countries for remarkable persons coming amongst us either for pleasure, or
state-imployment: which the rather has place of wonder, because we are seated
in the sea, and so far remote from the maine commerces of the world: so that
whosoever comes to us, must look for no through-fare, nor Cities of strength,
as in many places; but be content to sit amongst us with amasement, that every
man eats under his vine with plenty, peace, and such acates, as great Kingdoms
want for all their treasure, and popish fasting days.

CHAP. XXVIII. THE CONCLUSION.
I Could further mark your tallies with many memorable priuacies, wherein we
ouer-passe other Nations: but they be things so well known already to
judicious and understanding men, that I must needs be ielous of my self for
entering so slenderly armed into the lists of so great a contention, and against
such adversaries, who will either out of courtesy smile at my folly, or prouder
experience deride my ignorance, or peremptory wilfulnes scorn my tenuity: but
I will anticipate all censorious exceptions with a plain confession of
Scribimus indocti, doctique poemata passim.
Yet notwithstanding seeing I have played the truant already, I will imitate
the cunning and stubborn schooleboy, who perceiving an impossibility to
avoid the punishment for his offense, gave a longer content to his pleasure,
and tarried out the last hour with supposition, that all could end but with one
chiding: so considering I have racked your patiences thus far, I will
questionles determine my first purpose after my own fashion, and undergo your
pity, or vilipending for all together.

Know then, that our Universities for state, majesty, good order, number of
scholars, and judicious learning, surpass all countries of Europe; and if in
Cambridge you look on Kings College chapel, the sumptuous quadrant of
Trinity, and the delicate compacting of our new Colleges, you cannot but
imagine, we had a hope in the structures to contriue some thing for admiration.
If in Oxford you consider the Divinity schools, the foundations of Christ's
Church, Sir Thomas Bodleis library, and other things of account, you must needs
conclude, that we striued to exalt our Nation for such rarities. Our bathes,
high ways, and security to travel in are not to be over passed. Our Inns, or
as they call them Hosteries, with other places of entertainment, yield a
plenary satisfaction to our travels, and open the embracings of extraordinary
welcome, insomuch that our wearied bodies are folded in the arms of quietness
and rest, and our troubled spirits settled in reposednes and content. In our
hospitality we go beyond all other Nations, and many worthy men's houses
exceed scattered villages both for diverse buildings, and numbers of people
else where: Our diet is abundant, and the best of the cattle, and for the
blessings of increase bids you welcome to the fat of the earth, Abraham's cake,
Abraham's calfe, Esaus venison, Labans good cheer, the loving fathers fat kid,
and all of that sort. Our servants are hansome and honest in comparison of
others: our civility and attendance extraordinary, nor is the Gentleman to be
dallied with by inferior grooms, nor any man to be abused, if he stand on the
true legs of observation. Our laws are severe toward capital crimes, and if
offenses bedurty us, we are not yet impudently to mount on a stage to be
seen; nor be so ignorant, but we can hide our selves, till we be cleaner, or
make a composition with mercy and pacification, if the business be not darkened
indeed with loathsomnes: and every thing amongst us with a fashionable
hansomnesse ouerswaieth nicer exception.

Thus I hope you will first pardon me for vainglory or affectation,
considering I speak for my country, and then yield unto the truth, which at
last must prevail, considering I have confirmed her excellencies and
prerogatives: Nor have I taken this task upon me out of supposition, that
England would have lost her reputation, if I had not traduced my self in these
triuiall Tractates: but merely I protest to affront some humorists, who as
irresolute or ignorant think too slightly of our worth, and in my own hearing
have presumed to match petty Princes with us, against whom I dare maintain,
that if there were such occasion, the Voluntaries and idle disposed of our
Country would go in such troops, and in such a manner, that we need neither
pay customs for silks out of Florence, Genoa, Leuca, or some other of their
principal states of Italy; nor have our storehouses empty of the marchandice
of India or China. As for the gold of Ophir, though many think, ancient mines
may be exhausted: oh that they might try their fortune, I believe we should not
need proclamations against exportation of our coin. But better is better: I
have commended the peace of Solomon, as one of the cheifest parts of
blessedness, which the birth of our Savior ratified, and the coming in of our
King exampled: and let it continue a Gods name with the spreading of the
Cherbins over sanctum sanctorum, and the shadow of the Almighty cover us,
until we come to the port indeed of all comfort, happiness, and security.

FINIS.

