Salutem in Christo.
GOod men and evil delight in contraryes. The good in seeking for truth, and
maintenance thereof: Evil, in hiding of Truth, and oppressing thereof: And so
consequently to publish Truth, is to please the good, and to displease the
evil. Wherefore, hearing ye amongst the common sorts of men at this time: it
is not certainly known what is the cause that ye Duke of Norffolk is newly
committed to ye Tower and sundry others: And knowing that good men will be well
satisfied to understand the truth, which evil men would coouer and oppress: I
could not but in conscience to satisfy the good, and bridle or stop the lyeng
and open sclaunderous mouths of the evil and seditious, notify thus much to
you, whereby you may also communicate ye same to others, for that it is likely
that false and sclaunderous reports will be readily made hereof to serve the
appetites of the evil disposed.

First, it is not unknown that the Duke of Norffolke did of late years
secretly practice to have married with the Scottish queen without the knowledge
of the Queens Majesty our Sovereign Lady.

It is not also un known yt the said Scottish Queen has been the most
dangerous ennemy against the Queens Majesty our Sovereign Lady, that lived,
in that she sought to have the Crown of England from her Majesty,
immediatlye after Queen Maryes death.

It is also well known that when she could not get it, neither by force nor
connyng, she solempnly promised to acknowledge her error, and to recognize the
very true right to be iustlye in the Queens Majesty our Soueraygne Lady to
whom the same belongs, as lawful Daughter and Heir to king Henry the eight
her Father, and so also by the Laws of ye Realm perfectly established, to
succeed king Edward the sixte her Brother, and Queen Marye her Elder Sister,
and by the Homage of all her Nobles, Prelates, and People as duly acknowledged
at her Coronation, as ever any king of England was in any former time: And in
very deed, as worthy a Prince for this Realm for her Clemency and goodness
in government as ever reigned

It is also known yt the Scottish Queen has not yet performed her promise,
but with fryuolous answeares has delayed it, Neither is it of any force to be
demanded, or worth the having, if she would yield too perform it. For
neither can she yt could not get this Realm when she sought it wrongfully,
nor keep her own when she had it quietly, amend the Queens Majesty's
estate: which is fully parfect: nor yet is any thing that she should promise,
to be holden firm and durable: but as time shall give her cause to keep it or
break it.

It is also said and credibly avowed that the Scottish Queen, was ye greatest
cause of the Rebellion lately in the North, whereby some noble Houses that had
served this Realm, partly by themselves, and specially by their Ancestors
valiantlye against the Scotts, were now by connyng practice of this Scottish
Lady being deprived of her Kingdom, enticed to overthrow them selves and
their Houses, with a multitude of more English Subjects than she could have
don by Arms in the Field, if she had been in possession of her Kingdom.

It is also known, notwithstanding this, that the Queens Majesty being
void of a reuengynge Nature, (as in all Acts has so appeared, that some
sort of wise men have noated it a fault for a Prince) did labor to have
restored her to her Country (as in deed the Queens Majesty was the cause of
sauinge of her life, after the murder of her husband) with composition betwixt
her and her son the king, and yt States and people of that Realm, thereby to
put some good end to the Civil wars in the same.

It is also known, that the Queen of Scotts did upon the first apprehension
of the Duke of Norffolke by wrytinges to the Queens Majesty, utterly renownce
the Duke of Norffolke and his Marriage, with some Noate that she did not of her
self first move it, nor yet like it. And so did the Duke him self, after his
first apprehension: by many messages, and by special writing directed to the
Queens Majesty, humbly and penitentlye acknowledge his offense in seeking to
mary with the Scottish Queen, and did firmly under his hand and Seal promise
never to deal therein any further, or in any other matter with that Queen.

And now it is certainly found, that the former practice betwixt that Queen
and the Duke, notwithstanding their several renunciations and firm promises
to the contrary, has had continuance without interruption by secret means of
sundry evil parsons, both all the time that the Duke was first in Prison in the
Tower: and also ever since, when he was committed to his own House, until he
was now newlye committed to the Tower.

But how dangerous soever this attempt may be judged in them to continue the
secret practice and intention to marry against the Queens Majesty's will, and
the expectacion of all that be known duetyfull Subjects to her Majesty, and
true friends to the Duke: That may best appear by the dangerous practices
that have accompanied and followed this attempt, which Almighty God has
maruelously discovered, to the safety of her Majesty's person and preservation
of the Realm.

It was devised and determined that a new Rebellion should be moved near
London. The City should be taken by force and possessed: In the mean time, a
number of Strangers men of war, should be brought by Sea from the low
Countries beyond the Seas, to a notable Port of this Realm meet for the
purpose, and so both forces of ennemies and Rebels should join, and than
proceed to further things than is expedient (as I hear) to be spoken off at
this time.

These devises were not only talked off, put in wrytinge, and fully concluded,
but the Messengers were also sent over Sea in Lent last, with sufficient
Authority of commission and wrytinges to testify the determination of them
that should be the heads and conductors of this Rebellion, as the same being
imparted on the other side the Sea, was well accepted and allowed: and there of
several Letters were speedilye written to the said Queen, and to the Duke of
Norffolke, and specially to that ungracious Priest named the Bishop of Rosse
(the Instrument of all the Dukes calamytie, and the Seed man of all Treasons
against this Realm) that this enterprise must be kept secret, and namely from
the French, for certain respects not of small moment, as is said, until the
Messenger should post to Rome to the Pope for Money, and to the king of Spain
for order and direction for men and Ships. The Messenger had his Letters of
Credit from the Scottish Queen, the Duke, and others, to the Pope, and the
King of Spain. And so coming to Rome: he returned Letters from the Popes
gracious holiness in the beginning of May to the said Queen, and to the Duke
and others. The Letter to the Duke was in Latin, beginning, Dilecte fili,
salutem. But in deed the Duke might well say he sent not Salutem but
perniciem. The Duke had them, and red them by the intercession of that
aforesaid ungracious Priest. The contents in some part were, that the Pope
well allowed of the enterprise: He would write also to the king of Spain to
further it, but his present busynes of the chargeahle Wars than in preparyng
against the Turk, was the cause that Money could not then be had for that
So^mer: And yet his ungracious Holiness after his accustomed sort comforted
them all not to despair: So it appears that God yet ordained him either to
be so zealous against the Turk, which surely was a good act, or else his
Holiness Coffers are not now a days so full of Money as his Bulls are of
Thunder clappes, so as the lack of money at that time happily stayed the
prosecution to full effect of this dangerous treason: And so it is to be hoaped
that by the same goodness of God, the mischief hereafter meant shall be
diuerted.

It was also by the deuisors of these rebellions and invasions determined yt
the Realm of Irelande should be assailed at the same time thereby to weaken the
Queens Majesty's Forces, or to divert them from Defense of her self and her
good Subjects.

Now were it best to leave with these former Branches, for it is credibly said,
that this Tree of Treason and Rebellion has a number of other Branches of the
very like nature: That is, in deuisinge how the Scottish Queen should have been
conveyed away, sometime by disguising, sometime by plain force, and raising of
Rebellion: and so put to liberty, and proclaimed Queen of England and
Scotland: but to increase the error of her Style: she should have been
proclaimed King and Queen of England and Scotland. It might be also reported
how her Son should have been stolen out of Scotland, to be sent into Spain,
with such like devises tendyng to move troubles in the Realm, that was and
yet is (thanked be God) quiet.

And now it may be that some will say, that many of these things are
doubtful, and percase wreasted in report, either by malice, or by overmuch
credulity: But truly in such credible sort are all the things above
mentioned, with sundry others to me reported to be very true by such as
have cause to know them, and use not to report vntrouthes, as I do bouldly
auow them to be true. And if they shall be found otherwise, than it is lykely
that some of the Queens Majesty's Counsel will cause them to be reprehended,
who upon this my wrytinge shall report them, and thereupon I will patiently
suffer correction for my hasty Credit: for it is most lykely that such
matters of estate as these are, will not be suffered to be communicated without
reprehension. On the other side, if they be true, as I have reported, and yet
not fully enough reported, than time will shortly enlarge and confirm them,
when her Majesty shall cause the parties now imprisoned to answer openly
thereto* by order of her Laws, as there is no doubt but she will observe to
all manner of Subjects that course as hitherto manifestly and graciously she
has don and so God long keep her under his special protection, as hithertoo
he has miraculously, to raygne over us in peace.

Since I wrote this, I am ye more boldened to think all these things true, for
that this present day the Lord Mayor of this City of London with a number of
his Brethren were at the Star Chamber with the Queens Majesty's Counsel,
where I understand by Report of some of them that hard what was said by the
Counsel to them concerning the present case of the Duke of Norffolke that the
substance of all that is by me before reported, is very true, with much more.

At London the. xiij. of October. 1571. Your loving Brother in Law. R. G.


