A SERMON INTENDED FOR PAVL'S CROSS, BUT PREACHED IN THE CHVRCH OF St. PAVL'S,
LONDON, THE III. OF DECEMBER, M.DC.XXV.

Upon the late Decrease and withdrawing of GODS heavy Visitation of the Plague
of Pestilence from the said City.

By THO: FVLLER, Master of Arts in Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by B. ALSOP and T. FAVVCEY, for Nathaniell Butter, and are to
be sold at his Shop at St. Austines Gate. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT HONble: ALLANE COTTON, Lord Major of the Hon: City of London,
and to the Right Worcester: Sir JOHN GORE, his worthy Predecessor: THO: FVLLER
wishes length of prosperous days here, and fruition of Eternal prosperity
with the Ancient of days hereafter.
Right HON: and Right Worcester ps^ll:
THis Sermon not long since preached in your public Assembly, is besides,
though not against my will published: The severe censure of the ear amazed me,
but that more exquisite Test of the eye, does little less th^n confound me:
Even Manna in this kind is distasted of our corrupt natures; And but that I
know there are stomachs, that will desire Fruit when they refuse wholsommer
diet, I must not have adventured so ill a cook't dish to so various pallats;
Some, I hope, will look upon this piece without any thought of the worthless
Author; and if in it they find ought either for Information of judgment,
which I dare not hope, or Reformation of life, which is the All of my ambition,
the Whole neither to them, nor me may prove unfruitful.

The subject of it being our late heavy Affliction, with it is ill cause our
Transgressions, and it is good effect our Sorrow, together with GODS gracious
deliverance and our hearty Thanksgiving for it, this City, the Stage of those
scoenes may justly challenge it as her own; And to whom then within these
Walls does it of right belong, but to your Lordship the present, and that other
worthy Gent: the last principal Magistrate therein? whose sad eyes were
witnesses of what this is only a rude and unpolished draught; He had the
happiness to out-liue those many Deaths, to finish his course not more in
safety then Honor: You have the Honor to enjoy the year of Thankfulness,
to rule in a clear and fair sky, wherein it will be your Crown to destroy
the Cockatrice in the egg, severely at first to punish these Transgressions
and Iniquities, which like Garden-weedes will spring up in a sunshine after a
storm, and, if not prevented, will o're-runne the whole Plot, and bring again
the like desolation; Heb. 13. 8.
God is the same yesterday, to day and for ever, the same to see, to hate, to
punish Malefactors; Hitherto only the hands or toes of Adonibezick have been
cut off, Judge. 1. 6.
his life spared; Worse things then what we yet have suffered, may befall us:
You are at the Stern, and may be a great means to prevent Ship-wracke: Good
luck have you with your Honor, ride on prosperously, and let the Word of
Truth guide, and it will defend you.

Be pleased to pardon his boldness that means and wishes well, and humbly
offers not only This but himself in all due respect:

At your Service, THO: FVLLER.

Faults escaped.
PAge 3. line 1. read (...). p. 8. l. 15. for Fool, r. Fools. p. 10. l. 9.
for these r. theirs. p. 12. l. 6. r. opera. p. 16. l. 16. r. ebriosorum. p. 19.
l. 8. r. En. l. last, r. interimat. p. 23. l. 12. r. paruas. l. 16. for out
the, r. out of the. p. 40. l. 1. for enfused, r. infused. p. 41. l. 13. after
Remembrance, put in of. p. 43. l. 18. for respects, r. expects. p. 44. l. 12.
r. (...). l. 13. r. (...) p. 45. l. 8. for conditions, r. condition. p. 47. l.
5. r. long. l. 28. for repented. r. reported. p. 49. l. 5. for against, r. to
p. 55. l 1. r. (...). line 4. decursus.

PSALM. 107. VERSE 17. etc.
17. Fools because of their transgressions, and because of their Iniqu^ties
are (nou: Trans:) afflicted. (vet:) Plagued. 18. Their soul abhors all
meat, and they draw near to the gates of death. 19. Then they cry unto the
Lord in their trouble, he saves them out of their distresses. 20. He sent
his Word and healed them, and delivered them from their destructions. 21. Oh
that Men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men.
WHat Euripides spoke in Hecub^ concerning a noble and vulgar person delivering
the same speech, Eadem oration non aeque valet: The same do I hold true of an
ancient and a younger Divine should they preach, for matter and form totidem
verbis, the same Sermon; it would find a far different acceptance. Lue. 5.
last.
No man when he has tasted old Wine will desire new, for he says the old is
better.

I freely acknowledge this chair of Moses should rather be furnished with
Masters in our Israel, men of such gravity and learning, whose awful presence
alone might stop the mouth of all, either censorious Criticisme, or envious
detraction: But so heavy has the hand of Heaven been upon us, as not only
the sheep, but the shepherds themselves have been scattered; Those greater
and more glorious Luminaries are retired to their more private orbs, there
praying and interceding with Genesis 18.
Abraham in the fields for threatened Sodom; wisely careful, according to the advice of Solomon Prou. 27. 12
not to expose their bodies to these arrows of God, which as if they had
chosen this City for their proper aim, have thus long, thus mortally wounded
us; so that this Night of our desolation has been enlightened only with
less and weaker constellations. And those reverend and worthy ones that have
stayed, have found their own Pastoral charges a double labor unto them. So
that young Samuel, or none must supply the place of old Eli, and in the absence
of the Prophets, their children of servants must discharge this duty. It will
be your charity to expect from Children no more then what such weaklins, and
Nouices can produce; to pardon weak if there be no wilful aberrations; St.
Paul 1 Cor. 13. 11.
himself when he was a child, spoke as a child, Psalm. 8. 2.
and out of the mouths of babes and sucklins is God often pleased to make his
praises issue forth: What then the Heathen were wont to proclaim in the
beginning of their sacrifices (...) so we desire none but equal ears and
mild censurers at our Sermons. 2 Kings 7.
Good news is good news though from a Leaper, and truth though uttered out of
weak and unworthy lips ought to lose nothing of it is worth and acceptance.

The Prophet in this Psalm describes four several sorts of men that stand
indebted to God for deliverance from earthly and temporal dangers, and
afflictions. vers^ ^.
The first whereof are they that have suffered banishment, as the beloved
Disciple Revel. 1. 9.
John in Pathm^s, are exiled from their native soil, and may say with them in
the Poet, Virg* Ecclog. ^*
Nos Patriae fines and dulcia linquim^s ar^^, Their native Country with all the
pleasures thereof they forsake, and are driven to live among strangers, to
seek their bread in an unknown Land, to converse with such people, whose
language is riddles unto them, yet there they cry unto the Lord, Zach. 4. 10.
whose ears as his eyes go through the world, and he hears them and brings
them home in safety.

The second are they that have with Act* 12*
Peter bin locked up in Prisons, and with ler. 37*
Jeremy thrown into the Dungeon, and fettered, not only in chains of Iron,
but which is worse, in fetters of darkness, not having so much happiness as
to see themselves miserable, yet thence from those disconsolate places, they
crying unto the Lord, he also hears them and delivers them, breaks those
bonds in sunder, and set^ their (...)* in a larger r^^me.

The third being the Text which at this time I have chosen to be the subject
of my weak discourse, Verse 17.
are they that have been brought so low, with the harbinger of death;
sickness, that their souls abhorred all meat, and all pleasure is as the gall
of Aspes unto them, unwelcome and unsavory, yet they also with ^ Reg. 20.
Hezekiah, crying unto the Lord, their strength is renewed, and there are days
and years added to their lives.

The fourth are they that go down to the sea in Ships, and occupy their
business in great waters, Seafaring men, that are neither Inter vi^^s ^ec
inter mor^uos, between the living nor the dead, and are ready to offer up
their souls to every flaw of wind, and billow of water which assailes them,
yet these at last are joyfully delivered, and safely brought to that haven
where they would be. The A^^aebeum or burden of each one is this, Oh that men
would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the
children of men.

It was the saying of Solomon Pro. 25. ^1.
A word spoken in due time is like apples of gold with silver pictures, whose
outside is fair, but the inside glorious; if ever text was seasonable, this is
now at this time, being a lively description to our ears, of what our eyes
have been woeful witnesses and spectators, here is a real narration, and a
true demonstration of our own lamentable estate, whether we consider our
misery we have been plagued and afflicted, or the cause of those sorrows our
Transgressions and iniquity, or the effect of those disasters, our fasting and
crying unto the Lord, or the happy event of our humilia^ion and contrition. He
heard us in our distresses, he sent his Word and healed us, he has spoken
and we have escaped from the noisome Pestilence. Or lastly the good end and
conclusion which we all should make our thankfulness, Oh that men would, etc.

Ciprian.
Plus profic^tur, cum in rem presentem venitur, when we see and feel the truth
of what we hear, the words cannot but move and prove eff^ctuall. Horace.
Illi ^^bur and oes triplex c^ra pectus, his sinews are of I^on, and his soul
of Marble, who, when he hears the sad relation of those miseries wherein
himself and his brethren have been miserable sharers, shall not have his
heart pricked, as the Act. 2. 37.
Jews had at Peter's Sermon, t^lling them their sin past, and their judgment
to come, so again, that heart is as (...) as Brawne, and himself not worthy
the air he breathes in, that is not taken with this great deliverance of our
gracious God, that has not his soul ravished with joy, and endeavors not to
express the fruits of his gratitude in his life and conversation, in real
acts of charity and obedience: For if ever Death triumphed, 'twas this year in
the streets of our forsaken City, and if ever Mercy again victoriously
overcame, it was now in this sudden and unexpected declination from the deaths
of so many thousands in one week, to so few hundreds within a few we^kes
after, it was only the Psalm. 118. 23
Lords doing, and it ought to be marvelous in our eyes. Wherefore as Tully
spoke of a book which Cran^or wrote, it was Paruus, sed aureolus, and ad
verbum ediscendus, with better reason may I say of this Text of Scripture, it
deserves to be engraven upon the palms of our hands, or rather on the tables
of our hearts, never to be forgotten, to be worn as a bracelet upon our
arms, or rather as a ^ron^let between our eyes, still to be thought upon and
still to magnify God for it.

But because (...)
Pleni sumus r^marum as he in the Comedy, and the thought both of sorrow and
deliverance equally slips out of our memories with the sense of them, give me
leave to thrust my finger into an al-most-healed soar, to draw fresh blood
from our late wounds; to discourse a while of our afflictions, that so our
extremity duly and often considered, our own escape, and miraculous
preservation may be more welcome to us, and we more thankful for it. And so I
come to my Text.

Fools because of their Transgressions, etc.

Psa. 101.
The subject of David's song Mercy and Judgment, as of all holy Writ in
general, so it is the chief matter of this Text in particular, here is
Judgment in the punishing, and Mercy in delivering again from that Judgment,
or rather here is Mercy, then Judgment then mercy again; for what was it that
suffered these fools so long to run on in the ways of their foolishness,
till they added Transgressions to their F^lly, and Iniquity to their
Transgressions, till they heaped one sin upon another, that their regions
were forborne not only till they were Albae ad messem, but Siccae ad ignem,
white for harvest, but dry for the fire, till the measure fo their wickedness
was not only full, but heaped up, pressed down, and running over, but those
Viscera misericordiae as they are termed, the bowels of his compassion, his
long suffering patience, who wills not the destruction of any; He could in the
infancy of their sin ^aue thrown them not only to the gates of Death, but
even the belly of Hell, but yet He stayed, and stayed, till there was no end of
their rebellions, so that laes^ patientia fit furor, patience too long, too
much abused becomes fury: yet a little while and his bow will be bent, and his
arrows drawn to the head, and He is as it were compelled to strike. And yet
see and wonder at Mercy in the midst of Judgment, they are not swallowed up
quite of this deuourer, they are but at the gates of death, Psalm. 1 18. 1^.
He has chastened them sore, but he has not given them over unto death. He
plagues none ad destructionem sed ad correctionem, to amend, not to destroy us;
loath to begin, and yet in the proceeding procuring our good and advantage. O
quam vellem nescire literas, Sue^. in vita Nero^is.
said Nero in the beginning of his reign, when he was to subscribe for the
execution of a Malefactor; ten thousand times more loath is our governor, the
Father of all comfort, and God ^f all mercy to strike, much more to kill. Ez^k.
18. 32.
He wills not the death of a sinner, but rather their conversion and salvation.

And because prosperity does rather breed corruption then amendment, as Deu^.
3^. 15
Ges^urun waxing ^at will kick, and we see that standing waters will soon
grow noisome. Adversity must then succeed, as when 2 Samuel 11. 29.
Absalom could not draw Ioab unto him by fair entreats, he fired his Barley
^ieldes to make him come, so that here is the course, God blesses, they sin,
God strikes, they pray, and then He presently hears and helps them.

Thus then my Text falls in sunder: First, as all Physicians coming to their
Patients examine the cause of the disease; so here we have the ground and the
original of all our sorrows our Transgressions and Iniquities.

17. Fool because of their Transgressions, and because of their Iniquities,
are afflicted.

Then secondly we have the nature of the disease, the new Transl^tion says in
general they are afflicted. The old has it, they are plagued which by the
symptoms of it may be thought to b^e the same disease under which we have
thus long groaned*

18. Their soul abhors all meat, and they draw near to the gates of
death.

Vomiting I am sure is one of the certainest signs of the plague.

Then thirdly the seeking to the Phisi^ian.

19. Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble.

F^u^^hly the cure intended in the same verse applied in the next. He saved
them out of their distresses.

20. He sent his Word and healed them, and delivered them from their
destructions.

And lastly the conclusion of all, the only Fee and gratification which our
Physician expects for the cure.

21. Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men.

These are the parts, The cause, The disease, The seeking to the Physician, the
Cure, and the discharge, or satisfaction.

As the Prodigal Luc. 15. 18.
when he returned to his Fathers house freely confessed he had sinned against
Heaven and against him, and was no more worthy to be called his son, and so
reduced all his delinquencyes to these two heads, God, and Man; So are all our
sins we can be guilty of, included in these two, our Transgressions and our
Iniquities; our Transgressions, as all interpreters do agree, smiting against
the first Table, and our Iniquities violating the second; our sins of
knowledge, our sins of ignorance, our sins of weakness, our sins of
wilfulness, our secret, our open sins, of our thoughts, of our mouths, of
our hands, are all here comprised, whatsoever the devil can suggest, or to
which our hearts can consent, or our hands act are all here understood.

Should I take upon me to number the Transgressions of our Judah, and reckon up
the particular Iniquities of our Israel, I might as easily call all the ^^arres
by their names, and give a true and exact account of the sand upon the
Seashore; not only the ends of the world as 1 Cor. 10. 11.
Saint Paul says, but the ends of all goodness are met upon this last and
worst age of ours.

The sins which in former ages were but in their Infancy, are now in ours,
grown to their full height and strength, those which whilome were but in the
Egg, are now come to be fiery flying Serpents; All these we have and more of
our own, more horrid; Every new day almost brings in a new way of offending;
Were Solomon now alive, he would recant, in that Eccles. 1. 9.
he said, He saw no new thing under the Sun, Et dictum, and factum quod non
prius, we offend both in word and works in such kinds, such fashions, as
former ages were never guilty of the knowledge of, and Non habet vlterius quod
nostris moribus addat.
Posteritas --
Posterity will never be able to parallel our exorbitancies; As in the time of
the Plague we wondered not so much at those that dyed, as at those that
escaped: so in this general Infection, they deserve no admiration that offend,
but they that are found innocent, vt Pueri Iunonis au^m, are wondered at as a
Bird of diverse colors.

Should every Leaper in this kind be enforced as those other Leapers in the
old Number. 5. 2.
Law were, to go out of our Cities, and rend their clothes, and cry I am
unclean, men would swarm in our fields like those Grasshoppers in Egypt, our
Towns and houses should only be places for Isa. 13. 21.
Zim and Iim, Owls and Ostriches to inhabit in; our streets should be left
so desolate, that grass might there grow, and a Ibid. ver. 1^
man should be more precious then the purest gold of Ophir.

2 Samuel 24.
Not a man amongst us but may cry as David did Peccaui, nay Stul^e seci, we
have sinned and done very foolishly; Stock and branch, Cedar and shrubbe,
Prince and Priest and People, all of us are dug out of one and the same pit
of Adams disobedience, and hewn out of that rock of Infidelity. Ez^k. 16. 3.
The father of us all was an Ammorite, and our mother an Hittite; in sin have
they begotten us, and in Iniquity have they produced us. and we our selves
suck not the air faster, nor Behemoth drinks down Iordane with more
greediness then we Isa. 5. 18.
hale on sin with cart-ropes, and pull it unto us even by violence: The Isa.
1. 5.
whole head of mankind is sick, and the whole heart faint of this malady.
There is none that does good, no not one, Psalm. 14. 1.
says David; there is none that does not cuill, say I, and very evil, no not
one. Solomon 1 King 8. 46
at the Dedication of the Temple concluded us all under sin; Omnes aliquid,
Nemo nullum. All of us offend in some things, and some of us offend in all
things; Pro^. 24. 16.
The most righteous in all the cluster of mankind falls in his happiest day
seven tim^s. He has Breuia, leuiaque peccata, quam^is pauca, quamuis parua,
non tamen nulla, so that omnes odit, qui malos odit, His sword must needs be
against every man that fights against wicked men. For our skin cleaues not
faster to our flesh, nor our flesh to our bones, then Transgressions and
Iniquities to the hearts and hands of us all.

But to reduce my In^ectiue into some method, as Caesar comprised his Victories
in three words, Veni, vidi, vici. So will I reduce all our extrauagancies to
three other, Corda, ora, opa; our hearts, our tongues, our* hands, are the
three weapons with which we fight against our God, our neighbor, and our
selves, with our hearts we contemn, with our tongues we defy, with our hands
we work against the God of Heaven. Or if you please, because my Text has but
two words, Transgressions and Iniquities; I will confine my self also to two
particulars, our Transgressions against the first, and our Iniquities against
the second Table.

The former Table briefly contains in it four several Precepts, the first
whereof commands internal piety, that in our hearts we have one, and but one
God alone; The second external worship of that one God, and sorbids us to bow
our knees, or prostrate our selves to any graven or carved Image, or likeness
of any creature, but only to himself: and because ex abundantia cordis os
loquitur Luc. 6. 45.
as our Savior says, as we conceive in our hearts, our tongues will
express, therefore the 3. Commandment orders that, which is the principal
member we have, either to honor or dishonor our Maker; in it is both life and
death Prou. 18. 21.
says Solomon; that commands us to exercise them (...) in blessing and
praising his holy Name, not in swearing, cursing, and blaspheming, but to
speak reverently as befits the servants of so great a Majesty. And as at all
times we ought to be busied in the celebration of his praises, so especially on
that day which he has set apart for his divine worship, in the Tabernacle and
great congregation; for which the fourth Commandment takes order, which sets
one day apart wherein we should meet and pray to him for things wanting, and
praise him for benefits received at his hands.

Give me a man that has not transgrest against these four words, and I will
say and pronounce, that he needs no Savior, nay himself shall become a kind
of a Savior of his fellow-brethren. I may not be long in particulars, I shall
but only touch them leui digito, as Number. 6. 13.
the 12. Searchers of Canaan brought some of the fruit of the land to their
brethren, for a taste, so must I only trouble you with a few, and in brief of
our rebellions in this kind, yet so as ex vngue Leonem, ye may guess at the
Lion by his claws, we shall see that, what the most are by act, all of us are
by nature.

To tax us with the common Idolatry of bowing our selves as Exodus 32.
the Jews to their golden Calfe, to any carved or graven Image, it shall now
be altogether unnecessary, since the glorious shine of the Gospel has quite
dispeld all those mists of ignorance and superstition; those Idolatrous Micha's
that are, dare not, (thrice blessed be that power by which they dare not) show
themselves abroad, but like Owls and Batts in obscurity, or Be^sts in their
dens, they bury themselves in their secret and unknown Houses, and there
more blinded, then the ^ King. 11.
Syrians were when they were led into Sa^aria, fall to their abominations; But
such order is happily taken, by direction from his sacred Majesty to his
Judges and principal Officers of state, that these Cacus-dennes shall be more
narrowly searched into, and these Wooden ^riests, and wooden Saints, together
with their wooden Gods, shall be excluded our Israel, and sent to eat their
bread in those places where first they sucked their contagious Poison, or living
here, they shall be served as the Josh. 9.
Gibeonites were, so kept under and suppressed, as they shall never endanger our
State and Commonwealth. When the head has thus well ordered and commanded,
may those hands forget their cunning that shall either be careless, or
negligent in the execution. Cursed may he be, and may the curse cleave to his
seed, that shall do this work of his Lord and Master perfunctorily with a
double heart, or a double eye, carrying fire in one hand, the authority and
command of the King, and water in the other; his own timorous or ^upine
conniuence.

But there is another Idolatry more common, no less dangerous then that other,
if the Col. 3. 5.
Apostle deceive us not, Covetousness is Idolatry, and there are whose backs
and Phil. 3. 19.
Belly is their God. Mammon is the God of the Covetous, and Belial of the
Voluptuous; these are thy Gods o England, to which the greatest part of the
Inhabitants are votaries and Idolaters; in these respects we may complain as
the Prophet did of Judah and Jerusalem, Ier. 11. 18.
According to the number of thy Cities O Judah have they set up Altars, and
according to the number of thy streets O Jerusalem have they erected Images, so
according to the number of men are their Idolatries. The Heathen were justly
taxed for burdening the poor shoulders of Atlas with so many Deities, for
every several purpose they had one, for Peace, for War, for Corn, for Wine,
houshold-Gods, and Country-Gods, and Citie-Gods, and field-Gods; ^ay, Rome was
so base in it, as to erect a godhead for their draughthouses, Cloacina was the
Goddess for that purpose. Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum, Wherein are
we inferior, and in what are they better that dei^ie their throats or
bellyes? that ob vnius horaehilarem insaniam, as Drunkenesse is called, diuest
themselves of all hope of eternal happiness: Whose Temple is the Tavern, and
the Drawers their Priests, the Flaggons of Wine their sacrifice, which they
pour down their Throats, as the Heathen did to their god Bacchus, and so
give a drinke-offering to the Devil.

That Epicure that wished his neck as long as a Cranes, that he might have the
longer pleasure of his meats and drinks, compared to many a man in our times
might be thought temperate, and Luc. 16. 19.
Di^es his dain^y fare; or Apitius diet would be thought penurious.

The Devils walk is undertaken, Job 1.
Seas and Lands are compassed for the satisfying our appetites in this kind;
and as ^ Sa^. 24. 17.
David called the water of Bethlehem fetched with the hazard of the lives of
his men, the blood of those men, so the blood of many men is daily drunk, and
drunk in excess, that blood of the Grape fetched from far always with the
hazard, and many times with the loss of many a man's life. Nor does the
variety so much offend, as the abominable superfluity in the abuse of them,
making them indeed the liquors of blood, beginning them to the healths of
ourrfriends, but often ending like Tragedies in one another Massacre.

As Seneca complained in his times, vidi ebrioserum sitim and v^mentium famem,
have we as much reason to complain in ours, there being objected daily to our
eyes, as was to the blind man's in the Mark. 8. 24.
Gospel at the first recovery of his sight, Men walking like trees, shaking
like the tops of them in a wind, reeling like a vessel in a tempest at Sea,
cutting indentures with their inconstant feet without sense or shame, or
controlement.

I have read that Cleopatra beat a Jewel valued at 50000. pound to powder, and
drunk it off at one draught to the Health of Mark Anthony, such sums few of
our Drunkards are guilty of, but as Christ said in the M^^k. 16. 43.
Gospel, that the Widow in offering but two mites, offered more then the rich
Pharisees did, because she offered all she had, so in this respect we have
among us, that drink more then that vain woman did, ventring their whole
estates through the ^^raytes of their throat, and have lost it all in the
bottom thereof their Bellyes, themselves having been after such shipwreck
forced with Belisarius in Rome to beg a farthing, and glad, with the Luc. 15.
Prodigal, of Husks and Acornes for want of other food.

And for our Tables, how are they surcharged with the weight of dishes upon
them; One foul is fed 100. times, that it may feed us but once, and Romans 5. 22.
all the creatures groan under that burden, Hand necessitatem deprecantes sed
iniuriam, They willingly like those Number. 11.
Quayles in the Wilderness, offering themselves to our slaughter for our
necessity, only desiring the excessive abuse of them to be forborne. I know
there must be Feasts for the honor of Kingdoms, of States, of Magistracy,
public persons must have such public meetings as their worth and place
requires, but for 1 Samuel 25. a Luc. 16. 19.
Nabal to feast like a King; for homo quidam as Dives was called, a certain
rich man, to fare daintily quotidie, he is the Belly-God, and this is his
Idolatry; whose Kitchen is his Temple, whose Priest is the Cook, whose Table
is the Altar, and whose meat his Sacrifice which he daily offers up to that
god, as the Babilonians sometime did to their Idol Bell.

So weighty is the Idolatry of the back, carrying thereon whole Farms and
Mannor-Houses that Clemens Alexandrinus said, it was a a marvel they were not
killed, Cum tantum onus baiulent, Augustus the Emperor termed this vanity
vexillum superbiae, nidumque luxuriae, they are tokens of a naked and a wanton
mind, which because their souls want that inward clothing of grace and good
works must thus like Sepulchers paint and beautify their bodies for want of
better ornaments; 1 Timothy 2. 10
they are fruitless twigs that aspire aloft when the fertile bows humbly
descend to the earth. They who thus vainly set out their bodies as it were to
sale, merely discover the poverty of their spirits.

It is a pretty picture that points out an Englishman naked, with a Tailor
standing by with a pair of Sheeres in his hand, ready to shape him into any
dress, sometimes he is French alone, then Spanish, then Dutch, then Italian,
then altogether like them all, and in all so unlike himself, that when the
true God that made him comes to see him, he must needs say Non novi, depart
from me, you have so disguised and misshapen your selves, as I do not know you.

Their faithful Tailors are the Priests to these Idolaters, and their Bills
their Bibles, which sometime for want of discharging they keep by them, but
when they are paid, they profanely cut them in pieces, but yet so happy are
their Priests, that their tenths grow to a greater heap in the close, then all
their Patrons 9. parts besides.

But there may be some reasons for these Idolatryes, the pleasing of our
senses, and the satisfaction of our flesh, but the other that we should Job 31.
24.
say to a wedge of gold thou art my hope, or to silver, thou are my confidence,
that we should make our selves servants to that which every beast treads under
his feet, this, as it has less show of reason in it, so is it far more
hateful; an abomination which the Indians themselves abhorred in Christians,
when holding up a piece of gold, they cried Eh De^s C^ristianorum. I cannot but
think how soon a covetous man would be down on his face, and* up with his
hands to the devils worship, should he but say to them, I will not say as the
Devil did to Christ, Mat. 4. 9.
Omnia hac dabo, but the least Molehill almost that it contains, which is not
more base in it self, then uncertain for the continuance* The holy Altars of
God shall be sacrilegiously robbed, and his Sacred Reuenews purloyned to fill
full their Coffers, the Temples of their Mammon. And so thrifty are these
Beads-men, as they will not be at the charge of a Priest, themselves will do
that office, or at least they do as Micah, Judge. 17. Consecrate one of their
Sons, who looking to their Temples and golden Gods, sometime play false with
them, as Micah with his Mother, and they with others; what they get with the
sweat of their brow, and the sorrow of their heart, their sons like those of
1 Samuel 2.
Eli, spend as merrily. The father grindes the faces, and grieves the heart of
the poor, the son glads the heart, and decks the body of an Harlot. What
Agrippina said of Nero her son, Interim at modo imperet, so the Father he
will kill, burn, destroy, so he may but get 1 Timothy 5. 6.
gain, which is his godliness, and the Son kills, burns, destroys, to
satisfy his mistress, which is his Saint, and the only matter of his
Religion.

Thus we violate the two first Commandments, now for the third and fourth,
let our horred oaths, tearing God in pieces with blasphemy, with John 20. 27.
Thomas, putting our fingers into the wounds of our Savior, making new blood
thence to issue afresh, witness: Words come not faster then oaths, and those
newly coined, old ones are scorned as obsolete, and the forge of our brains is
still on work for new ones, such as will make the ears of every honest
Christian man to tingle and shake, if it were possible, the foundations of
Heaven and Earth.

So likewise our profane violation of the Sabbath; I will not strictly urge a
ceremonial abstinence from all moderate and lawful recreations at seasonable
hours, but I only could wish this day were as happy in its kind as the other
six are in theirs, then are the manuary Trades exercised, every man is busy
in his vocation, buying or selling, or the like, few or none are idle, only
this day wherein our humane Laws ^orbid works, and the Divine laws command
sanctity, men take more liberty to do evil, being longer and with far
greater content in the Tavern, and sometime in worse houses then the Temple of
God.

Thus we multiply our Transgressions as the hayres of our heads, and there is
no end of our Rebellions the evening of our carelessness, and the morning of
our presumption makes the first and second and third, and all the days of our
lives.

And if we thus deal with our God, how do we use our neighbor? if the first
Table be thus profaned, how is the second violated? if we swallow down these
Camels, surely what follows are but G^^ts, and while we with such facility
pass over these Mountains, Mole-hills will never keep us in our bounds, and
so I come to consider our Iniquities against the second Table.

I will but run them over. 1. We scornefully cast the cords of superiority
from us, and break the b^nds of all subjection in sunder, our Fathers that
begat us, our Mothers that bore us, our earthly gods are neglected and
forsaken, should they but command ought contrary to our humors;

2. Nay, is life spared when anger and fury is provoked? Caligula among the
Romans was called Lutum sanguine maceratum, are there not many among us that
have made Blood touch blood? a wry look, a misplaced word, a mistake sometimes
has spilt the blood of him for whom Christ dyed; Man was made at first to be
as Exodus 4. 16.
Moses to Aaron, a God, a friend, a helper, but now Isa. 1.
our silver is become dross; the beasts de^uour not one the other more
fiercely then one man does another.

3. So for the third, How are our bodies that should be vessels of honor, 1
Cor. 6. 19.
Temples for the Holy Ghost to dwell in, given over to all uncleanness, men
Ier. 5. ^.
neighing with the horse after his female, and thinking no Prou. 9. 17.
waters so pleasant, nor any bread so sweet, as what in that sort is purloyned.

4. Those Pronounes Meum and Tuum are rased out of our Grammers, many violently
stealing, but more fraudulently cozening their Neighbors of their estates;
Prou. 20. 14.
It is naught, says the buyer, and coming to sell it, he as much commends
it, and in both equally deceiptfull.

5. How greedily do our ears suck in false Reports of our brethren, and how
are our mouths with child till again they be delivered of them to the
detraction of their repu^es; The Devils name comes from such practice Diabolus
is Divulgator, a spreader abroad of evil reports, so that they that report
them, have the Devil in their tongues, and they that receive and believe them,
the Devil in their ears, both in their hearts. Nay, are there not found among
us 1 King. 21.
Sons of Belial, such as Iesabell procured to swear against Naboth, who for a
small salary will swear down Innocence it self, and condemn it? The
Temple-walkes in the Tearme-time are seldom unfurnished of such necessary
mischiefs.

6. And whence come all these? what is the ground of all these Iniquities, but
our own concupiscence, the sin against the last Commandment, which as St.
John 1 Ioh. 2. 24.
diuides it, is either carnis or occulorum, with Josh. 7. 21.
Achan we see a Babilonish garment, and a wedge of gold, and so we desire to
be fine, or rich, or to enjoy such a beauty, or to be revenged in such a
kind, for such an injury, and lo all these actual Iniquities follow.

These are in gross our gross Transgressions and Iniquities, against which
being to declaime, I could wish I had Stentors voice, and more sand to run
out, but there are other things which call for my labor and your attention:
But yet ere I leave this verse, with the practice of which sins we so much
please our selves, give me leave to do as the Finers of gold and silver, who
non solum aurimassas, verum and bracteolas parvus tollunt, not only make use
of the Wedge it self, but even of the smallest rays or foyles which their
metal casts, so here give me leave to note out the first word of the
verse, the censure which the Wisdom of God gives upon men, when they are in
their greatest Ruff, in the top of their Pride, as Nebuchadnezzar in his
Galleries, and say with Exodus 5. 2.
Pharaoh, who is the Lord that I should obey him, or with ^ King. 19.
Rabsaketh to Hesekiah, he shall not be able to deliver thee out of my hands, I
say though they like the Dromedary weary themselves in the race of their
abominations and yet triumph, thinking that Wisdom shall only live and die
with them: Yet see what a black coal they are marked with by the finger of
the Spirit, the honourablest style they can have, is but Fools, that is the
best and most charitable construction can be given of all their actions, and
the fairest title they can deserve. One builds and thinks to get him a name
that way, another lades himself with thick Clay to use the phrase Hab. 2. 6.
of the Prophet, and hopes that way to get him a name, another ventures his
life to get him a name after his death, and there are Catilanary dispositions,
who by mischief think to procure a name, as those Inventors of the
Powder Treason, but see here what name they get, this is the denomination which
they have in their lives, and shall without repentance be written on their
Tombs, Fool and unwise to heart, and without understanding shall each of them
be called, and so recorded to Posterity. As 1 Samuel 25.
Abigal spoke of her Husband, Nabal is his name, and folly is with him, so it
is with us all by nature, we are all bound up in a bundle of folly together,
were we as wise as Achitophell 2 Samuel 16. 23.
whose counsel was thought as the Oracles of God, or as 1 Kings 4. 33.
Solomon who could dispute of every thing, from the Cedar to the shrubbe, or as
Genesis 2. 10.
Adam, who had the wisdom to impose names according to the several natures
of every creature, yet is all 1 Cor. 1. 20.
the wisdom in the world folly with God, who Psalm. 2.
sits in Heaven and sees the actions of men, and laughs them to scorn, and
will at last openly discover their nakedness to themselves, that they
themselves shall be enforced to acknowledge their folly, and be ashamed of it.

Though the sword of Gods vengeance long rests in the scabberd of ^his
patience, as it did to these men here in my Text, yet at last it will be
drawn forth, The Heathen shall know themselves to be but men, and these men
to be but Fools, the day of their pleasure is now past, and the night of
their Tribulation comes, they were well and in health and merry, but see now
they are afflicted, nay, Tarditatem supplitij gravitate compensat, for see the
manner of it; Their soul abhors all meat, and they draw near to the
gates of death, and so the second part comes in, the Disease.

The cause of our disasters you have heard, our Transgressions and our
Iniquities, hinc nostri fundi calamitas, hence is the source of all our
sorrows, the original of all our afflictions.

Had our first Parents continued in that Innocence wherein they were created
the name of affliction had been a stranger unto them, they had never suffered,
had never dyed, but they starting aside like a brok^n bow, and falling from
that Integrity, have not only brought a death, and that a double one upon
themselves and their issue Mori^nd^ moriemini, but also encumbred that short
life which was allotted them with a world of sorrow and vexation. Hence come
that infinite number of diseases which begirt and enuiron this body of ours, so
that not one part from the sole of the foot to the top of the head may
challenge any freedom and immunity, some whereof ambitiously aspire to the
seat of Majesty the head, and there despightfully triumph over us, while
others more humble, no less cruel, content themselves with the Injury they
offer us in our more inferior members; Others there are who as if they had
received that commission of his 1 King. 22. 31.
to his Soldiers, fight neither against small nor great, save the King only,
so these bend all their forces against the only fountain of our life, our
heart, where yet more kindly cruel, they strike us with present death, while
others to show the virulency of their disposition, are many years in killing
us, during all which time, our whole life is but labor and sorrow, and the
grave is more desired then all the treasures of the world; One he complains
of his head as 2 King 4. 19
the Shu^a^it^s Son, another of his belly, Ier. 4. 19.
as the Prophet, another is ^icke in his legs, 1 Kings 15. ^23.
as Asa, another of a soar, as 2 Kings 20. 7.
Hezekiah, all of us have some way or other to bring us to these gates of death
here spoken of.

I am not able to call all the several Arrows of this quiver by their proper
names, but surely the least, and most gentle of them is sufficient to rob us of
the best of natures Jewels our life. We have all experience in this kind of as
much as I can relate, we see that all the Cities and Towns of the earth, so
far as the line of them is stretched, are but humanarum cladium mis^randa
consepta, and though there is but (...), yet there are I^numeri exitus, but one
way of coming into the world, yet there are a world of ways of going out, and
if any question the cause of these our maladies, let him at his leisure but
read over the 28. of D^ut. and there he shall see that the

sin of his soul is the only cause of the suffering of the body. It was the
word of the Son of Syrach, Let him that sins against his Maker,
Ecelesiast. 38. 15.
fall into the hands of the Physician. And experience tells us daily, that
there are some Diseases which grow upon men merely by their sin and
wickedness; Our Luc. 21. 34.
Savior bids us take heed that our stomachs be not ouer-charged with
surfeiting and drunkenness. Plures gula quam gladi^, a true, though as old
Proverb, the Grave has been as much beholding to Intemperance, as any other
thing whatsoever. Whence come our Agues and Fevers, and that other, which was
once outlandish, but may now be called our native disease, not fit to be
named, which breeds corruption in the bones, and consumes the marrow in the
loins, but by excess and voluptuousness?

For this cause 2 Cor. (...). 30
says St. Paul, speaking before of the neglect and abuse of the Sacrament,
many are weak and sick among you, and many are fallen asleep. Ier. 23. 10.
For vain Swearing the whole Land mournes, and the Heathen did observe that
(...) as the Israelites were discomfited for the offense of Achan.

But for this disease which thus long has troubled us, and which, if any, is
particularly meant in this place, you shall observe tha^ that never came, but
for some great and grievous precedent sin, in the 11. of Numbers and 16.
there the people were so plagued, the cause is set down, their murmuring and
impatience, one time against God, a second time against Moses and Aaron, So
when David lost 70000. 2 Samuel 24.
of the same disease, the Text says, for his sin in numbering the people.
This is called Psalm. 91. 5.
the arrow of the Lord that flies by day, and when this once comes, the Text
has it, that Wrath (...) is gone out from the Lord, as Moses said to Aaron, as
if all other diseases were but whipping with Rods; light, and slight
afflictions this whipping with Scorpions, the worst, the terriblest, the most
severe of all other. It is not the Infection of the Air, nor distemperature of
the body, nor the heap of Inhabitants, nor the Influence of the Stars which
Physicians could or would ever apply this disease unto, but as the Exodus 8. 19.
Egyptians said of the Plague of Lice, Digitus deiest hic, and that for some
great some grievous offense.

Wherefore let us all strike our selves with amazement upon the thigh, and say,
what have we done, let us resolve a Christian alteration and reformation,
otherwise though this be removed, yet a worse thing will befall us, which
surely must be in the other life, for here naught worse can come, for see how
it is described. Their soul abhors all meat, and they draw near to the
gates of death. All pleasure, all delights prove hateful to them, nay, their
necessary food which should preserve their being, keep life and soul
together is loathsome, and then no marvel though they be near death, for
can a fire continue without ^ewell, and nature be sustained without its
appointed food?

But they whom God has delivered out of it, can better express the nature of
this disease then my self, only thus much, it is in the most mortal, in all
fearful and uncomfortable, when a friend is barred from a friends visit,
when he shall have none to close up his dying eyes, nor to say to him leave
thy fatherless children to me, when he not only suffers himself, but it
any be so aduentrously kind to come to see him, he may be a pe^^iduct and an
occasion of the like misery to him.

But we have not changed the color of our hair, not added one inch to our
statures since our wet eyes and heavy hearts were witnesses of more then what
my tongue is able to relate; when naught was heard but crying and complaining
in our streets, no fights but some carrying others to their graves, and not
many days after, others doing the like necessary office for them. Gods arm is
not yet shortened, nor his strength so much weakened, but that if we still
sin, he will surely smite again.

The only way to make a perfect cure, is to humble our selves under the hand
of heaven, who has wounded us, and who can heal us, the Soar is but skinned,
not perfectly healed without that plaster be applied, this did these in my
Text.

Then they cried unto the Lord in their troubles.

Prou. 26. 3.
A whippe for the Horse, and a Bridle for the Ass, and the Rod is for the
back of a Fool. They have sinned and smarted, and now they feel it and cry
for help.

The wild Ass used to the Wilderness snuffeth up wind at her pleasure, who
can turn her back? they that seek after her will not weary themselves, but
they will find her in her month, Ier. 2. God sees and observes at all times
the vntamednesse of the wicked, wearying themselves like an Ass in the
bypath of ungodliness, but he takes them in their Month, and happy are
they that are so taken.

As St. Austin of necessity, so say I of misery, Foelix qua in meliora cogit,
happy misery that drives us to eternal happiness. Adversity makes them seek
to that God whom their prosperity made them forget. In the time of their
trouble they will say, Arise and save us says God, Ier. 2. 27. 2 Chronicles. 33. 12.
Bind Manasses with Chains, and load him with Irons, bow down his nceke, and
his back with bonds, and he will soon know himself; Pull the King of
Babylon also from his Throne, Dan. 4.
lay his honor and insolency in the dust, banish him the company of men, turn
him to eat grass with the Ox in the field, and he will at last learn to
praise the King of Heaven: Let Moab settle her self upon her Lees, and not be
emptyed from vessel to vessel, and her sent will remain in her, Ier. 48.
does the wild Ass bray when he has grass, or the Ox low when he has
Fodder?

Job 6. give but any of the sons of men, peace, plenty, and prosperity, all
things at his hearts desire, let but the Sun of happiness still shine upon
him, how like Wax will he melt into all pleasure, and cast off the yoke of
all obedience, but let storms and frowns seize on him, then he will say,
Hos. 6. 1. 2.
Come and let us return unto the Lord, for he has spoiled us and he will
heal us, he has wounded us, and he will bind us up. I doubt not but there
are many who heretofore have been wild like the untamed Heifer, that the Lord
has by this rod of chasti^ement reduced home, and made them his, who had they
not thus suffered perierant nis^ perijssent, had they not lost their lives or
their healths, had lost their souls. And thrice woe to that soul that shall
not make this use of this his preservation, and of Gods correction. It is a
fearful complaint that God has in the second of Ier. I have smitten their
children and they have received no correction, that heart must needs be seared
as with an hot Iron, that is not sensible of these stripes, and we cannot but
judge him, delivered up to a reprobate sense, that is not mollified at these
afflictions. What can prevail when neither Mercy nor Judgment are auailable?
2 Samuel ^0. 16.
They were wont to enq^ire of Abel, says that mother in Israel to Ioab, when
he besieged that City, before they destroy it, so does God, the grand
Captain of Heaven and Earth, as Tamberlaine was wont to do, first hang out
his white flagge to any City he environed, his proffer of peace and mercy if
they will yield, then the red Flagge of threatenings, yet so as if yet they
would submit, there was hope, but lastly the black Flagge was displayed, and
then no way but death and destruction if he prevailed; so does God first offer
mercy, which if abused, then he threatens, and long it is before he strikes,
he was 120. years before he smote the old world, if those prevail not, then
he strikes, but so gently as it shall but be a taste as it were of what he
can do, which if that also be in vain, Immedicabile vulnus ense recidendum,
that man is incurable, and must needs be cut off. We have had so long, so
large, so flourishing a time of peace, as our G^shen has been as it were the
envy of all the Nations of the world besides, this little fleece of ours has
been dry, when all the earth round about us has been overwhelmed with the
Deluge and Inundation of War; Germany groaning under persecution, France
encumbred with her fatal infelicity, Civil wars, Italy burdened with the
tyranny of Antichrist, Spain ambitiously desiring to ^athom all, like to
keep nothing* The Hollanders continually at war, only we, by the blessing
of our God, and the happy means of our late Sovereign of ever blessed memory
have sit under our Vines and Fig Trees; But yet this peace having bred
corruption, we have had light and small punishments many times inflicted, by
Water, by Fire, and by the Pestilence, and all but to reclaim us, which if we
do not seriously lay to heart, the sable flagge will be displayed: Our Candle
will be extinguishe, a night will come, an eternal night of destruction both
of body and soul. But such was our happiness, as in the time of our general
sufferings, we had a general sorrow commanded, a Fast was proclaimed by the
King and his Nobles Ion. 3.
as it was at Nineveh, and we all wept and mourned, and prayed, and cried unto
the Lord, and, I hope and dare say by the happy effect, it was serious and in
earnest, with these in my Text we cried, and we are delivered. 1 Samuel 2. 9.
Annah in a part of her song tells us, that it is the wont of the wicked in the
time of Affliction, to lay their hands upon their mouths, and hearts too, they
fret with indignation, and repine to themselves, letting neither voice nor
groan come forth, nor any token of submission to him that has cast them
down. But says St. Gregory, Tolerare and odisse non tam virtus mansuetudinis,
quam velamentum furoris, which because they dare not utter, Murmura tunc secum
and ^abiosa silentia rodunt, they bite the lip with an impatient silence,
which comes from no other but from the Devil himself, as Tertullian
witnesses, Impatientiae natales inipso diabol^ deprehendo, but here as there
was outward smart and inward sorrow, so there was a vocal expression of it, no
way giving any discontent, as 2 Kings 6. 13.
that King said, this evil comes of the Lord, why should I wait any more
upon him? but only a vociseration and hearty invocation for mercy.

In the great Famine of Samaria, a woman came and cried unto the King, Help
Ibid (...). 27.
my Lord o King, the King wisely and soundly replied, How should I help with
the Barn, or with the Winepresse, seeing the Lord denies us, In vain shall we
go to Gilead for Balm, to the Apothecaries for Ointment, to Physicians for
receipts, to any for help, unless withal we cry unto the Lord, it is not
the plaster of Figs, nor bathing in Iordane, nor washing in the Poole of
Bethesda, that will here cure, but only seeking to the Lord, and yet the other
are not to be neglected: 1 King. 15.
Asa was not condemned for seeking to Physicians, but because he neglected the
Lord. Eccle. 38. 1.
Physicians are honorable, and the act of the Apothecary is to be made use
of. Wherefore has God infused virtue into Plants and Metals, but to be used?
2 King. 20.
Did not he command Hesekiah's Plaster? 2 King. 5.
And was not Naman willed to wash? they are only here condemned, that
altogether neglect the Lord, and only rely upon these who can do nothing
without him, Nec Deus oratur nisi dignus vindice nodus, Inciderit, 1 Cor. 3. 6.
Paul may Plant, and Apollos may in their kind water, Physicians may
prescribe, and Apothecaries may apply, but our health only comes from above.

Virtus est in herbis plus gemmis, maxima verbis, there may, Chap. 38. 9.
and there is power and efficacy in Herbs, and Metals, but Prayer is the
chief, and principal efficient. Pray unto the Lord in thy sickness says the
Son of Syrach, and he will make thee whole, And it is Iam. 5. 15.
St. James his counsel, if any be sick, let him send for the Elders of the
Church, and let them pray over him, and so the prayer of the faithful shall
save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up. A real experience whereof
these men had, for no sooner did they cry unto the Lord but he delivers them
out of their distress. He sent his Word, etc.

I remember a certain speech by Bias used in jest in that earnest, when
certain Mariners were in distress, and were every one like those in Jonas
crying upon his God, sile^e ne audiant dij vos hac preterire, 1 King. 20. 31.
The Kings of Israel, say the servants of Benhadad are merciful Kings. I am
sure the God of Israel is a merciful God, who will hear the unfeigned cry of
the most wicked in their afflictions.

As the cold of Snow in the time of Harvest, so is a faithful messenger to him
that sends him, for he refreshes the soul of his Master, says Solomon,
Prou. 25. 13. Here is a faithful Mercury, a winged Messenger, that in so short
a space has climbed up into the highest Heaven, and gotten Audience. What
manicles to the hands of Gods justice are the cries of poor afflicted penitent
men, that will not suffer him to proceed in his intended vengeance! Nay, rather
then they shall fail, God himself shall seem to be mutable, who though he
threatens Nineveh without any hope of escape, yet upon those prayers is
entreated to spare them. Or rather how gracious is our God, and willing to be
thus entreated, who upon the first call answers and performs, he in the Luc.
11. 17.
Gospel when his friend did but knock at an unseasonable time, answered, the
doors were locked, the children were in bed, and so did not satisfy his
desire, but for a loaf of bread; But no such thing here, no time in all our
life is unseasonable; the first, the second, the third (...) he hears and
opens. Bis qui cito, the bene^^^ is double, that is speedily performed. 1 Kings
18. 28.
The Priests of Baal prayed from morning till noone, and could get no answer,
but the first word of Elias fetched fire. And indeed how should such suppliants
praying to such deities be heard, for what taste is there in the white of an
Egg, or how can Baal, or any other living or dead creature hear or help,
when they cannot help themselves? It is only the infinite Maker and creator
of the ear that can hear all men, at all places, at all times altogether. No
Saint, no Angel, no forged or feigned godhead can do that, but only the God
of all power and might, the mighty God of Heaven and Earth. Vna eademque manus
vulnus opemque tulit, He that bruised can again bind up, he that made the
wound can, and only did cure it, now the means which he used was his Word. He
sent his Word and healed them, etc.

This is that Delphian Sword, or universal Instrument which he used in
framing the World with all that therein is; He said, let there be Light, and
there was light; Let there be Firmament, let the Waters be gathered into one
place, and let the dry Land appear, and all was fulfilled; and He still
vpholdeth all things by the Word of his power, Heb. 1. What is his Word now but
the real and effectual performance of what he intends, he but speaks, and
all things in Heaven and Earth, and the great Deepes presently are obedient. I
see now as man Mat. 4.
lives not by bread alone, but by every word which proceeds out of the mouth
of God, so he is not cured by Physic alone, but by the only blessing of the
omnipotent Word of God. No means can prevail without that, and that with,
without, besides, yea, against all means can easily be preualent. No God can
deliver as Dan. 3. 19.
the God of the three Children can, as the King confessed, whose Dicere is his
Facere. His only Word is able to bring mighty things to pass. Whatsoever
seem impossibilities to man, are easily brought to pass by him that can do
all things. The Sea will be calm, Diseases vanish, all the Creatures are
morigerous, yea Devils themselves are obedient to this Word, only Man dares to
rebel against it, but he that will not bend at the Word of his command, shall
be broken at the Word of his Power.

They that allegorise this part of Scripture, as Hugo Cardinalis, and Lorinus,
make this Disease a farther proceeding in the ways of impiety, a sitting down
in the chair of ungodliness, a delivering up from one sin to another, and
are at last grown to that height, that they care no more for their soul, then
if they had none, the Word and Sacraments, the only food of their souls they
neglect and despise, it is as Wormwood to their taste, or smoke to their
eyes, they so wholly deuote themselves to sensuality, as it might seem to
grieve them, non quadrupedes esse natos, that they might freely take their
pleasure and delight, yet at last God has a hook to draw these in, a means
to enlighten and preserve them. Though they be dead in sins and trespasses,
and with Lazarus buried in the grave, yet if the Lord do but say, Exi for as
come forth of that Mare mortuum, wherein like Jonas in the belly of the Whale,
or rather of Hell, as himself called it, they are entombed, their Fetters fall
presently from them, as they did from Peter in the Prison, they come to
acknowledge themselves Fools, wicked and rebellious, to say with Exodus 10. 16
Pharaoh, I have sinned against the Lord. This is wrought by the power of his
Word, that cibus inconsumptibilis as Ciprian called it, that immortal Word
which Ioh 1.
St, John says, was in the beginning, the only begotten Son of God our
blessed Savior. He like the Number. 21. 9.
Brazen Serpent cures all foule-diseased, that look up to him.

I urge not this Interpretation to any, I know one sin is oftentimes the
punishment of another; as when Israel had 2 Samuel 24.
provoked God, he stirred up David to number the people, and it is the
fearefullest judgment that can be, to heap more coals upon the head of the
delinquent by giving them over to their own hearts lust I know also, that
there is a death of the soul as of the body, Etiam viuens mortua est, says 1 Timothy 5. 6.
St. Paul of a woman living in pleasure, there is a death spiritual as
temporal, out of which God is able to deliver. Nay, his Word, that is the
second Person in Trinity came for that end into the world, was made flesh and
took our nature upon him, not for the righteous but Mat. 9. 14.
to call sinners to repentance, yea, though they were twice dead, as he was
called twice a Murderer, Semel consilio iterum spectaculo. Once in the act,
and a second time in the glorying in it. Yet there is a blessing in this dead
Elm, though he be consumed as a Sheep in the mouth of a Lion to a leg or an
ear, or as a block in the fire to a stumpe, yet the least breath of his mouth
is able to revive him. But the context me thinks gives no great warrant for
this exposition, having both before and after spoken of temporal dangers and
deliverances from them. I see no reason why it should be thought, that herein
only he speaks of spiritual danger and a spiritual deliverance.

I have hitherto showed you this disease, with the cause and the effect of it,
The Physician also I have brought you acquainted with, together with his
Physic, that if ever there be the like need again, we may with boldness
approach the same throne of grace, and obtain the like mercy, Probatum est may
be subscribed to this Recipe* so many sighs mingled with tears, and a
quantity of faith enfused, taken in poculo charitatis, and the blessing of our
Doctor is a (...) for all diseases, a ^ure Antidote against all infection, all
amulets and preservatives compared to this, are mere toys of Mountebankes.
This never fails.

Many here in this place have experimentally tasted of the efficacy of this
Medicine, All of us have been Testes occulati, eyewitnesses of it, some have
smarted, and all I hope have been admonished. The like cause breeds again the
like disease, Relapses are most dangerous, We have sinned, with David, we
with David have smarted, with him we have sorrowed, and with him we have
been delivered. Psalm. 4^. ^.
Abyssus abyssum inuocat says he, the depth of our misery I hope, caused the
depth of our sorrow, and I hope it was according to the occasion, hearty and
unfeigned; if like 1 Kings 21.
Ahabs, it were but feigned and temporary, and like the careless Boy we
forget the rod with the smart, and so return to the vomit; Woe, woe to that
man, the latter end of that man will be worse then the beginning. None are now
delivered, but either to their greater happiness, or greater misery. They who
are now spared, are either spared to redeem the time that formerly they have
carelessly lost, or till their sins are more ripe for a seuerer Judgment. The
Israelites were kept out of the Land of Canaan so long, till the sins of those
Inhabitants were fulfilled.

Luc. 13. 3.
Our Savior told the Jews, that they were not greater sinners upon whom the
Tower of Siloa fell then those that escaped, but unless they repented, they
should all likewise perish. De mortuis nil nisi bonum, says the Canon; Our
Predecessors sins have not been more great against God, but Gods mercy has
been more toward us; Many green and fruitful Trees have been cut up, when
leauy and barren Trees are let alone; We have seen Death like an unskillful
Archer shooting at Rouers, has hit our superiors above us, our inferiors
beneath us, our friends on our right hand, our foes on our left. The Cedars
have been plucked up, and the shrubbes have continued. Nay, to make the
remembrance this fatal year for ever wear a sable livery, he of whom we
may say as the Israelites did of David, 2 Samuel 18.
he is worth 10000. of us, our blessed Peacemaker under whose branches we
have 22. years sat shadowed from the scorching heat of War, which has
parcht and withered most of our neighbour^ Nations. Yet now, though not of
this, yet of another as violent a disease has been taken away, and but that
reliquisset nobis semen, he has left us of his seed, the flourishing estate of
our Kingdom might have dyed with him. We have also been bereft within the
space of two years of many of the principal Peers, and Pillars of the State,
two Dukes, one Marquess, five or six Earls, some Barons, and most of them
Privy Counselors, all which were, as if our arms had been cut from our
bodies, or our eyes plucked out of our heads. And then so many thousands of
inferior subjects, as the memory of man cannot equalize it. And lo, all we
that are alive this day, are escaped as a bird out of the snare of the Fowler.
But let me tell you, we may be delivered in six troubles, and the seventh
may dispatch us, we may escape the pit, and be taken in the snare, as Ier. 48.
44. We may flee from a Lion, and a Bear shall overtake us, or lean our hand
upon a Wall, and a Serpent shall bite us, Amos 5. 19. Him that escapes the
Sword of Hasael shall Iehu slay, and him that escapes the Sword of Iehu, shall
Elisha slay, 1. Reg. 19. Though our Master has thus long deferred his coming
to us, yet at last the time of our Audit will come, we must all Reddere
rationem, we must stand at the bar, and answer to what shall be objected.
Luc. 12. 18.
To whom much is given, of him much shall be required. The longer life
afforded, we must either perform more duty, or expect more pain; our Lord
will take an account of our Talents be they more or less, and in what kind
soever. Wherefore seeing our sins are the cause of Gods anger and our
sufferings, and having had but the lappes of our garments in comparison 1 Kings
2^.
cut off, as David did to Saul, to show what he might have done. As we have
sorrowed outwardly, so let us show the fruits of it. It is not the wearing o^
customary blackes, the absteining from one meal in the week, or the bowing of
the head like a bulrush, that God respects, it is the absteyning from our
Transgressions and Iniquities that he regards, Oportet aliquid esse intus as he
said of a dead body to make it stand; So there must be a true sorrow attended
with visible works, which argue sound repentance. It is true, we did fast and
pray, and mourn, and cry, while the rod was upon us, and did not God regard
us? he beyond expectation spoke to the Destroying Angel to desist. Now
therefore as the effect of Judgment was compunction, and sorrow, and we did
express that heartily and really in the liberal and freely relieuing the
necessity of our brethren, for which double honor shall ever attend this
honorable City, which may be a pattern and example to all the Kingdom of
liberal and Charitable contribution: So now after mercy received, let us
express the thankfulness of our hearts, in vocal thanksgiving, and actual
obedience to his behests. And so I come to the last part of all The Fee which
the Preserver of men as Job called him, our God respects from us. Oh that men,
etc.

Wherein we have qui, quem, quid, quare, the parties, Who, Men, the duty
what, Praise, the object whom, The Lord; the reason why, for his goodness and
wonderful works, endeared unto us by the mention of the parties to whom this
goodness, these wonderful works were extended, The Children of Men. I shall
rack your patience but a very little while to run over these, and I shall
conclude.

1. The first Who, Men. They who erewhile when they thought themselves wise
were called Fools, are now, being humbled at the sight of their sin, and
sense of their sorrow called Men. They have lost nothing by losing all they
had, they have gained now their true denomination. The nature of Man in his
first Creation, before that lump was soured with the leuin of sin, was full
of glory and grace, and as God said to David, I made thee King over Israel, and
if that had been too 2 Samuel 12.
little for thee, I would have done more; So Man was made King, and put in
Lord-like dominion over all the earth, not of some cantons or corners, but over
it all; Nay, the air and the Sea also were put under his dominion, with all
the creatures in them all, all things were created for us 2 Phisi^.
(...) as Aristo: we are in a manner the end of all things. And if this be too
little, God has yet done more for us, for our sakes were the Heavens created,
and for our sakes were the Heavens bowed, and propter hominem Deus homo factus
est, God was made Man to pleasure Man. The wise men in the world, who could
never look so far into the nature of Man, as we can, yet evermore commended
that Creature above all others; One called him a little world, the world a
great man, another a mortal God, God an immortal Man, another all things,
because he partakes the nature of Plants, of Beasts, and of spiritual
Creatures. Phauorinus merueiled at nothing in the World besides man, in man at
nothing but his mind. Abdala the Sarazen being asked what he most admired in
the Stage of the world, answered Man; and Augustine says, that a man is a
greater miracle then all the miracles that ever have been wrought amongst men.
When Vedius Pollio a Roman at a supper provided for the Emperor Augustus,
would have thrown a servant of his into a Fishpond wherein he kept his
Lampries, because he had broken a Cup of Crystal, the Emperor withheld him,
and controld him with these words, Homo cuiuscunque conditionis, etc. Aman of
whatsoever conditions, yet if for no other reason, yet because a man is more
worth then all the Cups and Fish Ponds in the world. Great reason then there
is for the performance of this duty, that Man should praise and magnify his
Maker, if for no other reason, yet because he has made him Man; he has given
him a soul to govern his body, and reason to rule his soul, and a Religion
to direct that reason, and he himself who is all Good, all Wise, all Religious
is the Lord of that Religion, and expects that homage and only Man can
perform it, fail not then. Other creatures have bodies but no souls, mouths
and tongues, but not the gift of speech, only that is proper to Man, and that
is the instrument wherewith we are to praise him, and so the second; the duty,
Praise.

The word in the original which signifies laudare is also Confiteri, for that
is a part of the praise which God requires, we must humble our selves at his
presence, acknowledge our own unworthiness, and that all his punishments are
far less then our deseruings. Josh. 7. 19.
Joshua wished Achan to confess his fault, and so to give glory to God. We
commend the proceeding of the Almighty when we condemn our selves, our
falling low before him, exalts him the more; and when we lay open our weakness,
is his power made more illustrious. (...).
We must in all things give thanks, says St. Paul, if in our Adversity, then
much more in our prosperity, if like the beast we look only downward for what
we receive. Os homini sublime dedit coelumque tueri Iussit, when our faces are
erect, and we should only mind Heaven, if we only look to secondary causes
and means for our blessings, and so neglect the God that gave them, the earth
it self will spue us us out as an unworthy burden: But now it is not only the
Heb. 13. 15.
fruit of our lips as the author to the Hebrews calls them, which is here
expected; 1 Samuel 15. 22.
Obedience says Samuel to Saul is better then sacrifice. It is in
Thanksgiving, the only Christian sacrifice, as in the old Sacrifices, nunquam
in odoribus sacrificiorum delectatus est, Dominus, nisi in fide and desiderio
offerentis, says St. Augustine, the outward act never was acceptable without
inward piety and devotion, Cain and Abel both sacrificed and externally both
alike; but the soul of a sacrifice a faithful heart was wanting in Genesis 4.
Caines which God saw who looks as with Cresset-light into the closet of a man's
heart, and so refused it, and accepted the other.

They are men that may be deceived with words, but God is a God of spirits, as
of bodies, and so will be magnified in both. Men's cuiusque est quisque, and so
the meaning and inward intention of an action is the reality of it. To bless
God with our lips, and blaspheme him in our ^hearts, is to honor him ex vsu
magis quam sensu, rather of custom then devotion. God is weary of this
lip-labor, it is as if you offered a dog in sacrifice. Honorant me labijs Isa.
29. 13.
says God in the Prophet, cor autem eorum longi ame, God has the Tongue and
Mammon, or Milchrom, or Belial has the heart, what is this but to mock God?
but be not deceived God will not be mocked; he searches the inward parts of
man, and there finds the dissimulation of the heart which cries to the tongue,
make a show of piety, do something to get me credit among men. But alas Adam
was not more naked when God called him after his fall, then the hypocrisy of
these men shall be discovered. Praise him with our tongues, and bless him with
our hearts, and serve him with our hands, this is the true praising of him; For
as he made all these parts, so he will be served in them all, and he has
power of all, for he is Lord of all, which is the third; Praise the Lord. A
Lord that has power over us, as the Potter over his vessel, if it distastes
him; He challenges duty and observance of us, first by creation, then by
preservation; he still defends and prouides for us, then by protection he keeps
us in all our ways, so that no evil shall be^ide us, but chiefly in our
assured hope of glorification. Him that honors me, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
says himself: I will honor. Scipio repented that he had not a Soldier in
all his Army, who if he commanded would not cast himself headlong from a steep
Tower to the Sea; a powerful Lord* and an obedient Army, no doubt we owe as
much service* to our Lord as Scipio's Soldiers did him, and he will as amply
recompense it. When Gedeon had delivered the Israelites out of the hands of
Mad^an, they came to him and said, Thoushalt be Lord over us for thou have
delivered us. Judge. 18. 28. Whether God has mightily delivered us, let our
selves be judges, and whether even by those deliverances he may not challenge
superiority over us; Nay, these deliverances are but earnests and pledges of
what he yet will do, that glory that shall be revealed to those that truly
glorify him, is far beyond the shallow heart of man to conceive, glory and
Immortality, and life, and joy, and pleasure at his right hand for evermore. If
these certain hopes will not allure; yet let fear stir us up, the
consideration of what is due to the neglect of it. What a reprehension did our
Savior give those unthankful Leapers, Luc. 17. 17.
Were there not ten healed, where are the other nine? a fearful thing when the
Creator shall ask where the Creature is, as God asked Adam in the Garden after
his fall, Where art thou? Ioh. 1. 18.
our Savior saw Nathaniell under the Fig Tree; so no doubt he knew where those
nine ungrateful men were, but by their ingratitude they were lost in
themselves, and so were quite out of his protection. He will be a Lord no
longer to defend and protect us, then we are servants to obey him; Not a
servant here below that will endure his Masters disgrace, (...).
ais aio, negas nego, says he in the Comedy! Their Masters word goes still
for a law, and he will be more jealous of his Masters honor then his own
peace, shall earthly servants be so obseruant of their earthly Masters from
whom time may release them, or distance of place secure them, and shall we dare
to neglect our obeisance against him, against whom there is no privilege? No
place, nor any time can exempt us from his Dominion. Mat. 25.
The unprofitable servant that gave his Master his own Talent, yet was
condemned because he did not increase it, where shall they then appear that
do not give him what of right belongs to him? Mat. 22. 21.
When the Pharisees tempted Christ by asking him whether they should give
tribute to Caesar or no, he called for a penny, and seeing Cesars image and
superscription upon it, judged it his, give says he to Caesar the things which
are Cesars, and to God the things which are Gods; Honor, and glory and praise,
is that which of due belongs to him, and that which all the host of Heaven,
Angels and Saints, daily sing unto him; Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Sabbath,
Heaven and Earth are full of thy glory, the glorious company of Prophets praise
thee, the noble army of Martyrs praise thee, The Holy Church throughout all the
world does acknowledge thee. Luc. 2. 14.
In the Angels song there went gloria in Excelsis, before Pax in terris, no
peace on earth, if no glory to Heaven, and yield but that Peace shall be within
our Walls, and plenteousnes within our dwellings. Would ye yet know a farther
reason wherefore ye should praise him, my Text tells you; For his goodness* etc.

Marvelous are thy works says David, in Wisdom have tho^ made them all, the
earth is full of thy goodness, so is the broad Sea also, not the least
creature in the Air, or the Earth, or the Water, but if we rightly consider,
it is fearfully and wonderfully made, and the least part or member of them is
more then the weak and shallow reach of Man is able either duly to commend or
to comprehend rightly. It is a true position in morality, nimia familiaritas
parit contemptum, it is also true in Divinity, Perseuerantia consuetudi^is
amisit admirationem; quam multa vsitata caleantur, qua considerata stupent?
says Augustine, how many things does custom make vile, which consideration
would make admirable? Did we but with David truly consider the creation of our
selves, that we are wonderfully made, and that our bones were not hidden from
him, though they were formed in a secret place, it would enforce us to give
acclamation to the workmanship of our Maker, as that sweet singer of Israel
there did, Marvelous are thy works O Lord, and that my soul knows
right-well.

Then have the wondrous works of God their true end, when we take them for
wonders, when we tremble at the sight of them, and fear that mighty Lord that
has wrought them, God does not miracula propter miracula, but for our sakes,
not caring so much himself to do them, as that we consider and bear them
away. The gracious God says David, has made his wonderful works to be had
in remembrance. O Lord how gracious art thou, thy works are very deep, an
unwise man knows it not, and a fool does not understand it; So that all his
Goodness is extended to us, and his Marvelous works are done for us, which
are the Children of men. The last part of all. O that Men, etc.

Tantus ille, tantilli nos, this adds to our engagement; That he should so
consider us, and think upon us, that never think upon him; that he should
regard us that never mind him; for us that have deserved so little at his
hands, nay, rather so much, so much misery, and so many plagues, being non
prius nati quam damnati: that are not only strangers but enemies, and that the
most despightfully conditioned that can be, vessels of wrath, and sons of
perdition, that he should do all these things for us; how are we honored,
that he will vouchsafe to be honored by us so vile, so unworthy as we are? All
that we can do is a thousand times less then a drop of rain to the Ocea^, he
is infinite of himself, and nothing can be added to him, it is only our
happiness, our welfare and advantage.

The wonder which David here instanceth in, is the recovery of us out of
sickness. We little consider how daily and hourly we stand beholding to God
for our lives and healths, when we have such enemies within, the Elements
whereof we are composed, heat and cold, moisture and drought, which being
brethren of one house, as one called them, but withal the Fathers and Founders
of us, as it were of our natures, if they but fall at variance within us, how
will they rend and tear us like wild Boares, how many have been buried alive
in the grave of their earthly and melancholic Imaginations? how many burnt in
the flames of pestilent and hot diseases? their bowels set on fire like an
Oven, their blood dried up, their inwards withered and wasted with the violence
thereof? The vapors and fumes of their own vicious stomachs, like a
contagious Air how many have they poisoned and choked up? and finally how
many have been glutted and ouercharged with water between their own skin
and bones? And therefore we must conclude and cry with the Prophet; It is the
wonderful mercy of God, that we are not consumed.

When a grape-gatherer comes, will he not leave some grapes! if ought in the
opening of this Scripture has escaped me, as my ignorance and weakness dare
hope for no other, it will be your charity to impute it to multitude of other
private business, and brevity of time, in which as Agabus with the girdle of
Paul I am confined, these few sands are too little to expatiate my self in
these many and various points which offer themselves to our consideration,
though not all of some, yet somewhat, I hope I have spoken of all; I would
gladly conclude with some short application.

How many are there now in this City alive, that have been summoned as
Hezekiah was, to set their house in order, for they thought no other but they
must die? that have seen before them, the greedy and inexorable Grave with
open mouth ready to receive them; that friends and Physicians have all
forsaken, giving them for dead, yet have escaped, and are recovered, and many
there are also, to whom God has given continuance of health in this general
Deluge of infection, when so many thousands have fal^e round about us; To what
shall we attribute this? were we not in the same Air? did we not converse
with the same men? are not our bodies equally subject to the like diseases? was
it not only as our Savior says, that the works of the Lord might be
manifest? who spoke to this Infection, as sometime to the Sea, hitherto shall
thou go and no farther, Divide in one house between brother and brother, in
one bed between Husband and Wife, in one Family between servant and servant;
These shall thou absolutely take, these thou shall but touch their bodies and
spare their lives, as he said to the Di^ell concerning Job; Thus long shall
thou reign and no longer; if ever we live to forget this goodness, this
wondrous work of God, (I will sooner wish we should forget to take our daily
food) how justly should God forget us, when we stand in the like need of mercy
again. As the Emperor had his Boy that cried every morning to him, Remember
thou art but a man; so let us still have something or other to put us in mind
of this great deliverance; Let every man write it upon the doors of his house,
as the Exodus 12.
Israelites in Aegipt sprinkled their posts with blood, that if ever God should
again strike, he again may spare us. I Genesis 18. 19.
know, says God of Abraham, that he will tell his children what great things I
have done. Let it be our talk to our children, that they that are yet unborn
may know, though not by sight, yet by hearesay, what great things the Lord has
done for us. Scipio Africanus the Elder having made the City of Rome exanguem,
and morituram, as himself called it, ready to give up the ghost, Lady of
Affrik at length being banished into a base Country-Towne, his will was, that
his Tomb should have this Inscription, I^grata Patria ne ossa quidem mea
habes, let not the God of Heaven complain so of us, that we should have no
thought, no memory, of our great preseruations, let him not be exiled our
thoughts, and buried in oblivion, but let some remnant and foot-print be left,
to witness to the world, that we have been delivered. Let him not have cause
to complain as he sometime did, Isa. 1. Hear O Heavens and hearken O Earth, I
have brought up and preserved children, and they have despised me: Can a mother
forget her child says God; no child so dear to the mother as we have been
to him, he has tendered us as the apple of his eye, and preserved us, as the
Signet upon his right hand. Oh then let us observe and respect him. It is a
good thing says David, Psalm. 92.
to praise the Lord, and to sing unto the name of the most High, to declare his
loving kindness in the morning, and his truth in the night season. It is good
touching the act it self, for it is better to bless then to curse, and to
give thanks, then to give out a voice of grudging. It is good, because of the
retribution, (...) give and thou shall receive, and all that we can give to
him, is our thanks (for can our goodness extend to him? says David) and
cessat de cursus gratiarum vbi non fuerit recursus, the course and descent of
the graces of God cease, and the spring is dried up, where there is not a
recourse and tide of our thankfulness, Wherefore let us always be thankful
to the Lord, for it becomes well the just to be thankful. Had I the power,
I would do as David did, begin above, and call the Heavens, the Sun, and
Moon, and Stars to praise the Lord for this our deliverance, then would I
descend to the Air, and call all those winged Messengers of God, all Birds and
feathered Fowls to bear a part with us, then would I come to the Earth, and
have Mountains and all Hills, fruitful Trees and all Cedars, Beasts and
Cattle to join with us, then would I go down to the Deep, and there summon
all those Sea-citizens of those brinie Regions to come with us, and magnify
his great and glorious Name. In a word, I would conclude as David does, Let
every thing that has breath praise the Lord. Psalm. last.
The Lord whose goodness is without quality, whose greatness is without
quantity, infinite in both; but all of us that are the sons of men,
especially I would have to learn, the song of the blessed before hand, that
hereafter we may be able to sing it with more perfection, Reu. 5. 13.
Praise, honor, and glory be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and to the
Lamb* that Immaculate Lamb of God which once offered himself for us, and at
last will assume us to himself in that place where he ^its and Reigns for
ever. To the which place he bring us, that only bought us, and can save us,
JESUS CHRIST the Righteous. Amen.

FINIS.

