THE MOVRNING of Mount Libanon: OR, THE TEMPLES TEARS. A Sermon preached at
Hodsocke, the 20. day of December, Anno Domini, 1627. In commemoration of the
Right Honorable and Religious Lady, the Lady FRANCES CLIFTON, Daughter to the
Right Honorable the Earl of Cumberland: And Wife to the truly noble Sir
Geruas Clifton of Clifton, in the County of Nottingham, Knight and Baronet, who
deceased the 20. November, 1627.

By WILLIAM FVLLER Doctor of Divinity, one of his Majesty's Chapleines in
Ordinary.

ECCLES. 40. 19. Children and the building of a City continue a man's name, but
a blameless wife is counted above them both. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper
for Robert Bostocke, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at
the sign of the Kings Head. 1628.

TO THE MVCH honored, Sir GERVAS CLIFTON, Of Clifton, in the County of
Nottingham Knight and Baronet, my most noble Patron.
Noble SIR,
HOW much J stand obliged to your love and bounty, should I be silent, others
would testify: to conceal it, were to call witnesses; and to deny it, to
proclayme ingratitude. Neither has your respect come single or alone. For
those excellent Ladies, of pious memory, which successively made your bed
happy, and I hope your house prosperous, as they were to you most dear, so to
me most noble: never stranger found either more encouragement in his labors, or
more ample remonstrance of an honorable love. But there is no earthly
contentment, but has interruption or intermixtion: we must leave it, or it
must leave us. I only, now instance in this, that God has taken those
ornaments of their sex, as fit for heaven, too goo^ for earth, to both which
living, I was indebted and for both dead (by your election) the sad*
membrancer. Others might have set out their perfections better, none more
mournfully or more truly. In which the rareness of the subjects have had the
power to make my weakness, not only to pass without censure, but the
publishing to be importuned with an earnest zeal, both by your self and
others of their and your honorable friends. The first long since went out in
written copies: this last (it seems) must not be restrained within so narrow
bounds, nor the desire of many satisfied without more ample notice. Which
sithence it must come to public view: to whom should I present it, but your
self, who have the loss, and know the truth, from whom I have received my
means, and to whom I shall ever remain thankful, and faithful in all
Christian duties.

William Fuller.

ZACHARY 11. 2. Vlula abies, quia cecidit Cedrus, etc. Howl thou fur tree,
for the Cedar is fallen.
ALl the former Prophets (one only excepted) did see, or foresee the Temples
desolation, the holy Cities widowhood; how she that was so great among the
nations, the princess among the provinces, was become tributary, weeping
continually even in the night, Ier. La. 1. 1
and the tears running down her cheeks, whilst the people sigh, and seek
their bread abroad, the elders sit upon the ground and keep silence, cast dust
upon their heads, and gird themselves with sackcloth, whilst the virgins hang
down their heads: La. 2. 10.
all crying the joy of our hearts is gone, our dance is turned into mourning,
the crown of our head is fallen, La. 5. 15. 16.
woe now unto us that we have sinned. But Haggai, Zachary, and Malachie, are
raised as messengers of glad tidings to tell the comfort of a blessed
deliverance: that the gold should be no more so dim, nor the fine gold so
changed, that the stones of the sanctuary, should no longer be so scattered in
the corner of every street. But it is the nature of all earthly hopes to be
like sick men's pulses full of intermissions, there being rarely seen, sperate
miseri, in the superscription, hope ye wretched, but it is subscribed with
cauete foelices, beware ye happy. No day so fair without some cloud, nor life
so successful without some crosses: Exodus 12.
the ioyfullest feast the Jews had was eaten with sour herbs, and the
blessed Evangelists themselves as they preach Christ and his mercies, so his
cross and our afflictions. And this our Prophet sent to proclayme restoration
to the people: cap. 9.
to his exulta satis filia Zion, etc. rejoice greatly, O daughter Zion; shout
for joy, O daughter Jerusalem; behold thy king comes unto thee etc. in
prescience of that aduent which we are within so few days to celebrate,
annexeth an interruption in my text, and some verses following. Vlula abies,
quia cecidit Cedrus howl thou fur tree, for the Cedar is fallen.

I may term my text the mourning of mount Libanon, 1. Reg. 5. 8.
a hill replenished with firres and cedars: or the temples tears, for it was
builded of that wood fetched from that mountain: and Hector Pintus
interpreting the 17. of Ezekiel and the 3. verse, where an Eagle is said to
come unto Libanon and take the highest branch of the Cedar, makes Libanon to
be the Temple, and proves it out of the Chaldee paraphrast, which reads
the former verse to my text. Open thy doors, O Libanon, thus: Open thy doors,
O temple, and the fire shall devour thy Cedars: some mean the holy City, some
the land of promise, but all agree that it may insinuate the lamentation of
Gods people for some great one fallen. And God we know does often cloth his
will in parables, Gerson ser. 19. post pentec.
vt noua minus fastidiat variet as, that variety may delight and make a deep
impression in him that hears: Nathans tale of the poor man's sheep that was
his whole flock, 2 Samuel 12.
went to the quick with David: nor is there a more piercing passage in the
whole book of God, then Iothams parable of the trees choosing their king, Iud.
9.
and all refused the troublesome honor, but only the ambitious bramble,
meaning Abimelech the usurper. Omnis homo arbor inuersa: every man (they say)
is a tree with the root upward and the arms downward. Suppose me then to be
this hour upon mount Libanon condoling with the fur trees, because a Cedar
is fallen.

In the words of the Prophet are three problem questions, (as parts
obseruable) to be both discussed and resolved. 1. Why it is said Vlula: howl,
a sign of sorrow without measure. 2. Quare abies, why the fur tree should
howl, it being the hieroglyphicke of a child of God, who is in no case to
sorrow as a man without hope. 3. Quare, quia cecidit Cedrus: why, for the
Cedars fall. Sithence it is cut down only for the building of the Sanctuary,
and to its own increase of glory. This is the compass I am to sail by,
until I land upon the shore I steer to, which is the sad occasion of this
days meeting.

A wiseman should not use much passion, Quare dicit, vlula.
nor a good man persuade it, for the one argues weakness of judgment, the
other wickedness of mind. Affections being those unruly beasts, which reason
and religion strive to bridle. But there is a great difference betwixt quid
agitur, and quid deletur; what is done, and what should be done: as is betwixt
contemplation and practice; the one living in politia Platonis, the other in
faece Romult: they are but in a dream that conceive a common wealth without
corruption, a Church without error, or a man without passion. It is an easy
matter for one in health and plenty to cry shame on him that is distracted
with pain and care: and for the wanton on his couch to disesteeme the soldier
in his tent, because not more hardy both in cold and danger, when tu si hic
esses, change but the condition of the parties and the case is altered. A
public loss is a general sorrow, to the bewayling whereof the greatest
expression is required: a tear is not held sufficient, where there should be
an inundation; nor a sigh, where howling. Rachel in childbirth called her son
of which she died ben-oni, Genesis 35. 18.
the son of sorrow. Naomi bids her friends call her no more Naomi, that is
beautiful, but Mara, that is bitterness, Ruth 1. 20.
out of the sense of her misery: but Phineas his wife had just cause to name
her son Ichobod, that is, 1. Sam. 4. 21.
where is glory? because the glory was departed from Israel, for the Ark of the Lord was taken, O that my head were full of waters, and mine eyes a
fountain of tears, to weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of
my people, (said the Prophet Jeremy;) 9. ^.
and thence it was, that our Prophet in the chapter following would have the
mourning of Jerusalem like the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of
Megiddon, verse. 11.
yet not every family apart, and their wives apart, verse. 12.
(as it there follows) but their forces joined both of tears and shrikings
to move heaven to pity, and earth to imitate. Abyssus abyssum inuocat: one
depth calls for another; great sins must have great repentance, and great
judgments great acknowledgement. Mine eyes do fail with tears, my bowels
swell, my liver is powered upon the earth, for the destruction of the daughter
of my people, because the children and sucklings faint in the streets of the
city, Ier. La. ^. 11. 12.
and say to their mothers, where is bread and drink, as the Prophet
complayneth: although reason and religion should forbid, yet nature and
necessity would enforce a howling. Yet is not all this a note of distrust of
Gods providence, but a manifestation that we are sensible of his justice and
our demerits: Aug. dever. Apost. ser. 33.
Quid miraris quod Maria dolebat, tuno cum ipse Dominus flebat? It is no
marvel if Mary grieved, when as her Lord himself wept; not as bewayling the
dead man whom he presently intended both to raise and to recover, but the dead
man's sin which had attracted death for punishment. Sicut mors animae
praecessit deserente Deo, Idem ibid.
sic mors corporis secuta est deserente anima. Thus then in all sorrow this is
the highest note. La. 5. 1^*
Woe unto us that we have sinned. The death of the soul was first when God
forsook it; and the death of the body soon followed, the soul forsaking it
in condign recompense. Whence in the truth of judgment, the just causes of
extreme sorrow in a man are, vel cum ipse, vel cum proximus offendit Deum: when
either himself or some other offend his God. And though a man may seek, yet
shall he never find any true cause like unto this. De miseria hominis.
Which caused Anselmus to phrase it in these terms: when I consider the
multitude of mine offenses, I shame to live, I fear to die; then what
remains, o sinner, in thy whole life, but only vt ipsa tota se ploret totam,
to bewail thy whole life: so washing (as Saint Bernard speaks) the
barrenness of his soul with the floods of tears, Sermon. in Cant. 20.
quia magis frugiferae lacrymantes vineae: the bleeding vines for the most part
are most fruitful.

And yet in this we must not sorrow as men without hope: for with God there is
mercy that he might be feared: maiores motus impediunt minores: the greater
wheels do hinder the lessers motion, and the son of God the sins of man.
Subordinate powers having but limited authority, moved from above as is the
inferior by the higher orb, the proconsull can do nothing but what the
Consul pleases either to command or to permit: as praesumptio superbiae de
proprio ingenio, is a course held without card or compass, a man's own works
being a weak staff to lean upon. And so I see not how a Romanist should die
comfortably, yet praesumptio confidentiae de diuino adiutorio, is the pole that
cannot alter; and so I see not how a true Christian should die desperately. Most
excellent is the counsel which the Chancellor of Paris gives: Before thou
sinnest, think of divine justice, Tract. de remed. contra pusillanimitatem.
and thou will abstain: when thou have sinned, think of divine mercy and thou will not despair. Sicque ponderent suam negligentiam, vt praeponderent Dei
infinitam clementiam: So weighing our own negligence, with the counterpoyse of
Christ's indulgence. In 4. sent. did. 16.
It is a subtle question that is made by Denise out of Bonauenture, whether it
be possible that contrition for sin can exceed the measure of duty, Item
Aquarius in 4. sent. ex S. Thom.
or we be more penitent then there is occasion: it being a rule that as much as
the presence of any good is to be beloved, so much the absence of it is to be
lamented, but God and his grace cannot be too much in one kind, therefore
neither the loss in the other. Certainly (me thinks for answer) quoad
displicentiam rationis, in eye of reason (if we go no further) after sin we
may weep and despair, despair and die; for how should infinite sins expect
any but infinite punishment: Aug. sermon. 189. de tempore.
but quoad desperationem fidei, in the apprehension of faith we may be
comforted, for that is the evidence of things not seen, whence Christians are
called fideles, not rationales. And it is contrition not attrition (as the
School distinguishes) that affoords us comfort. Idem lib. de vera and falsa
poenitent. cap. 9.
Doleat, sed ex fide doleat, says Saint Augustine. Hence it is Hector Pintus
his observation commenting upon Ezekiel, In 1. sent.
(yet borrowing it from Aquinas) that if it were revealed to any one that he
were a reprobate to be condemned, that man were bound to esteem of it, not as
divine revelation, but a diabolical illusion. Nay, if God himself should
speak it, it were to be interpreted with an exception of repentance. And in
the 33. Ezech 33. 14. 15.
of that Prophet, verse 14. 15. it is made manifest. Gods blessings pronounced
in the present tense do intend praesentiam extensam, an act without
backsliding, continuing to our lives endings, and his judgments threatened are
not absolute, but conditional, if we repent not: God can easily stay his
hand, could we as willingly amend our lives. If we do survey the book of
God, every word that is used to insinuate his mercy will be found effectual.
Panigarola ex Bonauent. in l^^. 5.
For consider sin, as the bondage to Satan, redimitur, it is redeemed: Dan.
4 24.
as the spoil of grace, tegitur, it is covered: Ps. 32. 1.
as the blot and blemish of nature, mundatur, it is cleansed: Ps. 51. 2.
as the wound of conscience, sanatur, it is healed: Ps. 41. 4.
as an offense against the highest, remittitur, dimittitur, Matthew. 9. 2.
it is forgiven. Then even in this great cause of sorrow, Matthew. 6. 14.
our sorrow must be bounded. Much more in humane crosses, for they rightly
apprehended are but healthful, (howsoever bitter) potions, in which a servant
of God may in time find comfort, as Sampson found honey in the Lions belly,
which lately menaced death: thus the waters which Israel feared would have
drowned them, are on both sides as rampires to defend them: the Lions fawn on
Daniel and devour his adversaries: and the dogs that should have bawled at
Lazarus did lick his sores. The Drum beaten a far off, makes a fearful
noise; come near and open it, and it shows its own emptiness, and our
Panicke fear. Thus every passion has bounds and limits; a man may be
transported too much both in joy and sorrow, as he that windeth up the strings
too high, and he that lets them down too low, does mar the music. Pope
Leo the tenth that died for joy was as erroneous, Ouicciard. lib. 14.
as others that dyed with grief. Lib. 2. not hist.
Pliny tells of a Lake, that although you power in never so much, it runs
not over, and let out abundance, yet it still is full. Man's heart should be so
tempered, as that affections should neither run out of it, nor over it: for
the one would make men stony hearted, the other effeminately minded. As a man
may use pleasure but not enjoy it: Lib. 1. sent. art. 5 Item Aug. lib. 11
deciuit. Dei, cap. 25.
(so Lumbard distinguishes betwixt uti and frui;) so suffer grief but not
sink under it. How well do tears become the eyes in the house of mourning, so
that moderation lends a napkin to dry up excess of weeping? And S. Ambrose
speaking of the death of Valentinian the Emperor says, that to pious
affections there is a kind of content even in tears, and plerumque graves
lacrymas euaporare dolorem, and that much weeping did euaporate much sorrow.
Sure grief often times is like fire, the more it is covered, Pet. Bless. ep. 49.
the more dangerously it burns, as the wound concealed rankleth inward. Saint
Bernard bewayling the death of Gerardus the monk and his dearest brother,
says, at his death my heart failed me, Sermon. 26. in Cant.
sed feci vim animo, with much ado I dissembled, lest affection should seem
to overcome religion, and whilst others wept abundantly secutus ego siccis
oculis inuisum funus etc. My self followed with dry eyes the happy hearse.
Bystanders with watery cheeks admyring, whilst they did not pity him, but me
that lost him. Indeed whereas tears and words fail, the blood leaves the
cheeks to comfort the heart, and speech gives place to amazement; like Niobe
in the Poet, a woman turned to marble, no difference betwixt men and statues,
but that they are softer. That observation of Saint Peter is good, Ambr. sermon.
46.
fleuit sed tacuit, he wept but was silent: as if his eyes would in some sort
tell what his tongue could in no sort utter: Item lib. 10. in Lucam cap. ^6.
Leaves dolores loquuntur, ingentes stupent: They are small miseries, when he
that has them can presently tell them. Thus he that howleth may have less
sorrow then he that is mute and silent, vox rationis pierces heaven sooner
then vox orationis: and God regards sad hearts when he does not hear puling
voices. I come to the second part, Quare abies, to show the cause of the fur
trees howling.

Passion often times commends what reason does disallow, (...)
and reason as often wills what Religion gaynesayth; so that the howling of
briers and brambles is no president for the fur trees mourning: that is, a
tree straight and tall (not like the shrub, short and crooked) dwelling on
mount Libanon, neighbor to the Cedar, and both lovingly join to build up Gods
Temple, the true types of Saints in the Church militant, 1. Thessa. 4. 13.
which must not sorrow as men without hope: De verb. Apost. sermon. 32.
Non vt contristemur, sed non sicut caeteri, qui spem non habent, says S.
Augustine upon that place; Not that we should not sorrow, but that we should
not exceed in sorrow: the best members of Christ's Church mourn for the
necessity of the loss, and yet are comforted with the assurance of a second
meeting. Inde agimur, hinc consolamur, inde infirmitas afficit, ^dem vbi supra.
hint sides resicit: inde dolet humana conditio, hinc sanat diuina promissio:
on the one side we are dejected, on the other cherished; there affected with
infirmities, here erected by faith* there humane condition wounds, here
divine promise heals, as the same Father has it. A man (says Hector Pintus)
must not expect the medicine of time (time gives ease to all afflictions) when
we may presently have that of reason; In Ezech. 24.
nay of religion rather. For Gersons consolation of Theology does far
exceed Boethius his consolation of philosophy, because the supreme part of the
elementarie world, depends upon the inferior part of the celestial, More
concatenationis, as links in chains are joined; and robur Socraticum is far
short of robur Christianum, the rules of reason, of the principles of religion:
where philosophy ends, physic begins, and where reason faltereth,
Religion makes good the place. As the traveler in a long voyage, when he
loses the Northern, rayseth the Southern pole. To believe passion above
reason, were to subject judgment to affection; and to incline to reason rather
then religion, were to prefer nature before God, supposition before faith,
humanity before Divinity.

Certaynty of adherence does as far surpass the certainty of evidence, as
faith does sense, or Gods means man's intelligence: hence it is that so many
are dejected, not because their troubles are so great, but because their faith
is so little. Although Peter might justly tremble when he felt himself sinking
(if we look no further) yet is he as justly termed one of little faith,
sithence Christ was by to help him. So as the Prophets counsel in my Text
(me thinks) rather shows the fur trees cause, then the fur trees
practice, which always goes betwixt those two extremes, astoicall stupidity
not capable of sorrow, and desperate infidelity incapable of comfort, always
confident in Gods providence, howsoever usually weeping out of one of these
four occasions: either for contrition, compassion, devotion, or oppression:
and every Saint is another Augustine, Aug c^^^ 12.
filius lachrymarum, a child of tears; here is the difference, he was so for
his conversion; they (and he afterward) in conversation. For the first, Aug de
ver^d and sal. p^n^^. cap. 8.
puniens in s^quod dolet commisisse, punishing with grief what he committed
with folly. And therefore the Father deriueth poenitere quasi poenam tenere:
Io^d ca* ^2.
vt semper puniat vlciscendo quod commisit peccando: for every several sin
yelling out a several sorrow. (...) sent.
As loud as our sins have been, so loud should be our cries; deep wounds
must have long and careful cures. Poenitentia crimine minor non sit: Cyprian.
ser. de lapsis.
betwixt foul crimes and superficial mourning there is no due proportion.
David could do no less then water his couch with the tears of his complaint,
and make them his bread day and night, considering his transgressions. Anselm.
de si militudine, cap 102.
For he must of necessity have sorrow for them that expects pardon of them;
rejoicing that he can sorrow, and sorrowing if he repents that sorrow, A^g vbi
supra cap. 13.
weeping because he cannot weep, and that much more because he can weep no
more. And all this not impatienter habitus, sed desiderio susceptus: not
imposed by necessity, but assumed by desire, as knowing that repentance is the
super sedeas that discharges sin, making God to be merciful, angels to be
joyful, man to be acceptable; an heavenly gift, an admirable virtue,
ouerruling the rigor of Gods justice and the force of Law: whose validity
consists mente non tempore, not in length of time, but in true sincerity.
Even at the last gasp, cum iam anima festi^et ad exitum, Cyprian. de coena
Domini.
when the soul labors for passage, and almost cease to inform the body;
the ears of the Lord are open to the cries of his people; as no sin so great
but may be pardoned, so no time here so late but may be accepted. Neither the
faults greatness, Idem ibidem.
the lives wickedness, the hours shortness, if there be true contrition,
true conversion, exclude from pardon. Et ideo vlulat abies: and therefore in the
first kind Gods servant mourns.

Nor is he weeping for himself alone, but lends misericordia dicitur quasi
miserum cor habens, quia alterius miseriam quasi suam reputat: Aug ^ de (...)
cap. 5.
mercy has her denomination from participation) or fearing that in himself
which he sees in others. As the good old Father that hearing of his friends
sin, Gersin. sermon. pro hum^l.
cried out, ille heri ego body, he yesterday and I to day. Particular
accidents (much more public ruins) will wring pity from any but a Nero that
could sit and sing at Romes burning: it being held a shame to an Athenian (much
more to a Christian) never to have been in the Academic of Philosophers, nor
in the temple of mercy.

It is an observation that the doors of the Tabernacle which is called the
holy of holiest, Bellarm. lib. 3. de bonis operibus in particulari. cap. 4.
was of Olive, the hieroglyphicke of mercy; but the gates of hell, 1. Kin. 6.
21.
of brass and iron, the signs of hard hearts, and instruments of destruction:
Ps. 107. 10.
to show that the way to heaven was by pity, and to hell by inhumanity. And
therefore that act of Licinius the tyrant was strange: Eusebius. de vita Con. lib.
1. cap. 47
to forbid mercy to Christians upon pain of the same calamity to be inflicted
upon them that should dare to show it, as was in those happy wretches that were
to receive it. Miserable man that he was; as if he could hinder Gods Saints
from suffering with them, that daily suffer in them. Malice armed with power
may hinder that we cannot be (as Job said he was) eyes to the blind, Job. 29.
15.
and feet to the lame: which is the mercy of consolation. Yet can it not hinder
the tears and prayers of Samuel for Saul, and Moses for the people, (...)
Bless. ser. 53.
which is the mercy of intercession. In a word, they will (maugre all
opposition) rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep, Rom
12 ^1.
being of like affection one toward another: and sic vlulat abies. Thus the
fur tree mourns.

Aquin^. 4. contra gent. cap. 81.
So Saints in the Church militant, upon consideration of the future perfection
and the present vanity, in despite of nature, groan until they be dissolved,
and the number of Gods elect may be hastened. It is only ignorance that makes
us dote upon earth, and dissolutio continui that is so troublesome, Hieronymus
in vita eius, lib. 3. epist.
faith and reason strive against it. Egredere anima mea quid dubitas,
septuaginta prope annis seruisti Deo, and iam mori times? said old Hilarion.
Go out my soul why doubtest thou, seventy years almost have thou served God,
and fear thou now to die in the vpshot? And Platoes scholars out of
judgment (as they thought) offered themselves violence so to compass
immortality, which was all one to desire to come to the end of the race and to
run a course quite contrary. But the mortified members of Christ that tarry the
Lords leisure, do join with the creatures, that groan and travel in pain
unto this present, waiting when the son of God shall be revealed; Romans 3.
and the Saints in heaven pray continually for hastening that number, whilst
the spirit it self makes it a request with sighs that cannot be expressed.
The bride too cries, Apoc
come Lord Jesus, come quickly. There is recorded in holy Writ a threefold
longing of the faithful, first to dwell continually (although but as a
doorekeeper) in the house of the Lord: P^^^.
secondly to be delivered from the body of sin. To. 7.
Lastly to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Philip. 1*
Howsoever the parting of soul and body is harsh to nature, yet future
happiness (as one that drinks a bitter potion to procure his health) bids
present sorrow welcome. A wise man cheerfully holds out his arm, willing
the Chyrurgion lance and spare no^; when that way and no other, Cyprian de
immortalitate.
the cure is certain. Eius est mortem timere, etc. He should only tremble at
the name of death that will not go to Christ, and he only be unwilling to go
to him that despayreth of reigning with him; for the whole life of a good
Christian is nothing else but a continued desire of dissolution: My soul
thirsts for God, when shall I come and appear before the presence of God?
Ps. 42.
said the Psalmist. Christ is my life and death advantage, Phil. 1.
says the Apostle. Then what have we to do with this light, for whom a light
never eclipsed with any darkness is in reuersion? De laud martyrij.
said S. Cyprian. And that of Ignatius going to martyrdom, is a speech most
excellent. Being exercised with injuries (said he) I am made wise (though not
justified by them;) O how I wish for your wild beasts, Fuseb. lib. 3. eccles.
hist. c. 33.
how I would flatter them to devour me, Platina in vita Anacien 1.
and if they will not, I will compel them* Pardon me, I know what is good; now
I begin to be Christ's disciple, I regard neither things visible nor invisible,
neither fire nor cross: let the fury of beasts, the breaking of bones, the
conuulsion of members, the destruction of the whole body, and all the torments
that Satan himself can impose, rush upon me, modo Iesum Christum acquiram: so
I may gain my Savior. A quiet death is the usual symptom of an honest life:
humane fraylty even then striving to accord with Gods just pleasure. But he is
a man after Gods heart that lives in a kind of pain, and d^eth with desire
and comfort, as one that sees worldly vanity, knows the future reward, and
thirsts for the accomplishment, as the Heart does after the rivers of water:
life being to him as irksome as death to others: such a one non patienter
moritu^, sed patienter viuit, delectabiliter moritus, said S. Augustine
speaking of S. Paul's desire of dissolution. Should the hand of divine bounty
confer upon me all the contentments the world so aspireth to, did the spheres
join with the elements to make me happy, yet there is nothing in the earth
that I desire but him, nor any thing in the whole heavens that I desire in
comparison of him, omnino me non satiaret Deus, nisi promitteret semetipsum
Deum: God himself could not satisfy my ambition, except he gave himself unto
me*. Beauty is not ague proof, wealth will leave me, or I must leave it,
honor must borrow poor men's eyes to see its excellency. Earth, sea and air
are but creatures; and so by consequence both vain and corruptible. But God is
(...) and (...), that is, and was, and is to come; in whose presence is joy for
evermore. It is no marvel then si ululet abies, if this be reckoned among the
fur trees mournings.

But these three are voluntarily assumed; there is Cyprian speaking of Elias
sed by Ravens, and Daniel spared by Lions) ferae parcunt, aues pascunt, and
homines insidiantur and saeuiunt: fowls of the air they bring meat, beasts of
the field they bring comfort, whilst man against man does rage and tyrannise:
Now, virtue it self that rejoices in the object, yet finds trouble in the
act; no patience so strong but it is sensible, nor sanctification so perfect as
to extirpate nature. When the glorified Saints in heaven do cry, Revel. 6. 10.
vsquequo Domine etc. How long Lord faithful and true, do not thou judge
and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? and Abels murder speaks
loud a brothers injury. No marvel then if here on earth, good men's wrongs,
cause good men's howlings: the one being so frequent, the other cannot be
altogether unusual. As is the head, such are the members: Here is the
difference, the children of the bridechamber did not mourn whilst the
bridegroom himself was with them; malice was joined with policy, aiming by
the death of the General to disband the Army; as long as Christ lived, we
read of no persecution against his Disciples, but he once removed Stephen is
stoned, Peter crucified, Paul beheaded. Some burned, some strangled, some
broyled, some brayned; Hieronym. cont. Iouin. lib. 2.
all (but only S. John) murdered. And ever since that is too true, amara est
veritas, and qui eam praedicat repletur amaritudine: bitter is the truth, and
he that preaches it is filled full of bitterness. The woes of Saints having
no ease but custom; and that passage of S. Bernard is good: Ser. in Cant 47.
the spouse lovingly (says he) inuiteth the beloved to her bed; and he her
again to arms and trouble: illa monstrante lectulum, ille vocat ad campum, ad
exercitium: hence it is that in her garden do grow Roses as well as Lilies,
because the Church is both operibus candida and cruore purpurea: Cypr. ep. 9.
having this inseperable lot to do good and suffer evil. Ioh. 20. 21.
As my Father sent me, so send I you, says our Savior to his Disciples. That
is, as Bellarmine does well expound the place: Lib. 3. de poenit. cap. 18.
1. To bind and loose. 2. To reconcile God and man. 3. To bear my cross and
suffer afflictions. Indeed why should we look for love when our head found
hatred? If the world hate you, it hated me before you: (as himself speaks.)
Most comfortable is that of S. Augustine: Ep. 49.
In ipsum Christum non crederemus, si fides Christiana cachinnum metueret
Paganorum: that man will never be Christian, that can be dismayed by the scoffs
of a Pagan. And it is as usual to see untouched consciences, and untouched
fortunes to dwell together, as for men that know no sorrow, to know no God. It
is opposition that gives the trial, and causes argent seem bright in a sable
field, as the fun pleases breaking from a cloud. It is the portion and virtue
of goodness, to suffer and shine in great extremities. Et hic vlulat abies.
Whether the fall of Cedars will prove another cause, is my third part and
question.

Of all the sorrows that the fur tree has, ^. Quare, quia cecidit Cedrus.
the fall of Cedars is the least (if any.) It may seem envy that they enjoy
heaven, or self-love that we enjoy not them, when we are so transported to
the degree of howling for such as know no sorrow. Do thou lament the body
from which a soul is parted (says Augustine:) rather deplore the soul from
which God is separated. A Saint (you say) is fallen. It is impossible, Si
iustus quomodo cadit, si cadat quomodo iustus? If so how fell he, if he fell
how so? Vespasian said of himself, that he was not a dying, but a diefying.
And Blessensis of a friend, abijt non obijt, recessit non decessit: Ep. 27.
heeis but gone aside a while, but not departed. The garment that was taken
from Joseph, was but a false argument of his death or loss: for he then not
only lived, but governed Egypt. Nor does the senseless body prove any thing
more, then that the soul has left that sinful prison, and is fled to heaven,
which whosoever does soonest is happiest: as the traveler that has taken up a
good lodging, Greg. Nazian* oratione de funere Patris.
feels not the trouble of him that is coming to him in the rain and dirt.
As in Paradise, there was a liberty of life or death, so in the world a
necessity of death, not life. But in heaven and hell a necessity of life that
can never be extinguished. For in one, death would bring ease which cannot be
granted; in the other, loss which cannot be imagined. The corolary is this:
Saints are not to be lamented as lost, but beloved as absent. If briars or
brambles fall, weep for them: they must be burned. If Cedars, they were
planted to be transplanted from the hill of Libanon to the Sanctuary of God.
David had just cause to exclayme: O my son Absalom, my son, my son
Absalom: would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, ^. Sam. 1^. 33.
my son, my son. He was both a private sinner and an open traitor. But
Christ's was, O daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your
selves, and for your children. It was good for the Church that Paul should
abide in the flesh, Luke 23. 28.
but better for him to be dissolved and be with Christ. What ingratitude were
it to repine at our friends promotion, and for our pleasure to debar his
preferment? when there is more then hope, that we shall meet again with
unspeakable joy and comfort. Jacob, I suppose, was more refreshed at the news
of Joseph's life and greatness, then dejected with the sorrow of his conceived
loss. Non moeremus quod tales amisimus, sed gratias agimus quod habuimus, immo
quod habemus: We do not lament those we have lost, Ep. 27.
but give thanks because we had them, Ep. 2.
nay still have them, says S. Hierome. And in another place, bewail your
dead, but such as hell receives, not such as angels do accompany to heaven,
and Christ meets: and there brings in God himself thus speaking: Thou
denyest thy self meat, not out of a desire of fasting, but of sorrow. Non amo
frugalitatem istam: I like not this frugality: your fasts are both adversaries
to me and to your friends. Nullam animam recipio, quae me nolente separatur a
corpore: I receive no soul, but such as with my will is severed from the body.
But alas, it is a Cedar, the hieroglyphicke of greatness, as well as
goodness, and the cutting down of such make those deep impressions both of
grief and wonder. Vanity of vanities! The heathen themselves that implored as
many dieties, as they conceived chimaeraes in their fancies, yet were never
known to erect an Altar to death, because that was ever held implacable. Genesis
25. (...).
What is my birth right seeing I am almost dead? said Esau. What profit is
there in my blood, when I go down into the pit? said David. Philosophers make
sport with great Alexander, (as hares may play with the beards of dead Lions)
being intombed in a poor vrne, whose ambition before the whole world sufficed
not. And Nature makes no other difference, then does the potter, that of the
same clay makes vessels of honor and of dishonor; the one more polished but
as brittle as the other. Or the Mason that from the same quarry diggeth stones
both for the pauement and for the Altar; although we trample the one and
kneel to the other. The same wood may make some goodly image, and a plough or
fuel: and the figure is the same, that stands for one and for one thousand,
they being mere ciphers, nothing in themselves that alter the account. The
Prince is as corruptible as the poorest beggar; lay aside dying and dressing,
painting and pruning, and all are but earth, the worms meat, and graves
inheritance. Diadema non fanat caput, nec annulus digitum: The crown cannot
help the headache, Paniga.
nor the ring the finger. What then is the Prophets meaning to advise this
sadness? It must be truth unquestionable that such men utter. All the
Scripture being credibilis vt credibilis, to be believed without a reason.

Holy men inspired did but pen what God did dictate. It is most true and for
all the premises there is great cause of howling, not because the Cedars fall,
was the Cedars harm, but the whole mountains both loss and danger, like the
comet portending ruin to Jerusalem. A good man is a common good, that brings
not blessing for himself alone, but for all about him. Themistocles setting
his house to sale prized it much deerer then ordinary, propter bonum vicinum,
because seated by a good neighbor: and Christians always accounted their
peace more sure by the life of Saints, as knowing that the world it self must
fail when the elect are finished. Sodom must necessarily perish when Lot is
out of it. Ten righteous could have guarded it, not against the powers of men
and earth only, but of heaven and angels also. Whilst Jacob served Laban, he
and his prospered; once parted, the one grew rich and the other poor. And his
son Joseph was not Putaphars only, but all Egypts blessing. The righteous
like Moses stand in the gappe, and hold the Almighties hands from striking: the
very chariots of Israel and horsemen of the same. Judges on earth cut off
offenders, to secure the innocent, holding it a cruel mercy to spare one to
manies ruin: but God in heaven cuts off his children for the wickeds sorer
punishment; that their defenses being surprised, he might have none to give
stoppage to his intended vengeance. Troy (they say) was impregnable whilst
they had the Palladium, or Hector lived. But it may be better auerred that
families, cities, kingdoms (for one is the model of the other) are more
prosperous, whilst they enjoy the godly. For it is presupposed that God
remoueth them but from the anger to come. And therefore no marvel if David
cries, Ps. 12. 1^.
Salvum me fac, Domine: Help or save me, O Lord. Giving such a pregnant proof
of imminent danger, quia defecit sanctus, there is not one godly man left, the
faithful are minished from the children of men. The Physician sometimes
lets the arm blood to cure and correct the head; and God did as much in the
three days pestilence sent to the people for David's numbering them: He crying,
2. Sam. 24. 27.
I have sinned, yea I have done wickedly, but these sheep what have they done?
But when the head is wounded, all the members are likewise smitten with it, (as
the sheep are scattered when there is no shepherd) the eyes grow dim, the
arms weak, the tongue does falter and the legs do tremble. If the bushes
be stubbed up, the Cedars prosper more, and flourish better; but if the Cedars
fall, either the shrubs are beaten down with the weight, or standing are
likely to be blasted by the storms and tempests for want of shelter. I need
not trouble you with further application, since he that runs may read the
meaning.

I have been tedious in a theme that rellisheth not, nevertheless I must
proceed without apology or craving pardon: love and sorrow admit no ceremony.
And you, I know, will not be weary to hear me descending to particulars, which
more affect then do all general, either notions or instructions, but sometimes
accompany me with sighs (if not tears) and all the way with sad attention,
whilst I relate with grief how our Cedar is fallen.

A subject in which a just Orator might incur the imputation of flattery,
with strangers, did they not in charity and judgment remember, that God is his
spectator and angels auditors. But to men acquaynted with the person and her
virtues, all will fall short that one man can speak; and every one may afford
some thing worthy memory omitted by the Preacher. Nazianzene commending
Athanasius said, Oratione in laudem Athanas^ j.
that commending him he should commend virtue. Idem enim est illum dicere, quod
virtutem laudibus efferre: I might well apply it, yet neither sow pillowes
under the elbowes of the living, or shoulders of the dead. She was the Lady
Frances Clifton, (well were it for most here could I speak it in the present
tense) a Lady of those endowments as might bid detraction it self, Belch her
poison: she would so live (as Socrates once answered a backbiter) that none
should credit it. The cupping glass which draws none but impure blood, and
the fly that lights upon nothing but ulcers, this here would famish, that
be vselesse. He that should dare to snuff this taper, would but defile his
own fingers and make her light the cleerer; as the waters (says Stella) that
by ouerflowing* their bounds, make the banks clean and themselves dirty.

A flourishing branch she was, of a stock as honorable, as ancient; and as it
to her, so she to it an ornament: knowing that virtue with much ado might
begin a house, but vice with little labor easily end it* that Cham and Esau
had noble parents, and themselves were base: that there is no greater argument
of poverty, then to boast another worth or virtue. And therefore strove to be
side nobilis, quae omnibus ornatibus ornamento est: noble in faith, which to
all honors is an ornament. Who knows not that great births have the strongest
ties to chain them to those duties, by which the ancestor rose or flourished?
And the greatest liberty for to lose themselves in courses that are both
irregular and unlawful, which begets a soloecisme in great houses: that is,
honoris titulum sine homine: much style, and little man. She therefore knowing
both the rocks and channel, sailed in the one and waued the other; there being
not any noble virtue befitting her blood and sex, that she did not in high
measure practice; as if she had been ambitious to be vere nobilis, that is,
virtute prae alijs notabilis, as some derive the word, exceeding others as much
in the gifts of mind, as fortune. Nor is it marvel she should be scarlet in
the cloth that was dyed so in the wool, sucking Religion with her milk, the
excellency of her nature being perfected by education. It were very improbable
she should degenerate, having such a sister to accompany, and such a mother to
lead the ways of godliness, both demonstrating in life and death, how she
following should learn of them to live and die. So as it were no arrogant
challenge to bid Rome (which makes traitors Saints, and strawes miracles) to
set from forth their legend, such a parent, with such a pair of sister
Saints. Sure I am, many a superstitious knee has been bowed to inferior
worthies.

From the time of her marriage to her death, few can give more ample testimony
then my self; for from that time I had good cause to know and to observe, and
cannot but with comfort remember the happy both fruit and encouragement of my
weak endeavors, as a poor labourer that looks with joy upon some goodly pile
of building, because he can say, he brought something to it, although but
stone or mortar.

She was a woman full of noble courtesies, either when she did visit others,
or her self were visited. One that could stoop low by the rules of Religion,
and vet knew her distance in the truth of reason; so she had always the rich
men's applause, and the poor man's prayers: with the one she conuersed not but
with an honorable familiarity; nor with the other but with a charitable
relief. He must have been of an evil life she would not have deigned to
speak to, and of an evil disposition that would not be content with her
answers. Judicious in all discourse beyond the degree of her sex, yet pleasant
to; interlacing mirth with earnest, both in such a posture as did well become
her, and such a manner as was beyond exception: her presence would not grace
either the Cynicks rudeness, or the wantons boldness. Well seen in History
and other humane knowledge; but so as her main aim was at Religion and to be
skillful in the Law of God. For that father that chasteneth every child that
he receives, had given her a long infirmity, bred with her from her childhood,
bringing as much pain to her, as shame to the Physicians. And this though the
bodies hurt, yet the souls physic: filling those empty parts, that appeared
at her dissection with invisible graces, M. Foelix. in Octav.
that there might be no vacuity. Calamitas saepius disciplina virtutis est:
Her calamity directed her virtue. So mortifying all her affections as she
valued not the world, relied not upon art, trusted not her strength, nor ever
was unprepared to entertayne death so long expected. I have diverse times heard
her say, that she never went to her bed but as to her grave; nor ever saw that
morning, that she did think she should live to see the evening. Thus what some
make easy with patience, she made easy with preparation and providence; and
Quicquid expectatum est diu, leuius accidit: what so is foreseen before it
happens, falls lightly when it comes, when he that is surprised is half
beaten before a blow be given. Omnia nouitate grauiora: All things seeming
more grievous as they are more sudden. She, if any, might truly take up that of
the Apostle, 1. Cor. 15. ^^.
I die daily, having so many and so bitter fits, as all attendants as well as
her self thought them mortal; yet borne with that undaunted resolution, as
might well demonstrate how she had learned Christ; her tongue never venting the
least word of murmur or repining, but continually uttering heavenly
^inculations to God, and comfortable assurances to those about her. Nor were
her many deliverances passed over in silence, as if she would receive the
fruit and not look to the tree, that dropped it to her, for God had always
due praises, and the poor large alms and bounty. One time (among many others)
was most remarkable: having conceived and a fit taking her when she was quick
with child, the extremity was such, as within her she felt no motion, and but
small sign of life either of her self or that she went with. From which
danger when God had preserved her, she vowed a vow unto the Lord, and performed
it truly, that that day should be annually holy unto his name, which she spent
in her private Chamber with fasting, reading, Psalms and prayer: her fast
indeed, but the Poores feast, they might well write that day in red letters, as
their greatest Festival So as what she was in every relation as a daughter,
sister, wife, mother, Lady, Mistress, neighbor, Christian both in life and
death, need not seem strange, although transcendent in each particular, the
goodness of her nature being ordered by education, that rectified by grace,
grace exercised by afflictions, and they purged out all vanities, and thence
she was as fine gold often tried, fit for her Makers Temple.

Such a Daughter as would make a Father wish to be aged, to have the comfort of
that respect and duty, ever attending him with a bended knee, and a careful
love, humble obeisance, and a joyful heart, as if she had received a second
life by his presence, from whose blood the first was taken. Such a Sister, as
if the blood were still in the old veins undivided. Such a Wife, as might be
an argument against a vow, her society rather perfecting then interrupting
devotion. She seldom parted from her noble Husband in any journey without a
sad heart, and sometimes bedewed cheeks in his absence, in her Closet she
prayed for him, at the Table remembered him, against his return was zealously
careful nothing might offend him, the Messenger that brought news of his
coming never unrewarded, and then with what open heart and arms would she
entertain him? Such a Mother as most dearly loved her tender Progeny, yet
knew full well that all Children were borne alike, and that virtues only gave
distinction, and therefore with a careful eye surueyed each natural
disposition, cutting off with discipline the course of humors, not suffering
those little bodies to have settled infections, seasoning them in minority with
goodness and religion, that in riper years it might be another nature; for
instructions then instilled enter easily, but depart with difficulty. And
these Olive branches produced a great care of domesticke affairs, as not
ignorant that these challenged provision answerable to their births, and
providence to be the leader to entertainments: there was not that week in
which she exacted not an account of all expenses, descending to such trifles as
in a house so plentiful is scarce imaginary; yet did this care lessen her
bounty, never any of her Servants departed without gratuity, nor office looked
into without reward: and if she were enforced to complain, it was so as that
the fault might be amended (I have it from his mouth that can best relate it)
but the faulter pardoned. For a Neighbor though I say nothing, your selves can
speak it. Never was hospitality accompanied with a more cheerful look, nor
an open hand with a more open heart.

Super omnia vultus accessere benigni. As if that Conduit had had no Cisterne,
and that abundance no providence. But O you poor, to you what was she? when
was any hungry (if she knew it) and she did not feed him; thirsty, and she sent
not drink; nay, the naked too she sometimes clothed; was any sick or sore,
this house was an Apothecaries shop open to all comers, without money, or
exchange, how many diseased, how many hurt have here been helped, neither
medicines nor cordials were ever spared if want were known, or unknown
demanded. Were ever those eyes seen without pity, or hands without bounty?
she believing certainly that God blessed their store that spent on their
brethren, as running streams are fed that they may continue. The neighbor
Towns and Villages are now as sad witnesses that I lie not, as before joyful
receptacles of her alms and charity: and yet all this without the least
cackling of merit, her left hand scarce knew what her right hand did, and her
tongue accusing her self for an unprofitable servant, every day promised a
further reformation; as if she had not been good, except she had been
perfect, which degree in this life may be aspired unto, but not accomplished.

Then what she was to man you may make some scantling, as he that by Hercules
his foot guessed at the proportion of his whole body; and you may assure your
selves her devotion to God was nothing inferior. In which she was neither
foolishly factious, nor Popishly superstitious, she did not so ingeminate the
first Table of the Law, that under that gloss (as Hypocrites do) she might
take occasion to neglect the second, nor yet so conceived of the second, but as
a rule to be applied according to the lines of the first. In a word, her
belief and life were each others counterpane, a true light that did both
ardere and lucere, burn with inward zeal, and shine with outward practice.
Every morning about five of the clock, she had a light and went to her private
prayers, lying in her bed. When she was up and half ready, she called for
meat (such was the weakness of her vital spirits as she could abstain no
longer) and then often times some read by her: no sooner dressed, then she and
her women went to prayer, from the chamber to the Chapel to call upon God with
the whole family, in which she never failed (if she were able) although she
often rested her weary legs in so short a passage. After dinner she was for
company, her book, or exercise, as there was occasion. Before Supper again to
Chapel to her God; after Supper and in her bed she and her women went to
prayers.

Upon the Lords day in the morning, as before, and being ready, all the maid
servants were called into the next room to pray for the disposing of their
hearts to hear reverently; and for the Preacher that he might speak
powerfully, that both he and they might practice truth and godliness. From
thence hither to pray and to attend; Sermon once ended, if she her self could
not, yet her women went privately to give God thanks for their instruction;
and in few words to pray for a blessing. After dinner in her chamber she and
her women sunga Psalm, read a Sermon, and again sung a Psalm after it; and
then children and the maids were catechized. Then hither again and so as
before; and this course she so affected, as she gave the same directions to
her noble niece whom she most dearly loved, almost as her last legacy. A
soul (says S. Chrysostom) guarded with prayers, is stronger then a City with
walls and rampires. Then how armed she was against sin and Satan is
evident to the impartial hearer.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper she highly prized and received often,
understanding well that as long as we are here capable of augmentation and
subject to diminution of grace, that means was as necessary for our souls as
for our bodies, meat or medicine: and that she might receive it worthily,
excellent was her preparation before, and contemplation after it. But in the
act a gesture and posture so humble and reverent, that I for my part never
doubted, but I delivered and she received Christ our Savior; as if upon her
knees she would have said with learned Hooker in the determination of the
question which has cost so many lives, Lib 5. Eccles. poli. sec. 67.
O my God thou art there, O my soul thou art happy. The word preached was her
delight and comfort, in hearing whereof she ordered her body to attend, her
understanding to intend, and her memory to retain what should be spoken,
laying up the words, not as the lazy servant his talent in a napkin, but as
Joseph his corn to relieve in necessity. I must not omit (for the example is
not usual) that the messenger was so respected with her, for his message, and
both for his sake that sent them, as maugre the well known contempt of the
world (the undoubted demonstration of irreligion, I had almost said Atheism)
she had a vehement desire, if God should send her another son to dedicate him
to God and make him a Minister; as if she had read Salvian: Lib. 4. de
gubernat. dei.
Si quis ex nobilibus conuerti ad Deum coeperit, statim honorem nobilitatis
amittit: If any of the nobility turn to God, they are reputed to have lost the
honor of nobility. And it presently follows, O quantus in Christiano populo
honor Christi est, vbi Religio ignobilem facit: How little honor do Christians
show their God when the profession of the Religion makes the professor to be
held ignoble. Let me add that no nation under heaven of what religion soever
if they acknowledge a God, do undervalue their Priests and orders but only the
Reformed Churches. I pray God it may portend no judgment. I have now breathed
her course of life, and proceed to a conclusion, (if I be tedious you must
blame her virtues.) As her life was nothing but a care for death, so her death
an entrance to a better life. She having been a Mary to God, a Martha to the
world, a Sara to her husband, a Lois, an Eunice to her children, a Lydia to the
Disciples: in a word an elect Lady borne for the good of many. So as she might
well utter S. Ambrose his speech to his people of Millan which S. Augustine so
much admired: Non sic vixt vt me pudeat apud vos diutius viuere, nec mori timeo
quia bonum Dominum habemus: I have not so lived as that I should be ashamed to
live longer, nor fear I to die because we have a gracious Lord. Sure it is
that death which was so long expected and prepared for, could neither be
sudden nor grievous when it happened. About a month before her childebirth
she had a dream which something troubled her, and sent for me (a bad
interpreter) if I could to tell the meaning. Her body (she thought) was past
all cure, her vital spirits spent, she had taken her leave of the world and
reconciled her self to God, and was even giving up the ghost into the hands of
her redeemer, and so awaked. I told her, dreamed came either from the
disposition of the body, or the solicitude of the mind, and that
questionless her meditations were much upon mortality, and that some of those
broken species remained in the fancy vndiscoursed, and the soul which cannot
be idle, did work upon them.

She replied in few words to this effect. I do, or should daily think to die,
and sure I am, not I only, but all should do so, and occasion being offered of
some thing to be done a month after by, that time, said she, shall I be in my
grave. And indeed within three or four days of her account she was so, (as I
compute the time) as if God (rather then nature) had revealed it to her. After
her delivery, succeeding a painful labor, it was well hoped she had at once
parted with her Child and danger, and that her many faintings were signs of a
weak (but not a dying) body. Lord, how a little glimpes of comfort gives
light to desire and love, and makes men think they she when they do but
dream, hope being the first thing that takes us, and the last that leaves
us: but she that had often seen the face of death, and had as often wrestled
with his forces, seldom coming off without great pain and hazard found him
now manifestly prevailing, and cried out, farewell vain earth, I embrace thee
Heaven. Then calling for her noble Husband, took her leave of him, and prayed
for him, blessed her Children, and s^^tching her little Son into her dying
arms, desired God to make him true to him, and just to man, and at other times
(although not then) that he might resemble his great Grandfather in all noble
virtues, for he (said she) was likewise a Cliffords Son, then casting her
eyes upon all together, with a zealous exclamation besought God for them, that
the seeds of his grace might be so sown within their hearts, that they might
bud and blossom, and bring forth fruit, and become in time broad shades for
the poor afflicted members of Christ to sit under and receive comfort. In the
morning before she died, she had conuulsion and the signs of death: and I
coming to her, although she had not slept four or five nights before, (an
infirmity able to have weakened the strongest brain) yet presently, without the
least distemper, distraction or shortness of breath, (her old disease) she
recalled all her vital spirits, to do that last office, comfortably and
confidently made the profession of her faith, auowing that there was no name
either in Heaven or in Earth that she hoped to be saved by, but that of Jesus
Christ the righteous. She was not then to learn either the principles or
practice of Religion, so that I stood rather to behold the use, then teach the
theory. From that we went to prayers, she repeating with wonderful feruency
the words after me, until perceiving her weakness, I besought her to spare
her decayed spirits, telling her that both she and we might receive as much
comfort by her silent assistance in the length and vocal assent in the
conclusion. When all was done that could be required of a Christian in that
extremity, I boldly proceeded to the office of my Ministry, and pronounced her
absolution, and am very confident that it was olaue non errante, with a Key
that erred not, and that God did ratify in heaven, what I his unworthy
Minister declared on earth: she receiving it as comfortably as I delivered it
faithfully. After this she seemed to sleep, and a great care was had for fear
of interruption, and so continued until the afternoon, when her speech left
her, and the messengers of death again appeared: And we (as was our duty)
renewed our prayers, which for a time she answered with signs until her memory
as well as her tongue did fail her. Nor did we then give over, as knowing well
with S. Augustine, that God differreth sometimes to grant, to teach us to beg,
and so promises to beginners, as that he will give to none but perseuerers. My
self and another Minister (that came in that perplexity) continually
soliciting his Divine Majesty for mercy, until in the midst of one of my
prayers, in which I desired him to give his Angels charge over her, in that her
agony against sin and Satan, she departed; going her self to undoubted
joy, and leaving us to unfeigned sorrow. And thus (O fur trees) our Cedar is
fallen; If such a fall be not an exaltation rather, for it shall be my
ambition to live so, that I may die so. And now she lies low, by the side of
that other excellent Lady her predecessor; two such parcels of earth, as the
earth that covers them may seem proud of. What remains but a general
sorrow, not for her, but for our selves; in which each order may bear a part
of mourning: the fur trees because all the mighty are spoiled (as it
follows the words of my text) and the oaks of Bashan to, for their defenced
forest is come down. I shall not need to bid the shepherds howl, for the
next verse says, that their voice is already heard (and good reason) for their
glory is destroyed: nor the Lions whelps, their roaring is presupposed, because
the pride of Jordan is destroyed. Questionless, all that but remember that the
righteous are taken away from the anger to come, howsoever they have no part in
our private loss, may join themselves in our public fear, knowing that the
death of Saints trencheth to further danger. God for his infinite mercy grant
grace in our lives, pardon at our deaths, and after both, the fruition of his
blessed vision. Amen.

In obitum praematurum praeclarissimae Heroinae D. Franciscae Clifton, quae
obijt in pace paulo post puerperium.
Ad turgescentem tumuli molem.
Qu. CVrita turgescis moles? vnumne cadauer,
Aut multa hac sacra contumulantur humo.
Res. Hic sita nobilitas and quicquid nobile, virtus,
Ingenium, probitas and pietatis amor.
Hic sita faeminci sexus laus, deliciumque:
Hic Francisca sita est: desine musa, sat est.
Ad patrem de quina tantum defunctae matris prole.
QVinque tibi casti charissima pignora lecti
Donauit coniux nobilis, atque obijt.
Non auxit numerum, sed sensibus omnibus vnum
Ex aequo tribuit, disce quid hic numerus.
Vt videas, tangas, gustes atque oscula figens
Coniugis olfacias dulcia dona tuae.
Atque etiam ascultes, cum blando murmr pappant;
Tu nobis matter quinque paterque simul.
Per Sam. Simson.

Pietati, virtuti, honori and foelici memoriae illustrissimae D. D. Franciscae
Clifton Ampliss. Comitis Cumberlandiae charissimae filiae, atque honoratissimi
viri D. Geruasij Clifton Militis and Baronetti coniugis spectatiss.
PEtrarum in clivis gaudent habitare columbae,
Hoc est quod Christi sponsa columba cluit.
Christus enim petra est, Christique in vulnere clivus,
Gestit vbi solum figere sponsa pedem.
O te foelicem idcirco Franscisca Columbam,
Quae tota in cliuis vixeris and moreris.
A cliuo ad clivum mortalis sponsa volabas,
Nunc eadem in clivo, caelica sponsa lates.
Vtque ille in terris ampli tibi portus honoris,
Hic itidem aeternae porta salutis erit.
Io. Crauen.

What means this mourning on mount Libano^*
Why howl ye fur trees? O a Cedars gone,
Whose hallowed boughs to us such shade had lent,
As shepherds sang, and trees made merriment;
Which being fallen, the hills would equal feign,
Hadadrimmons mourning on Megiddons plain:
Yet know we well it is but removed hence,
To holy Zion, where with dear expense
Of Shiloes blood, God raised has a quire,
To which all Firres and Cedars do aspire.
It is our loss, foul crimes have caused these throes,
For present want and fear of future woes.
FINIS.

