A SERMON preached on Sundaye, being the. 17, of March Anno. 1577. at S.
Alpheges Church within Creplegate in London, by William Fulke Doctor in
Divinity.

Seen and allowed, according to the order appointed in the Queens Majesty's
Injunctions.

Imprinted at London for Lucas Harryson.

To the Right worshipful M. Robert Forth of Butley in Suffolk Esquyer.
YOur good will toward me testified by many benefits (right woorshypfull)
has many ways deserved that I should show my self thankful unto you for
the same. But chiefly your great love of the Gospel, joined with many godly
virtues accompanying the same, procures the love and good will not only of
such as have tasted of your benevolence, but also of many other which know
you not in person, whereby both thanks is given to God by many for your godly
zeal and prayers to him are made for your increase therein, and preseruance
unto the end. And for a public signification of my good will and thankful
mind toward you, I have thought good to present this Sermon unto you, which
by great importunity of diverse of my godly friends, I was constreyned to put
in writing, nothing doubting but you will accept it as thankfully, as it was
meant of me duetifully. The Lord preserve you and all yours in his fear, with
increase of godly worship in this life, to the reward of eternal felicity at
the coming of our savior Christ, which you with all the children of God, both
love and pray for, to who^ be all honor and glory both now and ever.

Your worships to command in the Lord William Fulke.

A Sermon preached on Sunday, being the. 17. of March, Anno. 1577. at S.
Alpheges Church within Creplegate in London, by William Fulke, doctor in
Divinity.
Galat. 4. Verse. 21 Tell me you that will be under the Law, do ye not hear
the Law?

22 For it is written that Abraham had two Sons, one by a bo^dwoman, and one
by a free woman.

23 But he which was of the bondwoman, was borne after the flesh: and he
which was of the free woman, was borne by promise.

24 Which things are figuratively understood. For these are the two
Testamentes, the one from mount Sinay, begettyng unto bondage, which is Agar.

25 (For Agar is the mount Sinay in Arabia, and answeareth to that Ietusalem
which is now,) and is in bondage, with her children.

26 But Jerusalem which is above, is free: which is the mother of us al.

27 For it is written, Rejoice thou barren that bear no children: break
forth and cry, thou that trauaylest not: for the desolate has many mo
children then she which has an husband.

28 Therefore brethren, we after the manner of Isaac, are children of the
promise.

29 But as then he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was
borne after the spirit, even so is it now.

30 But what says the Scripture? Put out the servant and her son: for the
son of the servant shall not be heir with the son of the free woman.

31 Then brethren, we are not children of the servant, but of the Free woman.


AFter that the Apostle has by many pithie and substantial reasons proved
the abrogatio^ of the Law, and the Justification of man by faith only in
Christ: Now does he in this Text by the example of the two Sons of Abraham,
describe and set forth before their eyes, the state of both sorts of men, as
well them that seek to be justified by their own works, as of them that trust
only in the mercy of God. His purpose is not by this comparison to prove either
the abolishing of the law, or the justification by faith, for that he has
done plentifully before, but only to show the Galathians what they shall
gain, if they proceed as they began, to lay upon themselves the unnecessary
and intolerable burden of the law, namely the reward of Ismael, that is, too
be banished from the Church of GOD, and the Heavenly inherytaunce* whereas
they that will obtain the inherytaunce with Isaac, must become as he was,
altoogether Children of the promise.

And first of all he imputes their error too ignorance: Come of, says
he, and Tell me, you that will needs be under the Law, when you need not,
do you hear the Law: do you know the Law? as though he should say, I
see verily, that you are ignorant of the Law, although you would never so
feign be under the Law: for if you knew the Law, and whyther it would
bring you, and from what it would hinder you, doubtelesse you would not be,
so ready too take the yoke upon you. You imagine too get freedom by
submyttyng your selves unto the Law, but that is the very way too bring you
intoo perpetual bondage. You have an eye too reward, when you seek too
merit, but while you seek too have it by deserte, which you can not, you
leese it, being offered by gift, which you might atteyne. And all this
comes, because you know not the Law, for no man will wyttingly and
willyngly depryue himself of reward, and thruste himself intoo eternal
chraldome. See therefore what comes of ignorance the Mother of Popyshe
devotion, and of all error and superstition, false Doctrine, and Idolatry.

The Papists are wise in their generation, when they will not have the people
too know the mysteries of their own Popish Religion. For I am persuaded,
that a great number which now continue in blyndenesse, if they did see that
which they handle in the dark, they would repent that ever they touched it,
yea, they would detest it as much as he that for lack of light puts a
toade in his bosom, in stead of a bird, or which takes up dounge in stead
of goulde, or drynketh Poison in stead of Wine, when he sees how he has
been deceived. And therefore I may say too them, as the Apostle does too
the Galathians. Tell me, you that long too be under the Pope, do you know
what Popery means? Do you know whyther it will carye you? I am persuaded,
if you knew, a great number of you would soon have done with it. But alas
how should you know? Your masters hold best you should not know, fearing you
would not follow them, John. 4.
if you saw whither they led you. And of us you will not learn, for so your
masters teach you to worship you wot not what, and wilfully to refuse all
instruction, whereby you might be learned to worship God aright: Howbeit this
is most true, think of it as you will, The end and drift of Popery is to
carye you from Christ, and so from God, unto whom there is no access but by
Christ. For that I may bring so many controversies as are between the
Christians and the Papists into one, what other thing do we strive for in
all our preachings, but that Christ only should be our perfect savior and
redeemer? What other thing is sought throughout al parts of Popery, but that
Christ only should not be our King, Savior, Redeemer, high Priest, sacrifice
and propiciation for our sins, mediator and advocate, and his word our
only sufficient instruction? But that the Pope, the Mass, our own merits,
the merits of Saints and invocation of them, Popish ceremonies, traditions,
counsels, decrees and decretals, pardons and Images, and such like, must needs
challenge no small portion of that honor and glory, which the holy scripture
makes proper to God and our savior Christ alone. Apoca. 7. 10.
Salvation be ascribed to him that sits upon the throne of our God, and to
the Lamb. It is the voice of all them that are saved by Christ: And therefore
all the Angels of God, and all the creatures of God, join with them in
confessyng, that al blessyng, glory, wisdom, thankesgeuyng, honor, might,
and power ought to be ascribed to him for ever and ever. Consider this you
papists for your own benefit, learn to know what popery is, before you
determine to dye therein. And as in this general controversy I have called the
papists to knowledge and consideration of their own grounds and principles,
so might I run through every particular error of theirs: But one or two may
serve for examples: Tell me you that would eat the natural body of Christ in
the sacrament, do you know what absurdities do follow of it? O you think
it a goodly matter to receive the body of Christ into your mouth. But if you
had wit, you would think it much better to receive Christ into your hearts,
and so to receive him, that he should never depart from thence, for he dwells
in our hearts by faith. (...). 3. 17.
And so do we teach men to receive the body of Christ by faith, that he may
dwell with us for ever: Whereas they that teach you to receive the natural
body into your mouths, give no more to faith, then to infidelity: for wicked
men, as they say, receive the body of Christ as well as the godly: you will
say, yea, but it taryeth not with the wicked. No more it does with the
faithful by your own doctrine, for you have not yet determined how far it
goes down into the stomach of man, nor how long it abides, but you all
agree, that it abides no longer then the fourmes of bread and mine remain
vncorrupt, which is not long after they come into the stomach: but this is not
all the absurdity that follows of that eating. For while you streine the
body of Christ into so small a compass, and multiply the same into so many
places, what else do you, but overthrow the truth of his natural body? Which
if it be not like ours in all things, except sin, then could it be no
redemption of our bodies. Then have we no hope of resurrection, nor assumption
into heaven, which is grounded upon the truth of this natural body, being
flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, in which our nature he suffered
death, rose again, and ascended into heaven for us. But I may not stand upon
these matters. Tell me you that would feign hear your old Latin service, do
you know what it was? Uerely a great part of it was such as you would be
ashamed to hear it in English. But if it had been nothing else but the
Scriptures of God, and godly prayers, yet the Apostle in his Epistle to the
Corinthians tells you plainly, that being in a tongue unknown, it were not
mere for the Church of God. But to leave the Papists, and return to the
Galathians: Tell me, says S. Paul, you that would be under the law, do you
hear the law, or have you read the law? etc. As if he should say, take no
heed what men beside the book teach you of the law, but look to the law
it self. The false Apostles would have borne the Galathians in hand, that they
must join the observation of the law with the faith of the Gospel: They
would not bring them altogether from Christ, but they would match the
ceremonies of Moses law, with the faith of Christ. Wherefore the Apostle
wylleth them to look what the law says, and not what these counterfeyt
lawyers said. He wills them to examine the law, whether it admits or
allows any such mixture as they would bring in, or no? The like, and in a
manner the same controversy, we have now with the Papists, saving that the
Papists as very Antichristians, are worse then the false Apostles. They agree
both in this, that they join works with Christ, merits with mercy, man with
God, in the mean of our salvation: but herein the false Apostles were less
hurtful, that they joined the works of the law which God himself required,
the Papists join works of Superero^ation, which are such as God never
commanded, and prefer them as much more meritorious, then any works which
God has prescribed. They both agree in this, that they place righteousness in
the observation of Ceremonies: but the Papists are more blasphemous then those
false Apostles. For they, although they placed righteousness in Ceremonies,
yet it was in such ceremonies as God himself appointed to be observed for a
time: but the Papists place instification in ceremonies which were never of
Gods institution: for Circumcision, the passover, with other sacrifices, and
rytes of the old Testament, had God for their Author: but holy water,
holybread, Pilgrimages and such like, had neither God nor good man for their
founder, but came from Antichrist the enemy of GOD and Christ.

And therefore you that would be under the Law, look well to your footyng
whether you stand upon good ground, for if righteousness come by the Law,
then comes it by such deeds only as the Law commands. And if a man may
be justified by observation of Ceremonies, they must be such Ceremonies as GOD
has required, when even of those which he himself required, being done
otherwise then he meant them, he says: Esaias. 1. 1^.
Who has required these things at your hands? At whose hands do you look
too receive the reward of righteousness? is it not of him that has taught you
the rule of righteousness? Therefore if you will be justified by the Law, look
what be the works and Ceremonies of the law and keep the^, for god has not
promised the reward but to him that observes them. The man (says he) that
does them, shall live in them. Give not ear therefore too the Papists, but
give ear too the Law, if you hope too win reward by observing the law.
And especially in that point, wherein the false Apostles of Saint Paul's time,
and the false Apostles of our time, agree, that is, joining man's merit with
Gods mercy. Tell me, you that refuse too be clearly see at liberty from the
bondage of the Law by Christ, and will needs be under the Law, do you
know the Law? Can you tell whether God will allow such a mixture, or no, of
works and grace, of mercy and merits? If the condition of the law will bear
such a medley, no man forbids you, but that you may seek righteousness
where it may best be found: but if the condition of the Law be so straight,
as it will admit nothing but a perfect observation in him that shall have the
reward, why will you seek too establish your own righteousness, and so void
your selves clean of the righteousness of God in Christ? And so while you will
be justified both by Christ and by the works of the Law, you shall be
justified neither by Christ, nor by the works of the Law. For the Law can
abide no transgression, nor the grace of Christ any satisfaction. And yet there
is perfect righteousness in the observation of the law: And a man is justified
by faith, without the works of the law. Whereupon the devils sophistry
concludes, that if justification be by either of these means by it self,
much rather it must be when they are both joined together. Wherefore we must
see whether they may be joined together, or no. Let us therefore first hear
the law. The law in deed is a perfect rule of righteousness to justify,
not the hearers, but the obseruers: The man that does all things commannded
by the Law, shall live thereby, that is, by his righteousness has deserved
eternal life. But here is a perfect observation required, or else no
righteousness obtained, no life deserved: for cursed is he that abides not
in all the precepts of the law to do them. So that here appears a double
condition annexed to the law. The one is an absolute and perfect observation
required of them that shall be rewarded: the other everlasting curse and
damnation threatened to him that has transgressed. By which it is most evident,
that the Law and the Gospel, grace and works, merit and mercy, be of so
contrary nature, as it is impossible they should be joined together in the
atteyning of eternal salvation. One transgression if there were but one in a
man's whole life, and that never so small, yet such is the rygour of the law,
as it barreth us from ryghteousnes, and makes us subject to the sentence of
Gods curse. Now let us on the other side consider the Gospel, and see whether
that admits any mixture of deeds of the Law. By the Gospel we are
assured, Ephesians. 2.
that we are saved by grace: but grace is a word of such freeness, as it
ceasseth to be grace, if you add any thing to it. If it be of works)
says the Apostle) then is it not of grace, and if it be of grace, then is it
not of works: for grace were not grace, if it were not free. And it could not
be truly said, that we are justified freely by his grace through the
redemption of Christ Jesus, if any thing in the world came in place of
satisfaction besides the redemption of Christ Jesus* Romans 3.
But let us hear what the law says: It is written in the law (for so are
all the five books of Moses accounted) that Abraham had two sons, one of a
bondmayde, another of a free woman, the one called Ismael, the other named
Isaac. Ismael was borne of Agar the Egyptian, which was a bondwoman, Isaac was
borne of Sara the wife of Abraham, which was a free woman: such as Agar the
mother was, such was Ismael her son, and Isaac was free, as his mother Sara
was.

First we must observe here, that this comparison is altogether within the
family of Abraham, that was a figure of the Church of GOD. And therefore we
must not seek Ismaell and his posterity among them that are altogether
without the Church, and profess open hatred against the same: But even in the
bosom of the visible Church, even in the family of Abraham, those that
profess themselves to be the sons of Abraham, that is, the sons of God,
and occupy no small ro^mes in the Church, but even the highest oftentimes, as
Ismael for a season being the first borne of Abraham was accounted as the heir
of Abraham, and so the most principal person in all the household. Wherefore if
we will at this day know who be the Ismaelits, we must not look to the profane
nations of the Turks and misereantes, that openly despise the Church of God,
but even to those that make the boldest and lowdest claim to be heirs of the
Church, even the Papists. They have their profession, so had Ismael, they
have their title, so had Ismael, they stand upon their prerogative, and so did
Ismael. They will have a place in the family of Abraham, yea they will thrust
out Isaac. They claim (they say) by the elder title, to be heirs of the
Church, yea they ween they have the Church it self in possession. And here
it is marvelous how they swell and stand upon typtoes, if you seem to
allow them any place at all in the Church, though it be but in the Belfrey,
they will straight way perke up into the Chancell. But soft a while my
masters, we allow you no other place in the Church of God, then that which
Ismael sometimes occupied in the family of Abraham. And that in deed was no
base room in outward appearance, and in the judgment of men. For who was
thought to be the heir of Abraham for sixteen or seventeen years, but
Ismael, the eldest son of Abraham? You, who seemed to have more right unto
the inheritance of Abraham, then he that had the prerogative of the first
begotten. But all the sons of Abraham are not the heirs of Abraham. For it
is written: In Isaac shall thy seed be called. Wherefore we must not regard
who makes claim to the inheritance of Abraham, but who is rightly begotten to
be the heir of Abraham: for a bond man is capable of no inheritance. And the
child is accounted in the civil law, of such condition as his mother is.
Therefore Ismael being borne of a bond woman, has no just title to be the
heir of Abraham, though he pretend to be his eldest son. And he that was
borne of the free woman, though he were younger by many years, yet by the
prerogative of his free birth, became the heir of Abraham his Father.
Wherefore if the Papists and all they that seek to be justified by their
works, be proved to be the sons of the bond woman, it will not help them
any thing in the world, that they have of long time been accounted as
principal members of the family of Abraham: for it will fall out in the end,
that they shall be found no better then Ismaelits and Agarynes, and have the
same reward that Agar and Ismael had.

We have heard now, that Abraham had two sons, of which, the one only was his
heir. And now let us see why Ismael being the natural son of Abraham, and
the first borne, was not the heir, either before Isaac or at leastwise jointly
with him: here indeed stands all the matter of controversy, although there
be two sons, why there is but one heir, but it is soon answered, because
there is but one way to come to the inheritance, and that is only by promise,
only by mercy, only by faith. So the cause now follows, why Ismael could not
be Abraham's heir, and only Isaac was: because Ismael was borne after the flesh,
and Isaac was borne by promise. The inheritance depended wholly upon the
promise, and the promise altogether upon the grace of god. Therefore he that
was borne after the promise, was the heir, and not he that was borne after the
flesh. But this at the first view, seems to be strange, why S. Paul should
say, that Ismael was borne after the flesh, and Isaac by promise. Whereas there
seems to be no difference, but that Isaac was born after the flesh, as
Ismael was, for he was conceived after the manner of all the world, as Ismael
was. It is the only privilege of our savior Christ to be conceived by the
holy ghost. Wherefore Isaac might be thought to be borne after the flesh, on the
other side it seems that Ismael was borne by promise. For Abraham was not
moved by fleshly lust to take Agar to his wife, but by the suggestion of Sara,
that he might have an heir of the promise. Why should not Ismael then (whose
birth was sought by so good an intent) be said to be borne after the promise?
And wherefore should Isaac be denied to be borne after the flesh, when he was
conceived and borne as Ismael and all other men are? But let us hear what the
Apostle says: He that was borne of the bond woman, was borne after the flesh,
and he that was borne of the free woman, by promise. Now let us see how
Ismael was borne after the flesh, and Isaac by promise. If we look to the
conception of Ismael, we shall see nothing in it, but carnal and fleshly, not
only because it was altogether according to the course of nature: but also and
chiefly because this devise of Sara, whereunto Abraham consented to beget
children of Agar, though it seemed to come of a good intent, yet was it
altogether carnal and fleshly. But God would have man's devise to have no
place in the Nativity of Isaac, because he should be a right figure and
pattern of them that are heirs of the promise. For thus the case stood, God
had promised to Abraham to give him the land of Canaan, and to his seed,
which should be as the stars of heaven, and as the sand of the sea
innumerable, that he should be the father of many nations, and that in his
seed all the nations of the world should be blessed.

Now Abraham believed this promise of God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness, bu^ while he continued steadfast in this Faith, GOD seemed too
suspend of long time the performance of his promise, for Abraham waxed old,
Sara was both old and barreyne, so that all hope of Children between them
seemed too be cut of: at last, this deuyse came intoo Saraes head, that
Abraham should take Agar the Aegiptian her bondemayde too wife, and so of her
should begette Children that should be heirs of the promise. No doubt her
end and purpose was to obtain that which God had promised, and in such
respect and none other, did Abraham agree too her devise. And here we see what
good intents are, if they be not directed by Gods word. For surely the intent
of Abraham and Sara in this matter, was exceeding good: but their mean which
they had devised, was stark naught. For it was altogether beside the word of
God: it proceeded not from the spirit of God, but from the spirit of man, from
flesh and blood, and therefore it was a mere carnal and fleshely devise, and
although it has a show of great godlynes, yet is there no spark of godliness
in it, for it proceeded not of faith, but of infidelity: for although Sara
believed the promise of God to be true, yet she thought it could not otherwise
be performed but by this carnal devise of hers: she would help god to
perform his promise, when she thought he was flack in perfourma^ce, and saw
more and more difficulty to grow daily by the age of Abraham increasing in
weakness and old years, unapt for generation, and such are all the devises of
me^, by which they sek to obtein the promised inheritance of the kingdom of
heaven they be altogether carnal and fleshly, and proceed only of infidelity.
For why do they sek to add any thing of their own to the most free and
gracious promise of god, but that they doubt either of his strength or goodwil
to perform that which he has promised? and therefore they will help the one with
laying to the shoulders of their own strength and the other they will procure by
commending the dignity and worthiness of their own persons, as though God were
not thoroughly well pleased in his only begotten son our Lord and savior Christ.
By this that has been said, I trust you do now understand, how Ismael was born
after the flesh, namely that in his conceptio^ and generation, there can
nothing be considered that is heavenly and spiritual, but altogether natural
and carnal. For notwithstanding there was an intent and purpose to beget an heir
of the promis, yet eue^ this intent and purpose, being governed by a carnal and
fleshly devise, proved nothing else, but an earthly, carnal, and fleshly
matter. Wherefore he that was borne of the bond woman, was borne altogether
after the flesh. Now let us see how Isaac was borne by promise. Isaac was born
of Sara the free woman: not by her carnal devise as his brother Ismael was, but
by faith in gods promise. For Abraham was now old, and past the strength of
begetting children, Sara was both old and barren, here nature had denied the^
children: flesh and blood had denied the^ children: humayn reason had denied
the^ children. Therefore the child that was now conceived and borne, came
altogether by promis of God, and not by strength of man. Abraham waxed now
strong in faith, though weak in body, and considered neither his own body as
good as dead, nor the dead womb of Sara his wife, but only believed that he
which had promised, was also able to perform it. And Sara by faith received
strength to conceive seed; and brought forth a son when she was past
childbearing and barrein, because she compted him faithful, Ebru. 11. ^^.
which had promised so, that the whole work in the conception and birth of
Isaac, was proper to God, and not to man, and so did the whole praise red^unde
to God, and not to man. For Abraham's body being now as good as dead for age,
received new strength for generation, as if he had been restored from death to
life. Sara, beside her natural impediment of barrainnesse being taken away,
which kept her from bearyng of children when she was young, being now
nyentie years of age, was endued with new strength to conceive Isaac, and
therefore here is nothing of man's strength or wisdom in Isaackes nativity to
be considered, but only the perfourmance of Gods promise. And therefore God
only deserved to have all the praise* Whereas if Ismael should have inherited
the promise, the lea^t portion of the praise should have been given to God. For
nature should have had one part, because Abraham although he were old when he
begat Ismael, yet he was not so old, that he was past the strength of
generation. And as for Agar, she was lusty, and in the flower of her age. What
singular praise should God have had in this co^ception, other then in all
natural works? But the chief part of the commendation, should have been
challenged by the wisdom of man. For if this devise of Sara had taken place,
how much think you would she have pleased her self in that witty
invention? And Abraham's diligence and endeavor to put in practice this
invention of theirs, might have been thought worthy of no small commendation.
And in Ismael the title of First begotten, would have thrust in it self, for
some dignity and portion of glory.

Amongst these matters, every one setting forth it felfe as worthy of the
praise, I pray you how small a pittance should have been leaft for the
promise of GOD? And as you see it here in the patterns, so is it most
clearly to be seen in them that follow these patterns. Whereby the Papists
show them selves most plainly to be after Ismael, children of the flesh, the
natural sons of the bondwoman, borne after the flesh. For that they may be
heirs of the promise, they ascribe somethyng to nature, somethyng to man's
wisdom, somethyng to their own industry, and by no means they wilbee
persuaded, to receyne the inheritance altogether by Gods promise. To nature
with the heathen Philosophers, they attribute the beginning of al virtues in
themselves, and such strength, as without the grace of God they may dispose
them selves to an aptnes to receive the grace of God, but with the grace of God
they may be able to perform whatsoever God requires at their hands. By man's
wisdom, they have found out works of greater price and worthiness to win
the favor of God, then God himself in his Law has prescribed and appointed.
And as for their own labor and industry, it does in a manner all in all, for
thereby nature is applied to win grace, grace is exercysed to merit reward,
wisdom is practiced to increase merit, which shall not only be sufficient for
those that labor in them, but also does ouerflowe too the satisfaction of
other men's sins, and too the obteyning of righteousness for other men which
fail in the measure of their own. In the mean time, they say they do not
exclude the grace of God. No more did Ismael the promise of God, but Ismaell
could not inherit the promise of God, because he was borne after the flesh,
no more can they he partakers of the grace of GOD because they seek to
procure it by camall and fleshly means. And they only are after Isaac heirs
of the promise, which pretend no tycle too the promised inherytaunce but only
the promise of GOD, which seek it only by grace, and not by works, which
obtain it by Faith and not by deserts.

For neither nature, nor the wisdom of man, nor the strength of man, nor the
worthiness of man, made Isaac heir of the promise, but only Faith in the
promise. These things (says saint Paul) which are written of the two
Mothers in Abraham's house of contrary condition, and the issue of them both,
are Allegorical, that is figuratively or typically to be understood.

For in as much as Abraham's house was the Church of GOD, such notable
euentes as happened in that householde, were fygures and examples for us too
see the state of the Church, and diverse kinds of men therein, for all ages
followying. Wherefore as there was a bond woman ingendring into bondage him
that is borne after the flesh, even in that familey, so has there always
been in the outward face of the Church, a great seed and multitude of
Heretykes and Hypocrytes, which have sought justification by their own
merytes. Such were before the coming of Christ a great number of the froward
and obstynate Jews, and in the time of Christ, the Scribes and Phariseys,
which abusing the doctrine of the law, contrary to the scope and end of the
Law, sought to establishe their own righteousness in observation and keepyng
of the law: but in the mean time, they became void of the righteousness of
God. And yet thy did not pretend to exclude the grace of God, as appears
right well in that Phariseye of whom our Savior Christ tells the Parable
Luke. 18. against them that trusted in themselves that they were ryghteous, and
despised other. This Pharisey trusted in himself that he was righteous, and
yet not without the grace of God. For he gives God thanks that he was not as
other men were, or etc. And such for all the world, as this Pharisey was, are
the whole generation of Papists. For they will seem too ascribe much to the
grace of God, in form of words, and almost altogether, and so did the
Pharisey. But yet nevertheless, he with them, and they with him, are
Ismaelites, sons of the bond woman, borne after the flesh, because they
ioigne any thing with the grace of God, which only does triumph in the
Salvation of all the Children of promise. For by grace you are saved (says
the Apostle) through Faith, Ephesians. ^. ^.
and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God, not of works, least any
man should boaste. And how is boallyng excluded? by the law of works? No but
by the law of Faith. But let us proceed in the Text. Rom^. ^. 27.
The two Mothers (says s. Paul) are the two couena^ts or Testaments, that is,
they represent unto us the two Testamentes, or covenants, that God has made
with mankind touching their Salvation. For God has made two couenantes, one
in the Law, the other in the Gospel, the one, the covenant of Justice, the
other the covenant of mercy. In the one he requires perfect righteousness, in
the other he offers remission of sins. And both these couenauntes have a
necessary use to bring us to salvation. The Couenauntes of Justice, do show us
what perfection of righteousness God requires, and how far we are from it,
to humble us and enforce us to seek righteousness else where then by our own
deserts. And so the law when it is rightly used, is said to be a
Schoolmaster unto Christ. For God did not make that covenant of righteousness
with us, to the intent that we should obtain righteousness by observation of
the Law, but by settinge before our eyes, the impossibilytie of the condition
which is required to be observed, and the extreme sentence of Justice, when
the condition is broken, to drive us altogether from hope of attayning to the
reward of righteousness by works, and to cause us most joyfully to receive the
second Covenant of his mercy offered in Christ. So that the law indeed
prescribes a rule of perfect righteousness, if men could observe it, but in as
much as no man was ever able to observe it (except our savior Christ) no man
ever was or shall be justified by it, but by Christ only. And as the covenant
of Justice does require perfect righteousness and gives no pardon: so the
covenant of mercy gives righteousness freely, and admits no satisfaction.
These are those two Covenants that GOD has made with mankind concerning
their iustifycation and salvation, and more then these two, he has not made:
so that he which will be justified by the law, must look for no mercy: and he
that will be justified by grace in Christ, must not think of any merit,
worthynesse, or satisfaction of his own, but only in Jesus Christ.

What place then have these mongrels that make a confusion of grace and
merits, of Faith and Works, of the Law and the Gospel? They have no place in
neither of the two Testamentes, the old nor the new. If they will have a
third way of Iustifycation, they must show a third Covenant: if they cannot
show a third Covenant, they cannot have a middle way of Iustifycation.

We have showed good euydence for the two Covenants, the one of Justice, the
other of mercy, and how the one Couenaunte neither bears with any
transgressyon, nor allows any pardon, the other admits no dignity of the
person, nor allows any satisfaction of his, for his unworthiness. Let the
Papists which wilbee justified partly by the grace of God, and partly by their
own merits, let them I say now stand forth, and show us the Tables of
such a couenante, if ever God made any such with men, that he would forgive
them half their sins, and allow them to make amends for the other half: let
them show their evidence if they have any, if they have none, as there is none
mentioned in the Scripture, but the two Testamentes, the two Couenantes, the
law and the Gospel: what title or claim can they make to the heavenly
inherytance, whereof they have no promise, no Testament, no covenant, but only
a carnal persuasion of their own fleshely reason, an earthly Imagination of
humayne wisdom, yea an hellishe presumption of their proud worldly
affection: whereby they show themselves to be nothing else but Agarens and
Ismaelytes, Children of the bondewoman, and borne after the flesh, as Ismaell
their Father was, whose title and claim unto the spiritual inheritance, was
altogether earthly and carnal, utterly void of the promise and word of God.

But let us hear the Apostle descrybing the two Couenantes. The one (says
he) is from mount Sinay, gendrying into bondage, which is Agar. The Law
therefore which is the first covenant, is compared to Agar, because it begets
into bondage as she did, yea mount Sinay from whence the Law was published,
is compared too Agar. And then the Law is as it were the seed, by which, of
Sinay, that is the Church of Hypocrites, are begotten no Children but unto
perpetual bondage.

But here now aryseth a doube, how of the law of GOD which is holy and good,
such wicked and ungodly Children should be conceived. For answer unto this
doubt, we must understand, that not of the law rightely used, such
unhappy Children are begotten, for we know that the law is good, Tim. 1. 8.
Romans 7. 1^.
if a man use it lawfullye. But when righteousness is sought by observation
of the law, which is not attained by any man, but through grace only, then is
the law abused, and of the Law so abused, are begotten no Children, but
hypocrites, unto everlasting bondage. The Law is used rightly, when it is made
our Schoolmaster unto Christ, Galat. 3. 2^
that we may be justified by Faith. But when Justification is not sought by
Faith without the deeds of the Law, but either by the deeds of the Law
only, or by the deeds of the Law and Faith: then is the law which is holy
of it self, by this abuse, made a corrupt seed, of which is conceived these
bastardly Hypocrites that falsely challenge to be the Sons of GOD. whereas
they are in deed the sons of eternal sclauery and bondage. You will say,
they seek lyberty by this means, and not bondage, but certain it is, they
find nothing but bondage: what soever they pretend too seek. For such is the
nature of the law, that it brings all men intoo bondage, that are not set at
lybertye, by the only mean which GOD has appointed for their
infranchismente, which is the Redemption of the Son of GOD. Now when these
men that seek too be under the Law, refuse the only charter of
infranchismente, which almightye GOD does most mercifully offer to give them
freely, they are entangled with double bondage, and thraldom both that which
is by nature, whereunto all the sons of Adam are subject, that are not set
at liberty by the son of GOD: and also that which grows by their omne
confession, while they refuse the freedom offered, and voluntaryly put their
necks under the yoke of the Law, which promises no liberty, but upon the
keeping of an impossible condition, and threatens certain and perpetual
bondage, for every voluntary, and yet necessary transgression. So that it is
impossible for all the^ that are under the Law, either to obtain the reward
which it promises, or to avoid the punishment which it threatens. Wherefore
mount Sinay which is Agar, and the law thus abused, begets no children, but
hipocriticall sclaues unto everlasting bondage. (For Agar is mount Sinay in
Arabia, and answers in figure too that Jerusalem which is now, and is in
bondage, with her children.) First let us here observe, that manner of speech
which the Apostle uses, when he says that Agar is the mount Sinay, whereas
it is euydent that he means that Agar does figure or signify the mount
Sinay. The Papists make great exclamation against those Interpreters, which in
the words of consecration as they call them, This is my body, do expound est
for significat. This is my body, that is, this bread does signifye my body.
And a great matter they make of the verb substantive est, as though that when
soever it is used is Scripture, it declares a substance, and no figure or
sign of a substance. Howbeyt there be infynite places of Scripture, where
this verb substantive est, can not be otherwise interpreted, then for
significat, and this our Text is one very manifest place. Agar (says he) is
the mount Sinay in Arabia. What? was Agar now changed into the substance of
a Mount? who is so vayde of reason or sense, but he must needs confess, that
his meaning is, that Agar does sygnifye Mount Sinay, or is a figure of Mount
Sinay in Arabia:

Yea: but I know what will be replied. Sayncte Paul speaks not here of the
Sacraments. That is true, but when the holy Ghost speaks of Sacraments,
which are holy and Heavenly signs, it were more probable too understand his
speech fyguratiuely, and not literally. Yea it is most usual in the
Scripture, when the spirit of God speaks of the Sacraments, to say they be
those things which they do but represent and signify. As Circumcision is
called the covenant, the Lamb is called the Passover, Baptism is called the
new birth, and S. Paul speaking of the Sacrament of Christ's blood says, The
Rock was Christ: And our Savior Christ himself says, This cup is the new
Testament. In all which speeches there can be no transsubstantiation and change
of substances be understood, but a sign, a figure, or representation. What
then? Do we make the Sacraments nothing else but bare signs, naked figures,
and imaginatiue representations? God forbid, it is not in vain that the
ontwarde elements in the divine Sacraments do bear the names of those
things which they do represent, but that God does truly and in deed
perform his promises unto the faithful, of which these Sacraments are the
seals, to confyrme their faith. So God in Baptism which is the Sacrament of
regeneration, does work effectually to the mortifying of the old man, and
renewing of the new man, whereby the man that is baptized, is made the child
of God. And Christ in the Sacrament of his body and blood, does truly feed
us with his body and blood which is the only food of our souls, whereby we
are nourished and preserved unto eternal life. But to return to the matter:
Agar in this figure, does signifye the Mount Sinay in Arabia, from whence the
Law of bondage was given, as Sara does signify the Mount Sion in Jerusalem,
from whence the Gospel of freedom proceeded. And we must note here, that
Sinay is a mountain in the desert of Arabia, where the law of bondage was
proclaimed. Namely we must understand, that it was altogether out of the
compass of the land of promise. It was in the barren wilderness, not in the
land that flowed with milk and honye, It was in Arabia, and not in Canaan. So
that god would signify, even by the place where he published the law, that it
perteined not to the promise of his mercy, but to the pacte or Covenant of his
justice. For the land of Canaan, was the land of promise, a very fruitful
land, abundant in all commodities and pleasures of this life, which GOD
professes oftentimes unto the people, that he gave it them, and that without
all desert or worthiness of theyrs, of his only goodness and mercy toward
them, to fulfill his promise made to their Fathers. Forbydding them always to
think or say that for their own righteousness God had chosen them, to cast
out those nations before them, putting them often in mind that they were a
froward and stiffnecked people, and how many ways they had deserved that God
should utterly have rejected them, as Moses preaches to them in Deuteronomie.

Wherefore the land of Canaan was to them a Sacrament of the Kingdom of
Heaven, which being an inheritance of most glorious and eternal felicity, no
man shall attain unto, by his own merytes or worthiness, but only by the
mercy of God. No more then the Israelites were brought into the land of
promise in respect of their own deseruings, but only by the promise of GOD.
Now far without the bonds of this holy land, in a deserte and solitary
place, in a barraine and unfruitful soil, where nothing grew for the
sustentation of man's life, where water wanted for the necessary use of man
and beast, even there God chose a hard stony and craggie rock to be the
pulpet from whence he thundered out the Law of Justice, with most terrible
lights and noyses, to signify that by the Cavenant of his righteousness, no
man should look for any favor or grace, but that all they that were found
transgressors of this law, should undoubtedly incur the pains of eternal
condempnation. This was Mount Sinay in Arabia, This was Agar the Egyptian, This
was the mother of Ifmael, This is the nobility of the sons of bondage.

But he proceeds, and. says that Agar or Sinay answers in figure or
similitude to that Jerusalem which is now, and is in bondage with her
children. Some translations read that Sinay bordereth upon Jerusalem, but
that is neither true in the litterall sense, nor agrees with the meaning of
the Apostle in this figure, nor expresses the Greek word which the Apostle
uses. For mount Sinay does not border upon Jerusalem, but is far distant
from it by certain hundredth miles. But the word which the Apostle uses, does
signify a respect or relation of one thing to an other. And so he means that
Mount Sinay has respect to that Jerusalem which is now, which is, to the
earthly Jerusalem, because the earthly Jerusalem did answer in figure to
Agar, and not to Sara, to Sinay, and not to Sion. And why so? Because she was
now degenerated and gone out of kind, as the Prophet complayneth: Esaias. 1. ^^.
How is the faithful City become an Adulteres? Because she sought to be
justified by the Law that was given in Mount Sinay, and refused the grace of
Christ, that was preached on Mount Sion. She should have been a lively Image of
the heavenly Jerusalem, if she had accepted the Gospel of Christ, but now
by refusing the same, she answers in figure to Sinay the mountain of
Arabia, to Agar the mother of Ismael, and is in bondage, with her Children.
She was called with her children to liberty and freedom by the son of God,
who only has authority to set at liberty those that were in bondage, but
they proudly refused it, and stood upon their prerogative, saying, We are the
seed of Abraham, we have not served any man, how say thou that we shall
be made free? They would not understand that every one that commits
sin, is the servant of sin, and cannot have eternal abiding in the house.
John. 8. 67.
They would not acknowledge that the Son of GOD who always abides in the
house, has Authority to infranchise them, and that they could not be
delivered from the bondage of sin, but by him. Therefore they ramayne still
in bondage without hope of deliverance. For the Adultresse Jerusalem their
mother, having now embraced a seruyle doctrine and Religion, is become Agar or
Sinay, whose qualities and condition she does properly represent. Wherefore
although they do with full mouth never so proudlye boast themselves to be the
seed of Abraham, they are nevertheless, the sons of Agar. And no greater
privilege they have by being the sons of Abraham, then Ismael had, who also
was the Son of Abraham, but after the flesh only, and not after the spirit.
Wherefore though Sinay in distance of place be far of from Jerusalem, yet in
quality and condition they are altogether like, for they are both seruyle, the
doctrine of them both ingendreth to bondage.

Thus you see how Jerusalem which is now, that is, the earthly Jerusalem, by
reteyning the doctrine and religion of bondage, and refusing the doctrine and
Religion of freedom, is become Sinay of Sion, Agar of Jerusalem. A good
admonition for us al, to take heed, that we do not embrace the doctrine of
bondage, but most joyfully and thankefully receive the glad tidings of
liberty. That we may beware by the punishment of Jerusalem, to refuse
freedom offered, least we be chrust into perpetual bondage. No City nor
people in the world had greater privileges of honor, then the City and
people of Jerusalem: And yet we see now, how justly Jerusalem is turned into
Sinay, freedom into bondage, glory into shame, that we should not stand upon
any prerogatives or privileges, as though any thing could exempt us from the
severity of Gods judgment, if we reject the grace of God when it is freely
offered. If Jerusalem escaped not punishment for all her dignity, what shall
become of Sodom or Babylon which have no prerogative of dignity, if they
being called to liberty do still continue in bondage? And here we have an
example whereby to shape the Papists an answer, for all that they can bring,
to commend the dignity of their Church of Rome. For the present time, or
that has been these many hundredth years, they can speak little good of her,
if they will speak the truth that all men do see with their eyes in this age,
or may read in stories of the former ages, written by their own Registers:
but they have a great glory to bring forth the ancient commendation of faith
which the Scriptures and old doctors do ascribe unto the Church of Rome, the
godly conversation of the Anrient Christian Romans, the multitude of Constant
Martyrs which that Church did yield in the space of two or three hundredth
years, but all in vain, yea all to their greater shame, except they can prove
the same faith, conversation, and Christian constancy, to remain now in the
Church of Rome, that was in those golden days of the primitive Church. S.
Paul in deed commends the faith of the Romans, to be celebrated in all the
world, which place the Papists think to make much for the dignity of the Sea
of Rome. But let them show that the Pope and his Church of Rome do now hold
the same faith which S. Paul praised in the Romans of his time, or else it
makes nothing in the world for the Church of Rome now, but to her shame and
reproach, which is degenerated from that doctrine of liberty which of old
time was wont to be embraced in those places. The faith of the Romans of that
time, which S. Paul commended, was this, that a man is justified by faith
without the deeds of the law. Is this the doctrine of the Church of Rome
according to the true meaning of S. Paul and the whole discourse of his
Epistle to the Romans? Do they not teach the contrary directly, that a man
cannot be justified by faith only without the works of the law? Wherefore
seeing the Romans that are now, have a contrary faith to the Romans of old
time, there is no cause why they should claim the ancient praise, which have
not retained the ancient faith. And forasmuch as they are fallen from the
grace of Christ to seek ryghteousnes by their own merits, there is no reason
why they should have the commendation of the faith of the Gospel, which have
submitted themselves to to the bondage of the Law.

And if Jerusalem that is now, be turned into Agar, and the earthly Sion into
the barreyn Sinay, because she has despised the promise of mercy and
redemption which the ancient Jerusalem and Mount Sion in the time of the
godly Parriarches and Prophets most joyfully received: why should Rome that
is now, with her seven hills, appointed for the throne of Antichryst, enjoy
the praise of the ancient Romans and the Christian Church that sometime was
a stranger in that place, whom now she persecuteth, and condemns their
faith for Heresy? She cannot be taken for the heavenly Jerusalem, that
professes the seruyle doctrine and Religion of the earthly Jerusalem. Neither
can her children the Papists, be taken for Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem,
which think so great a part of religion to consist in going a Pilgrimage to
the earthly Jerusalem. The Apostle here utterly rejects Jerusalem that is
now, and thrusts her out of the land of promise, into Arabia the desatte.
The Papists make no account of Jerusalem that is above, but all their
delight is in Jerusalem that is on earth, so they show themselves right
Agarens and Ismaelites. What a great matter is made in Popery of Jerusalem
that is now? yea although it be in the hands of Turks and Paganes, yet they so
esteem it, that they think they should have the greatest treasure in the
world, if they could get the possession of that city, out of the Paganes
hands. And for that purpose how many thousand men have lost their lives in
the enterprises that have been adventured, to gain that place out of the
Turks and Souldans dominions?

What an high point in Religion is it made of the Papists, to visit
Jerusalem, that is now? yea it is a matter of so great importance, that the
vow which one has made to go on Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, cannot be dispensed
withal, by any other inferior person, but even by the Popes own holiness
himself. Such a goodly matter it is to be a Citizen of the earthly Jerusalem.

But let the Papists alone with their holy mother the earthly Jerusalem mount
Sinay or Agar, and let us return to the comparison of the Apostle, which
says: But Jerusalem which is above, is free, which is the mother of us al:
we heard before, that there were two mothers in the family of Abraham, Agar,
and Sara: the one begetting into bondage, the oher unto liberty, we hard
also that these mothers do signify two Covenants, or two Churches, and that
Agar signifies the Covenant of Justice, or Jerusalem that is now, the
Church of Hypocrites, which abuse this covenant in seeking to be justified
thereby, which was given to direct us to the covenant of mercy: Now must we
consider Sara the second mother, which was a freewoman, how she was a figure
of the new covenant, and of the heavenly Jerusalem, that is the mother of all
the Children of God. The first covenant in Mount Sinay what it was, namely the
Covenant of righteousness, we have sufficiently declared already. The second
Covenant of mercy is excellently well described, by the Prophet Jeremy.
Jeremy. 31.
Chap. 31. alleged by the Apostle to the Hebrews. Hebr. 8.
Chap. 8. Behold the days come (says the Lord) that I will accomplish
with the house of Israel and Judah a new Covenant.

9. Not according to the Covenant which I made with their Fathers in the day
when I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt: for
they themselves abide not in my Covenant, and I regarded them not (says the
Lord.)

10. For this is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel. After
those days (says the Lord) I will give my Laws into their minds, and write
them in their hearts: And I will be their God, and they shall be my people.

11 And they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall al know me from the least to
the greatest of them:

12 For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and I will no more
remember their sins, and their iniquities.

Behold this is the new Testament, this is the second Covenant of mercy, not
written in Tables of stone as the first Covenant of justice was, but in the
fleshely Tables of our hearts, by the spirit of GOD. Of this Covenant Sara was
a lively figure, when she brought forth Isaac, not by course of nature, or
Carnal deuyse as Ismael was begotten: but by the power of GOD, according to
his promise. For by the doctrine of this covenant, the children of God, are
borne unto liberty, through faith. For to those that receive Jesus Christ, he
gives this dignity, that they should be the sons of God, eue^ to those that
believe in his name, which are not borne of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, John. 1. 12. 13.
nor of the will of man, but of God. And this is that law that comes out of
Sion. that word that proceeds out of Jerusalem, which proclaims liberty
and freedom from Sion. to all them that embrace Christ by faith. The same
godly matrone Sara, being the mother of the faithful, is also a figure of the
true Church of god which is no earthly City flourishyng in worldly dignity,
but is altogether heavenly and spiritual, Jerusalem that is above, is the
mother of us all. For although a great number of children be dispersed over all the world, yet is she heavenly, because she has her beginning of the
heavenly grace, and dwells above by Faith: and those her Children which are
in the world, are but Pilgrymes and strangers on the earth, for their
conversation and dwelling, their Franchise and liberty is in heaven, from
whence they look for a Savior. Philip. 3. 2^
The word of promise and covenant of mercy, is that incorruptible seed, by
which she conceiueth children, and heirs unto God: In the same she has milk
for her infantes, and stronger meat for them of ryper age, she cherishes and
brings them up until they come of years apt to enjoy their Fathers
inheritance, perfourming all offices and duetyes of a most kind and natural
mother. And therefore it is truly said, he shall not have GOD to his Father,
that refuses the Church to be his mother. And here we must note, that there
is but one true Church, namelye, Heavenly Jerusalem the mother of us all,
that are Gods Children, and therefore all Heretics and Scismatykes that be
not Children of this one mother, are excluded from being Children of God. Here
also we see that the Church is Catholic or Uniuersall, and how she is
Catholic or Uniuersall, not in respect of every great multitude, that
challenges her to be their mother, but she is the mother of all the
faithful, of all the free borne Children of God, that are borne according to
the promise, according to the Covenant of Gods mercy, and not of the will or
works, merits or worchynesse of man, but of the spirit of God.

The third condition, she is heavenly, she is from above, she is not bound
to any place upon the earth. No she has forsaken earthly Jerusalem, to dwell
in heaven. And think you she will forsake heaven to come down and dwell in
Rome? No no, all the inchanters and Sorcerers of Aegipt and Babylon, cannot
draw her down from Heaven too place her seat at Rome. If we will be Children
of the freewoman, we must look up intoo Heaven by Faith, where our Mother
dwells, and not too any place on earth, neither too Jerusalem in Judah, nor
to Rome in Italy, nor to Constantinople in Thracia, nor to Alexandria in
Egypt, nor to Antiochia in Syria, but to Jerusalem in Heaven, for she is the
Mother of us al, that are the Children of God. We learn here, that if we be
true children of Jerusalem that is above, what manner life and conversation
becomes us, namely such as our Mother is, yea and our Father also, heavenly,
Godly, Spiritual. Besides this, in that Jerusalem is above, we see how
mad the fury and rage of Tyraants is, that think by persecutyng her
Children which are strangers on earth, they can destroy and vanquishe her
that is in Heaven, whereas when they have done the uttermost that their rage
leads the^ unto, that is, to kill their bodies, they do but send home the
Children to their Mother, who as long as she is great with Child, by the
seed of the Gospel, she still traueleth in birth in brings forth men
Children, which under their Prince and eldest Brother the Son of GOD, shall
tread down that Dragons head, that persecuteth the mother and the Children,
until he be caught by the heels, and thrown into the bottomless lake that
burns with fire and brymston.

The fourth condition of the Church is, that she is free, and therefore
brings forth Children unto freedom. She is free, in that she is redeemed
and bought out of bondage, by the blood of the Son of God, that she might be
holy and unspotted before him, not having her own righteousness, wherewith
she is adorned, but the garment washed in the blood of Christ, which is the
righteousness of Saints, Thus is she a glorious mother, and brings forth
Children that are made free from sin and wickedness, to serve the Lord GOD
their father in holiness and rlghteousnesse all the days of their life. By
this that has been said, it is manifest, that the Church of Rome, is not the
Church of Christ, for she is earthely, glysteryng in Earthly glory, maynceyned
by carnal strength and wisdom, mainteyning the Doctrine of bondage, and
persecutyng the Gospel of lybertye. Here also is decyded a great controuersye
between the Papystes and us, whether the Catholyke Church of Christ be
vysible yea or no. The Papystes stoutely mainteyne, that the Catholic Church
is vysible, that is, apparent and open to be seen to the eyes of all men, and
they think it the strongest reason they have, either too defend their
Church, or to impugn ours, that their Church has always been and yet is
vysible, and in the open veywe of the world, when our Church within these
hundredth years, was driven intoo Corners and not too be spyede except it
were in a few persecuted members. The ground they stand upon is a wrong
Interpretation of the saying of our Savior Christ in the. 5. of Saint Math.
Math. 5. 14.
A City that is builded upon an hill cannot be hid. But this perteyneth
nothing to the City of Rome, although it be builded not on one, but upon seven
hills, For our Savior Christ (as the whole contexte of his speech does
euydently declare) speaks not there of the Catholic Church, but of his
Apostles that were appointed to be the light of the world, and therefore must
needs be seen, were as a City which is builded on a hill, and therefore
could not be hydden, exhorting them therefore to give good example of life
and doctrine, because their place was such, as their example could not be
secret, but open and manifest, and therefore either very profitable or very
hurtful. But this place, (which every man must confess to be understood of
the Catholyke Church) does most clearly declare, that the Catholic Church
neither is, nor can be visible and subject too the eyes of any man, but only
them, that are indewed with the eyes of Faith. For he says that Jerusalem is
above, she is in Heaven, even she that is the Catholyke and universal Mother
of us all, and therefore she is not to be seen but by the eye of Faith. Let
the Papists still glory in their visible Church, let them acknowledge none
other Mother but their visible Church of Rome, we will boldly defy them and the
whore their mother, for the Heavenly and Spiritual Jerusalem, that is above,
is the mother of us all. And this the Apostle proves by the Testimony of
Esaye, taken out of the. 54. Chapter, that the Church brings forth lawful
sons and heirs too God according too the promise, even of the gentiles. For
in as much as the Galathians were Gentiles, he brings forth the
comfortable promise made unto the Church of the Gentyles, that (although of
long time she were barreyne and had no husband, and therefore brought forth
no Children too GOD, yet the time should come, that God would join her as a
chaste virgyn in marriage unto Christ, and then she should be more
fruitful, and bring forth more Children unto God, then ever did the Church of
the Jews, when she was the spouse of God so many hundred years, all which
time the other was barren, desolate, and had no husband. So brethren (says
he) we are after Isaac Children of the promise. Not only those that are the
carnal seed of Abraham by Isaac, but all those that take hold of the promise
of God by faith. For what prerogative of dignity had Isaac too be the Son of
God more then Ismaell: because he was the carnal leede of Abraham: so was
Ismaell: Because he was the first begotten of Abraham, that was he not, but
Ismaell was: nothing then but the promise of GOD made Isaac the Son of GOD,
and the same promise extends too all nations of the world as largely and in
as ample manner, as too the carnal seed of Abraham Isaac or Jacob. In thy
seed shall all nations of the world be blessed.

Therefore Brethren we are after Isaac, not by carnal generation, but by
spiritual regeneration, Children of the promise.

For the only Pryuyledge that made Isaac the Son of GOD, was the promise of
GOD, and that also makes us the sons of GOD. What made Jacob too be
preferred before Esaw, who was the Son of Abraham and the Son of Isaac, yet
Jacob was loved, and Esaw was hated? Whereby (I say) was Jacob preferred to
be the heir of Isaac his Father, but by the election of GOD? It is therefore
of the election, grace, mercy, and promise of GOD, that any man is advanced to
this honor to be the Son of GOD, and not of any merit, dignity, or
worthynesse of a man.

But even as then he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was
borne after the Spirit, even so is it now. By these words the Apostle
comfort the Galathians and all other, that were true Children of the Church,
and armeth them to patience, assuryng them that of the Hypocryticall Church of
meritmongers, they should look for nothing else but persecution. For it is no
marueyle if those proud sclaues, the Children of the Earthelye Jerusalem, did
unto the Sons of the Heavenly Jerusalem as Ismaell their Father did to
Isaac the true heir, boastyng of his birth right. For such is the swellyng
pride of that slauysh generation, that although they be altogether bondemen
and thrall unto perpetual destruction, yet do they most arrogantly contemn
and despise all other, that profess not the same way of Justification that
they do.

Therefore our Savior Christ tells a parable against them that trusted in
them selves, that they were ryghteous, and desprsed other. For they that be
once so proud as to justify them selves, they will also contemn and despise
others. Of this contempt aryseth their cruel mind, whereby they do also
persecute them.

Thus the false Apostles that preached justification partly by Christ, and
partly by observation of the Law, raised persecution against the true
Apostles, that taught justification by grace of Christ only, embraced by Faith
alone without the deeds of the law, and al them that received the same most
comfortable doctrine. And their successors the Papists, are nothing behind:
for they never cease to the uttermost of their power, too persecute and
afflicte the true Children of promise with all kind of torments that they can
deuyse, to maynteyne the proud persuasion of their own righteousness, and
too deface the glory of the mo^te free and plentyfull Redemption of Christ.
But for as much as the Apostle here says, that he that was borne after the
flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the spirit, we have to see, what
kind of persecution this was, by which Ismael persecuted Isaac. For in all the
story of Ismael there is no mention of persecution, but only in the 21.
Chapter of Genesis, where it is written, that at such time as Abraham made a
great feast at the weaninge of his son Isaac, and there was great joy and
rejoicing on every side for Isaac that was Abraham's son by Sara according to
the promise of GOD, Ismael which was then in the house, a proud Ladde of
syxteene or seventeen years old, scorned and mocked his young Brother Isaac.

This derysion and skorninge, the Apostle compteth for persecution, and not
without great cause, for it showed the proud stomach of Ismael that contemned
and despised him whom GOD had chosen, secondlye it declared his inward hatred
and cruel mind that he bare against his Brother whom he so contumelyoustye
deryded, workynge him all the spighte and villanye that he could and durst.
And chiefly it deserved to be called persecution, because he scorned and
mocked the grace and election of GOD. Wherefore though he did not persecute
him with the Sword which he could not, yet he persecuted him with his
scornful reproaches, which is worse, because he contemned and trod under his
feet, the promise of GOD whereof Isaac was made an heir by the mercy and
grace of God. And verily there ought no persecution to be so grievous unto us,
as when we se the grace of GOD upon which our vocation is grounded, to be
trodden under foot and defaced with the proud tauntes and scorns of the
ungodly: yea it is the fountain and beginning of all persecutions, when the
wicked do hate and despise the grace of GOD in his chosen, as appears most
plainly in the story of Caine and Abel: yea our Savior Christ himself no
doubt was more grieved with that blasphemous mock of the proud persecuting
Jews, He trusted in God, let him take him if he will have him. etc. then with
their buffetinge, scourginge, and naylynge of him. And as the glory of GOD
ought to be more dear unto us then our own lives, so ought we to be more
grieved at the defacing of Gods glory by the scorning and deriding of the
ungodly, then at any bodilye Torments, or at the loss of our own lives. For
there is no kind of persecution more detestable, then that, by which the
salvation of our scules is assaulted, as it is by the proud taunts and scorns
of gods enemies both Papists and Atheistes, who when their cruel rage is
restrained, that they cannot persecute us by fire and sword as their desire is,
then they blaspheme the grace of GOD, in our election and vocation, with most
bitter and contumelious scorning and derisyon. So that the children of GOD and
all they that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall never want persecution.
For if the bloody sword be wrung out of the Tyrauntes hands, yet will they
not cease to persecute, unless their tongues also were pulled out of their
heads. For they that are borne after the flesh, that is, al Hipocrites and
Iustifyers of them selves, will ever play Ismaels part, if they can do
nothing else against the Children of promise.

And this is the ground of the hatred of the papists against us. But to
conclude, what shall be the end of these persecuting scorners? Ask not the
world, for the world thinks that such holy Hipocrites are the chief pillars
of the Church, and principal members of the same. They them selves say: that
they only are the Church, and that the sons of promise shall have nothing
to do there, but by there license. But what says the scripture? The scripture
will not flatter them, the scripture will not dissemble with them.

Cast out the bond woman and her son, for the son of the bondwoman shall
not inherit with the son of the free woman. These were in deed the words of
Sara unto Abraham, but they were confyrmed by the Oracle of god, which willed
Abraham to follow the word of Sara in all that she had said. Therefore this is
the sentence of GOD, though Ismael keep a stir in the house a long time,
and bear himself bold on his birthright as though he would be the only
heir, persecuting the right heir Isaac with tauntes and scorninge, yet at the
length he is thrust out of doors with that proud dame Agar his mother, that
despised her misteris Sara, and utterly rejected from the inheritance.

There were a great number of s^ruauntes which tarried in the house when Ismael
the first begotten was thrust out. What was the cause that they tarried? Because
they reverenced the grace of God in Isaac, which Ismael contemned. The same
e^de remains the popish Agar and all the Ismaelites her children, though they
boast themselves to be the only Church, so that they would seem to thrust
Isaac and his seed out of the doors, yet the scripture has determined their
end long a go, and of all other hypocrites which now are mixed they shall
be severed, which occupye great rowmes in the Church, they shall be cast out of
the doors, they shall have none inherytance with the sons of God.

Let us therefore thankfullye embrace the Covenant of GODS mercy the doctrine
of the Gospel, and free remission of sins, by which we are sure to be set at
liberty from sin, made the sons of GOD and heirs of eternal felycitye,
which GOD of his mercy grant unto us all for Christ his sake, to whom with
the Father and the holy ghost, be all honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London for Lucas Harrison. 1577.


