THE MIRROVR OF MAJESTY: OR, THE BADGES OF HONOR CONCEITEDLY EMBLAZONED: WITH
EMBLEMES ANNEXED, POETICALLY UNFOLDED.

-- Nec his Plebecula gaudet.

LONDON, Printed by William Jones, dwelling in Red-crosse-streete. 1619.

TO THOSE NOBLE Personages rancked in the CATALOGVE.
MY feebler Muse far too too weak to sing,
Has got your Honors on her flaggring wing,
And borne them to the loftiest pitch she may:
Therefore (submissiue) she does humbly pray,
That when her tongue reeles, or Invention haults,
Your Favors will give crutches to her faults.
Your LORDSHIPS in all dutiful obseruancie, H. G.

A CATALOGVE OF THOSE NAMES UNTO WHOM this work is appropriated.
THE Kings Majesty. The Queen. The Prince. The Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury. The Lord Chancellor. The Lord Treasurer. The Lord Privy Seal.
The Lord Admiral. The Duke of Lenox. The Marquess of Buckinghame. The Lord
Chamberlain. The Earl of Arundell. The Earl of South-hampton. The Earl of
Hertford. The Earl of Essex The Earl of Dorset. The Earl of Mountgomerie.
The Viscount Lisle. The Viscount Wallingford. The Bishop of London. The Bishop
of Winchester. The Bishop of Ely. The Lord Zouch. The Lord Windsor. The Lord
Wentworth. The Lord Darcie. The Lord Wootton. The Lord Stanhope. The Lord
Carew. The Lord Hay. The Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench. The Lord
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. The Lord Chief Baron of the Excheaquer.
FINIS.
TO THE KING.
I R

QVI MAL Y PENSE HONI SOIT



THose (mighty Sovereign) are your Graces text,
Right King of Heralds, not to any, next:
You might their mysticke learning blazon best,
But you reserve your knowledge vnexprest:
As being most peculiar to you:
And yet because the people may allow
That which concerns your self: Let me to them
Unlock the value of this prizelesse Iem:
The Lions trebled thus, may represent
Your equal fitnes for the Regiment
Of this fair Monarchy: Britain then
Which ever has bin stuffed with valiant men,
May fittest bear a Lion, urged to spoil:
Your Irish Kernes, who never used to toil,
Are in their silver-studded Harp explained.
These Splendent Beauties limm'd by Natures hand,
By grace of Ancient Kings, made Royal flowers,
But now thrice Royal made, by being Yours.
EMBLEM 1
REX ET SACERDOS DEI



Why be these marshaled equal, as you see?
Are they dis-rankt, or not? No: they should be
Thus placed: for Commonweals do tottering stand,
Not vnder-propt thus by the mutual hand
Of King and Priest, by Gods and humane laws:
Divine assistance most effectual draws
Kings to confess, that t'heav'n they homage owe;
Which consequently leads a King to know,
That, that Ambition's by dead Embers fired,
Which has no* beyond earth to heaven aspired:
Earth can but make a King of earth partaker,
But Knowledge makes him nearest like his maker.
For man's mere power not built on Wisdoms fort,
Dos rather pluck down kingdoms than support.
Perfectly mixed, thus Power and Knowledge move
About thy just designs, ensphear'd with love;
Which (as a glass) serve neighbour-Kings, to see
How best to follow, though not equal thee.
EMBLEM 2
NVLLVM BONVM INREMVNERATVM



SEated on this three-headed Mountain high,
Which represents Great Brytaines Monarchy,
Thus stand I furnished t'entertaine the noise:
Of thronging clamours, with an equal poyse:
And thus addressed to give a constant weight
To formal shows, of Virtue, or Deceit:
Thus armed with Power to punnish or protect,
When I have weighed each scruple and defect:
Thus plentifully rich in parts and place
To give Abundance, or a poor disgrace:
But, how to make these in just circle move,
Heaven crowns my head with Wisdom from above.
Thus Merit on each part, to whom it is due,
With God-like power disbursed is by you.
TO THE QVEENE.


OF all proportions (Madam) diverse dare
Conclude that absolute, which is most square:
Well may they prove that Theoreme: for I know
Square Bodies do the most perfection show:
Perfection still consisting in this best,
To stand more sure, the more it is suppressed.
Which special virtue chiefly does belong
Unto square bodies, or right does them wrong:
Your Scutchion therefore, and the Honors due,
May constantly support your Worth and You;
Whose life's drawn out (vnsoild with subjects hate)
By such a Samplar, none can imitate.
EMBLEM 3.
VNICA ETERNA AL MONDO



HEre above number, does one wonder sit;
But One, yet in her own, an infinite:
Being simply rare, no Second can she bear,
Two Suns were never seen stalk in one Sphere.
From old Eliza's Vrne, enricht with fire
Of glorious wonders, did your worth suspire:
So must, from your dead life-infusing flame,
Your Multiplyed-selfe rise thence the Same:
She whose fair Memories, by Thespian Swains
Are sung, on Rheins green banks, and flowrie plains.
Thus Time alternates in its single turns;
One Phaenix borne, another Phaenix burns.
Your rare worths (matchless Queen) in you alone
Live free, vnparalle'd, entirely One.
TO THE PRINCE.
C P

ICH^ DIEN



YOur Princedome's Ensign here (Right-Royall Sir)
May pinion your vp-soaring thoughts, and stir
Them to a pitch of loftier eminence,
Then can be reached by base vulgar sense.
These Plumes (charact'red lively signify
Valor in war, joined with velocitie.
The black Prince (bearing Plumes) approues this true,
When through the French he like win'gd-lightning flue,
And pulled down lives about him to the ground,
Till he himself with death had circled round;
His very look did threaten public death:
With every stroke fell from him, fled a breath.
Armed in the confidence of his just cause,
Thus freely fearelesse his foes overthrowes.
Those high-borne acts which from his valor flue,
With new-additions are impress't in you.
EMBLEM 4.
POST NVBILA PHEBVS



When Peace (suspecting he would war infer,)
Took Henry hence, to live above with her,
She bade Jove's Bird return from's quick convoy
Of his fair soul, left in Heavens lasting Joy,
And mildly offer to your Princely hands,
This Emblem of soft Peace and Warlike bands:
Both which (used rightly) their large cares extend.
To gain over others, and their own defend.
Though all bright Honors did their Beauties shroud
In his Eclipse, like Phoebus in a cloud:
Yet at your Rising, they more clear again
Peept-forth, like Sunshine after clouds and rain.
And in your worth their worthiness displayes
To worthiest Princes; as the Sun, his rays.
TO THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBVRY.


HOw well these sacred Ornaments become
One, who by earth walks to his celestial home:
The Staff of Comfort this, to lean upon,
This, Pall of peace* these, Crosses undergone:
How easily good men (known well by this)
Lodge at the Inn of their eternal Bliss:
These Fruits, are works, from Bounty springing found,
Perfuming Heaven, and with Heavens bounties crowned:
These shadowed fruits, but by a figure, show
The Joys of Paradise prepared for you.
Sail thither with good speed then, yet make stay;
Good Angels guide you, you are in the Abbots way.
EMBLEM 5.
MORIR PIV TOSTO CHE MANCAR DI FEED.



THese Hands connext, engird Religion,
Deciphring the holy Concords unison,
Of faiths full harmony: this spiny pale
Sharp conflicts are, who still the Truth assail:
This Heart the Church is, the holy Ghost being Center,
Afflictions may surround, but cannot enter.
You are the prime link of this manual chain,
Whereby Religion does its strengthmaintaine:
O! may the Reverend Rest to you stick fast,
That Truth (though long) yet conquer may at last.
TO THE LORD CHANCELLOR.


THe North and Southern Poles, the two fixed Stars
Of worth and dignity, which all just wars,
Should still maintain, together: be here met
And in your self as in your Scutchion set:
The half Moon 'twixt, threatens as yet no change,
Or if she do, she promises to range,
Till she again recover what she lost:
Your endless fame, (so) gains your Bounties cost.
EMBLEM 6.
SVB VMBRA ALARVM TVARVM



Never should any think himself so sure
Of friends assistance, that he dares procure
New enemies: for vnprouok'd they will
Spring out of forged, or causeless malice still.
Else, why should this poor creature be pursued,
Too simple to offend, a beast so rude.
Therefore provide (for malice danger brings)
House-roome to find under an Eagles wings.
You are this Eagle, whcih ore-shades the sheep
Pursu'de by humane wolves, and safe does keep
The poor man's honest, though might-wronged cause,
From being crushed by oppressions paws.
Fair Port you are, where every Goodness finds
Safe shelter from swollen Greatness, stubborn winds*
Eager to drench it: but that fearelesse rest
Dwells in your harbor, to all good distressed.
I bid not you provide, you are complete,
The good for to protect, or bad defeat.
TO THE LORD TREASVRER.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



YOur sable Crescent might to some (whose lips
Speak ignorance) portend a black Eclipse:
I rather thus discern, how Time would shroud
Your radiant Crescent in a sable Cloud:
And hold those envious, ignorant, or dull,
That cannot see, your Crescent growing full.
EMBLEM 7.
QVI CVRAT VIGILANS DORMIT.



THe careful Statesman, who the Key does carry
Of a a Kings Treasury, must not (partial) vary:
But to just causes compass still be ti'de:
For Justice (unjust shutting) opens wide,
And lets in hard Opinion, to disgrace
His Sovereigns self, his Person, and his place.
Nor must he careless slumber: but thus keep
His lids vnshut-vp by soft-fingred Sleep:
And hold a Counsel with the saddest hours
Of silent Night: and spend his purest powers
In care, to render to whom dues belong,
That Subjects may have right, and Kings no wrong.
But you (Great Lord) bear up this weight of Trust.
With a most easy Care, because most just.
TO THE LORD PRIVY SEAL.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



THose dressings that adorn both parts of Nature,
First, is expressed in this Maiesticke Creature:
Next, in these Flowers of Light both which present
Your Honors at full height of complement,
And Clearness, which runs through your noble Blood,
Mixed with this twofold tincture, Great and Good:
What Is here but shadowed then, by outward kind,
Bedeckes the ^nner Rooms of your brave mind.
EMBLEM 12.
ET DEO ET PATRIAE



When ere thou draw'st out thy revenging rod,
Let be for Country, and the cause of God:
Else thy Oblations will thy curses be,
When thou encountrest with thine enemy.
Nor is it sacrifice that can appease
Gods wrath, unless the man's obedience please
More then his offering: for if his dull heart
Thinks he inricheth God in any part,
By offering Hecatombs, he loses all:
Nay further yet, he gives a sword with all
To Heavens high Justice, by inuoking down
Revenge, in lieu of Guerdon, or a Crown.
Such as were sacrifices once, such be
Our prayers still, and our true Sanctity:
Which is your In-mate, and familiar guest,
More clearly seen in You, then here expressed.
TO THE LORD ADMIRAL.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



YOur sable mullet like a Star in black,
Shows what our honored Admiral does lack:
And shows as if that Star of Effingham,
Were thus bemourn'd in a brief Epigram:
This may your Pole-starre be, most noble Lord,
And guide you unto that (so much abhorred)
The mournful, yet the blessed, Port of death,
Blown by the prayers of all good men's breath.
EMBLEM 9.
QVEL CHE DRITTO DA IL CIEL TORCER NON PVOSSI



SVppose a Globe were fast'ned in the sky,
With cords depending on it quarterly,
And men should strive by violence to wrest
That cordage to what crooked form they list,
All wise men would conceive them madly bent,
Why should they else impossibles attempt?
And we may think it as absurd a drift
In him, who craftily shall hope to shift
When Fate forbids him, or shall hope to thwart
The good intentions of an honest heart.
For that which heaven directs (all ages see)
May injured, but not diuerted be.
Seek then no further, honest meanings can
Make a plain mind best policy in man.
TO THE DVKE OF LENOX.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



What need I further strive to amplify
Your high-borne worths, and noble dignity:
Then by these beauteous flowers, which declare:
Your mind's fair purity, unstained, and bare:
These golden Buckles bordring them about,
A Palizado, to keep Foulness out.
EMBLEM 10.
NON MANCA AL FIN SE BEN TARDA. A VENIRE.



THe Wolf and Lion once together met,
And by agreement they their purpose set
To hunt together: when they had obtainde
Their booty long pursude, the Wolf refrainde
No more then formerly, from greediness:
The Lion apprehending, that much less
Might satisfy a beast no bigger grown,
Thought all the purchase rather was his own:
And thought suppression of a beast so base
Was Justice, to preserve the common race
Of harmless beasts; then speedily he tears
The Wolf, to take away their usual fears.
Even thus when our great Monarch clearly saw,
How that insatiate Wolf of Rome did draw
More riches to his coffers, then dear souls
To Heaven, he like this Lion then controules
His usurpation, deeming him a slave,
Who more intended to devour, then save.
But you know best to follow, in free course,
The Best in best things, and pass by the worse.
TO THE MARQVESSE OF BVCKINOHAM.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



ALL that we see is comely, and delights*
The eyes; which still are pleased with precious sights:
And (as your golden Scallops) You appear
To promise (that which we may value dear)
More then a glorious outside, which contains.
Meat, not to be disclosed without due pains:
Thus is it scarce to be imagined how
Desert should parallel your worth, or You.
EMBLEM 11.
INVIDIA SVVM TORQVET AVTHOREM.



THis glorious Star attending on the Sun,
Having, from this low world, just wonder won
For brightness; Envy, that foul Stygian brand,
TO extinguish it thrusts forth her greedy hand:
To catch it from its mounted moving place,
And hurl it lower to obscured Disgrace:
But while she snatches, to put out the flame,
Foolishly fires her fingers with the same.
Who others glories striuet' eclipse (poor Elues)
Do but draw down selfe-mischiefe on themselves.
You waiting on the Sun of Majesty
May that elamping Heliotropium be:
Still bright in your Eclipticke circle run,
Y' are out of Envies reach, so near the Sun.
Move fairly, freely in your wonted Orb,
Above the danger of Detractions curb,
And her selfe-bursting Brood: sit there, contemn,
Nay laugh, and scorn both their despite, and them.
TO THE LORD CHAMBERLINE.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



NOt because you are given to rage or spoil,
Like rampant Lyonse, which deserve a Toil:
Nor yet because your gifts divided be,
Do Lions thus divide themselves in three:
But (when provoked) to show you can resist,
Or show your courage when Your Honor list:
Or thus in number they do look one way,
To show, what You command, your friends obey.
EMBLEM 12.
CANDIDA, SAL DA, ET IMMOBILE



Fixed here snow-vested Piety remains
Al-pure, and in all pure, purged from the stains
Of all false worship, chaste as air, untainted
With the foul blemishes of that al-painted
Proud Curtizan: nor wander does her mind,
She best content in Constancy does find:
To Alethea's pillar close she clings,
Maugre the rapting strains Romes Siren sings:
Who is athirst, and does but touch her Cup,
Drinks, with delight, his souls salvation up.
Thus comprehends she joys, which most would buy
At the highest rate, in this one Constancy,
So above others may your Honors shine,
As past all others, does this Form Divine,
With her ingenuous Beams blaze bright in you,
Who Is doubly gilt, with Her, and Learning too.
TO THE EARL OF ARVNDELL.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



ON Gules you bear the figure of a Bend
Between cross crosselets fixed: which all intend
Rightly to shadow Noble birth, adorned
With valor, and a Christian cause, not scorned
By any but by Infidels, and they
Mistaking this, their hel-bred hate display.
But to leave shadows, you (substantial) shine
With those good things, which make a man divine.
EMBLEM 13.
PACE FERMEZZA, E FRVTTO ALL' ALME APPORTO.



KNow (honored Sir) that th'heate of Princes love,
Throw'n on those real Worths, good men approve,
Does, like the radiant Phoebus shining here,
Make fruitful virtue at full height appear:
T'illustrate this in you, were to confess
How much your Goodness does your Greatness bless,
By its own warm reflexe: Thus both survive,
And both in the Sun of Royal favor thrive.
O may's reuerberating rays still nourish.
Your noble Worths, and make your Virtues flourish.
TO THE EARL OF SOVTH-HAMPTON.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



NO storm of troubles, or cold frosts of Friends,
Which on free Greatness, too too often, attends,
Can (by presumption) threaten your free state:
For these presaging sea-birds do amate
Presumptuous Greatness: moving the best minds,
By their approach, to fear the future winds
Of all calamity, no less then they
Portend to seamen a tempestuous day:
Which you foreseeing may before hand cross,
As they do them, and so prevent the loss.
EMBLEM 13.
IN VTRAQVE PERFECTVS



What coward Stoicke, or blunt captain will
Dis-like this Union, or not labor still
To reconcile the Arts and victory?
Since in themselves Arts have this quality,
To vanquish errors train: what other than
Should love the Arts, if not a valiant man?
Or, how can he resolve to execute,
That has not first learned to be resolute?
If any shall oppose this, or dispute,
Your great example shall their spite confute.
TO THE EARL OF HERTFORD:


THese Lions gardant wisely seem to take
The name of gardant, for the flowers sake:
As if they kept the flower-de-luces thus
From them, who any way obnoxious,
Might gather them: it is a noble part,
To keep the glories purchased by desert.
EMBLEM 12.
VNVM COR VNVS DEVS VNA RELIGIO



THis Triple Close, if dis-united, none:
But knit by faith, an individual One.
Standing vnmoou'd, like an heroicke rock,
Affronts the batt'ries of fierce Enuies shocke.
God, Heart, Religion, these, One, made of three,
Joined in vnseuer'd threefold Unity,
Royal paire-royall (see) three are the same,
He that has this paire-royall wins the game.
View, how this heart, and how these hands agree,
Whose heart, and hands are one, thrice happy he.
And though two hands, yet but one are these two,
Both do the same, and both the same undo.
Concord makes in a million, but one heart,
Whereat stern Hate may level her fierce dart,
And deeply wound too, yet cannot that wound
Disanimate, or her free thoughts confound:
But with a double Valor she vp-beares
Such hearts, above the stroke of baser fears.
Thus you within have raised up such a fort,
As keeps out Ills, and does your good support.
TO THE EARL OF ESSEX.


THe chiefest of this Scuchion comprehends
Three Torteaux, which unto all commends
A firm and plenteous liberality,
Proper to you, and to your family:
And this one virtue, in you (clear as day)
All other virtues elements display.
EMBLEM 16.
QVIS CONTRA NOS



NO wild, or desperate fool can hence collect
Proof to applaud his vice, or to protect:
Nor can this Figure civil war portend,
Whither oppose, or whither it defend:
But ancient Valor, that which has advanced
Our Predecessors, (while fine Courtiers danced)
That Is here inferred, to re-informe the mind
By view of instances, wherein we find
Recorded of your Auncestrie, whose fame
Like forked thunder, threatened cowards shame;
Who fearing, lest on their debosh'd base merit,
Heaven should drop Bolts, by a flame-winged spirit.
TO THE EARL OF DORSET.


It Is true, your various Bend thus quarterly
Described, points out the great antiquity,
Of Honor, and of Virtue truly claimed
By You, who have preserved them free, vnmaim'd.
Let none that is generous think his time ill spent,
To imitate your Worths so eminent.
EMBLEM 17.
D'ODORE IL MONDO E D'ACVTEZZA IL GIELO.



THe world whose happiness, and chief delight,
Nay more, whose *Wisdom lies in Appitite,
Rather then Knowledge; claims the largest share
Of that which pleases most: nor does it care
To comprehend a higher mystery:
And therefore well does nature dignifie
The ascending point, with heavens near neighbor hood
Leaving to earth what is great, to heaven what is good.
Which you perceiuiug, wisely do bestow,
Your thoughts on Heaven, your wealth on things below.
TO THE EARL OF MOVNTGOMERY.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



THe Crescent to a second House belongs,
The golden Crescent (worth a Poets songs)
Well appertains unto thy House and thee,
Thou Arch-supporter of Mountgomery.
For not the vaprous breath of bad report,
Can cloud the splendor thou deseru'st in Court:
But as in gold no rust can find a place,
So has thy Crescent no enforced disgrace.
EMBLEM 18.
MVSICA DII PLACANTVR MVSICA MANES.



AS busy Bees unto their Hiue do swarm,
So does th'attractiue power of Music charm
All Ears with silent rapture: nay, it can
Wild Reason re-contract, diuorc'd from man.
Birds in their warblings imitate the Spheres:
This sings the Treble, that the Tenor bears:
Beasts have with listening to a Shepherds lay,
Forgot to feed, and so have pined away:
Brooks that creep through each flowr-befretted field,
In their harmonious murmurs, music yield:
Yea, senseless stones at the old Poets song,
Themselves in heaps did so together throng,
That to high beauteous structures they did swell
Without the help of hand, or use of skill:
This Harmony in t'humane Fabric steals:
And is the sinews of all Commonweals.
In you this Concord's so divinely placed:
That it by you, not you by it is graced.
TO THE LORD VISCOUNT LIS^E.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



LEt there be no addition, this alone
Will make an Emblem, and a perfect one.
Conceive it thus then: A Darts forked head
Apt to endanger, though not striking dead.
Such is, or should be every noble mind,
Prepared like this in most resolved kind
To wound, or kill offensive injury,
And though vnurg'd, yet threatens dangers nie.
EMBLEM 19.
ORDINE TEMPO NVMERO EMISVRA



HEre Sience does in contemplation sit,
Distinguishing by forms, the soul of wit:
Knowing, perfection has no proper grace,
If wanting Order, Number, Time, or Place:
The Theoricke and Practicke part must be
As heat and fire: the Sun, and Claritie:
Such twins they are, and such Correlatiues,
As the'one without the other seldom thriues.
How can a man the feats of Arms well do,
If not a Scholar, and a Soldier too?
If either then be missing in's due place,
Defect steps in, and steals from all their grace:
On good acts you employ the practicke part,
The Theory lies lodged within your heart.
TO THE LORD VISCOUNT WALLINGFORD.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



Well may you never find the want, or loss
Of that most hallowed, and instructing Cross,
On which our Savior di'de: for these will show
The many blessed thoughts of that, in few:
Here you may over-looke the world, and see
Nothing so plentiful, as crosses be:
Thence you may take occasion to prepare
Your soul, to bear those that worse crosses are.
These are the badges of Your noble breast,
That will conduct You to heave'ns quiet rest.
EMBLEM 20.
SOTT HVMANO SEMBIANTE EMPIO VENENO



THus plays the Courtly Sycophant, and thus
Selfe-pleasing Sin, which poisons all of us:
Thus played the whore whom the wise King describes:
Thus he who rayles at, and yet pockets bribes:
Thus plays the Politician, who will smile,
Yet like this Serpent sting your heart the while.
Bung up thine ears then, or suspect the harm,
When sweet Cyllenian words begin to charm.
But you, can these unmask by knowing best
How to keep such from lurking near your breast.
TO THE BISHOP OF LONDON.


TWo swords there be, which all Divines should take,
E're they this victory can perfect make:
Prevailing Language is a powerful one,
Zeal for the truth, the other: these have done
More noble acts, then war could ever boast:
Both are in your Field found, though elsewhere lost.
EMBLEM. 21.


ME thinks (Right Reverend) here you silence
Viewing this Emblem, and it thus bespeake: (break.
Ride on Triumphing, make a glorious show,
Catch those, who only but thy Outside know:
Hold forth thy witching Cup, advance thy Crown,
And' Mounted think thy self past pulling down:
Yet after all, thou can be proved no more,
Then a deluding, and deluded whore.
TO THE BISHOP OF WINCHESTER.


THe Sword and Keys to Churchmen been bequeathed,
Since Paul and Peter were of life bereaved:
The Keys, a type of Prayers, which unlocke
Heavens glorious gates, to let in those that knock.
The Spirits zealous, and soule-sauing Word,
Is shadowed by the sinne-subduing Sword:
Of Word and Sword th'incorporate quality
Has power to heave base earth above the sky.
Your powerful, and victorious elegance,
Which ouercomes bold vice and arrogance,
Does prove, no weapons to the Church belong,
But such as Heaven makes to encounter wrong:
Nor does your Gentry differ: Lozenges
Are curing Cordials: Gentrous thoughts like these.
EMBLEM 22.
SERO IVPITER DIPHTHERAM INSPEXIT



BEhold, on what the Roman Faith consists:
So tossed by Errors winds; so lapt in Mists;
That their Arch-pilot scarce can rule the stern*
He lackes foundation, therefore still to learn
How to make's Ship his Harbor. O I wonder
Th'ore burdened Vessel crackes not quite asunder,
And sinkes not down, oppressed by its own weight,
With sinful souls so stuffed, and over-freight.
The high Auenger (though he seems to fail)
With winged wrath will split their proudest sail.
Heavens yron-hand (most slowly heau'd aloft)
Falls quick, dead-sure, and home, although not often.
All wish, for their sakes of Romes simpler sort,
That you might steer their vessel to the Port:
TO THE BISHOP OF ELY.


HOw much more better may you challenge these,
Then all your Predecessors, who in ease,
And sloth (you being considered) did neglect
That which deserves a Crown, or good respect:
These then the Heralds may think rather due,
Not to your place of state, but unto you.
EMBLEM 23.
VNVM ET ALTERVM DIVINVM



REligion still its own, cannot be lost,
Nor from it self diuorc'd, though to the most,
Who judge by guess and slight formality,
There might appear schism in Divinity:
When not Divinity, which cannot change,
But humane reason to schisms vild does range:
For so the fruits of diverse plants may seem
Diverse in quality: and men may deem
Nature has erred in such a serious course,
When both considered be the same in force.
You, that best judge of Schisms, can clearly see,
Error termed Truth, and Truth termed Heresy.
TO THE LORD ZOVCU:


SEe, how a worthy spirit not imployde
May seem to lookers on, or vain, or void:
These golden pieces thus vnshap't, vncoin'd,
Seem as if worth and they were quite disioyn'd:
When brass or copper being stamp't or framed
Into the shape of plate, is often misnam'd,
And often mistaken for the purest gold:
But you are ever active, and unfold
Your precious substance, that your self may take,
Honors true stamp; what is counterfeite forsake.
EMBLEM 24.
CHIARO QVIETO PROFONDO E. DIVINO.



Here Phoebus and the Sacred Sisters sit,
Chiefly attending Harmony, and Wit:
Who stay to hear the dying Swans to sing
Sad Epods; riding on the Thespian Spring.
Here the Wingd-Horses hoof digs up that Well
Whence gurgle streams of Art, and sacred Skill.
Divines (like Pegasus) divinely move
In Man, springs of profound, and precious love
To heavenly Wisdom; who t'ech passing by,
Points out the pathway to Eternity.
And whilst You do your noble thoughts confine
To what Divines preach, You become Divine.
TO THE LORD WINDSOR.


ME thinks, I see in this, the true estate
Of man still subject to a lucklesse fate:
As if the greatest Cross did represent
The general curse, which even all over went.
From Adam to his wretched progeny:
The lesser Crosses which accompany
The greater, be each several hapless chance:
And all together show, that ignorance
Is irrecoverably blind, where none
Prevents what happens thus to every one.
But You do well support the waightiest crosses
With Patience, and esteem them but light losses.
EMBLEM 25.
PACE A GLIELETTI E GVERRA A GLIEMPI E REI.



Ye, whose blind folly does not so maintain
A former choice, but ye may choose again:
And ye, whose innocence (not knowing yet
The worse from better) carelessly does let
Both rest vnchosen: now begin to make
Your new, or first choice, and here wisely tak e
The pattern: if you would incline to Peace,
Love books with Virtue stored, so will decrease
Your troubles: those will bring such powerful fame,
As shall the sternest Lion soonest tame.
Experience leads thee to this certain choice,
Choose then at first, to grieve, or to rejoice.
You have already chosen true Content:
Nor needs your Honor ever to repent.
TO THE LORD WENTVVORTH.


LEopards have ever ranked bin among
Those nobler beasts, which are both swift and strong.
Swiftnes alludes to a dexterity,
Or quick dispatch without temeritie.
Their Strength alludes to Judgment which indures,
When flashing Wit no long delight assures.
Make these your own, and then you bear displayed,
Your Scutchions morrall, in your self portrayed.
EMBLEM 26.
IOVIS APOLLINIS ET MINERVAE



Jove, Phoebus, and Minerua were assigned,
To be the three chief ornaments of mind.
Jove figured Providence, Minerua, Wit,
Phoebus, Content: and all that purchased it
Well are they seated in a holy place,
To show the Continent of all, is grace:
It seems that you have well considered thus:
The fairest of titles is, Religious.
TO THE LORD DARCIE.


THese health-preseruing leaves thus inly fixed
Amongst the Crosselets; show, heavens favors mixed
With all calamities that seize on man,
If patiently he entertain them can.
To find cure then for Crosses, look above:
See, ill made well by heavens all-curing love.
EMBLEM 27.
ET TENEBRAE FACTAE SVNT



Sleep, being the type of death: darkness must be
The shade of that, which we euanisht see:
Men so departed, that it may be said,
A Bird, as well, as such a man, is dead:
Chase, while thou live, the clouds of death away:
Or dying, never look to see more day.
You have on earth, so studied heavens delight,
That you can never be obscured: though night
Should threaten to obscure noonday, yet will
Your Noble mind vanquish deaths darkest ill.
TO THE LORD WOTTON.


Settled afflictions may be well expressed
Under this form of Crosses, which men blessed
Have still endured to prove their patience:
But I would rather in another sense
Have this appli'de to such a man, whose vows
Have fixed him to the faith Christ's Church allows:
And such a man (scorning ungrounded wrongs)
Are you, to whom this fixed Cross belongs.
EMBLEM 28.
TEMPVS CORONAT INDVSTRIAM.



TH'ascending Path that up to wisdom leads
Is rough, uneven, steep: and he that treades
Therein, must many a tedious Danger meet,
That, or trips up, or clogs his wearied feet:
Yet led by Labor, and a quick Desire
Of fairest Ends scrambles, and clambers higher
Then Common reach: still catching to hold fast
On strong'st Occasion, till he come at last
Up to Her gate, where Learning keeps the key,
And lets him in, Her best Things to suruay:
There he unkind (though to himself best known)
Takes rest, till Time presents him with a Crown:
In quest of this rich Prize, your toyle's thus graced:
Ever to be in Times best Border placed.
TO THE LORD STANHOPE.


THis enterchang'd variety of Furre,
And naked quarters, fitly do concur.
To show the seasonable contenting store
That rich wise men enjoy, alike with poor:
Both are provided (lest they might take harm)
To keep their innocence, both safe and warm.
EMBLEM 29.
BIS INTERIMITVR QVI SVIS ARMIS PERIT



IMagine here, Christ strongly fortified,
Against the Popes bold herefie and pride:
And think, whilst his Accomplices combine
The Castle of Christ's truth, to undermine;
A flame breaks forth, which does consume them all:
So seeking his, they meet with their own fall.
And thus whilst heretics (like wretched elues)
Out-stare the Truth, they do condemn themselves,
Subjected to the twofold victory
Of Truth, and of their own impiety.
Take refuge then, in Heavens eternal rest,
And see Christ's foes against themselves addressed.
TO THE LORD CAREVV.


THe noblest parts of Wisdom, as clear wit,
High Courage, and such virtues kin to it:
Should ever be proceeding, and go on
Forward, as seem these Lions; urged of none.
So (like to these) You keep a passant pace,
Till Wisdom seat You in your wished place.
EMBLEM. 30.
VIRTUES VNITA FORTIOR



FOrces united geminate their force,
And so does virtue: never should remorse
Nor obstacle restrain that man, who may
Strengthen his virtues by a noble way:
Who cannot perfect be, needs not repent
To add his own to another President.
And he that is entire may therewithal,
By others help prove more effectual.
So help me Learning, as I do not know,
Where I this Emblem fitter may bestow.
TO THE LORD HAY.


BEauties chief elements of White and Red
Is all that in your Coat is figured:
Nor is it needful, any thing should be
Added to this most copious mystery:
Gules upon Argent to conceit are plain,
And pourtray out a life without all stain.
EMBLEM 31.
MERITVM SIBI MVNVS



SEe Bounty seated in her best of pride,
Whose fountains never ebb, ever full tide
At every change: see, from her streaming heart,
How rivulets of Comfort do impart
To Worth dryde up by Want; and to assuage
The drought of Virtue in her pilgrimage.
Look, how her wide-stretcht, fruit-befurnisht hand
Unlocked to true Desert, does open stand:
But if she should not be Deserts regarder,
Yet is it, in itself, its own rewarder.
This Emblem's not presented (Noble Sir)
Your bounteous nature to awake, or stir:
For you are Bounties Almner, and does know,
How to refrain, destribute, or bestow.
TO THE THREE LORDS CHIEF IVSTICES.


BY these life-lengthning Lozenges, are show'n
Cares to cure Ills, by times corruption grow'n*
To comfort Virtues heart, at point to die
Of a Consumption, and does bedridden lie:
This Star, that Justice is, which is not blind,
(As the ancient Hieroglyphickes her defined)
But searches out with quick discerning eye
Th'hard difference twixt Faith and Fallacy.
These Birds, as yet vnlearnt to light on earth,
Figure that Justice, which from Heaven has Birth,
And scorns to look so low, as base respect
Of its own private ends, and Truth neglect.
Care, Truth, and Justice thus unite, we see
Make in their Goodness mixed, a Sympathy,
On whose joint pinions the Realms Peace vp-towres
T'her Chair of State, subsisteted by your powers.
EMBLEM 32.
SIC VBIQVE



SHe that illuminates the midnight, may
Be well admitted to take rest all day:
Yet have our antique Poets rather made
Night-wandring Luna to have a daily Trade;
Reporting, that by day she takes delight
To hunt wild creatures, and then shines at night:
Teaching (or I mistake) how Magistrates
Should quell Disorders in all civil States.
In darkness they should watchful insight keep,
To hunt out Vice, when men are thought asleep:
For Mischief (as in darkness) skulkes disguised,
And therefore needs some watchfully advised,
Who having sented out this secret game,
May then pursue them to a public shame.
But your deep wisdoms, better know, then this,
What in our Commonweal most needful is.

