A very brief and profitable Treatise declaring how many counsels, and
what manner of Counselers a Prince that will govern well ought to have.

The Book speaks.

All you that Honors would atcheeue,
And Counslers eke desire to be,
Of self love flee the false believe,
And learn my lore that you may see
What worthynesse in you does reygne,
Such worthy state thereby tatteyne.
IMPRINTED at London by William Seres.

Firmo Appoggio.


1570

To the right Noble Earl of Leycester, one of her highness most Honorable,
wise, and grave Counselers.
FOR LACK OF BETter ability, I am bold after my old wont, to present your
Honor with Ink and Paper, more to do my bound duty in showing my self
thankful toward you, for your great benifites bestowed on me: than for any
profit or pleasure, that I know your Honor can reap any way of my rude
writing. And yet amongst all the tryfles that ever I wrote, there was none in
mine opinion that ought to please you better than this little Treatise,
representing unto you as it were in a glass, many of those good virtues and
qualities that do reign in you, and ought to reign in cuery other good
counseler. Which Treatise was first written in the Spanishe tongue by a
Spanyard called FEDERIGO FVRIO, and afterward translated into the Italian
tongue by another Spanyard called ALFONSO D'VLLOA, but not with so good grace
as I believe it had in the Spanishe, which in deed I never saw, and therefore
though my very friend May ster John Baptist Castiglion one of the Gromes of her
Highness privy chamber, upon good zeal he had to profit many, delivered me
the said book at my last being at the Court, earnestly requesting me to put
the same into our vulgar tongue, yet I would not altogether translate it, but
thought it best to make a brief collection of the substance thereof, cutting
of all superfluous talk, and yet leaving nothing out (I trust) that was
necessary to be spoken. But how soever it be I most humbly beseech your Honor
to take it well in worth, and in pervsing the same to conceive of my labor
bestowed therein, with that favorable judgment, which you have always used
toward me, in all my other doings, and therewith to continue still my good
Lord, even as I think my self bound to continue your faithful servant. Thus
leaving to trouble your Honor any further: I pray God to grant you health and
long life, with much prosperity. From Newton Flotman the first of April. 1570.

Most bound to your Honor

Thomas Blundeuill.

With what order and method the Institution of a Prince ought to be written.
WHO so will write the Institution 1
of a Prince, ought to divide his work into five parts. The first whereof
would contain three Books, and the first Book must show what a Prince is,
how he was first ordained, and to what end, what power he has, who
gave it him, and who may take it from him. The second book must declare
what Arts and Sciences are required in a Prince that will govern well. The
third book must show what moral virtues a Prince should have, and how to
use them.

The second part must treat 2
of the Princes education, of his Schoolemaysters, governors, servants,
friends and lovers, of his house and householde: and therefore as the
Physicians do divide man's life into seven ages or times, so this part would
be likewise divided into seven books, the first treating of the Princes
infancy, the second of his childehood, and all the reast of his other ages or
times.

The third part vvoulde contain 3
three Books, the one whereof must shevve the duty of the subject in every
point toward the Prince, and the other, the duty of the Prince toward the
subject: whereby it shall plainly appear, who is a Traitor, and who is a
faithful subject, and also who is a just Prince, and who is a tyrant.

The fourth part would show how a Prince ought to rule 4
and reign, so as he may escape and overcome all diffycultes that may chance
any manner of way, which are not easily known, by cause they are diverse,
according to the diversity of the kingdom, or principality: which is gotten
and possessed by one of these four ways: That is, either by inheritance, by
election, by forcyble conquest, or else by pollicye: it is requisite therefore
that this part be divided into four Books, every one treating of each of the
said kinds of possession.

Finallye, because the Prince 5
can not hear all, see all, know all, and provide for all, alone of
himself: the fifth part therefore ought to treat of the council, and
counselers of a Prince teaching him how to make his counsel, and what manner
of counselers to choose, of which part mine Aucthor about nine years past
took upon him to write, dividing the said part into eight books: but as
yet he never set forth more (that I know) than the first Book, the effect
whereof hereafter folovvith.

What a counsel is, and how many counsels a Prince ought to have.
A Counsel is an assembly of wise and discreet persons chosen by the Prince
to counsel him in all his affairs, both of peace and war, in such sort as
he by their help may govern his Realm vviselye, and foresee all dangers
that may bety de, so as in all his doings and enterprises, he may have good
success, or at the least, as little evil success, and as seldom as may
be. And though that the Counsel and the Prince makes in deed but one
entyere thing, in that it has but one head which is the Prince, yet it is
necessary that the said counsel be divided into many parts, which though
they have diverse offices, yet they shall make but one body, no more than the
several parts of man's body, serving to diverse purposes. Wherefore it is
meet, first to shevve how many several counsels a Prince that vvil
govern well ought to have. And than to every one of those counsels, how
many counselers, how many Presydents, how many Secretaries, and how many
Clerks be needful, and also what qualities be required in those men, that
they may be able and sufficient to serve the turn. Also what prerogatives,
preheminences, and authorities they ought to have: Again, how they ought to
be assembled, where, in what time, and what hour, then which matters
ought to be first propounded, to whom the Bylls of remembrance for dispatch
and al other vvritings ought to be delivered, who ought to solicet the
matters, and how they should be entered into the books, and many such like
things. Furthermore to shevve how one counsel ought to answer another
orderly, to the intent there be no confusion nor mingle mangle of matters. And
lastly, to show them when they have all determined upon some matter, how
and in what sort they shall make relacion thereof unto the Prince before they
make any final resolution or conclusion. Follovving then this order, mine
author says, that if the Prince mind to govern his state well, and to
dispatche many matters speedilye, he ought to have seven counsels every one
differing from other in affairs, offices, and in authority.

And first he begins with the counsel of reuenevves, The Eschequer.
not for that it is first by vvorthynesse, but (as I take it) for that it is
first by order of nature, taking here perhaps the Princes reuenevves to be the
matter, without the which nothing can be done, to which counsel belongs
these points here follovving.

To gather up his reuenevves.

To see that they be not waste.

To increase them by all convenient means.

To consider from whence, how and in what time extraordinary These things
belong to our high Court of Parliament.
reuenevves may be best leuyed, to appoint taskes, and subsedies, tolles, and
customs, and to reform them when they be either to much or to little,
without dammaging the weal public, to abridge superfluous, and to increase
necessary expenses.

The second is the counsel The privy counsel which for worthiness would
be first placed.
of the state, whose office and duty consists in these points here
follovving. First, to see whether such officers and governors as serve under
the Prince as well in peacible as in warlike affairs, do their duty or
not. To know how long their time of service endures, vvhyther they ought
to be changed or not, and who ought to be chosen to serve in their rooms.
Moreover, to see that all charges both ordinary and extraordinary, as well
for matters of peace, as also of war, be paid in due time by virtue of
their vvarrant directed to the counsel of the reuenevves, which have
authority to receive, but not to disburse one penny without special vvarrant
from this counsel, which only has power to distribute the Princes money.
Also to consider with whom either peace, war, league, or truce, is to be
made. Again, with whom the Prince ought to join in true, or feigned
friendship, and how far, how much, in what sort, and at what time,
vvhither secretelye or openly he ought to aid his friends. And therefore this
counsel having so great matters in charge, deserves well to be the head
and chief of all the other counsels.

The third counsel is for The counsel of war, whereof England has most
need.
matters of war, and therefore mine author calls it the counsel of
war, whose office is to see that the Princes Towns, Ports, and
Frontiers, be well fortifyed, and to understand the whole Art and
Discipline of war, to the intent the Prince and his realm may not only
be defended from all forreyne power, but also get the victory of his enemies,
with whom he shall hap to join in battle. And therefore this counsel
besides being skillful in Fortification, in taking of musters, in trayning of
Soldiers, and in setting of battayles ought also to have in prompe memory all the former vvarres of the Prince and of his predicessors, and to know how
and upon what occasion those vvarres were first begone, follovved, ended,
and what success they had, and how those vvarres differed one from another
by reason of time, and what conditions of peace have been offered or received,
and upon what causes. Also to consider as well the force of the enemy and of
his allies and confederates, as of the Prince and his confederates, and to
compare them together, that they may know vvhyther they be equal in power,
or that the one excels the other, and vvherin, as in men, armor, discipline,
vittails, same, credit, money, friends, allies and such like, vvythout due
consideration of which things, he that begins any war, ends the same
for the most part to his great loss, shame, and reproach, and therefore how
necessary this counsel is to a Prince, it is easy enough to see.

The fourth counsel is for Purueyours
provision of vittailes, and therefore it may be well called of us the counsel
of vittelers, or purueyours, whose charge is to furnishe the whole state
with vittailes both in time of peace, and war. And therefore this counsel
had need to knovvc every part of the Country, and what it is able to yield
and to keep books of remembrances that may shevve them at all times what
store of vittaylc there is, and what is lacking, what comes in, or goes
out by sea or by land, also from whence they are brought and vvhyther they are
carried, by what way, by whom, in what sort, how much, and at what time,
and such like matters appertayning to their office. And to this counsel the
Prince shall do well to refer al matters touching lycences of carrying out
corn, or other vittayle, granting license to no person to carrye out of the
realm any vittayle, without the consent and advise of this counsel, vvherby
the state shall not only have sufficient alvvayes for themselves, but also
many times such abundance as they may help their friends and loving
neighbors, in their need, whereas contrariwise for lack of this counsel
having this authority, the realm many times suffers great famine by means
that a fevv covetous persons preferring their own private lucre before the
profit of the whole common wealth, by money and friendship do procure
licenses of the Prince, to carry out into foreign places that vittayle, whereby
the common wealth at home should be sustained. Yea, and many times for vile
lucre sake and hope of greater gain, do rather relieve the enemies, than the
friends of the state, which through unkindness by them conceived causes
offense, yea and sometime breach of friendship. Moreover for lack of this
counsel, vvarres are made many times in Countries, vvheras no meat is to be
had for man, or beast, so as the army is no sooner in the field, but it
suffers extreme hunger, and is thereby forced to return immediately home
again with shame enough, or to make peace, or truce, either out of time, or
else with such conditions, as are not meet, nor honorable, whereby the
Prince loses his estimation amongst strangers, and gets the hatred of his
own people. For two things makes the people to love the Prince, that is, to
be defended from the oppression of the mighty, and to be in league with
those Nations, without whom they can not well traffic.

The fifte counsel is touching matters of law, whose The common place.
charge is to appoint as many and as fevve officers as shall seem requisite
to minister justice These points also do belong to our high Court of
Parliament.
in civil causes throughout the whole state, and this counsel must have
authority to make laws, to repeal laws, to reform laws, and to
interpret laws, for lack of which counsel great wrongs are suffered, and
many disorders committed in all common vvealths to the great decay of the
state, and setting up and aduauncing of a fevv Lavveyers and advocates, which
in these days may boldly rob and spoil the poor commons, without any fear
of punishment or correction.

The sixth counsel is touching The kings bench.
cryminall causes, and therefore it may be called the counsel of correction,
this counsel must have authority to judge and give sentence of all crimes
committed any manner of way, and to punish the offenders according to the
laws of the country.

The seventh counsel is touching The Whitehal, or court of rewards.
rewards to be given by the Prince to such as deserve, and therefore it may
be very well called the revvarding counsel, for the office of this counsel
is to know who deserves well, and who does not, and to inform the Prince
thereof, to the intent the Princes benifites be not evil bestovved: and
therefore the Prince shall do well, not to give any tevvarde vvythout the
advice of this counsel. And for lack of such a counsel, we see for the most
part in Princes Courts that the virtuous sort which commonly be no crauers,
are sildome or never considered, and such as least deserve, are alvvayes best
revvarded. The Prince being thus furnished with these diverse counsels shall
be able to dispatch more matters, than when the whole charge lies only
upon two or three persons, by whose long delays the Princes subjects are
now forced to consume themselves in continual waiting, for dispatch of
business, and yet as mine author says, the ambition and covetousness of some
counselers is such, as they can not suffer to have any partiners in their
doings, because they will have all the honor, and all the gain to themselves,
esteeming more their own private lucre, than the profit of the common
wealth, which kind of men are unmeet to be counselers, be they never so
wise. And to the intent that these seven counsels before mentioned, may not
be reduced all to one, in such sort as two or three persons should rule all,
as commonly is seen in most places now a days. It is requisite therefore
that no counseler be suffered to be of diverse counsels at once, but to tend
one alone, meddling with no matters of any other counsel, but only with
those, which appertains to that counsel, whereunto he is called. But
now, to order these seven cou^sells rightly, it were needful to write
seven Books, declaring all the particular parts and circumstaunces that belong
unto every one of the said cou^sells, but for so much as it were a superfluous
thing to repeat in every one of those books, all the qualities that be
requisite in those counselers that are to be admytted into any of the foresay
de counsels, and specially such qualities, not differing very much one from
another. I thought it best therefore to spend this book in making one
discourse of that matter for all, which here follovveth.

What a counseler is, and what qualities he ought to have.
A Counseler is a sufficient person, chosen by the Prince, meet to serve in
some one of the foresaid counsels, and able to discharge his duty therein. In
which definition two things are to be considered, that is, the sufficientcie
of the manne, and the choice of the Prince, of both which things we mind to
speak: but first of the sufficientcy of the manne, which consists in two
points, that is, in the qualities of the mind, and in the qualities of the
body.

The qualities of the mind requisite in any counseler in general, are in
number as mine Author says. XV. that is,

1 To be wise.

2 To be eloquent.

3 To speak diverse languages.

4 To be a good Hystoriographer.

5 To be a good Moral Philosopher.

6 To be politic.

7 To be a traueler.

8 To know the force as well of his Prince, as of his enymies and neighbors.

9 To love his common wealth, and to prefer the profit, and honor thereof
before his own gain and estimation.

10 To have a right judgment in all things without partiality, esteeming
honesty and truth more than friend or kinsman, and to be no maintainer of
any sect or faction; which be perilous members in any common wealth.

11 To be just in correcting the evil without rygour, and in revvarding the
good according to their due deserts.

12 To be liberal.

13 To be benificiall toward his common wealth.

14 To be affable, that is to say, courteous and gentle, in his speech and
behavior toward all sorts of men, both poor and rich.

15 And finally, to have a noble, stovvte, courageous, and constant mind, not
fearing to lose both life and goods for the truth sake. All which qualities
mine author might easily have reduced into these five general kinds: that is,
Prudence, Science, Justice, Fortytude, and Temperaunce, For under Prudence are
comprehended the first, the sixth, seventh, and eight quality, for there is,
PRVDENTIA, MONASTICA, DOMESTICA, and POLITICA. The first vvherof, teaches a
man to govern himself, leading a sole life, the second, to govern a
familye, and the third, to rule a common wealth, which requires such
policy and experience as he talks of. Under Science may be comprehended the
second, the third, the fourth, and fifth quality: and under Justice, the
ninth, tenth, leauenth, twelfth, and thirteenth quality: under Temperaunce,
the fourteenth: and under Fortitude the fifteenth, and many others, which
mine Author as I suppose leaves out of purpose, thinking these sufficient (as
I take it) yea, and perhaps more than are to be found in some counselers in
these days, and therefore though I have a good will to treat of these
things in another order, yet for his sake that delivered me the book, I
will follovv mine Authors order, briefly declaring the uses of the foresaid
fifteen qualityes, and what causes moved him to think them most necessary
for a cou^seler, and finally how the Prince shall know by trial, and not by
relation, vvhither his counseler has such qualities or not: VVherby it seems
that mine Author supposes, the Prince to be endued with all these qualities
himself, for otherwise I see not how he should be able ryghtlye to judge of
them.

Well then the first quality A lively vvytte.
is, as he says, to have a quick and lively vvytte, which is the beginning,
mean, and end of all noble enterprises, without the which all other virtues
do little prevail. For we see by experience that the rude vvytte with great
labor and dilygence, sildome or never, attayneth to that knowledge or
judgment, which the fine vvyt gets in short space, and with little pain.
Neither do rude vvyttes ever attempt any worthy enterprise: wherefore to
have a fine vvyt is a thing most needful to any counseler. Which, vvhyther
he has so or not, the Prince ought to know by trial of the manne, and not
by information or relation of others. And such trial is to be had two manner
of vvayes, by his words, and by his deeds, for the wise man commonly does
not talk of such matters, nor in such sort as the common sort does, neither be
his words or phrases like unto theirs, his talk is grave and wise, he is
ready in aunsvvering, and quick of understanding, and easy to be understood
in declaring any thing. He is pleasant in matters of sport, and in earnest
causes grave and circumspect. And finally, he is able to use talk meet for
all companyes, vvythout breaking the bounds of comeliness, due to his calling.
Now as touching his deeds they are known by his actiuitie, and by his
dilygence used in reading, vvriting, and conferring with wise and learned
men, and in practicing with men of experience, and with men of diverse
nations. For with such the wise man will acquaint himself, to the intent
he may know all things and be ignorant in nothing. But the dull and gross
vvytted man does clean contrary, for he giving himself to sloth, to belly
cheer, to lewd company and to vain pastimes, abhors the company of the
wise and learned sort and utterly neglects all virtuous exercyses.

The second quality, meet for a counseler is to be eloquent Eloquence.
to the intent he may be able to persuade or disvvade, to accuse, or to
defend, to praise, or disprayse, to rejoice or to sorrovv with others, to
entertain Ambassadors with pleasant talk or to do any message, or
Embassage from the Prince, also in time of tumults and commotions, the eloquent
counseler with his authority and good persvvasion, may cause much quietness,
and profit the common wealth diverse vvayes. Now why there the counseler be
eloquent or not, the Prince may know partlye by his words, and partly by
his deeds, for by often talking with him, he shall know his order of speech,
what words and phrases he commonly uses, and he may cause him to tell
some tale or Hystorye, marking him how he begins, deuideth, follovvith,
and ends the same, and with what grace and propriety of words, also how
he delateth or abridgeth the same. Again, the Prince may know him by his
deeds, by considering what Masters he had to teach him, also what diligence
he used, and what time he employed therein, vvhyther he made any work or
not, and to examine the same: or fayning that he has some Embassage of
importance to send somevvhyther, he may cause him to endight the same in his
own presence.

The third quality of the Knowledge of tongues.
mind meet for a counseler is to have diverse tongues and languages, to the
intent that when he is sent in message to any forreyne Prince, he shall not
need the help of any trussheman or Interpreter to tell his tale. Which
Interpreters many times by adding to, or taking fro, do hinder the same, or
else do not tell it with such grace, nor to so good purpose as he himself
vvoulde. Moreover, by having the tongue of the country, where he serves, he
shall the better understand the manners, rightes, and customs, and all the
secrets of the same, and Spies will more gladly confer with him, and
reveal to him alone, that which they would not vvyllingly do in the
presence of a third person. And the Prince of the country will delight the
more in him, who sometime shall have occasion to declare some secret to the
Ambassador or messenger, which he would have no other man to know,
therefore how needful this quality is to a counseler, it is easy enough to
see, which quality, vvhither the counseler has or not, the Prince ought to
know by trial, as by making him to write or speak some thing in those
tongues wherein he should be skillful. The tongues necessary for an English
counseler in mine opion are these. Latten, French, Spannishe, Flemmishe, high
Dutch, and Italian, for with all these nations we have many times to do.

The fourth quality belonging Reading of Hystories.
to a counseler, is to be a good Hystoriographer, that is to say, to have
seen and red as well the Hystories of old times as of late days, and
specially those that appertain to the state wherein he serves. And also the
Hystories of the friends, neighbors, and enemies to the same state, whereby
more knowledge and experience is to be gotten, than by any thing else, for
Hystories be no other thing but a collection of diverse experiences of all
times, and of all sorts of men. Wherefore, a dyligent Hystoriographer, which
reads to further his knowledge, and not to please his ears, can be
ignorauut in nothing that appertains to government, be it in time of war
or peace. For he sees and knovveth all the sleytes and fine policies that has
been used in either of both times. Neither is it possible for any man, live
he never so long, to get by his own experience, the tenth part of that
knowledge which a diligent reader of Hystories shall obtain in fevve years.
For whereas the man of experience in his time perhaps sees a small number of
battayles, skirmishes, besiegings, sedicions, tumults, breaking up of vvarres,
leagues, peaces, and such like matters, the Hystoriographer knovveth an
infinite number of such things, together with the beginning, proceeding, and
ending of the same. Also he knovveth the best way of government, belonging to
a common wealth or kingdom, and how to maintain the same, and to increase
the power thereof, by reason that he has read of so many common wealths
and kingdoms, and known by what means they have increased or decayed,
therefore nothing is more necessary for a counseler, than to be a diligent
reader of Hystories, which vvhither he be so or not, the Prince may know by
trial, as by asking him such questions as these are, how many chaunges has
the crown of England, France or Spain suffered? what families has possessed
it? by what means, how long time, and what was the cause of every
change? and how many of every familye raygned, and which of those had
most or least fame? how many vvarres every one of them made, for what cause,
with whom, and in what time, and how such vvarres were first begone and
ended? also to ask him what notable battayles has been ever since the birth
of Christ, either in England, France, or Spain, who has vvonne, and who
has lost, and to show the cause thereof. Also to ask him what seditions and
tumultes has been in any of those countries, upon what cause such seditions
were made, what hurt or good they did, and how they were appeased, to
which and such like questions, if the counseler can aunsvvere readily, there
is no doubt but he is a good Hystoriographer, and can use his knowledge to
good purpose, when time and occasion shall serve.

The fifte quality is to be a good Moral Philosopher, to Moral Philosophy.
the intent he may perfitely know the end and true use of every virtue,
vvherin it consists, and how far it extends, for lack of which
knowledge, many do account rudeness and ignorance to be plain dealing,
pride to be magnanimity, modestye to be covvardlynesse, and foolish
hardiness to be fortitude, and to be short, do take virtue for vice, and vice
for virtue. In all counsels and deliberatio^s, the first thing that men do
consult of, is vvhither the thing they go about, be honest or not, and if the
counseler knovveth not wherein honesty consists, and how far it
extends, he can neither make wise deliberation, nor good resolution.
Moreover, in appointing offices to meet persons, and in revvarding every man
according to his deserts, the knowledge of the virtues is so necessary, as a
counseler can not be without it. The Prince may know vvhyther his
counseler has such knowledge or not, by demanding him such like questions
as these are. What things be needful to the obtaining of the chief
felicity in this life? what is Prudence? what is Justice? what is
Fortytude? and what parts they have, vvhyther it be better for a Prince to be
covetous or prodigal, and which of those extreemes dravve nighest to the
virtue of liberality? wherein clemency does consist, and vvhither it be
better to be over merciful, or to severe, and how many vvayes a man may
offend against Fortitude? Again, wherein magnificencie does consist, and
what contraries it has. The Prince also may know his councelers skill in
these matters by his doings, studies, and trade of life.

The fixed quality is to be pollitike, that is to say, to be practiced Policy.
in government, both in time of peace and war, for the office of the
Prince, is not only to govern well his people, but also to defend them from
all violence. And therefore the counseler had need to be skillful as well in
martial affairs, as in cyuill government. And first as touching cyuill
government, he must know that every common wealth consists of two parts,
which I may call here for difference sake, the body and the soul. By the
body I mean the habitations or dwelling places, vvherin the air first is to
be considered, as vvhyther it be hot, cold, or temperate, then the scyte
thereof, as vvhyther it be near to some Sea, running stream, or standing
water, also vvhyther such scyte be high, or lovv, dry, or moist, in fruitful
soil or barren ground, nighe to, or far fro the enemy. Also to what
vvindes it is most subject, for according to these considerations, the streets
in Cities or towns ought to be made, vvyde, or strayte, open to one vvinde,
and shut to another, according as they be good or hurtful, the market places
aptly placed, and the houses built in such order, and having such shape, as is
most necessary and convenient to serve al purposes. VVherby it seems by my
Authors words, that the counseler had need to be skillful in Architecture,
which in deed is a noble Science, and necessary to all men, but specially to
counselers and Magistrates. By the soul of the common wealth, is meant the
government of the same, vvherin first is to be considered, of what manner of
form it is, as vvhither it be governed by one only King or Prince, as the
Kingdom of Spain, Portugale, and Castyll: or by noble men only, as Venice
now, or as Sparta in old time past: or by the common people, as now in our
days the Cities of Svvyzerland, called the Cantovvnes: or by the king and his
nobles, as the Kingdom of Denmark, and as Rome when it had kings: or by the
king and his commons, as for a certain time the Empire of Persia was
governed: or by Nobles and commons together, as Rome after they had put down
there kings and chosen Consulls and Trybunes: and the like government was in
Lacedemony and Athens, and in our time in Floraunce and Seane, and diverse other
common vvealths in Italy: or vvhither it be governed by a king, his nobles,
and commons, all three together, as the Empire of Almanie, the kingdom of
Pollonia, of Arragon in Spain, and also of England, and in every one of
these governments, the counseler ought to know how, and by what means the
state may be preserved, augmented, or decayed, what perilles may hap, and
how the same may be remedyed with lest trouble, cost, and expenses. What
laws and Magistrates are most meet and necessary for every government. For
it is impossible for the counseler that is ignorant in these things, to
remedy all such disorders as may chance. Neither can he counsel his Prince
how to behave himself with this friend, or that confederate, with this or
that foe, nor know how much the one may further him, and the other hinder
him. Thus much of cyuill government. Now as touching Marshall affairs or
vvarlyke pollicye, the counseler ought to know such circumstaunces as do
belong to a good Soldier, Captain, or general, as how Souldyours are to be
leauied, mustred, and armed, how they should March, how to be encamped,
how to fight, how to retire, how a Camp should be fortified, and how a
town should be besieged or defended, and finally, all such things as do
appertain to the Art of war. But now to know vvhyther the counseler be
thus pollitike or not, the prince may try him, by asking these or such like
questions here follovving. As vvhyther it be better to build a City in a
ferty ll or barren soil? which winds are to be barred from an habitation or
dwelling place? how many vvayes a state or kingdom is wont to be lost?
by what means the good government of any common wealth is decayed? of
what causes seditions and rebellions do spring? how they may be oppressed?
vvherin the power of a Prince does consist? vvhyther in riches, or in good
Soldiers? how many ways one Prince vvythout slander may make war upon
another Prince, that has given no just occasion thereunto? vvhyther it be
better to tarry the enimye at our own home, or to seek him at his home, how
many things a Prince has to consider before he enter into war? and being
entered, how many before he fight any battle? and having fought, how many
things he has to consider after he has vvonne or lost the victory. To which
and such like questions, if he can rightly and readily answer, he is worthy
to be called a pollitike counseler.

The seventh quality belonging to a counseler is to be a Traueling of
Countries.
traueler and to have seen not only all the terretories of his Prince, but
also many other Countries, and specially those that be either friends or
enemies to his prince, so as he may understand their government both in time
of peace and war, and their reuenevves as well ordinary as extraordinary:
also how the Princes and the subjects of those countries do like one of
another, and how they agree or disagree amongst themselves, of what power
they be, what Forts and Holds they have, how they are maintained and kept,
what trade of life and trasfique the common people uses, of what nature,
disposition and manners they be, and such like things necessary to be known.
VVythout consideration of which things, who so traueleth into strange
countries spends his time in vain, as the young Napolitan that had been at
Rome, and at his return, could render no good account of his trauelle to the
Prince that gave him leave to go abroad, but only how he had seen wales,
towers, cvties, towns, hvlles, dales, floudes, trees, and busshes, of all
which things he had plenty at home, and therefore was commanded by the
Prince from thencefoorth to tarry still at home. But the wise traueiler
observes such profitable things as are before told, and many more very
diligently, and by comparing the strange countries first one with another,
and then all those with his own, is able to judge of the government of his
own country, how good or evil it is, and knovveth how to root out all
abuses and evil customs, and to plant good in their stead. He knovveth how
to entertayne strangers, be they friends, foes, or nevvtralls, by reason that
he is acquainted with their manners and conditions, and can apply his words,
writing, and deeds, according as the condition of the men, of the matter, of
the time, and of the Prince shall require, knovving both the commodities and
discommodities of times and places, vvherby the Prince or his counsel can
never be decey ued in any thing, by vvrong or false information of strangers,
neither shall he need to depend upon their judgment. The Prince to know
why there his counseler be a traueiler, and what profit he has reaped
thereby, may question with him in this wise. How many miles contains the
length of France, and how many in breadth, and also how many in circute,
what notable cities, towns, and Universities it has? and specially what
holds and Fortes? And on what side the country is most easy to be invaded,
what floudes and streams it has that be not vvadable, what virtue or vice
is most proper or peculyer to the French men, and in what thing they most
delyght? also vvherin the nobility of France differs from the nobility of
England? and wherein their people differ from ours? how much their
buildings differ from ours? which of the two kings of France and England
has most absolute power? upon what occasions and how the people of
France is wont to vvithstande their prince? And wherein their servitude
differs from the servitude of our people? how the king of Fran^ce leauyeth
his Soldiers? how they are exercised and trained? And in marching through
the country, what order is taken and what provision is made, that the poor
countriemen be not spoiled nor molested by them? The like questions may be
demanded of any other country, or vvythout asking these questions it is
easy to perceive by his own talk of the countries where he has been,
what profit he has gathered. For if he be alvvayes ready either to condemn
strange countries and their customs or government and to praise his own, or
else contrary wise to praise the others and to dispraise his own, without
due consideration or comparison had: it is an evident sign that he makes no
distinction of things, and whereas is no distinction, there can be no choice
or election, and where election wants, there is no wisdom nor judgment,
and where wisdom and judgment fails, all things fail.

The eight quality requisite in a counseler, is to know as Knowledge of the
Princes power.
well the strength and power of his Prince, as also of his allies, friends,
neighbors and enemies, for want of which knowledge, many times the Prince
is counseled to war with those, with whom he ought to live in peace, and
to make peace with those with whom he should rather have vvarres. And the
Prince may try the knowledge of his cou^seler in this behalf, by asking him
these or such like questions. As what ordinary or extraordinarye reuenevves
his friends or foes have? vvherof such reuenevves do rise? what Souldyours
they are able to make? how they are leauyed, armed, trained, and exercysed?
what Captains they have? of what things necessary to maintain war,
their countries have either plentye or lack? and such like.

The ninth quality requisite in a counseler, is to love his The zeal and true
love of the Counseler toward his country.
common wealth, so well as he does alvvayes regard the profit and honor
thereof, more than his own, esteeming in respect thereof, neither his
goods, dignity, life, nor fame, without which love, he can never be so
careful, for the preservation of his common wealth, nor so diligent in doing
his duty, as he ought to be, which love or zeal, vvhyther the counseler
has or not, the Prince may know, partly by hearing his opinion in such
matters as do redovvnde more to the Princes peculier profit, than either to
his honor, or to to the profit of the common wealth. As vvhyther upon some
fained cause, it be good to break a league or truce made with some Prince? or
to depryue Cities or towns of their liberties? or to charge the commons with
some extreme subsedie, task, loan, benevolence and such like. And partly he
may know him by his conditions. For if he be either an hipocrite or
dissembler, a covetous person or a flatterer, ready to uphold the Princes
words with yea and nay, affirming alvvayes that the Prince may do what
him lysteth, and that he can not err: it is impossible that such one can love
his common wealth, but must needs be a great enemy thereunto.

The tenth quality is to have a right judgment in all things, Upright
judgment.
and to hear al men indifferentlye, vvythout partiality or respect of
persons, and to think himself more bound to right and Justice, than to Lord
or Duke, to friend or kinsma^. For the counseler is a public person, and
therefore ought to be void of all private affection, loving in general all
good men for their virtue, and hating the evil in like manner for their vice, of
what country or nation soever they be. For though there be many nations, yet
there be but two sorts of people, that is either good or evil.
Notvvithstanding of those that be good, we are bound both by Gods law and
man's law, to prefer in some respects, our Parents, kinsmen, and countrymen
before others. The Prince may know vvhither his counseler has this quality
or not, by observing his doings, and marking vvhyther he be a procurer of
favor, living, office, or dignity for his kinsmen, or others that be not
worthy thereof. Again, vvhyther he be factious, that is to say, favoring
and maintayning one part of the state more than another, as the Nobles more
than the commons or contrariwise. And vvhyther he vpholdeth the
Ecclesiastical power, more than the lay power, which kind of men are
perilous in all common wealths. For so as their faction may stand, be it by
right, or by vvrong, they care not what mischief they do, having no regard
to the common wealth at al. Neither is it good for a Prince to admyt into his
counsel, any man that has been known to be an open enemy to any
dominion, Province, City, or town, that is subject to the Prince, or to
suffer any such to bear rule in any of those places. For man being naturallye
vindicatiue, having once gotten power to execute his desire, will undoubtedly
when he sees his time, under the color of Justice, revenge his private
vvrong, with the public svvorde. Neither is it good to put any man that is
the head of any faction, in authority, or to make more account of him, than
of the contrary part: for that breeds disdain and hatred in that part, not
only against the party so promoted, but also against the Princes own person,
for his partiality shevved therein, which thing has brought many Princes to
their destruction.

The leauenth quality belonging to a counseler, is to be a Justice.
just man, vvylling to give every man his own, according to his desartes,
that is to say, to chastise the evil without cruelty, and to reward the
good with such reward as is due to their virtue. The just manne is faithful
and perfect in all his doings, and therefore is beloved of both young and old,
of rich and poor, and all men dare boldly commyt to him themselves, their
wives, their children, their goods, their honor, and their lives. The Prince
may know vvhyther his cou^seler be a just man or not, partly by his words,
and partly by his deeds, for his talk is grave, wise, and full of truth, he
alvvaves speaks plainly, even as his heart thinks, he is no tatler, no
tale teller, nor carryer* of nevves, no evil reporter, slaunderer, or
backbyter of the absent. For to carry tales proceeds of a vile and base
courage, and they that use it, are never faithful. He is no hypocrite or
dissembler, nor double of his tongue, speaking one thing in presence, and
another thing in absence, neither will he report any thing out of the mouth
of hearesay, that lying Author, but only that which he has seen or felt, he
reprooueth the evil courteously, and praises the good without flattery, for
he will neither flatter nor be flattered, yea rather he loving nothing but
truth, hates all liars, flatterers, scoffers, iesters, and raylers. Now as
touching the deeds of the just man, they are easily known. For he lives
quietly contented with his own, seeking neither honor nor riches by any
other means than by virtuous travel: Whereby if he did not seek preferment,
he should shevve himself to be unjust. For as it is ambition in him that is
unworthy to seek honor or dignity by favor, money, or by any other
unlawful means, so is it covvardlynesse of courage in him that well
deserves, not to seek by virtuous mean his due revvard. Moreover, the just
man's house and family is well ordered, and his servant are modest, he
deals with all men justly, he pays his dettes truly, he is no maintainer
of busy bodies, nor byer of other men's dettes or doubtful tytles, he is no
vvrangler in the law, but flees all occasion of suit, contention, quarrel,
strife, and sedition, and finallye he is loving, kind, faithful, friendly,
charitable, and thankful. Which virtues together with the rest before
mentioned, who so has not, is no perfect just man.

The tvvelth quality requisite in a counseler is to be liberal, Liberality.
that is neither to be covetous, nor yet prodigal, but to use the mean
betwixt them both, whereby he shall procure the love and good will of the
people, whereas the covetous cou^seler is hated of all men. For he has al
things to be sold, in so much as he will neither hear suitors nor speak for
suitors without reward, and such one with money is easily corrupted, to
betraye both Prince and Country, so as he may do it covertly and safely, he
is also ready at all times, to agree to the confiscation of another man's
goods, be it by right or by vvrong, because his part is therein. Again, the
prody gall cou^seler on the other side with vvastfull spending, by little and
little consumes himself, and so loses his reputation, and at length
becomes as evil or vvoorse than the covetous counseler. The Prince may
know vvhyther his counseler be liberal, covetous, or prodygall by his
doings, for if he be lyberall, he keeps good hospitality, and he is good to
the poor, and ready to relieve the necessity of such as want, as in helping
with his money and friendship to bestow honest maids in marriage, to redeem
poor prisoners and captyues, and also to pay the dettes of his honest
friends, that are fallen into decay, and to help such as are like to deserve
well of the common wealth. But if he be covetous he does none of these
things, for all is little enough for himself, has he never so much, he
lives miserablye scratching all to himself, and in any service of the Prince
seeks his own gain, and not the honor of his Prince, or the profit of the
common wealth, he is ever craving of the Prince and putting in bills of
remembrance either for himself, or for some of his. Again, the prodigal
counseler vvasteth his substance in making superfluous bankets, in gaye and
costly apparel, in Iustings, Torneis, in Music, dancing, on Havvkes and
Hovvndes, on flatterers, iesters, and scoffers, and in keeping a rabble of idle
servants without any purpose, which things when he is no longer able to
maintain with his own goods, then he is ready to take of other men's, and
spares not to rob both Prince and common wealth, so as he may have
vvherevvith to feed his vain delights. Whereby it appears that both the
covetous and prodigal counseler have regard only to themselves, and not to
the Prince, or to the common wealth. But the lyberall counseler contrariwise
regards only the profit and honor of his Prince, and therefore it is the
Princes part to make much of such, and to enriche them by giving them both
lands, fees, and offices, to the intent that they having sufficient to
maintain their callings, need not to feke any bie means to enrich
themselves, and thereby fail in doing their duty either toward him, or the
common wealth.

The thirteenth quality requisite in a counseler, is to be beneficial
Beneficialnesse.
to his country, which virtue diffreth from liberality, for liberallitie
consists in gyuing money or moneys vvorth as it ought to be given. But
beneficialnesse, called in Latten BENEFICENTIA, consists in doing good turns
and friendly pleasures, as in helping the common wealth and all the members
thereof with his good advise and counsel, by procuring the profit thereof,
by comforting the afflicted, by praising the good, and reproouing the evil, by
defending, helping, and furthering with his favor, power, and authority
such as deserve well, vvhyther they require it or not: finally, he is
alvvaies ready to traueile with the Prince and his officers about any thing
that is needful to the common wealth, and therefore he is well worthy to
be called a father of the common wealth. This man is easily known to the
Prince by his doings, and therefore there needs no further trial to be made
of him.

The fourteenth quality requisite in a counseler, is to be affable, Affability.
that is to say, gentle and courteous both of speech and behavior. For such
one is easy to be spoken with, and receives both poor and rich with a
cheerful countenance, ready at all times to hear their suits with a pacient
and attentyue ear, using no frovvning looks, nor froward answers, he will
not be offended with every word that shall be unadvisedly spoken by the
suter, or by his inferior. Neither is he captious, taunting, disdainefull,
scornful, or over severe in his speech, he commends without flattery,
and reprooueth without villanye, he promises with gravity, and denies
with such courtesy, as the suter departs therewith well satysfied. The
Prince shall know him by his conditions and behavior in this sort. For the
courteous man is alvvayes merry and pleasant, vvatchfull, diligent and
circumspect, he goes cleanly apparelled and loves good company, he is not
factious or partial, but universal and friendly to all men, he is free of
speech, and a great enemy to all dissimulation and hypocrisy, he is neither
coloricke nor provvde, for the colericke man is vvhote and hasty, and vvil be
offended with every little trifle, and in his fuerie will neither hear
reason, nor speak reason. Again, the provvde man is spiteful, and full of
disdain, esteeming no man but himself: wherefore neither of these men can be
affable or courteous, and therefore unmeet to be counselers.

The fiftenth quality requisite in a counseler is Fortytude, or valiant
courage, whereby he is made stovvte and constant in the defense of right, and
truth, esteeming in respect thereof, neither goods, life nor honor. Again, he
is able to bear both prosperity and adversity, with a contented quiet
mind, so as he will not be puffed up with the one, nor oppressed with the
other. For he contynueth alvvayes one, and is Lord of himself, and therefore
the more able to provide a ready remedy for a soden mischief, as well in his
own behalf, as also in the behalf of his Prince and common wealth in time
of service, and to encourage both Prince and people when need requires. The
Prince shall know him by trial in this manner. For the valyant man is alvvayes
an earnest lover of the truth, and a cruel enemy to all liars, flatterers,
scoffers, and tell tales, which are the corruption and plague of all Courts,
for by their means, the Prince syldome or never hears the truth, whereas
contrariwise, this man lets not to speak the truth to the Prince at all
times vvythout respect of favor, or fear of displeasure, and boldly
reprooueth the abominable lies of the false flatterers, for this man is no
hypocrite or dissembler, but free of his speech, and just in his dealings. Let
the Prince therefore chose such a man to be of his counsel, and utterly
refuse him that is a friend to flatterers, and iesters, or that will hide the
truth from him, let him also bevvare of the covetous man that loves money, for
he in hope of gain will sell both his own freedom and other men's. And
finally let him never admyt into his counsel a covvarde, or faint hearted man,
that is not able to suffer the loss of things transitory, as of wife,
children, friends, riches, or such like, but will mourn and sorrovve
without measure. For such one is an effeminate and chyldishe person, and not
worthy to serve in that place.

Having hitherto treated sufficiently Qualities of the body.
of the qualities of the mind that be required in a counseler, we come
now to speak somevvhat of the qualities of his body, not of all, but of
those that be most needful, to be considered. Which as mine Author says be
in number five, his age, complexion, stature, making, and countenance, which
some call favor or feavvter of the face.

And first as touching his age, Age.
as he had need to be no less then thirty years old, so is it not good,
that he be more than three score, for before thirty years of age, man's vvytte
for the most part is not stayed, his experience is small, and his presumption
great, he is hot and high minded. Again, he can not be so grave as he ought
to be, neither vvil the people have any great credit in him, yea, rather they
will mourmour against him, and say that he is a very young counseler. And
therefore such had more need to go to school, and to follovv their learning,
and to traueile countries to get languages, to follow Camps and Courts, and
to see the diversity of customs, laws, and governments, that they may have
knowledge, judgment, and good experience of things, before they be made
governors or rulers. Again, when a man passes three fcore, then his memory
fails, his vvyttes wander, and through his experience he becomes vvylfull
frovvarde and obstinate, he is also cold in all his doings, and takes not
occasion when it is offered. Also his body is vveake and feeble, and not able
to traueile in the Princes causes, and to be short, he is rather a burden and
trouble to the Court, than otherwise. And therefore it is meet for such one
to be discharged of all service, and to be sent home revvarded by the Prince
according to his deserts, to the intent he may quietly spend the rest of his
old years at his own home in the service of God. And yet I will not deny,
but that there be some of greater age, which have both lively vvyttes and
strong bodies, and that there be young men also not arryuing to thirty years,
that be both grave, wise, and of good experience. But I speak of the most
part, vvishing the Prince alvvaies to chose those that be of a mean age
betwixt both, which being neither to green nor yet to dry, are the stronger
and the more stayed, and the better able to serve the Prince, both with spirit
and body at al assayes, yea, and the people also will conceive the better
opinion of them, and have them in the more reverence.

The complexion of the cou^seler, is a thing not lightly to be Complexio^,
regarged, for most commonly as men be either well or evil complexioned, so
are they well or evil conditioned, of complexions there be four kinds, that
is, sanguyne, colerique, flegmatique, and melancolique, of which mine Author
only praises the sanguyne and colorique, affirming such as be of that
temperature, to be most serviceable, either with spirit, or body. For in
such do naturally reign great gifts of the mind, as vvytte, memory,
discourse, judgment, justice, love, affability, fidelity, bounty fullness,
magnanimity, and fortytude. Again, their bodies are healthful, lively,
nymble and strong, and able to endure traueile and pain, which kind of men
as they are partly known by their doings: so mine Author would have the
Prince also to consult with his learned Physicians touching that matter. Fot
to judge well of complextions is a thing chiefly appertaining to their Art.
And as for the flegmatique and melancolique person he utterly rejects, saying,
that the flegmatique man is rude, dull, heavy, and ignorant, and as for the
melancolique man he is vvorst of all the rest, for he according to the nature
of the humor, which chiefly raineth in him, is cold, dry, and earthly, and
therefore base and vile of courage heavy, sorovvful, miserable and vain, an
enimye to all noble devises and worthy enterprises and so superstitious as
those which have been of that complexion have with their dreams, false
visions and foolish fantasies, confounded all the religions of the world. And
besides all this, the melancolique man is superstitious out of measure, and
very envy it self. For he is a member of the frovvarde Planet Saturnus,
whereof such complexioned men are called Saturnij, which be most abhorred
of the Astrologers, in so much as Apolonius Tianeus did not let to write,
that he once found in the City of Ephesus a melancolique manne, who with
his presence corrupted the whole City in such sort, as there grevve thereof
a most terrible pestilence: wherefore such complexioned men are far unmeet
to be of a Princes counsel.

The mean stature in a counseler is most laudable, that is to Stature*
say, to be neither to high, nor yet to low, to fat, nor yet to lean, for
the long and lean man, and specially if he have therevvith a long neck, is
utterly condemned of the Philosophers, and judged to be some great lovvte and
good for nothing Again, to be over lovv, is as great a deformity, for the
low men be they never so wise, yet the people will have them in no
reverence at all, but jest of them, and call them dvvarffes. And most commonly
such little men be also hasty, provvde, and presumptuous* wherefore it is good
that the Prince chose for his counselers men of a mean stature, and therevvith
neither to fat, nor yet to lean. For the over fat man bellyed like a
barrel, and likewise the over lean man shaped like a dried Congre, besides
gyuing with their presence cause of laughter, are therewith sildome seen to
be serviceable.

The body of a cou^seler ought to be well proportioned, having Proportion of
body.
all his parts and members aunsvverable one to another in due proportion, so
as there be no lack nor superfluity in any part, as for example his head may
not be to great, nor to small for his body, or one shoulder hier than another,
nor one arm longer than another, nor he may not by defect of nature be crook
backte, splaye footed, squynt eyde, or lack an eye, an arm, a hand, a leg,
or foot, or any other part, nor likewise have more than he ought to have,
for such defects of the body as come not by misfortune, but proceed either of
the want or superfluity of nature, do betoken great imperfections of the
mind, which has been so much observed of the natural Philosophers, as this
Proverb Cauc, asignatis did rise thereof, and is observed of al men even at
this day, in so much as no man almost will take a common servant with any
such defect, how much more then ought a Prince to bevvare how he chooses
any such to be of his counsel.

A good visage and comblye countenance is very requisite Vysage.
also in a counseler. For that makes him to be both loved and reverenced. His
head therefore vvoulde be round and of mean bigness, and his face would be
somevvhat long, rather than altogether round, and therevvith neither to
blovvghtye, nor yet to shrympe, his forhead would be high, large and plain
without any vvrincles, his eyes neither to great nor to little, but in a mean
betwixt both, and therevvith not heavy or dull, nor yet vvanton or often
rolling to and fro, but quick, lively, and steadie, his nose neither to long
nor to short, to great nor to small, nor over flat, or turned vpvvard, but
plain and smooth, and to be somevvhat hooked is no evil grace, for it
betokens wisdom and stovvtnesse of courage, his lips would be neither
to thick nor to thin, nor hang over low dovvnvvarde. And to be short, all
the parts of his face would be so proportioned, as his countenance may be
alvvayes both grave and amiable. And thus we end with the qualities of the
body requisite in a counseler, vvherin we may seem perhaps to some folks
to be more curious than is needful, thinking many of those things that we
have spoken, to be but tryfles and things of small weight, and yet such
tryfles are not to be passed over with silence: For truly whosoever will
treat of any matter absolutely, must leave nothing out, but must express
every little part. And we daily see that if any man bieth a house, he will
not only view the bevvtiful places thereof, as Hall, Parlour, chambers, and
such like, but also all the houses of offices, yea even those that are not
meet to be named. Again, if a Prince be desirous to buy a horse, he will
thorovvly view every part and member of him, yea, and will not let to open
his mouth with his mouth, with his own hands, to see his teeth, and to
know his age, how much more careful then ought he to be in choosing of his
counseler, into whose hands he must commit both his goods, his life, and
his honor.

Of the Princes choice.
WE say de in the beginning, when we defined what a counseler was, that
two things in that definition were to be considered, that is to say, the
sufficientcy of the man, and the choice of the Prince, and that such
sufficientcy did consist in the qualities of the mind, and in the qualities of
the body, of both which qualyties having hy thereto sufficientlye treated, we
mind therefore now to speak somevvhat of the Princes choice. Touching
which matter mine Author has set forth nine remembraunces or aduertisementes
to be observed by the Prince when he choseth a counseler, whereof because
some be rather confirmations of those that go before, than nevve precepts: And
again, because some are to be considered by the Prince before he choseth, and
some to be observed after he has chosen: I thought good therefore to reduce
them into a lesser number, and to make no more several precepts but six,
declaring those first that are first to be considred, and then the others
consequentlye, wherein though I shall somevvhat differ from mine Author in
order, yet in matter nothing at all.

First, then the Prince has to The first advertisement.
consider, that all the honor, and dishonor, fame, and infamye, profit and
loss, preservation and destruction, as well of himself, as of all his
people, wholy depends upon the good or evil choice, of his counselers, for
if they be well chosen, the Prince is judged as well of strangers as of his
own subjectes to be wise and careful of his common wealth, and for that,
they extol him with infinite praises, and his subjects are ready at all
times to obey both him and his counsel, thinking themselves to be in great
safety, vvhilste they are governed by such wise counselers, assuring
themselves that all things must needs prosper that they take in hand. But
contrariwise if the counselers be evil chosen, then they condemn the Prince
of great follye, they be unquiet and alvvayes murmuring against the counsel,
saying, that all will come to naught. And if there be any noise or likelihood
of war, they tremble and quake for fear, because they mistrust the
wisdom, manhood, and policy of their governors, saying, that they have
not one man able to defend them, and if any thing succeed well, contrary
to the peoples expectation, they impute it rather to chance, than to any
wisdom or foresight of the counsel: whereas on the other side, if the
counselers be wise men, the people co^ceyueth such an opinion of them, as they
will not believe that they err, when they err in deed, for wise men
sildome err. Wherefore, since so many evils do rise of the evil choice, and
so many good things of the good choice, the Prince therefore in mine opinion
can not be to choice in his choice, and so let this suffice, for the first
advertisement.

Secondly, the Prince to the The second advertisement,
intent he may have a plentyfull choice of men meet to serve his turn had
need not only to consider of such as keep in his Court, and be nigh about
him: but also to seek to be informed of so many as he can besides, giving
charge and commission to his Lieutenants and chief officers abroad in every
Sheere, to learn by diligent inquiry, which men in their lymittes, be
known to be most sufficient to such purpose, and to send up Kalenders of
their names unto the Prince, to the intent that he may send for such as he
shall think good, pretending only to know them and to be acquainted with
them himself: appointing some reasonable allowance to bear their charges in
iorneying to and fro. By this means the Prince shall have choice of many,
amongst whom it is more likely to find out some one excellent man, than
amongst a fevv. And besides that, he shall win great love, and fame of his
people, and encourage all estates, to endeavor themselves, to get vvisdome and
knowledge, and to follow such virtuous exercises, as they may deserve thereby
to be named and numbered amongst those, that are thought meet for such purpose.
And by this means also, the Prince shall know what able men he has within
his realm, of what skill they be, and vvherin they are most meet to serve
him, at any time that he shall have need to employe them. And though he shall
sildome have need to chose above one, or two, to serve him as counselers: yet
he must show himself courteous toward all the rest, and praise their well
doing, exhorting them to continue still therein, and therevvith put them in
good hope of preferment in time to come, revvarding some with offices, some
with fees, and some with money, and some he may retain in his Court, and
discharge the reast, using himself in such sort toward them all, as they
all may have cause to be satisfied and contented.

Thirdly, if the Prince be a Lord of diverse countries and The third
advertisement.
nations, I vvoulde not vvishe him to be altogyther vvedded unto his own
native countrymen, but rather to choose some of every one of those countries to
be of his counsel. For the Prince is a public person, and therefore ought to
be without private affection and respect, or partiality, yea he ought to be
a natural father to all his true subjects, of what country soever they be,
and stepfather to none, to whose counsel, if any of the subjects be vvronged
or grieved, they have only to repair for redress. But if none of their own
countriemen be of the counsel: how or when I pray you shall they be hard?
for who knovveth their customs, their humors, desires, commodities,
discommodities, gaynes, and losses so well as they? or who will be so ready
to hear their causes, suits, and complaints as their own cou^trymen, which
are forced by law of nature to love them, and to tender them. Besides this if
the Prince should have no counselers, but of his own countrymen, all the
other countries would think that either he did not esteem them, or counted
them as slaves, or at the least did not trust them. VVherof the first would
breed hatred in them toward the Prince and the counsel, the second vvoulde
cause them to seek liberty, and to make conspiracies and rebellions, and the
third vvoulde make them to become unfaithful, disobedient, and obstinate
subjects. Wherefore these things being well vvayed and considered, I believe
the Prince shall find it much better to choose his counselers out of all such
domynions as are subject unto him, then out of one, or two only.

Fourrhly, the Prince may not be to hasty, but take good The fourth
advertisement.
deliberation in making his choice of such men as are named unto him,
resolving upon none of them all, until he has thorovvly tried them, as well
by report of the counttye from whence they come, as also by his own
examination. And first as touching the report of the country, it shall be
necessary for the Prince, as well to avoid the favorable, as slanderous
tales that may be told him, to give every man leave to accuse the persons
whom he minds to make his counselers, subpenatalionis, that is to say, that
the accuser shall suffer the pain or penalty of the crime, vvherof he
accuses the party, if he can not duly prove it. And the Prince on the
other side must take such order as the defendant may not hinder, or stop by his
authority, power, or friendship, any accusation that may be made against
him. And since all men are subject to affects, the blinders of all truth: I
vvoulde vvishe the Prince in these causes, before due try all had, to give no
credit to the report of any man, be he noble, or unnoble, spiritual or
temporal. By this means the Prince shall be sure to have none but good men to
be of his counsel, for the cuill will not be over hasty in seeking
advancement by such kind of try all. Truly the Romans in old time did
very straightly execute this kind of discypline in choosing their
Magistrates, whereby as their common wealth greatly then flourished: so
afterward for lack thereof, it quickly decayed and came to naught. Now as
touching the Princes examination to be made by himself, I say by himself,
and not by his Deputy, he has to examine what sufficientcie is in the person
to be elected, by considering and measuring every part of him, both soul and
body. To which end mine Author has made and discribed unto him heretofore
two apt measures to measure vvithall, the one of fiftene parts, and the other
of five, that of fiftene parts serves to measure the soul, and the other of
five parts to measure the body. To which measures though very fevve are to he
found, that are aunsvverable in every condition: yet let those that are more
aunsvverable be alvvayes chosen before those that be less aunsvverable, and
let those that have more gifts of the mind and less of the body, be
preferred before those that have more of the body, and less of the mind. And
if any two that stand to be elected, be equal in both gifts, and yet be
not of like birth, power, and authority, or if the Prince perhaps favors
the one more then the other upon some affection, or for some service done, then
it is good reason that such person be chosen before the other. Wherefore since
such things are to be considered, when comparison is made, me thinks mine
author should have done very orderly, to have added also unto his two measures
before descrybed. A third measure, briefly containing some of the chief
gifts of Fortune, as noble lynage, honors, riches, favor of the Prince, and
such like. Which kind of measure mine Author left out as I suppose, because
he thought that such as were aunsvverable to the two first measures, ought
of duty to be promooted by the Prince to honors and living, and that they
deserve to be loved as well of the noble men, as to be honored of the common
people. But since noble birth, is a gift that has been alvvayes much
esteemed, and that vvofthily, so long as the successors do not degenerate from
their Predicessors: And that such gifts comes not immediately from the
Prince, but requy reth contynuaunce of time, to be perfect in his kind: (for
it is an old saying, that the Prince may make a noble manne, but not a Gentle
man): Also since there be many other gifts of Fortune which man may obtain,
without the Prince: as honors given by strange Princes, riches, goodlucke in
any thing that he takes in hand, be it in service of the Prince or
otherwise, also friendship, love and favor, as well in strange countries as
in his own, and many such like: It had been necessary, I say to have added
also this third measure, to the intent that the Prince might have a trinity
of measures to measure both the length; breadth, and deapth of his counseler.
which three measures, if the Prince do righly use in making his choice it
shall well appear that he chooses with judgment, and not for favor or
upon any will or power. For all offices, as mine author says, are wont to
be given but three manner of vvayes, that is either for the deserts and
sufficientcy of the receyuer, or for tho favor and affection of the Prince
borne toward the party, or else for that the Prince of his own power will
have it so whereof the first belongs to the just prince, and the other two
to the unjust tirant. And truly he did very well in saying that offices be
given but three manner of vvayes, for otherwise it might have been objected,
that offices many times do pass by a fourth way, vvoorser than all the
rest, and that is, by way of sale for filthy lucre sake, vvherby for the most
part, justice is bought and sold, the Prince evil served, and the poor
people pilde and povvld. Thus then having shevved how the Prince should
choose no man to be of his counsel, before due try all had, and also how
such try all is to be made, I leave to speak any further, touching this
advertisement, the last of those that are to be considered by the Prince,
before he chooses any man to be of his counsel: for the other two
aduertisements here follovving, are to be put in execution after he has chosen.

Fifthly, then the Prince having made his choice in such The fifth aduertisment.
sort as is before taught, shall do well within two or three days after,
to call the nevve elect unto him, and in open presence of his Court and
household, briefly to tell him how he has chosen him only for his virtues
and good deserts, and what credit both he himself and all his people has
in him, and what shame it would be unto him, if he should not with his
doings answer both his and their expectation. That done, he must commend
unto him both the honor and profit of his state, friendly requiring him, yea,
and straightlye charging him to admonish him, and with all due reverence to
correct him, when he sees it needful, and in any wise to be plain with
him, and to tell him the truth without all flattery or dissimulation, because
he was chosen chiefly for that purpose. For as it is not meet that every man
should tell the Prince of his faults: so is it requisite that some should
admonish him when he erreth. For otherwise, Princes should be in vvoorse case
than all men, being utterly destitute of faithful friends, whose office is
to speak the truth, and to tell their friends friendly of their faults at
times convenient, and not to flatter at any time. Neither let the Prince be
vnvvylling to hear the truth modestly told, and in due time, at his
counselers hands: Yea rather let him encorage him thereunto though it be
against the stomach, for otherwise he shall be overwhelmed with lies, and
forged tales, and never hear the truth. Frnallye, as the Prince must put him
in fear of hard punishment, if he shall leave to do his duty so must he
lykevvise put him in hope of due revvard, if he continue in his well doing.
VVherby the Prince shall both vvynne to himself the praise and love of his
people, and also make his nevve chosen counseler, the more careful and diligent
in his vocation.

That done, let him be solemly The sixth aduertisment.
sworn to be true and faithful to the Prince, and to promise before God to
be diligent and careful in procuring the wealth, profire, and honor of his
Prince, and of the common wealth, and to deal truly and justly with all
estates, using indifferency without corruption, svvaruing from justice at no
time, either for meede or dreed, for love or hate, for friend, or foe.
Moreover, never to have privy conference with the Ambassadors or messengers
of forreyne Princes, without special commission from the Prince, nor to recey
ue reward, fee, or yearly pention, of any foreign Prince. For by such means
the princes secrets are many times revealed, and the causes of foreign
princes more favored, than the princes own causes, or those of the common
wealth. The cou^seler being thus sworn the prince shall be assured of him and
may the better trust him. And if the counseler should chance to fail in his
duty, after he has taken his oath, the Prince may the more justly punish him
as a contempnor of God and of his sovereign. Again, the counseler will be the
more circu^spect in his doings, and the less bold to commit any treachery.
Furthermore, by means of his oath he may the more safely and boldly deny the
unrightful and unreasonable requests, of his parents, kinsfolks, friends,
and servant: yea, rather both they, and all others knovving him to be
sworn, will be afray de to make any suit unto him, that is not just or
reasonable. And here ends the sixth and last advertisement, the which
together with the other five before declared, do comprehend the full effect
of the nine aduertisements or memorialles set forth by mine Author.

The effect of my Authors Peroration or conclusion.
THus you have heard what a counsel is, and how the Prince that vvil govern
well, ought to have seven counsels, differing one from another in offices,
officers, and in authority. You have heard also what a counseler is, and
wherein his sufficientcy consists, that is to say, in having fifteen
qualities of the mind, and five of the body. Finally, there have been declared
unto you certain necessary aduertisments to be observed by the Prince, when
he chooses his counseler. And this is the sum and effect of all that mine
Author thought meet to treat of in this his first of those eight Books,
which he has promised to set forth touching this matter, who wishes that
he had been as able to frame such a counsel in deed, as he has hear
descrybed in writing, for then he vvoulde have set forth to the world a
visible example of the goodness thereof, to be seen and felt, rather than
this imagined pattern, to be considered only with the mind. And because he
doubts not but that some will be ready to find faults with this his
work: he briefly aunfvvereth to such objections as may be lay de against
him. And first whereas it may be objected, that it is not a meet thing for
a Prince to take such pain, and to trouble himself in making so precyse a
choice. He aunsvvereth that it is no trouble or pain at all, in respect of the
great ease, rest, and quietness, that he shall thereby purchase to himself,
when he shall have to deal in great affairs, and matters of wait: be it
either in time of peace or war, for be they never so troublous or vvaytie of
themselves: yet to him having such counsels and counselers, they shall seem
very easy and light. Some again will object that the Prince is free, and
that he may give and dispose his offices as him pleases best. Whereunto mine
author answers that the freedom or liberty of the Prince is no freedom,
when it passes the bounds of reason, and that in preferring will before
reason, he ought rather to be called a tyrant than a Prince. Thirdly, it may be
said, that it behooves Noble men and Gentlemen, to be revvarded according to
their birth and calling, which mine Author denies not, and yet therevvith
says, that it is not al one thing to reward a noble man and to make him a
counseler, since there be means enough to revvard him vvythout that, unless
he be meet for it. Fourthly, it may be objected, that there are no such
counselers as he has descrybed, to he found in all the world. Whereunto
he aunsvvereth, that there are a number of good men and very sufficient in all
conditions to be had, if the Prince choose them for their virtue and deserts,
and not by his own affection, favor, or power. And though there were not,
yet if the Prince would do as he ought to do, he might make men of stones.
For to what soever the Prince is given, be it to vice, or to virtue, all men
will follow the same. And therefore if the Prince delight in wise, learned,
and virtuous counselers, mine Author says, that he dare adventure his head
that a number of Barrons and Knights in fevve years, vvoulde become most
sufficient counselers. And for proof thereof, wishes that some Prince
vvoulde put these his precepts in ure, not doubting, but that in so doing, he
should quickly see such an alteration in his Court, as those that do now
leavvdely spend their time in idleness, vain pastymes, and in wantonness
of life, would give themselves to lavvdable exercises, and thereby make the
Court to become a school of virtue, and knowledge. Which should be to the
great honor of the Prince, to the profit of the common wealth, and to the
glory of God, who give grace to all Christian Princes, so to order their
courts, and to give such ensample themselves, as the common people may learn
thereby, to live in the fear of God, and to do that which is acceptable in
his sight, and thus I end this treatise.

FINIS.

