Pyramus and Thisbe.

LONDON, Printed for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop near Fleet
Conduit, 1617.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL his very friend, D. B. H. DVNSTAN GALE, wishes all
happiness.
THe worthiness (good Captain) of your demerits, with the benefit of your
friendly courtesies, incites me to make profer unto you of this my unpolished
Pamphlet, humbly entreating you to vouchsafe it acceptance, in that amongst
many whom I have known, I could find none more meet for the patronizing it
then your self. Which if it please you, I hope it will be the better welcome to
others for your sake: and if unconstant fortune do but once more enable me for
better, then shall you find a grateful mind ready to requite you with a
double guerdeon for your former kindness. Thus craving pardon for this my rash
attempt, I humbly take my leave this 25. of November, 1596.

Your Worships ever devoted, Dunstan Gale.

PYRAMVS AND THISBE.
1
Near to the place where Nilus channels run,
There stood a town* by love long since undone:
For by a chance that happened in the same,
The town's forgot, and with the town the name.
Within which town (for then it was a town)
Dwelt two commanders of no small renown,
Daughter to one, was Thisbe smooth as glass:
Fairer then Thisbe never woman was.
Son to the other, Pyramus the bright:
Young Thisbes play-feare, Thisbe his delight:
Both firm in love, as constant and were any,
Both crossed in love, as proud Love crosses many.
2
For in the pride of summers parching heat,
When children play and dally in the street,
Young Thisbe seuerd from the common sort,
As gentle nurture lothes each rusticke sport,
Went to an arbor, arbours then were green,
Where all alone, for fear she should be seen,
She gatherd violets and the Damask rose,
And made sweet nosegaies, from the which she chose,
One of the sweetest. Sweet were all the rest,
But that which pleased her wanton eye the best.
And this (quoth she) shall be my true loves favor:
Her tender nonage did of true love favor.
3
No sooner spoke, but at her speech she blushed:
For on the sudden Pyramus in rusht,
Having but newly cropped the spredding pine,
And other branches that were green and fine,
Of which to pass his idle time away,
The boy made wreaths and garlands that were gay,
And spying Thisbe, Thisbe made him start,
And he her blush, so tender was her heart:
She blushed, because another was so near,
He started, for to find another there;
Yet looking long, at last they knew each other,
For why, they loved like sister and like brother.
4
When they left looking, for they looked awhile,
First Pyramus, last Thisbe began to smile,
I was afraid, thus Thisbe straight began:
Faint (he replied) a maid and fear a man?
I feared (quoth she) but now my fear is past.
Then welcome me (quoth Pyramus) at last.
Welcome (quoth she) and then she kissed his lips,
And he from her, sweet Nectar drops out sips:
She pats his lips, he pals her milk white skin.
Thus children sport, and thus true love begins:
But they as children, not as lovers gamed,
For love (alas) twixt them was never named.
5
Often would he take her by the lilly hand,
Cirkling her middle, straight as any wand,
And cast her down, but let her lie alone,
For other pastime Pyramus knew none.
Then up she starts and takes him by the neck,
And for that fall gives Pyramus a check:
Yet at the length she chanst to cast him down,
Though on the green she never gaind a gown,
But rose again, and hid her in the grass,
That he might tract the place where Thisbe was,
And finding her (as children use) embrace her,
For being children nothing could disgrace her.
6
But mark the issue, of their sportiue play,
As this sweet couple in the cool shade lay,
Fair Venus posting whom to Paphos I Will,
Spied their sports, nor could she choose but smile,
Wherefore she straight vnyok't her silver teame,
And walked on foot along the Crystal stream,
And envying that these lovers were so bold,
With jealous eyes she did them both behold.
And as she looked, casting her eye awry,
It was her chance (unhappy chance) to spy,
Where squint-eyd Cupid sat upon his quiver,
Viewing his none-eyd body in the river.
7
Him straight she called, being called he made no stay,
But to his mother took the nearest way.
Yet ere he came, she marked the the other two,
Playing as often tofore th'er wont to do:
And then she swear, young Pyramus was fair,
Thisbe but brown, as common women are:
Anon she wished young Pyramus was near,
That she might bind love in his golden hair,
And love him too, but that she called to mind,
That young Adonis proved so unkind.
But Cupid came, his coming causd her hate them,
And in a heat, proud Venus began to rate them.
8
See thou my son (quoth she) and then she fround,
Those brattish elues, that dally on the ground?
They scorn my kingdom, and neglect my mind,
Contemn me as inconstant as the wind.
Then shoot (quoth she) and strike them so in love,
As naught but death, their loue-dart may remove.
At this he looked, the boy was loath to shoot,
Yet struck them both so near the hearts sweet root,
As that he made them both at once to cry
(Quoth he) I love, for love (quoth she) I die.
Of this both Venus, and her blind boy bosted,
And thence to Paphos Isle in triumph posted.
9
Now was the time, when shepherds told their sheep,
And weary plow-men ease themselves with sleep,
When loue-prickt Thisbe no where could be found,
Nor Pyramus, though servants sought them round.
But news came straight, that Pyramus was seen,
Sporting with Thisbe lately in the even:
Like news to both their Parents soon was brought;
Which news (alas) the lovers downfals wrought.
For though they loved, as you have heard of yore,
Their angry parents hate was ten times more,
And hearing that their children were together,
Both were afraid least each had murdered other.
10
When they came home, as long they staid not forth,
Their storming parents fround upon them both,
And charged them never so to meet again,
Which charge to them, God knows was endless pain:
For years came on, and true love took such strength,
That they were welnigh slain for love at length:
For though their parents houses joined in one,
Yet they poor peats, were joined to live alone.
So great and deadly was the daring hate,
Which kept their moody parents at debate,
And yet their hearts as houses joined together,
Though hard constraint, their bodies did disseuer.
11
At length they found, as searching lovers find,
A shift (though hard) which somewhat easd their mind:
For lo a time-worne creuis in the wall,
Through this the lovers did each other call,
And often talk, but softly did they talk,
Least busy spy-faults should find out their walk:
For it was plast in such a secret room,
As thither did their parents seldom come.
Through this they kissed, but with their breath they kissed,
For why the hindering wall was them betwixt,
Sometimes poor souls, they talked till they were windles
And all their talk was of their friends unkindness.
12
When they had long time vsd this late found shift,
Fearing least some should undermine their drift,
They did agree, but through the wall agreed,
That both should have unto the grove with speed,
And in that arbor where they first did meet,
With semblant love each should the other greet.
The match concluded, and the time set down,
Thisbe prepared to get her forth the town,
For well she wot, her love would keep his hour,
And be the first should come unto the bower:
For Pyramus had sworn there for to meet her,
And like to Venus champion there to greet her.
13
Thisbe and he, for both did sit on briars,
Till they enjoyed the height of their desires:
Sought out all means they could to keep their vow,
And steal away, and yet they knew not how.
Thisbe at last (yet of the two the first)
Got out, she went to cool loves burning thirst,
Yet ere she went (yet as she went) she hide,
She had a care to deck her up in pride,
Respecting more his love to whom she went,
Then parents fear, though knowing to be shent,
And trickt her self so like a willing lover,
As purblind Cupid took her for his mother.
14
Her upper garment was a robe of lawne,
On which bright Venus silver doves were drawn:
The like wore Venus, Venus robe was white,
And so was Thisbes, not so fair to sight,
Nor yet so fine, yet was it full as good,
Because it was not stained with true loves blood.
About her waste, she wore a scarf of blew,
In which by cunning needle-worke she drew
Loue-wounded Venus in the bushie grove,
Where she inheated, Adon scornd her love.
This scarf she wore, ( Venus wore such another)
And that made Cupid take her for his mother.
15
Nymph-like attyr'd (for so she was attyr'd)
She went to purchase what true love desyr'd,
And as she trod upon the tender grass,
The grass did kiss her feet as she did pass:
And when her feet against a flower did strike,
The bending flowers did stoop to do the like:
And when her feet did from the ground arise,
The ground she trod on, kissed her heel likewise.
Tread where she would, fair Thisbe could not miss,
For every grass would rob her of a kiss.
And more the boughs would bend, for joy to meet her
And chanting birds, with madrigals would greet her.
16
Thus goes this maidlike Nymph, or Nimphlike maid,
Unto the place before appointed laid,
And as she past the groves and fountains clear,
Where Nymphs vsd hunting, for Nymphs hunted there,
They swear she was Diana, or more bright.
For through the leauie boughs they took delight,
To view her dainty footing as she tript:
And once they smiled, for once fair Thisbe slipped,
Yet though she slipped, she had so swift a pace,
As that her slipping wrought her no disgrace:
For of the Nymphs (whose coy eyes did attend her)
Of all was none, of all that could amend her.
17
When she had past Dianes curious train,
The crooked way did bending turn again,
Upon the left hand by a forest side,
Where (out alas) a woe chance did betide:
For loue-adoring Thisbe was so fair,
That brutish beasts at her delighted are:
And from the rest as many beasts did rome,
A lamb devouring Lion forth did come,
And having lately torn a silly Lamb,
The full gorged Lion sported as it came,
To him a sport, his sport made Thisbe hie her,
For why, she durst not let the beast come nie her.
18
Yet still it came, to welcome her it came,
And not to hurt, yet fearful is the name,
The name more then the Lion, her dismayed,
For in her lap the Lion would have played.
Nor meant the beast to spill her guiltless blood,
Yet doubtful Thisbe in a fearful mood,
Let fall her mantle, made of purest white,
And tender heart, be took her straight to flight,
And near the place where she should meet her love,
She slipped, but quickly slipped into a grove,
And lo a friendly Cave did entertain her,
For fear the bloody Lion should have slain her
19
Thisbe thus escaped, for thus she escaped his force,
Although (God wot) it fell out farther worse:
The Lion came yet meant no harm at all,
And coming found the mantle she let fall,
Which now he kissed, he would have kissed her too,
But that her nimble footmanship said no.
He found the robe, which quickly he might find,
For being light, it houered in the wind:
With which the game-some Lion long did play,
Till hunger called him thence to seek his prey:
And having played, for play was all his pleasure,
He left the mantle, Thisbes chiefest treasure.
20
Yet ere he left it, being in a mood,
He tore it much, and stained it ore with blood,
Which done, with rage he hasted to his prey,
For they in murder pass their time away.
And now time-telling, Pyramus at last,
(For yet the hour of meeting was not past)
Got forth (he would have got away before)
But fate and fortune sought to wrong him more:
For even that day, more fatal then the rest,
He needs must give attendance at a feast,
Ere which was done (swift time was shrewdly wasted)
But being done, the lovely stripling hasted.
21
In have he ran, but ran in vain God wot,
Thisbe he sought, fair Thisbe found he not,
And yet at last her long love robe he found
All rent and torn upon the bloody ground.
At which suspicion told him she was dead,
And only that remained in her stead:
Which made him weep, like mothers, so wept he,
That with their eyes their murdered children see;
And gathering up the limbs in peecemeale torn,
Of their dear burden murtherously forlorn:
So Pyramus sick thoughted like a mother,
For Thisbes loss, more dear then any other.
22
Or who has seen a mournful Do lament
For her young Kid, in peecemeale torn and rent,
And by the poor remainders sit and mourn,
For love of that which (out alas) is gone?
Let him behold sad Pyramus, and say,
Her loss, his love, does equal every way.
For as a man that late has lost his wits,
Breaks into fury and disaster fits,
So Pyramus in grief without compare,
Does rend his flesh, and tear his golden hair,
Making the trees to tremble at his mourning,
And speechless beasts to sorrow with his groaning.
23
Alas (quoth he) and then he tore his flesh,
Gone is the sun that did my Zone refresh,
Gone is the life, by which I wretch did live,
Gone is my heaven, which hopeful bliss did give,
To give me heat, her self lies nak't and cold,
To give me life, to death her self she sold,
To give me joy, she bale alas did gain,
My heat, life, joy, procured her death, bale, pain:
Had I been here, my love had not been dead,
At least the beasts had torn me in her stead,
Or would they yet tear me for company,
Their love to me would slack their tyranny.
24
And then he cast his eyes upon the ground,
And here and there where bloody grass he found;
Sweet blood (quoth he) and then he kissed the blood,
And yet that kiss God wot did little good,
Could thou being powered into my half slain breast,
Revive again, or purchase Thisbes rest,
This hand should tear a passage through the same,
And yet that blood from Thisbe never came.
And then he gatherd up the bloody grass,
And looking grieved, and grieuing cryde alas,
Where shall I hide this blood of my dear lover,
That neither man nor beast may it discover?
25
Then in the mantle he the grass up tide,
And laid it close unto his naked side:
Lie there (quoth he) dear to me as my heart,
Of which thy mistress had the greater part.
Tut she is dead, and then he vowed and swore,
He would not live to murder love no more:
Which spoke, he drew his Rapier from his side,
Of which the loue-slaine youth would then have died,
But that he thought, that penance too too small,
To pacify fair Thisbes Ghost withal:
Wherefore he raged, and ragingly exclaimed,
That he true love, and true love him had maimed.
26
And then his Rapier up again he took,
Then on the mantle cast a grievous look,
For me (quoth he) fair Thisbe lost this blood,
She dead, my life would do me little good,
And well he thought he could endure the smart
Of death, and yet he could not harm his heart:
For why his hand being guiltless of the deed,
Denied to make his harmless heart to bleed,
And like a trembling executioner,
Constrained to slay a guiltless prisoner,
His hand retired still, further back and further,
As lothing to enact so vile a murder.
27
But Pyramus like to a raging Judge,
Seeing his executioner flinch, and grudge
To do the duty he enioyn'd him do,
Replied, dispatch, or I Will cut thee off too:
At which the trembling hand took up the blade,
But when the second profer it had made,
It threw it down, and boldly thus replied,
He was not cause that lovely Thisbe dyed,
Nor would I slay thee, knew I she were dead:
Then be the blood upon thy guilty head.
Of these last words young Pyramus dispences,
And called a synodie of all his seuer'd senses.
28
His conscience told him, he deserved not death,
For he depraved not Thisbe of her breath:
But then suspicion thought, he causd her dye,
But conscience swore, suspicion told a lie.
At this suspicion prompted love in the ear,
And bad him show his verdict, and come near,
Which soon he did, and sat among the rest,
As one whom Pyramus esteemed best:
For when proud Love gave in his faulty plea,
He asked if he were guilty, Love said yea,
And with the youth, fond youth by love entangled,
Agreed his guiltless body should be mangled.
29
Resolved to die he sought the pointed blade,
Which erst his hand had cast into the shade,
And see, proud Chance, fell Murders chiefest friend,
Had pitched the blade right upwards on the end,
Which being loath from murder to depart,
Stood on the hilt, point-blanke against his heart:
At which he smiled, and checked his fearful hand,
That stubbornely resisted his command.
And though (quoth he) thou scorned to do my will,
What lets me now my mind for to fulfill?
Both Fate and Fortune to my death are willing,
And be thou witness of my minds fulfilling.
30
With that he cast himself upon the sword,
And with the fall his tender breast through gored:
The angry blood, for so his blood was sheed,
Gusht out, to find the author of the deed,
But when it none but Pyramus had found,
Key cold with fear it stood upon the ground,
And all the blood, I mean that thus was spilt,
Ran down the blade, and circled in the hilt,
And presently congeald about the same,
And would have called it by some murtherous name,
Could it have spoke, nere sought it any further,
But did arrest the Rapier of the murder.
31
And as the child that sees his father slain,
Will run (alas) although he run in vain,
And hug about the shedder of his blood,
Although God wot, his hugging do small good,
Even so his blood, the offspring of his heart,
Ran out amain, to take his fathers part,
And hung upon the rapier and the hilt,
As who should say, the sword his blood had spilt:
Nor would depart, but cleave about the same,
So dear it loved the place from whence it came:
For sure it was poor Pyramus was murdered,
Nor by pursuit, could his poor blood be furthred.
32
When this was done, as thus the deed was done,
Begun, alas, and ended too too soon,
Fair Thisbe stricken pale with cold despair,
Came forth the Cave into the wholesome air:
And as she came, the boughs would give her way,
Thinking her Venus in her best array.
But she (alas) full of suspicious fear,
Least that the late feared Lion should be there,
Came quaking forth, and then start back again,
Fearing the beast, and yet she feared in vain.
She feared the Lion, Lions then were feeding,
And in this fear, her nose gusht out a bleeding.
33
Her sudden bleeding argued some mischance,
Which cast her doubtful senses in a trance,
But of the Lion troubled Thisbe thought,
And then of him, whom fearfully she sought:
Yet sorth she went, replete with jealous fear,
Still fearing, of the Lion was her fear:
And if a bird but flew from forth a bush,
She straightwaies thought, she heard the Lion rush.
Her nose left bleeding, that amazed her more
Then all the troublous fear she felt before:
For sudden bleeding argues ill ensuing,
But sudden leaving, is fell fears renewing.
34
By this she came into the open wood,
Where Pyramus had lost his dearest blood,
And round about she rolls her sun-bright eyes
For Pyramus, whom no where she espies:
Then sorth she tript, and nearly too she tript,
And over hedges often this virgin skipt.
Then did she cross the fields, and new mown grass,
To find the place whereas this arbor was:
For it was seated in a pleasant shade,
And by the shepherds first this bower was made.
Fair Thisbe made more haste into the bower,
Because that now was just the meeting hour.
35
But coming thither, as she soon was there,
She found him not, which did augment her fear:
But straight she thought (as true love think, the best)
He had been laid down in the shade to rest,
Or of set purpose hidden in the reeds,
To make her seek him in the sedgie weeds,
For so of children they had done before,
Which made her thoughts seem true so much the more:
But having sought whereas she thought he was,
She could not find her Pyramus (alas)
Wherefore she back returned unto the arbor,
And there reposd her after all her labor.
36
To one that is weary drowsy sleep will creep,
Weary was Thisbe, Thisbe fell asleep,
And in her sleep she dreamt she did lament,
Thinking her heart from forth her breast was rent,
By her own censure damned to cruel death,
And in her sight be rest of vital breath.
When she awak't, as long she had not slept,
She wept amain, yet knew not why she wept:
For as before her heart was whole and sound,
And no defect about her could be found,
She dreamt she hurt, no hurt could she discover,
Wherefore she went to seek her late lost lover.
37
Suspicious eyes, quick messengers of woe,
Brought home sad news ere Thisbe far could go:
For lo, upon the margent of the wood,
They spied her love, lie weltring in his blood,
Having her late lost mantle at his side,
Stained with blood, his heart blood was not dried.
VVisty she looked, and as she looked did cry,
See, see, my heart, which I did judge to dye:
Poor heart (quoth she) and then she kissed his breast,
Were thou inclosd in mine, there should thou rest:
I causd thee die poor heart, yet rue thy dying,
And saw thy death, as I asleep was lying.
38
Thou art my heart, more dear then is mine own,
And thee sad death in my false sleep was shown.
And then she plucked away the murtherous blade,
And cursed the hands by whom it first was made,
And yet she kissed his hand that held the same,
And double kissed the wound from whence it came.
Himself was author of his death she knew,
For yet the wound was fresh, and bleeding new,
And some blood yet the ill-made wound did keep,
Which when she saw, she freshly began to weep,
And wash the wound with fresh tears down distilling,
And viewed the same (God wot) with eyes unwilling.
39
She would have spoke, but grief stopped up her breath,
For me (quoth she) my Love is done to death,
And shall I live, sighs stopped her hind most word,
When speechless up she took the bloody sword,
And then she cast a look upon her Love,
Then to the blade her eye she did remove,
And sobbing cride, since love has murthred thee,
He shall not choose but likewise murder me:
That men may say, and then she sighed again,
I him, he me, love him and me has slain.
Then with resolve, love her resolve did further:
With that same blade, her self, her self did murder.
40
Then with a sigh, she fell upon the blade,
And from the bleeding wound the sword had made,
Her fearful blood ran trickling to the ground,
And sought about, till Pyramus it found:
And having found him, circled in his corse,
As who should say, I Will guard thee by my force.
And when it found his blood, as forth it came,
Then would it stay, and touch, and kiss the same,
As who should say, my mistress love to thee,
Though dead in her, does still remain in me.
And for a sign of mutual love in either,
Their ill shed blood congealed both together.
FINIS.

