A brief and clear Confession of the Christian Faith.

Containing An hundredth Articles, after the order of the Creed of the Apostles.

Made and declared by John Gardener.

Translated out of French into English by John Brook of Asshe, next Sandwitch.
An. 1577.

Romans 10. The belief of the heart justifies, but to confess with the mouth
makes a man safe.

Imprinted at London for Edward Wight, and are to be sold at his shop at the
little North door of Paul's, at the sign of the Gun. 1579.

To the Right Honorable Sir William Cecill Knight, Baron of Burgley, Knight of
the Honorable order of the Garter, Master of her Highness Wards and Liueries,
one of the Lords of her Majesty's privy Counsel, and Lord high Treasoror of
England.
REading this small little Volume, first written in French, and collected by
Master John Gardener (right honorable) and perceiving the same in my simple
judgment, under a poor habit and little show, to bear and importe great and
weighty effect, finding also therein such singular ground of profound learning
and rare wisdom, and therewithal such firm approbations and inexpugnable
defenses, with authorities of holy writ, I thought it no less then needful,
and nothing more then necessary to do what in me mightlye, to make the same,
obuious, usual and familyer unto my brethren of this Realm, by translating
the same into our mother tongue. The which thing having once performed and
finished, according to my poor talent, and sclender skill: although I do not
doubt to have followed mine Author directlye and truly in sense and
exposition, without corruption or abuse: yet finding in my self such
imperfections of learning, such barrennes and want of fine Phrase and choice
words wherewith to have garnished the same, vnneathes I durst of my self, or
in mine own name, launch forth my silly bark into the troublesome waves, not
doubting (sail she never so sure and true) but sometimes she shall be countermet
with churlishe byllowes, and puffed at with outrageous blastes and violent
tempests. The force whereof more safely to defend and withstand, being loath to
leave the same in such obscurenesse and secrecy, as I found it, whereof no
Christian man ought to be ignorant, I imagined with my self to seek to ancor
in your harborough, being very desirous that this my vnsmoothed and roughe
hewn workemanshippe might have free passage and safe conduct under your Honors
favorable protection and defense. In which purpose and pretense, being abashed
and more then half dismayed, by the occasions aforesaid: yet grew I in double
heart and took treble encouragement, that the authority of the matter it self
would more then counteruaile the rest in your Honors favorable acceptaunce. But
when I further considered, whereof I should crave you to be a supporter, namely
of the Christian faith (for so the Book is entitled, and contains an
hundredth Articles of the Christian faith) all fearful doubts expelled,
assured trust willed me to abide constant in my purpose. For as to your
Honorable title, Wisdom has annexed her enlargement of Authority: so to that
Authority, godly zeal having adioined a feruencie of true faith, and to
these also humilitye of spirit, having coupled frank curtesye and benevolence
toward all: These I say, right Honorable have made me so bold to crave that
this my small piece of travail, whatsoever, may receive that hope has
promised, and with my good will would gladlye deserve being no ways able,
except by prayer to almyghtye GOD, on whom as duty byndeth I shall not cease
contynually to call for your Lordshippes long preservation of life, and much
increase of his most comfortable blessings.

Your Honors daily Orator John Brook.

John Gardener unto all the little French Church of Strasburg, assembled
together for the Gospel, in the name of Jesus Christ: grace, peace and mercy
of the Father through Jesus Christ our Lord, only Savior and redeemer, in
the virtue of the holy Spirit, be given unto you eternally. Amen.
WHen I consider the clear lights, the great ingenyous and sharp wits,
which the Lord in our time has placed in his Church (dearly beloved brethren
and well-beloved in Jesus Christ) who never cease day nor night to advance the
glory of God, and to promote the kingdom of Jesus Christ his son, as well
by their words, as writing, of whom I am not worthy to be a Disciple. I am
ashamed and fear lest I be judged raish to put my hand to the pen after them,
and chiefly for to entreat of things so little and common, the which they have
entreated of in their Catechismes from the beginning. But the holy desire of
you and of many other good brethren, who having heard openly the reading of
this little Treatise, instantly requiring to be pertakers have incited, yea
constrained me to do it, with the great desire that I have of the advancement
of the glory of God and of the health of all my brethren: Knowing that God
would have all the world to come unto the knowledge of ye truth, 1. Tim. 2.
and by that means to be saved. I know also that for the building of the
Lords tabernacle made by Moses, S. Ierom. Exo. 25.
every one brought that he had, some gold and silver, others precious stones,
others linen cloth, goats and buckes skins, others wood, and common stones,
and all of it was set a work: So I esteem, for the building of this house of
the Lord, 1. Cor. 3. Ephe. 4.
which is his Church, every one may and ought to bring that yt he has, some
more, some less, according to the tallentes which the Lord of the house has
given them, I will content my self to carry little common stones for this
building, and do hope that the Master work men will not reject my service, nor
my little stones, so that they be fit for the building (as I hope they shall be,
God ayding me. Math. ^. Luke. 21.
) The poor wydowe which did put into the box but two little pieces of silver,
was not rejected nor despised of the Lord, but was as much praised as the
great rich men which gave a great deal more then she. All that being well
considered has moved me to set forth this little treatise in this time
chiefly, in which the Lord has the sieve in his hand to sifte, examine, and
repurge his Church, in which it should be very good (in my judgment) that
every man's faith should be known, and chieflye of those which make profession
of the Gospel, for to teach others, as are the Doctors and Ministers of the
word, that the false Prophets and Hypocrites which do bow their shoulders and
lean their ears unto false papisticall doctrine of Antechriste should be
known, driued and chased a way from the good and faithful. For that cause I am
content, yt my faith, in which I will live and dye through the grace of the Lord
be known of all the world.

Now this little Treatise shall have much need of a second which shall give the
reason of that that this here confesses, for it is one thing to confess the
faith, and another to give a reason of the faith. To confess the faith, that
is purely, symply, and clearly, to say, and confess with heart and mouth, or
by writing that that one believes of God and (...) ^is word. But to give a
reason of the faith is to prove and openly to show by teres of the holy
scripture, and manifest reasons grounded in the same, what one believes, and
wherefore one believes, as Saint Peter 1. Peter. 3.
the Apostle commands. The which I have made in times past, in the time of
the faires, (as you have heard and understood) in declaring that confession by
Articles, for to give some little taste of the Gospel unto the straingers which
came hither, and to make them to understand, what is our faith and religion in
which we will live and dye, and that we are not heretics, seditious nor
blasphemers (as many do esteem us to be) but faithful and true Christians,
having and receiving one only Jesus Christ for our Lord, Savior, Mediator
and Advocate, believing and hoping in him only, and not in any other, for which
also we will venture and ieopard not only our external goods, but also our
bodies unto the last drop of our blood. Mat. 10.16 Mark. 8. Luke. 9.17.
Knowing that whosoever shall loose his life for the love of him, shall find
it, and he that will keep it in renouncing and forsaking him, he shall loose
it eternally. This has been my mark and principal end, all that time there,
in which I had not (nor have yet at this present) the leisure to collect and
put in writing all the probation arguments and reasons, which I have used as well
of the holy scriptures as of the ancient fathers for to yield a reason of my
faith, and to show the truth of the articles thereof therein contained. But if
ye Lord do give us good peace, and keep us yet still in this place (as I hope
yt he will do through his mercy, although we have not merited it) I promise to
give unto you ye second treatise corresponda^t unto this here, in which I will
give ye reason of my faith, as in this I will declare and confess (with the
help of the Lord (the verity of all these Articles which are in number an
hundredth, as well by the word of God, as by the writings of the ancient
Fathers, according to my little faculty and the grace which the Lord shall give
me, and then I will content my self that I have lived in this world. In the
mean time dear brethren, I pray you to receive and take in good part this
little gift and present, of the hand of your lawful brother and faithful
friend, hoping to receive a greater. I assure you that the only word of the
Lord is the fair and large garden of pleasure, within which I putting my
self, have gathered these goodly sweet smelling flowers, and made this fair
garlande of triumph, for to put it upon the heads of the true faithful
Christians (such as now are.) And I have taken nothing from the sink, puddle
and takes of Luiterim, nor from other such like papisticall doctrines,
Antechristians and inventions of men. For out of such sinkes puddles and
infections such flowers spring not forth, but rather thorns briars and
thystles for to feed and crown the Asses of Antechriste.

I may boldlye say, that there is nothing in this little Treatise, but that I
can show and prove it by the word of God, the which I have followed and not
the diverse opinions of men: For I have not sworn in any man's word, but in that
same of Jesus Christ, upon which my faith is builded, and not upon the opinion
of men: therefore I have spoken here and written freelye that which I feel in
my heart, without having regard unto any other then unto my only Lord and
Master Jesus Christ.

This may serve at all times for a pattern and rule of the confession of faith,
to all those which will declare them selves to be of the number of our assembly
following the holy custom and most allowable, of this little Church, that all
those which will perticipate or communicate with us in the holy table of the
Lord, first of all ought to make public confession of their faith, that is
to say: to declare before the assembly the faith and knowledge, which the
Lord has given unto them of the word and Gospel of his son Jesus Christ,
that they may be known and manyfested unto all the congregation, to be of the
number of the faithful and true members of Christ, worthy to perticipat of the
gifts, graces and benefits of the Lord with the brethren. As also of late
under the law all strangers which would communicate or perticipate the
pascall Lamb with the people of Israel, Exo. 12.
ought first to renounce all Idolatry to receive circumcision, and to make
profession of all the law, and religion of God, given by Moses, promising to
live and walk in the same all the days of their life: And by that means were
admitted to the Passover, to eat and communicate with the other, and not
otherwise. Exo. 12.
As it is written in the book of the law. Truly it is more to perticipat in
the holy table of the Lord (that is to say in the holy Sacrament of the Supper)
the^ to eat the pascall Lamb: for so much as the cleerenesse is more then the
shadow, Heb. 10. Collos. 2.
and the verity more then the figure: For the law was but the shadow and
figure of the verity, the which we have present before us. If the^ there were
under the law observed and kept such discipline in the Church of God, among
the faithful, how much more ought it to be observed under the verety in the
sheepfold of Jesus Christ, which is his Church? Ioh. 10. Exo. 20. 1. Pet. 5.
Math. 7.15
who commands the shepheardes thereof to know the sheep, and call them by
their name, and diligently to consider their estate, lest they should give ye
childrens bread unto dogs, and the pearls unto hogs. Then as Moses the
servant of God did not admit unto the Passover any strangers, before they
first declared their faith: so the good and faithful ecclesiastical pastor,
ought not to admit (according to my advise, saved always a better judgment)
unto the holy table any strangers, whose faith is unto him unknown, but to
endeavor him self first to know their faith and religion by all means
privately and perticulerly, if he cannot publikelye before the Church and
Congregation, that he may witness of their faith before all the brethren: And
by that means to admytte them with the other.

This pollycye and lowable disciplyne, was kept and observed in this our little
Church (as you know) from the beginning, unto this day: The Lord through his
grace, grant that it may long continue, to the praise of his name: For by the
same many ignorant are taught, in the rudimentes of the Christian faith: And
there knowledge is always augmented, and there is none of us but receives
great profit. To this then this little Treatise may well serve for a pattern
and rule (as it is said) for the young ones, simple and ignorant, who may
take what they think good and leave the rest for to avoid prolixity: therefore
I have divided and distinguished it by Articles. Furthermore, this Confession
is divided in to four principal points: In the first I show what I believe
of the holy Trinity, chiefly of the eternal Father and of the things made by
him, of the first creation of man, and of his fall: In the second what I
believe of the Son which is the second person, and of the things by him
made, chiefly of the repayring and restoring of man: In the third, what I
believe of the holy ghost, which is the third person of the holy Trynitie by
whom man (made by the Father, and restored by the Son) is mayntained and kept
in his being: In the fourth, what I believe of the holy Catholic Church, and
of the things concerning the same. That done, I show and declare the great
fruits proceeding and coming from that faith, which are three in number, as
you may see toward the end: And all of it is made after the order of the
simbole or creed, which we call commonly the Apostles creed, which has been
received at all times without any contraduction in the Catholic Church. And
let no man marvel, although I multiplye these Articles unto an hundredth,
although that the Creed contains but twelve: For every one of the twelve,
contains other twelve and more. Do then as the honnye Bees, who of all
flowers do gather profit: By that means you shall augment more and more in
faith and knowledge of the Lord, and in charity and love toward your
neighbors, for therein depends all the law and the Prophets. I beseech
that good God and celestial father which has delivered you from the tirraunye
of Antechriste, and has drawn you from darkness, error and ignorance,
opening your inward eyes, declaring him self unto you by his Gospel, that it
would please him to augment always his gifts, graces and benedictions in you,
to direct and keep you by his holy spirit. Unto eternal life, in the name of
his son Jesus Christ our Lord and one-Sauiour. Amen.

From Strasburg. 24. July. 1549.
John Brook to the Christian Reader.
THis little Pamphlet (gentle Reader) may seem unto thee a thing of small value
and less importance, if thou make thy estimation thereof by the small outward
show and feeling: But if in this little and light work to the eye, be encluded
great and weighty matter, if in this brief and short Treatise be wrapped and
sufficiently set forth long and manifold causes, how much the more then is it
to be embraced and esteemed. I promise thee nothing, but for gramrecye, offer
thee my good will and travail, I red it in French, written by master John
Gardener: and finding it pithy, profitable and necessary to be red of all
Christians, for thine only commodity and comfort I have translated him into
thy mother tongue. If in this translation thou find any imperfection, let my
zeal and good meaning toward thee, counteruaile or rather prevail to gain
thy friendly acceptaunce, and do not therein condemn the thing or the Author,
who undoubtedly needs no supporter or defender, but brings with him
munition and defense sufficient. But adventure (I say) the reading as I did at
the first, if thou find him worthy, make it a Jewel unto thee, bear him
daily in thy hand, or button him nere thy heart in thy boso^, he is neither
heavy nor cu^brous, nor will be unto thee very chargeable. Gods holy spirit be
thy guide in reading and understanding, to the establishment and confirmation
of thy Christian faith. Farewell.

A brief and clear Confession, of the Christian Faith: containing a hundredth
Articles, after the order of the Apostles Creed.
I believe in GOD, the Father almightye, maker of Heaven and Earth.
The.1. Article.
FIrst of al, Deuteronomy. 6. Esa. 6.45. Mala. 2. Gene. 1. Ps. 33.101. Esa. 64. Iere.
23. Acts. 4.17
I believe in one GOD, only in essence and substance, three in person, the
Father, the Son and the holy Ghost. The Father as the Original and beginning
of all things, as well visible as invisible: Of whom also they depend, as well
in their being as conservation. And he depends not but of him self,
eternal, without end and without beginning. Psa. 2.110, John. 1.3, 5, 14.
The Son, as the heavenly word, the sapience and wisdom of the Father,
Math. 3.17 Luke. 3.
which is eternally and before al worlds, begotten of the Father of his proper
substance and nature: Because that in him shines his proper carecter and
Image, otherwise invisible unto ye mortal man. 2. Cor. 4. Colos. 1. Hebre. 1.
Ps. 51.143 Ioh. 3.14.15.16.
The holy Ghost, as the virtue and eternal power, which is neither made nor
created, nor begotten, but proceeding from the father and the Son eternally,
as alone proceeding of two persons.

Deuteronomy. 4.23 Esa. 44.45. Ioh. 1.5.10 Exodus 20. Deuteronomy 6.32. M^la. 2. Ioh. 10.17.
P^a. 24.50. Roma. 11. Job. 9.
The 2 Article.
I Believe that these three persons, are of one essence and substance, nature.
Authority, power, will, goodness, wisdom and eternity. And that these three
are but one spiritual substance, eternal, without end and beginning, true,
good, just, merciful, of sovereign power and wisdom, having and containing
in him self all goodness, having no need of any thing.

The 3. Article.
Deuteronomy. 6.30 Math. 4.
I Believe that GOD being so only one in essence and three in person ought
only to be served, honored, 1. Timo. 1. Apoca. 14.
feared, loved, adored and inuocated in all our necessities, as he which can
and will provide for them and none other: And therefore I say and confess,
Esaias. 55. Iere. 2. Psalm. 50. Math. 6.7.
that I believe in one God, that is to say: I acknowledge and receive him for
one only Lord, Master and Savior, of whom proceeds all my goodness,
with whom I can do all things, Without whom I can do nothing. John. 15. Phil.
^. Psalm. 91. Genesis 17. Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. Psa. 37.55. Esai. 49.99 Math. 6.7.
1. Peter. 5.
In him alone I do trust and fix all my heart, hoping that he will take my
part against all men: assisting me always through his holy spirit, and
delivering me from all perilles and dangers, through his grace and mercy
without my merits, administering unto me all things necessary, as well for the
soul as body: as a good father, as he promised me by his word.

The.4. Article.
I Believe that he being altogether puissant, Gene. 1. Psa 33.101
has of nothing from the beginning, created Heaven and Earth, and all things
that are therein. That is to say: Iere. 32. Mala. 2. Job. 1.2. Lament. 3.
Acts. 17. Hebre. 1.
all things as well celestial as terrestrial, visible as invisible,
reasonable as unreasonable, sensible as insensible: Whom he keeps, guides,
rules and governs, through his divine wisdom, without whose providence
nothing comes to pass, neither in this world, nor in the other.

The.v. Article.
Ge^. 1.2.5.9 Ephe. 4. Colos. 3. Sapient. 2. Eccle. 17.
I Believe that the same God the father, Son and holy Ghost, after having
created all things, created and made man, after his own Image and likeness,
that is to say: immortal, good, just, true, sage, wise, merciful and perfect
in all things, perticipating unto him his goodness, righteousness and other
perfections of God, having a will that can accord and agree in all and by all
unto the will of his Lord, Eccle. 15.
and that altogether by grace, without any merit.

The.vi. Article.
I Do also believe that as the Lord has created all things celestial and
terrestiall, for the service of man, Gene. 1. Psalm. 19. 1. Cor. 3. Sapien. 13.
Roma. 1.
and to the end that by his creatures, he should come unto the knowledge of the
Creator, Gene. 2.
that also he has made and fashoned Man for him self, that of him and by him,
he should be known, loved, feared, served and honored: (this is the
sovereign goodness of man) and that in him should shine the Image of the
heavenly virtues and perfections in all good works, 1. Cor. 6. 1. These. 4.
John. 17. Ephe. 2. Colos. 1. 2. Peter. 2. Jude. 1. Apoca. 12. Math. 25.
the which GOD has prepared that we should walk in the^, unto his honor and
glory, and to the confusion of the adversary, and by that means the ruin of
the Angels was restored and man possessed the eternal kingdom made and
prepared for him before the constitution of the world.

The.vii. Article.
I Believe the same man to have been constituted by the Lord God, Gene. 1.
Psalm. 8. Gene. 3. Roma. 5. Dani. 7. Mat. 11.2^
master and ruler over al creatures, the which he did loose by his sin,
as well for him self as for all his posterity: the which domination and
segniory, John. 8.13 Phil. 2.
I believe now to appertain unto one only Jesus Christ very GOD and man, and
unto those to whom he will bestow it, as are the faithful and not unto the
infidels and reprobate.

The.viii. Article.
Gene. 3. Psalm. 49.
I Believe, the first man through the subtilty and craft of Satan to be fallen
from the excellentnesse, in which God created him, agreeing through his free
will (which then he had) to the canteloas suggestion of the Serpent, Eccle. 15.
whereby he has lost the benefits which the Lord gave unto him. Ps. ^.13.52
Eccle. 17. Oseas. 13.
In so much that of wise he became foolish, of just, unjust: of true, a liar:
of perfect, altogether imperfect: having afterward a will altogether depraved,
Romans 3.5.7 Phil. 2. 1. Cor. 2 John. ^.15
which can not, nor will not agree with the will of GOD: but altogether unto
the will of the Devil, the world, the flesh and of sin: not able to do any
thing of him self, but evil, for that he is altogether carnal, captive,
bond and sold under sin: Roma. 7.
Behold the free (or rather) the bond will of man for the estate of of this
present life.

The.ix. Article.
I Believe that that discord and corruption of nature, Gene. 8. Ps. 14, 140
Esaias. 59. John. 8. Roma. 3.5, 1. Cor. 15.
was not only in Adam because of his sin: but also in all men generally which
descend from him (one only Jesus Christ except) insomuch that they are all
according to their nature corrupted, unrighteous, liars, ignorant, Iere. 10.
John. 15. Roma. 7. 1. Cor. 3. John. 3. Titus. 3.
ungrateful and imperfect altogether: Not being able according to their
nature, to do, think, speak nor will any thing which pleases God, until such
time as they are regenerated and renewed by the spirit of God.

The.x. Article.
I Believe that this corruption of nature (otherwise called, Psalm. 51. Ephe.
2. Roma. 7. Gene. 2. Job. 4.5. John. 5. Roma. 5. Roma. 6
original sin) is the beginning and root of all other sins, by which do come
unto us, all the miseries, calamities and adversities which we suffer in this
life, as well in body as in spirit, and in the end double death, to wit of
body and soul. These are the fruits and rewards for sin: 3. Reg. 19. Roma.
11. John. 10. Roma. 8. 1. Timo. 2.
But although that the same is due and common unto all men generallye, yet
nevertheless the Lord through his mercy, has reserved a certain number,
(to him only known) whom he has drawn from this corrupted mass, and has
sanctified and cleansed them in the blood of his Son Jesus Christ. And by that
means has made the vessels of election to honor, Rama. 9. 1. Timo. 2.
apt and fit to all good works. And therefore.

The.xi. Article.
Math. 25. Ephe. 1. 2. Timot. 1. Titus. 1.3. Roma. 8. Galath. 4. Esaias. 49.
Psalm. 113. Math. 7.
I Believe that the Father in Jesus Christ his Son, by the holy Ghost, has
elected and chosen those that be his, according to his good will, before ye
foundation and constitution of ye world, whom he has predestined to
eternal life, because they were his Children by adoption, having greater care
of them, Job. 1.2.21
without any comparion, then the best Father could have, of the best child of
this world, not suffering that any thing should come from the heavens above, or
from the earth beneath, Psalm. 94.73 Math. 8.1^
but it should be for their vtilitye and great profit.

The.xii. Article.
I Believe that the father by his Son with the holy Ghost from the beginning,
Iere. 31. Ephe. 1.2.3 1. Peter. 1. Gene 1.22. Galath. 3. Deuteronomy. 18. Esaias. 40.
has always seen to the restoring of man, to whom he manifested him self,
yea after the sin, making unto him a promise of the blessed seed, by which
ye Serpents head must be broken, and the faithful ought to receive blessing by
that promise, Genesis 17.21 2. Reg. 7. Psalm. 132. Luke. 1. Gala 4.
(afterward oftentimes confirmed and ratefyed to the holy fathers) the man
(otherwise in despair in his sin) being releued, aided and comforted, has
lived in hope unto the exhibiting and accomplishing of the same.

The xiii. Article.
I Do also believe that after this promise, Exodus 19. Leuit. 18. Ezech. 20.
Roma. 10. Galath. 3.
the Lord has prescribed and given the law of the commandments to man,
promising life unto those that keep them, and death unto those that
transgress them, Baru 4.
and he gives them not that man should seek justification, Exo. 20.21 22.23.
Ezech. 20. 1. Timo. 1,
health or life in them: but for the policy, peace and tranquillity of his
people: for to defend the good, and to chastise and correct the wicked, and to
houlde and keep every one in his office: Romans 3.5.7 1. Cor. 15. Galath. 3.
And chiefly yt by the same, man should better know him self, his disease,
poorness and imperfection. And by that means should have occasion to humble
him self before the law geuer, and to seek remedy, health and life,
otherwise, to wit, in the holy seed promised, which is Jesus Christ. For that
cause it is called a Scoolemayster, Gene 3.17. Deuteronomy. 18. Acts. 3. Galath. 3.
Romans 3.5.7 Galath. 3. John. 5. Leuit. 26. Deu. 27.28 Gala 3. 2. Cor. 3. Gene.
^. Math. 27. Luke. 22. John. 18. Galath. 3.
for to come unto Christ: the which also serves us as a glass for to know
our vices, our spiritual leprosy, and to augment that knowledge. In like
manner it serves us for an accuser, to accuse us before the Lord: and
insteede of a severe and cruel Judge, for to declare the wrath and judgment
of GOD upon us, the condemnation and eternal death, and by that means to fear
us, and to make us in despair, until such time as we be comforted by the
Gospel, which is the faith in Jesus Christ, by ye which we are exempt and
delivered from all those maledictious. These are the Offices of the law, the
which are turned to us in goodness, by the says of the Gospel, the which
has oppositiue offices and altogether contrary. Furthermore, Psalm. 19. Roma.
7. 1. Timo. 1. Hebre. 7. Romans 1.7.8. Acts. 15.
I confess yt the law of God is good, right, holy and perfect, and whereas it
brings nothing to perfection, the fault is not in it, but in us: which are
altogether imperfecte, nor we can not any thing at all accomplish it, not to
touch it with the least finger: And therefore.

The.xiiii. Article.
I Believe and confess Jesus Christ to be the fullness, Romans 10. Galath. 3. 1.
Cor. 1. Math. 5. Roma. 8. Psa. 18.32. 130 143. Exodus 34. D^niel 9. Acts. 15.
the end and consu^mation of the law, to the righteousness of all believers,
to whom and by whom only, all the promises of the father are fulfilled, who
also alone has perfectly satisfied the law, the which none among men could
do, for so much as the law commands impossible things to the corruptible
man, the which nevertheless he shall fulfill, not in working: Romans 8.11.
Galath. 3.
but in believing, as also ye law is fulfilled by faith and not by works, and
by that means he shall find the righteousness of faith auailable before the
Lord, and not those of works, Romans 10. Phil. 3. Hebre. ^.
the which brings nothing unto perfection.

Behold as touching the first point of my faith, what I believe of the Father
and of the things made by him, and consequently of the holy Trinity, with the
fall of man.

Let us now come unto the second point, which is of the Son of GOD, and of
the things done by him, chiefly of the restoring and reparing of man.

I believe in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by
the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin MARY: suffered under PONCE PILATE, was
crucified dead and buried, descended into Hell: the third day he arose again
from death. He ascended into Heaven, there he sits at the right hand of GOD
the Father almighty. From thence shall he come to judge the quick and the
dead.
The.xv. Article.
I Believe yt Jesus Christ is very God and very man, Esaias. 7.9. Math. 1. John.
1.3. Psalm. 2.110 Roma. 1.9. Heb. 1.2.3. 1. John. 4.5. Hebre. 2.4.
having two natures inte^mixts in one person, ye divine nature according to
which he is the natural Son of God, equal to the Father in all and through
al. And human nature, according to the which he is very man in all and by all, like unto us, sin only excepted.

The.xvi. Article.
I Believe that Jesus Christ the Son of GOD in the fullness of time prefixed
and preordained of the Father from everlasting, Roma. 8. Galath. 4. Phil. 2.
Esaias. 7. Math. 1.
was sent into the world by the Father, and was made very man, Luke. 1. Galath.
4. Gene. 3.22. 2. Reg. 7. Psalm. 132
conceived within the womb of a Virgin called Mary, of the proper substance
and of pure blood purifyed of her: because that he was found very Man,
descending from the seed of Adam, Noe, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, and of
the other fathers, to whom the promise was made.

The.xvii. Article.
Math. 1. Luke. 1, Job. 14. Psalm. 51.
I Do also believe all that to be done by the operation of the holy Ghost,
without the work of man, to the end that all should be holy, undefiled, pure
and clean, and by that means our conception was purified and sanctified, the
which of it self was marred and defiled with sin.

The.xviii. Article.
Math. 1. Luke. 2. Esaias. 7.9. Ezech. 44.
I Believe the same Jesus Christ to be borne of the Virgin Mary, without any
sin, and without breaking of her virginity: because that by his pure and holy
nativity, he purifyeth and sanctifyeth ours, the which of it self is
altogether marred and defiled with sin. John. 3. Ephe. 2. Gene. 1.2.3 Math.
9. 1. Tim. 1. Esaias. 9. John. 3. Roma. 8.
In that nativity of Christ I see and consider the first estate and condition
of man: with his fall which was the cause of ye coming of Christ into this
world, likewise the grace and benevolence of GOD the Father: who has
represented and given unto us his only begotten son for to serve us: And the
love of the son, Phil. 2. 2. Cor. 8. Gala. 4. Rome. 8.
who has abased and humbled him self for to eleuate and exalte us, has made
him self poor for to enrich us, and has him self subjected for to
affranchise us, and he is made the son of man, for to make us the children of
God and possessors of eternal life: John. 1. Ephe. 5. Iere. 18. Luke 15. Roma.
5.
by whose coming man's nature was restored and made noble, and the man that was
lost, broken and destroyed, was raised up again, and set again in his first
place, and has recovered all that which he lost throw sin and more: Roma. 8.
Colos. 2. Ephe. 2. Titus. 3.
For by that means all the treasures, graces and benedictions of the Lord are
given and bestowed upon him, and that altogether through grace without any
merits.

The.xix. Article.
Esaias. 26 Math. 2 Mark. 3. Luke. 8. John. 1. 1. Cor. 4. Galath. 4. Roma. 10.
Math. 10.
I Do also believe and know by the holy scriptures an other conception and
nativity of Christ, which is spiritual, the which I say to be of no lesser
dignity, then the first. That is, that every faithful man, ought to conceive
in his heart and mind Jesus Christ, through a lively and true faith, and to
bring him forth through the manifest confession of the mouth, as often as
need shall require. S. August.
I esteem that conception and nativity to be so necessary unto salvation,
that if the Virgin Marye had not more blessedly borne Jesus Christ in her heart
and mind, then in her womb, ye carnal maternity would not have much profited
her. By that means we are called, Psalm. 27. Math. 12. John. 20.
ye mothers, brethren and sisters of Jesus Christ.

The.xx. Article.
I Believe that the same Jesus Christ is verily the Christ, Psalm. 110. Esaias.
61. Mat. 1.16. Luke. 2. Ioh. 1.4.6. Heb. 7.9. Deuteronomy. 18. Acts. 3. 1. Reg.
10.16. 3. Reg. 1.19 Leuit. 8. Psalm. 45. Esai. 61. Luke. 4.
that is to say: the Messiah, the anointed by the holy Ghost, because that he
should be the true King, Prophet: and great Priest of all the believers, the
which was promised in the Law, of whom also have spoken all the Prophets.
This annoynting of Christ was not corporal with a material and visible oil:
as the same of Kings, Priests and Prophets in times past: But spiritual with
an invisible oil, which is the grace and gifts of the holy Ghost, of which he
was filled above al other, Psalm. 133. John. 1. Ephe. 4. Acts. 11.
insomuch that that ointment is descended unto us, which have felt and proved
the savor thereof, whereby also we bear the name of a Christian, that is to
say anointed.

The xxi. Article.
I Believe that that Sacrifisor Jesus Christ, Heb. 7.9.10
not to have been Leuiticall or carnal, Leuit. 1.2.4.7.8. Heb. 10. 1. John. 2.
for to offer up and sacrifice, bullocks, kyne, or such like things, as Aaron
did and al his successors: but spiritual, (yet nevertheless real and true)
for to offer and sacrifice him self, that is to say: his body and his blood for
the remission of the sins of all the world, Dani. 7. John. 19. Luke. 17.
Romans 8.
as also his kingdom is not of this carnal world, but spiritual, the which
consists in the guyding and governing of his by his holy spirit, over whom
he reigns by his word, 1. Cor. 4. 2. Cor. 10.
and to the utter destruction of all his adversaries, which are sin, death,
hell, Satan and all infidels, wicked and reprobate, which rebel against the
word of the Gospel.

The.xxii. Article.
Mat. 5.6.7.24.27. Luke. 21.23 Ioh. 17.19.
I believe that Jesus Christ has truly exercised these three offices, to
wete, Prophet, King, and Priest, not only in this world, he being a mortal
man as we are: Romans 8. Heb. 9. Act. 7.
But also that he yet does exercise them daily in heaven before ye face of his
father, where he stands and appears continually for us, and thereof being
taught by his spirit, aydeth, maynteyneth, and defends those that are his,
and therefore he is called Prophet, Genesis 13. Psalm. 110. Heb. 7.
King, and high Priest after the order of Melchisedech, which is eternal, and
not after the order of Aaron which ended with the Law.

The.xxiii. Article.
I Believe that the same Jesus Christ after that he had preached the Gospel in
the country of Judea and Galile by the space of three years or there abouts,
Math. 4.9. Luke. 4. Ephe. 2. John. 5.6.7.8.9.10.11 12.
declaring him self the natural son of God, as well by his miraculous works,
as by the words, and wrytings of the Prophets, Math. 26. Mark. 14. Luke. 22.
John. 18. Act. 2.4. Mat. 27. Mark. 15. Luke. 23. John. 19.
that he has been unjustly and falsely accused by the Priests, who when that
they had taken him, in their counsel did unjustly condemn him to death, being
bound and chayned, brought him before Pilate, Provost at that time in
Jerusalem, who at the instance and request of the said Priests, has unjustly
and without any cause condemned him to death, the most horrible and ignominious
that one can think or excogitate: That is to be put on the cross and to be
crucified between two thieves, as though he had been the prince and captain
of them, Esai. 53. Sapi. 2. Gala. 3. Philip. 2.
the which he endured and suffered willingly, and innocently without deserving
it: for otherwise he had not satisfied for us, and his cross had profited us
nothing at all.

The.xxiiii. Article.
I Believe also that he being on the same cross, Luke. 23. John. 19. Psalm.
16.18 Acts. 2.
dying and yielding up his spirit to God his father, that he descended into
hell, that is to say: that he verily felt and experimented the great distress
and pain of death, with the pains and flames of hell, Esai. 53. 2. Cor. 5.
Gala. 3. 1. Pet. 2.
that is to say, the great furor, ire, and the severe judgment of God upon
him, as though he had been man and half damned, insomuch that he was
constrained to cry with a loud voice: My God, Psalm. 22. Math. 2. Mark. 15.
my God, why have thou forsaken me. Behold simply what I understand by ye
descending of Christ into hell. Furthermore, I know that this Article was not
at the first in the Creed, and that many have understood and interpreted it
otherwise, and have thought Christ verily and in very deed to have descended
into hell into the place of the dampened, aleadging the text of Saint Peter, 1.
Pet. 3.4.
the which I confess to be covered and hyd from me at this present. The Lord
grant us to open the gate and give us entrance into those mysteries.

The.xxv. Article.
I Believe all that to have been done, not for him which never did any sin,
Esai. 53. John 8.14. 1. Pet. 2. 1. John. 3. Esai. 53. John. 3. Romans 5.6. 2.
Cor. 5. Gala. 3. Colos. 1. 1. John. 2. Gene. 2. Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. Eze.
18.33. Romans 5.6. Ephe. 2. Colos. 2. 1. These. 5. Hebr. 9.10. 1. Pet. 2.3.
in whose mouth there was never found any fraud nor lying: but for us poor
and miserable sinners, whose place he held in the cross as a pledge, where he
represented the person of all the sinners, which ever have been, are or shall be
until the end of the world. And because that those have by their sins
deserved to feel and try the extreme dolours of death, to be forsaken of God,
and of all creatures, to feel the furor, ire and severe judgment of God upon
them: Christ who was their pledge did satisfy for them in the cross, and did
feel all that same and that to affranchise us and deliver us from all these
pains from the furor, ire, and judgment of God, from condemnation and eternal
death. Herein I reject and esteem as fables all the lymbe of the fathers and of
little children, purgatory and other such follyes, dreams and abuses, which
men invented and found out, without the word of God. Act. 11. Mat. 25. Luke.
16. Math. 7.
For I believe and receive but two places in the other world, to wit, paradise
for the faithful and elect with the Angels, and hell for the Infidels and
reprobate with the dyuels.

The.xxvi. Article.
I Believe and consider that death and passion (as also al other mysteries) of
Jesus Christ, Math. 14. Acts. 7.12. 1. Pet. 2. Esai. 53. John. 3. Romans 5.6.8
2. Cor. 5. Gala. 3. Colos. 1. Heb. 2.
not only as touching the history as a patron and example for to imitate and
follow, as the same of holy men which have died for the Lords quarrel: But also
chiefly touching the cause, fruits and use of the same, thereby to know the
gravity and burden of my sins, the grace and mercy of the father and the
love of the son, 1. John. 2. 1. Pet. 2.
by which we are reconciled with God, delivered from the tirannie of the devil,
released and restored into the liberty of the spirit. That is the glass
without spot for to make us know our fylthines: John. 13. Heb. 9.10. Apoc. 1.
Romans 8. 2. Cor. 5. Gala. 4. 1. Tim. 2. 1. Ioh. 2.
The lauer or clear fountain, for to wash and cleanse us, and the infinite
treasure for to satisfy and content our creditors. Of whom and by whom only,
Gods divine justice has been fully satisfied, for all the sins of all those
which have been, are and shall be until the end of the world. Gala. 3. Ephe. 2.
Colos. 2. John. 14. Romans 3.5. Ephe. 1. Hebr. 1. Apoc. 1.
And therefore I believe and confess the condemnation of Jesus Christ to be my
absolution: his crucifiyng to be my deliverance: his descending into hell, to
be my ascending into heaven: his death, to be my life: his blood, to be my
washyng and purgatory, by whom only I am washed, purified and made clean
from all my sins, so that I neither receive nor believe that there is any
other purgatory, neither in this world, nor in the world to come, by which I
may be purged, but the only blood of Jesus Christ, Heb. 9.
by which all is purged and made clean for ever.

The.xxvii. Article.
Apoc. 20. Romans 6. Colos. 3. 2. Tim. 1. Hebr. 2. Esai. 53. John. 19. Romans 5.
I Believe that Jesus Christ by the sacrifice of his body, that he offered upon
the tree of the cross, has defaced and destroyed sin, death and Satan,
with all his kingdom, and has altogether consummated and finished the work of
our redemption, and has ended and abolished all other sacrifices: insomuch
that from henceforth we must not look nor seek for any other propiciatorie
sacrifice then this, neither for the living nor for ye dead. For if we sin
wyllingly, Heb. 10.
after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no
other sacrifice for the remission of sins, then this here, by which Christ
alone, has consecrated for ever all those which are sanctified. And therefore.

The xxviii. Article.
Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luke. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
I Believe the holy Supper of the Lord, not to be a sacrifice: but only a
remembrance and commemoration of that holy sacrifice of Jesus Christ.
Therefore, John. 6. Colos. 3.
it ought not to be adored and woorshipped as God, nor Christ to be in the
same: but only in him self out of all corruptible elements. In like manner I
believe and confess, that the papisticall Mass The Mass
is an invention and ordinance of man, a sacrifice of Antichrist, Heb. 10.
and a forsaking of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, that is to say: of his death
and passion, Mat. 23.
that it is a stynking and infectious sepulcher which covers and hydeth the
merit of the blood of Christ. And therefore it ought to be abolished, and the
holy Supper of the Lord restored and set again in his first estate.

The.xxix. Article.
I Also do believe that as the Prophet Jonas Jonas. 1.2.
was in the Whales bellye (which is a place of corruption) three days and
three nights, Mat. 22.
without being any thing at all corrupted, from whom he came out the third
day, without any hurt, safe and sound: that even so Jesus Christ after his
death, Mat. 27. Mark. 15. Luke. 23. John. 19.
was put into a new sepulcher (which is a place of corruption) within which he
was three days and three nights, not being touched with any infection, Psalm.
16.30 Acts. 2.
stynking or corruption, but always abode safe and sound, for to declare the
virtue of his blood, for to accomplish the writing of the holy Prophets, Esai.
11.
and for to verefie the verity as well of his body as of his death, with which I
believe the law to be buried, 2. Cor. 3. Gala. 4. Ephe. 2. 1. Tim. 1.
abrogated, and abolished to the faithful, not as touching the obligation that
they should be no more bound to live and walk after the same: John. 3.8.
Romans 8. 1. John. 3.
but only as touching the condemnation, that is to say, that the transgression
of the same, does not condemn them at the judgment of God, through the faith
that they have in Christ. And therefore within one sepulcher, I comprehend
three things buried, Romans 6. Gala. 5.6. Colos. 3.
that is to say, Christ, the law, and all the faithful, which ought to be
crucified and buried with Christ through the mortification of their flesh.

The.xxx. Article.
I Believe that even as Jesus Christ was delivered to death for our sins,
Romans 4.6. 1. Cor. 15. Mat. 28. John. 20. Romans 1. John. 2. Oseas. 13. Ioh.
12.16. Luke. 11. Heb. 2.
that so he arose again the third day for our justification to immortal
life: wherein he declared him self openly to be very God and very man,
triumphing over all his enemies, having confounded and beaten down all his
enemies, that is to say, the world, sin, death, hell, and Satan: not so much
for him self, as for us which believe in him, knowing his victory to be ours,
and that in him and through him we vanquishe those same enemies having victory
over them, to the honor of God and our great profit.

The.xxxi. Article.
I Believe and consider that resurrection of Jesus Christ not only as touching
the story, John. 11. Mat. 27. Luke. 7.
as the same of Lazarus, or other like which have been miraculoslye raised up
through the virtue and power of the Lord, Ose. 6. 1. Cor. 15. Phil. 3. Colos.
1. 1. Pet. 1.3.
but also as the example and efficient cause thereof, as the seals and marks
of the general resurrection of all the believers: for as Christ is raised the
third day after his death, through his divine virtue, into immortal life: so
by the virtue of the same, I hope to rise one day, 1. These. 4.
in body and soul, into eternal life, afterward to be here in this world
raised in spirit through a new and true faith, in newnes of life, Romans 6.
Colos. 3. Gala. 5.6.
mortifying and crucifiyng the flesh with the affections and concupiscences of
world, the which ought to be dead and crucified unto us, and we unto it: Romans
6.
for we are buried with Christ in his death, by the baptism, that as he rose
again from death by the glory of the father without ever dying any more: that
so we should walk in newnes of life without ever serving any more sin,
Colos. 3.
seeking always chiefly the things above, celestial and eternal: Forsaking
the earthly and transitory things of this world, knowing that we have not
here a continual City: Hebr. 13.
but let us seek that which is to come.

The xxxii. Article.
I Believe also and confess, Mark. 16. Luke. 24. Act. 1. Psalm. 68. Ephe. 4.
John. 3.17.
that Jesus Christ the forty day after his resurrection, visibly, and before
all his Apostles eyes went up into heaven, that is to say: in the majesty of
God his father, in glory and eternal felicity, in which he was before, he
came into this miserable world, for to be made man, yea before the constitution
of the world, that is to say: from everlasting.

The xxxiii. Article.
I Believe that he ascended in heaven for to accomplish and fulfill, Ephe. 4.
John. 16.
and to make an end of his pilgrimage: John. 14. Heb. 10.
also for to prepare us the place, and to open the way for us in heaven, that
we may there ascend after him, John. 17. Ephe. 12.
and follow him as our head, for to be eternally united with him in glory. The
which we begin here through faith: 1. Cor. 12. Ephe. 4.
in like manner because, that of ye same he beautifieth his Church, in sending
the Comforter unto his Apostles (as he promised them) by which they should be
comforted, Ioh. 14.16. Acts. 1.2.
instructed, and directed in all truth: and the Church sustained, mainteyned,
and defended, against the wynds of Satan and all the gates of hell. Mat. 16.


The.xxxiiii. Article.
Ioh. 14. Romans 8. Heb. 9.
I Also believe that he is ascended into heaven, for to be there our Patron,
Intercessor, Mediator, and Advocate, because that now he appears for us,
before his fathers face obteyning for us grace and abundance of all goodness.
Mat. 11. Acts. 4. 1. Tim. 2. 1. John. 2.
In so much that I know nor receive any other Mediator between God and men,
nor any other Advocate, nor Intercessor before GOD the father then his only
son Jesus Christ our Lord. Unto him I draw my self, of him I content my
self, and any other I will not seek nor look for, fearing to blaspheme the
name of God, giving unto the creature that which belongs unto the Creator, or
unto the servant that which apperteyneth unto the master.

The.xxxv. Article.
I Believe that all those which demand, search, Esai. 55. Iere. 2. Math. 11.
Ioh. 14.16. 1. Tim. 2. 1. John. 3.
or receive any other Mediator, Intercessor, or Advocate, toward God the
father then Jesus Christ his son, do abuse and dream them selves greatly,
yea do blaspheme against God, and do dishonor unto Jesus Christ, and to the
Saints by which they pray. Mat. 3.11.17. Luke. 3.9. John. 1.3.6. 2. Cor. 4.
Colos. 1. Heb. 1.
For as God the father would be known, served, loved, feared, and honored in
his son Jesus Christ and not by any other means, so would he be prayed unto
and called upon in his son and by the only name of his son, and not
otherwise. For besides Jesus Christ there is no other God. Herein I think not
nor will not speak evil of ye blessed Saints The saints.
which are in heaven with the Lord, but will honor and reverence them, as
lawful and faithful servants of the Lord, 1. Cor. 3.6. Romans 12. Ephe. 4.5.
as the Temple of the holy Ghost and true members of Christ, 1. Cor. 4.11 Phil.
3. 2. These. 3. Heb. 6.11.15
and will have them as myrrours and examples before my eyes, for to follow them
as well in their good life and conversation: as in their faith and holy doctrine.
Furthermore of them or by them, I look for none other thing, knowing that all
my goodness, aid and help, proceeds from one only God, Psalm. 121. Esai. 45.
Iere. 2. Oseas. 13. Romans 11. Iam. 1. Colos. 1. 2. These. 1.
by the means of one only Jesus Christ, who has made the Saints worthy of
his glory by his free grace, by which also (as I believe) he will make me
worthy with them for to be their companion in glory, because that al together
do give honor, praise and glory unto him alone, Apoc. 4.19.
for ever and ever.

The.xxxvi. Article.
Psalm. 110. Colos. 3. Heb 8.10.12 Mat. 8. Job. 1.2.21 Psalm. 37.94 John. 1.10.
Heb. 1.
I Believe that the same Jesus Christ is set down at the right hand of God
the father almighty. That is to say, that he reigns in one self majesty
and equal power with God his father, by whom he so governs his until the
consummation of the world, that no power of the adversary can hurt them without
his permission and will: Psalm. 8. Mat. 11.28 Ioh. 13.17.
Also the father has made and constituted him Lord and Ruler over all
creatures, celestial and terrestrial, giving him all power over heaven and
earth, Ephe. 1. Philip. 2. Heb. 2.
when he elevated him above all principallitie and power, virtue and seignory,
and above every name which is named, not only in this world: Esai. 42. Romans
12. 1. Cor. 12. Ephe. 1. Colos. 1. Math. 16. Ephe. 5.
but also in that to come. And has assubiected all things, under his feet:
Constituting him above all things to be the head of the Church, the which is
his body. And therefore I receive not nor acknowledge any other to be the head
of the church: but one only Christ, who has given his blood for to wash her
from her filthiness, and to heal her of her wounds, who keeps, nurrisheth,
John. 14.16 Mar. 21. 1. Cor. 3. Ephe. 2. 1. Pet. 2.
defends and governs her by his spirit. He is the only head and foundation
of the Church, upon whom every one ought to build according to his vocation.

The.xxxvii. Article.
Mark. 16. John. 20. Acts. 1.3. Irene. Turtul. S. Ierom. S. August. Virgil.
Flugence.
I Believe that Jesus Christ is ascended into heaven, and that he is there
corporallye: that is to say, in flesh, bone, body and soul. So that he is not,
nor cannot be (by such means and fashion) here below on the earth with us, for
as much as his body (although that it be glorious) cannot be in diverse places,
nor in many places at one very time: but so in one (according to the nature of
his glorious body) that then he cannot be in any other: Math. 14. Mark. 6.
Luke. 24. John. 20.
otherwise he should not be a true and natural body, but a shadow: that is to
say: a thing appearing and not being, the which is false, and altogether
against our faith. And therefore I say and confess the true and natural body
of Christ, Acts. 3. 1. Cor. 15. Ephe. 1.
to be in heaven, and that from thence he shall not depart, until he has put
all his enemies under his feet, and come for to judge both the quick and the
dead.

The.xxxviii. Article.
Ma. 24.25. Acts. 3.
I Believe when the number of the elect children of God shall be accomplished,
the Lord Jesus in that same body, with which he suffered, 2. These. 3. Psalm.
50.97 Esai. 65.66 Dani. 7. Malac. 3. 2. Pet. 3. John. 5. Romans 2. 2. Tim. 2.
with which he roase and ascended into heaven, shall come with great power and
majesty, visibly in a cloud, even as he ascended, and that shall be to judge
the quick and the dead, and shall give unto every one according to Justice,
unto the good which shall be found among them, after their goodness, and to the
wicked after their naughtines. That judgment shall be general: Esai. 45. Mat.
24.2^ John. 5. Romans 14. 1. These. 4. 1. Cor. 15.
that is to say, all shall be called and summoned to appear personally, by ye
voice of the Angel, to which, all shall appear, as well the good as evil,
the elect, as reprobate, that every one do make and render up his account and
reckoning before the judicial seat of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.
of all things done by them in this world, be it good or ill: yea, Math. 12.
Dani. 12. Apoc. 20.
for every idle word, the which the world does not think to be sin. Then
shall all those be saved, which shall be found written in the book of life.

The.xxxix. Article.
Mat. 25. Mark. 4. Math. 13.
I Believe that then shall be made the total and last separation of the good
from the wicked, of the elect from the reprobate, the which now are mingled
together, as the good fishes and badde in the nets, the chafe with the
corn, and the darnell with the wheat: Math. 5. Luke. 3.
But when the harvest comes, he which has the fan in his hands will make
the separation, and will put the corn aside in his garner: but the chaf and
tares shall be cast into the fire, for to burn eternally. Then shall be perfectlye
declared and known the justice and mercy of the Lord, Math. 25. Romans 2.16. 1.
Cor. 4. 2. These. 3.
with the fruit of the Cross and blood of Jesus Christ: the which now we
know only but in part. Then the good and elect shall know the stone, 2. Pet.
3. Psalm. 118. Esai. 28. Math. 21. Luke. 2. Acts. 4. 1. Peter. 2.
upon which they builded their faith and hope, and shall not be confounded: And
the wicked shall also know the stone, upon which they stumbled, the which they
rejected, contemned and despised, and shall be confounded. Then the Lord Jesus
shall make an end of his office and ministry, Sopho. 3. 1. Cor. 15. Ephe. 4.
for his mistical body shall be altogether accomplished with all his members, and
shall render the kingdom and his spowse (which is the Church) unto God his
father, al fair, Ephe. 5.
glorious, erreprehensible and acceptable, without spot or wrinckle, or any
such thing. 1. Cor. 15. Heb. 2.
Then shall be perfectly vanquished and confounded Satan, hell, sin and death,
and all the other adversaries of Christ, who at this present do exercise yet
tirrany over all his members, Romans 8.
holding them under their griefs, bonds and snares: But then we as people
ravished for Joy, Oseas. 13. 1. Cor. 15. 1. Ioh. 5.
will rehearse the words that are written, O Death where is thy stinge? O Hell
where is thy victory? But thanks be unto GOD, which has given us victory
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The xl. Article.
I Believe that that Judgment being marvelous, Joel. 2. Heb. 10. Math. 24.
Luke 21. Roma. 8.
terrible and fearful unto the wicked and reprobate, is much to be desired,
and of great consolation unto the good, faithful and elect, for as much as the^
their total redemption (to weete of body) shall be ended, Psalm. 127. Mat. 25.
Luke. 14. Sapience. 5 Exo. 32. Mat. 10.
and that they shall receive the fruit of their labors: Their Innocence shall be
openly declared and known of all the world, and they shall see the vengaunce
and condemnation of the wicked, which have tirrannously afflicted and tormented
them in this world, Romans 2. 1. Cor. 4.
whose iniquitye and wickedness shall be manifested by the Lord, and clearly
known of all, to their great confusion, and to the honor and glory of the just
children of God, the which shall be in perfect peace and tra^quillitie, Sapience.
5 Esai. 25.66 Apoc. 7.21.
and shall have full joy and fruition of all that, which the Lord has
promised and prepared for them that love him. Esai. 64. 1. Cor. 2. 1. John. 3.
Which the eye has not seen, nor the ear has heard, neither has it entered
into man's heart. Therefore I tarry and look for that great day of retribution,
Romans 8. 1. Cor. 5.
with a great desire, as the same which brings and declares unto me my
chiefest goodness.

The.xli. Article.
I Believe that we shall not all dye, 1. Cor. 15. 1. These. 4. S. August,
but we shall be all changed in a moment: that is to say, that in that latter day
and general judgment, some shall be found living, which shall never dye by
separation of ye body and soul: but shall abide so alive eternally, that
Christ may be known Lord and Judge of the quick and the dead, Dan. 7. 1.
Pet. 4. John. 5. Act. 10. Romans 14. 2. Tim. 4. Romans 5. Gala. 3.
and his grace and merit may be found greater then the sin of Adam. For as
sin has reigned to death: In like-maner must grace reign through Jesus Christ
to eternal life. Nevertheless they shall be changed and transformed from
corruption into incorruption, from mortallity to immortallity, from despising
into glory: insomuch that they shall be the chiefest of of all the gifts, graces
and benefits which the Lord shall give unto those which before were dead,
whom they shall not go before: 1. These. 4.
but all together shall be ravished in the clouds before in the air, and also
they shall be always together with the Lord.

Behold for the second point of my faith, touching Jesus Christ, the second
person of the Trinity, and of the restoration and repairing of man, don by him.

Let us now come unto the third point, which is of the holy Ghost, by whom
man is restored, maintained and keept in his being.

I believe in the holy Ghost.
The.xlii. Article.
Gene. 1.6 Psa. 51.143 Esa. 59 63. Math. 3.28 John 14.16 1. John. 5. 1. Cor. 12.
I Believe that the holy Ghost, is one divine person distinct from the father
and the son proceeding of them both, equal in all and through all, and
coeternall with them, by whom the Church has been always, is yet and shall be
ruled, conducted, direct^d and governed, until the consumation of this world:
by whom also have spoken all the holy Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore I believe nor receive any other Vicar or
Lieuetenant of Christ in earth, within his Church: John. 14.
but the holy Ghost, which cannot be received of the wicked.

The.xliii. Article.
I Believe that the holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 1.5. Ephe. 1.^ John. 1.3. Romans 8. Gala.
4.
is the wages and ernest of our celestial enheritance, by whom we are assured,
assertained and lively persuaded in our consciences, that we are the children
of God, and adoptiue brethren of Jesus Christ, Exo. 8.31. Luke. 11. John. 1^.
Acts. 2. Romans 5. 1. Cor. 2. 2. Cor. 1.
and consequentlye Coheyres of eternal life. That is also the finger of God,
the which printeth in our minds the faith of those things, seals and
confirms the promises of the Lord within our hearts, through his goodness
and grace, that we need not to doubt any thing at all.

The.xliiii. Article.
I Believe that that holy Ghost, 1. Reg. 10. Psalm. 104.
dwelling in us, does regenerate us through his grace and virtue, John. 3. Romans
6.8. Ephe. 4. Colos. 3. Titus. 3.
into a renouation and changing of life, mortifiyng in us, all that which is
of us and of the old man, the flesh and the world, and quickening all that
which is his, that we should live no more to our selves: but to Christ, who
also does and works in us al good works agreeable to the father, Esai. 26.
Prouer. 16. 2. Cor. 3. Phil. 2. John. 16.
and rebukes, checketh and vanquisheth the world of sin, righteousness and
judgment.

The.xlv. Article.
Math. 10. Luke 12.21. John. 14. 1. Cor. 2. 1. John. 2. Esai. 51.66 Job. 1.2.
John. 14. Acts. 6. Romans 8. 2. Cor. 1.
I Believe that the holy Ghost is the Doctor of the Ignorant, who teaches,
directs and leads us into the knowledge of the truth, by which we are
delivered from darkness and set into life. Also he is the comforter of the
poor afflicted: for to aid, fortify, comfort and assist them in all troubles
and adversities, that they should not despair in them, as the wicked and
reprobate do: but that they should taste and feel, Act. 14. Heb. 12. 1.
Pet. 14.
the gentleness, benignity and mercifulness of the father, who through cross
and diverse trybulations does bring his into eternal glory.

The.xlvi. Article.
I Believe that that holy Ghost, Gene. 2. Act. 17. Esai. 57. John. 7.20. Romans 8.
is the spirit of life, quickening all other spirits, as well celestial as
terrestrial, and that he is only holy in him self, by whom all other are
sanctified: so that, if any spirits are holy (as they are) either in heaven or
in earth, it is not but through the sanctity of that holy spirit, Exo. 31.
Iere. 1. Eze. 20.3^ John. 17. 1. These. 5. Heb. 9.
which is the cause wherefore I believe in him: that is to say, that in him I
hope and put al my affiance, assurance and trust, as I have spoken before of
the Father and the Son.

Behold the third point of my faith, which is touching the holy Ghost the
third person of the holy Trinity, by whom (after that we are made by the
father and restored by the son) we are kept and governed unto the end. Now
it remains to entreat of the fourth point of my faith, which is touching the
Church and the things concerning the same.

I believe the holy catholic Church, the Communion of Saints.
The.xlvii. Article.
Gal. 4. Numb. 20. 1. Cor. 12.14 Ephe. 5. John. 10. Heb. 12. Roma. 8. Ephe. 1.
2. Timo. 1. Titus. 1.3.
I Believe and confess one only catholic and universal Church, which is a
holy Congregation and assembly of all the faithful believers, chosen and
predestined to eternal life, before the constitution of the world: of whose
number I account and believe my self to be one, through the only grace and
mercy of the Father, having the merit of my good Lord and Master Jesus
Christ, and not by my good works or merits, which are none at all.

The.xlviii. Article.
I Believe that Church to be invisible to man's sight, 1. Reg. 19. Romans 11. 2.
Tim. 2. Gene. 22. Psalm. 2.86. Esai. 21.49 Iere. 3. Ephe. 4.
and unto God alone known, the which is not set, tied, or limited in a
certain place, or to certain men, but dispersed and separated abroad through
out the world: Nevertheless ioygned together in heart, will and mind through
the band of faith and love, acknowledging all of them one only God, 1. Cor.
10.11
one only head and mediator Jesus Christ, one faith, one law, one baptism, one
spiritual table, in which one only meat and one only spiritual drink is
administered unto them, until the consumation of this world. Math. 23. John. 10.
Heb. 11.
That Church comprehends in it all the just and elect, from the first just
Abell unto the last, which shall be ^ound in the end of the world, Math. 23.
and therefore I call it universal. For touching the visible Church, which is
the congregation of the good and of the wicked, the elect and reprobate, Romans
10. Hebr. 11.
and generally of all those which say that they believe in Christ, I believe
it not, because I see it with my eye, and faith is of invisible things.

The.xlix. Article.
Esai. 2.4.5. Mat. 13.21 1 Timothy 3. 2. These. 2. Heb. 3.
I Believe that that invisible Church is the Lords field, within which there
is neither cockle nor darnell: but that it is the house and habitacle of the
holy Ghost, within which there is neither Caim, Judas, nor the wicked rich man.
John. 10. Math. 25. Ezec. 34. Zach. 10.
That it is also the sheepefolde of Christ, within which there comes no
stinking nor infected goats: but all sheep, lambs and domestical ewes,
bearing fruit in their times and seasons. Romans 12. 1. Cor. 12. Ephe. 4. Psalm.
45. Cant. 2.4. Ephe. 5.
That it is the body of Christ, in which their is no rotten or corrupt member.
That is also the spowse of Christ, pure and clean, without spot or wrincle or
any such like thing, holy and erreprehensible, purified and sanctified in the
blood, and by the word of his head and wel-beloued spowse Jesus Christ, John.
10. Roma. 8.
wherefore those which are grafted in her through lively faith cannot perish.

The.l. Article.
I Believe that the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost, Romans 12. 1. Cor. 12.
Ephe. 4.
are dispersed and given unto every one of the members of that Church, not so
much for the particular profit and vtility of them, as for the general profit
and vtilitye of all the assemble, or Church, 1. Cor. 14. Ephe. 2. Titus. 3.
and that altogether through grace, without any merit, according to the good
will and providence of God, to some more, Math. 25. Luke. 19. Romans 12.15 1.
Cor. 12. Colos. 2. Gala. 6.
and to some less, that we may know the one to have need of the other, and
may aid and help the one the other, in all necessities, as well corporal as
spiritual, as members of one body.

The.li. Article.
I Believe the communion of Saints: that is to say, Math. 25. Ephe. 4. Romans
12. 1. Cor. 12.
that all that which the Lord gives us in this world, whether they be
goods concerning the body of the spirit, that he gives them chiefly to the
profit and vtillitie of all the Church, and therefore ought to be distributed
and bestowed unto all the faithful, Math. 5. Acts. 4. 1. Pet. 4. 1. John. 3.
chiefly in necessity: Insomuch, that as we do al communicate in one GOD, in
one faith, Ephe. 4. 1. Cor. 11.
in one law, in one baptism, and in one spiritual table, that also we may
communicate in all that which proceeds and comes unto us by the means of
all those things: Math. 25. 1. Cor. 4. James. 5.
for otherwise we are not Christians, nor faithful dispensators of Christ: I
always reject the Anabaptisticall Communalty of goods, wives and other like
things, Math. 14. John. 12.13 Acts. 2.4.
receiving the Apostolical communaltie, which having and possessing some
goods perticulerly, deuideth and distributeth unto every one, as he shall have
need, and as necessity requires.

The lii. Article
I Believe that that Church is as the Ark of Noah, within which there was
health and life, and out of which there was but death, ruin and perdition. For
as Christ is, and reigns in his Church: so Satan is and reigns altogether
out of the same, Math. 28. John. 14. Psalm. 119. Mat. 8.14. Mark. 4. Luke. 8.
the which also is kept through the spirit of Christ, directed and guided by
his word, and nurrished by the Sacraments. She shall have always
adversaries, Esai. 59.63 Zach. 7. Math. 16.
and shall be always tormented in that sea, by the thunders of Antechriste, and
by the winds and tempests of Satan. Esaias. 40.
For all the gates of Hell do arm and set themselves against it. 1. Cor. 3.
Ephe. 2. 1. John. 2. Esai. 25. Apoc. 19.
But she shall not be drowned in the waters, but shall abide eternally: For
so much as she has a good Patron and foundation, which is Jesus Christ the
righteous. Therefore I call it myllitant, looking for the triumphant of the
blessed, where there shall be but peace, i^ie and eternal salvation.

The.liii. Article
I Believe that the Lord has given unto us three signs or principal marks,
Math. 28. Mark. 16. John. 8.10.
by which we may know that Church, that is to say: the word, 2. Pet. 1. John.
5.
the Sacraments, and the disciplyne. I call the word, only that which was
revealed by the holy Ghost; unto the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles
of Jesus Christ, the which is contained in the cononicall books of the old
and new testament, John. 15. Ioh. 1.3.6.
by which we are mundified and receive the very same, and altogether as much as
by the Sacraments: That is to say, that Jesus Christ gives and communicates
himself unto us by the word of faith, Romans 12. Ephe. 3.
as well (without saying better) as by the Sacraments, although it be after
another manner and fashion.

The.liiii. Article.
John. 5. Gala. 1. 2. Tim. 3. Esai. 28. Deuteronomy. 4.12.28. Pro. 30. Apoc. 22.
I Believe that word of God to be of more greater authority then the Church,
the which alone sufficiently declares and teaches unto us all things
concerning our salvation, what we must do or not do. That is the true patron,
and perfect rule, after which all the faithful ought to govern and direct their
life, without declining either to the right hand or left, without chainging
any thing or diminishing, Gene. 1. Deuteronomy. 31. Eccle. 1.
knowing that all the works of God are perfect, and chiefly his word.

The lv. Article.
I Believe that as one only Jesus Christ amongst al men is holy and true,
Esai. 53. John. 8. 1. Pet. 2. Psalm. 16. John. 8.14.17. Romans 3. 2 Cor. 1. Esa.
12.40 55. John. 7. Exo. 13. Psalm. 119. Deuteronomy. 8. Math. 4. John. 6. Romans 1. Phil.
1. 2. Timo. 4.
and all other are sinners and liars, that also amongst al doctrines, his
only doctrine is holy and true, and all other are unclean, and full of
lyinges. That doctrine is the fountain of life, the lamp and pyller of fire,
for to guide us: The bread of the soul, and the virtue of GOD, to the
salvation of all believers. Therefore the same only for all occasion ought to
be advanced, preached, heard, understood, and received through out the whole
world: to the consolation and health of the believers, and to the greatest
condempnation of the unbelievers, wicked and reprobate. Exo. 16. Mat. 21. Luke.
2. John. 9. 1. Pet. 2.
For as the Manna in the wilderness gave unto some worms, and to other some
good meat, and Christ was set and given as a stone of offense, to the ruin
of the wicked, and resurrection of the good: So the word of the Gospel, is
unto some a savor of death in death and unto other a savor of life in life,
Cor. 2.
the which only I receive and take, ^ Joshua. 1.
for my guide, after which I will live and dye.

The.lvi. Article.
Leuit. 19. Deuteronomy. 11. John. 5.
I Believe yt the reading of that word or Gospel, ought not nor can not be
forbidden or prohibited any man whatsoever, of what estate or condition soever
he be: Ma. 24.28. Mark. 6.16 Acts. 1.
But ought to be common unto all the world, as well men as women: yea also in a
vulgar and common languag understand of al, for as much as to al generally it is
directed, and the promises of the Lord contained in the same appertains unto
all, Roma. 13. Luke. 24.
whereby Antechrist with all his do exercise great and cruel tyranny upon all
the faithful children of God, 1. Timo. 4. 2. Timo. 3. 2. Pet. 3.
as well for that he takes from them and forbids them the reading thereof,
setting before them his dreams, cannons, and damnable traditions in steed of
the same. But also for that he forbids and commands in any indifferent
things, upon pain of deadly sin and eternal condempnation, which is a true
note and mark of Antechrist.

The.lvii. Article.
I Believe that holy euangelical doctrine, Heb. 2. Ioh. 5.10. Math. 8.9.10.27.
Luke. 9.10. Ac. 3.4.5.9 13.14.19.20
to have been confirmed in his time by divine miracles, as well by Jesus Christ,
the prophets and Apostls, as by other faithful and good ministers of the same:
So that it is not need now to have, or demand other: but to content our
selves with that which has been made, and to believe simply in the only word,
without seeking any further. Watching and always taking heed that we be not
deceived by the false miracles of Antechriste (of which the world is at this
day full) which are done and wrought by the opperation of satan for to
conform all idolatries, errors, Math. 24. Mark. 13.
2. These. 2. Apo. 13.16.
abuses and iniquities, in blinding the poor ignorant people. The Lord does
permit the same iustlye, 3. Reg. 23. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
because they well not receive the spirit of truth for to be saved. He
permits that they should receive the spirit of lyinges with the effecacie
of abusion for to be condemned, for that they have allowed lying and
iniquity. And have rejected righteousness and truth. Math. 27. Mark. 16.
Ioh. 10.21. Act. 3.5.19. 1. Cor. 12. 1. Cor. 14.
Then the true miracles are done by the only virtue of God, for the
confirmation of his doctrine, and are given unto the Infidelles, and not unto
the believers: but the prophecy, that is to say, the word is given unto the
faithful and believers.

The.lviii. Article.
Gene. 17. Roma. 4. Math. 28. Mark. 16. Luke 3.
I Do also believe the holy Sacraments (which are the second mark of the true
Church (to be the signs of the Alliance made between God and us, by Jesus
Christ, seals of the Lords promise and externe and visible Symboles of the
inward faith, S. August
the which are only two in number: to weete. Luke 22. John. 1.3. Titus. 3.
Act. 19.
Baptism, and the holy Supper of the Lord: These are not void and emptye
signs, but full: That is to say, not only significatiue signs, but also
exhibitiue, of the thing they signify indeed (as we will declare hereafter
GOD wylling.) Touching the other five, which are received and exercised with
great abuse and superstition in the papisticall Church: to weete, Math. 19. 1.
Tim. 5. 2. Timo. 1. Mark. 8. Ieam. 5.
Confyrmation, Confession, Marriage, laying on of hands, otherwise called,
order and unction. I say all those to have been ecclesiastical ceremonies,
which the holy Fathers, have used in their time holyly, without any
superstition, which also we may at this day use after their example, 2. Cor.
3. Gala. 3.4. Ephe. 2. Coloss. 2. Hebr. 9.10.
so that it be done without error, abuse and superstition: Always saved the
christian and euangellicall lybertye, the which delyuereth our consciences
from all external Ceremonies instituted by men, without the word of God.

The.lix. Article.
Mat. 28. Mark. 16. Gene. 17. Coloss. 2.
I Believe that the Baptism, is the sign of the new alliance between god and
us, made by Jesus Christ, and the mark of the Christians in the Gospel, as of
late the Circumcision was the mark of the Jews under the law. John. 3. Ephe.
5. Titus. 3.
That it is also an exterior washing done by water, signifiing an interior
washing in the spirit, don by the blood of Christ: the which ought to be given
and bestowed, Mat. 19.28 Mar. 10.16 Heb. 6. Ephe. 4.
as well to the little Children, as to the old ones, according to the ordinance
of Jesus Christ, and that once only, without reiterating it. Exo. 14.
That is the red Sea, within which, Pharao (that is to say the Devil) with
his prouokementes of sin, 1. Cor. 10.
is altogether drowned, and the Israelites passed through the mids safe. Acts.
4.
And afterward walked through the wilderness of this world, with great
anguish, John. 6.
werynesse and troubles, used daily the celestial Manna, which is the holy
word of the Lord, until they entered by death, into the Land of the
celestial promise.

The lx. Article.
I Believe also that the Baptism is the entrance of the Church, Acts. 2. John.
3. Ephe. 5. Titus. 3.
a washing of regeneration and a renewing in the holy Ghost, by which we
renownce our selves, Satan, the flesh, sin and the world, Romans 13. Ephe. 4.
C^lo. 3.
for having laid away the old man with all his concupicences, we put on the
new man, which is Jesus Christ in righteousness and holiness, Romans 6. Colo.
2. Gala. 3. 2. Cor. 5. Colo. 3.
with whom we dye, and are buried in his death, that as Christ is risen from
death, by the glory of the Father: so should we walk in newness of life,
mortifiyng always that which is of us in us, for to destroy and root out the
body of sin.

The.lxi. Article.
I Believe that that baptism ought to be administered (not with oil, Mat.
3.28. Mark. 1. Luke 3. John. 1.3. Act. 13.8.9
salt, spittle, or such like things) but only in pure and clean water, in the
name of the Father, the son and of the holy Ghost: after the ordinance and
institution of God, without changing any thing, adding or diminishing, and
that altogether in a vulgar and common language, understood of all:
forasmuch as all that which is done or said in the Church of Christ, 1. Cor.
14.
ought to be understood and known of all the faithful. Math. 16. John. 3.
Gala. 3. Acts. 2.22 1. Pet. 3. Romans 8. Gala. 4. Math. 28. Titus. 3.
By that Baptism we are changed, and transformed from the Children of wrath,
sin, dyuell and perdition, into ye children of God of grace and salvation:
For to be heirs of GOD, and coheyres with Christ in eternal life. And
therefore it ought to be given and bestowed only to reasonable creatures,
which are capable of those things, and not unto vels, or such like things
which cannot receive it, nor exercise the things sygnifyed by the same.

The.lxii. Article.
Mark. 16. Romans 2. Act. 8.9.10
I Believe that Baptism of water not to be so necessary unto salvation that
man cannot be saved without it, in case of necessitye: Mat. 19. 1. Cor. 7.
Also I doubt not of the salvation of the little Infanntes which dye without
Baptism, but that they are saved in the faith of their parents, as well as if
they were baptized, as also in times past the little Children under the law
which dyed without Circumcision, 2. Reg. 12.
were saved in the faith of their parents. I understand that only of the
children of the faithful, Genesis 17. Romans 4.
to whom the promyses of the Lord appertayned, and not to the Infidels and
reprobate.

The.lxiii. Article.
I Believe that the holy Sacrament of the Supper, Math. 26. Mark. 14. Luke 22.
1. Cor. 12.
is a holy and externe Ceremonye, instituted by Jesus Christ in his Gospel,
one day ebefore his death, under the likeness of bread and wine, in
remembrance and recordation of his death and passion, having and containing in
it the promise of the forgiveness of sins, by which we perticipate truly the
body and blood of Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 10.
and are nurrished and fed in the Lords house (which is his Church) after that
we are entered in the same by the Baptism. That also ought to be given and
bestowed unto all under both kinds, Math. 26. 1. Cor. 11.
after the ordinance and commandment of Christ, against which it is not
lawful to attempt any thing.

The.lxiiii. Article.
1. Cor. 11. Iereneus. S. Ambro. S. August. s. Chrisost. Tertulian.
I Believe that in that holy Sacrament, the signs or Symboles are not in any
wise chainged: but that they abide wholye in their nature. That is to say, that
the bread is not changed nor transubstantiated (as the Caphardes and false
Doctors have taught, deceiving the poor people) into the body of Jesus Christ,
neither the wine transustantiated into his blood. Math. 26. Luke 22. Genesis 17.
Exo. 12.19. Oseas. 4. Romans 8. 2. Cor. 3.
But that the bread abides always bread, and the wine, wine, every one in
his proper and first nature. For the words which Christ spoke unto his
Apostles in giving the bread, saying: This is my body, I do understand and
believe it to be spoken by a figure called Metonimia, which is a kind of
speaking very common in the holy scriptures, as the holy scriptures and
ecclesiastical Doctors, Ireneus, Cyprian, Tertulian, Ambrose, Augustine,
Chrysostom and such other, have understood and declared by their writings,
who lived before the Counsel of Lateran, in which was concluded ye
transubstantiation of the bread into the body of Christ and the wine into his
blood, De sum. Trin. tit. 1. Cap. 1.
and given for an article of faith to the great dishonor of God, and offense of
all the Church, in the year of our Lord.1050. by pope Leo the ninth, in
which time Satan was then let loose, as was foreshewed in the Apocalips, Apo.
20.
and troubled the Church of Christ more, then it was before.

The.lxv. Article.
I Believe that all that Sacrament lies and consists in using, Act. 2.20.
Luke 22. 1. Cor. 11.
so that in not using, that bread and that wine do differ nothing from other
common bread and wine, S. August Origin.
which men use commonly in their houses, and therefore I believe not, that the
body of Christ is contained, tied, or enclosed, in that bread, under that
bread, or with that bread: neither the blood, in that wine, under that wine, or
with that wine. But I believe and confess his body to be in heaven at the
right hand of the Father (as we have declared before) and that as often and
when we use that bread and that wine, Article. 37.
according to the ordinance and institution of Christ, that truly and indeed,
we receive his body and his blood.

The.lxvi. Article.
Job. 6. 1. Cor. 10.
I Believe that that receiving is done not carnallye or corporally, but in
spyrite, through a lyuelye and true faith. S. August
That is to say, that the body and blood of Christ, are not given to the
mouth, or belly, for the nurrishing of the body, but to our faith, for
nurrishing of the spirit, and inward manne to eternal life. And for to do
that, it is not needful that Christ descend from heaven for to come unto
us: but that we ascend unto him, Phil. 3. Colos. 3.
addressing our hearts through lively faith an high to the right hand of the
father, where he sits, from whence we look for our redemption: and not to
seek it in these corruptible elements.

The.lxvii. Article.
I Believe that that holy Supper, 1. Cor. 11. Romans 8.
is a Sacrament of faith unto the faithful only, and not for the infidelles:
in which one fyndeth and receives, S. August
that that one brings thither, and no more, except it be peradventure
augmentation of faith, grace and virtue, and therefore in the same, John. 6. 1.
Cor. 10.
those only do receive and find Jesus Christ to salvation which bring it
with them through a lively and true faith. John. 13. 1. Cor. 11.
But others do find and receive there only the externe and visible Symboles,
and that to their condempnation, as Judas and other such wicked and reprobate.

The.lxviii. Article.
Luke 22. 1. Cor. 11. Iereneus.
I Believe that that Sacrament contains two things, one which is
terrestrial, carnal and vsible, another which is celestial, spiritual and
invisible: and I do confess that as our body and inward man receives the
terrestrial and visible thing which is the bread and the wine, by which it is
alymented and nurrished, that also verily our spirit and inward man received
the celestial and spiritual thing, signified by the bread and wine, Ephe. 5.
to wete, the body and blood of Christ: So that we are made one with him, bone
of his bones, flesh of his flesh, perticipating with him in all righteousness
and other virtues, gifts and goodness, which the eternal father has put in him.

The.lxix. Article.
1. Cor. 10. Exo. 1.2.6.17.
I Believe that the holy Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets and all other faithful
and good people, which have gone before us and are dead in faith, did know
far of him that should come, to wete, Christ, Hebr. 11. Ioh. 6.14. Ephe. 3.
Romans 1.3. Gala. 3. Ephe. 4. 1. Cor. 10. Number. 20.
by the word and faith: and did receive as much, and the very same, which we
receive now by the Sacraments: who also were of the very same Church, faith
and law, of which we are: Christians as we are, and have used the same
Sacraments in figure, which we use in deed.

The.lxx. Article.
I Believe that unto that holy Table ought to be admytted, 1. Cor. 5.10.11. 2.
These. 3.
but only the faithful, the true contryte and penitent, and all that are
unworthy to be rejected, for fear least they defyle and contamynate the holy
meats, which the Lord gives not, Math. 7.15
but unto this domestical and faithful. I call unworthy, all Infydels,
Idolaters, blasphemers, contempners of God, Heretics, and all people which
make sects, for to break the unity of the Church: all perjured persons,
all those which are rebellious against their fathers and mothers, and their
superiors, all seditious persons, quarrellers, fighters, whoremongers, thieves,
rauishers, covetous, droonkerdes, gluttons, and generallye, all those which
lead a slanderous and dyssolute life. Such manner of people have no part nor
portion in the kingdom of God, Gala. 5. Ephe. 5.
therefore they ought to be rejected and put out of the Church: Romans 16. 1. Cor.
5.6. 2. Cor. 2.6 2. These. 3.
with whom it is not lawful to frequent, eat, drink, or contract allyaunce,
except it be peradventure to win and lead them to repentance.

The.lxxi. Article.
I Believe that the popish Mass The Mass
is not, nor can not be the holy Supper of the Lord. But a mere invention of
lying and wicked men: altogether contrary unto the same, as the night to the
day, Beliall to Christ: The which shall be known of all men, more clearelie
then the noone day, by the conference and collation made between the
institution of that Supper, recyted and written by the Evangelists, Math. 26.
Mark. 14. Luke 22. 1. Cor. 11.
and chieflye by the Apostle Saint Paul, and the celebration of the Mass.
Therefore it is not a remembrance of the true sacrifice, that is to say, of
the death and Passion of Christ, as the holy Supper is. Psalm. 115. Romans 3.5.
Colo. 1. Hebr. 9.10.12.13. 1. Pete. 1. 1. John. 2. Apos. 1.15.
But a renouncing of the same, for so much as it attrybuteth that which
belongs unto the only blood of Christ shed upon the cross, to wete,
satisfaction, purgation, and remission of sins, with collation of grace: and
makes us to worship the creature, in steed of the Creator, a piece of bread
in steed of Jesus Christ our only Lord, savior, and redeemer.

The.lxxii. Article.
I Believe the third mark of the Church (which is the Ecclesiastical
discipline) to be greatly profitable, Math. 28. Luke. 17. John. 20. 1. Cor.
5.10.14.
yea, necessary in ye Catholic church, for ye consolation of the good, and
correctio of the wicked: Acts. 5.8. 1. Cor. 5.
The which also I receive, and submyt my self to the same, knowing that it is
the ordinance of Christ in the Gospel: 1. Cor. 2. 1. Timo. 1. 1. Cor. 14.
The which also was practiced by the Apostles in the primative Church, that all
might be done honestly and in good order: which is an honest and necessary
thing in every Congregation.

The.lxxiii. Article.
Math. 16.
I Believe the power to bind and loose, excommunicate, and absolve, which we
call commonly the keys of the Church, Math. 18. John 20.
to be given of God, not unto one man or two, or to any particularly, but unto
all the Church, that is to say, to all the faithful and believing in Christ,
not for to destroy, 1. Cor. 10. 2. Cor. 6.
waste or consume, but for to build up and advance it altogether. Therefore I
say and confess that the excommunication or absolution of the same, ought
not, nor can not be given at the appetyte, or will of some perticularlie, but
by the consent of all the Church, or at least of the greatest, best, and
holiest part of the same, congregated, and assembled in the name of Christ
with prayers.

The.lxxiiii. Article.
I Believe that excommunication executed duelye, Math. 18. John. 20. Math. 16.
Acts. 5.8. 1. Cor. 5.
according as Jesus Christ has declared, and commanded in his Gospel, to
be of so great authority, power and strength, that it can shut men out of
heaven. So that all those which are by lawful excommunication rejected, and
put out of the Church mylitant, they shall be also rejected and put from the
Church tryumphant, 2* Cor. 2. Math. 18. 1. Tim. 1.
which is in heaven (except they repent) that is a sharp sword for to c^tte
away the rotten members of the mystical body of Christ, which is his Church.
Math. 16. Acts. 5.8. 1. Cor. 5. 2. These. 3.
A key for to shut up the heavens against the wicked, and a rod to chastise
and correct them: The which yet nevertheless, is not made for to confound
them, but as a spyrituall medicine for to amend, relieve, heal, and to set
them up again, from which they are fallen.

The.lxxv. Article.
Math. 18.
I Believe that that excommunicaon (which is the last staff of the Church)
ought not, nor can not be cast against any person, 1. Cor. 5.
which first has not received and made profession of the faith and christian
Religion. As also it cannot be pronounced for every small thing, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
as are, debtes, or other like things. Nor also be executed against all
sinners, Acts. 5.8. 1. Tim. 1. 2. John. 1. Math. 18. Luke. 17.
but only against publycke, rebellious, and obstynate sinners, toward whom
the word of God, and the brotherly correction, commanded by Christ in the
Gospel, takes no place. Wherefore all those do greatly abuse that staff which
do excommunicate the Christians, John. 9.12.16.
for small things, with out having suffered the brotherly correction. In like
manner also, those which do excommunicate the Jews, Turks, Heathens, and
other Infidels: yea, also the Flies, and other brute beasts, wylling to cast
and put out of the christian Church, all that which never was in it.

The.lxxvi. Article.
I Believe besides the same, Ephe. 4. Ioh. 13.15. Roma. 12.13.15. Gala. 6. Ioh.
2.3.4.
that the unity of spyrite and will, peace concord and love, that is to say,
true love and brotherly delection, amiable and the mutual supporting the one
toward the other, is also one of the marks and signs of the true calholyke
Church, and of the faithful children of God, by which they are known to be of
the school, and number of the Disciples of Jesus Christ: Iere. 7. Math. 7.21
25. Luke. 6.13. Romans 2. 1. Cor. 13.
And we must not glory of the title of Christian, or of the faith, saying: I
believe, I believe: except we have that love, peace, charity, and true unity
of the heart together, agreeing the one with the other in all good works:
James. 2. John. 8.14. 1. Ioh. 2.3.4.
For the true faith never goes without these things, by which also, it declares
and manifests it self unto al. These are ye signs and marks of the true
christian church, to which she is bound and tied, and not to a certain place,
S. August.
time or persons. And there she is perfect, where these marks are found and
exercised: and not otherwise, that if one of that fail, then it is not
perfect. And although that, that total perfection can be found for the estate
of this present world, in the Church myllytant, yet the fault ought to be
acknowledged before the Lord, and to endeavor to remedy and set it in good
order.

The.lxxvii. Article.
Luke. 22. Math. 28. Mark. 16. Luke. 24. Math. 10. Mark. 6. Luke. 9.10. Ephe. 6.
I Believe and receive in that Church two swords, that is to say, two powers,
the one Ecclesiastical and Spyrituall, the which consists in the only
administration of the word and Sacraments, she caryeth, neither rod, nor
staff, other then the tongue, and she uses none other knyfe then the sword
of the spyrite, Leuit. 21. Iere. 23. Ezec. 34. 3. Reg. 2. 1. Tim. 3. Titus. 1.
which is the word of God. In like manner I confess that all those which have
that sword between their hands, ought to be irreprehensible, as well in their
life as doctrine: Otherwise, one ought to depose and put them from their
offices, and to put and substytute other better, in their places. The other
power is pollitike, Romans 11.
to wete, the Magistrate, as touching externe and civil things, for to give
according to Justice unto every one that appertains unto him. 1. Pet. 2.


The.lxxviii. Article.
I Believe that the Magistrate, Exo. 18.2^. Deu. 16.17. Prou. 8. Esai. 1. Dam.
2. Roma. 13. 1. Peter. 2. Mat. 17.22.
is one ordained of God in his church for to defend the good people, and to
chastise and punish the wicked: To whom also we must render and give the
tribute, honor and reverence, and obey him in all things, which are not
against the word of God. Mark. 12. Luke. 26. John. 18. Ephe. 6. Colos. 3. 1.
Peter. 2.
And I do understand that not only of the faithful Magistrate: But also of
the unfaithful, wicked and Tyrant: to whom also we must obey as to the Lord,
in all things: so that he command nothing against the word of the Lord:
For then we ought rather to obey God then men, after the example of the
Apostles Peter and John.

The.lxxix. Article.
Romans 13. Deuteronomy. 7.12.17. 3. Reg. 15. 4. Reg. 18.23. Nehemias. Esai. 49. 4. Reg
23. Nehem. 8.
I Believe that unto the Magistrate belongs not only to have regard over
pollityke things, but also over the Ecclesiastical things, for to take away
and put down all Idolatry, and all false serving of God. For to destroy the
kingdom of Antichrist, and all false doctrine: and to promote the glory of
God, and to advance the kingdom of Christ: to cause the word of the Gospel
to be preached every where, and to maintain the same eue^ unto death: Deuteronomy. 13.
Also to chastise and punish the false Prophets, which lead the poor people
after Idolles and strange Gods: and which in steed of the Gospel, do preach
and teach the fables and traditions of men, to the dishonor of God, and of
Jesus Christ his son, to the great evil and offense of the hearers, and to
the ruin of all the Church. Roma. 13. 1. Pete. 2.
Unto that Magistrate, every person of what estate or condition so ever he be,
Exodus 22. Prou. 16.19.20. Baruc. 2. 2. Cro. 20. Psalm. 82. Esai. 45. Roma. 14.
Ierem. 29. 1. Tim. 2.
ought to be subject and obey him in all honest and reasonable things, for
that he represe^teth the person of ye great Lord, before whom every knee
ought to bow: Therefore he ought not to be forgotten in our prayers, for that
the Lord will dyrect him in all his ways, and that we may join together in
good peace and tra^quilitie under him.

The.lxxx. Article.
I Believe that that Magistrate (as also the sacraments and other like things)
was ordained of the Lord for to aid the imperfection of man in the corrupt
nature after the sin, Deuteronomy. 17. 1. Reg. 8.
whom the faithful (after he has proved all other means) may holyly and
iustlye use in all controversies, 1. Cor. 6. Romans 13.
which may happen between him and his neighbor, and for to make an end and
peace in all things. Wherefore he which in necessity will not use him, ought
rather to be judged an Annabaptist, then a Christian.

The.lxxxi. Article.
Exodus 22. 4. Reg. 23. 2. Cron. 15. 1. Esdr. 10. Hebr. 6. Deuteronomy. 6.10. Leuit.
19. Exo. 20.23. Math. 5.
I Believe that the Magistrate, holylie may give the oathe unto the faithful
in judgment, for to know the truth, and to make an end of all controversies
and dyfferences between men, the which ought to be done by the only name of
the living God: for as much as it is the third commandment of the first
Table. And although that the Christian perfection be, Iam. 5.
to say simply, yea, yea: nay, nay: without swearing any thing at all. Iere.
4.12. Esaias. 9. Gene. 22.
Yet nevertheless, the faithful may holylie use an oath in place and time,
with discretion, in the fear of God, for honest, just and true things, Hebr.
6. Romans 1.9. 2. Cor. 1. Gala. 1. Eccle. 23.27
for to confyrme the truth, when the honor of God, or the health of our
neighbor depends on it, and not otherwise. For the man that accustometh him
self to swearing shall be filled with iniquity, and the plague shall never
depart from his house. Deuteronomy. 23. Joshua. 4. Psalm. 76. Eccle. 5. Malac. 1. Math.
5.23
I do also confess, that as all oaths, vows and promyses (made according to
the Lords word) be it unto God, or to men, are obligatorie, and ought to be
kept and observed inuyolablie. Also that those which are made without, Judges.
11. Math. 14. Acts. 23.
or against the word and commandment of God (as are the monastical vows
and other such like, which promise impossible things and altogether against
the word of the Lord) do bind nothing at all: but may be holylie broken and
vyolated: 1. Reg. 25.
For in wicked promises, and in foolish and indiscrete vows, the faithful,
prudent and wise man may change his mind.

The.lxxxii. Article.
I Believe and confess that the estate of marriage is honorable amongst all
men, and the bed undefiled, Hebr. 13. Gene. 2. Math. 19. 1. Cor. 7. 1. Tim. 3.
Titus. 1.
holy and clean, ordained and instituted of God for generation, and for to
avoid fornication, from which none ought nor can not be rejected (except there
be some just and lawful let by the word of God, Leuit. 18. Genesis 1.8.9. 1.
Cor. 7. Sapi. 8. Math. 19.
) but ought to be free for all men of what estate or condition soever he be. For
it is a great deal better to marie then to burn. And therefore those which
have not the gift of contynencie, 1. Cor. 7. Sapi. 8. Mat. 19. 1. Cor. 7.
are bound to marie: least the temple of the holy Ghost, that is to say our
bodies, be polluted or profaned. 1. Cor. 3.6.


The.lxxxiii. Article.
1. Tim. 4. 1. Tim. 3. Romans 14.
I Do also believe that the forbidding of marriage to certain persons, as also
the forbidding of meats, the difference of days, apparel, and all such like
things, Malac. 1.2. Baruc. 2. Esai. 1.9. Iere. 6.13. Oseas. 6. Amos. 5. Gala.
4. Collos. 2. Roma. 14. 1. Cor. 8. 1. Tim. 4.
is the diuellysh doctrine of Antechriste, altogether contrary to the christian
and evangelical liberty, given by Jesus Christ, the which delivers us from
all those legalles, and external ceremonies, and puts us at liberty to use
all things (without offense nevertheless of our neighbor) with giving of
thanks unto God. For all things are made holy by the word and prayer, to him
which has known and received the truth. Wherefore to compel and constrain the
christians to such things, that is, to take from them, and rob them of the
christian liberty, to tyrannyse them, Apo. 13.17. Gala. 3.
and bring the^ under again the curse of the law, of which Christ by his
death and passion has delivered them. And it is a true mark and note of
antechrist.

The.lxxxiiii. Article.
I Believe yt the pure and true serving of God consists not in those
ceremonies and outward things, Esai. 1. Iere. 6. Math. 6.23 Luke. 17. 3. Reg.
18.
nor in much babbling, and mumbling of long prayers, nor in crying and howling
in the Temple, like unto Asses, or the Priests of Baall. John. 5.6. Romans 14.
Act. 7.17. Gala. 5.
But in spiritual things, as are the lively and true faith in God, and in his
word by his Son Jesus Christ, working by charity toward their neyghbor, in
true and perfect invocation of his name, Gene. 4.12.21. Psalm. 50. Joel. 2.
with obedyence to his commandments, and humility of spirit according to
his word. For as God is a spyrite, John. 4. 2. Cor. 3.
so would he be served in spyrite and truth.

The.lxxxv. Article.
Esai. 1. Ierem. 6. Amos. 5. Esai. 37. Iere. 2.7.9.32. Eze. 5.6.16.
I Believe that all the seruyng of GOD which is done without his word and
commandment to be Idolatry and wickedness. I call Idolatry (after the
fashion of the Prophets) not only that which is done to the honor of an
Idol, or of strange Gods. But also that which is done for the honor of the
living God, without his word and commandment. Therefore Idolaters are not
only those which do worship and serve Idols and strange Gods, 3. Reg. 3.12
15.22. 4. Reg. 12.14.18.23. Esai. 29. Math. 15.
as the Ethnickes, Panymes and such like: But also all those, which worship
and serve the true God of heaven, after their fantasy, or traditions of men,
without faith, without the word, and otherwise then God commanded. And on the
other side, I call those faithful which do acknowledge and serve one only God
of heaven, after his word and commandment, 1. Cor. 10. Gala. 2.
of whom all the works as well external and internal, corporal as
spyrituall, Collos. 3. Romans 12. 1. Cor. 7. Ephe. 4.
are the true serving of the Lord, for that they are done in the faith of the
son of God, and according to the vocation of the Lord, according to which
every faithful person ought to walk.

The.lxxxvi. Article.
I Believe and confess, Deuteronomy. 13. Esai. 52. 1. Cor. 10. 2. Cor. 6.
that it is not lawful for any Christian, to be assistant, neither in spirit
nor body, to the sacrifices of Idolaters, nor also to enter into their Temples,
whylest they are doing their Idolatries and Sacrifices: except it be for to
rebuke the^, 3. Reg. 13. 4. Reg. 10. Acts. 3.9.17.19. Gene. 2. Job. 10. 1.
Cor. 3.6. Ephe. 5. 1. Cor. 15. John. 5.11. 1. These. 4.
in showing them their abuse, and to teach them ye truth, as the holy Prophets
and Apostles have done, and not for to dyssemble as Hypocrites. For if the body
be a creature of God (as it is) as the soul is the Temple of the holy Ghost,
and member of the mystical body of Christ: If it must one day rise again,
and possess the eternal life with the soul, it must also necessarily be,
that it be altogether given unto the serving of God in this world with the
soul and spyrite: Otherwise they cannot be ioygned together after the general
resurrection: but being separated, the one should be in heaven with God whom
be loved, and the other in hell with the devil whom he served: Math. 10.
Romans 10. Luke. 12.
the which is an impossyble thing. Therefore I say, that all those
dissymulations to be a very renouncing of Christ and of his Gospel. Gala. 2.
2. Math. 6.
In like manner I believe and confess that all those fayninges and false
shows, by which the verity of the Gospel is hidden, and the word of God
despised, or by which the ignorant and Infidel is confirmed in his error, or
by which the weak is offended, are not of God, but of Satan, altogether
contrary unto the truth of the word. 1. Reg. 18.
Therefore we must not halt on both sides, but go uprightly before that great
God, which sees, Dan. 13. Heb. 4.
beholds, and knows all things: yea, before they are begun.

The.lxxxvii. Article.
Sap. 14. Psalm. 97.
I Do also believe that the beginning of all Idolatryes, was the excogitation
and first invention of Images, Esai. 40. Osc. 10. Baruc. 6.
the which also were made to the abomination and offense of the Souls of men,
and are as snares and nets to the feet of the ignorant, for to make them
stumble. Therefore they ought not to be honored, served, adored, Psalm. 114.
nor suffered in the Temples or Churches, Deuteronomy. 7.16.27, 29.
nor in the places where the Christians do assemble them selves together for
to hear and understand the word, but altogether to be taken away and
destroyed, Exo. 20.23. Deuteronomy. 7. 4. Reg. 18.23.
as the second commandment of God does well declare, and that by the publyke
authority of the Magistrate, and not by the private authority of one
particular man. Deuteronomy. 17. Sapi. 14. Psalm. 114. 1. John. 5.
For the woodde of the gybbit by which one does Justice, is blessed of God: But
the Image made with man's hand, is curssed of God, and he that makes it with
it. Therefore we ought to keep our selves from Images above all things.

Behold what I believe of the catholic Church, and of the things concerning
the same: and that is for the fourth point of my faith. Now remains to
speak of the fruits proceeding from it, and what I receive by that faith,
which are three in number. VVherof the first is.

The forgiveness of sins.
The.lxxxviii. Article.
Job 15.25. Psalm. 14.15. Roma. 3. 1. John. 1. Esai. 53. 1. Peter. 2. Gene 8.9.
Pro. 20. Ephe. 2. John. 8. Romans 3.
I Believe yt all those which are come, and which shall come of the race or
line of Adam, generallye are conceived and borne in iniquity and corruption
(except one only Jesus Christ) and that they are all sinners and
transgressors of the law and will of God: And according to their nature,
corrupted, the children of wrath, worthy of Gods judgment, of condempnation
and eternal death, John. 3.
having all need of the grace and mercy of God, and of the blood of Christ to
be shead. For God has enclosed all men under sin, Romans 11. Gala. 3.
that he should show mercy unto all through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The.lxxxix. Article.
I Believe that the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.7. Ierem. 31. Mich. 7. Ioh.
3.5.10. Act. 4.5.10 To. 4.5.10. Ephe. 2. Titus. 3.
proceeds from the law, but the forgeuenes and pardon of the same comes
from the Gospel, and is given unto us through the only grace and mercy of God,
in the blood of Jesus Christ, keeping the faith that we have in him, by which
we are reputed righteous before God: and not through our good works or
merits, nor by the merits of ye purest creature celestial or terrestiall:
For I do not know, Esai. 53. Romans 5.6. Ephe. 5. Hebr. 9.10.
nor receive any other merits the^ those of my good Lord, master and only
savior Jesus Christ, who has merited and satisfied abundantly for us, and
has paid the debt, for all his, 1. Peter. 2. 1. John. 2. Colos. 2.
in cancelating ye hand writing and obligation which was against us, and taking
it away from the midst of us, has fixed it in the Cross.

The.lxxxx. Article.
I Believe that that justifying faith, Math. 16. John. 6.
is a pure and singular gift of God, the which is commonly given by the hearing
of the word, Ephe. 2. Roma. 10. Hebr. 12.
upon which only it is builded, and not upon the doctrines and traditions of
men. Faith. Roma 8. Gala. 4. John. 3. Math. 7. Roma. 5. Ezech. 18. 1. Timo. 1.
John. 1.3. Gala. 3.
I call the justifying faith, a certain assurance and sure peswasion of the
good will, love, grace, goodness and mercy of God toward us, by which we are
assured and verily persuaded in our hearts, of the mercy, favor and benevolence
of God the Father, that he is for us, toward us, and against us, and will be
unto us a merciful father, Ephe. 2. 2. Timo. 1. Titus. 3.
to pardon our sins, and to give grace to adopt us for his children, and to
constitute us to be his heirs in the eternal life, and that altogether
freely, Mat. 17.21. Luke. 17. Mark. 9. Philip. 4.
in his son, and through his only son Jesus Christ our Lord, and not
through our merits or good works. That faith can do all things, Luke. 17.
Mark. 9. Philip. 4.
and nothing is impossible to it: the which is never perfect nor great enough
in us, therefore we ought always to pray with the Apostles, saying: Lord
increase our faith, help our unbelief. Luke. 17. John. 1.36.20. Acts. 10.15.
For that only does comfort us, makes us holy, righteous, and agreeable
before the Lord, does make and declare us to be the children of God, and
heirs of eternal life. Romans 1.14. Gala. 3.4. Hebr. 11.
The which also is the mother, the beginning and root of all good works,
Roma. 14
as infydelitie is the fountain and root of all euylles.

The.lxxxxi. Article.
I Believe moreover, Math. 7.19 21.25. Ioh. 3.8.10 13.14. Roma. 2.12 1. Cor.
13. Gala. 5.6. Works.
that the good works are not superfluous, vain nor unprofitable, but
necessary to salvation: I call good works, not those which are done after the
fantasy or commandment of men, but those only which God has commanded to
be be done, by his word, Roma. 14. Luke. 17. Esai. 64. Gala. 5.
the which ought to be done, not for to merit any thing toward the Lord, or
for to avoid eternal condempnation: But only, because that God has
commanded them: Exo. 20. 1. These. 4. Ioh. 14.15. Math. 5. Ezech. 16. Roma. 2.
And for to testify the love which we have unto the Lord, and the obedience
unto his word and commandment: And to the end that in us and by us he be
glorified, and our neighbors, as well faithful as unfaithful, may be
edifyed. 1. Pete. 2. Iam. 2.
Likewise to show and manifest the faith which we have in God and in his
word, as the good tree declares him self, Math. 7.
and is known by his fruit, and for to render certain and sure our vocation,
2. Pete. 1.
election, and Predestination. These are the ends of good works commanded of
God, and who so ever does them to any other end, Gala. 2.5.
he abuses, sins, does wrong and dishonor unto the blood of Christ, and
dishonoreth God and his word. For by his doings he declares Christ to have
dyed in vain.

The.lxxxxii. Article.
Esai. 43. Math. 9. Mark. 2. Luke. 5.7. Mat. 10.16.18. Mark. 16. Luke 24. John.
20. 1. John. 1.2
I Believe ye there is no man in this world, nor in the other, neither in
heaven nor in the earth, which can forgive and pardon my sins, but one only
God, who also has given the power and authority unto the Mynisters of his
word, to declare unto the faithful that believe, and which are contrite and
penitent, the remission of their sins to be done by grace freely, Acts.
2.3.5.10.15.
in the blood of Christ shead for them. And to declare them to be absolved
from their sins, 2. Cor. 3.5.10.
and that altogether by the Minister of the word, in the catholyke Church, 1.
Peter. 3.
in which that forgeuenes is made and done, and not otherwise. Repentance.
But of our part, is required entyre and true repentance. The which has two
parts. Ezech. 18. Esai. 55. Acts. 3. Iere. 18. Gene 4. Math. 27.
The first is contrition, that is to say, knowledge, with displeasure and
detestation to sin, the which is administered by the law, and causes in us a
despair, if it be not aided of the other part, Math. 3. John. 3.8. Roma. 5.
Iere. 3.
which is the lyuelie faith in the mercy of the father, by the blood of Jesus
Christ, the which proceeds from the Gospel, that does comfort us, and makes
us to persyst and find grace and favor before the judgment of God.

The.lxxxxiii. Article.
I Believe that the sin abides always in man, yea, Job. 3.6.7.9. Ierem. 20.
Math. 6. Romans 7.8. 1. John. 3.
unto those that are sanctified, after the regeneration made by the baptism
and the holy spyrite, the which nevertheless is not imputed unto them, Math.
21. 1. John. 3.
through the faith that they have in Jesus Christ: For as all the sins of the
Infidels and reprobate are mortal and irremissyble, because of their
infidelity, Hebr. 11. Ioh. 3.5.6. Roma. 8.1
so all the sins of the faithful and elect are veniable and remissible,
because of their faith: 1. Ioh. 4.5. Mark. 6. John. 3.8. Roma. 8. 1. John. 3.5
And therefore I believe one only sin to be mortal and irremissyble, that
is to say, Infidelity: That is to say, not to believe in the son of God,
for where true faith in Jesus Christ is found, all sins are hydden, covered
and pardoned.

I believe the resurrection of the flesh, which is the second fruit of my
faith.
The.lxxxxiiii. Article.
Job. 14.19. Esai. 26. Dan. 12. 1. Cor. 15. Apoc. 20. John. 5.11.
I Believe a resurrection to come, and general unto all the world, as well to
the good as evil: The which shall be done at the end and consummation of the
world, by the virtue of Christ, and by the ministering of the Angels: Math.
24. 1. These. 4.
the which with a loud Trumpet shall call all the world before the Lord, and
shall assemble all the elect, from the four winds, from the highest heavens,
unto the lowest part of the earth, and shall separate the wicked from the
midst of the righteous: Math. 13.
and shall cast them in the furnace of fire, where shall be weeping and
gnashing of teethe. Dan. 12.
Then the righteous shall shine as the Sun, in the kingdom of their Father.
And shall be like and companions with the Angels of God. That is the second
resurrection, Math. 22. 2. Timo. 2. Apoc. 20.
and blessed is he that shall have part and portion in the same, for he shall
never be touched with the second death.

The.lxxxxv. Article.
I Believe that that resurrection shall be done in flesh, and not in spyrite.
Ezech. 37. Sopho. 3. Philip. 3. Eccle. 12. Mat. 10.21 John. 3.5.
That is to say, that the soul or spyrite of man shall not rise again, for
so much as it is immortal, and never dies. But the body, the which before
(as well according to his nature, 2. Cor. 5. Gene. 3. Romans 5.6.
as through sin) was subject unto death, corrpution, rotten and brought into
dust and ashes, shall be raised up and united with his soul and proper
spirit, 1. Cor. 15.
and set in a perfecter estate then that of the first man before sin, Gene.
2. Eccle. 17. Roma. 8. Phil. 3.
exempted from all corruption of sin, and consequently from all other
imperfections, like unto the glorious body of Christ.

The.lxxxxvi. Article.
Job. 19. John. 5.11. Acts. 23.24. 2. Cor. 5.
I Do also believe that I shall rise again, not in the flesh or body of
another man's, but in my very own body, which I brought from my mothers womb:
with those same bones, with ye very body which I have now: The same
notwithstanding transformed and changed: 1. Cor. 15.
made of mortal, immortal: of corruptible, incorruptible: of vile and
contemptible, glorious. Phil. 3.
And therefore I look for my savior Jesus Christ: who through his virtue,
shall transfigure my vile body: that it may be like unto his glorious body,
according to ye power, by which he can make all things subject unto himself.

I believe the life everlasting. Which is the third and last fruit of my
faith.
The.lxxxxvii. Article.
I Believe that I shall rise again (as I have said) with all the faithful
and elect, not for to dye again, 3. Reg. 17. 4. Re. 4.13. Math. 9.27 Luke. 7.
John. 11. Acts. 9.20. John. 5.11.
as those which were myraculouslye raised, as well by Christ, as by the
Prophets and Apostles and such other, but into an immortal, eternal and
perdurable life, for to reign eternallye with God in body and soul: John. 3.
Roma. 8. Gala. 3.4. Ephe. 1.
And hereof I am very certain and doubt nothing at all of it: knowing that
whosoever doubts of his salvation made by Jesus Christ, he shall never be
saved. Wherefore, Roma. ^.
even as I am sure and certain, that Christ is dead and rose again for me,
and doubt nothing at all thereof, but am sure and certain of my salvation made
by him. And that infallibly I shall be saved, John. 3.5.6.8.10.
and shall go into eternal life by him.

The.lxxxxviii. Article.
1. Cor. 13. 1. John. 3.
I Believe that then I shall see face to face, him whom I do now see but by
the glass of faith, and shall know him perfectly, Psalm. 110. 1. Cor. 15.
whom I know now but partlye, who after that he has destroyed and
confounded all his adversaries, putting them as his footestoole, Esa. 65.66. 2.
Peter. 3.
will make all things new, for the glory of his chosen. And shall be God all
in all, and in all things: Then every one shall not teach his brother, Apoc.
21. Ierem. 31. Hebr. 8.
saying: Know the Lord: For all shall know him from the greatest to the least
among them.

The.lxxxxix. Article.
Luke. 16. Numb. 16.
I Do also believe that as the souls and spyrites of the Infidels, wicked and
reprobate, 1. Peter. 3. 2. Peter. 2. Jude. 1. Apoc. 20.
after they are departed from the body: that straight way they descend into
hell, in the eternal fire of hell, their bodies remaining in the earth
corrupted and rotten: So the spirits and souls of the faithful, Luke. 23.
John. 5.6.8.11.17. 2. Cor. 5. Philip. 1.
and elect children of God as soon as they depart from their body, without
tarying any whytte, do go straight way into heaven into glory with the Lord.
And there do look for always with great desire, Roma. 1. Luke. 21.
the coming and total redemption of their bodies, the which they have left
rotten and corrupted in the earth, the which they shall obtain at the latter
day, and not before. Wherein I reject the foolysh opinion, Collos. 3.
Ierene^^^. S. Chriso. S. Barna^.
of the dreamers (although there be of the ancients and excellent Authors)
which affirm ye spirits of the Saints not to be yet in heaven, but to sleep
in a certain place, to us unknown, until they having received their bodies
at the latter day, Ephe. 4.
in which the mystical body of Christ being entyer, perfect and fulfilled,
ought to enter into eternal glory.

The.C. Article.
FInally, I believe that as ye Saints and blessed (the Judgment being done)
do go with Christ triumphing in the air in body and soul, for to abide
eternally in glory with him, and his Angels. That so the wicked, miserable
and dampened, shall go into hell in body and soul with the devil and his
angels, for to abide there eternally, and to be tormented with him in hell
fire, which never goes out, where is weeping and gnashing of teethe, where the
woorme never dies. From which the Lord preserve and keep us through his
grace and mercy. Amen.

The Conclusion.
Behold (my dear and well-beloved brethren in Jesus Christ) briefly, the faith
and knowledge of the mysteries which the Lord has given and bestowed upon
me through his grace and mercy, unworthy and poor sinner, which have not
meryted so much goodness toward him, but rather his wrath and judgment: And
therefore I know and confess all to have proceeded from him, unto whom only I
render eternal thanks, whom also I beseech in the name of his Son Jesus
Christ our Lord, to preserve and keep me through his holy spirit, in that faith
unto the end, and to give me grace, virtue and power to confess it with the
heart and mouth, as well before the Infidelles, as the faithful, the tyrants and
hangmen of Antechrist, and to mayntaine the same unto the last drop of my
blood: I desire greatly to live and dye in ye faith, knowing and being well
assured, that it has for her foundation the only word of God, and that in ye
same all the holy Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles of Jesus Christ
have lived and dyed in it. That is ye true knowledge of the Lord, the which
consysteth in the beatytude and felicity of man, as Christ says in the
Gospel, This is life eternal (O Father) that we acknowledge thee to be very
God, John. 17.
and him whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. This is the ancient doctrine now
revealed by the holy spyrite, the which in our time was raised up again, and
as from the bottom of the depthes was restored unto us again, by the grace
and mercy of God, and by the mynistring of good Doctors, and true faithful
Mynisters of the same. This is the hydden truth, the which was buried and
kept close by that Antechriste of Rome, and his false Prophets, these five
hundredth years or there about: who in steed thereof did auaunce their
dreaminges and man's traditions, and other like doctrine fryuolous, vain and
unprofitable, to the great dishonor of God, to the offending of the faithful,
and to the ruin of all the Church of Jesus Christ: As also they do yet at
this day in many places through out the world, persecuting that holy
Evangelical doctrine, in all places and by all means. Endeavoring them selves
to bury it again, to hyde and cover it, and altogether to destroy it, but
they shall all perish in their enterprises, Esai. 49.
and the word of the Gospel shall abide eternally: For so has he promised,
Luke. 1.
who is only true and can not lie, And heaven and earth shall sooner pass,
then his promise should not he fulfilled. Math. 10.
Wherefore blessed is he that shall continue unto the end in that doctrine.
For he shall be partaker of all the promises of God: And on the contrary, woe
be unto him that shall contempne, despise or reiecte it. For the wrath of God
abides upon him. He that believes in me (says Christ) he shall not be
condemned. John. 3.
But he that believes not, he is already condemned, his part and portion
shall be with the perverse and wicked Hypocrites, in eternal hell fire.

Also I reiecte always the doctrine of Luiterim, with whom I will have
neither part nor portion. And also I renownce all the doctrine of that
Antechrist of Rome, with all his Idolatries, man's sects, errors and papisticall
superstitions, in which, I have been some time plunged in it (to my great
hurt) even up to the ears, abusing my self after the creatures, forsaking my
Creator, persecuting (yea, eue^ unto death) those which did teach that same
which I now believe and confess. But I have obtained mercy of ye Lord, 1. Tim. 1.
because I did it through ignorance, in my unbelief, as many do yet at this
day through out the world, being lead and conducted with a foolish and
indiscreet zeal: who in accusing, persecuting and putting to death the
faithful, and true members of Jesus Christ (which do seek nothing else but
the honor of God, and the salvation of all the world,) do think to do
things agreeable to God, John. 16.
and to offer unto him great Sacrifices: whom I desire not to be so wylful and
rash in judgment, but to examine it nearer, and to search and try the matter
better, before they take any thing in hand. To the end they be not one day
constrained to say and confess, that which I now confess of my self, that
they have shamefully erred and sinned. (But thinking they did well,
notwithstanding) in persecuting my good Lord, master, and only savior Jesus
Christ. For that which I have done unto his members and faithful (whom then I
esteemed as Heretics, seditious, and blasphemers of God and of his word,
where they were lovers thereof,) I do esteem that I did it unto him self.
For he says in the Gospel, Math. 25.
that that which men do unto those which believe in him, he esteems it to be
done unto himself, be it good or evil. Acts. 9.
The which he has afterward confirmed to Paul, persecuting his Church after
his ascencion. I then knowing the great errors, abuses, and superstitions,
wherein I was plunged beforetyme. Now I renounce and forsake all Idolatryes
and false doctrines, which are contrary and against the doctrine of my master
Jesus Christ, which is the holy and pure word of God, contained in the
canonical books of the old and new Testament, revealed by the holy Ghost:
2. Peter. 1.
whom I take for my guide and leader, for to dyrect and lead me in this
mortal life, as the pyller of fire did lead the children of Israel through
the wyldernes into the land of promise. Exo. 12..
That shall be the Lantern unto my feet. Psalm. 119.
Furthermore, I promise from henceforth, and for the residue of my life, to
walk and live according to that doctrine, the best I can possible: having the
spirit of God, who shall assyst and dyrect me in all my ways, without whom
I can do nothing, with which I can do all things, Philip. 4.
insomuch that all shall be to the praise of the Lord, to the advancement of
the kingdom of his son, and to the edifycation of all the Church, and to
the salvation of my soul. The which most humbly and with all my heart I
require, Math. 6.
of that good father which is above in the heavens, that his name may be in
us and through us sanctified, as he is holy in him self: And that his
kingdom come, so that he do raygne perfectly over us, and we may obey his
word, and commandment: That his will be done here below in earth, as it is
done by the Angels above in heaven. Beseeching him also through Jesus Christ
his Son our Lord, to give and admynister unto me in this mortal life, all
things necessary, Deuteronomy, 8. Math. 4.
as well to the Soul as body, admynistring unto me every day the daily
bread of his word, without which my soul can not live. Prou. 24. Roma. 7.
And because I am a sinner by nature, corrupt, sold under sin, not able to
do none other thing but to sin, and that I offend more then there be days,
I beseech him not to enter into judgment with me, neither correct and
punish me according to my merytes and deserts, but mercifullye pardon me all
my offenses against him committed, as I do pardon all those which have
offended me: And look upon me, not in me, but in the face of his son
Jesus Christ, through whose means I find grace and mercy before him, and
before his righteous judgment: I beseech him always to assist me through his
holy spirit, by which I may escape the assault and embushments of the world,
the flesh and of Satan: to surmou^t always and vanquish their assaults and
temptations, without being broken or overcome in any thing: That their snares
and cords being broken, I may gloriously escape: and by that means I shall
know plainly, that be is the King of Kings, Apoc. 19.
and Lord over all Lords, only God, sage, immortal, and inuysible,
altogether mighty, strong and glorious: unto whom only appertains the
kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
26. February. 1577.

