CHARACTERS And ESSAYS,

By Alexander Garden.

ABERDENE, Printed by Edward Raban, Printer to the City and both Colleges.
1625.

TO THE TRVELY HONORED, and worthily worshipful, SIR ALEXANDER GORDON,
Knight-Baronet of Clunie, etc.
WHen these CHARACTERS curt, and short ESSAYS,
Right Worshipful, unworthy of Your view,
At some successiue Hours, on idle days,
My Pen, for Pinsell; Coal, for Colors, drew,
I stood, and studi'd, whose praeponed Name*
Should dye in Grain, and Luster lend to Them*
My Wits convened, and in my Brain combynd,
The free and friendly Favors that I fand,
With th'ever-courteous Countenance and kind,
That I have always at Your Honors Hand;
Advise me only, that Your Worship shall
Give Luster, Life, Dye, and adorn Them all.
Deigne then t'accept Them with that wonted Grace,
Smoothe Front, and Face, that I did ever find:
Which perfectly does point out, and express
The Gen'rose Sprite, the wise and worthy Mind,
Which does before the Work, and Work-mans Skill,
In given-Gifts, regard the Givers Will.
Your Worships ever Devoted, ALEXANDER GARDEN.

TO THE READER.
EN^ I and tenderly entreat,
If you have teasure, and th'Effayres not great,
To take some time, and to survey this Table:
Which well perused, shall prove profitable.
Where thou thy self in some of these shall see
Portrayed, if either Good or Bad tho^ be.
If good, insist, and make a Progress still:
And if perverse, pray, and repent thine ill.
But I would wish, that thou thy selse find forth,
Amongst the best and worthy for thy worth.
Disdain not then, nor loathe thou for to look
Upon the Tenor of this tabled Book.
Nor scorn thy Misses among these Maps to mark,
Albeit they be not cut in curious Work:
As these, Apelle^ ^o ^he Life had limm'd
Or Hondius hand had them attyrd and trimmed,
Yet sagely searched thou in These shall see,
The not to please, yet what may profit thee.
Even as justly you merit
So AL GARDEN inherit.
CHARACTERS AND ESSAYS.
A worthy King.
A Worthy King, of GOD OMNIPOTENT,
Is in the Nature of Governament,
The very Figure and the Image: Then
He is the Chief and Quintescence of Men.
The Champion of the Church next GOD is He,
And the Protector of the Policy.
The Lator of the Laws and of the same
The strength and force, of those that he does frame.
The Sword of Justice is the King to kill,
And Mercies Scepter too, when ere He will.
The Glass of Grace, the eye of Honor, and
The Blessing of the LORD unto his Land.
Life unto Loyalty, to Treason Terror,
To Reason Rule, and Arbiter to Error:
His power Sovereign is, and his Command,
Most absolute, and vncontroll'd must stand.
His frown is Death, keen as a killing Knife,
And in the favor of his look, is Life.
He is a Pilote, and His Bounds the Barge:
And all His Subjects therein, are His Charge.
Their Peace, His Pleasure, Q^etnesse his Care,
And their kind love, does his content declare.
He has no Paralele, since in degree
None is, nor with Him in aequalitie.
His Royal Crowns prae^ogatiue ^one ever
Can from his sole Sov'ra^gnitie dissever:
He is the Anointed of the Lord, and such
None should therefore presume ^t attempt to touch.
He of a Body is the he^d, heerefore
As sacred should vnwrong'd reign evermore.
He is the Scourge of Sin, the Rod of Vice,
And rateth Virtue at the highest price.
God His Viceroy, He Is over His people Supreme,
And under him whole Governor to them.
His Safety must be all his Counsels Care:
His Health and Honor, all His Peoples Prayer.
His Pleasure must be pleasant to his Peers,
And His Content His Kingdoms glads and Cheares.
His Presence must with Reverence be respected,
His Person strongl' attended and protected.
His Court must be adorned and decor'd,
And still His State must b'intertain'd and stored.
None must presumpt'ouslie pry in, nor pea^so
Into His Bosom, nor his Secrets Search.
His Will none should with-stand, nor it retard
When he directs, but do it with great regard.
Since he is (tho not a God) more than a Man.
And next to God for to be honored than.
A Wall of Jasper, and an House of Gold
He is, that does an Heavenly Treasure hold:
Whose strong foundations are of precious Stone,
That Gates and entresse bot of Pearl have none.
And all is precious passing every Thing,
Into a Godly, Wise, and Worthy KING.
An unworthy King. 2.
A Wicked, vicious, and unworthy King,
Th'Vsurper is of Power in governing:
Where Tyr no^s rule into Authority,
Losseth the Glory of true Majesty.
While dread and fear of Terror frighteth hence,
In subjects hearts, Love from Obedience:
For when the Lion Wolf like lives, the Lamb
Murdered but mercy, dies with the dambe.
He is a piece, of too much power and worth,
To riot, and to lavish Fury forth*
He is the scourge of sin, although the same
Shall be for sin, cast in the fiery Flame.
He the Actor is, clad with the Cloak of Law,
That all good Acts, and Order does orethraw.
He Fautor is, and Father of the offense
Whereat he winkes, or does therewith dispense.
His Reason in the acting of his fury
He in the Belly of his Will, does bury.
And in his Temper best, and calmest Case,
He Is desperate, and in a doubt of Grace.
His People and Kingdoms he destroys and wastes,
And all but Care, to Ruin helps, and hastes.
Himself a Prey to's Followers, and Foes,
He makes: and all in end to Ruin goes.
Himselfes a ^ortor to his loathsome life,
And fears, each keeps to cut his Throat, a Knife.
He scorneth GOD, and is to Him a Traitor,
And makes a God, and Idol bot of Nature.
He uses Reason bot to ruin Sense,
And speaks fair upon a foul pretense.
His Will, his Wit, it violen^lie carries,
While Death, and Wrong, together mixed, it marries,
And jugulates, ^ot with Injustice hand,
To bib their Blood the best Men of the Land.
Vnlimitable his Lust is, and desires,
And to work Tragic Vengeance never tyres.
Inevitable is his Envy and Spite,
Hatched in his hollow Heart, both Day and Night.
That should be best of Men, the worst of Things,
Are tyrannous and cruel bloody Kings.
His Blood-swolne Eyes, Darts ire; his banefull breath,
Breathes with the Basiliske vntimous death.
The hand of him is the unrighteous Rod,
That smites the Godly, in the spite of GOD.
The Tyrants heart, it is a Court of evil,
The dwelling and Divano of the Devil.
His feet as the Eagle flies, and spurs the post,
To execute his mall inventions most.
His Heaven his Pleasure is, his God, his Gold;
His face aff^ights, and 's horrid to behold.
The exercise that he delights in
It only is, Iniquity, and Sin.
His words are wicked, and uncomfortable,
And all his Actions are intolerable.
In sum, he hateful ^s, and inhumane,
The Curse of Crowns, of Royal State the Stain.
The Clogg of Court, and all the Counsels Cross.
A public Plague, and all the Kingdoms loss.
A worthy Queen. 3.
A Godly Queen, a Gift, is good, and great,
Unto the King, the Country, Crown, and State:
She is the vmpeered Mistress, by her Merit,
And Grace of all her Sex in Royal Spirit:
She is the chief of Women, and the chose,
Like to the Moon, amongst the Stars she shoes:
And in her Sphere of Brightness gives none place,
Bot to the King, her Sun, in any case.
She is his Diamond, that is never dimbe,
Bot clearly shynes, to all the World and Him.
She is that rich, and precious Pearl, that He
Vnprisable esteems in his Eye.
The Joy of Courts, and Comfort of the King,
From whence Content, all Peace, and Pleasure spring.
She the Orb is where, his loving Motions move,
In the effects, reciproake of their Love.
She Is Wisdoms fairest Love, She Is Virtues Grace:
In Naturs first, and Honors highest place.
She is the Hand-mayde of the LORD most hie.
And the other half unto the King must be.
Last, by her worthy carriage she gains
To be the Kingdoms Beauty, where she reigns.
A worthy Prince. 4.
A Worthy Prince, he is ^h' Extreme, the Scope,
The Altitude, and Kingdoms highest Hope.
The richest Jewel, reckned of Renown*
That Kings can have (...) in their Crown:
And is the fairest ^lowre, for to be seen,
That grows into the Garden of the Queen.
He is the ^ym'd ^t-Object of the Eye
Of all the Kingdom, in his Infancy:
He ^s the M^rrow of the Mothers care,
A loving Sy^es solisitude, much m^ire.
He is the Theme the Counsel often thinks on,
In the succession of the Royal Throne.
He is the Love, Delight* and Joy of all,
This great Incorporation General.
He Is Natures Masterpiece, and ^oue no less,
Of Wisdom, in the life of Worthiness.
He is a Massie-precious Ivor Box,
Full of Rubies, of the richest Rocks:
Attending Time, to empty and unloose.
Such dear and dainty Wares as 't does enclose.
These are the Royal deeds, that he shall do,
In his succeeding life, and Reign into.
He pricks in's Wisdom, Expectations Sprite,
And lays Ambitions Heart before his Fee^e*
And by his Virtue wins, and Valor both,
The Noblers Love, and in their Bosom go'th,
His bounty strongly binds, and not Constraint,
The service of the most sufficient.
He is the Crystal Glass, where Nature may
The Quintescence of all her Art display.
He the Index is, and Reasons Book indeed,
Wherein true Virtue may her honor read*
He is the Morning-Starre, that blazeth bright,
And does from the Sun receive its light.
He is the first wished Fruit that does arise
From the blessed Tree, of the earthly Paradise.
He is the Subject of the most Import,
And Study of the best, and wisest sort*
Unto the Learned, and the sharpest wit,
He is a Matter admirable to it.
Last, he is Wisdoms Son, and Honors hight;
Virtues Choice, and Valou^s working Spright.
An unworthy Prince. 5.
A Prince corrupt, he is the Kingdoms fear,
And the Precursor of Corruption there:
A Pest to the Peace, and Rest of the Realm,
And the Concusior of the common Calm.
A Precedent that bad example gives,
And much mischief, and wickedness contriues.
A naughty Ductor, that great numbers draws
Unto Contempt, and to the breach of Laws,
When Will and Power, Pride in fury horse,
To act Ambitions bad designs perforce.
He Is like a dreadful Dream to one that is vexed,
And in the sprite much troubled, and perplexed.
H'affrights, and most into his humors then,
The very minds and hearts of prudent Men,
And for too much delight in Vanities,
He (careless) quites the love of all the Wise:
And with th'advise of gross and giddie Heads,
His Actions all imprudently proceeds.
He Is like a little mist, before the Sun
His Carriere and daily course begin:
Which aye the more, and greater that it grows,
Less good it does, and operation shows.
He is the grief of the King, the Queens sorrow,
And the Cross of the Court, both even and morrow.
The Curse of Crowns, the Seed of Unhappiness,
And the ungracious Fruit of Ungodliness*
The Canker he is that Kingdoms clean consumes,
And Treasure Boxes empties all, and toomes.
His Country last, it may with Care him call
An vndigesting Bolle of bitter Gall.
A worthy Counselor. 6.
A Worthy Counselor into a Land,
Supporting it, does like a Pillar stand:
And from th'Anoynted one, that reigns there,
His is the greatest, and the chiefest care.
The pains of his person, pa^sing of his Sprite,
Into the state Effaires* are infinite.
He is a Guarde. Watch tower and Sentinel,
The Enemies approach t'a^end and tell.
He Is a Provisor, to provide in straites*
The Weal and preservation of the States.
An Oracle hee^s in the Princes ear,
And in his fist him as a Brand does bear^.
An equal Weight, in Justice balance he,
And light of grace, in love of truth, must be*
In the carriage and the course of the Law,
As a clear rayd eye, himself he does shaw,
And in his fervor, in playing of his part*
In's Sovereign service, behold, he is an Heart.
A mind of Honor, a brain of Inventions,
For his Countries good, are all his Intentions.
His place is powerful, and his Arm is strong,
While his service is faithful, and does no wrong*
His Honors, his Place, and Calling does claim,
Due by desert, and competent to them.
He, a Planet is, placed in the firmament,
Of the politic Heaven of Government.
Which through the cloudie, gross, and thickest air,
The nature of his light does kythe, declare.
In sum, and last, such a one is he,
That never can be spared in Policy.
An unworthy Counselor. 7.
A Public Poison, and pernicious thing,
And hurtful harm, to the Crown of a King,
Is a corrupted Counselor, and evil,
The Son of Shame, and Suppost of the Devil.
The danger of the State, and often the fail,
When Judgment wants, or weakness wryeth all
The Ears of the King, he does enchant, and charm.
And does so, the whole* Republicke harm.
False in effect, tho most fair in his word,
And in th'advise of tyranny, a sword
Pridefull, and pe^lious, his power still,
And partial proves his voting, with his will.
His heart is hollow, for his own behoue,
In protestation of a feigned love.
Hypocrisy the Cloak he carries on,
His cold and counter^et Religion.
Traiterous invents, the only Agents are,
That sti^re in him, a bold Ambition dare.
He Is ly^e a cloudie and a threatening Storm,
That seems to have a Natural cause and form:
When that it Raines, dissolues, and forth does fall,
It strikes dead, and ofttimes drowneth all.
Disloyal to his Lord, ingrate to GOD,
To both unworthy, and of Virtue void.
He is no person proper for his place,
But does the grandour of that Rowne disgrace.
Unworthy always, and therefore, unfit
For to look once, on Majesti^ from it.
A worthy Nobleman. 8.
He Is a true Noble, that is nobly borne,
Whose graceful Virtue does Descent adorn.
Nobility consistes not aye in Blood,
But in a personal, and practicke Good.
When as the Noble-borne, by active worth,
Decores, and crowns, and beautifies his birth.
He Noble is, that never to Virtue, Wealth,
Nor to his Honor, does prefer his Health.
For Country, King, and for the Christian Faith,
He Is truly Noble, that does disdain the Death.
And never does regard (for love of these,)
His Hazards, Pains, his Loss, his Gain, nor Ease*
And he is Noble the noblest Nobles among.
That will not do, nor will receive, a Wrong.
He is compleatlie Noble, in every Case,
Whose Nature is nobilitate with Grace.
And he is Noble, that prudentlie, and wise,
Does hugg Humility, and Pride despise.
Grave Wisdom justly does most Noble esteem,
The temperatelie Just, and Magnaneim.
A very Noble, a King, a Prince, or Earl,
In Natures Shop, is like a polisht Pearl:
Whose reasonable Soul is rapt above
Terrestr'all Trash, with hopeful holy Lone.
He Is wholly Noble, into his Heart that has
Strong holding Hope, true Love, and living Faith.
He Is merely Noble, whose Sprite aspiring springs,
Never blinking back* to Baggage basest things.
He is the Heart of Hospitality,
Bounties Life, and Nurse of Charity.
He Is Learnings Love, Necessities Relief,
Valors Fame, and Wisdoms constant Cliefe.
The Falcon he is, that on no Carrion feeds,
And The Eagle that after no Spider speeds.
He is the Dolphin true, that fears no Whale,
And never will for terror turn his Tail
He is in Reasons Heaven, a stately Star,
And chosen Saint in Virtues Calendar.
He Is in the Royal Round and Hemispheare,
A sure and settled Cynosura there.
He Is Rector in Reasons Philosophy,
Load-starre of Light, in Loves Astronomy.
In Honors Court, he has the Marshals place,
And's Royal Gallant into greatest Grace.
In brief, he is the Beaut' of his Abode,
Beloved of Men, and gracious unto GOD.
An Ignoble-Man. 9.
The Ignoble are, that be in Noble Rooms,
Putrid within, without fair painted Toombes,
Like The Apple of Sodom, that is ash within,
Although it have a gold-lyke glancing Skin.
It is to Reason an exceeding Gr^fe,
When Glories Styles, and Honors Tytles chief,
Birth, Fortune, Fate* or Chance, does put or place,
In, and upon the Subjects of Disgrace.
Base, naught^esse, and the ignoble Mynds of them,
Nobility, does falsif', and defame.
When the Folly of Will, and want of wit,
For Vert' advancing, frames Nature unfit.
The Ignoble are Bulks and Bodies of Baseness,
The very Mind, and Spirit of Grossnesse.
Into his Indevours and Disposition
Of right Generation, he is in Suspicion.
Wisdom never knew, and Virtue never bred him,
Learning never taught, nor Honor never led him.
To waste and consume, his course and inclination,
Without respect, to his place, or Reputation.
Vanity and Wrong, are the whytes of the But,
Where-at the Ignoble do aim, and do shoot.
Wastrie and Avarice, tho both b'extreame,
Are dearest, desir'de, delightsome to Them.
The Ignoble are the Sorrow and the Shame
Of Kinsmen, Parents, Pedigree, and Name.
The stain of their Title, the Plague of their Place,
Wrack of their House, and Ruin of their Race.
A worthy Bishop. 10.
ALL worthy BISHOPS, Ambass'dours they are,
To plot, and preach Peace, in the midst of War:
From The Almighty to miserable Man,
Most worthily worthy these Worthies are Than.
They make th'Attonoment* take up the Trews,
From th Heaven, to The Earth, they bring the best news.
Where mercies Patience, does practice, and prease,
Nature cor^upted, to call unto Grace.
They are the sweet sounding Trumpets of love,
That Fighters of Faith, to fight it out move.
And Heralds of wrath, that thunder-lyke threats,
For sinful Trespasses, all manner of States.
Praying, imploring, with folded up Hands,
Before the Holiest, humbly He stands.
Charie of their charge, and war'lie they watch,
From forcing their Flocks, and stands in the breach.
They Are Pastors comple^t, that None can reprove,
Full of a faithful, and fatherly Love.
Yet dreadful, and deadly Denuncers of Woe,
To sinful Secure, in their Sermons they show.
These vigilant, wise, and worthy Divines,
Are Suns to our Souls, but setting that shines.
In the Night of Nature, before us they pace,
To lead us to Goshen, to light us with Grace.
He Is unreprovable, whole of his Life,
The Houseband and Head, of an only Wife.
He Is prudentlie prompe* and apt for to preach,
To confirm, confute, instruct, and to teach.
He Is harbrous, he is helpful, he is holy,
To Wisdom wooed, to Virtue wedded wholly.
He does direct, by his works and his word*
And squares his life, by the Law of the LORD.
He Is a Physician, and uses (Therefore,
For the love of the Soul) to search every Sore:
Lansing what Leprose, or Festred He finds,
And so He remeads the Mallad' of Minds.
Searing sometimes, and Corrosiues in cure,
He uses for Putrids, till they be pure.
He is fore-pacer, in the path-gate to Grace,
And worthy of Honor, respect of his Place.
For preaching of Life, he is worthy of Love;
And he for his Pains Prayse-worthie does prove.
An unworthy Bishop. 11.
A Bastard that the Ephod does abuse,
And is of faithful Pastors the Refuse;
He Is th'Out-cast, the Scroofe, the Scumme, and the Shame,
Yea, th'Ignommie, of a worthy Name.
A Dog that is dumb; a Drudge, and a Drone,
Unworthy the Charge he is chosen one.
When sparing of Pains, of Knowledge misuse,
Unfaithful Effects, but Profit, produce.
Idolatrous Seeds he seminates, so
Sowes in the Soul, a Fury* and a Foe.
Unhappy, for lorne, and light-lesse the Sheep,
That Bishops so bad, have credit to keep.
When these they shall, for wanting Food be found
To perish, pastring in a barren Ground
He breeds a War, Distrust, and Diffidence.
Into the Wits of all his Audience.
Good Pastors aye, he preasseth to supplant,
A Devil indeed, and bot in show a Saint*
He makes Religion bot a Cloak of Sin,
That covertly he walks, and walloweth in.
And with a feigned Humility does hyde,
A passing and imcomparable Pride.
His Flesh does fret, and all his Bones do itch,
To raze the Poor, and for to rob the Rich.
Even Wise-mens Eyes, he leads, blind-folded forth,
Bot with Conceit of his imagined Worth.
And draws their thoughts to call Account, esteem
(Tho he be not) him such as he does seem.
He looks like a Lamb, he lives like a Fox,
And cruelly, crafty, kills all his Flocks.
He is the person of Hypocrisy,
Th'vnpure Spirit and Heart of Heresy.
Grief to the Good, to the Faithful a Foe,
Cross to the Church, and to the World a Woe.
A worthy Judge. 12.
THe worthy Judge, does well his Calling know,
And is the Grace and Glory of the Law.
Hi Stomach is a Treasury of Truth*
And pondereth all, with Reasons Scalls of Rueth.
He is indeed a Doom, whose Blast of Breath,
On breach of the Law, is dreadful as Death.
Where criminal Faul^s must cleanly be cut,
And from the Peace of the Publict-weale put.
A worthy Judge, is a Sword in the Hand,
(To kill or conserve) of the Lord of the Land.
In the Countries Cause he ever has an Eye,
That does the weal of the Commonwealth see.
His Study and Pains, (Proportion to keep)
Bereaues him of Rest, and of his sound sleep:
Betwixt Commanding and Obedience,
To keep the Crown on the Head of the Prince.
And safely and sure, of the Subject als,
To hold on the Head, vnhewne from the Hals.
The worthy Judge, is feared bot of Fools,
Cursed bot of Knaves, and hated bot of Snools.
He Is honored of Wise, of Prudent approved,
Grateful to the Good, of the Godly beloved.
He judges all Right, revenges all Wrong,
And doing these both, he is steadfast and strong.
His word is the Law, his Power is Grace;
His Merit, Honor; and his Labor, Peace.
An unworthy Judge 13.
IS JUSTICE grief, in judging when He erres,
And partiallie, the Wrong, to Right preferres:
And when through Ignorance, Wrath, or Envy,
Th'Innocents Life, upon his Lip does ly.
His Hands are full of Brybes, defyl'd with Blood,
The guiltless Gore, it fatts him most of Food.
His Heart is full of Hypocriticke Hate,
His Tongue of Treason, Untruth, and Deceit.
His face is feigned, and Smooth as smoothest Oil,
Politickly, more to oppress and spoil.
He is a Man more moral, than divynd,
Judicious more, than to be just enclynd.
His Mercy mercinarie is, and sold,
His kyndest countenance, vncoft, is cold.
His Lips do lavish, Legendes of the Laws,
Yet gives cold comfort, to the Poor man's cause.
The weighty Angel does over-weigh his Grace,
And turns him Devil on his Tribunal place.
Although the liverie of the Law, he wears,
His Process all unlawful led appears.
His holiness, is superficial,
And seems to be so, and that is all.
Into the preached word, he has no Pleasure,
And for the World, to hear it, has no leisure.
His appetites, as they his Mind do move,
Is the Religion, that he best does love.
His goods, they are his Glory, and his Gain,
And he impure, does bot his place profane,
While Justice sacred Seat, he makes to be,
By his abuse, naught bot a Boucherie.
A worthy Knight. 14.
A Worthy Knight, is he that does inherit,
The proper Virtues of a perfect Sperit:
Whom Power can not appall, nor Cross foot chance,
Opposed* depresse, nor prosperous veles, advance.
True worthiness is eminent in him,
That sa^elie in most dangerous deeps can swim.
He is a Magnanime and worthy Knight,
Into the Worlds vp-roars that walks upright:
And not with Fortunes Change, nor Grief of Mind,
Confounded, nor perplexed in Sprite we find.
He worthy is, that wis^lie gives his word,
And keeps it too, th'vnsheathing of his Sword,
And not with light Escapes, or bastard bracks,
As Some snuff Pepper, soon exceptions takes.
He worthy is, that bitter Things can bear,
And over his Stresses Patience Tropheas rear.
True Magnanimity, his Sword, and Horse,
Convoy, and hewes, his passages perforce.
And th'onlie Paradise, into his Eye,
Are Fields defeat. Tryumphs, and Victory.
To pardon the Submissiue, and Distressed
Relieve, his Glory is, and conquest best.
He will be free from every Blott and Blame,
That may imply Dishonor to his Name.
His pardon granting, to his prostrate Foes,
Most rich and famous him, in Mercy shoes.
He Is void of Spite, and not with Hate defylde,
In Spirit stout, and in his Nature mylde.
He is not One, with Love and Hate, that is mixed,
Nor wavers, as One fast, and loose betwixt.
Bot he is Constant, true, and Bellicall,
Heroic like, and honorable with all.
Bot worthy Knights, Note this, in Number are,
In unities, and now, be singular.
And like The Arabian Bird, does bot abound,
For They with us, as there, these Fowls are found.
An unworthy Knight. 15.
THe foul Refuse, and the defect of Nature,
To Fortitude, and Honor true, a Traitor.
When to advance, his Valor it occurs,
His Blade is blunt, and he wants ravell'd Spurs.
A Cipher in Court, a Sheep in the Camp*
Yet like TYTIDES in the streets will stamp.
He is amongst Men, like Owls amongst Birds,
Shaming the Sword, to his side that he girds.
He counts for no Promise, nor Honor, nor Faith
(Gain once he his point) that he plighted has.
A Friend, or a Foe, he finely can feign,
Grace thee even now, and gloome on thee again.
He Is worshipped for his Wealth, not for his Wit,
Neither was Valor the worker of it.
Where Courage for Honor does enterprise,
Th'vnworthie Knight like to a Lubbard lies.
When Magnanimity with Courage strong,
Through Peril passes to repare a Wrong.
He faintly fears, and Couragelesse he quakes,
And to hear these Attempts such Terror takes,
That all his Sprites, they post from him apace,
And Lead-lyke, Liue-lesse, he looks in the Face.
He is the Child of Pride, that does despise,
The truly Worthy, that through Virtue rise.
He Is Follies Favorite, full of Ostentation,
And only mighty in Imagination.
In Honors Court, yet there be no such Apes,
Knights bot in Clothes, and Cavelliers in Shapes.
Unto the Mould whereon they move, bot Masses,
And God forbid our Country breed such Asses.
A worthy Gentleman, 16.
HE is a bearing Branch of Honors Tree.
And Gentle Germen of Genuitie.
Whose Fruits for to be* Virtues Actions fall,
As pleasing to the Eye of Judgment all.
As truly Rellishing and Smelling sweet,
Unto the Soul, and understanding Sprite.
The De^ds and Actions fitting him to do,
He is not forced, nor is compeld there-to:
Except they be Things naughty, ill, and bad,
Where-to in Heart he nere Intention had:
Bot either does unwittingly such Acts,
Or forced unwillingly unto those Facts.
Most effable, and in his Nature kind
And flexible, yet with a Genrose Mind.
In his Alleadgeance is, and Love most Loyal,
Unto The Authority, and Power Royal.
Religious, hot, and fyrie in his Zeal,
Most kyndlie careful for the Commonweal:
And what is his, he heedfullie regards,
And bount'fullie bestows his Rewards.
He Is Confident, resolved, and Enteare,
From Foeminine, from Base, and Bairnlie Fear.
He Is not composed, nor come of Cur^ish kind,
Bot cast in Virtues Mould, pure, polisht, fyn'd.
And by the Sprite of Wisdom, dressed and squared,
In Honors House, for to be placed, prepared.
He in Apparel does more comely go,
Than costly, for a Pharasaicke sho
More healthsome is his Fare, and daily Diet,
Than Exceffiue, Profuse, and given to Riot.
He Exercise, for Pleasure, more does love,
Than that the same should to him painful prove.
His Studies all, are for Instruction more,
Than Ostentation, Pride, or worldly Glore.
His I oues not wanton, no, nor f^itting are,
Bot faithful, virtuous, chaste, and regulare.
He is no Niggard, no, nor Prodigal,
But treades the Temprates steps, the best of all.
His Carriage is not Carledge, nor austere,
Nor Apishly does he his Body bear.
His Pedigree, Descent, and gentle Blood,
By courteous Carriage he does make them good.
And by the virtuous Course, and Life he lives,
H'example good, to his Succession gives.
An unworthy Gentleman 17.
IS the Derision and the Scoff of Wit,
True Honors Scorn, and the idle Ape of it.
Where Wealth much more than Worth and Wit we see,
Is vainly worshipped with Simplicity.
He Is One of Vices Varlets, that delights
In Vanities excessive Days and Nights.
And one that all does prodigally spend
Imprudently, but eyeing ever the end.
And ydlie more on worthless works and Vain
Does waste, than would a Temprate STATE maintain:
Or well husbanded, or managed, might
Attain to Honor, in the Virtuous sight.
All his Delight's in Vice and Vanities,
His Cogitations idle, and inanities.
His Heart is hollow, hardened, and unholy,
His exercise, is fecklesse, frivole, folly.
His pleasures imp'ous are, and all profane,
His studies such as yield no Grace, nor Gain,
His Conversation, bairnly is, and base,
Degenrate from a Iennet, to an Ass.
His Raiment and Apparel out of form,
His dyets are inordinare, enorme.
Out of all Square, his Carriage is almaist,
And None his company at all requeast.
Since Buzzard-lyke he is with a Falcons Bell,
Or like a Jade, spread with a golden Pell.
A worthy Lawyer 18.
IN Virtue Conscience, Grace, and Judgments grouth,
He is the Indagator of the Truth:
He painfully PLEAS, does practice, and preasse,
To bring them into Conclusions of Peace.
The Time he divides in uses to know,
From Ignorance, the knowledge of the Law.
Obscurities, h'vnlockes and open lays,
And truly th'Orator pleading he plays.
With empty hands, a pitying Sprite, and pure,
In Conscience Court, he patrones aye the Poor.
In Resolutions, and Responses plain,
And quick in giving, But all greede of Gain.
A CORRYPHaeVS in his Clients Cases,
And still the Best, and not the Bad, embraces.
He does not love to hold a Client long,
Nor will defend what well he viewes is wrong.
The Case, and not the Client, he respects.
And not what is wrong, but Verities protects,
His labors are to make his Calling be,
(Even as it should) seen in Sincerity.
He does despise, both Falsehood, and Delays,
And others Knaveries, in their PLEAS displayes.
H'abhors Advantage, by ore-sight, or sleuth,
Of Others, if the Matter be of Truth.
He wearies not his Poore-men, with depending,
Nor to the Judges, or the Writers sending.
But all that these bad Patrons puts Them to,
He by his Servants o^ himself, does do.
And more for Conscience, Credit, and his Name,
Than for their Money, he does do for Them.
Still of his Calling he does Conscience make,
And bot what They may gladly give, will take.
He does not suck their Substance by slim Shifts,
As Thiefe-lyke some do use, and yet Unthrifts.
He by his faithful Labors (not by Stealth)
And gotten, guided well, does grow to Wealth.
Yet all the Goods with Honesty he gains,
He prudentlie in ployes, and naught prophanes;
So worthily, most worthy, he does grace,
Where h^e does pass, and is employed the Place.
Of ^ll men he is respected for good parts,
And gets for gracious Guiding, Good-mens Hearts,
For he is faithful, efauld, upright ever;
Dissimulate, nor false, nor feigned never.
An unworthy Lawyer. 19.
HE is a Lawless, Perdite, and a Lost,
The Figure bot of a foot-faring Post;
That carries, not knowing (a Bag full of Bills)
The Tenor, Contents, their Mynds, or their Wills:
Only can read their Tytles, and direct,
Sans knowledge unto what farther effect.
To be informed he troubles nor travels much,
Since that the Truth he nere intends to touch.
He Will agravate and make the Matter great,
And many Maxims of the Law repeat:
To cause his Client think his Cases are
Pronounced PRO, before he breast the Bar,
He speaks bot Problems, Sentences, or Phrases;
Quotes Acts, and Laws, till Rustickes he amazes.
Yet what he speaks, or quotes, be words bot waste,
And waird bot as the Blind their Clubs do cast:
Or as the Bairnes their Lessons learn by rat,
So he but farther knowledge rymes bot that.
He has an Heart to Greediness so given,
That he will peril all, and hazard Heaven,
Before he shall not (O Ungodly gain!)
By beggering his Clients, Wealth obtain.
He never with his Conscience comes to count,
So that he see his Means and Honor mount.
He glores in Gear, Gold-Angels are his Gods,
For which his Truth, he tramples on, and troads.
He studies all, to Sophistry and Shifts,
Protracting Time, still he delays, and drifts.
And empties so his long Dependers Purses,
Till they, by weeping Cross, with Sighs, and Curses,
Depart: when what they had prepared is spended,
Their Causes ill persude, and worse defended.
They never have compassion on the Poor,
Bot like a Prostitute and public Whoo^e,
From both the Parties, but a sense of Shame,
And all that Silver sets they take from them.
They Trickers are, and Tyners of a Cause,
But Conscience, and Knowledge of the Laws.
They have no Soul, they have no Shame, nor Eyes,
Bot such as sole their present Profit sees.
A worthy Soldier. 20.
A Worthy Soldier worthily is stylde,
VALOVRS Genuine, and natural Child.
Predestinate trained up, and borne to be
Fit for the service of Necessity.
And th'Ensigne to advance and carry forth,
Of Honor in the active Acts of Worth:
He dies the Earth, in crimson with his Hands,
While he the Violence of Wrong with-stands.
He ruins that which proud Ambition reares,
And Tyrants Statutes into Tags he tears.
He is a wary Watch man, and with Wit,
Advantage takes of Time, and uses it
Into the Projects and Designs he has,
For executing of his lawful Wrath:
While Cowards base make Flight their foul Refuge,
He makes his Blade his Arbiter and Judge.
And with the Pike Objections he impoungs,
When others bot retort them with their Tongues.
The dint of Death, although before his Eyes,
He obviates, before Indignities.
He is a Lion, awful to Ambition,
And like a loving Lamb, unto Submission.
He holds Hope, in hazards by the Hands,
And on the Head of Fear, triumphing stands.
He is the Peace, Preserver, and a Shield,
Unto his king and Country in the Field.
Unto disloyal Subjects he is seen,
A Persecuter constant, and a keen.
He leads to Battle cheerful, as he past
Unto a Banquet, for to break his Fast.
He knows not Cowardice, nor fainting Fear,
On Resolution, he his Rest does Rear.
Search all his Forts, his strongest you shall find,
To be the Magnaminit' of his Mind.
Look to his Life, and Thou shall see it, a way,
Where Dangers obviate, and meet Him ay.
Yet with undaunted Sprite he forward fares,
And to no Fortune stoups, nor peril spares.
In midst of Martial Broyls, and brave Alarms,
He with his Arms, there floutly wins his Arms.
And by his Merits, in the Fields, and Plains,
In Court at home, his Honors he obtains.
An untrained Soldier. 21.
A Soldier but skill, and an vntrain'd,
Is like a young Hound, or a Whelpe new wain'd,
That can not do, when first he falls to hunt,
Lay down his Nose, as other Hounds are wont:
Nor put upon a piece of Service, knoes
His Pike, nor Piece, nor Person, to dispose.
The manner of his March is like as when
Tired at the Plough, trudge home is seen a Man.
He bears his Blade, before his Belly tide,
For to be sure, he lose't not from his Side.
His Pike he like a Pyke-staffe lifts aloft,
As Boors their Bacon carry, when it is coft:
And with a minicke minsing of his own,
A kind of Carriage, yet in Camps unknown.
He so presents his Piece, with special Grace,
Which makes his Fellows flout him in the Face.
On goes his Arms, VVaste-coat-lyke, ore his Ears,
And he his Murrion, like a Nightcap wears.
When to be quarterd, to the Field he is led,
As with his Bobbie he looks for his Bed.
And when prepared his Provant he espyes,
He Kyte-like craving, for his Victuals cries.
And ere he scarce be come, or known, he will
Wish to be home, at's Mamie, or the Mill.
And hanging down his Head, he drouping goes,
As if he had his Heart into his Hose.
And in his Hut, when he to rest does take him,
He sleeps, till Drums or deadly Pellets wake him.
Thus he himself he carries, and descryes,
In all Employments, in all Companies.
Till Martial Discipline this Milk soppe raw,
Do season* and to understanding draw.
A Cipher he is, among Figures, and is naught,
Bot a Shadow, and not a Substance thought.
A worthy Physician 22.
IS open Enemy, and Foe professed,
To Sickness, Disease, to Plagues, or to Pest:
Purging from Nature Corruptions, and what
Infects destroys, or weakneth, yet that.
In feeling of Pulses, or groaping of Wrists,
Or viewing of Water, his Actions consists.
Discourses that chiefelie fits him, and pleases*
Are of the Causes and kinds of Diseases.
In Physical things, he frets till he finds,
And searches of Simples, Sorts, and the Kinds.
And then of these all, accordingly takes,
Advisedly, so his Mixtures he makes.
Unto his Patients, he Patience persuades,
And with a modest Mirth, their Griefs he glads.
Much he does move, allow, and advance,
And praises often in Purpose, Temperance,
Both to avoyde all Wastrie of Wealth,
And for upholding of bodily Health.
Purging and Bleeding his Counselors be,
Into conserving of sound Sanitie.
His two Attendants and On-wayters are,
The choice Chyrurgion, and Apothecare.
Resolved with these, of Time, and Seasons sure,
He temprate tryes, and cunning in his cure.
Surfets, Excess, and Venerie both,
Agents always for his Employments go'th.
When as from one-an-others weakness he will,
Strain Strength to himself, by Knowledge and Skill.
Thus they are needful, and necessare Men,
To cure Diseases vnnecessare then.
An unworthy Physician. 23.
AN Ass turned Ape, his Office he uses,
Yet Artlesse, both Practice and Parties abuses.
Bayard-lyke blind, he bloodeth with the Lance,
Do he cure, or kill, he cares not what chance.
Witless with Vomit, or Purging he will,
Give Health in haste, spoil presently, or spill.
He cracks of his Cures, his Travels, and where,
Such Wonders he wrought, seen seldom or rare.
Bot so far a-Field, that there are found few,
Will tie them, to try his talking, if true.
He vaunts of Rewards, and venteth out Wonders,
That his Receipts, were nere less than hunders,
In Markets and Faires, he is not away,
Walking, and viewing, some Vrinals ay.
Where if he find Hot, Gross Humors, or Raw,
Albeit that Liech he little does kn^w;
Yet some thing to seem, somewhat he will say,
Lyn'd with some Latin, that lykelie it may.
And if he hit, and to a Purpose speak,
Then l^ks he like One to salve all the Sick.
This Fellow effronted, he never fayles,
In telling stale Jests, and old merry Tales.
For old Ones to laugh, and the Young to allure,
Pears he has pocked, and Sweeties be sure.
Peartly he speaks, as having Inspection*
And skillful in knowing of evrie Complexion.
And if a strange Cure he stumble on, or chance,
Out of his Artlesse use, and Ignorance;
Yet saucie, and shameless, swears this Ann*
That easily cure Incurables he can.
Bot being vnlearnd, dishonest, and als,
Often times found foolish, found fraudfull, and false;
Indeed, if not Death, it is Danger to deal,
With such Quacke-salvers, for sick Men, or Whole.
A worthy Merchand, 24.
IS th'Heire of Adventure, whose Hopes do hing,
On Gain, that the Winds from the Waters bring:
With Halters of Hemp, and Horses of Tree,
Through the watrie waste Region rydeth he:
And with a Merry Gale cheerful he is,
Furrowing the Foame, and shearing the Seas:
In Trading by Toil, and Travel he takes,
Discoveries of Coasts and Countries he makes.
N'Hazard this Worthy from Ventring exempts,
Bot stablie he stands in all his Attempts.
He spares not Expenses, expecting his Gains,
So Traffic and Trade, the Merchand maintains.
His Study is Number; his Care, his Accounts,
To know how (...) Means diminish, or mounts*
His effauld-Faythfull Forms are his Defense,
And greatest Comfort* is, his Conscience.
He trades not with a Measure false, his Fame
Is whole, and all* his Wealth, is his good Name.
He fears no Sill', and by Charibdis sails,
Nor for a Wrack, he out of measure wayles.
Although with Tempests, he be tossed and strest*
Yet hopes in the Hav'n to ride, and to rest.
And by his Trade, and Labors long at leisure,
He gets his Goods, and finds the Key of Treasure.
He bringes, from th'Observations of his Eye,
The Modeles best, of Architecturie.
And from a bought Exper'ence, and the Sourse
Of Knowledge high, he draws his Discourse.
What comely is abroad, and good, he knows,
Most circumspectly that at home he shows.
In h^s Apparel, he is neat, and clean,
And modest in demeanure, he is seen.
Not dainty, nor too delicate, in Diet,
Using the mean twixt Parcimon* and Riot.
Full of Civilitie, and always, (Note)
He Holy is, Religious, and Devote.
And to the City, Country, Court, and King,
What cannot wanting be, does daily bring.
An unworthy Merchand. 25.
A Cheater he is, that with a full Purse,
Will with the Best to the Board, and the Burse:
Then soberly bargain, and promise to pay,
Peremptorly keep his hour, and his day.
So craftily thus in Credit he creepes,
For once he or twice his Covenants keeps.
But Pedlar-lyke yet how ever he begins,
More with his Wit, than Honesty, wins.
He lifts what he can, from Coap-men, and Strangers,
While Credit he cracks, and Conscience indangers.
At greatest rate, he buys the worst of Wares,
But for the Payment, neither counts nor cares.
Yet with fair words tho false, these Foreign Goods,
As trusty Stuff, at Home, on Friends, h'obtrudes.
His Measures double are, and wrong his Weights,
And seldom holds (suppose he swear) his Heights.
He passes not for Piety, if Poor;
And if he be Rich, none dow him endure.
He in the Streets derayd, above his State,
A-gadding goes, and up and down does jet.
Old CHAVCERS Cook, he likned is unto,
That busy seems, where there is naught to do.
He is a cogging Knave, and crafty aye,
Over-Roguing all, that overreach he may.
T'impone the Simple, (...) often times are witty,
Yet they dishonor, and they shame their City.
And with their Fashions (...) tho false, deface,
And are unto all Merchands good disgrace.
Yet time decyphers these Deceivers all,
When they debosh, and play Bankrupt, with all.
A Good Man, 26.
THat fears for Love, his GOD, and in His Light
Of Truth does trace, and walks His Ways aright;
And as in Love, through Faith, his GOD he knaws,
To keep in him the compass of the Laws.
Of GOD, a Good Man is th'Idea, and
A Lord ore all He create to Command*
To worship Him, and serve Him holy made,
Tho from Sincerity, to Sin, he slade.
With Reason borne, to know Things Natural,
Inspir'de by Grace, for Metaphysicall*
He has a Face, that up to Heaven does bend,
A Soul to Sense, that all the Life does lend.
And to the World is a Stranger given,
While of his Sprite the Home is only Heaven.
His Life a Time of Toil, is strangely strest,
His Death, again, the Walk and Way to Rest.
His Study is, into the Word of Troth,
Which carefully he keeps in his Mouth:
And in his Life to practice it does prove,
For his Delight is in the Law of Love.
He does provide bot for Necessity,
And casts his Care in the use of Charity.
He does converse with divine Prophets, more
Than worldly Profits, to increase his Store.
In the Law of the LORD is all his pleasure,
And in His Knowledge, all his Wealth and Treasure.
His Bosom thus the best of Wit inclouds,
And thus he is rich, into the best of Goods.
Heaven of his Eye, it is The Extent and Scope,
And Life through CHRIST there-in his highest Hope.
Humility, the Scale it is, where-by
He having Pride deprest, does mount on hy.
His Patience is Procurer of his Peace,
That guyded is with Virtue, Wit, and Grace.
He is the Seed of Love, and by the effect
Of Grace, he is Heir of Heaven, and Life Elect.
For all that he does care for, crave, and claim,
Is for that Heavenly High JERUSALEM.
A bad Man, or Atheist. 27.
WIth GOD, with Man, the World, himself, at War,
And what not, all he to Damnation dare.
In Nature like a Dog; in Wit, an Ass,
And Beast-like he does in his Passion pass.
Into his Actions, which are always evil,
He is a Corporal Incarnate Devil.
He makes Sin a Mock; the BIBLE, a Babble,
GODS Grace, an Humor; and His Truth, a Fable:
And calls it Cowardice, for to keep Peace,
For troubled Times, he holds his Happiness.
His Castle he does call his Sword; and Pride,
The Horse, where-on this Hell-hound haunts to ride.
His Purchase, Pyckrie is; his Language, Lies;
His Longing, Lust; his Puncke, his Paradise.
And with a Whore, and a polluted Punke,
His Glory is, to be debosht, and drunk.
He is the Patron of Impiety,
And deadly Danger of Society.
He Virtue loathes, and loves Vanity,
And is the Horror of Humanity.
In Bawdrie, and in Barratrie, h'abounds;
Till Body, Soul, and Fame, he all confounds.
He boasts the Good, and he vpbraids them broadly,
And spights at all the Gracious and Godly.
His Paunch is his Prince; the Tavern, his Tower;
Mahound, his Master; his Mistres, a Whore.
Oaths are his Graces, and Wounds are his Badges:
Rebel, and Rogue, and Picke-purse, his Pages.
He knows not GOD, nor goes where Grace does dwell;
Bot walks through the World, like a Devil to Hell,
He Treachrous is, and a Truethlesse Detractor,
The Fellon, the Fool, the Fiends Benefactor.
Untimely Begotten, and backwardly borne:
Unworthily waxes, and lives forlorn.
A Monster to Men, a Fool to the Wise:
In doubting, Despare, and damned he dies.
A wise Man, 28.
IS Like unto a Clock, that never does chyme,
Bot at the Hour, and strikes still in Time:
Or as a Dyall just, set with the Sun;
Or Glass that well does keep, and restless runn^.
So will he never ware a Word, bot when
To speak pertains, unto a Prudent Man.
He measures Time, and all in Season does:
He tempreth Nature, and does Reason use.
Sense he commands, and Will he keeps under:
And all with Knowledge, he does pose and ponder.
None can his Ears with Charms blow up, and batter;
For fast They are, when Parasites do flatter.
Closse is his Mouth, unto detracting Tongues:
And no false Imputations he impungs.
An humble Heart, an open Hand, and free,
He has to Want, and unto Piety.
To Observation aye his Labors tend,
And wise Experience is his Aim and End.
To Contemplation, and to meditate,
His Thoughts are often devote, and dedicate.
The Divine Word made Man, his Will, his Law*
Is all that he does call for, cares to know.
Swollen Pride he knows no^ of Prosperity,
Nor yet the Mis^rie of Adversity.
Bot takes the one, as if the Day, or Light,
And the other, as the Darkness, and the Night.
He knows not Fortune, and no Fate he fears,
Bot builds, and all, on Providence he reares.
And through the hope of Faith, that Grace has given,
He reaches high, and does lay hold on Heaven.
His Works are good, and Godly, as his Mind,
His Words and Thoughts to Honor all inclynde:
For he in Love th 'Elect is of the LORD,
A Master to the World, that cares not for it.
And tho here borne a Stranger, bot on Earth,
In Heaven a Burger, by a second Birth.
A Fool. 29.
A Fool he is, the'Abortiue Birth of Wit,
And the vnfashiond Embrio of it:
Where Nature had more Power, than Reason Use,
The Fruit of Imperfection to produce.
His Actions all, are almost all Extremes,
Of Means, nor Ends, he never doubts, nor dreams.
Nature taught Fools, to Eat, to Work, and Sleep,
Tho they there-in no Time nor Measure keep.
Fools have no fear of GOD, respect to Men,
And void of Reason, they no Duty ken.
Bot as their Passion, and their braine-sicke Wits,
Transport them, they do play their foolish Fits.
His Exercise, it is foure*folde always,
H'eats, drinks, and sleeps, or then is laughing aye.
Five things do humor him, and much do move,
And not bot these can he think of, nor love.
And what are they? a Bauble, a Bell, and bot
A pupped Pudding, or a pyed Coat.
His Words want Wit, and Reasonlesse his Will;
For it resolved, does neither good nor ill.
He Wisdom and Instruction does despise,
Since he can naught, or he will not be wise.
His Front, his Index is, and does express,
His Minds distemprature and giddiness.
His foolish Fits, neither the Bad do please,
Nor can the Good be seen content with these.
He out of Measure is in Motion ever,
And bot when he does sleep, he rests never.
He is unhappily begotten and borne,
(Tho not his fault) Reason and Wisdoms Scorn.
A Shame to's Sire, a Blott unto his Brother:
A Curse to's Kin, a Mischief to his Mother.
He lives a Beast, and does no better die,
But Wit and Reason, Natures Infamy.
A plain honest Man 30.
LIke JACOB is, and dwells into Tents,
Not full of Congi^s and Court Complements:
Bot he is faithful, efauld, free, and plain;
And so but change, immobile does remain.
Like to a Coat, that is so well prepared,
To fit the Wearer plain, but Welt, or Guard.
When as the Stuff where-of the same is made,
Nor is the form, in more request is had:
So th'honest Heart, but Fraud (that breeds Offense)
The Credit keeps of a good Conscience.
Fred from infernal Brands of Infamy;
From Scandal, and deserved Obloquie.
His works are vert'ous, and his Words are Truth:
His Progress plain, and all his Practice Rueth.
His Life is Labor past with Patience,
His Rest is Death, and his Sprites Passage hence.
His Travel is from Infancy to Age,
A painful Passage, and a Pilgrimage.
His Ways yet plainness, and his Pleasure, Peace;
His whole delight, is love, his Glory, grace.
His Crdit, is his Coin, Reason, his Square:
Content, his Kingdom, Conscience, his Care.
His Carr'age courtous is, and no ways vain:
His Heart is humble, holy, and humane.
He (...) is Churlish, ever Charitable:
In Talking, and Discourses, delectable*
He ever was, and ever will be found,
Amongst rich Iemms, the rightest Diamond.
A Phoenix amongst Fowls: yea, he is borne,
Among Men a Saint, among Beasts an Unicorn.
A Knave, 31.
THe Worst of Wit, and the Scorn of Reason,
Begot but Grace, and syne borne* out of Season.
He is the Shame of good Society,
And Promptuarie of Impiety.
He does dishonor all the humane Race,
And is past help of GOD, past Hope of Grace.
He corrupts Age, and he infecteth Youth:
He hates Wisdom, and detracts the Truth.
His Words are false, his Oaths prove perjuries:
His Studies, Tricks; his Practice, Villainies.
His Wealth, for Wit and Honor, he does hold:
^or Glory, Gain; and for his God, his Gold.
To Trust, a Traitor; t'Amitie, a Thief:
Prompe in the Plots, and Practice of Mischief.
A Friend to none, or found to few is he,
And yet he is aye his own Enemy.
An Unthrift since his Breathing first, and Birth;
Abhorred in Heaven, unhallowed on the Earth.
His Heart of Poison is a Pond that springs,
His Tongue deceitful, and like Dragons Stings.
And like a Limbecke is his fleeting Brain,
That does distill Inventions vilde and vain.
He loves no Laws, nor counts of their Commands:
For Hell, Mahound, and he has shaken Hands.
And as he VVolfe-lyke lives, false like a Fox;
^ee Dogg-lyke dies, or in the Streets, or Stocks.
An Usurer, 32.
THe Character and Pattern is express,
Of worldly Misery, and VVretchednesse.
The Gold and Money that these Misers have,
Their Master is, and they their Silvers Slave.
What they do call, and for their own do claim,
They have it not for it bot holds Them.
They have no Grace Divine, nor God, bot it,
Which robs their Reason, and bereaues their Wit.
The more they come by, more and more they crave;
And wish their Gardivyots were their Grave.
For where their Heart and Treasure is, there would
They ly, and be engraveld with their Gold.
Their Greed it is, s'vnsatiate, and such,
Gain what they like, they cannot get too much.
Their ever unbounded Pleasure in their Pence,
Makes them but Soul, but sight, but Shame, but Sense.
Their Fear, is Want, and for to get, their Care:
Their Diet is, plain Fasting, or poor Fare.
Their Study, Sparing; and their loathsome life,
Still with it self is at Debate and Strife.
Their Habit, and their Clothing, often declares,
They were the Hang-mans, or of rouped VVares.
Their Teeth of Interest destroys and eats,
And is a Canker unto all Estates.
They swill, they suck, and like Loach-Leeches Bloods,
And drink their Debtors Substance, and their Goods.
They loathed live, and unlamented die:
Drudges to Dross, and Mappes of Misery.
A Beggar, 33.
A Laysie Lout, that does himself profess.
The Fellow, Pheire, and Mate of Idleness.
His Life a Resolution is of Ease:
Highways, his Walk, he travels most in these.
Bot the Alehouse is the Place of his Retreat,
Where with his Whore he will not miss to meet.
And there ore-turnes, and freely toss the Pot,
That with a feigned Infirmity they got.
For busily his Studies are all bent,
To counterfit th'Infirme, and Impotent.
And all his Practice, is espyde to be,
To cogg, and coozen simple Charity.
Of all the Rabble of all ranging Rogues,
None are more noisome, than th^se swarming Frogs.
For into every Hamlet, Town, and Farm,
Like Caterpillars they do flock and swarm.
At Bed, at Board, from Home, and in the House,
Their Fellow and Companion is a Lowse.
With Blessings they begin, and pray for all;
Bot into Cursing ofttimes ends their Call.
None lives on The Earth Religious less than they,
They prey on Men, yet never to GOD they pray.
Thanks none, or few, to Him they give; and less
Regard they give their Givers in Distress.
No, none more ^ewdlie lives, and more impure,
And none are worse, and vicious more be sure.
They carnal are, and lustful, out of Measure,
And brutish in the acting of their Pleasure.
They Marry seldom, baptize never their Brood,
And others know, but Caring, Kind, or Blood.
They Are Atheists almost all, and in effect,
God nor the Devil, Hell, Lord, nor Law respect.
They trade by Beggrie, many times by Stealth*
And always VVasters of the Commonwealth.
His Birth, his Life, and Death, often falls thus,
He Is gotten and borne into a Barn and Bush.
Then ydlie dryues his Days, and leads his Life,
Without all Law, and her that for his Wife
He holds, a Whore, a Th^efe is, or a VVitch;
And last, he ends and dies in a Ditch.
A Virgin, 34.
IS like the Lillies, and the Crimson Roses,
When PHOEBVS force their luked Leaves v^loses:
Which kythe in Colors pure, and all Ingraine,
But any Macule, Tash, or any Stain,
She Is Natures Beauty, in her chiefest Pride,
In Chastity, and Virtues Tinctures died:
Where th'vnpolluted Spirit Gracious,
Does make her Angell-like, and Glorious*
She Is Virtues Darling, VVi^domes Milk-whyte Dove,
Reasons Care* and she is Honors Love.
The Grace of Youth, the Comfort of the Age,
In both discreet, in both digest and sage.
Her Studies, and her Exercises, holy;
But Petulance, lascivious Sports, or Folly.
An handsome, humble Gravitie, her Grace,
With comely Carr'age, and a constant Pace.
Lovely her Looks, and yet most chaste her Eye,
Her Countenance severe, yet sweet to see.
Her Actions all, are with her Words, that is Truth,
Her Constancy, her Fame, in Age, and Youth.
Her Wealth, her Virtues are, her Grace, her Glore,
Her Labor, Patience, and Content her Store.
Her usual Diet, it is Abstinence,
Her Ornament, and Crown, is Continence.
Her Lawne-like Love, unspotted is* and clean,
Her Orisons devote, her Hopes divine.
Her Parents Pleasure, Honor of her Kin,
And Phoenix of the Land she lives in.
Of Female kind, she is the first and fairest,
And one of all the Rational, that is Rarest.
And to be found the Heavens beneath, and under,
The choysest Jewel, and the chiefest Wonder.
A wanton Woman. 35
A VVanton Woman, 's Vicious, and strange,
The type of Imperfection, and of Change.
In Quality a VVag-taile, and in shape,
A Siren; in her Nature, bot an Ape.
Her Vult, a Witch; inviting to all Evil:
For she into Condition is a Devil.
Her Words are Charms, and every Nod, a Net,
To snare the Fool; and for the fleshly set.
Her Looks are Hooks, and Baits, bot to Abusion:
Her Company is Death, Iosse, Confusion:
Her lustful Lips, like Hybla-Honey Drops;
Bot loathsome sour these Liquors have their Sops.
Her Mouth is soft, and smoother more than Oil:
Bot what it speaks, does poison, spill, and spoil.
Her End is worse, and bitterer by far,
Than Worm wood, Gall, that tarte and bitter are.
Her Heart with Pride, and with Deceit does swell:
Her Feet to Death, her Steps tread down to Hell.
Her kind Embraces, and her Kisses killes:
Her Breath for Balm, bot bitter Venom stilles.
Her wavering Wit, bot naughty Fancies nowrish:
And all her Thoughts are wanton, vain, all Whorish.
Her Life is lewd, all Idleness, and Play:
Her Diet is the excess of Dainteis aye.
Her Love is Vanity; and still in Change:
And as her Eyes, so her Affections range.
Her Exercise, bot Rest; and yet are wholly,
Busied about Inventions bot of Folly.
Her Fancies are for Fashions, Toys, and Shows:
Her Weal in Colors, and her Wealth in Clothes.
To catch, and cousin Men, is all her Care,
Her House, an Hell, and all 's unholy there.
Her VVayters on, are Bauds, for Beasts and Bables:
Her Friendship false, and her Discourses Fables.
She is the Plague of Youth, Repentance Story,
The Abuse of Time, and Ages Purgatory.
A Quiet Woman, 36.
IS like a Wind, low, quiet, calm, and still,
That blows no Dust, nor does the Body chill:
Whom never Impatience does provoke, and move,
Bot with her Patience wins the Heart of Love.
Her VVisdome makes her Will to be preferred,
And worthily to get a great Regard.
She fears the LORD, flees Sin, and loves Peace:
She walks to Heaven; her Guide thereto, is Grace.
She helps and aids, into Asperitie,
And takes a part into Prosperity.
Her Tongue is still unto Discretion tied:
Her Face with modest Shamefastness is dyed.
She is her Husbands Heart, his Love, his Chose,
And Doane-Bed, where his Spirits do repose.
Her brave Behavior, is a Glass, where-by
Her Children may their own Miscarr'age see.
She treades upon the Tortoys, never strayes
From Home, nor ydlie walks upon the Ways.
Her Virtuous Doings, they do her adorn;
She cares not Change, and Fortune she does scorn.
A Turtle to her Husband, in her Love;
And meek to him, she like a Lamb does prove.
No, never what he concludes, does control;
An Angel, and a Saint into her Soul.
She is a Pearl, that is vnprizable;
A Pleasure great that is unspeakable,
A Comfort too, that is Incomparable,
And in the World, a Wife Inimitable.
An unquiet Woman, 37.
She is a Thing, much worse to keep than Know;
A Beast that brooks Subjection to no Law.
The Mischief, and the Misery of Man,
That scarcely can descrybed be: and when
It is, into the very Hearts and Heads
Of Law and Reason, Detest^aion breeds.
For her Demeanures, they indeed are Theams,
Which aye and only stand into Extremes.
Her Words and Voice, the scrighing of an Owl,
That to affright Men, on the Night does yowle.
Her Eyes, even as the Cockatrice, do kill:
Her Hands, the Claws are of the Crocadill.
Her Heart, a Cabinet, that does contain
All that is naughty, vicious, and profane.
Time she abuses, and she wounds Wit:
No Reason she regards, bot wrongeth it.
She is impure, her Pride unsupportable:
Her Malice, matchless; Will, insatiable.
She does respect, nor any person spares:
Defame she fears not, nor for Counsel cares.
Her Wit is Will, Command, is, Must, not No:
Her Reason, Shall; her Satisfaction, So.
She cannot love, like, nor allows no Lord,
And does from Law and Order both debord.
She is a Cross, bot not of CHRIST, a Cross:
A Grief to Nature, and to Life a Loss.
And from her Birth, she is empty of all Grace:
A Plague to Piety, a Foe to Peace.
A Wrack of Wealth, a Wrangler, full of Wrath:
Most Tarte in Taste, and in Digestion, Death.
A GOOD WIFE. 38.
A World of Wealth, a Jewel good and great,
And to her Lord, a Kingdom, in Conceat:
An Heavenly Blessing, and Man's Happiness,
That naught, not Death, can minish, nor make less.
Her Husbands Jewel, and her Childrens Ioe:
Ever Virtues Friend, and ever Vices Foe.
Her Conversation, is solacious:
Her Countenance grave, yet ever gracious.
Her Tongue is temprate, and her Eye is wary:
Her Carriage is kind, yet chaste and charie.
She Is graceful grave, a Mirror to her Mayds:
Her Beauty natural, but Art, but Ayds.
She with no Pomate paints her Face, nor fairds:
Nor does not use with Oil to smooth't* and smeard,
To make it show before the Sun, and shine,
To help pure Nature, wrong the Work Divyne.
But she does count it well, and best decor'd,
As fashioned with the Finger of the LORD.
She Is Mistres of her Passions, and her Tongue
To Reasons Girdle it is tide, and hung.
Next Heaven, her House she holds her chiefest Care,
And that her good Houswyfrie does declare.
She goes not gadding, bot at Home she dwells:
And when she goes she goes on Tortois Shells.
She in Apparel is, and clothed cleanly;
Not too magnificke, no, nor yet too meanly.
Her Words are wise, her Voice is Musical,
And al^ her Actions are Harmonicall.
An Effoeminate Man, 39.
IS like a Man, to see, in shape, in sho,
That has the Form, and in effect is no.
He is a primped Piece, and therefore than,
Is Womanish, and bot a Chyldish Man.
Into his Relish, he is Liquorous:
In Love, and his Desires, Libidinous.
He tryfles Time, and bot with Puppets plays:
A-Wenching walks, and ydlie dryues his Days.
He covets for to look in Mirrours often:
For to sleep sound, and to lie long, and soft.
He loves to be embraced, and to be kissed;
And then, above the Best, he thinks him blessed.
Hee'inanelie talks, a Look demure he shoes:
He mirds too much, and too-too nycelie goes.
He Iuncates loves, and Dainties much desires;
And for to Ball, and Banquet, never Tyres.
To be his Mistres Man, he urges still:
Bot to be a Master to her Maid he will.
To frame lewd Lines, and sing Love Songs, he loves:
To smell Perfumes, and have sweet watered Gloves.
He coyneth Purposes, and tells Lies:
He studies Daunces, and Riddles does devyse.
He loves Good-morrowes, and yet does delight
To sleep the Morning, and to watch all Night.
He doates to hear, and wandering News to chase:
And hunting for Them, haunts the Market place.
He sighs for Love, and will for Kyndnesse greet:
Yea, with each Humor will a Cadance keep.
His Game with Girls is most at Barla-breakes:
And after, on his Bed Tobaccho takes.
And then with Frictions, and with Clothes fire hot,
Full of these Fumes, breathes like a boiling Pot.
This Ganimede, soft, nyce, and Man-turn'd-Woman,
In very deed, and in effect is No-man.
A Parasite, 40.
HE is the Picture of Impiety;
To gain a Groat, avowde to Villainy.
For with a flattring Tongue he will not fail,
To pick Men's Pockets, and their Money steal.
His Face is Brazed, that he cannot blush:
Shame set aside, none he regardes a Rush.
And what he lights on with both his Hands,
He holds; for they are lym'd, and like Bird Wands.
His Tongue vntymous, clinketh like a Bell,
And naught but Tryfling Truethlesse Tales does tell.
He plays the Pandare, and with Graceless Greetings,
He carries Messages, for Evil Meetings.
And with smoothe Words, which he is cunning in,
Persuades a sort of Sweetness into Sin.
He is much like a Dog without a Door;
Where-at the Devil to dance, went in before.
Or like a mounted Spyder he does show*
And yet but lives on Poison here Below.
So he may gain, he looks not who does loss,
And for a Crown his Credit he will cosse.
He has no Honesty, and does no Duty:
He spoils the Youth, and is The Abuse of Beauty.
A Knave at Court, a Cheater in the City,
That should be punished, and expelled but Pity,
A Iester always, (tho his Iestes be stall)
He is, and is a Iacke-an-Apes in all.
A Baude. 41.
A Baude, she is a kind of Woman-beast,
That spoils Virginity, and Mayden-heads may:
For dissolutelie when she was bot young,
She vitiate, and did her own a Wrong.
And ever since, without Remorse or Fear,
She uses sundry Men, and Merchands Gear.
And for vntymous Trading with their Wares,
Into her Age Post to the Fiend she fares.
To Damsels she is dangerous, lest these,
She with th'Oft-Falling-Sicknesse and Disease,
Do fyle them, and infect; for she was ever
Since she was twelve years, touched with that Fever.
The Youth to spell, never trust her for to teach,
(Although for Proofs and Practice she might Preach)
Lest that she do, scarce well weand from the Mother,
Learn them too soon to Point, and put Together.
She plays the Surgeon, that can ease no Smarts,
Bot only swellings in the lower Parts.
She has one song, and it she sounds aye;
Time is, Time was, and Time will wear away.
Sweet Dainty Things, therefore, neglect not You,
To use the Time, and take your Pleasure now,
Incace when it is past, Occasion gone,
You sit unsought, and courted be with None.
And while this Toothlesse vents her vicious Voice,
From a waste Womb, and Breast with birnings bosse,
T'affright the Fiend, flat fallen, and low-lyke shoes,
(As eldren Apes) her Cheeks, her Chin, her Nose.
The Humor that she is most displeasing in,
Is at her Disabilitie to Sin.
And she is never more joviall, than when
She is persuaded, She is young for Men.
She cares for nothing, nothing bot her Ease,
Loves bot her Lust, pains bot her Panch to please.
She sels her Soul, for Sack, for Bottle-Ale;
For to lay down her Flesh, She will not fail.
In naught bot one, is she Industrious,
In th'Hospitall, or in the Baudie House.
To see the Wenches well set all to Warke;
Bot almost ever, and oftest in the Dark.
Her Breath corrupt, her Head is balde, her Eyes
Rheumaticke, running thou beholds and sees.
She Is Virtues Spoil, and Graces great Regrate,
The Wrack of Wealth, Natures Disdain, and Hate:
For SHE is stomached, and still does storm,
That so deformed a Monster she should form.
A Drunkard. 42.
A Drunkard, to define him, is a Beast,
Tho he the Figure have, and be Man-fac't.
Man Cup-shot, is no Man, no, scarce in part;
For he has neither Hands, nor Head, nor Heart.
He is a Nowne, and an Adjectiue One,
That by himself, well can not stand alone.
And yet a Tryer, and Contestor great,
Into his Weakness, and that stau'ring State.
If that in Surfets, Health, or Sickness shall,
The Mastrie have, command, and o're-rule all.
He is the Figure of Deformity:
And th'evidence of all enormitie.
H'abuseth Time, and Natures Rights ore-turns,
He wastes Wealth, at Reason spights, and spur^ns.
All Modesty h'anoyeth, and he ^oarres,
All temperate Sprites he frights from him and skarrs.
Civilitie he does disturb, and trouble;
And all Disorder Orderlesse does double.
He Is Woe to his Wife; to his Children Grief:
His Neighbors Skoffe, and to himself a Thief.
His Feet do reele, his Tougue at Randon runs,
He does, he says, and knows not what, yet sins.
He blasts, he braiks, he bans, and he blaspheams:
He shouts, or sleeps, and still is in Extremes*
He wastes, and wots not how, and so does weaken,
His Stomachs strength, although that it were oaken.
The Sober sigh, and for his Fashions flees him:
And all beside they scoff and scorn that sees him.
And so he serves for naught, except to shame,
Himself, and slay his Body, Soul, and Fame.
A Coward, 43.
THe Fruit of Fear, Suspicion, and of Dreed,
Whom Nature got, bot in cold Blood did breed.
And had too much a-doe, to make up than,
A Creature, that should resemble a Man.
And that is all he keeps of his Kind,
For beastly base dejected is his Mind.
His Life a Sickness is, that does resemble,
A sort of Palsy, for his Joints do tremble.
And but a Cause, such Terror he will take,
That he will faint, and all his Members shake.
His Death then by debased Diffidence,
It is a Terror to his Conscience,
His feeble Faith, no kind of Hope it bears,
And therefore Death he out of Measure fears.
All Persons he suspects, and every Place,
And therefore wretched is the Cowards Case.
He much affects Peace, for fear of Wars;
The thought of which his Sprite affrights and sca^res.
And if he bleed his Finger, he anon,
Looks for the Sign, and lays, his Life is gone.
And if his Tooth but ache, incontinent
He makes his Latter Will, and Testament.
The Roaring, and Report, that Cannons gives,
Prostrates him flat, and near of Sprite depriues.
And Thunderclaps do him discourage so,
That he can neither stand, nor stir, nor go.
Before he fight, or to Combat he kythe,
Content is he, and to be beaten, blythe.
And if his Feet may succor him, be sure
His Head, nor Hands, no danger shall endure.
He of no Hazard hears, nor hardy Feats,
Bot, fie for Shame, he shudders, and he sweats.
He will b'affrayde, with flying of a Bird,
Or noise of Wands that with the Winds are stird.
Marry he will, and marry bot with Such,
As are bot Mean, and not of Might too much.
Nor will he have a Wife that is fair: For why?
Some Broyls may be, and Quarrels come there-by.
And when he getts her, if he finds her frown,
Then he is abashed, dejected, and cast down.
If she bot chance to chyde him, than he weeps;
And comes as Spanels, when they couch, and creepes.
Where Dogs do bark, he comes not near that House,
Bot flees, as from the Catts th'amated Mouse.
If he be rich, for fear he never concludes,
How to dispose upon, or use his Goods.
And in his Nature, NATVR^ does defame,
For he does Manhood both disgrace and shame.
An Honest Poor Man, 44.
HE is a Proof and Map of Misery,
In patient porting of his Pe^urie.
With Wants unknown, he does resolve to sterue,
Than those relieve, and with Discredit serve.
He proves his Patience* and her strength he tryes,
In suffering Grief but grudge, even while he dies.
His Little is Much, his mean and sober Rent,
Affords him Store, rich quiet, and content,
Yet some times so the Touch of Want him plyes,
That from his Heart Tears burst out at his Eys^:
And from his Soul such Pailes of Sighs, and smoke,
Are sent, that would impatient Spirits choke.
Bot so his Reason his hot Passions temper,
That it controules, and moderates them Semper.
Yet blushes often for shame of Beggarie,
Or with the Sense of his Necessity.
For Rich Men shun, and flee him like Infection,
His Wants refuse, his Suits, finds all Rejection.
And with a Frowning, cold and careless Eye.
Or with a Skoffe th'vpbraide him going by.
His Lodging is the Earth, and oftimes even
The Bank his Bed, his Courtanes clouds of Heaven.
Roots his Repaste, bot fending over his Fare,
And such poor Portion as the Godly spare,
The Sun his Summer-Comfort until Night,
The Moon his To^ch, his Lamp, and Winter Light.
His Mournings are the Music of his Breath^
His Songs are Swan-like, sung before his death.
His study, Patience, and his Labor Prayer:
And yet with-all, meek are his Forms, and fair.
His Life below a Pilgrimage does prove,
His Resting Rowme and Home, is Heaven above.
He lightly lives, and as no Man, neglected,
And dies not moand, not mist, no, nor respected;
Yet tho the World his Wants and State contemn,
He shall inherit The High JERUSALEM.
And more nor he (stands in the State of Grace,)
That has the Worlds Prosperity and Peace.
He fully has the Favor of the LORD,
And he with Faith, with Hope, and Love is stor^d:
And there-in has for him reserved a Treasure,
Past Reckning, Rich, Great, past all Means and Measure.
A Just Man, 45.
THe Child of Truth and Virtue both, a Birth
That shall inherit Heaven, inhabit Earth.
For Nature in a mean and temprate Mood,
Bred and brought forth this Fruit, as Rare, as Good.
His Eyes from wilful Blindness they are clear;
His Hands from Blood and Brybrie are enteare.
His Will is void and free from Wilfulness;
His Heart most holy, has no Wickedness.
His Word and Deed are ever and always one:
He violates, nor this, nor that, to None.
His Life does show the Nature of his Love,
Whose Aim, whose End, and Object is Above.
His efauld Dealing, and his Deeds declare,
To keep his Conscience clean, his constant Care.
The chiefest Comfort that such happy have,
The Assurance is of Life, and to be save.
When as he on the Bench a Judge does sit,
He ponders all, and powders all with Wit
With closed Hands, and Single eyes he shawes,
That there he sits to grace as give the Laws.
And thus in judging, so his Judgment proves,
He honors Reason, and he Justice loves.
He fears not Power t'Equall, and to Place,
With Justice, Rigor; Mercy myld, with Grace.
He fears the LORD, and as he loves Him too,
His Worship he, in Fear, and Love does do.
His Walks are v^rt'ous, in his Makers Sight,
He treads not by-Rods, bot he traces Right.
He loves the Good, the Bad he cannot by de:
He loves Humility, and hates Pride.
His Works are always worthy for his Deeds:
As Honor bringes Them forth, so Virtue breeds.
And Wisdom fostring war'lie weaneth Them,
For his rich Virtue, to renown his Name.
So that he has an understanding Brain,
And Sprite of Knowledge, more than is Humane.
And thereby is One from Above that is Bl^st,
And on the Earth, One earthly, that is Best.
A Repentant Sinner, 46.
OF all Forlorn, he finds himself the First,
And vows he is of Wretches all the Worst:
So bad is the Estate he stands in,
While he is sowsed in the Seas of Sin.
He sighs, therefore, and for his Guilt does groan,
And sends Remorsefull thoughts to MERCIES THRONE;
To pray for Pardon, Pity, and Compassion,
For CHRIST'S most bloody, and most bitter Passion.
And offers with a broken Heart contreete,
Of Praise and Thanks a Sacrifice most sweet.
Whose sad Remembrance, all his Entralls tears,
And makes him weep, and wash his Couch with Tears
The hate of Sin, is figured in his Face,
By th'operation of the Sprite of Grace.
He covets nothing, bot such things that are
Conducent for him, and most necessare.
Superfluous, and vain he does abhor,
And never delights in these that is transitore*
He lusts not after more, than he would have,
Yet more contemplates* than he can conceive.
The sharp Recording of his Sins does search,
His secret Soul, and to the Spleen does pearse.
While in the Detestation of them all,
Woeful he weeps, for his Offense and Fall.
Yet still his Hopes for Mercy springs Above,
Despare and Fear, through Force of Faith and Love.
His Senses tire his Sprites, and thus distressed,
His Soul in Natures Course can find no Rest.
The Slough of Sin, and Rags of Vice he wore,
He shifts him off, and mynds to use no more.
Bot as that Snake, that slays with the Sight,
All Sin, all Wrong, and Vice, he does despite.
He labors still in Love, and lively Faith,
To live to GOD in Fear, and at his Death
To die in favor, that he may in Heaven
Enjoy the Glory GOD has freely given.
A Reprobate, 47.
HE is the Work of Violence and Wrath,
The Son of Sin, but Hope, but Love of Faith:
Who being borne, for Service of the Devil,
But Care does all, and all he does is Evil.
No Villainy escapes him, that he can:
For loathsome Sins delights most this Man.
His Wits are wandering, weak, and still unstable,
His Speech prophaine, impure, unprofitable.
His Actions orderlesse, and scelerate;
Corrupted all, cursed, and contaminate.
With all these Ills, that with the Fiends down fell,
From the highest Heaven, unto the lowest Hell.
For Wisdom, stands his Will: which while its so,
Bot Fury, or bot Folly, flows there-froe.
He Is full of Infidelity, Mistrust,
And only does delight t'injure the Just.
The Simple he deceiues, and sucks the Blood;
And under Trust, of The Innocent and Good.
His Breath is bot the Blast of Blasphemy,
And all his Practice proves Impiety.
His Conscience cauteriz'd, his Senses ^eard,
His Heart is hardened, and he is not feared
To Fault and Fall, bot like a Freeman fares,
And never in Public his Trespassing spares.
He worships seldom, and it is in vain,
Like Cains Sacrifice, because profane.
He is endured, an Outcast from the LORD;
Impenitent, unmindful to remord.
His wicked wishes are the wrack of those,
That Vertous, godly are, and Vices Foes.
He loves Confusion, and desires Disorder,
And Boucher-like, bathes in the Blood of Murder.
T'oppresse and spoil, he bot a Mirding makes,
And scorns the Law, when he her Statutes breaks.
And be he put in a respected Place,
The Good they smart, the guilty gets the Grace.
Remorse, regard, nor Pity he has none;
For Fear of GOD and Hope of Grace is gone.
This Peace-Oppressor, Lawless, Litigious;
This damned Reprobate, and Irreligious,
Is a Man-Monster, and an Humane Evil;
A Diabolicke, and Incarnate Devil.
An Holy Man, 48.
HIs heart is Heavenly, and his Hopes are hie,
Ever over-mounting all Mortality.
Things that is corrupt, he does contemn, and hold
All Mammons Means, bot Mucke, Goods, Treasure, Gold.
No Honors here, nor Pleasure he respects,
Bot thinks they are of Fancies, frail Effects.
The Soli-loquies of his Soul are sweet,
His Mouth and Mind in Meditation meet.
Natures Perfection, is an Holy Man,
And the best Good that She exhibit can.
For what has Earth more perfect than that Spright,
In Sanctity that serves his GOD aright?
Yet Nature perfects no such Peace alone,
But Grace and Faith their working there-vpon.
The Holy Man, is only he that is wise,
For only Heaven he holds before his Eyes.
And what is here Below, and Earthly, he
That uses only for Necessity.
And so, as that they find him and afford,
To serve his Needs, while that he serves his LORD.
His Senses so he tempreth and commands,
That they to obey his Spirit ready stands.
Which in an Orb Aethereall does move,
Stirred by a Strength and Power from Above.
And by observing Natures Course and Laws,
The Art of Reason, he acquires, and knawes.
And Treads on the The Earth, and trav'ling, does remain,
While he turn Earth; and be trod on again.
Although his Soul, enlarged from Carnal Strife,
Do live in Heaven, that gave his Senses Life:
Until the Resurrection of the Flesh,
That from the Earth shall rise, refynd, and fresh:
When all the World is waltring vp-syde-downe:
When Fortune fawnes, or when the Fates do frown:
He happy does his Sprite possess in Peace,
Because supported with the Power of Grace.
His Charity, and librall Hands declare,
Of Others Want, his kind and Christian Care.
He gladly gives, of what his GOD has given,
Which shall to him redoubled be in Heaven.
To live to GOD, his Practice all does prove:
Heaven is through Faith, his Hope; the LORD, his Love.
His Exercise is Prayer, his Studies be
Into the Volumes of Divinity:
And There he meditates, admiring most,
Th'Vnit' of the FATHER, SON, and Holy GHOST;
Which never in all the numbers of his Days,
Enough can he admire, extol, and praise.
His Heart, (to watch his Eye) he ordaines it:
And to his Mouth a Door he makes his Wit.
And both he ordaines ever, and does direct,
His Sprite from sinful Pleasure to protect.
He lives not like a Worldly Worm, that does
For Permanent, Things perishing, here choose.
No, no, his Love is set on Things unseen,
And ravished with VVares that are Divine.
His Love is Heavenly, Holy, and does hold
No Holy Days with Love of Mundane Mold.
Wherefore he is liable to many Losses,
And often incurres and combred is with Crosses.
Yet Heavenly Helps, and Hope vp-holds him so,
That Loss no Loss, nor Cross he counts no.
An Old Man. 49.
THe Instance of a Tract of Time of Years,
VVhere-in declyning, Natures Power appears:
When by Defect of Senses see we may,
The use of Reason both restraind, and stay.
Bot yet his Knowledge with his Time confer,
And he shall prove Experience Calendar.
Tho in the power of Action he is not,
As't were a Blanke, extracted from a Lot.
He is a Subject bot of Sickness now,
And Weakness Agent, that the Back most bow.
Crossed with the Coagh, and a corrupted Breath:
And so Praecursor to approaching Death.
An Old Man, ^s bot half a Man, and twyse
He turns to be a Bairne, and childish lies.
He Is bot the living Picture of a Man,
And is a very dying Creature than.
Behold him well, and in effect you will find
Him bot a Bladder, blown and stuffed with VVinde.
He Is like a withred Tree, and arride Root,
That buds not, flowrisheth, nor bears no Fruit.
And like a VVeather-worne, and Tyme-torne House,
Decaying fast, and falling ruinous.
Tho in his dying and declyning Grouth,
Yet is he Pepper in the Eyes of Youth.
He is the jest of Love, and for Infirmity
He may the Mirror be of Misery.
Yet Aged Locks, and Silver Hairs, deserve
That Youth should reverence, regard, and serve.
For Honor often times, and VVisdome both,
Into an Old Man's Gown and Garment go'th.
Aged Gravitie, and great Experience,
Does challenge both Respect and Reverence.
His wise Advyse, his Counsel true and sage,
By Practice long, often proov'd, from Youth to Age,
Should with all States and Persons be respected:
And not in Honorable Age neglected.
His Words are Oracles; they should be Noted
In Kalendars, for Common use, and Quoted*
His Actions should be imitate, and choosed,
To be there-after for Exemples used.
But as the Time, and Torch of Wax does waste;
So, live he nere so long, he dies at last.
A Young Man. 50.
THe Spring of Time, when Nature minds to vent,
Her Pride, and best of Beauties, excellent:
And to the World show and exhibit will,
Her Art Divine, in-Imitable Skill.
He is the Love, and the Delight of The Eye*
And well considred, singular to see.
His Flesh and Sprite, are at a Just and Iarring,
And he is all in Making, or in Marring.
His Wit and Will, stands at intestene Strife,
If This, or That, shall Lord and lead his Life.
His Virtues be in Waxing, or in Waining,
And all his Good, in losing, or in Gaining.
His Thrift is as he guydes him, and begins,
If Tentlesse, sure he tynes, if Wisel', he wins.
His Credit is (what ever be his Calling,)
And Honor in the Mounting, or the Falling.
His Life is in th'Increasing, or Decay,
And he walks in the VVyde, or Narrow Way.
He is a Bloome, that is blasted in the Bud,
Or grows to be a Fruit that is fair and good.
He Is like a Bird, that dies ere Nature brings
Her to make use, and venture to her Wings.
Or like a Colt, that is Fensce-fed, and Idle,
And None can break, without a Stryping Bridle.
Or Falcon-like, must be well Manned, and Framed,
Else he can never, or hardly, be reclam'd.
He is Dames Natures Darling, and her Io,
And cheifest Charge of Reason is also.
His Exercise is Study, in his Youth,
Or it is Action, in his elder Grouth.
His Studies are unto his Pleasures most,
Or upon Knowledge is bestowed his Cost,
The Disposition marked of his Mind,
Declares him Iade-lyke, or of Iennet kind.
His Carr^age is a Trying Table, or Touch.
That proves him Gentle, or degenred much.
For Youth is like to Lumpes of Lead, or Wax,
That at the Workers Will The Impression takes.
Which being hardened, and becoming cold,
Th'Indented Dints and form it has, does hold.
The Qualit of his Birth, frames him perforce,
In his Vpbringing better, be or worse.
And while Experience fine, and Reason fit,
His Understanding, he is no Man as yet,
No, rather bot a Child; and I may say,
With Flattery to be depraved, a Prey:
And does consist and stand in such a Case,
As either he, is in the Way of Grace,
To prove a Saint; or walking in his Evil,
And Path of Sin, shall doubtless grow a Devil.
FINIS.

