Ientaculum Iudicum: OR, A BREAKE-FAST FOR THE BENCH: PREPARED, PRESENTED, and
PREACHED in two Sacred Services, or Sermons, the Morning Sacrifice before the
two Assizes: at Thetford, at Norwich: 1619.

Containing monitory Meditations, to execute Justice and Law-Businesse with a
good Conscience.

BY SAMVEL GAREY, Preacher of GODS Word at Win-farthing in Norff.

EZECH. 3.1. Son of man, eat that thou find, eat this roll.

JOHN 10.10. And I took the little Book out of the Angels hand, and eat it
up, and it was in my mouth sweet as honey, but bitter in my belly.

LONDON, Printed by B. A. for Matthew Law, and are to be sold by Edmond Casson
at Norwich in the Marketplace, at the Sign of the Bible, 1623.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR THOMAS HOLLAND, KNIGHT, and his very worthy Lady,
all happiness External, Internal, Eternal.
(RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL)
THe law of Nature, which condemns ingratitude, yea, the common Rules of
humanity, which oblige the grateful to good Benefactors, enforce me to this
Dedication.

I have reaped with a plentiful hand the goulden harvest of your favors, in
requital whereof, I tender unto you the small gleanings of my poor labors:
for although I am easily overcome of others, in parts of nature, learning, and
grace; yet, in gratefulness to my good friends, I say with resolute Luther,
Cedo nulli: I ever abhorred from my heart that fault, wherewith the Romans 1.21.
Apostle taxes mankind, they were not Thankful. Seneca.
Many men like Zeno's mony-minstrell, sing for silver, or pipe for pence, to
whom the Wiseman said, Si dedero, and te, and pecuniam perdo; When their turn
is served, they return no thanks: I hope I shall never merit an exclusion out
of the Calendar, or Catalogue of your thankful debtors: Saying with Seneca,
Epist. 8 3.
Nunqua^ tibi gratiam refer p^tero, illud certe non desinam vbique confiteri,
me far non posse; God accepts votall satisfaction, where is no power of
actual restitution: I know you desire to imitate your Maker; and with him,
Solutio debiti est grata confessio Beneficij. But to pretermit all public and
private debts of duty, whereby I stand engaged to your Service, these two
Twins, or sister-Sermons desire to call you Patron; who as they were
conceived, and brought to light by the life of your love, so they run to you to
be their Protector: And to none more willingly do I commend, and communicate
my preaching pains, then to your Worthiness (so cordially affected to the
Gospel), who of all the Tribe of Gentry in these parts (whereof be many
sincerely religious), yet among the most eminent, (if Envy be not judge) you
merit the Palm: Pro. 31.29
Many have done virtuously, but you surmount them all: And as the flower of
Religion (Piety) is fixed in your heart; so the fruits of it, flow from your
hand, (Charity, and Hospitality): far unlike many wandering Planets in some
places, who at Michaelmasse make the Country their Circumference, to gather in
their Rents; but at Christmasse, when they should expend their store to feed
the poor, make the City, or their Cosens houses their Center; as great
non-residents from the Basket, as some of our coat be from their Benefices: but
you with charitable Job. 31.17.
Job may say, I have not eaten my morsels alone, the fatherless have eaten
thereof: Covetousness never stood for Porter at your Gate.

But I will not blow a trumpet of your virtues, and almes-deedes; they Reu.
14.13.
shall follow you to Heaven, when your body falls to Earth: and herein you
are worthy to be praised, that though you deserve, yet you desire no praise:
Seneca.
Magnum est, nolle laudari, and esse laudabilem; You have the love of the
Clergy, Gentry, Country; the fire of this Triple Love flames in many hearts,
Cant. 8.7.
Much water cannot quench this love, neither can the floods drown it; Vereor,
ne violem frontem tuam, Sedem verecundiae.

Worthy Sir! Accept in good part this poor oblation of my deep Affection,
then which favor, when I weigh my worth, I can wish no more; when I remember
you, I do hope no less. I preached these cursory meditations at your
appointment, in the time of your great Imploiments (being the very worthy high
Sheriff of Norfolk) and then they found good acceptance; and the Lord chief
Justice, the Oracle of the Assizes, graced them with approbation, requiring a
copy of them for private devotion, which here I publish (persuaded by many) to
posterity: So craving a favorable construction, and acceptance of this
plain, and perfunctory labor, with my hearty prayers to God, to make your
paths every way prosperous, To bless your Worship, your religious Lady, and
hopeful progeny with health, and happiness on earth, and with a glorified
life in Heaven, I ever rest

Your good worships to command, SAMVEL GAREY.

To the gentle READER.
ANtiquity placed Mercury in their Temples among the Graces, meaning, that as
Mercury (the supposed God of Eloquence) and the three graces, the Ladies of
Courtesy, were placed together; so Speech is desirous of friendly Ears, and
Writers wish Courteous Readers.

When men read with a mind to carpe, then their throats are so narrow that
nothing will down; this seems too round, or too flat, too blunt, or too
sharp, one way awry. Many who keep no warmth in their own Chimney, will
find fault with their Neighbors fire: I say with Martial,

Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.

What I preached to the Ear, I here present to the Eye, that one way or other
it might get to the heart: wherein I fear the fortune of Seiramnes the
Persian, who seeing many men wonder that he spoke well, but nothing which he
spoke, ever practiced, answered, That words were in his own power, but
Success above his reach: So the Admonitions here propounded, be good, and
wholesome, the Success I refer to God, who must give increase.

In publishing of which poor pains, I hunt not after worldly praise, or
profit, the two Lackies of most men's labors: praise is but a vulgar breath, or
air, fit to feed a Cameleon, my stomach can brook no wind: and profit, many
times they find most, who preach or print least:

Hos ego versiculos feci, tulit alter honores:

The Drones which creep into the Hine, suck away most of the honey, when the
laboring Bees be starued: All I can say for my self is, I desire to do good;
Whereof if I fail, yet my intent shall content my conscience: saying with the
Roman Orator,

Malim mihi facultatem, quam voluntatem deesse.

So craving thy courteous Acceptance of my good will, ingenuously acknowledging,
that frequency in the Service of Preaching, depriues me of leisurable times to
polish any thing for the Press, or to make (as once one said) my labors to
smell of the Candle: If ought be amiss, impute it to the weakness of men:
what herein is good, for thy good, give glory unto God, and to the word of his
Grace, which is able to build thee further, etc. I rest

Thy Christian Well-willer Sa: Garey.

A BEAKE-FAST FOR THE BENCH.
TEXT. PSALM. 2. v. 10. Be learned ye that are the Judges of the earth: serve
the Lord in fear.


THis Psalm Piscator in let.
is partly prophetical, and partly protrepticall, and paraeneticall.

The Psalmist prophesies of the Kingdom of Christ unto the tenth verse: and
then exhorts and admonishes all Kings, and Judges to serve, and honor this
high and holy Lord and King, in the three last verses following.

Of the Kingdom of Christ, three things prophesied: 1. Of enemies: Why do the
heathen rage? verse. 1. 2. Their enterprise: The Kings of the earth band
themselves, etc. verse. 2. 3. Their overthrow follows. specially described,
verse. 9. Similitudine dissipationis vasis figlini: Break them in pieces like a
Potters vessel.


The second part of the Psalm paraeneticall, Admonitorie, or exhortatorie to
serve Christ, who is here prophetically presigured. I will be no general
Surueior of this Psalm, upon a little piece of ground I set this Fabric.

And this David, a princely Prophet, who from a poor Shepherd raised by God
to sit upon the Kings Bench, here gives a Spiritual Charge to Kings and
Judges: David, the prolocutor, is (...) Let the hearer be, (...):

A Charge, Quibus? de quibus?

1. To Kings, and Judges. 2. Be wise: be learned.
The duty of both conioined: Serae the Lord in fear.

I have chosen half his charge, work enough for my discourse, and for your
practice.

In this Apostrophe, or Compellation, behold Danids Information, and
Exhortation:

Information, Be learned.

Exhortation, Serve the Lord in fear.

Here is both Theoricum, and Practicum.

1. A Qualification, in quo: Be learned. 2. A Caution, circa quod: Serve the
Lord in fear.
Three parts, the principal points of all: 1. The persons, Judges; there is
dignitas: Their dignity. 2. Their properties, erudimini; Be learned: there is
qualitas, their quality. 3. Their practice, Serve the Lord in fear, there is
pietas, their piety.


Thus this Text, like a small Garden-plot, yields plenty of rarities: like to
Matthew. 26.7. John 12.3.
Mary's little Box full of sweet ointment, which being opened, the savor
perfumes an whole house: Verba pauca, longum Epiphonema: Few words, yet full of
weight: In handling of them, we implore Gods assistance, and your favorable
patience.

1. Of the persons, Judges: dignitas personae.

Judges are of Gods own Judge. 2.16.
raising. Their calling, and office venerable: Nomen honorificum apud omnes; an
honorable name among all: Their Authority not to be controuerted, except God
be countermanded.

Judges Acts 13.20.
ruled in Israel 450 years: and because 1 Samuel 8.3.
Samuels children were bribing Judges, therefore the people of Israel cried,
and called for a 6.
King to judge them like other Nations.

For before that time, 1 Samuel 7.15.16.
Samuel Judged Israel, and went about year by year, (as it were in circuit)
to Bethel, Gilgal, and Mizpeth, and judged Israel in all those places.

Moses the first, who chose Judges by the counsel of Exodus 18.21.
Iethro: which practice after continued long in Jerusalem: they had their
Gasith, their Court, in the inward City, which the Jews called Sanhedrim, the
Greeks Syned^ion, the counsel of the Elders.

I purpose to pass by the Antiquity and Authority of Judges, their
properties are marks more proper for our discourse: and these properties
specially five, required in a just Judge.

1. Perspicacit as ingenij: deep understanding. 2. Audacitas An^mi: boldness
and courage. 3. Honestas conscientiae: honesty of Conscience. 4. Impartialitas
Iustitiae: uprightness of Justice. 5. Aequitas sententiae: Equity of
Sentence.
These sieve fair properties are better ornaments to adorn Judges, then
Joseph's sieve Genesis 45.22.
suits of raiment to set out Benjamin.

1. Perspicacitas Ingenij: sharpness of apprehension: Ignorantia Iudicis est
calamitas innocentis (says Auslen), the Ignorance of a Judge is the calamity
of the Innocent: and grave Iudicium est eius, qui non habet iudicium, says
Seneca: Grievous is his judgment, who has no judgment. They must be wise,
and learned, and have the eyes of understanding in their own heads, not to be
guided by others: or like the Plutarch.
Lamiae, carry their eyes in a box: rather Matt. 10.16.
to be wise as Serpents. A Magistrate should not be like Polyphemus, who had
but one eye, and that a had one: to be monoculate rather, like Argus, oculatus
a front, and a tergo: eyes before and behind: An office, which requires the
prayer of the Ephesians. 1.18.
Apostle, That the eyes of their understanding may be enlightened: So hard a
Task to perform, that the Son Ecclus. 7.7.
of Syrach counsels; Seek not to be made a Judge or a Magistrate, lest thou
be not able to take away iniquity.

I have read, that Heraclitus being sick examined his Physician, concerning
the cause of his sickness, and for that he was ignorant of the cause, he would
none of his Physic, saying; If he be not able to show me the cause, he is
less able to take away the cause of my disease: So the Physician of the
politic Body, If he has not wisdom, and knowledge, he can neither see, nor
take away the causes of the corruption of Commonwealths: but by a man of
understanding, a Realm endures long, says Pro. 28.2.
Salomen.

They had need of great knowledge and experience, who are appointed Instruments
to preserve Regem. The King. Iagem. The Law. Gregem. The Country.


They had need to be learned, and able to carry the Iethro of Counsel in
their own Bosoms. There are many sores and sicknesses in a Commonwealth:
Fraud is subtle:

-- mill necendi

Arts: a thousand ways to deceive:

And as Ovid of Autolicus, that he was

-- furtum ingeniosus ad omne:

Witty in all kind of wickedness.

The world is full of wicked wits. Magistrates had need of Serpentine
wisdom, to Cant. 2.15.
take the little Foxes of the world: Ier. 15.19.
to separate the precious from the vilde.

The Egyptians Emblem was, Oeulus cum Scepter: an Eye with the Scepter. The
Heathens in their Hierogliphicks did decipher Jupiter with an Eye, and an
Eagle: insinuating such a nature beseemed his Majesty, not to be deceived, or
deluded by any Object: To be Eagle-eyed, and to be Lion-hearted. Magistrates
should be for Wisdom, Eyes; for Instruction, Ears; for Protection, Hands; for
Supportation, Legs. Like Job 29.15, 16.
Job, who was Eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, hands for the poor, to
help the fatherless and friendlesse. The Psalm. 10 13.
poor commit themselves unto you, for you should be helpers of the fatherless.

1 John 5 19.
Mundus in maligno positus, the world is set upon wickedness: yea (as Mic. 7.2.
Micah) Every man hunteth his brother with a net. So that I may say of the
subtletie of sinners, as Caesar said of the Scythians, Difficilius inuenire,
quam interficere; Harder to find them, then to foil them: like the fish
Sepia, they can hide themselves in their own mudde; or like the fish
Atramentarius, they will so roar in the water, it is hard to catch them: So
that the Magistrates, the Kings-fishers, had need of great experience,
industry, and wisdom to catch them with the hooks of Justice, who are so
crafty, and slipperie to avoid and escape them. Be learned therefore O ye
Judges of the Earth, and pray to God with 1 King. 3.9.
Solomon, Give unto thy servant an understanding heart, to judge this people,
to discern twixt good and badde.

None might come into the number of the Rabbis among the Jews (as Picus
Mirandula writes) until they could speak seven Languages: so none are fit
for Magistrates, who are not furnished with good literature, and wisdom: And
as you are (as Act. 7.22.
Steven speaks of Moses) learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians; so
seek to countenance Learning. It is an old and true saying; Scientia non habet
inimicum praeter Ignorantem, Learning has no enemy but the Ignorant. Tantum
sumus, quantum scimus: not living, but learning should make a man esteemed. I
say of Learning, as our Savior of Wisdom, Matt. 11.19.
She is justified of her children.

Be not like Tob. 2.11.
Tobyes Sparrowes, who built under Tobyes roof, yet were a means to put out
his eyes: but herein I use the modesty of the Heb. 6.9.
Apostle, We have persuaded our selves better things of you, and such as
accompany salvation, though I thus speak. Thus much, or little, of the first
property Perspicacitas Iugenij, Sharpness of wisdom: which I point at, not
prosecute: for, Sus Mineruam, I am too shallow to put my foot too deep in
your fountain.

2. Property, Audacitas Animi; boldness and conrage.

So Ex. 18.211
Iethro advises Moses, to choose men of courage, etc. So the Lord creating
Iosuah Judge of Israel, Josh. 1.6.
Confortare, et esto robustus; be strong and of a good courage. A joyful
sight, when they on the Bench, like the men Nab. 2.3.
Nabum speaks of, The valiant men are in Scarlet: and as the Angel of Judge.
6.12.
Gedeen, The Lord is with thee thou valiant man.

Multi homines, pauci viri: many men, yet few of courage: like Neh. 6.11.
Nehemiah, Should such a man as Nehemiah fly? Courage an essential property
to adorn a Judge.

A Judge should not be (...), nor (...), without heart, or head.

We read in the Fable, when the Heart is made a judge twixt the Wolf and
Lamb, it must needs go on the Wolfes side: Quis metuit offendere, cum Iudex
metuit abscindere? Who fears to offend, when the Judge fears to punish?

Four ways (says Anselmus) humane Judgment is perverted.

Timore, by fear. Amore, by love. Odio, by hate. Lucro. by luker.
But they who be in authority, should be free from these corruptions, the
four mortal feauers of this courting Age. Men of courage, yet far from
choler, like the Puisition Hippocrates, of whom it is written; That he was
never seen to be in choler with any man: who had many Scholars, yet
permitted none to praclise till they had taken an oath before the Altar of
Apolto, land brcuiate diseases to their uttermost power.

A good president for Physicians, and a good pattern for Lawyers to abbreniate
Suits to their uttermost power. A long Suit in a Court, like a long sore under
a Surgeon, it may increase coin, it decreaseth credit.

In the Jewish Commonwealth, Judgment Seats Ruth. 4.2.
placed in the gates of the Cities, intimating quick dispatch: Quod sacis, fac
cuo. Suits should not grow aged, and gray headed in Courts: experience speaks
it; Non terminata negotia, donec enacuata Marsupia: The matter in hand, so long
as money in hand. An hungry Age for money: Auri sacra fames; an industrious Age
in the chase of treasure: many ready to crack their Lungs to plead for Fees: I
confess a Lawyers life is painful, riding from term to term, from Court to
Court, a work to make a man sweat, and therefore no marvel, though the
Clyent bring a golden bottle to quench the thirst. It is sitting, the Law
should be costly, else it would be too common: Malice often gives up the ghost
for lack of Curia panperibus clausa est.
gold: the world too full of wrangling Clients, and the Lawyer with an Ablative
case, gets away the money, and throws them the bag; and many a contentious
Clyent may say to his Advocate, as Balaams Ass to his Master, Numb 20.30.
Am not I thine Ass, which thou have ridden upon, since thy first time till
this present day. They are ridden with golden spurs: and as Aquinas, in
civil censures speaks; Damnum pecuniae propter bonum animae; Punishment of
the purse may be physic for the soul: yet a Physician, who puts his patient
out of pain by a quick recovery, is worthy of a double reward: sestina lent,
make slow speed is no good practice in Physic, or Law.

But I pass these inferior members of the Law, they lie not within the way, or
walk of my text, I dare scarce salute them, and except they make better
speed, I dare not say, 2 Ioh. v. 11.
God speed. You who be the Rabbis of the Law, should be men of courage;
animosi, luminosi; full of brains, and heart; to fear, or flatter none: Iudex
cordatus quasi lat is quadratus; A stout Judge, like a foure-cornerd stone; no
wind or weather stir it, like Psalm. 125.1.
Mount Sion, which cannot be removed: Qui habet se, habet totum in se, He who
is Master of his own mind, is a sit man for this work.

They who sit in Moses chair, should be men of courage, and good Conscience,
and always think upon the sentence, which the young man put under the pillow
of King Darins, 1 Esd. 3.12.
Truth overcomes all things: and to end this with Syrachs Ecclus 4.9.
admonition, Deliver him who suffers wrong, from the hand of the oppressor, and
be not faint-hearted when thou iudgest.

3. Property: Henestas conscientiae: Honesty of Conscience.

Now there is a threesold Judgment: Coeli, above, in Heaven. Saeculi, below,
on Earth, Conscientiae, within, in thy Conscience.


And Ecclus. 14.2.
blessed is he, who is not condernned in his own conscience: Socrates may be
your friend, Plato your friend; but Truth and a good Conscience prefer before
all. The Conscience of a Judge should be as true to God, as Sun to day; no
way to be corrupted by bribery, or any partiality; able to say with 2 Cor.
1.12.
Paul: Our glory is the testimony of our Conscience: and truly to protest with
upright 1 Samuel 12.3.
Samuel; Behold, here I am, bear record of me, whose Ox have I taken? whose
Ass have I taken? of whose hand have I received any bribes, etc. It is a
comfort to the soul, when able to bear a part in David's song, O Lord, thou
know my Psalm. 7.8.
Innocence.

There is nothing worse (says Ecclus 10.9.
Syrach) then a covetous man: for his Conscience will be corrupted with, Omnia
haec dabo, Matthew 4.9.
all these will I give thee.

Therefore David's petition necessary, Ps. 119.36.
Incline my heart O Lord unto thy testimonies, and not unto Covetousness: The
1 Timothy 6.10.
desire of money is the root of all evil: Such a covetous Judge Acts 24.27.
Felix, who did grope for a bribe. He who sels Justice for silver, sels his
Soul to damnation.

It is a clause of a Judges oath (as I have heard) when he is promoted to that
office, to repeat this diresull imprecation: If I do not Justice, God blot me
out of the Book of Life: a fearful oath, if not faithfully performed: Had
they Robes as rich as Solomon, or dominions as large as Alexander, yet if
corrupt, they may quake at their doom, to be blotted out of the book of life:
O verbum ipsa gehenna terribilius; Chrysostom. A word more terrible then hell it
self: as Wis. 6.1, 3, 4
Wisdom her self, Learn ye that be the Judges of the earth, the Lord will
try your works, and search out your Imaginations, and for the mighty abides
the sorer Trial. Therefore Psalm. 57.1.
David examines all, Are your minds set upon Righteousness, O ye
congregation? and do ye judge the thing that is right, O ye sons of men?
Many make their conscience poor, to make their coffers rich: we envy not the
gravel which sticks in the throat of the unconscionable: It is better to be
Pauperem pium, quam prosperum peccatorem, a godly poor man, then an ungodly
rich man. A little that the righteous has, is better then the riches of the
ungodly. And says David, Ps. 37.16.
Ill gotten goods never prosper: and says Job, Job. 15.31.
Fire shall devour the houses of Bribes.

I have read, how the Sophy of Persia, being to send a great sum of money for
an oblation to Mahomet in Arabia, would send none of his own coin, because it
was gotten by ill means; but exchanged it with Merchants, whose money (he
thought) was gotten honestly, and with a good conscience. Do unbaptized
Idolaters know, that unconscionable offerings are unwelcome offerings to their
false, and fictitious gods? and shall not Christians much more acknowledge,
that the true God of heaven and earth loatheth the service and sacrifice of
unconscionable sinners? he Psalm. 6.8.
cries, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity. Many with Tim. 4.10.
Demas stoop for gold, and lose the goal; and What shalit Matt. 16.26
profit a man to win the whole world, and lose his soul?

Quicquid agas, prudenter agas, et respice finem: Remember the end, and you
shall never do amiss: wealth is Genesis 27.39.
Esaus portion, the fatness of the earth shall be thy dwelling place: But God
Genesis 27.28.
give thee of the dew of heaven, is Jacobs blessing: Gods children say -- Non
est mertale quod opto: If God prosper them with wealth, they praise God, and
never practice to augment their store by a bad conscience: they seek not to
set their nest on high, by Hab. 2.11.
making the stone to cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber to
answer it. The Son of man, Judge of quick and dead, is said to Reu. 1.14.
have Eyes as a flame of fire: Eyes to behold sinners, as a flame of fire, to
punish for sin: Testes factorum stare arbitrabere Diuos: Heb. 4.13.
All things are naked, and open to his eyes: he behold, all deeds of
darkness: no curtains can keep out the light of his eyes: Horace: Noctem
peccatis, and fraudibus obijce nubem:


No cloud, nor night can dazell Gods eyes: Zeph. 1.12:
He will search Jerusalem with lights, and visit the men frozen in their
dregs, and say in their hearts, the Lord will neither do good, or cuill: O
Lord (says Ier. 5.3.
Jeremy) are not thine eyes upon the truth? It is a poor comfort, laudari ore
alieno, et damnari conscientia sua, to have the crouches, and commendation of
the people, and to be condemned in their own conscience: but a joy to the
soul, if able truly to say with Acts 23.1.
Paul, Men and brethren, I have in all good Conscience served God until this
day. And as Austen accused by Secundinus, to have come from the Manichees for
hope of preferment, answered; I esteem not what Secundinus faith or thinks of
me, so long as my conscience accuses me not before God. O te miserum! si
contemnas hunc testem: Miserable is the man, who contemns the testimony of
his conscience. Remember S. Iam. 5 9.
James caveat: Behold, the Judge stands before the door: The Reu. 20.12.
Judge before whom all shall stand. And to end this, as the Genesis 4.7.
Lord to Caine: If thou do well, shall thou not be rewarded? But if thou do
ill, sin lies at the door; the door of thy conscience.

4. Property: Impartialitas Iustitiae; impartialitie of Justice.

Justice is the quintessence of the Law, the essential property of a Judge:
Tandiu Iudex, quamdiu iustus: So long a Judge, so long as Just: Nomen ab
aequitate sumitur, per iniquitatem amittitur, says Cassiodorus; A name given
from equity, and lost by iniquity. The eyes of Justice (says Crisippus) are
pure eyes, and she has open ears to hear Truth, without a golden eare-picke:
The Heathens did dedicate Justice to the Sun, which goes immovable in his
circuit, seeing all, and seen of all: and The just (says our Matthew. 13.43.
Savior) shall shine as the Sun in the kingdom of their Father. Justice was
borne on sound not halting legs: and earthly Judges should imitate the Judge
of all, Psalm. 119: 137.
Iustus es Domine, et recta iudtcia tua: Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just
are thy judgments: yea, think upon Ieromes meditation; Surgite mortui, venite
ad Iudicium, Arise ye dead, and come unto Judgment. To remember Psalm. 58.12.
David's saying, Doubtless there is a God, that judges the Earth: a Judge
above, to judge Judges, and all below: Quid faciet Agnus, vbi aries tremit,
Oregor: The Reu. 6.15.16.
Kings of the earth, great men, mighty men, rich men, are afraid of the Judge
that sits upon the Throne. All the Gods (as Homer faines) could not ward a
blow of Jupiters hand: If God be angry with you, I may say to you, as God to
Genesis 20.3.
Abimelech, Thou art but a dead man. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, etc.
as it follows in this Psalm: Injustice is a sin, as red as scarlet; like
Seianus horse, to break his Masters neck: Factores legis nonessent fractores;
Magistrates for Justice, should not be ministers of injustice.

Two Vipers seek to Acts 28.3.
leap upon the hand of Justice. Bribery: Partiality.

Let Benchers say to Bribers with Peter, Thy Acts 8.20.
money perish with thee. Or as said 2 King. 5.26.
Eliza to Gehasi, Is this a time to take money? Indeed Prou. 19.4.
Solomon says, Wealth makes many friends. And the Greeks have a Proverb,
Fight with silver lances, and you cannot fail of victory. The French use a
byword, Silver does all. It was the Mich. 3.11.
Lords complaint, Ye heads, Judge for rewards: The Esaias 5.7.
Lord looked for judgment, and behold oppression, etc. Esaias 10.1:
Woe unto them, who decree wicked decrees, to keep back the poor from
Judgment.

The Tole-money the Emperor Vespasian raised from his Subjects urine, gave
occasion to this speech, Bonus odor lucri exre qualibet: The smell of gain is
good from any thing: this corrupt gain breeds the Apoplexies, and Lethargies
of the Bench.

Truth should not be buried in a bag. To such as sell, or smother Truth, I
say with Job 14.17.
Job, Their iniquity is sealed up as in a bag. Buy truth (says Prou. 23.23.
Solomon) but sell it not: Estote amatores, non mercatores Iustitiae:
Be Magistrates not Merchants of Justice.


2. Partiality.

Judges are the kingdoms Rods, to scourge the great offenders, as well as the
small: not like 1 Samuel 15.^.
Saul, to spare Agag, and the fat cattle: Exuit personam Iudicis, qui amici
induit He puts off the person of a Judge, who puts on the person of a friend. A
Judge should not favor great men, or frown on poor men: Dat veniam coruis,
vexat censura columbas: As Iuuenal said of his time:

I have read in a book called Paenitentiarius Asin^, this Fable: That the
Wolf, Fox and Ass came together to shrift to do penance; the Wolf confessed,
and the Fox dismissed: the Fox did likewise, and was absolved: But the Ass
confessed, and his fault was this; that being hungry, he took one straw out of
the sheaf of a poor Pilgrim traveling to Rome: for it he was severely
punished, the Wolf and Fox deuoures him, and make a great matter of it: they
comment upon it thus: Immensum Scelus est iniuria, quam peregrino
Fecisti, stramen surripiendo sibi.
A great offense it was, to pick a straw
From Pilgrims sheafe: we execute the Law.


By the Wolf there, is meant the Pope, by the Fox his Priests, by the Ass
the simple Laity, who shall pay well for their penance: So where Pilate is
Judge, Mark. 15.15.
Barrabas shall be loosed and Christ condemned: This partiality in Justices
made Solon and Anacharsis compare Laws, Aranearum telis, to the cob-webs,
which catch small flies, when great ones escape: but want of equal Justice
brings woes to Common wealths. Demosthenes being asked what preserved Athens
so long, and made their Princes so famous, answered, the Citizens delight in
peace, the Orators are learned, the Common people fearful to transgress
Laws, and the Magistrates delight in doing Justice. We read that Cambyses
flaied unjust Sysamnes for his briberie and partiality, and of his skin made a
cushion for all succeeding Judges to lean and look on: Let this be the
resolution of a Magistrate, Fiat Iustitia, aut ruet coelum: Let Justice
prevail in the sight of men and Angels.

Take away Justice, and the world is not (...), but Chaos, not a place of
comeliness, but of confusion. Yet as there is a punishing Justice, so there is
a sparing Mercy: and as our dread Star Chamber Speech.
Sovereign says, no Justice can be without Mercy: Nimia Iustitia incurrit
peccatum: Aug. Extremity of Justice injury: Draco's laws all bloody, and
therefore barbarous. It is reported of Bias, an old Judge of Greece, that he
never condemned any but with tears: Vere amat, qui miserum amat; He loves a
man truly, who loves a man in calamity: It was Claudians counsel to Honorius;
miseris misereri, to pity the distressed: and Mercy did eternize Caesar; of
whom the Poet: Est piger ad paenas princeps ad praemia velox,
Quique dolet, quoties cogitur esse ferox:
A Prince to punish slow, and swift to give,
And when he must be cruel, did much grieve.
Mitigat Iudicem pudor, et paenitentia reorum: Ambr. Let the sorrows of
sinners, where is hope of amendment, mitigate the rigor of Justice. Seueritas
quasi saeua veritas: Severity has too sharp an edge, and is too quick a
Surgeon: Deus praecipit charitatem, diabolus crudelitatem; God commands
Charity, the devil commends cruelty: Austens counsel excellent, Sic vi
gilet tolerantia, vt non dormiat disciplina; Let Mercy so wake, that Justice
may not sleep. In one word, Diligite homines, interficite errores; Love the
men, but punish their misdemeanors: so shall you rightly imitate the Judge of
all, who has Ier. 9.24.1
Mercy for the penitent, Esaias 41.2.
Justice for the obstinate and disobedient.

5: Property: Aequitas Sententiae; Equity of Sentence.

The John 7.51.
Law judges no man before it hear him, and know what he has done, said
Nichodemus. Iudicis non est, sine accusatore damnare: Ambr. It is not the part
of a Judge to condemn without an accuser: as Christ said to that Adulteress;
John 8.10.
Woman, where are thy accusers? Equal Sentence must have sufficient
Testimony, and be agreeable to the merits of the cause and crime. It is the
Lords Commandment, Leuit. 19.15.
Ye shall not do unjustly in judgment.

The Thebans painted the pictures of Judges blind, not to see friends, or
malice foes: and without hands, not to feel bribes. Indeed the Amos 6.12.
Lord complains, They oppress the poor in the gate from their right. I have
read, that Archbishop Baldwin boasted, that he never did eat flesh at any
time, to whom a poor widow replied, yes (says she) you have eat up my
flesh; being demanded how, she answers, by taking away her Cow contrary to all
equity and Justice. Psalm. 53.4.
Do not the workers of iniquity know, that they eat up my people like bread:
Therefore the Lord often proclaims by his Prophets this Commandment to great
men, and Judges, Esaias 1.17.
Seek Judgment, relieve the oppressed, comfort the fatherless, and defend
the widows. Their Motto may be that which was Hadrians symbol, Non mihi, sed
populo: Not borne for themselves, but others. To end this with the Lords
Counsel to the king Zedechiah Ier. 22.3.
Execute Judgment, and righteousness, deburr the oppressed from the hand of
the oppressor, vex not the stranger, the fatherless nor widow, do no
violeuce, nor shed innocent blood.

Thus I have a little touched the office and duty of the Judges of the earth,
their peculiar properties; wherein I may be said to me, as 1 King. 10.7.
Sheba to Solomon: Lo, the one half thou have not told us. I confess I have
no skill in the politickes, I only do remember the Ethics, to show what is
good, and what the Lord does require of you; Surely to do justly, to love
mercy, to humble your selves, to walk with God: as the Lord by Mich. 6.8.
Micah.

And now as Sam. 2.23.
Ioabs men, who did follow the chase upon Abners host, when they came to the
place, where Asail lay dead, there made a stand in wonder and pity; thinking
how so brave a man came to so bloody a death: So here I will make a little
pause, and stand and ouer-looke a while these forenamed properties of
faithful Judges, and worthy Magistrates. To be wise, learned, men of good
courage, of good conscience, impartial in Justice, and upright in Sentence:
These ornaments ennoble Judges, more then their Robes, wherewith a lorned; or
their troops, wherewith attended: And these properties (Right Honorable) are
your ornaments, who may say of them, as Cornelia did (to a certain woman of
Campania, boasting of her bravery) of her sons the Gracchi; Et haec sunt
ornamenta mea, these Sons are my ornaments: So you are wise, learned, of
courage, of good conscience, upright, and equal in Justice. These things
afford our Country comfort, that now you come with Alexanders sword to cut a
sunder the knot of sin, and sinners, which swarm in every place: It were
envious, yea infinite to arraigne the several sins of this Age: Let me name
but three worms, which gnaw the belly and bowels of the Commonwealth: The
Slow-worme, the Glow-worme, and the Wild-worme: worms worthy to be crushed
with the sword of Justice.

The Slow-worme, Drunkenness, Idleness; swift to the Alchouse, but slow from
it: they run to it, but reele from it: Multa pocula, multi morbi; Many cups
breed many corruptions. These drunken drones dote on the two Pro. 30.15.
daughters of the horse-leach, which suck out all their thrift; the Flemish
hop, the Indian weed. These Alehouses, which nourish them, begin like Hydras
heads to multiply; and there these Maltwormes make their nest, saying of the
Taphouse, as Peter of Matt. 17.4.
Tabor, Bonum est esse hic: It is good for us to be here: Vbi nec deus, nec
demon; Where they think both God and the devil are a sleep. Thus they wast
their days, their health, their wealth, abuse the creatures, profane Gods
name: Love the Tavern better then the Tabernacle. It were to be wished, these
common Drunkards might stand forth at the bar, and be punished as the Samians
did their captives, brand them with the figure of an Oule, ashamed of the light
who live out their days in loving the works of darkness.

The Glow-worme, Cozenage, Cheating; the shops of Cities full of these
Glow-wormes: and yet there is another Glow-worme; Popery is a Glow-worme, and
can cozen the Law, and come with their Statute-legs once a month to the
Church; Lunae vituli, Moone-Calues, whose religion is mutable like the Moon;
carried like the Acts 3.2.
Creeple to the Temple, upon the crutches of Law or custom: or come a little
before the Assizes, more for fear of Law, then love to God. Let such remember
Austens counsel; Quando timore, non amore fit bonum, nondum been fit bonum:
Where for fear and not for love, they do good, their good is not well done:
Of these kind of Popish Glowwormes, I may say, as Lactantius of the Pagan
gods, Nascuntur quotidie, a daily breed of them: These non serendi, verius
feriendi; not sufferable, lukewarm parasites to God and man; and since the
Gospel cannot make them blush, the Law should make them bleed: Haeretici
corrigendi, ne pereant; reprimendi, ne perimant: Punish them lest they perish,
and correct them lest they corrupt others.

Moses and Aaron, the Magistrates and Ministers of God, like the Ger. 3.24.
Cherubins, set to keep the way to the forbidden Tree: they should wave the
blade of the shaken sword, the one the sword of Justice to correct the carcass;
the other the sword of the Spirit to convert the conscience. It was the royal
speech of our gracious Star. Chamber Speech.
Sovereign, saying, My heart is grieved, when I hear Recusants increase: Ecce
gladius Domini, et Gedeonis nostri: Behold the sword of the Lord, and of our
Judge. 7.14.
Gedeon, and these able to make them decrease: and herein

Primaque suscipite pro Jove bella, patres: First, and before all draw forth
your sword in defense of Gods Word, let this be your primum Agite, as it should
be every man's primum quaerite.

A godly Magistrate is custos vtriusque Tabulae, an happy instrument for the
glory of God, and good of men; to punish all contemners of Gods worship, and
Anti-Sabbatarians, who have no care to serve the Lord in fear; and to use the
words of the Psalmist, Psalm 45.3, 4.
Gird thy Sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty, ride on, because of the word of
truth, of meekness, of righteousness, and thy right hand shall teach thee
terrible things.

I would not be thought too bitter, I speak in general, I accuse none in
particular: with Acts 28.19.
Paul, I accuse not my Nation: Yet honey was no Leuit. 2.11.
offering for gods Sacrifice, neither must the sweet wax of Bees burn within
the Tabernacle of the Temple: Wholesome Admonitions like John 10.10.
John's book, Sweet in mouth, and bitter in belly: and the Lord commands, Esaias
58.1.
clama, Cry aloud, and spare not, to tell Jacob their offenses, and the people
of Israel their sins.

The Wilde-worme, Contention, the cares of Magistrates too often verberated
with her querulous noises.

Oppression is a Wild-worme, and stings to death, Specially if the worm be
great. This Sin, Oppression, like 1 Samuel 15.14.
Saul's fatlings, bleates in the ears of Samuel, and cries, Quousque Reu. 6.10.
Domine? how long Lord? Avenge our cause against these Oppressors.

Faction is a Wild-worme, furious, and fierce in profession. Saint Cyprian does
report of Nouatus, a seditious and pernicious Wild-worme, that he would not
allow his own Father bread, being alive; or bury him, being dead: because he
would not consent unto him in his heretical opinions.

Jesuits, Brownists, Anabaptists, Arminians, Separatists, all Wild-wormes.

What should I name any more of these Babylonian brats, I say with the
Psalmist, Psalm. 137.9.
Blessed is he, who takes them, and dasheth them against the stones: The song
of the Angels, is the sum of all your labors, and of our desires, Luke 2.14.
Glory be to God on high, peace on earth, and good will among men.

Last part follows:

Pietas: Serve the Lord in fear. The principal point of all, and duty of all.

But the public Assaires of this Time, Qui quid praecipies, este breuis.
and your great Employments command celeritie. I will top this Sheafe, I may
not stand to thresh it out.

And to begin with the Chorus which the Psalmist produces, Psalm. 148.11.
Kings of the earth, and all people, Princes, and all Judges of the World,
Serve the Lord in fear; For Psalm. 110.10.
the fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom: Deo date prima, qui vobis
dedit omnia; Give God the first of all, who has given you all: Romans 13.7.
Fear to whom, fear belongs: For blessed is the man, who fears the Lord.
Not so much your blood, your wealth, your farre-setcht line of pedigree, as
your Christianity, piety, and service of the Lord, makes you great, and noble.

They 1 Samuel 2.30
who honor me, I will honor them, says God. It is God (says Job Job 12.8.
) who puts on the Kings girdle, that fasteneth honor about him.

The Ecclus 10.10
honorable Seed are they, who serve the Lord.

They who are great in place, and in Authority in the Commonwealth, should
Serve the Lord in fear, their good examples will move inferior members to do
the like: as the Pharisees told the Officers, John 7.48.
Number quis ex principibus? Do any of the Rulers believe in Christ? Great men,
like the mayor proposition in a syllogism; vulgar people like the conclusion,
they follow the premises of great men's presidents: their neglect in the
service of God is exemplarie, and like plaguesores infects the standers by, and
lookers on: According to their good or bad example, -- Totus componitur orbis.
Popularitie much moved by the planetorie motions of the highest Spheres. A
great man whose life and light is good, et carbo, et lampas est; sibi ardet, et
alijs lucet: Like as a coal, and lamp, warmes himself, and enlightens all:
And on the other side, the wicked are great, and greedy imitators of the
follies of Superiors, -- Tutum peccare Authoribus illis. Safe sinning with
their Superiors: and being reproved, they will reply, nihil feci, nisi quod
fecere principes: I did nothing, but that which I saw my betters do.

I may say of great men, if corrupt, Seeds p^^ma, sed (...).
as one of Dice-players, Quanto peritior, tanto nequier, the more learned, the
more leaud: the greater, the worser.

Diogenes, when he saw a boy play the part of a Rakell, went and beat the
Master, saying, Talia doces, siccine instruis? teach thou such things?
Nothing sooner blind men, then bad examples of great men. Indeed it is a great
weakness to be directed by corrupt presidents: It was good counsel of one to
the Emperor Domitian, who perceiving most of his predecessors to be hated, was
very desirous to learn what he might do to be beloved: to whom one answered,
Tu fac contra; Do contrary to them. So should we do contrary to them, be they
high, or low, who do forget their service to God: Better to follow the virtues
of poor men, then the vices of great men.

Well, Magistrates make other men's sins their own, and that 4. ways: 1.
Connivendo: by Conniuence. 2. Consentiendo: by Consent. 3. Consulendo: by
Counsel. 4. Non corrigendo: by not Correcting.


Let not the Leprosy of others cleave to you, who bear the sword: convince
them, by your exemplarie piety; correct them by your legal authority.

It is the saying of Ecclus. 10.3.
Syrach, as the Judge of the people is himself, so are his Officers; and what
maber of man the Ruler of the City is, such are they who dwell therein:
Confessor papa, confessor populus: Good orders among inferiors, where good
example among Superiors: None too good to serve the Lord in fear, be they as
high as Solomon in his Throne, or as poor as Samson in the Mill.

Pharo in his profane pomp and pride, cries; Exodus 5.2.
Quis est dominus? Who is the Lord, that he should know him, or fear him? but
his fall may teach all: Discite iustitiam moniti, et non ^emnere diuos:
Learn by the fall of some, to be more wise,
And never the eternal God despise.
Let none forget their original this Lord who must be served in fear, framed
all of dust, and shall bring all to dust: Job 1.21:
Naked they came, naked they shall return; Authority shall fail, when piety
shall follow to the Gate of Heaven: Miseranda obliuio originis non meminisse:
They never rightly knew themselves, what they are, who forget what they have
been, or shall be. It was Genesis 32.1^.
Jacobs acknowledgement of Gods mercy to him, With my staff I passed over this
Jordan, and now I have gotten two bands. So if blind Ingratitude would suffer
many proud eyes to see it, or tongues to speak it; they had cause night and
day to serve the Lord in fear, whom he by his favor has highly advanced, and
requires of them the dutiful tribute of humble service, and holy obedience.
Remember the Esaias 51.1.
Prophets speech; Look unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of
the pit, whence ye are dug; and then with hearty vows of thankfulness
glorify this Lord, and serve him in fear. They whom the bountiful Lord has
laden with earthly riches and honors, let them be like the full ears of corn,
hang down their heads in true humility to the earth, from whence they came;
or if their stalk be so stiff, that it bears above the rest of the ridge,
let them then look up to heaven to render up holy and humble thanks, or else
the Lord will soon bring the Luke 1.52, 53
mighty from their seat, and send the rich empty away. To whom God has given
much, he expects much: the greater Tallent must render the greater Tribute.
When one bragged to wise Lacon, of the multitude of his great ship, and
Sea-furniture; the Wise man answered, I esteem not this selicitie, which
hanges upon ropes and cables: So at last your piety and service of the Lord,
not your plenty, and prosperity, which is transitory, shall stand you in
steed. These make of man's sacrifice smells never the sweeter before God,
because they are clothed in silk; or because like the birds of Paradise, they
are adorned with plumes, and fine feathers. God looks not on the gay and
painted outside, in which he beholds man (...).
lighter then vanity: the inside he regards, he looks on your obedience,
requires your service, loves your thankfulness, respects your holiness; and
therefore I say with Saint 2 Cor. 7.1.
Paul, Grow up into all full holiness in this fear of God. Remember the
General Assizes of all, when Reu. 20.12.
Great and small shall stand before God, and receive their reward according to
their works. They who serve the Lord in fear, shall find an happy venite,
Come ye blessed: they who do not, shall hear a most dismal discedite, Depart
ye cursed: and well, if no more woe? Feign would the condemned sinners fly
away: Heu fuge peccator, teque his (ait) eripe slammis: They wish the wings of
swiftest birds to fly from the fury of these fierce flames; all in vain: they
call and cry to the Reu. 6.15.
Mountains and Rocks, cadite super nos montes, and Petrae; Fall upon us ye
rocks and mountains: Gladly would they be pressed to death with the ponderous
weight of mountains, desirous to have the Rocks for their pillowes, and
Mountains for their couerlets, to hide them from the presence of the Judge of
quick and dead. Oh desperate voice of deep misery, to wish to be hid from
Christ's presence; which to Gods elect, is as a refreshing Paradise; to the
Reprobates, is as hot as hell, as terrible as the second death endured with the
devil, and his Angels. I may say with Anselmus, Heu miser peccator, sic
deprehensus, quo sugies? Latere impossible, apparere intolerabile: Woeful
sinner, who can rescue thee? impossible to escape, intolerable to appear. The
Glorious Judge will say, Ito lictor, ligato manus; Go Satan, Iaylor, to
infernal souls, bind them hand and foot, cast them into darkness, where the
Esaias 66.24.
worm never dies, and the fire never goes out: The worm of conscience always
gnawes the heart, yet never gnawes the strings asunder: fire everlasting;
Semper punire, nunquam finire, No hope of ease, or end: Virg: Vna salus illis,
nullam sperare salutem:
Their comfort is, to expect no comfort: after many millions of years, still
remain millions more: eternity of torment breaks the heart of all.

Think upon this all ye, who forget God: fire, Psalm. 11.6.
and brimstone, storm and tempest, this shall be your portion to drink. Too
many are ready to serve Satan, who yet is (as Paracelsus terms him), a base
and beggarly spirit, his wages damnation: but few are forward to serve the Lord
in fear, who is the best Master, his reward is Salvation:

The cry of the damned, at the judgment day, will be like the wish of the
Roman Valerius, who when Caligula that monster was killed, and it could not be
found out, who had done it; Noble Valerius rose up, and said, Vtinam ego, would
to God I had killed that monster: so all will say at last, if not too late,
Vtinam ego, Would to God, when time did serve, I had served the Lord in fear;
would to God, I had killed those monstrous sins, wherewith on earth, I was
enamored; and now like Pharos Ex. 14.23, 25.
Chariot, they have drawn their master into the bottomless Sea of
destruction. Sin, and Satan are like Actaeons hounds, they devour their
masters who feed and follow them.

Fools make a mock of sin, says Prou. 14.9.
Solomon: Cum illis ludunt, quae laedunt: They dally with their own vexation,
like Waspes about a Gally-pot, for one lick of honey drowned for ever. Let us
take pity upon our own Souls, and not lose them in the errors of our lives:
Now Esaias 55.6.
seek the Lord, while he may be found: Serve him in fear; So run that we
may obtain: put holy Matthew. 25.10
oil in our Lamps, that when the Bridegroom comes, we may enter into the
mansion of eternal glory.

Remember 1 Pet. 1.17.
Saint Peter's precept, If ye call God Father, who without respect of persons,
judges every man according to his works, See that you pass the time of your
dwelling here in fear.

To wind up all in one word: Principatum, quem geritis, ornate: Pythagoras
principle to princes: Adorn your several places,
With Christian, and sacred graces:
Never cease your best endeavors to serve the Lord infeare: think it not
enough Quaerere Coelum, sed acquirere; non Christum sequi, sed consequi: Luke
11.9.
Seek till you find, and knock till Heaven gate be opened unto you: Never
forbear, or give over your search and service of God, until you come unto,
Summum ad quod, caput bonae spei: The head and Haven of all good hope, -- Quo
mihi cursus erit:

Where I desire to land my self, and all the Brethren at this most happy
Haven; That when the King of Kings shall come and call us all before his
Throne, we may receive that most heavenly Euge, Luke 19.17.
Well done good servant, you have been faithful in a little; Matt. 25.23.
Go and enter into your masters Joy.

The Lord for his infinite mercy sake, grant to us all this Grace, that with
soul and body we may serve the Lord in fear, call for mercy, pray for
repentance, practice better obedience, that so by true faith in the merits of
CHRIST JESUS, we may find forgiveness of all our sins, and never be
condemned for them at the great day of Judgment to come.

That we may live in Gods fear, and die in his favor, rest in peace, rise in
power, and reign in eternal glory: To which blessed selicity he vouchsafe to
bring us, who with his precious blood bought us, JESUS CHRIST the righteous. To
whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be ascribed of us all, all praise,
power, and majesty, now, and for ever.

Amen.

