A NEW YEARS GIFT FOR THE SVOLE, OR A Christian Meditation of Christ's
INCARNATION.

Preached in the Cathedral Church at NORWICH on Christmasse day last. 1614.

By SAMVEL GAREY, Preacher of GODS word at WYN^ARTHING.

LVKE. 10.11. I hold, I bring you tidings of great joy, that shall be to all
people: that unto you is borne that dyy in the City of DAVID a Savior, which
is CHRIST the LORD.

C^^ISOST. HOM. 5. (...) and quomodo factum sit, nescio, qu^ (...) ignorati

That is, (...) was made fle^^ and (...) is was made, I ^^ew not, and what
(...).

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM SEA^^^, for (...)

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, SIR THOMAS HOLLAND Knight, and his virtuous LADY:
all temporal, and spiritual happiness.
(RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL)
I Have presumed to seal this Sermon with the Signet of your names, that your
worthiness might give luster to this worthles labor: and I was induced by many
Allectiues to gratify you with this small remembrance: First, your religious
respect, and affection you bear, and embosome to our tribe of Leui. Secondly,
your Cordial love, and continual devotion you manifest unto the Gospel.
Thirdly, you are the viue Image of your departed father, a Foster-father of the
Clergy, who now rests with the Father of glory, from whom I received the
first fruits of my poor living: and therefore, as a due debt, I tender unto
you the first fruits of my small learning: Accept it as a grateful Testimony
of a thankful mind, Qui si non potui maxima, parua dedi: not the greatness
of the gift, but the gratefulness of the Giver is to be respected: Cassio.
and as one well speaks, Inuitat ad magna, qui grate accipit modica: So your
gentle acceptance shall encourage me to some greater business: and as the
Apostle speaks of Alms, 2. Cor. 8.12.
So in this Action, If first there be a willing mind, it is accepted according
to that a man has, and not according to that he has not: And as we read,
when the Tabernacle was to be built by Moses, Exodus 25.2.
Every one brought some thing, some more, some less, some better, some worse,
and all necessary: So for the building of Gods Church, every one should bring
such as they have, Lul. 21.2, 3.
some Talents, and some with the Widow, mites to cast into the Treasury: and
although in these flourishing days of learning, there is a Satiety of worthy
writers, yet they cannot breed a surfeit: for we cannot say of spiritual
oblation, as the wise men said to Moses in the bountiful times of popular
oblation, Exodus 36.5.
The people bring too much, and more then enough for the use of the work, etc.
No: all our h nds, hearts, and tongues were given us to this end, Aliis micans,
meipsum consumo.
to spend them as selfe-consuming lamps, to give light to others: and
therefore not to show my self defective in this public service, (which was so
begged by many to be published) and considering what Saint Augustine writes,
(...) confess. (...) 25.
Non licet habere cognitionem priuatam, ne priuemur ea: We must not make our
knowledge private, lest we be deprived of it. I have adventured to present this
Travel to the general eye of men, hoping that the grain being good, it does
better in the market, then in the garner. If any one Soul shall receive good
by it; I shall be fully satisfied, and your Worship shall be interessed in the
claim of that comfort.

As Jacob, when he left his sons, Gene. 49.28.
blessed them with a several Blessing: So do I beseech God, the giver of all
gifts, to bestow a spiritual Benediction upon this labor, and to give
increase to that doctrine, which we here plant and water: and so in all
submission, I commit this to your Patronage, and commend you to Gods good
protection.

At your Service in the Lord, SAMVEL GAREY.

TO THE CHRISTIAN, AND COURTEOUS READER, SAVING GRACE.
THe importunity of many, who heard this Sermon delivered, and solicited me
to have it published, were prevailing motives with me to take this opportunity
in offering it to the world, thinking of Saint Augustines speech, Qui rectum
facere cum possit, August. lib. 3. de libero arbitr.
non vult, amittat posse, cum velit, He that will not do good, when he may,
let him want power when he would. So I hope, this shall do good to them that
are good. Wherein I hunt not after vulgar commendation, which is like childrens
love, gotten, and forgotten in an hour: neither did I ever affect, that my
self, or my labors should be pinned as a Cognizance to the Towne-coat, or to
depend upon the common sleeue of popular judgment. And indeed I am somewhat of
Socrates mind in Plato, who evermore suspected that for bad, which the common
people extolled for good: and as Pliny gave it a rule in School, that he
declaymed worst, Prou 25.11.
who was applauded most. Yet Solomon thus far will give this a commendation,
that they were words uttered in due season.

I offer this to temperate men, studious, ingenuous, and zealous men: for, as
for Critical, or hypocritical, I never loved to praise them, or please them.
I say herein with Cicero, Perseum non curo legere, Cice. lib. 2. de Orat.
Laelium volo: Perseus is too learned, I wish honest, and not unlearned Laelius
to be my Reader: for I contemn the iniudicious censure of mere Ignorants.
Sen prou.
Grave iudicium est eius, qui iudicare non potest: the ignoranter man, the
seuerer Judge: to stand to such Judges, were beforehand to condemn my self.
Iaert. in vita Anachars.
Anacharsis misliked it in Greece, and so do I here with us, Artifices
certant, iudicant qui non sunt artifices: Divines preach in the pulpit,
Artizans prate, and judge of it in the Alehouse: But for the honest and well
minded Reader, who is neither captious, or curious, Psalm. 1.2.
But delights in the Law of the Lord, and meditates therein day and night: who
labors to purchase knowledge by diligence, and by his devotion to redeem
time, and not misspend it in idle pleasure, which one compares to Hawking, much
cost, D. Boys.
and little sport, To him I say, as the Angel said to John, Reave. 10.9.
Take this little Book, and eat it: Let thy Sauiors Divine incarnation be thy
devout meditation: and be not afraid, or offended with the Latin quotations,
for I have made them for thy sake, like Country-stiles, step over them, thou
losest not thy way by them, for their expositions follow them: and (si forte
mihi vitio detur) if I be blamed for inserting many marginall allegations,
know that I did it for the more learneds sake, that they might gustare post
fella fauos, the better relish their palates with tasting the honey of others
Hiues. Pro M. Caelio.
Dandum est aliquid aetati, says Tullie of youth, so something must be given
to this learned age, something to the solemnity of the place, and something to
the expectation of the hearers. And indeed of this matter, all good pens have
written, and tongues spoken, so that I have gleaned but an handful out of a
plentiful harvest: Yet though this subject has passed many worthy workemens
hands, ye^ (to my knowledge) I have followed the method of no particular
author. Thus have thou (ingenious Reader) the purpose of my publishing, and
proceeding, and now ventrously I traffic with this poor talent in this
banke-route world, and entrust thee with the benefit of my pains: let me not
find thee a bad debtor, to repay me with envy, instead of usury. Non quid
ipsi possunt, sed quid nos non possumus, dijudicant: An usual practice for
loyterers to detract from others labors: for it is an easier task to correct,
then to compose to censure, then to write: But wisdom is justified of her
Children, Matthew. 11.19.

Mart. Epigr. Carpere vel noli nostra, velede tua. Thine in the Lord, SAM.
GAREY.

A NEW-YEERS GIFT FOR THE SOVLE.
GALATHIANS 4.4.5. 4. But when the fullness of Time was come, God sent his
Son, made of a woman, and made under the Law,

5. That he might redeem them, which were under the Law that we might receive
the adoption of Sons.


THese words do contain two general heads.

1. Our Sauiors Incarnation.

2. Man's Redemption.

The time of this Incarnation set down with a Quando, when, When the fullness
of Time was come: And the sequel of the words deliver three points.

1. Christ's Divinity: 2. Christ's humanity: 3. Christ's humility.
1. Christ's Divinity, in these words, God sent his Son.

2. Christ's humanity, in the next, Made of a woman.

3. Christ's humility, in the next, Made under the Law.

In Christ's Divinity, and humanity, I will consider Christ's two Natures, Divine
and Humane,
confuting certain heresies from thence arising.

In Christ's humility I will observe his perfect obedience to work our
redemption, and reconciliation: And this Polani part. Theol. lib. 1. page 62.
Obedience has two parts. 2. impletio legis. 1. persolutio poena


1. The fulfilling of the law, set down in our Text, made under the law, that
is, as our Savior himself expounds it, Matthew. 5.17. I came not to destroy the
Law, but to fulfill it.

2. The payment of the punishment due for our sins, is elsewhere set down by
the Apostle Phil. 2.8.
Paul, He humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the death
of the Cross.

The second verse declares the cause of Christ's Incarnation, and humiliation,
which was to redeem them that were under the Law, and that Piscator super
Textum.
Bifariam, two manner of ways. 1. a maledictione legis. 2. a ceremonijs legis.


1. From the curse of the law, as Gal. 3.13
Paul, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse
for us.

2. From the ceremonies of the Law, as the Romans 10.4
Apostle, Christ is the end of the Law.

The Sum, or Corollary of all this, is propounded in the last words, That we
might receive the adoption of Sons.

So that by this you may perceive, that all our speech will generally hang upon
these four words, Quando, Quis, Quomodo, Quare.

1. Quando, the time when, when the fullness of time was come.

2. Quis, who? God sent his Son.

3. Quomodo, how? Made of a woman, made under the Law.

4. Quare, why, or wherefore? That He might redeem them which were under the
Law, that we might receive the adoption of Sons.

From these four heads, as from the Genesis 2.10
four divided heads of Paradise, the weak streams of our meditations flow.

And first of the first, Quando, when, when the fullness of time was come.

The coming of Christ in the flesh, is called the fullness of time, for four
respects.

1. For the fullness of Grace received by his John 1.16.
coming.

2. Because Christ is the fulfilling of the 2. Cor. 1.20
promises of God, as being in him, yea, and Amen.

3. Because the Romans 10.4
Law, and the Luke 1.70
Prophets are fulfilled in him.

4. Because the times from Christ's coming are the 1. Cor. 10.11
ends of the world, and it was fit he should come so late, for two reasons, as
Aquinas in locum.
Aquinas alleges them.

1. Because Christ is the Lord, and therefore meet there should be long
preparation, and expectation of so puissant a person.

2. Because Christ is the graund Math. 9.12
Physician of the world, and therefore requisite, that all sinners, his
patients, should thoroughly feel their sickness, before he came to visit,
and redeem them; venit de coelo magnus medicus, quia per totum vbique iacebat
agrotus, says Aug. super Joan.
Austen, that is, The great Physicion came down from heaven, because every
where sick sinners did lie and languish.

And of this fullness of Time (plenitudo, seu Piscat. Scholia super locum.
complementum temporis) the fullness, and complement of all time, there were
many prefiguring Typical representations, and prophetical predictions. All
grounded upon Gods first promise, Genesis 3.15.
Semen mulieris conteret caput senpentia: The seed of the woman shall break the
Serpents head.

This was the Axis, the Supporter, and foundation of all of them. Yea, God
reiterated, and renewed his first promise to some of the Patriarchs.

To Genesis 12.3.
Abraham, In thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed: the same
repromised to Genesis 26.4.
Isaacke, repeated to Genesis 28.14.
Jacob, reestablished to 2. Sam. 7.16.
David. And of this promised seed, who should break the Serpents head, the
most significatiue Type, was the Brazen Serpent, spoken of Numb. 21.8.9.

Isaac, Sampson, Solomon, Jonas, Melchisedeck, and others, did bear a figure
of Christ.

2. Not only Types prefigured, but also many prophesies aimed at this fullness
of Time.

The Patriarch Genesis 49.10.
Jacob lying upon his deathbed, did prophecy of it unto the Tribes of Israel,
The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, etc. until Shilo come.

Number. 24.17.
Balaam prophesied of this fullness of Time, saying, There shall come a star
of Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise out of Israel.

David prophesies of the coming, and kingdom of the Messiah, yea his second
Psalm specially runs upon that matter.

Solomon in his Canticles shadoweth forth Christ's wished, and welcome coming
to his Spouse the Church.

The Prophet Micah. 5.2.
Micah foretells the place of Christ's Nativity, Thou Bethleem Ephratah, art
little to be among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall be come forth,
that shall be the ruler in Israel.

The Angel Gabriel foretold Dan. 9.25.
Daniel the Prophet the fullness of this time, when the Messiah should be borne.

How lively does the Prophet Esaias 7.14.
Esaias describe the fulness of this Time with a demonstratiue Ecce, Behold, a
virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and ye shall call his name Emanuel.

Harken, how the Prophet Jeremy Ierem. 23, 5.
proclayms a fresh again with another Ecce, Behold, the days come (says the
Lord) that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch, in his days Judah shall
be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely.

The Prophet: Zechar. 9.9.
Zechariah trebbles again this Ecce, Behold, the King comes unto you, be is
just, and saved himself, poor, and riding upon an Ass.

The Prophet Mala^. 3.1.
Malachy (the last Echo of all the Prophets till John Baptist, echoes an Ecce
too, Behold, I will send my messenger before me, and the Lord whom ye seek,
shall speedily come to his Temple.

Thus all the Prophets in sense sounded forth the Poets verse.

Virg. Aggredere O magnos (aderit iam tempus) honores: chara deum Soboles. --
i.
O Son of God, thy labors great atchiue,
The Time is come: us from our sins repriue.
Yea these holy men the Prophets, spoke of this fullness of Time, as they were
moved by the holy 2. Pet. 1.21.
Ghost, and as the Apostle 1. Pet. 1.10
Peter speaks, of which salvation the Prophets have enquired, and searched,
which prophesied of the grace which should come unto you.

Nay, the Prophets not only looked, but longed for the fullness of this Time.

How patheticall is Esaias 64 1.
Esaias in his desirous expectation! Oh that thou would break the heavens,
and come down, and that the mountains might melt at thy presence! So that I
may say, that Christ was not only, Apoc. 13.8.
Agnus mactatus: a Lamb slain, but also, expectatus ab origin mundi: expected
from the beginning of the world.

All the Types, they were representative; all the prophesies significatiue; but
at this Quando, this, fullness of Time, the Messiah is exhibitatiue: they did
represent, now he presents himself.

At which fullness of Time all the Types were ended, all the prophesies of his
birth fulfilled, yea all the heathenish Oracles ceased.

Iuvenal. -- cessant oracula Delphis. i.
The Oracles which at Delphos spoke,
at his coming ceased, and brake.
Christ's birth dissolved those delusiue works of the devil: at his coming
all mute, and marred.

Excessere omnes Adytis, artsque relictis,
Dij quibus imperiu^ hoc steterat -- i.
All fained gods the Altars leave,
To which the Empire once did cleave.
Away, ye false Oracles of fained gods. Behold, the heavenly Oracle of Truth
descends himself.

Vanish, ye darker Types, the shadows of this sun, the Son of
righteousness appears himself, and that in the sign Virgo.

Indeed the incredulous Jews, and as Acts 7.51
Stephen brands with two stigmatical Epithites, Stiff-necked, and
Uncircumcised; they still expect the fullness of this time, their Quando is not
yet come.

But we, whom God has enlightened with the word of Truth, we know, and
believe, that the fullness of Time is come, and at this time the news of
Christ's actual nativity was proclaimed by the tongue of an Luke 2.10.11
Angel, that unto us is borne this day in the City of David a Savior, which
is Christ the Lord.

Oh let us celebrate, not annually, but perpetually, the memory of Christ's O
Natiuitas honorabilis mundo, amabilis hominibus, inuestigabilis Angelis, in his
omnibus admirabilis, etc. Ber.
nativity. Natiuitas Christi natalis Christiani, that is, the Birthday of
Christ, is the birthday of every Christian, Psalm. 118 24
This is the day which the Lord has made, yea wherein the Lord was made, let
us be glad and rejoice in it: let us power out Esayes Esaias 49.13 Coeli
Regenato, Angelorie chori prodeunt, hymnli dicunt, etc. Greg. lib. 27. moral.
words, Rejoice, O heavens, and be joyful, O earth, burst forth into praises,
O mountains; for God has comforted his people; and will have mercy upon his
afflicted.

Christ, who was in the old Testament velatus, shadowed forth, is at this
fullness of Time, reuelatus, reuelled, and exhibited. Before, praedictus,
foretold; now, praedicatus, present, preached, and published: as Peristep. him.
10.
Prudentius ^n his hymn.

Mortale corpus sumpsit immortalitas,
Vt dum caducum portat aeternus Deus,
Transire nostrum possit ad coelestia, that is,
Immortality takes mortality,
That whilst Eternity bears our frailty,
We might pass unto the Deity.
As 1. Tim. 3. the last.
Paul: God is manifested in the flesh.

Let me in a word speak something with celerity, which does concern the
spiritual celebrity, and solemnity of ^he fullness of this Time.

And I will begin with borrowing St. Bernards words, Ber. in Ser. de Aduent.
speaking of the same point, Dignu^ est (fratres) vt tota de^otione domini
celebremus Aduentu^, delectati ta^ta co^solatione, stupefacti ta^ta dignatione,
infla^mati ta^ta dilectione, etc. (...). It is fit, Brethren, that we should
celebrate the Lords coming with great devotion, delighted with such heavenly
^onsolation, admiring at such humiliatio^, ravished with divine love, and
affection. Saint Ambrose in Lucam.
Ambrose also speaks of the same matter after the same manner, Hoc tempus non
sine causa Domini Aduentus vocatur: deo Sancti patres celebrare coeperunt
Aduentu^, vt vnusquisque praeparet fidelis, ^t digne valeat celebrare: i. This
time not without cause is called, The Lords coming, therefore the holy Fa^hers
celebrated this coming, preparing themselves faithfully, reforming themselves
dutifully, that they might worthily celebrate, and solemnize it.

This is a time of spiritual festiuity, not of profane ^anity, dicing,
dancing, carding, or carowsing; but of Christian exultation, and joyful
Christus sit mel in ore, melos in aure, Iubilaeus in cord.
Iubilation, speaking to our selves in Psalms, and in spiritual songs,
singing and ^aking melody to the Lord in your hearts, Ephesians. 5.19.

A time of piety, a time of pity, and charity: the first ^equires your heart;
the second your heart and hand. For the first, say with Psalm. 108.1
David, O God my heart is prepared, so is my tongue, I will sing, and give
praise. And for the second, do with Job. 31.17.
Job, I have not eaten my morsels alone, the fatherless have eaten thereof. A
fit time to extend the fullness of mercy to others, since the fullness of mercy
at this time was extended to us. Solacharitas est, qua vincit omnia, and sine
qua nihil valent omnia, and vbi fuerit, trabit ad se omnia. Aug. de doctri.
Christiana
Feed Christ's poor members with the morsels of your bread, that Christ may
say unto you at his second coming, I was hungry, and you gave me bread, Math.
25.35.

But alack for pity, the proud back cruciates the poor belly; pride is the
cut-throate of pity and charity. As our Savior, Charity waxes cold, but
iniquity does abound: Non solum auarus est, qui rapit aliena, sed ille auarus
est, qui cupide seruat sua. Aug.
Charity is turned to bravery, and prodigality; large houses, but strait
gates; and the Porter Covetousness keeps out Lazarus from any entrance. In the
better Times, this was a time of charitable devotion, which is now turned to
deuoration.

The rich feast, and the poor fast; they dine, these pine; they surfeit, these
starve; yet both servants to one Master. Oh you, whom God has blessed with a
plentiful store, Ecclesiast. 11.1
Cast your bread upon the waters, and after many days ye shall find it. Tanta
est apud Deum hospitalitatis gratia, vt ne potus aquae frigidae a praemijs
remunerationis immunis sit, s^ith Ambros. de offic.
Ambrose. 1. God is so regardfull of hospitality, and charity, that a cup of
cold water lacks not a Si vere tua sunt, expende ad l^cra, and pro terrenis
coelestia commutato, Ber. Ser. 20.
reward. Do the works of mercy, for God loves a cheerful giver.

There are many Christmasse-Non-residents, that run to the City, to live in
obscurity; who should live in their Country, to keep hospitality: an
Epidemiall disease, as common as the tooth-ake. Auarus nec patientibus
co^patitur, n^c miseris subuenit, sed offedit Deu^, proximum, et seipsum. Deo
detinet debita, proximo denegat necessaria, and sihi subtrahit opportuna. Inn.
de vilitate cond. humanae.
against whom, or to whom the poor cries, as the Infants did to their mothers,
in the destruction of Jerusalem, Lament. 2.12. Where is bread, and drink? and
finding none, give up the ghost in the mothers bosom. Oh you, whom God has
made well-stored Stewards (none are Treasurers) open your-gates, and let the
King of glory his poorest members enter in: if you will not, remember Ideo
rogam Dives, non exauditur in tormentis, quia rogantem Lazarum non exaudiuit in
terris, Aug. hom. de Diuite.
Dives, he as a Gentleman, as many are, without Arms, or Heral^y, and because
he shut his gate, patuit atri ianua Ditis, ^e passed the broad-gates of hell:
he would not give Lazarus, micam panis, a crum of bread; he could not get
^fterward, guttam aquae, a drop of water to cool his ^ongue. Show mercy, if
ye expect mercy: be merciful, (...) your heavenly Father is merciful.
Foeneratur Domino, qui largitur pauperi. Prou. 19.17.
He that gives to the ^ore, lends to the Lord, and his righteousness remains
^r ever.

Prepare your selves, and souls with piety, charity, ^delity, humility, to
welcome this fullness of Time; put (...) your wedding garments, fidem
perfectam, charitatem ^rmatam, a lively faith, a lovely charity. Behold, The
^mmortall King of man's redemption comes unto you, Virg. I am noua progenies
calo dimittur alto:
A God-man is sent from God to man.


Welcome him with all fidelity, humility, piety, with ^ordiall sanctity and
solemnity. If a mortal King should ^ome unto you, I know you would adorn
your selves, ^rouide a solemn preparation to entertain him with ^ll duty and
diligence. Lo, the greatest King of all, in ^omparison of whom, all earthly
Kings are ^tomi, ^oates, and mites, in Revel. 19 16.
cuius foemore scriptum, Rex re^um, etc. In whose thigh is written, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords. Behold, he comes unto you, to lodge in ^he houses of
your hearts by faith. Behold, I stand at the ^oore, and knock; if any man
hear my voice, and open the ^oore, I will come in unto him, and will sup with
him, and ^e with me, Apoc. 3.20.

Be thankful to our Lord for the fullness of this Time; ^e dutiful to serve
him at al times. And to end this point with the Psalmists Psalm. 149.1.2 Licet
Deus cunctes dies creauerit, singulariter tamen hunc Diem fecisse dicitur, qui
Domini natiuitate sacratus est, in quo exultari conuenit et latari, etc Cass.
in Ps. 11^.
song, Sing ye unto the Lord a new song, ^t his praise be heard in the
Congregation of Saints: let Israel rejoice in him that made him, and let the
children of Sion rejoice in their King. And thus much, or rather thus little of
the first point, the Time, Quando, when the fullness of Time was come.

The next part I am to touch, is Quis, who? God s^^^ his Son, the Card^ and
Basis of this Time, and t^^^ God sent his Son: wherein I will observe three
things. First, the inseparable working of the Trinity in the work of man's
redemption. Secondly, the confutation of the heresy of Vide Vrsin. doct.
Christ. 2. par. tit. de deitate Christi. Noetus, et Pra^cas hanc haeresin
tenebant: vide Aug. haeres. 36.
Sabellius, who did maintain the Son to be, Eaudem personam cum patre, and
Spiritu sancto, that is, the same person with the Father, and the holy Spirit,
when we see here, that they be distinct, God sent his Son.

3. The manifestation of the heresy of Aug. haeres. 45. De hac haeresi vide
Zanchium and Theophilact. in Philip. 2. v. 5.
Photinus, who denied the divine nature of Christ, affirmed here, God s^^^ his
Son, that is his natural Son, begotten from eternity.

For the first: The works of the Trinity be inseparable, and indivisible: for
as the Trinity were Agents, in the creation of man, Faciamus hominem, Let us
make man, Genesis 1.26. so Actors at the Redemption of man.

In this high and heavenly work there concurred the wisdom of the Almighty
Father, the willingness of the All-mercifull Son, the power of the
All-sanctifying Spirit; the Father willed, the Son worked, and the holy Ghost
blessed; the Father decreed, the Son personally performed, and the holy Ghost
sanctified the work of redemption: in one word, God sent his Son.

Vide Musc. loc. com. tit. de Incar. verb.
Divines, to express this mystery, use this similitude, imagining three virgins
weauing of a coat, and one to wear it: so the three persons of the holy
Trinity wrought in the Incarnation of the Word, but the Son alone did put on
the flesh: for it was convenient, that He that was Son in the Godhead,
should be Son in manhood.

Now, as the Creation of all is attributed to God the Father, in respect of the
matter; to God the Son, in respect of the disposition of the form; and to
God the holy Ghost, in regard of the preservation of both: So the Redemption is
attributed to the Father. Pater per fili^^ taenquam fons, as the learned Vrsin.
doct. Christ. 2. par. tit. redemp. p. 34. 5.
Vrsinus: the Father by ^^e Son, as the fountain: it is attributed and
ascribed ^o the Son, who effected it, merito, and sua persona: by his ^erits,
person and passion. It is attributed to the holy Ghost, Tanquam immediate
effector regenerationis, as im^ediatly the effector of regeneration: yea, as
that wor^^y Vrsinus says again, Eodem loco.
Efficacia est communis Tribus perso^is, modus autem est filio proprius, that
is, the efficacy com^on to the Trinity, the manner is solely proper to the
^onne.

2. You may perceive that fond, and forlorn heresy ^f Vide Calu. harm. in
Ioh. 1. c. 1. and Vrsin. doct. Christ 2. par. page 378.
Sabellius, who denied Christ to be a distinct person ^om the Father and the
holy Spirit, affirmed here, God ^ent his Son, Alius personaliter, non aliud
essentialiter; another personally, though not another essentially, as (...)
Austen: filius ex ipso, cum ipso, hoc quod ipse: i. Aug. de Ciu. dei. lib. 11.
ca. 10 and Lomb. 1. sent. did. 25.
The Son ^f himself, with himself, the same which himself, as ^he foresaid
S. August. ser. 4 de temp.
Austen speaks.

We know and believe the Unity of the Godhead, yet a In summa Trinitate tantum
est vna, quantum tres simul sunt, ita singula sunt in singulis, and singula in
omnibus, and omnia in omnibus, and vnum omnia? Aug. lib. 6. de Trinitat.
Trinity of persons, God in essence one; in persons three* and yet an Unity in
Trinity, and a Trinity in Unity, all Co-equall, Co-essentiall, Co-eternall: yet
all distinct, the Father from the Son, the Son from the Father, and the
holy Ghost from both.

I might here meet with the heresies of Arrius, Paulus Samosatenus, Seruetius,
and others, who maintain, that the Son is not equal to the Father: but the
Apostle Phil. 2.6.
Paul has condemned this error, saying, Christ being in the form of God,
thought it no robbery to be equal with God: yea, it is an orthodoxe Axiom of
truth and belief, that Vrsin. doct. Christ. 2. par. page 381.
(...) est patri equalis and consubstantialis: i. the Word is equal to the
Father, and consubstantiall: true it is, that alius pater, alius filius est:
the Father is one, and the Son another: But how? Non alius Deus pater, nec
alius Deus filius, nec alius Deus Spiritus sanctus; hi enim Tres vnum sunt, as
writes Vrsin. doct. Christ. page 382.
Vrsinus, that is. The Father is not another God, or the Son another God, or
the holy Ghost another God, for these three be one.

The Father is first, not in priority of Nature, Honor or Time, but Perkins
upon the Creed.
Order: or as the Scholemen, Prioritate originis, in priority of beginning.
Pater est principium non de principio, Filius principium a principio, says
Them. 1. part. s^^. quaest. ^3 art. 4.
Thomas: that is, The Father is beginning, not of beginning; the Son
beginning from beginning: In principio erat, hoc est, a principio erat, says
Theophil. enarrat. in 1. Ioh. cap. 1.
Theophilact; that is, In the beginning was the Word, that is, from beginning.
Or as Austen, Principium principio carens: that is, A beginning, wanting
beginning: Or as Calvin. har. in 1. Ioh. cap. 1.
Calvin, Principium omni tempore superius, a beginning before all time: indeed
(as a Aug. de Trin. lib. 4 cap. 20.
Father writes) Pater est totius Diuinitatis, vel Deitatis principium, that is,
The Father is the eternal beginning of the Deity: and as Athanasius in his
Creed, The Father is of none, the Son is of the Father alone, and the holy
Ghost of Both. Filius per aeternam generationem, spiritus per aeternam
processionem, says Piscat. in Ioh. 1. cap. 1.
Piscator: i. The Son by an eternal generation, the holy Ghost by an eternal
procession. I will conclude this mystery with Ber. de consid. ad Eugen. lib. 5.
Vbi quaritur vnitas trinitatis, nec periculosius alicubi erratur, nec aliquid
laboriosius quaeritur, nec fructuosius aliquid inuenitur, etc. Aug. lib. 1. de
Trinit.
Bernards words, Scrutari temeritas, credere pietas, nosse vita est: i. Too
subtly to explore it, is temerity, to adore it simply, is true piety, to know
it fully, brings eternity.

3. Behold that exploded heresy of Photinus, who denied the divine Nature of
Christ, acknowledging him perfect man, but not God, which divine nature is
propounded, God sent his Son, that is, filium ex essentia Patris genitum, i.
the Son begotten of the Essence of his Father: and it is a divine rule among
Vrsin. s 2. part. page 382.
Divines, that, Essentia diuina nec diuidi, nec multiplicari, nec alia creari
potest: i. The divine Essence cannot be divided, multiplied, or another
created; therefore perfect God in respect of his divine nature: and this
confutes Ebion, and Cerinthus, two heretics, that denied that Christ was not
true God, before he assumed flesh, which also the Evangelist John more at large
declares, 1. John 14. The word was made flesh, and that this word was God
before, he shows in the 1. verse of all, And that Word was God: si Sermo Deus,
ergo aeternus Deus (says Calvin. harm. in cum locum.
Calvin) If the word was God, therefore God from everlasting.

Now you are to know, that the Persona Christi vna est, quia vnus est Christus:
Polan. part. lib. 1. page 57.
person of Christ is one; for but one Christ: his natures two, as I mentioned
in the beginning, Divine and Humane:


Divine, expressed here, God sent his Son.

Humane, which follows, Factus ex muliere: Made of (...) woman.

And there is not one point in all our faith, so inuolued with so many
heresies, as is this point of our belief, of Christ's Divinity and Humanity.

It Vide Musc. loc. com. tit. de incarn. verb. de hac re.
was the policy, and marvelous sleight of Satan, to entrench the faith of the
faithful, with bulwarks of heresies fronted on every side.

The Arrius filium creaturam, and facturam Patris esse tenet: Vide Theophil.
enar. in Joh. 1. cap. 1. Vide eundem Theoph. eodem loco, de his haeres.
dicentem.
Arrians deny Christ to be perfect God, of equal substance with the Father.

The Marcionites deny Christ to have been borne in the flesh, or perfect man.

The Manichees confess his divine nature, but not humane.

The Photinia^s attribute humane nature but not divine.

The Nestorians grant two natures to be in Christ, but so, that they make two
persons, and so cut one Christ in two, one as the Son of God, one as the
Son of man.

The Vide Bellar. de Christo. lib. 3. cap. 2.
Euticheans affirm one person to be in Christ, and but one nature, namely, the
divine, saying, that the humane nature was swallowed up by the conjunction of
the Word: thus, Incidet in Scyllam, qui vult vitare Charibdin: that is,
He shall fall upon the ^ocks,
that would escape the sands.
Our belief, like Matthew. 14.
Peter's ship, is tossed with Satan's winds, and waves, -- vnda superaduenit
vndae: one wave of error follows another, like Jobs Job 1.
messengers in the neck of another, that unless we be godlywise to put a
difference twixt person and nature; it will be perilous to escape the rocks, and
easily catch in these Meanders and Labirinths of Satan.

And herein to call to your remembrance one principle of your faith: you are to
know, that there is one person of one self same Christ: Yet two Natures In
personali union distinctae manent, and inco^fusae naturae, sieve proprietates,
sieve essentiam, sieve operationes earum, spectes, Polan. part. l. 1. page 59.
distinct; inconfusae, not confounded, and yet a personal union of both
Natures, not one disseuered from another: That of God, which is of the Word,
which took upon him flesh; and that of man, which is of the flesh, that was
assumed, of which none is changed into the other, but each of them do keep
their proper and natural condition, either in respect of the essence,
proprieties, or operations of them.

So that there is a threefold plenitude in our Redeemer Christ Jesus: 1. Verus
Deus, true God. 2. Verus homo, true man. 3. (...), i. God and man, by a
personal union: the which three are equipollent to those three wonderful
works of the omnipotent Majesty in the Assumption of the flesh: and as S.
Bern. ser. 10.
Bernard styles them, Mirabiliter singularia, and singulariter mirabilia, i.
miraculously singular, and singularly miraculous. What be they?

1. The Conjunction of both Natures. Deus and homo, i. God and man. Secondly,
Matter and virgo, that is, Marie his mother, and yet a Virgin. Thirdly fides,
and cor humanum, i. faith, and man's heart united by believing it. And surely,
the first three are as equally wonderful: first, true God: secondly, true man:
thirdly, God and man. As God, plenus gloria, full of glory: as man, plenus
obedientia, full of obedience: as God and man plenus gratia, full of grace. I
mean, gratia See the Bish. of Ely his Sermon, preached on Easter day. 1614. p.
19.
vnionis: the grace of union: ^or other grace in Christ, I take, that Divines
know ^one.

Now concerning Christ's divine nature, propounded ^ere, God sent his Son, I
shall not need to spend much ^ime: none but Atheists or heretics deny it. The
Scripture: which is the mouth of God, and Oracle of truth, every where testify
the verity of Christ's Deity and Di^inity.

So Col. 1.15.16.
Paul to the Colossians says, That Christ is the ^mage of the invisible God,
the first begotten of all creatures: For by him were all things made in heaven,
or earth, visible and invisible, Angels, etc.

So Mat. 16.16.
Peter, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God.

So Psalm. 2.7.
David, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten ^hee.

So John 20.28.
Thomas says to Christ, My Lord, and my God.

So Romans 9.5.
Paul calls Christ, God over all, blessed for ever.

So our John 5.23.
Savior says of himself, that all men should honor the Son, as they
honor the Father.

So Col. 2.9. John 5.19. 1. John 1.2.20. John 16.15. John 5.26. Matthew. 28.18.
Phil. 2.6.
Paul says of Christ, that in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily:

Yea, innumerable testimonies of Scripture to auerre the same.

The Scripture ascribes the same divine proprieties to the Son, which be
attributed to the Father: that he is, omnipotens, omnipraesens, omnisciens,
(...), that is, omnipotent, omnipresent, all-knowing, the knower of the secrets
of the heart, Romans 2.16.

Yea, to conclude this, with the words of the Heb. 1.2.3.
Author to the Hebrews, speaking of Christ, That he is the heir of all
things, by whom God made the world, the brightness of the glory, and the
ingraued form of his person, and bearing up all things by his mighty word, etc.

Prudentius in Psychomachia.
Ille manet, quod semper erat, quod non erat, esse incipiens. --
He that was ever an eternal God, in man's nature took a beginning. --
By these testimonies are confuted diverse heretics:

Zanchius in Phil. 2.5.
1. Ebion, Cerinthus, Photinus, Paulus Samosatenus, holding that Christ had no
being, before he took on him the shape of man.

2. Sophronius, and Calvin. harm. in Ioh. 1. c. 1.
Seruetus, imagining that the Word was not actually, and really subsisting from
eternity, non fuisse rem vere subsistentem, sed decretum tantummodo in mente
Dei de hoc homine creando, and sua deitate implendo: Not to be a substance
truly subsisting, but only a decree of God of creating this man, and fulfilling
him by his Deity.

3. Carpocrates and Arrius, acknowledging that Christ had another nature
besides his humane, but not of the same substance with the Father.

4. Bellarm. praefat. lib. 1. de Christo.
Philoponus, Valentin, Gentilis, and other Tritheists impiously maintaining
that the three persons are three Gods essentially differing in number, and
nature; whereas the Catholic faith acknowledges with Athanasius in his Creed,
that the Godhead of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost is all
one, etc.

Thus Christ being true God, took on him the shape of Homo factus, naturam
suscipiendo nostram, non amittendo suam, Aug. epist. 120. cap. 36. Ruffinus in
symbol.
man, not by confusion of Substance, but by personal Union.

God sent his Son, not adopted Son, as all the elect are by grace; not
Son by creation, as the Angels, and Adam was before his fall; but his
natural Son, be gotten from eternity: called Gods only begotten Son: So
God loved the world, that he gave his only Vocatur vnigenitus, qui ante humanam
naturam existebat, etc. Vrsin. doct. Chri. page 373.
begotten Son, etc. Ioh. 3.16. Equal to the Father, as touching his Godhead:
for whatsoever things the Father does, the same things does the Son also,
Ioh. 5.19. For he is of the same nature, (...), not (...), as the Greek
Writers, of the same, not of the like nature; Gods natural Son, and so
^aturally God, of the same essence with his Father. Qui ^lius Dei naturalis
est, habet eaudem integram, and imparti^elem Dei essentiam communicatam, says
Vrsin. doct. Chapter 2. par. page 382.
Vrsinus, that is, ^ee that is the natural Son of God, has the same ^otall,
and impartible essence of God communica^ed, etc.

So that, damnable, and detestable is the heresy of Photinus, Ebion,
Cerinthus, etc. infringing Christ's Godhead, whose divinity is here expressed,
God sent his Son: here is the Quis.

Next follows, Quomodo: how or in what manner ^ee was sent? Factus ex
muliere: Made of a woman: if made of a woman, then He was perfect man; which
o^erthrowes the heresy of the Marcionites, yea, all such as deny Christ to be
perfect man, or to be come in the flesh Saint 2. Ioh. 7.
John brands them with a character of Anti^hrist, saying, Many deceivers are
entered into the world, which confess not, that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh: he that is such an one, is a deceiuer, and an Antichrist.

Made of a woman; he does not say, genitus ex muliers, that is, begotten of a
woman: Erasm. annot. in Textum.
for though Christ had the materials of his body from Mary, yet the holy Ghost
was agent in his wonderful conception.

Ex muliere, non in muliere, of a woman, not in a woman, as Gorranus, and
Aquinas upon this place, which confutes Aug. haer. 11.
Valentinus heresy, who taught, that Christ had not his body from the Virgin
Mary, but brought it down from heaven, and passed through the womb of the
Virgin, as water through a conduit pipe: contrary to the text here, Made of a
woman: and the Preposition Aquinas in locum.
ex, notes the matter, as an house is made of stones and timber, etc. So Luke
1.42.
Elizabeth speaks to Mary, Blessed is the fruit of thy womb. So Romans 9.5.
Pecerit filium matter, a quo ipsa nutriretur, potiusqua nutriret, etc. Aug. ser
6. de not. domi,
Paul speaking of the Israelites, says, Of whom are the Fathers, and of whom
Christ, concerning the flesh came, etc.

Quid nobilius Dei Matre? quid castius? qu^ corpus sine corporis contagione
generauit? etc. Ambro. de virt. lib. 2.
Si quis sanctam Mariam Dei param non credit, extra diuinitatem est. Si quis
Christum per Virginem, tanquam per canalem fluxisse, non autem in ea, diuino
modo, quia absque viri opera, humano, quia iuxt a pariendi consuetudinem,
formatum esse dixerit, aeque Atheus est, says Nazian. Orat. 51.
Nazianen: or as Chrysostom. hom. in Psalm. 9.
Chrysostom, Maria dei filium concepit, credens verbo: hoc verbum caro factum
est, etc. that is, The Virgin Mary did conceive the Son of God, believing the
Word, and this Word was made flesh, how? as Aug. hom. 2. de Natiuit. Christi.
Austen speaks of the same words, non deposita, sed seposita Maiestate.

The same Aug. Ser. 6. in Not. Domi. Vnigenitus Dei existens ante secula, ex
Maria vtero natus est homo, Gregor. Carnem induit verbii Deus ex Sancta
Virgin, etc. Epiph. contra Collyridianos, baer. 79.
Father of this point, as in all other, excellently, Peperit Virgo filium, qui
Deo filios faceret, etc. Portanit in vtero filium matter, et hunc fudit in forma
serui in terris, quem habent Angeli imperatorem in coelis, that is, The Virgin
brought forth a Son, who should make sons to GOD; the mother carries the
Son in her womb, and is borne in the shape of a servant on earth, whom the
Angels have as their Emperor, or ruler in heaven.

So that Valentinus was vain, and much deceived, in dreaming that Christ had
not his body from the Virgin Mary, when our Text says, He was made of a woman.

In which Quomodo, how? you may behold great; nay, unspeakable humiliation,
that He, who is the Creator of heaven and earth, and to use Saint Aug. Ser.
27. de temp.
Austens words, Factor terrae, factus in terra, and exterra, that is, the Maker
of the earth, made of earth: that He, who was the Father of Mary, should be
the child of Mary. Sine Aug. Ser. 16. de temp.
quo pater nunquam fuit, sine quo matter nunquam fuisset: that is, without whom
the Father never was, without whom the mother never had been. This is such a
wonder, that I may burst forth in Ier. 2.12.
Ieremies admiration, Obstupescite coeli, super hoc, that is, O ye heavens, be
astonished at this.

And this ineffable, and admirable humiliation of Christ (as Polanus Polan.
part. lib. 1. page 58.
parts it) is divided into two branches.

1. The Incarnation: Made of a woman. 2. The perfection of his obedience, Made
under the ^aw.
And the Incarnation of Christ has three parts.

1. His conception; Conceived of the holy Ghost. Vide Pola. part. sup. dicto
loco.
2. The personal union of both natures. 3. The nativity; I will but even
mention them to ^our memories.
1. Conceived of the holy Ghost. It is an Article of our ^ith: declared by the
tongue of an Luke 1.35. Fides matris, non libido conceperat, Aug enchirid. cap.
34.
Angel, that is, The ^oly Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most
^igh shall ouershadow thee.

For as works of power are ascribed to the Father, works of wisdom to the
Son, and works of love to ^he holy Ghost: so this being a work of highest
love, it (...) specially ascribed to the holy Maldonat. in 1. Matthew.
Spirit.

And this Article confutes three sorts of heretics: first, the Iraen. lib. 1.
cap. 25.
Cerinthians: secondly, the Clem. Romans instit. lib. 6. c. 6.
Ebionites: thirdly, ^e Iraen lib. 1. cap. 24. Fecit grauidam Virginem ipse,
qui erat nasciturus ex Virgin, etc. Aug ser. 6. in Not. Domi.
Carpocratian heretics, who all held, and maintai^ed, that Christ was the
natural Son of Joseph, Verus, and merus homo, that is, a mere natural man,
begotten of ^oseph, contrary to the express Text, Joseph knew her not, ^ill
she had brought forth her first borne Son, Mat. 1. the ^ast verse.

2. The personal union of both Natures. I will con^lude with two testimonies
of divine Scripture: first, that ^f John 1.14.
John; The Word was made flesh: And as Musc. loc. com. tit. de verb. Incarn.
Musculus ^ightly comments upon those words: There was made in ^he womb of the
Virgin a conjunction of the Word and the ^lesh, that is to say, of the nature
of God and man: there is ^he personal Union.

The second place out of 1. Tim. 3. the last.
Timothy, God is manifested in ^he flesh; the which words the learned Piscat.
super cum locum.
Piscator para^hrases thus, Filius natura sua diuina inuisibilis, effecit se
^isibilem, assumpta vera natura humana in vnitatem sua ^ersonae, that is, the
Son of God in his divine nature invisible, made him visible, in assuming our
humane nature into the union of his person. In a word, with Aug. Epist. 3.
Augustine, Homo Deo accessit, non Deus a se recessit; Our Lord took upon him
that which he was not, and left not to be that which he was.

3. The Nativity, the manner of his Birth; I shall speak of that afterward, as
God shall assist, and the time permi^. And in this Incarnation of Christ and
the personal union of both Natures, we may behold his most incomparable, and
incomprehensible compassion and affection to mankind, which I can better admire
with silence, then express with utterance.

Oh beloved, had I sides of brass, that could not be wea^y, or an An^els
tongue to spe^ke with II, I should fal^ short in so^nd ng the bottom of this
bottomless and boundless compassion.

Non mihi si centum voces, linguae quoque centum sufficerent, etc.
An hundred tongues and voicEs were not able,
To show Christ^ love herein proportionable.
Our Lord, and Savior did so sitire nostram salutem, so ardently thirst after
our salvation, that he did vouchsafe to be borne of a woman. Lambit vbera, qui
regit sidera, tacet qui verbum est, as Aug. ser. 5. de temp.
Austen, that is, He sucks the breasts, that rules the Stars; he is an Infant,
and cannot speak, and yet he is the Word: great humility, to assume our
humanity; made of a woman, and made John 1.14.
flesh, and found in shape as a man, Phi. 2.7. He did not take Angelical
nature, and as the Heb. 2.16.
Author to the Hebrews: He in no sort took the Angels, but he took the seed of
Abraham: Vt nos aequaret Angelis, minoratus est ab Angelis, says Anselmus:
that is, That he might make us equal to the Angels, he made himself lower then
the Angels. So that there is greater affinity twixt God and man, then twixt God
and the Angels; for he assumed our nature, and was made of a woman. We do not
read in any place of Scripture, that Christ did ever call the Angels fratres
suos, that is, his brethren, as he ^lles men. Psalm. 22.22. Heb. 2.12. Magna
dignitas est fideliu, quod nominantur filij Dei, and fratres filij Dei
V^ig^^ti, etc. Piscat. Analis. in Haebreos. c. 2. v. 10.11. etc.
Narrabo nomen tuum fratribus meis, that is, will declare thy name unto my
brethren. I may here ^y use the words of a Father. Maritari noluit verbum ^t
altius nubere non potuit carogloriosius, that is, The im^ort^l God would marry
no higher then our nature, our ^ture could neu^r marry more gloriously.

There is a threefold affinity; first, legal by adoption. ^cond^y, spiritual
by regeneration. Thirdly, natural (...) generation. We are Gods adopted Sons
by Jesus christ, Ephesians. 1 5. Gods spiritual Son, by regenerati^. Except a
man be borne again of water, and of the Spirit, cannot enter into the kingdom
of God, John 3.5. Indeed ^e are not Gods natural Sons, and yet Christ took
^r nature upon him; for there is but one Son of God ^r nature, and that is
Christ Jesus, John 3.16. Math. 1.2.
called Gods only Begot^n Son in respect of his Father and divine nature;
first ^egotten in respect of his mother, and humane nature. (...) God the
Father, called Prudentius, Him. de Eulalia Virgin. Du^andus rationab.
diuinorum, lib. 4. ca. 48 2. Vide Ruffin. in Symbol.
Omnipater, that is, the All-fa^er of all men, and all things, by creation,
generally:

Of good men, by adoption, specially:

Of Christ, by nature, singularly:

We are only sons by favor, by adoption, by grace, ^at not by nature. Oh,
what an immeasurable measure of ^ue was this, that He, who was Gods Son by
nature, and (...) naturally God, of the same essence with the Father, ^d
receiving al which the Father has, saving the perso^ll propriety; who was so
great, did make himself (...) little, to make us great, as Tertull. lib. 2.
con. Marc.
Tertullian, who be^me the Son of man; that we might be the Cyp. ser. de
cleem^syna. Vide, homo, quomodo all amauit te, qui fecit te, vt propter te,
factus ipse, Hugo.
Sons of ^od: wh^ being very God, became very man, that he ^ight reconcile
God to man, and man to God; who be^g so great, that the heavens cannot con^aine
him, ^ould make himself so little, as to be contained in the ^ombe of a
Virg^n. Filius Dei, qui fecit nos, factus est in^r nos, as Austen: that is, the
Son of God, that made us, to be made like us. A mercy, or rather a mystery so
great, that I may say with Esaias 66.8. Psalm. 2^.1.
Esaias, Who has heard such a things who has seen such things? That he, who
was the Lord of heaven and earth, should become a servant on earth, a servant
to men: Optimam dignitatis viam ostendit dominus, nempe humilitatem, Bas. in
hex.
Nay (as Tertullian) nullificamen populi, that is, esteemed as the outcast of
men, a worm, and no man, the scorn of men, and the contempt of the people:
Psalm 22.6. it is such a wonder, as since the heavens were made, there is none
to parallel it.

Rightly did the Prophet Esaias 9.6.
Esaias foretell his nativity and name, stiling him Wonderful: for he was
wonderful in his Conception, wonderful in his Incarnation.

The Scripture teaches us, how man comes four ways into the world.

1. By the help of man and woman, as all are usually borne, Job. 14.1.

2. Without any man and woman: so Adam was created, Genesis 1.26.

3. Of a man without a woman: so Eve was created, Genesis 2.22.

4. Of a woman without a man, so Christ was borne, Matthew. 1.18.

Wonderful Incarnation, that I may say with Esaias 53.8.
Esaias, Who can declare his generation? Secundum conditionem naturae natus ex
foemina, super conditionem naturae natus ex Virgin, says Thom. 3. part. q.
31. art. 5.
Thomas: that is, According to the condition of nature, borne of a woman, and
above the condition of nature, borne of a Virgin: or as Eusebius. emiss. hom. 1.
de natiu. Christi.
Eusebius Emissenus, Datus ex diuinitate, natiu ex virgin, natus, and sic
matre junior, datus, quo nec pater antiquior, qui erat, datus est, qui non
erat, natus est: that is, Given of God, borne of a Virgin, borne, and so
younger then his Mother; given, and so as ancient as his Father; he that ever
was, was given, and he that was not, was borne. Wonderful Incarnation, that
He, who was the Non illius est silius fabri quem putatis, sed fabricatoris
omnium, etc. Chrysostom. sup. Mat. 14.
maker of the world, and Father of Marie, should be the son of Marie, at God
and man should in one person meet; and that (...) mother should be a pure
Virgin, and that this Son ^ould be the Savior of his mother. Ipsum sanguinem
^em pro matre obtulit, antea de sanguine matris accepit. ^th Hom. 1. de
Natiuitate Christi.
Emissenus: that is, The same blood which he offered (...) his mother, he
before received from his mother: yea (as ^ombard) Verus homo de homine, propter
homine^, secundu^ ^minem, super hominem, that is, True man of mankind, Lombard.
3. sent. did. 8.
for ^^nkind, according to mankind, and above mankind. ^onderful Incarnation!
that I may say of this mystery, as ^th S. Hieron. Epist. ad Eustochium.
Jerome of another matter; Si cuncta corporis mem^ verterentur in linguas, and
omnes artus humana voce re^arent, nihil hercle hac materia dignum proferrem,
that (...), If all the members in our body were turned to ^ngues, they were not
sufficient to express this mat^, and mystery. I will therefore say with
Maximus in Ser. de natali. Mihi impossible est generationis scire secretum,
men's deficit, vox silet, etc. Ambros. Vide Musc. loc. com. tit. de verb. Incar.
in principio.
M^^^mus; ^aires, generatio Christinea potest enarrari, and vbi ^ingua ficit,
fides proficit; that is, Brethren, the generation of ^rist cannot be declared,
and where the tongue is defi^ent, faith is sufficient.

Fond, and foolish be the questions of the Scholemen this point, arguing,
whether the Incarnation of the Lord, be a thing possible? what a Person, or a
Supposi^^n does add above nature? whether one person can be ^arnate without
another? whether God had been in^rnate, if man had not sinned? An idle
question, yet re^ued in this questioning Age, with many other of the ^e nature.

Horat. Quas pudeat recitare, and nugis addere pondus. Aug. 2. Epist. ad
Volusian. Quomodo non est supra omnem sensum tanta generatio? tu ergo ori manum
pone: Scrutari non licet superna mysteria. Ambr. con. Har.
Which it shames me to recite, or find,
In adding weight to empty wind.
In such mysteries and matters we should follow Saint Austens modesty, Demus
Deum aliquid posse, quod nos ^eamur inuestigare non posse, that is, Let us
grant, and co^^sse, that God can do many things, which our shallow ^prehension
cannot comprehend. Licet scire quod natus sit Christus, non licet discutere
quomodo natus sit, says Ambrose: that is, It is needful for us to know, that
Christ was borne, how, we must not too curiously search or examine.

Sufficient for us to know, that He was made of a woman. Made of a woman: and
this is more expressly, and particularly set down in our Belief, Borne of the
Virgin Mary: which Breuis regula fidet, quae mentem tastrua^, nec onerat
memoriam, Aug. Ser. 115. de temp.
Belief is (is Amb. Ser. 38. Maria, exaltata, amaritudinis Mare, Hieron.
Ambrose calls it) clauis Scripturae: that is, the key of the Scripture and
confirmed herein by Canonical authority out of the Scripture, Mat. 1.18. Luke
2.7.

Borne of the Virgin Mary: Mary, which signifies exalted, highly exalted, to
become the mother of Christ: or after the Syrian Etimology, signifying the Lady
of the Sea: the sole Lady of the Sea of Bliss, that the Lord would make her
the Lady of his Incarnation, and look upon the lowlines of his handmaid, Luke
1.42.
in the fruit of whose womb, all the families of the earth are blessed.

Highly do the Fathers extol this Mary with commendatory Attributes, and
Epethites, calling her Aug. Ser. 15. de temp. and fulgent. Ser. de laud.
Mariae. Quicunque Mariae optat praemium, imitetur exemplum, etc. Ambr. de Virgi.
fenestram coeli, that is, the window of heaven, through which it pleased the
light of the world to appear, to illuminate us that did sit in the shadow of
death.

The most Blessed woman of all, Soli Mariae datum est esse matrem Christi,
omnibus hominibus denegatum est esse patrem Christ's, says Hugo, that is, It
was only granted to the Virgin Mary to be the mother of Christ, when as it was
denied to all men, to be the Father of Christ. Eua inobediens meruit poenam,
Maria obediendo consecuta est gratiam; illa gustando prohibitum, maledicta:
haec credendo Angelo benedicta, says Aug. con. duat hares.
Auste^, that is, Eve disobeying, deserved punishment; Mary obeying, obtained
grace: the one by tasting the forbidden fruit, was cursed: this by believing
the Angel, was Blessed.

Talis fuit Maria, vt etas vnius vita ommium fit diciplina, Amb. de virt. lib.
1.
There is not any seasoned with true religion, that will touch the hemme of the
garment of her glory with the least reproach: for all generations shall call
her Bles^d, Luke 1.46.

A Prophetess on earth, and a Saint in heaven: always (...) such high
estimation among the faithful, that the ^hird gene all Council of Ephesus was
assembled against Nestorius, to Swarez. praef. disp. Tom. 2. in 3. Thom. Maria
sit semper in honor, and ^onorata, sed Dominus solus adoret, etc. Epiphan.
con. Collyridianos, haeres. 79.
mainetaine the dignity of the bles^^d Virgin Marie. Yet, on the other side, we
must not with the Papists give her a too high Magnificat, from ^onouring he, as
a Saint, to Deifie her as a Mediatrix.

But say with Aug. lib. de Virginit. Vult dicere, matter mea, quam appellatu
foelice^, inde foelix est, quia verbis Dei custodiuit, non quia in illa verbum
caro factum est, Aug. super Lucam. c. 11.
Austen, Foelicior partus spiritualis, quam ^arnalis. Beatior Maria concipiendo
Christum fide, quam ^arne, etc. i. Her spiritual bearing Christ more happy,
^hen her corporal: and Mary more blessed, conceiving Christ in her heart by
faith, then by bearing his body in ^er womb.

The Papists, to advance the glory of the mother Ma^y, do diminish the glory
of the Son Christ Jesus: they ^ray to her, as to God, they trust in her, as
in a Savior; ^ro, Maria, iube filiu^, monstra te esse matrem sumat per te
^reces: i. Mary, we beseech thee, command thy Son, show thy self to be a
mother, let him receive our pray^rs from thee: so Vide Cassandr. consult. art.
21.
run their Missalls. Thus they ascribe, and arrogate too much unto her, and
derogate too much from Christ; more then she would have her self: for she
said, My Soul rejoices in God my Savior, Luke 1.47.

How fully do the Papists fulfill Epithan. con. Collyridian. and
Antidicomarianitas: haeres. 78. haeres. 79. Maria erat virgo honorata, sed non
ad adorationem nobis data. Mariam nemo adoret, Deo hoc debetur mysterium, etc.
Vide Epiphan. super dicto loco plene de hac rescribentem.
Epiphanius saying? Non dominabitur nobis antiquus error, vt relinquamus
viuentem, and adoremus ea quae ab ipso facta sunt: coluerunt enim, and
adoraru^t creaturam, praeter Creatore^, and stulti facti sunt. Si Angelus
adorari non vult, quanto minus Maria, qua genita est ab Anna ex Ioachimo? etc.
i. Let not that old error bear sway among us, that we should leave the
living God, to worship the works of his hands: so the people aforetime
worshipped, and adored the creature, beside the Creator, and made themselves
fools. If an Angel will not be worshipped, much less the Virgin Mary, which
was begotten by Ioachim, of Anna, etc.

But among all the rest, and nest of Papists, Clarus Bonarscius, otherwise
Carolus Scribanius, has exceeded all his fellow Jesuits in impiety, or
blasphemy; who in his third Book, See M. Crashawes confutation on the Book,
called The Jesuits Gospel.
and eight Chapter, of Amphitheatrum honoris, etc. compares the milk of Mary
wi^h the blood of Christ.

Lac matris miscere volo cum sanguine Christi:
Page 356.
Non possum antidoto nobiliore frui:
Of milk and blood, a mixture I will make:
The soueraignst cordial sinful soul can take.
A Book worthy of fire, and forgetfulness.

Nay the learned do daily read among the Jesuits* and Friars works, what
Hyperbolies, or rather impieties in this point they do mainetaine. A man may
appeal from God, to the Virgin Mary, says Bernardin. de Bust. in Mariali
part. 3. Ser. 3.
Bernardinus de Bustis, God has made the Virgin Mary partaker of his Divine
power, and majesty, says Horatius Hor. Turs. in histor. Virg. Lauretana in
praefat. Vide Catalogum testium veritatis, editionis 1608.
Tursellinus.

They who have read the Papists Mariale, may there find, what gross and false
Divinity herein they hold, for example: Let the sinner fly to the Virgin Mary,
and he shall be saved: and again, That the Virgin Mary was with the Lord in
the work of Redemption, and bare all the wounds in her heart, which Christ did
bear in his body.

And to speak no more herein, they that have read the Papists Extat Psalterium
ad verbu^, apud Chemnitium, in examine Concilij Trident. in part. 3. p. 149.
Ladyes-Psalter, may find, how in many of the Psalms, they have turned
Dominus to Domina, our Lord, to our Lady: and this Book stands not only
uncontrolled, but even defended, and commended by the Gregor. de Val. in Vol.
de rebus fidei controuersis. Sect. 5. lib. de Idolatria. 5. c. 10.
Jesuits, and those of the principal: I will end this with the Poets verse,
Quid satis est, si Roma parum? --

What is enough, if Rome be too little? so this little is enough, to give you a
taste of Romish impiety, to show ^ou, how they rob our Savior of his glory,
and of^ce of sole Mediatorship, and would divide it to a crea^ure: but, riualem
possum non ego far: --

God is ielous of his glory, and can brook no rival. ^et me a little longer
trespass in this digression: Borne ^f the Virgin Mary: a perpetual Virgin,
that is the ge^erall opinion of Perk. refor. Catho. tit tradition. Beza
confess. c. 3. art. 23.
Divines. D. Bose.


And herein I will borrow a line or two of our learned Doctor, as I take, he
borrowed it before of St. Virgo concipit, virgo grauida, virgo in partu, virgo
post partum, praeclara illa Virginitas, and gloriosa foecunditas: Aug. Ser. 6.
in Not. Dom. Sancta, and beata Maria and Virgo ante partum, and Virgo post
partum, ego hoc miror, quomodo de Virgin natus sit, and post Natiuitate^
Virginis Matter virgo sit, etc. Chryso. hom. de Ioanne Baptista. Inuenta est
virgo, illa pragnans, ad quam vir non accesserat: vterus quidem foetu tumuerat,
and virginalis integritas manserat, etc. Chrysostom. hom. de S. Susanna.
Austen.

A Virgin Before In After
Christ's birth:

A Virgin before his Birth, against three sorts of men; 1. Jews, 2. Gentiles.
3. Corinthians.


Confirmed against them by the Scripture, Mat. 1.20. ^uk. 1.27.

A Virgin in his birth, against Iouinian, and Durandus,


Whose errors herein are recited by Iraeneus, and Saint Austen, and by them
both refuted, Iraen. lib. 1. cap. 24. Aug. de haeres. cap. 82. and con. Julian.
lib. 1. cap. 2.

Confirmed against them by the seventh of Esaias: the ^4. A Virgin shall conceive
and bear a Son: the which words (as one before me well interpreted) are to
be construed in sensu composito, non diuiso, that is, in a compounded sense,
and not divided: that is to say, that she was a Virgin, concipieus, and
pariens: conceyuing, and bringing forth.

A Virgin after his birth, against Heluidians, and Antidicomarianits,
whose errors are recorded by Saint Jerome, and by him confuted, lib. aduers.
Heluidium: and Aug. haeres. 84.

That Mary was a Virgin, before, and in Christ's birth, none but Athiests did
ever deny it: as also the perpetuity of Mary's Virginity, is generally received
of the Protestant part, and the Papists have made it an Article of the Churches
Faith, the perpetuity of Mary's Virginity, the which point I may fitly conclude
with the word: of Piscat. analis. in Mat. 1. versu vltimo.
Piscator, Curiosum magis est quam pium, inquirere, cum de ear Scripturae
nihil traedit: that is, It is a point more curious, then godly to inquire after
it, since the Scripture speaks nothing of it: and where the Scripture stays
her pen, there let man stay his tongue.

Thus you have heard, that our Savior was made of a woman, borne of the Virgin
Mary. and took our humane nature upon him, howsoever Valentinus, and his
followers deny it: so that I will end this point with Athanasius say^ng in his
Creed, Christ is God of the substance of his Father, begotten before all
worlds, and man of the substance of his Mother, borne in the world.

Now in a word, let us declare (as I promised) the manner of Christ's Nativity,
how he was borne of a woman? and that is plainly, and briefly set forth by
Luke 2.7.
Luke: And she brought her firstborn Son; and wrapped him in swaddling
clothes, and laid him in a cratch, because there was no room for him in the
Inn. And this manner of Christ's Nativity, does amplify the measure of Christ's
humility; Tha^ He, who was the Lord of all, The earth is the Lords, and all
that is therein, says Psalm. 42.1.
David; Quae superbia sanari potest, si humilitate Filij Dei non sanatur? says
Aug. Epist. 58. Qui sine humilitate virtutes congregat, quasi in ventum
puluerem portat, Gregor. hom. 6. Tanto pretiosior Deo, quanto propter Deum
humilior sibi: Gregor. lib. 18. moral.
Austen: that is, What pride can be healed, which is not helped by the humility
of the Son of God? Learn of me: for I am humble, and meek, says our
Savior; yea he showed himself so humble, and humbled, that he did vouch safe
to be wrapped up in swaddling clothes, to be laid in praesepi; in a cratch, or
manger; in such humility, penury, and poverty, that I may say of him, as Virgil
speaks of the Son of Pollio; Nec Deus hunc mensa, dea nec dignata cubili est:
Virg. eclog eui Pol^o: versu vltimo. Pollio had neither board nor bed,
To eat his meat, or lay his head.


Strange humility, Ber. Ser. 1. in Natal. Dom.
that he who thundered in the ^louds, should cry in the cradle, swaddled in
rags, and ^yd in a manger: Vbi aula Regia? vbi Thronus? vbi curiae ^egalis
frequentia? numquid aula est stabulum? Thronus ^raesepium? and totius curiae
frequentia Iosep and Maria? ^s writes Ber. in Ser. de Epiph.
Bernard, that is, Where is the Kingly Court? where is the Throne? where is the
regal frequency? what, is the stable the Court? the manger, the Throne? and
Joseph and Mary, the sole attendants? Is the King of ^srael thus welcomed into
the world? Strange humility!

Strange, that there should be no room for him in the ^nne, which is a
receptacle for all sorts, and as Saint Ambrose, Ambros. lib. de offic. Christus
omnibus omnia factus est, pauper pauperi^u^, ^ilic^^^ s^^ ^^tibus,
diu^^^^^i^^^, etc. Ama^. super. la^c. lib. 4. Esur^^at Christus qui omnes
p^^^^t, simut, per quem creatur omnis potus, and qui spiritualiter panis est
esurientium, fonsque sitientium, in terra fatigatus, qui seipsum nobis viam
fecit in coelum, Aug. de Catechizand. rud.
Est publica humanitatis species, vt peregrinus ^ospitio non egeat, suscipitur
officiose, and patet aduententi ^anna, etc. that is, It is common courtesy,
that a stranger should not lack lodging in an Inn, but to be received
^fficiously with an open gate. Our Savior deprived of ^his comm n humanity,
argues his greater humility.

We see how the infants of mortal Kings, yea of meaner persons, find better
entertainment in their ingresse to the world: their infancy welcomed with soft
and tender ornaments, entertained with respective, and sedulous attendants,
bo^ne not in Innes, but in houses seeled with Vermillion, laid upon beds of
Down, adorned pon^pously with purple, and purest whi e, cherished even with
Ambrosean succor, all variety, and delicacy to content their morning mourning
infancy: And yet behold, our Savior laid in a cratch, wrapped up with poor
clothes, and clouts: Number quid matter eius diademate coronata? aut in lecto
eburneo recumbens? number puer bysso, and purpura inuolutus? vtique non, sed
angustum, and humile tugurium, vile, squallidumque praesepium, magis
animalibus, quam hominibus aptum: puer vilibus pannis inuolutus, matter vix
tunicam habens vnam, non ad ornatum corporis, sed ad tegumentum nuditatis, as
writes Saint Chrysostom. super Mat. 2.
Chrysostom, that is, What? is the mother crowned with a diadem? o^ lying in
an Iuory bed? or the child invested with silk, and purple? no surely, but a
strait, and poor cottage, a vile and homely manger, fitter for beast, then
man: the child wrapped up in rags; the mother scarce having one coat, not for
ornament of body, but to cover nakedness. Strange penury! Why would the
immortal Creator abase himself in poverty, lower then many mortal creatures?
Saint Aug. Ser. 3. de Stephano.
Austen gives us the reason, Paup^^natus est in terris, vt nos diuites
nasceremur in coelis, that is, He was borne poor on earth, that we might be
borne rich in heaven.

Those divine and delicate bones, which should have been embosomed in the
nursery of heaven, lie in a manger. Who can hear this, and be proud of his
outward ornaments; and see his Savior swadled in such mean habilliments? Who
can with Dan. 4.27.
Nebuchadnezzar glory in his pomp, and strout himself in his Palace of Babel,
and halfe-deifie himself with a vain conceit of his Towers, Superbia de
Angelo diabolum fecit, and homini mortem intulit, omnium malorum matter,
scelerum fons, vena nequitiae, etc. Cassio. super. Ps. 18.
and Turrets, of his spangled gay ornaments, of his obsequious attendants, of
his court-like train, and sumptuousness; and see his Savior borne in a
stable, swaddled in poor fragments, laid in a manger? This humility should
deplume the feathers of man's Peacock-like pride; pull down his high, and
aspiring spirit; teach him to see himself, to know himself, to humble
himself, to contemn the vanities of this vain world, and look upon the
picture of his Saviors humility, to learn of him; for he was humble and meek.

Would this nice, and ouer-dainty Age lay this lesson to their hearts, it might
recover them from their falling sickness: for Adrastia Nemesis. Superbia
common Nobilitatis malum, Salust. in bello Iug.
Pride must have a fall, Prou. 16.18. then they would not be so enamored of
themselves, of their ornaments: the Ostridge should not be robbed of her tail,
to fan the Ladies face. Heu, hominum vnde ^e fastus, ista superbia? cui vita
aut abest, aut spondet ab^ntiam: mors aut instat, aut minatur instantiam, says
one: that is, Alas, whence is this puff, Alanus lib. de complanctu naturae.
and pride of ^an? to whom life is absent, or promises absence: ^eath is ever
instant, or threatens his approach: but ^ey have learned the careless Epicures
Enthymente: Let (...) eat and drink: inferring the conclusion out of Esaias
22.12.
Esaias, We must dye to morrow. Thus they spend away their ^ayes in pride and
pleasure, revel, and riot away their ^ules in sins, and thinks not of the
end of all. The ^me will come, when they will cry out the words of Bernard,
Quid profuit superbia? Ber. lib. 2. de consid. Subito, quid non suspicatur
infortunium, accidit, calamitas irruit, mors intercipit, quam nullus euadit,
Innoc. de vilit. condit. hum.
quid diuitiarum iactan^a? mundi potentia? vana voluptas? hen, de tanta
laetitia, ^uanta tristitia! that is, What has pride profited us? what ^he
bragges of wealth? worldly power? vain pleasure? ^las, from how great mirth,
to greater misery!

Oh learn in time, while time lasts, to humble your ^^lues, to follow the
example of true humility, to di^orce your minds from earthly vanity, and as 1.
Pet. 5.6.
Peter, ^umble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that ^e may exalt you
in due time: Look on our Exempla bonae vita a Christo, and ab eius actibus
assumere debemus, Ber. in Cant. Ser. 23. Quis talia fando explicet? -- Virg.
Saviors ^umility, penury, and poverty, the patternelesse pattern ^s
humility, that he would vouchsafe to be borne of a ^oman, and in such humble
manner, wrapped up in ^waddling clouts, and laid in a manger.

But I stay too long, though I deliver but a drop of matter, in comparison of
the abundant plenty which ^owes from this Sea of matter: but that which I omit,
I ^oe commit to your meditations, and contemplations.

The next point I come to touch, is the second part of his Quomodo. Made under
the Law: wherein I will re^uite my former prolixity with proportionable breuity.

Made under the Law. Omnis huius natiuitatis Schola, est humilitatis officina,
Aug. Ser. 22. de temp.
And this still enlarges Christ's humility; That he, who was the Maker of the
Law, yea ^he Law it self, would be subject to the Law, and under the Law: and
therefore according to the Law, he was circumcised the eight day, Luke 2.21. and
by this circumcision made himself debitorem totius Legis, a debtor of the Law,
and bound to keep the whole Law, as Gal. 5.3.
Paul says, Every one that is circumcised, is bound to keep the whole Law.
That I may say with Aug. lib. de spirit and litera.
Austen, Lex data est, vt gratia quaereretur, gratia data est, vt lex
impleretur, that is, The Law was given, that grace might be sought for; grace
was given, that the Law might be fulfilled. Christ fulfilled the Law, not by
grace, but by his merits, and perfect obedience of the Law: we fulfill the
Law, not by Vis excidere gratia? tunc tacta tua merita, Aug. in Ps. 31.
merits, but by imputation of Christ's merits by grace extended to us.

By the Law, we were all the sons of death, and servants of damnation,
Bondmen, and captives to the Prince of darkness: Ligat Diabolus peccata
connectens: soluit Christus delicta dimittens, says Cassio super Psalm. 146.
one: that is, The devil bound us with the cart-ropes of iniquities, tying
them together: O bone Jesus, mori nos debuimus, and tu soluis? nos peccauimus,
and tu luis. Opus sine exemplo, gratia sine merito, charitas sine modo, Bernard.
Christ did unloose us, cancelling our sins, satisfying his Fathers Justice
by obedience in his life, by his passion in his death: and as Saint Paul, Romans
8.3. That which was impossible to the Law, God sending his own Son in the
similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh, that
the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us.

Christ, by his perfect Sola obedientia ibi tenet palma^, vbi sola in
obedientia inuenit poenam, Ambro.
obedience to the Law, took away our culpable guiltiness of the breach of the
Law, and by his satisfactory passion, sacrificing himself (like the mother
Pelican willing to die, to give life by her blood to her brood.) So Christ,
offering himself a sacrifice once for all, as the Heb. 7.27.
Author to the Hebrews, and Heb. 9.12.
by his blood obtained eternal Redemption for us, has freed us both a culpa,
and poena, from the guilt and punishment of sin, freeing us from the curse of
the Law, being made a curse for us, Gal. 3.13. Sic tegit pecoata, vt noluit
aduertere, noluit animaduertere, noluit punire, noluit agnoscere, maluit
agnoscere, says Aug. in Psalm. 31.
Austen, that is, God so ^ouered our sins, that he would not look on them,
or ^rke them, or punish them, or acknowledge them, Vt sic velentur peccata, ne
in iudicio reuelentur, Heronym. in Psalm. 31.
but ^ther pardon them. Yea, he that knew no sin, surffe^^d for our sins,
did bear our sins, sorrows, and ^firmities, and by his stripes we are
healed, Esaias 53.5.

In me, and pro me doluit, qui pro se nihil habuit, quod ^leret, says Ambros.
de fide ad Gratian. lib. 2. c. 3.
Ambrose; that is, In me, and for me our ^^uiour sorrowed, who for himself
had nothing to be sorrowful. Thus he carried our sorrows, yea our sins, ^ho
did not sin, neither was there guile found in his ^outh, as 2. Pet. 2.22.
Peter: that I may say with Aug. lib. de Virginitat.
Austen, Inspice ^lnera pendentis, sanguinem mortentis, praecium redimentis,
^atrices resurgentis: haec quanta sint, cogitate, haec in sta^ra cordis vestri
appendite, vt totus vobis figatur in cord, ^i totus pro nobis fixus fuit in
cruce, that is, Behold Christ's wounds hanging, his blood dying, Filius Dei ad
crucem ducitur, expalmatur, spinis coronatur, ligatur, ligno suspenditur,
diciplina caeditur, salus vulneratur, vita moritur: occidit ad tempus vitam
mors, vt in perpetuum a vita occideretur mors, Aug. lib. de octo. virt.
Charitatis.
his price re^eming, his scarres, and bloody marks arising: Consi^r, how great
these things be, weigh them in the bal^nce of your hearts, that Christ may be
fixed in your ^earts, who was for you fastened on the cross.

Thus Christ for us, was borne, Made of a woman, and ^ade under the Law,
subject to the Law, who was the ^aker, and subject of the Law, fulfilling the
Law per^ctly, and plenarily: and why all this?

-- Quorsum haec tam long a dolorum
intendit series? --
To what purpose tended all these labors, and sor^owes? this incomparable, and
incomprehensible humi^ity? this active and passive obedience? the sequel of my
text expresses the true Quare, why? To redeem them which were under the Law,
that we might receive the ^doption of Sons.

The general, and summary cause of Christ's Incarna^ion, Humiliation, legal
subjection, passion, and all; was ^o redeem us from sin, Satan, and
condemnation: the Ille Iustus venit ad nos peccatores, vt ex peccatoribus
faceret ^ustos, venit ad impios, vt faceret pios, venit ad superbos, vt faceret
humiles, Ambros. super ^^cam.
coming of God to man, was, that man should return to God, put off the old
man, and put on the new, that as all died in the first Adam, they might live in
the second Adam: Christus venit, vt imaginem suam diaboli art fucatam, in
homine, and per lignum praeuaricationis morte damnatam, per passionem crucis,
and mortem, ad pristin (...) reuocaret pulchritudinem, says Origin. hom. 1. in
Genesis 1.
Origin, that is, Christ came, that he might re^tore his own Image soyled by
the subtilty of the devil, and by his preuarication in eating the forbidden
fruit, condemned to death, to recover it by the former beauty, by his death
and passion on the Cross: yea (as Aug super Joan. and in gloss. 1. Tim. 5.
Austen) Nulla alia causa aduentus Domini, nisi peccatores salues facere, that
is, There was no other cause of Christ's coming, but to finish the work of
man's salvation. I will use the words of reverend Bed^ super Cant. lib. 1. Venit
vnus sine peccato, qui saluos omnes faceret sine peccato, Aug.
Beda, Venit vt errantes corrigat, infirmantes adiuuet, dubitantes in fide
confirmet, and certantes ab hostium insidijs defendat, and victores hostium
perpetuae suae visionis corona muneret, that is, Christ came to correct the
erring, to help the weak, to confirm the wavering, to defend the striving,
from the crafts of the enemy, and to reward the ouercommers of their deadly
enemy, with the crown of the perpetual sight of God.

I may say of Christ's first coming, as Caesar writ to the Senate of Rome of
himself: Veni, vidi, vici, that is, I came, I saw, I overcame. So Christ came
in humility: he saw our misery, and for us he gate the victory.

In his first coming, he presented himself to the world in penury, poverty,
humility, Borne of a woman, made under the Law, subject to the Law, condemned
by a Law against all Law: We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to die, c^ie
the Ioh. 19.7.
Jews to Pilate. But at his second coming he shall appear in majesty and
great glory, not to be condemned, but to condemn: Venit Christus occulte
iudicandus, veniet manifest iudicaturus, says Aug. de ciuit. Dei. Quoties
Diem illum considero, toto corpore contremisco, sieve comedo, sieve bibo, semper
videtur illa tuba sonare in auribus, Surgite mortui, venite ad iud^cium, Hieron.
Austen, that is, Christ at his first coming was privily condemned, but at his
second coming he shall ^penly judge, and condemn; and woe be unto them ^en,
whom he has not redeemed from the curse of the ^aw, they shall never receive
the adoption of Sons.

At the day of the second coming of Christ, when ^e shall come to judge, he
will not be persuaded by ^tty, nor moved by entreaty, nor corrupted by money:
^erefore (as Aug. lib. 3. de Symbolo.
Austen writes, Hic dum tempus habet, ^at anima pro se, quia hic locus est
misericordiae, ibi erit lo^s iustitiae, that is, While time serves, let the
soul look (...) her self, for this is the place of mercy, then is the time
(...) Justice.

Christ at his first coming came ferendo, bearing our ^rrowes; at his second
coming he will come feriendo, ^eating and Psa. 2.9.
breaking the wicked in pieces like a Pot^rs vessel.

It is a piercing consideration of Ansel. de similitudinib. mu^di.
Anselmus speaking ^f this day of Christ's second coming, A dextris erunt
^eccata, a sinistris daemonia, subtus infernus, de super Iudex ^atus, foris
mundus ardens, intus conscientia furens; heu ^user peccator, sic deprehensus,
quo fugies? latere erit im^ssibile, apparere intolerabile, that is, On the
right hand (...) and thy sins, on the left the devils, beneath, hell, a^oue,
the angry Judge, abroad, the world burning, with, thy conscience raging:
alas, woeful sinner, so taken, whither shall thou fly? to hide thee, it is
impossible, to ^ppeare, it is intolerable.

Therefore if we desire to have him a gentle, loving, and a merciful Judge
unto us at his second coming, ^et us be well grounded in his first coming,
believing ^tedfastly his Incarnation, admiring his humiliation, ap^^ying his
obedience, righteousness, merits, passion, with all the benefits, and fruits
thereto belonging unto our souls by a faithful application, put on al Christ's
me^its, knowing that we of our selves be unprofitable ser^ants, and have no
merits, saying with Ber. Ser. 53
Bernard, Sufficit ad meritum scire, quod non sufficiant merita, that is, To
know the sufficiency of man, merits, is to know that they will not suffice:
For what have we that we have not Omne bonum nostrum vel ipse, vel ab ipso,
Aug. lib. 1 de doct. Christ. c. 31.
received? Deus author est meriti, qui and voluntatem applicat operi, and opus
applicat voluntati, says Aug. lib. de lib. arb. Boni si quid habeo, a Deo
sumpsi, non a me praesumpsi, Aug. Ep. 52.
Austen, that is, God is the author of merit, who applies the will to the
work, and the work to the will. Let us believe, that Christ's inherent
righteousness suffices to take away our inherent wickedness: That Christ's
obedience is made our obedience by imputation, his merits our merits; that he
by his painful passion, has for all our sins made a perfect satisfaction;
that all his sorrows and sufferings were to work our Redemption; to redeem
us, that were under the Law, and from the curse of the Law, that by grace we
might receive the adoption of Sons.

So that by this you may understand, that we receive the adoption of Sons,
not for our good Qui credit in Christum, saluus sit sine opere, sola side
gratis accipiens remissionem peccatorum, Ambros. com. in 1. Cor. 1.4. and
Anselm. enarrat: in eum loc.
works, or by the works of the Law; but only by grace, and a lively faith in
Christ Jesus: for to this end, he was made of a woman, and made under the Law,
to redeem us that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of
Sons.

As Romans 4.25.
Paul says of Christ, Who was delivered to death for our sins, and rose
again for our justification: and as the same Romans 3.24.
Apostle says, And a^e justified freely by his grace, through the redemption
which is in Christ Jesus: and yet somewhat more fully the said Gal. 2.16.
Apostle, Know that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the
faith of Jesus Christ, etc. Because that by the works of the Law, no flesh is
justified: the Apostle Paul abounds with pregnant proofs to manifest this
conclusion, That only faith does justify.

To cite a place, or two, in stead of many: as namely to there Ephesians,
Ephesians. 2.8.9.
By grace ye are s^ued through faith, and that not of your selves: for it is
the gift of God, not of works, lest any man should boast himself: What place
(...) be more perspicuous against Iusticiaries, and merit^ngers, then that
place? and again to the Romans 3.28.
Romans, (...) makes his undeniable conclusion, saying: Therefore (...)
conclude, that a man is justified by faith, without the ^orks of the Law: and
so in many other Romans 1.17. Romans 3.16. Romans 5.1. Gal. 3.8.11.
places.

And howsoever the abortiue ch^ldren of the false mo^er, which would divide
Justification, partly to faith, ^d partly to works, look asquint upon this
doctrine, ^lding that faith alone does not justify: and as the ^hemists more
boldly, Rhemists in 1. Pet. 4.7. etc.
that charitable works of mer^, cause remission of sins in the sight of God:
and so ^eanes of Justification.

Wherein I say, as one before me observes, that albeit ^r faith is not
solitaria, going alone, for it is always (...) companied with good Opera fidei
pedissequa, Chri. de fide, and lege. Perk. similitud. refor. cathol. tit.
Iustificat. Tutiores sumus, si Deo totum damus, Aug.
works, the fruits of faith: ^t in our Justification, it is sola, alone: even
as the eye, which in regard of being, is never alone from the head, ^t in
respect of seeing it is alone, for the eye only sees: ^o faith subsists not
without other graces, yet in regard ^f the act of Justification, it is alone
without them all.

The Bellar. de Iustificat. lib 4. cap. 1.. ac primu^ co^fessio, etc.
Papists themselves confess, that Luther, Me^nction, Chemnitius, Calvin, and
other learned Pro^stants teach, that good works be necess^ry to salua^on in
some sort, and that it is no Inseparab^lis est bona vita a fide, etc. Aug. de
fide, and operib. c. 23.
true faith, that is ^oid of them, though the inward work of Justification
(...) ascribed in holy Scripture to faith only: and herein ^e hold no more,
then Saint Paul taught us, and the best ^athers approved, and some of the
Papists allowed. I ^ill produce but a testimony or two, in stead of the ^loud
of witnesses we a e compassed about. Origin. in Ep st. ad Romans lib. 3. cap. 3.
Origin ^peaking of this point of Justification, says, Per fidem ^stificatus
est latro sine operibus Legis, that is, By faith the ^heefe was justified
without the works of the Law: and (...) little after, Igitur iustificatur homo
per fidem, cui ad iu^titiam nihil conferunt opera Legis, that is, Therefore a
man is justified by faith, to whom the works of the Law help nothing to his
justifying.

Ambros. de voca^^^ne Genti^^.
Ambrose speaks likewise for us, saying, Hoc const^tutum a Deo, vt qui credit
in Christum, saluus sit, sine opere, sola fide, that is, This is so ordained of
God, that he which believes in Christ, shall be saved without works, only by
faith.

Athanas. ad Galatas c. 3.
Athanasius speaks plainly, In lege nemo iustificatur, quia iustus ex fide
viuit, etc. concluding, Fidem sola^ iustificandi inse habere virtutem, that is,
By the Law none is justified, for the just man lives by faith: only faith has
the virtue, or power of justifying.

Saint Aug. ad Sixtum Presbiterii con. Pelagianos, Epist. 105.
Austen has many places to confirm this point, one for all: Colligimus
hominem non iustificari praeceptis bonae vitae, sed per fidem Jesus Christi, non
lege operum, sed lege fidei, non litera, sed spiritu, non factorum meritis, sed
gratuita gratia, that is, We collect that a man is justified, not by the
precepts of good life; but by faith in Jesus Christ: not by the Law of works,
but by the Law of faith: not by the letter, but by the spirit; not by the
merits of our works, but by free grace. If I should examine this point
copiously, I should (as it were) write Iliades after Homer. Our Divines have so
chased, and traced the Papists in this passage, that though they can gather up
their feet nimbly, and cunningly; yet they have been so hard followed, that
they have made them overtake, and enter-fire in their pace.

The old Papists will condemn their younger brethren the new Jesuits: for they
liked this Truth, which we hold, we^l enough: for Aquinas lect. 4. in 3 Romans
and l^ct. 4. in 3 Gal.
Aquinas has left it written, that works be not the cause, why a man is just
before God, but rather a manifestation of his justice: for no man is justified
by works, but by the habit of infused faith. So Antididagm. Colontens. tit. de
Justice. hom p. 29.
Gropper with the Divines of Colen say, By faith we are justified, as by the
apprehensiue cause: and Art. 1. contra Lutherum.
Roffensis, as moderator of the question, says, Fides absque partu operum, hoc
est, cum nondum peperit opera, iustificare potest, ^at is, Faith without the
birth of works, that is, before (...) has brought forth any works, can
justify: yea, many ^f the Papists approved it for sound Divinity, till the
late ^iui^ll Council of Trent rejected it. So that the railing ^hemists were
too intemperat in their glosing Gloss upon the third of the Romans, the 22.
verse, calling it a ^ew no-Iustice; a fantastical apprehension, showing ^eir
fantastical examination of the verse, and repre^ension of the Truth: or as an
Wright Art. 9.
other of their disciples ^lles it, a Solisidian portion: or as an Apolog. Ep.
sect. 8.
other, a desolati^n of order, a doctrine against the Commonwealth.

Surely, for the reverence of Romes elder Sons, they ^ould forbear to cast
such stones, lest unawares they ^oe hit their stepmother.

As in many things, so in this they offer us wrong, ima^ining that we exclude
good works from justifying ^ith; we know that there can be See D. Abbot
against Bishop. page 482.
no real separation of ^ith from good works: separation mental in under
^anding, is negative, or privative: negative, when in ^e understanding there is
an affirming of one, and deny^g of another: privative, when of things that
cannot ^e separated really, yet a man understands the one, and ^mitteth to
understand the other: So in our Iustificati^n, we do not negatiuely separate
other graces from ^ith, as if faith existed alone without them, but priua^uely
making them effects, and consequents, not con^utring causes of our
Justification. We truly confess, that a justifying faith is operative, as
Staplet. de Iustificat. lib. 9. cap 7.
Stapleton himself af^^mes we do: and as Super Euang. in festo Joan.
Evangelist.
Luther used herein a fit simili^ude: Faith is like Saint John in Christ's
bosom, possessing ^ll the merits of Christ: and good works are like Saint
Peter following his Master. Faith is the Hom. of good works. part. 1.
nest of good works; and if our birds be never so fair, they will be ^ost,
exc^pt they be brough forth in true Belief: our good woe kes, vn^esse they be
laid upon the Altar of faith, are not acceptable to God.

Infidels or heretics (says Aug. in Psalm. 8
Austen) in doing glorious acts, have not where to lay their young: for wanting
faith, they build upon the land. Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, as the
Romans 14.23.
Apostle.

Domus Dei credendo fundatur, sperando erigitur, diligendo perficitur, (says
Nemo co^putet bona opera sua aute fidem: vbi sides non erat, bonum opus non
erat, Aug. lib. 50. hom. homil. 17.
Austen) that is, The foundation of Gods house in our souls is faith, the
walls, hope, the roof, love and good life.

We detest and abjure that error of Aug. haeres. 48.
Manicheus, who thought God made the soul, but not the body: So the Papists
would make the world believe, that we so build faith in the soul, as if we
professed our selves Libertines in the body, or were Nudifidians, and carnal
Gospellers, as they are Nullifidians, and Merit-mungers. No, a good faith, and
a good life be inseparable, like Harpocrates twins, live and die together.
Faith goes before, good life follows: so Aug. de fide, and operib. c. 7.
Quicquid opera^ur homo ex se, naledictae arbor^ malus est fructis, Aug. super
Joan. Ser. 4. and 48.
Austen, Nisi praecedat fides, vita bona sequi non potest, that is, Unless
faith goes before, good life cannot follow: and as it is a true and old saying
in divinity, Good works follow him that is justified, Aug. lb. de fide and
operibus.
Non praecedunt iustificandum, that is, They do not go before he is
justified. We do not hold that an historical faith iustifies; but a lively
faith, which inwardly is seen to God, and outwardly showed in good works, and
love to our neighbors. Good works, though they be not causa regnandi, that
is, The cause to make us reign in Gods kingdom, yet they be via regni, the
way to the kingdom: for though God will not reward us propter opera, that is,
for our works, yet he will Reu. 22.12 Romans 2.6.
reward us secundum opera, that is, according to our works.

And thus I have a little exceeded my limits, (for I study not to be
Controuersall, but Doctrinall) in freeing our Eccles. Angl. in Confess. art.
12. Jewels Apology, part. 2. ca. 20. Zanch. Comment. in 1 Thessalonians. 4. Luth.
Com. Epist. ad Gal. c. 5. v. 6.
Church-doctrine from the calumniations of the enemies of the grace of God, who
like the Adder, stoppes his ear against the voice of the charmer, charm he
never so wisely, or truly.

The sum of all, is this: That we were not able to redeem our selves, nay,
no Saints could ransom us, for Mat. 25.9.
they can spare no oil for our lamps, no Angels redeem us; for God laid
folly on his Job. 4.18.
Angels: only Christ Jesus must be the 2. Cor. 5.21
propitiation for sin, that knew no sin, who was made of a woman, and made
under the Law, to redeem us from the curse of the Law, and to justify us by a
lively faith in him, and his merits, that we might receive the adoption of
Sons.

Now therefore to draw to a conclusion:

What shall we render unto the Lord for all his benefits bestowed upon us?
which benefits we could not have received but by Christ's Incarnation.

By it we have a Kingdom, in possessionem, Possess the Matt. 25.34.
kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. His body in
refectionem, that is, for our spiritual repast, My John 6.5.5.
flesh is meat indeed: his blood, in ablutionem, that is, for clensing us, he
Reu. 1.5.
washes us from our sins in his blood: his life, in redemptionem, for our
redemption; I Ioh. 10.11.
lay down my life for my sheep: his Divinity, in visionem, to behold it, We
1. Cor. 13.12.
shall see him face to face: his eternity, in fruitionem, that is, in fruition,
Ioh. 17.3.
This is life eternal, that they may know thee to be the only very God, and
whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ.

Oh Beloved, had I the tongue of an Angel, or you the hearts of glorified
Saints. I could not utter, nor you conceive the immeasurable measure of divine
benefits we receive by the Incarnation of our Savior: what shall we render for
them? Let Psalm. 115.12.13.
us take the Cup of Salvation, and give thanks, and praise the name of the
Lord. Let us imitate those Math. 2.11.
Wisemen, Who having found the Babe, fell down, and worshipped him, and opened
their Treasures, and presented gifts, Auru^^ soluitur, quasi Regi magno, Thus
immolatur vt Deo, Myrrha praebetur, vt Redemptori, etc. Aug. in Ser. Epiphan.
Gold, Incense, and Myrrh.

Iuuencus. Aurum, Thus, Myrrham, Regique, hominique Deoque dona ferunt -- that
is, Gold, Frankincense, and Mirrhe, the Wisemen offer
To him, as King, as man, as God they proffer.


So let us fall down, and worship this blessed Babe of Bethleem, and let us
offer gifts. First, A lively faith, 1. Pet. 1.7.
which is more precious then gold. Secondly, hearty Prayers, and Praises,
which are as Incense unto the Lord, like the Reu. 5.8.
four and twenty Elders, fall down before the Lamb, having every one
Harpes, and golden Vials, which are the prayers of the Saints. Thirdly, Let us
offer Myrrh, b tter, and contrite repentance for ou^ sins, considering that
Christ, who is the fountain of al goodness, was for our sins and sakes
accounted, (as Luther. loc. com. tit. de Christi passione.
Luther writes) Omnium possimus, reputatiue coram hominibus, imputative coram
Deo, that is, as the worst of all, by estimation before men, by imputation
before God, by estimation before men. So the Mark. 3.22
Scribes blasphemed him, He has Beelzebub: by Imputation before God; for all
our sins were imputed to him: Propter scelera nostra attritus est, says Esaias
53.5.
Esaias, that is, He was broken for our iniquities, and wounded for our
transgressions.

What shall I say more? but with Ioh. 1.29.
John Baptist, Ecce Agnus Dei, that is, behold the Lamb of God which takes
away the sins of the world. At this fullness of time, God sent this Lamb,
(as a Lamb among Wolves) to redeem, and to reduce to his fold the scattered
flock of Israel: Redemptor noster homo nascendo, Agnus moriendo, Leo
resurgendo, Aquila ascendendo factus est, (says Greg. hom. 4.
Gregory) that is, Our Redeemer made man by his Incarnation, suffered as a
Lamb in his passion, showed himself a Lion of the Tribe of Judah in his
resurrection, and mounted as a divine Eagle in his Ascension: and now Heb. 1.3.
sits at the right hand of his Father.

By his Incarnation we are regenerated, by his Passion redeemed, by his
Resurrection restored from death to life, by Ioh. 14.2.
his Ascension, he has prepared an heavenly possession.

He was made of a woman, and made the Son of man, that we might be made the
Sons of God, he was made under the law, and bond to the law, that we might be
freed from the bendage of the law: He conquered the law by a double right, (as
Luther in textum.
Luther writes) First, as the Son of God, and Lord of the Law. Secondly, in
our person, which is as much, as if we had overcome the law our selves; for his
victory is ours.

All this for our sakes, that we might receive the adoption of Sons, and has
sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, which cries, Abba Father.

Let this meditation be evermore a Cordial of comfort, the aqua vitae, water of
life to revive our sinne-sicke souls, and perplexed consciences, against
Sin, Satan, and the Law, which always accuse us, terrify us, and condemn
us: let us tell them boldly, that they have no power over us: for God the
Father sent his Son, ma^^ of a woman, and made under the Law, to redeem us
from the curse of the Law. Let us creep into that hole which bloody Aug.
Manuel. (...)
Longinus made with his spear in our Saviors side, there let us hide our
selves against our foes: let us plunge our bleeding conscience, in his bloody
wounds, dolorous death, victorious resurrection, and glorious ascension; and
let us firmly, and faithfully believe, that our Savior was borne, lived,
died, rose again, and ascended, that we might rece^^e, and enjoy the fruition
of the adoption of Sons.

The dew of heaven, which fell upon the ^eece of Judge. 6.38.
Gedeon, fall down upon these our labors, ^^meditations, and water them with
the dew of divine grace in all your hearts, to his eternal glory, and your
endless comfort, and that for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Lord, Savior,
and Redeemer: to whom, with the Father, and the holy Ghost, three persons in
Trinity, one eternal God in unity, be ascribed everlasting glory, might and
Majesty, Dignity, and Dominion, Praise, and Thanksgiving world without end,
Amen.

Tri-vni Deo laus, and gloria. 2. MACCA. 15.39. If I have done well, and as the
story required, it is the thing that I desired: but if I have spoken slenderly,
and barel^ is that I could.


