WINE, BEER, AND ALE, TOGETHER BY THE EARS.

A Dialogue, Written first in Dutch by Gallobelgicus, and faithfully translated
out of the original Copy, by Mercurius Brittannicus, for the benefit of his
Nation.

HORAT. Siccis omnia nam dura Deus proposuis. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for John
Grove, and are to be sold at his Shop, at Furniuals Inn Gate in Holborne.
1629.

THE STATIONER TO THE READER.
GENTLEMEN; for in your Drink, you will be no less, I present you with this
small Collation: If either Wine and Sugar, Beer and Nutmeg, a Cup of Ale and a
Toste, or all together, may meet your Acceptance, I am glad I had it for you.
There is difference between them; but your Palate may reconcile all. If any
thing distaste you, there is Water to wash your hands of the whole Pamphlet. So
hoping you will accept a Pledge of my Service, and have a care of your own
health, I begin to you.

J. Gr.

THE SPEAKERS.
WINE, A Gentleman. SVGAR, His Page. BEER, A Citizen. NVTMEG, His Prentice.
ALE, A Countryman. TOSSED, One of his rural Servants WATER, A Parson.
WINE, BEER, and ALE, TOGETHER BY THE EARS:
Sugar and Nutmegge from several doors meet. Sugar. NVutmegge?


Nut. Sugar? well met, how chance you wait not upon your Master, where is Wine
now?


Sug. Oh sometimes without Sugar, all the while he is well if I be in his
company, it is but for fashion sake, I wait upon him into a room now and then,
but am not regarded: marry when he is ill, he makes much of me, who but Sugar?
but to my remembrance I have not been in his presence this fortnight, I hope
shortly he will not know me, though he meet me in his drink.


Nut. Thou have a sweet life in the mean time Sugar.


Sug. But thou art tied to more attendance Nutmegge upon your Master Beer.


Nut. Faith no, I am free now and then, though I be his Prentice still,
Nutmegge has more friends to trust to then Beer: I can be welcome to Wine thy
master sometimes, and to the honest Country man Ale too. But now I talk of
Ale, when did see his man prithee?


Sug. Who Tossed.


Nut. The same.


Sug. I meet him at Tavern every day.


Nut. When shall thou, and he, and I, meet and be merry over a Cup?


Sug. I Will tell thee Nutmegge, I do not care much for his company, he is such a
chollericke piece, I know not what he is made of, but his quarrelling comes home
to him, fot he is every day cut for it, I marvel how he scapes, this morning
he had a knife thrust into him.


Nut. Indeed he will be very hot sometimes.


Sug. Hot? I, till he look black in the face again, besides, if he take an
opinion there is no turning him, he will be burnt first. I did but by chance let
fall some words against Ale, and he had like to have beaten me to powder for it.


Nut. How, beaten Sugar? that would be very fine in faith; but he being bread,
and thou a loaf, you should not differ so. Stand, look where he is.


Enter Tossed drunk. Sug. Then I Will be gone for we shall quarrel.


Nut. Come, fear not, I Will part you, but he is drunk, ready to fall; whence
comes he dropping in now. How now Tossed.


Tossed. Nutmeg? round and sound and all of a color, art thou there?


Nut. Here Is all that's left of me.


Tossed. Nutmeg, I love thee Nutmeg. What Is that a Ghost?


Nut. No, it is your old acquaintance Sugar.


Tossed. Sugar: I Will beat him to pieces.


Sug. Hold, hold. Nutmegge.


Nutmeg and Sugar hang upon Tossed. Tossed. Cannot Tossed stand without holding?


Nut. Where have you been Tossed?


Tossed. I Will tell thee, I have bin with my M. Ale. Sir, I was very dry, and he
has made me drunk: do I not crumble? I shall fall a pieces; but I Will beat
Sugar for all that: I do not weigh him, he is a poor Rogue, I have known
him sold for two pence, when he was young, wrapped in swaddling clouts of Paper.
I know his breeding, a Drawer brought him up, and now he is grown so lumpish.


Sug. You Are a rude Tossed.


Tossed. Rude? Let me but crush him: Rude? Sir, it is well known you came from
Barbary your self, and because of some few Pounds in a Chest, you think to
domineere over Tossed: you are a little handsome, I confess; and Wenches lick
their lips after you; but for all that, would I might sink to the bottom, if
I do not --: I will give Sugar but one box.


Nut. Come, come, you shall not.


Sug. Prithee Nutmeg, take out Tossed a little, to morrow we will meet and be
drunk together.


Exit Nutmeg with Tossed. So, so, I am glad he is gone: I do not love this Tosts
company, yet some occasion or other, puts me still upon him. Ha, who is this?

Enter Wine, drinking Tobacco. It Is Wine my Master. What smoking? Wine and
Tobacco, I think, are never asunder: but it is no marvel they agree so well,
they come both out of a Pipe.

Wine. Sugar, you are a sweet youth, you wayt well.


Sug. A friend of mine called me forth, to cure a cut finger.


Wine. You Will turn Surgeon, or Physician shortly.


Sug. But your diseases need none: for inflammations, which are dangerous to
others, makes you more acceptable, nor do you blush to have it reported sir,
how often you have been burnt.


Wine. So sir, now you put me in mind on it, I hear say you run a wenching,
and keep women's company too much.


Sug. Alas sir, like will to like, Sugar being of his own nature sweet, has
reason to make much of women, which are the sweetest creatures.


Wine. But some of them are sower enough.


Sug. I sir, Widows at fifteen, and Maids at twenty five; but I keep them
company, for no other thing, then to convert them, some of them could even eat
me, but for fear of spoiling their teeth.


Wine. Indeed one of your sweet-hearts complained the other day you made her
teeth rotten.


Sug. Alas sir, it was none of my fault, she bit me first, and I could do no
less, then punish her sweet tooth.


Wine. Well sir, I say, take heed of women.


Sug. Nay sir, if I may credit my own experience they are the best friends I
have, for I am always in their mouths. If I come to a banquet, as none are
made without me, in what fashion soever I appear, every woman bestows a
handkercher upon me, and strive to carry me away in their cleanest linen:
nay, but for shame, to betray their affections to me, they would bring whole
sheets for me to lie in.


Wine. Why sure thou were wrapped in thy mothers smock.


Sug, I think if the Midwife were put to her oath, I was wrapped in hers, oath
Christning day.


Wine.
Well sir, enough of this discourse, you are for the women, but we men have
a better companion, and indeed bitter, as thou art sweet, that is this Tobacco.


Sug. I sir, but I could never arrive at the understanding, why every man
should so affect it.


Wine. There Is thy ignorance, it is an excellent discourser, and a help for the
imperfections of nature.


Sug. As how, pray sir?


Wine. Why, when a man has not the wit to deliver his meaning in good words,
this being taken, dus presently help him to spit it out Gentleman-like.


Sug. Indeed the best part of our common complement is but smoke, and now I
know how Gentlemen come by it, but me thinks for all that, it takes from the
honor of a Gentleman, to be a common Piper, and if the premises be well
considered, we may conclude, they are no more men that use it.


Wine. How? not men? why?


Sug. Because it makes em children again, for I am sure they that use it most,
do but suck all the day long, and they are little better then children then.
But see sir, here is Master Beer.


Enter Beer. Wine. How, Beer? we are not very good friends, no matter, I
scorn to avoid him.


Beer. Beere-leaue sir.


Iustles Wine. Wine. So me thinks? how now Beer, running atilt, do not know
me?


Beer. I do mean to have the wall on you.


Wine. The wall of me, you would have your head and the wall knocked together,
learn better manners, or I may chance to broach you.


Beer. Broach me, alas poor Wine, it is not your Fierifacias can make Beer
afraid, thy betters know the strength of Beer. I do not fear your high
color sir.


Sug. So, so, here will be some scuffling.


Wine. You Will leave your impudence, and learn to know your superiors Beer,
or I may chance to have you stopped up, what never leave working? I am none of
your fellows.


Beer. I scorn thou should.


Wine. I am a companion for Princes, the least drop of my blood, worth all
thy body. I am sent for by the Citizens, visited by the Gallants, kissed by the
Gentlewomen: I am their life, their Genius, the Poetical fury, the Helicon of
the Muses, of better vaiue then Beer; I should be sorry else.


Beer. Thou art sorry Wine indeed sometimes: Value? you are come up of late,
men pay dear for your company, and repent it: that gives you not the
precedencie; though Beer set not so great a price upon himself, he means
not to bate a grain of his worth, nor subscribe to Wine for all his braueries.


Wine. Not to me?


Beer. Not to you: why, whence come you pray?


Wine. From France, from Spain, from Greece.


Beer. Thou art a mad Greek indeed.


Wine. Where thou must never hope to come: who dares deny that I have been a
trauailer?


Beer. A trauailer? in a tumbrell, a little Beer will go farther: why Wine,
art not thou kept under lock and key, confinde to some corner of a Cellar, and
there indeed commonly close prisoner, unless the Iaylor or Yeoman of the
Bottles turn the Key for the chambermaid now and then, for which she vows
not to leave him, till the last gasp, where Beer goes abroad, and randeuous
in every place.


Win. Thou in every place? away hop of my thumb: Beer, I am ashamed of thee.


Beer. Be ashamed of thy self, and blush Wine thou art no better. Beer shall
have commendations for his mildness and virtue, when thou art spit out of men's
mouths, and distasted: thou art an hypocrite, Wine, art all white sometimes,
but more changeable then Proteus: thou would take upon thee to comfort the
blood, but have been the cause that too many noble veins have been emptied:
thy virtue is to betray secrets, the very preparatiue to a thousand rapes and
murders, and yet thou dare stand upon thy credit, and prefer thy self to
Beer, that is as clear as day.


Sug. Well said Beer, he bears up stiff like a Constable. Now will I play
my part with 'em both. Sir,

To Wine. This is intolerable.


Wine. The vessel of your wit leakes, Beer: why thou art drunk.


Beer. So art thou Wine, every day in the week, and art feign to be carried
forth of doors.


Sug. How sir?

To Wine.
Win. I scorn thy words, thou art base Beer: Wine is well borne, has good
breeding, and bringing up; thou deseruest to be carted, Beer.


Sug. Suffer this, and suffer all, to him again.


Beer. Carted? thou would be carted thy self, rackt and drawn for thy
baseness, Wine. Welborne? Did not every man call you Bastard the other day?
borne? there is no man able to bear thee much: and for breeding, I know none
thou have, unless it be Diseases.


Sug. How, diseases? you have been held always to be wholesome Wine, sir.


Wine. Sir, if I take you in hand, I shall make you small Beer.


Beer. Take heed I do not make Vinegar of you first.


Sug. Do, do, make him piss it, in my opinion sir, it were not for your
honor to run away: yet Beer being a common quarreler, I fear may prove too
hard for you.


Wine. Too hard for me? away Boy, I Will be as hard as he for his heart: alas,
he is but weak Beer, if I give him but a tap, it shall stay him from running
out thus.


Sug. So, so, they are high enough, fall too, and welcome.

Enter Ale. Who Is this? Ale? Oh for a three-mans-Song: this Ale is a stout
fellow, it shall go hard, but Sugar which makes all sweet sometimes, shall set
him in his part of Discord.


Wine. Come, come, Beer, you forget how low you were the other day: provoke me
not too much, lest I bestow a firkin on you.


Beer. Strike and thou dare Wine, I shall make thee answer as quick as the
objection, and give you a dash.


Ale. Vmh: what is this? it seems there is great difference between Wine and
Beer. Sugar, what is the matter?


Sug. Oh goodman Ale, I am glad you are come, here is nothing but contention: I
have gone betwixt 'em twice or thrice, but I fear, one or both will be spilt.


Ale. What do they contend about?


Sug. For that, which for ought I can apprehend, belongs as much to you, as to
either of them.


Ale. Hah? to me? what is that?


Sug. Ale, by judicious men has been held no despicable drink, for my own
part, it is nothing to me: you are all one to Sugar, whosoever be King, Sugar can
be a subject, but yet, twere fit, Ale had his measure.


Ale. Are they so proud?


Sug. They mind not you, as if you were too unworthy a a Competitor. See, it is
come to a challenge.

Wine throws down his glove, which Beer takes up. Pray take no knowledge
that I discovered any thing of their Ambition; Sugar shall ever be found true
to Ale, else would I might never be more drunk in your company.


Ale. No matter for protestation.


Sug. So, so, now I have warmed Ale pretty well, I Will leave 'em: if Wine, Beer,
and Ale agree together, would Sugar might never be drunk but with Water, nor
never help to preserve any thing but old women, and elder brothers.

Exit.
Wine. Remember the place, and weapon.


Ale. Stay, stay, come together again, why how now, what fight, and kill one
another?


Wine. Alas poor Beer, I account him dead already.


Beer. No sir, you may find Beer quick enough, to pierce your Hogshead. I
shall remember.


Ale. But ith mean time you both forget your selves: dee hear? Ale is a
friend to you both, let me know your difference.


Beer. He has disgraced me.


Wine. Thou have disgraced thy self in thy comparisons. Wine must be
acknowledged the Nectar of all drinks, the prince of Liquors.


Beer. To wash Boots.


Ale. Hark you, are you both mad? who has heat you, that you run over, do
you contend for that in justice belongs to another. I tell you Wine and Beer,
I do not relish you. I Will tell you a tale: Two spruce hot-spurre fiery gallants
meeting ith streets, iustled for the wall, drew, would ha been fighting: there
steps me forth a corrector of soles, an vnderlaid cobbler, and cries out, Hold,
hold your hands Gentlemen, are you so simple to fight for the wall? why the
wall's my Landlords. Have you but so much wit as to apply this, you shall never
need fence for the matter. Superiority is mine, Ale is the prince of liquors,
and you are both my subjects.


Both. We thy Subjects.


Wine. O base Ale!


Beer. O muddy Ale!


Ale. Leave your railing, and attend my reasons, I claim your duties to me,
for many prerogatives: my antiquity, my riches, my learning, my strength, my
gravity.


Wine. Antiquity? your first reason's a very small one.


Ale. Dare any of you deny my antiquity? I say.


Wine. We must bear with him, it is in his Ale.


Ale. It only pleades for me: who has not heard of the old Ale of England.


Beer, Old Ale; ho there, it is grown to a Proverb. Ioanes Ale's new.


Ale. These are trifles, and convince me not.


Wine. If we should grant your argument, you would gain little by it, go
together, I do allow you both a couple of stale companions.


Beer. Wine, you're very harsh.


Ale. Let him, my second prerogative is my riches and possessions; for who
knows not how many houses I have: Wine and Beer are feign to take up a
corner, your ambition goes no further then a Seller, where the whole house
where I am is mine, goes only by my name, is called an Alehouse; but when is
either heard, the Wine-house, or the Beere-house, you cannot pass a street:
wherein I have not houses of mine own, besides many that go by other men's
names.


Beer. I confess you have here and there an Alehouse, but whose are all the
rest? has not Beer as much title to them?


Wine. And yet I have not heard that either of you both have fined for
Alderman, though I confess something has bin attempted out of nicke and froth.
Be ruled by me, Beer and Ale, and aspire no higher then the
Common-Councell-houses? Oh impudence, that either of you should talk of
houses, when sometimes you are both glad of a tub: dee hear Ale? do not you
know the man that did the Bottle bring?


Ale. Thou art glad of a Bottle thy self, Wine, sometimes, and so is Beer
too, for all he ^^oths now.


Beer. So, so.


Ale. My third Prerogative, is my Learning.


Wine. Learning? If you have the Liberal Sciences, pray be free, and lets
hear some.


Ale. For that, though I could give you demonstration, for breuities sake I
remit you to my books.


Beer. Books? printed Cum priuilegio no doubt on it, and sold for the Company
of Stationers: what are the names?


Ale. Admire me, but when I name learned, though not the great Alexander Ale,
and Tost-atus the Jesuit.


Wine. O learned Ale, you scorn to make Indentures any more, but you might as
well have concluded this without book.


Beer. Why, you will shortly be Towne-Clerke, the City Chronicler is too
mean a place for you.


Ale. Now for my strength and invincibilitie.


Beer. But here let me interrupt you, talk no more of strength, none but
Beer deserves to be called strong, no pen is able to set down my victories.
I? why, I have been the destruction. --


Wine. Of Troy, have not? here your own mouths condemn you: if killing be
your conquest, every Quacksaluing knave may have the credit of a rare
Phisician, that sends more to the Church and Churchyard, then diseases do: I
Wine, comfort and preserve, let that be my Character. I am cosen German to the
blood, not so like in my appearance as I am in nature, I repair the debilities
of age, and revive the refrigerated spirits, exhilarate the heart, and steel
the brow with confidence. For you both the Poet has drawn your memorial in
one.

-- nil spissius illa
Dum bibitur, nil clarius est dum mingitur, vnde
Constat quod multas faeces in corpore linquat.
Nothing goes in so thick,
Nothing comes out so thin:
It must needs follow then,
Your dregs are left within.
And so I leave you Stygiae monstrum conform paludi, a monstrous drink, like
the river Styx.


Ale. Nay but hark, it is not your Latin must carry it away, I will not loose
a drop of my reputation, and by your favor, if you stand so much upon your
preserving, I Will put you to your Latin again, and prove my self superior, for
Ale as if it were the life of mankind, has a peculiar name and denomination,
being called Ale from Alo, which every School boy can tell, signifies to feed
and nourish, which neither Wine nor Beer can show for themselves, and for my
strength and honor in the wars, know that Ale is a Knight of Malta, and
dares fight with any man bears a head, it is more safe to believe what a
Soldier I am, then try what I can do.


Beer. If you look thus ilfauouredly Ale, you may fright men well enough, and
be held terrible by weak stomachs, but if you call to mind the puissance and
valor of Beer, invincible Beer, tumble down Beer, you must sing a
Pallinode. I? why I have overthrown armies, how easy is it for me to take a
city, when I can tame Constables, which in their presence are formidable at
midnight, in the midst of their rugged Bill-men, make 'em all resign their
weapons, and send 'em away to sleep upon their charge.


Wine. How? upon their own charge? take the Constable committing that fault,
and he will never be good in his office after it.


Beer. Now for my virtue in preserving and nourishing the body wherein you
both so glory, you are not to compare with me, since thousands every day come
to receive their healths from me.


Wine. Kings and Princes from me, and like them I am served in plate.


Ale. But thou art come down of late to a glass, Wine, and that is the reason
I think, so many Vintners have broake: now observe my last Reason.


Beer. Yes, pray where lies your gravity?


Ale. Not in my Beard, I speak without mental reservation, I Will tell you, and
you shall confess it: the Wise men of ancient time were called Sages, and to
this day it signifies judgment, discretion, gravity; for by what other would
you excite to good manners more aptly, then to wish a young man to be sage,
that is grave: and with what title can you better salute him that is, grave, or
more honor him, then to call him one of the Sages. Now this appellation
neither of you can challenge, yet every man gives me the attribute; for who
knows not I am called Sage Ale.


Wi. One may guess what brains he caries by the Sage now.


Ale. And thus having given you sufficient reasons for your acknowledgement of
my principality, let your knees witness your obedience to your King, and I
will grace you both by making you Squires of my body, right honorable
Ale-Squires.


Wine. This is beyond suffering: was ever Wine so undervalued? Barbarous
detractors, whose beginning came from a dunghill, I defy you. Bacchus, look
down, and see me vindicate thine honor, I scorn to procrastinate in this,
and this minute you shall give account of your insolences: my spirits high, I
am enemy to both.


Ale. Is Wine drawn? then have at you, I Will make good Ale.


Beer. I stand for the honor of Beer, were you an army.


As they offer to fight, Water comes running in. Water. Hold, hold, hold.


Wine. How now? what comes Water running hither for?


Wat. Let my fear ebb a little.


Beer. What tide brought you hither, Water?


Water. The pure stream of my affection: oh how I am troubled! I am not yet
recovered.


Ale. So me thinks you look very thine upon it Water: but why do we not fight?


Water. Do not talk of fighting, is it not time that Water should come to
quench the fire of such contention. I tell you, the care of your preservation
made me break my banks to come to you, that you might see the ouerflowing love
I bear you: your quarrel has ecchoed unto me; I know your ambition for
superiority: you are all my kinsmen, near allied to Water, and though I say
it, sometimes not a little beholding to Water, even for your very makings. Will
you refer your selves to me, and wade no further in these discontentments, I
will undertake your reconcilement and qualification.


Wine. To thee, Water? will thou take upon thee to correct our irregularitie?
Thou often go beyond thy bounds thy self. But if they consent, I shall.


Beer. I am content.


Ale. And I.


Water. Then without further circumlocution or insinuation, Water runs to
the matter: you shall no more contend for excellency, for Water shall allow
each of you a singularity. First, you Wine, shall be in most request among
Courtiers, Gallants, Gentlemen, and Poetical wits, Qui melioris luti homines,
being of a refined mould, shall choose as a more nimble and active watering, to
make their brains fruitful, Fecundi calices quem non? but so as not confined
to them, nor limitting them to you, more then to exhilerate their spirits, and
acuate their inventions.

You Beer, shall be in most grace with the Citizens, as being a more stayed
Liquor, fit for them that purpose retirement and gravity, that with the Snaile
carries the cares of a house and family with them, tied to the attendance of an
illiberall profession, that neither trot nor amble, but have a sure pase of
their own, Bos lassus fortius figit pedem, The black Ox has trod upon their
foot: yet I bound you not with the City, though it be the common
entertainment, you may be in credit with Gentlemen's Sellars, and carry
reputation before you from March to Christmas -- tide I should say; that Water
should forget his Tide.

You Ale I remit to the Country, as more fit to live where you were bred: your
credit shall not be inferior, for people of all sorts shall desire your
acquaintance, specially in the morning, though you may be allowed all the day
after: the Parson shall account you one of his best Parishioners, and the
Churchwardens shall pay for your company, and drawing their Bills all the
year long, you shall be loved and maintained at the Parish charge till you
be old, be allowed a Robin-hood, or Mother Red-cap, to hang at your door,
to beckon in Customers: and if you come into the City, you may be drunk with
pleasure, but never come into the fashion. At all times you shall have respect,
but ith Winter Mornings without comparison. How do you like my censure now?


Ale. Water has a deep judgment.


Wat. And yet the world says sometimes Water is shallow: nay, I Will see you
shake hands, and tie a new knot of friendship.


Ale. We are henceforth brothers.


Wine. Stay, who is here?


Enter Tossed, Sugar, and Nutmeg: Tossed whetting a knife on his shoe. Tossed. I
tell thee, Sugar, I am now friends with thee. But if it be as you say --


Wat. What Is the matter?


Ale. Let Us observe him a little, Tossed is angry.


Nut. What need you be so hot, Tossed?


Tossed. Hot? it is no matter, Sugar: you will justify that Wine and Beer
offered this wrong unto Ale.


Sug. I know not whose pride began; but I was sorry to see Wine, Beer, and Ale
at such odds.


Tossed. Ods quotha? I do mean to be even with some body.


Nut. An even Tossed shows well.


Tossed. They shall find that Ale has those about him that are not altogether
dowe.


Sug. Thou have been baked, I Will swear.


Nut. And new come out of the Oven too, I think: for he is very fiery.


Tossed. Ale must not be put down so long as Tossed has a crum of life left.
Beer too?


Nut. What do you mean to do with your knife, Tossed? that will scarce cut
Beer and 'twere buttered.


Tossed. Come not near me, Nutmeg, lest I grate you, and slise you. Nutmeg, do
you mark?


Wine. Let Us in, and make 'em friends. How now Tossed?


Tossed. It Is all one for that: Oh, are you there? pray tell me which of 'em is it?


Ale. Is what?


Nut. Why they are friends: what did you mean, Sugar, to make Tossed burn thus?


Ale. No such matter.


Tossed. You will not tell me then. Hark you Beer, March-Beere, this way a
little.


Beer. What do mean to do with thy knife.


Tossed. I must stir you a little Beer: what color had you to quarrel with
my Master.


Beer. Ale. We are sworn brothers.


Ale. We were at difference, and Wine too: but --


Tossed. Wine too But, but me no buts, I care not a straw for his buts; dee
hear sir, do you long to be Graves Wine.


Wine. We are all friends.


Water. I, I, all friends on my word, Tossed.


Tossed. Fire and water are not to be trusted, away new River, away, I wash my
hands on thee.


Ale. Come hither again, Tossed.


Tossed. Over head and ears in Ale.


Wine. How comes this about, Sugar.


Sug. The truth is, sir, I told him of some difference between you, for he
and I had been fallen out, and I had no other security to put in for my self,
then to put him upon some body else.


Nut. Nutmeg durst scarce speak to him, he was ready to put me in his pocket.


Tossed. I am cool again: I may believe you are friends; then I am content to put
up.

Puts up his knife. Sugar and Nutmeg, come, we be three.


Sug. Let Us be all one rather: and from henceforth since they are so well
accorded, let us make no difference of our Masters, but belong to 'em in common:
for my part, though I wait upon Wine, it shall not exempt my attendance on
Beer, or Ale, if they please to command Sugar.


Tossed. A match, I am for any thing but Water.


Nut. And I.


Sug. But my service shall be ready for him to, Water and Sugar I hope, may be
drunk together now and then, and not be brought within compass of the
Statute, to be put ith stocks for it.


Wat. Godamercy Sugar with all my heart, I shall love thy company, for I am
solitary, and thou will make me pleasant. Stay.

Music. Hark Music? Oh some friends of mine, I know 'em, they often come
upon the Water: let us entertain the air a little, never a voice among you?


THE SONG. Wine. I iouiall Wine exhilarate the heart.

Beer. March Beer is drink for a King.

Ale. But Ale, bonny Ale, with Spice and a Tossed,
In the morning's a dainty thing.

Chorus. Then let us be merry, wash sorrow away,
Wine, Beer, and Ale shall be drunk to day.

Wine. I generous Wine, am for the Court.

Beer. The City calls for Beer.

Ale. But Ale, bonny, Ale, like a Lord of the Soil,
In the Country shall domineere.

Chorus. Then let us be merry, wash sorrow away,
Wine, Beer, and Ale shall be drunk to day.

Water. Why, now could I dance for joy.


Ale. Now you talk of dancing, Wine, it is one of your qualities, let us pay the
Musicians all together: we have often made other men have light heads and
heels, there is no hurt a little in tripping for our selves, what say you?


Beer. Strike up Piper.


Wine. Lustily, make a merry day on it; nay, leave out none, at Dancing and
Football, all fellows.


A Dance, wherein the several Natures of them all is figured and represented.
FINIS.

