CERTAIN WORKS of Chirurgerie, newly compiled and published by Thomas Gale,
Master in Chirurgerie.



Prynted at London by Rouland Hall.

The contents.
1. An Institution of Chirurgerie. lib. i. 2. An Enchiridion containing the
cure of wounds, fractures, and dislocations. lib. iiii. 3 An excellent
treatise of the wound made with gonneshote, in which is confuted the gross
opinion of Io. Vi go, Brunswicke, Alfonsus Ferrius, and others. lib. i. 4. An
Antidotarie containing the principal and secret medicines, used in the art of
Chirurgerie. lib. i.
To the right honorable the Lord ROBERT DVDDELEY Master of the Queens
Majesty's horse, Knight of the noble order, one of the most honorable privy
counsel, and his synguler good Lord and Master. etc.
IF that be true (right honorable) which not only Aristippus the Philosopher,
but all other do confess, that those things are to be taught, practiced and
mainteyned, which in a common weal are most profitable and necessary: Then I
may boldly without just cause of reprehension affirm that Physic is not the
least, but one of the principal to be taught, practiced, and had in honor and
price. And because I will not further wade then my profession extends, I
shall only touch the third part therapeutick called with us Chirurgerie.
This part whether for the antiquity, as the most ancient part of Physic:
or for the necessity and vtilie of it I should most commend, I can not easly
judge. But if we shall believe Cornelius Celsus, or the old writers, we must
of force confess it to be more ancient, then the other two. For before the
time of the Trojan wars, Chiron Centaurus, and Telyphus were of great
renome, and fame, because they had first found the art to cure certain
virulent and malign ulcers (which afterward according to the names of Chiron
and Telyphus) were called Chironia and Telyphea vlcera. In the time of the
Trojans mortal war, Podalirius and Machaon, being under Agamemnon, did
merueylously profit the Soudiours in curing their wounds, taking out of
Darts and things in them fixed, and appliyng healthful plasters and medicines
to the wounded parts. What necessity is of Chirurgerie, or how much
commodity and profit by it ensues, let them answer, which are by the
benefit of this art delivered from pain, preserved from loss and mutilation
of members, and defended from death it self? But here I hold back my pen in
further commending Chirurgerie, least it might justly be answered of your
Lordship to me as was to the Sophiste, who resiting a whole book written in
praise and honor of Hercules, said, who dispiseth Hercules? So in like sort,
your Honor might answer, who dispiseth Chirurgerie? In deed my good Lord,
none dispiseth it which are reasonable, and fewer enemies it should have, if
the Professors them selves (in this our miserable time) were less gredy of
money, and moore diligent to learn their art. And although the malice of
other make me hear to to hold my peace: yet if I may crave your Lordships
supportation in so virtuous an enterprise, I shall not cease to set out some
of the parts of Chirurgerie: that thereby the young and studious Surgians may
be made the abler both to know, and also to exercise their art. And therefore I
have made a book entitled the Institution of a Surgeon: then I show them
a methodicall practice to cure wounds, fractures, and dislocations, in my book
called an Enchiridion of Chirurgerie. And for that I hear that many Surgians
want knowledge of curing wounds made with gonshot (being now at Newhauen,
under the right honorable L. Ambrose Earl of Warwick, your honors most
dear brother) I for their aid have also compiled a treatise containing the
parfite cure of gonshot. In which also I confute ye errors of diverse touching
this question: whether the wound made with gonshot is venomous? last of all
because the young men for want of time have not judgment sufficient, either to
choose out ye best and most convenient medicines, or else to compounde new: I
have made mine Antidotarie, containing the principal and secret medicines
used in Chirurgirie. In which I do not only set out such as the best writers
makes mention of, and I by long experience have found profitable: but also I
do open diverse new, and to other yet unknown of my self invented. Besechynge
most humblye your Lordshyppe, to take these books (the first fruits of my
labors) into your noble protection, and defend both them and me the Author
from the malice of busye Detractours. And I shall not only haste other books,
which I have by me unfinished, but also as my duty requires, pray unto the
Almyghtye for your Lordshyppes long life, perfect health, and daily increase
in honor. At my poor house in London, the sixetenth day of July. 1563.

Your honors most humble and obedient servant Thomas Gale. Chirurgian

W. Cunyngham Doctor in Physic unto his approved friend Thomas Gale, Master
in Chirurgerie, salutations.
WHy cease you master Gale? what keeps back the publishing of your iiij.
books, which with so great travail, and perfect skyll you have so happelye
finished? Does fear of Sycophants and detracting tongues astoyne you? Or the
mistrust of severe judgment at the learned, keep back your honest attempt? Let
these be no impediments I shall desire you, but banishe fear, and put from you
mistrust. And as touching the maleuolent detractors, it either needs not, or
helps not to stand of the^ in dread. Apes vvil ever have apishe properties,
with mocking, movving, and grinning at every person do what you ca^. I my
self have somvvhat tasted of their courtesy, and therefore can better utter
their nature unto you. They be such as for the more part are ignorant the^
selves, or if they bear the face of learning, yet be they arrogant and loiter
in idleness: and therefore to maintein their name, do carpe and reprehend other
men's good labors, thinking thereby among the rude multitude to get them more
fame and honor. These have not so much hindered me with their serpentine
tongues, as made me among the wise and learned, of greater estimation. For
although it be a common saying, yet is it most true, VIRESCIT VULNERE VIRTUES.
But will you eschevve their sting and poison? Be idle then, loyter, regard
neither your duty to God, nor yet to your country. this must of force be
your shift, which how honest it is, be you the Judge your self. But you vvil
say peradventure, you are armed against this sort sufficiently not regarding
their fors: and yet you dread the censure, and judgment of the grave and
learned. Surely these you need least of all other to fear. For like as Apes
can do nothing but apishely: so will the learned do nothing but learnedly,
discretlye, and with great aduisement. They consider by their own
trauailles, that it is no trifling, but great pains to write in any art or
science. And when they read other men's labors, and find perhaps some
errors, they reject not the work, they deface not the author, but think
with them selves HOMINIS EST ERRARE. And if the errors be such as are thought
not tolerable, they will not currishely check: but courteously admonish, or
else with their pen spedely amend it. Seeing therefore that chattering lays may
not prevail against you: and that I have (as I suppose) delivered you of the
mistrust you had in the learned: defer no longer time, nor make no moore
delays. But since your country crave it, your approved friends earnestly look
for it, and your duetye to both these require it: Keep these books no longer
in darkness, but let them taste of light. And as touching your request in your
letters sent to me, to peruse and read your copies, to alter, change and add
as I should think good, I have some what satisfied your expectation herein.
And first I see your great diligence in reading your authors in Chirurgerie,
as Brunus, Theodoricus, Rolandus, Launfrancus, Rogerus, Bartalpalia, Guido de
Cauliaco VVilhelmus Ier. Brunssvvike, Vigo and other. And do also consider
what pain and great difficulty it was, to collect so perfect works, out
of so imperfite authors. I speak it not to their dispraise, they were in the
time of ignorance. But in my simple judgment, if the follovving of Galene,
Auicene, Mesue, and others, of whom in your books you make so often mention
had not stayed you, and your long experience conducted you, you should of force
have fallene into the huge pit of cloudy and most gross errors. Among
which these follovving are not the greatest, but yet not sufferable in any
case. For what man is so mad knovvinge the nerves to be the cause of fealing,
will in wounds of the nerves bydde stitch the same? who is so bold in
great vvou^ds in which there is fixed splentes, shot, arrovve heads, and such
like, to give the Pacient sleep drinks as they call them? who is so rude in
vvounds with gonshot made thorovv a member, as to dravve an hearing rope
through the wound? Or what ignorance appears in them all, in confounding
the names of diseases and miscalling of simples? Does not Guido the best of
these authors rehearsed, call oedema, vndimia? Erysipelas, hirisipela?
scirrhus, scliros? and that which I most marvel at, that he calls
estiomenon (which is herpes exedens) mortem et dissipationem membri, and he
interprets estiomenon, quasi hominis hostem. How far from the matter it
is, and how ridiculous an interpretation, let the learned judge. I loathe to
write them, and repent the lost time in reading them. But these for a taste I
offer, whereby gentle reader thou may the better judge and esteem the
labors of the author our contryma^. Who for his countries sake have spared no
time to travail, nor regarded his great expense. Yea and that which is more,
not his febled old corpse which is very unapt to take so great a thing in hand.
This for my part I dare bouldlye affirm, that never in English was so
perfect works in Chirurgerie set out: and I dought whether in any other
tongue there be in all points any work extant in Chirurgerie which with
these may be compared. For if we shall look first of his institution in
Chirurgerie, how pithylye plainly and compendiously does he set out the hole
body of the art, shovving the definitions, divisions and also apt names of
tumors against nature, wounds, ulcers, fractures, dislocations, and other
like? How diligently instructs he the student in Surgery first in the
theoricke and then in the practicke part? Then the student being thus trained
up and now made apt to practice, he sends him to his Enchiridion in which
is set out the method of curing vvou^ds both in the similer and instrumental
parts, and also such apt medicines as are for the^ conueninent. He does
moreover show the cure of such accidents as do often chance to wounds.
Last, he does open the curing of fractures and dislocations. Furthermore he
has finished a treatise of curyng wounds made with gonshot, in which
learnedly he does confute the long received error that has been maintained for
truth, how that such wounds should be venomous. How pleasant this argument
is, and also profitable, I refer it to thy judgment (gentle reader)
mistrusting nothing, but when you shall way his arguments, with theirs of
the contrary part, you will be wholy of mine opinion. And yet this good
Gale stays not here, nor is fatigate and vveried with these great pains:
but has also finished a golden work, which he calls his Antidotarie: in
which, is comprehended the treasures of Chirurgerie. There shall the
Chirurgian having need of medicines which do repel, attracte, resolve,
mollify, suppurate, mundifie, incarnate, conglutinate, cicatrize (and what is
else requisite to be used in the art) find abundance, as well of those which
are called simple, as also of them which because they stand in the mixture of
diverse simples, are named compou^d. There shall he also with small pain, and
great gain receive in one hour, that which in forty years travail with
no small expense, this Gale has invented and found out. These books are now
perfitly finished. He has moreover in his hands diverse other works (as I
hear) unfinished, as a book entitled a compendious Method of healing tumors
against nature: another, of the true and perfect cure of all kind of ulcers.
Also a nevve translation of Guido de Cauliaco, with certain brief
commentaries upon the same. Besides these: there be other, whose titles I do
not know. Therefore that these may also come to thy use, I shall require
thee to shevve a grateful heart, and thankfully receive that, which he has
with pain finished, and is freely without reward offered. But being
delyghted with the arguments of these books, I am digressed from ansvveryng
the other part of your letter Master Gale. You required me, that since I was
so earnest with you for the publishing of your books: that I would write
somevvhat in the praise and commendation of Chirurgerie. Which thing in mine
opinion were superfluous, when that there can be no greater praise then is
written in your works considering that through the benefit of this art the
vvoundid is made hole, the broken bones united, the Iointes being out of their
natural feat, reducid into their proper places, the hough and painful tumores
expelled, and the virulent and malign ulcers (which does eat and devour the
members of man no less then mothes do clothes, and fire that is put to it) are
vanquished and ouercom. Be not these great benefits? and such as needs not
the co^mendatio^ of other? But yet if these vvil not satisfy you, at the next
setting out of other of your labors if this my vveake body may recover
strength (I) vvil to my power satisfy your expectation. In the mean time: I
bid you well to fare, and remember your white hears are massengers to
admonish you that you must leave this world, and repair to the heavenly
Chirurgian Christ. And therefore have you for the time that remains, and
finishe those works which you have in your hands. Again fare you well:
and love your Cunyngham as you have begone.

At my house in London the.28. of May 1563.
Tho. Gale Chirurgian, to the Frindly readers Salutations in Christ Jesus, etc.
IT was not without great skill and knowledge, that the wise and learned Grecia^s
did call man by the name of Microcosmos, which is as much to say with us, as the
lesser world. for the greater world (in Greek, cosmos) does consist of the
heavenly, and elementarie region. And the lesser world (being man) does under
God, reule and govern what so ever is them contained. and applies them to his
use and profit, and if we shall begin first, with that most meruaylous hand
work of God, I mean the beautiful heauenes, so wou^derfully adorned and
decked with most confortable lights: what else shall we judge, but that he
rules them, when being placed so far from them distant, does diligently and
truly note and observe, not only there motions, ascentions, discentions,
progressions, retrogradations, stations, deuiations, declinations,
conjunctions, and sundry configurations: but also marketh what mutations,
alterations, and effects, they cause in the elementarie region, whereby he is
taught to take that which may be to his profit and gain: and eschew, or else
mitigate and equally bear, what is thereto contrary. and here of it came to
pass, that the great Astrotagian, Claudius Ptolomaeus durst boldly affirm
that The wise, by Prudence and good skyll.
Shall rule the sterres to serve his will.


Yea, and the wise Philosophers and Poets, which did deapely, and with no
small judgment behold the figure and shape of man: how he only among all
living creatures looked upward to the heavens, they did constantly affirm,
that only for that cause he had given to him such countenance, and that right
eloquently the Poet sits out in these few verses.

Pronaque cum spectant animalia caetera quaeque
Os homini sublime dedit, caelumque videre
Iussit, and erectos ad Sydera tollere vultus.
Where all things that do breath,
Do on the earth there looks cast:
God when man he did make
gave him so great a grace:
On Son, Moon, and eke Sterrys.
That he his eyes might fast:
Also to vein the sky.
And that with upright face.
And here by the way I gather, that this countenance was not given man only to
gape, gase, stare, and toote an the heavens: but wyselye to consider the
wounderful form and frame hereof, how incessantly it torneth, and moves
abought the center of the earth. and that the heavens are as fresh and lusty
at this present to fulfill there course, as at there first creation. and that he
by considering them, might confess that there is a God, who rules them, and
has made them to his use and profit. but let that past and cume we unto the
elementarie region. What thing is there in contained which he governs not, and
takes of them profit. the wyndes he gathers in a small compass, and by the
forse of them, he romneth and walks on the hough Seas as on the land. The
fyshes in the greates depes he brings to his hands. the fowls of the air
for all there swyfnes of wings, he gets for his pray. Yea he subdueth one
foul, and teaches it to bring diverse others unto him. Example of the hawk,
and the partrich. such is the divine wisdom, and great pour given to this
little world, man, what? does he not subdue the most strong and ferse
beasts, and over run those that are most swyfte? the horse being a
coragious and proud beast, for all his strenth, swyftnes, and forse in his
houys, does he not bridle and tame, and rydeth on him like an Emperor and
governor? The mighty Lion for all his strength, is made captive and subject.
the heart, and hare, for all there swyfnes, he ouertaketh. and to conclude, what
beast is it whom man has not, or can not bring in subjection? What say you
to the venomous serpents, scorpions, toades, and such as are poison to human
nature, which man does not only vanquishe: but of them makes healthful
medicines to expel grievous infirmities. I omit for brevity, the innumerable
trees, plants, fruits, herbs, rotes, gummes stowes, mettalls, and earthes,
whose secret natures he has found out, whose virtues he has tried, and whose
substance he does rightly use for his commodity and wealth. What arts has he
invented, what scienciens found, and mysteries set out? so that of right as I
suppose, I may call man microcosmos, and the lesser world. But me think I
hear one demand, to what end is this long tale of man set out. Forsooth
that you may riply and duly consider what a noble and excellent substance man
is of, who is the subject and matter on which the Phisician and Chirurgian do
work. but as touching the Phisician I have nothing to say, and therefore of
the Chirurgian I purpose somewhat to utter. both to warn this microcosmos man,
of those who under the name of Chirurgians be nothing else but open murderers,
and also to deface these rude Emperikes, and to prick fowarde the right
Chirurgian. and that you may the easelier conceive that which I go abought, it
behooves you to know, that surgery is most hard and difficultye to
attain unto, and is also a long art, and requires long time in learning,
and also exercisyng: as both the princes of Physic Hippocrates and Galen do
testify: and all wise men do also confess. for how can it be but difficil
and long, when the Chirurgian must consider so many diverse temperatures of
men, and hyd and secret effects, and properties of nature in them grafted.
Wherefore does one love porke, an other hates it as poison. some abhor
chese, some fruit, and other some wine? Wherefore does one concocte and digest
meat most hard to concocte: an other is not able with out long time to digest
the easiest and lightest meats? Wherefore is one by drinkinge of wine made
loose bodied, and soluble: where an other man can not have that benefit, no not
with strong and vehement laxatiues? furthermore, Chirurgirie for the greater
part consists in right use of profitable experime^ts: which require both
long time in the finding of them out, and also in obteynyng there right use.
and lest you may obiecte that one may receive experiments of other that are
learned, and so easily obtain the art: I must say that the right use can not
so easily be obtained. for to that, is required that both the Chirurgian
himself be learned and wise: and furthermore that he sees other Chirurgians of
long experience work, and put those experime^ted medicines in other right
use. This also makes the art longer, for that there spring new infirmities in
our days unknown to them before our time. What say you to Chamaeleontiasis,
vulgarly named morbus gallicus? Who ever have written of the nature cause, and
accidents of it? which is the occasion that so many miserablye have dyed, and
daily perish of it: and those that have received health, have been so small a
number. again the art is longer to us English men, then to other, when as we
are first constrained to learn the latin tongue before we can attain the
minds of those who wright of Chirurgirye. there be diverse other things which
also makes the art long: which for that I will not be tedious, I commit to thy
discretion to consider. Now this I conclude, if the subject of Chirurgirye be
so noble and excellent a creature: the art must also be noble and excellent,
which teaches to work on it. if the art be excellent, then it follows that
it is difficult and hard. again, if it be long: then it requires a long time
in the obteyning thereof, if then that the subject of Chirurgiry be so noble,
the art so excellent and difficill: and so long a time required in the getting
thereof: thou may easelye judge that the rabble of these rude Emperikes (and
dross of the earth which when they can not otherwise live choppe strayst
ways in to the art of Chirurgirye) be no Chirurgians: but manquillers,
murderers, and robbers of the people: such are some hosiers, taylours,
fletchers, mynstrelles, souters, horsheches, Iuglers, wiches, sorceres, bands,
and a rabble of that sect: which would by laws be driven from so divine an
art, the exercise of which for want of knowledge, brings some time loss of
member, some time of life, and some time both of lymme and life. Wherefore I do
admonish the friendly reader, what so ever thou art, that have need of
Chirurgirye, not to trust every runagate, and him that called him self a
Chirurgian: but consider whether he be learned or not, demand of him some
questions of his art (which if thou can not do of thy self, thou shall find
diverse in my book entitled, the Institution of a Chirurgian) which if he
answers them thou may be the boulder to commit thy self to to him.
otherwise trust him not, though he says he have cured an hundred of that
infirmity. for experimentu^ fallax, experime^tes are deceyuable. now seeing by
these few lives, you may conjecture what a divine and excellent art
Chirurgirye is, and how thou may discern and know the right Chirurgian from
the murtherynge and bursserly Emperike, I think it good in few words to set
out unto thee, what caused me to publishe these few and simple labors of
mine. There ware two things which moved and styrred me hereto (loving reader)
the first was the discharge of my talent toward God, and duty to my native
country: the second was to help my Brethren Chirurgians who although they
are desirous to attain there art, yet both because it is so long, and not set
out in our usual language, they are frustrat of there desire, and the
comonwelth unfurnished of men of this profession. wherefore musinge long with
my self, what part of the art I might best set out, as most necessary for
them, and most spedely to attain the art: I found none more convenient then
first to wright an institution of a Chirurgian, in which he might learn ye
theorike part and principles of the art: which when as I had finished and
brought to an end: I did not think good there to stay, but thought also it a
necessary thing to compile form tretise, comprehending the practice of some
parts of the art. Wherefore I did set pen to paper, and wrotte an Enchiridion
of Chirurgirye, contaynyng the method and way to cure wounds, both in similer
and instrumental parts, and eke fractures and luxations, with a new way, of
stanchyng flux of blod with out cauterizen yrons by a powder diuisyd by master
Perpoint and me, wha^ as any membre is taken of from the body, and is now in
the hospitalles of London used to the great comfort of the sick people, and
sauegarde of there lives, where commonly before they perished and decade. and
whil I thought hear to have stayed, behoulde wars followed, and controversy
arose wether the cure of wounds made with common gonnepouder and shot ware
like to inuenomed wounds, or else wounds contused, which controuercye to
decyde I thought for the time necessary. and have compiled a little volume
confutynge the adversaries opinions, and establishynge mine own, and yet
further wayeng what want the Chirurgians had of good and approved medicines
belonging to there art, I did take out of the best authors, such as might
serve herein there necessary use, addinge thereto such expert medicines as I
had both invented and proved. and this book I have called my Antidotarie. all
which.iiij. books, I shall require thee hartelye to take in so good part, as
I do offer with free heart, and love to profit, both the and other. and hear,
I may not forget master Doctor Cunnyngham, who was no small help to me in
diuising the arguments, and perusynge the copies written, whose trauelles in
this behalf I commend to thy tha^kful mind loving reader. there now reasteth
no more, but to commit my works with my self unto thy Judgment prayeng
thee where the errors have escaped, both to pardon the same, and also to give
me warning of them. thus Doing thou shall encorage me duringe life according
to my small knowledge, to travail in this my vocation.

Fare hartelye well loving Reader, at my poor house in London, the.xij. day
of September. 1563.
An Institution of a Chirurgian, containing the sure Grounds and Principles
of Chirurgerie most necessary and mete for all those that will attain the
art perfectly: for whose cause it is compiled by Thomas Gale, master in
Chirurgerie.

Theorica pars.

printer's device of Rouland Hall

PRINTED AT LONdon by Rouland Hall, for Thomas Gale. 1563.

THOMAS GALVS CHIRVRGVS-ANGLVS AETATIS SVE 56.
portrait of Thomas Gale

Thomas Gale Chirurgian UNTO THOSE THAT desire the knowledge of Chirurgerye
gretinge. etc.
TWO things their are (sore to be lamented which chiefly have brought the
most noble and ancient art of Chirurgerie to extreme decay and ruin: one is
that every person good and badde, learned and unlearned, Chirurgian or no
Chirurgian, do without penalty and correction of laws frelye take on them
the practice of Chirurgerie. the other thing is, that the Chirurgians them
selves (I speak for the greater number) are unworthy professors. The first
we can not redress, but lament: the second somewhat we both can and will
labor to amend. For the greatest number of Chirurgians (I mean those that
are their unto laufully called) are so rude and unskillful in their art,
because they have no method, no exact way, or yet order in learning the
grounds and principles of Surgery, either set out of any author whom they
are able to understand: or else taught of their masters and tutours, of
whom they should be instructed. So that they are confused in their studies, and
make rather a rude chaos then a perfect art of Chirurgerye. For now it is
come to this point, that if they can get this recepte, and that recepte as
they term it, they think they need no futher stodye. So that the more
receptes he has, the greater Chirurgian he thinks him self to be: such
ignorance now raygnes, that recepts bears the bell: theorike of Chirurgerye
is quit forsaken, or not regarded. For if you shall come to one of these great
masters with their rereptes, and ask him what Surgery is, what is the
subject to Chirurgerye, what is the end of Chirurgerye, how many parts
does Chirurgerye consyste on: they are constrained to be silent and say mum, or
if any be inpudent and speak, he gives but a ridiculous answer. and yet we
will think a man not mete to be called an artiste or worekman, which cannot
tell (being required) what his art is which he professes: although he has
never so many instruments and toales. For the art consysteth in the right
use of the instruments, and not only in having them. Which use is gotten
first by learning the art, and then by exercisynge the same. And to learn the
art, is required a Method and Order: for with out it, you shall never
exactelye attain the same. Wherefore we now according to our small pour
and simple knoweledge, wayinge the promysses, and hartelye wisshynge the
redress of the same: have set out the Theorike part of Chirurgrye in this
present volume containing the principles and sure grounds of the art, in
such order and method as shall be most convenient for the young student. And
if I have not here in performed that which I desired: yet I have given
occation to those that are better learned, to set out a more perfytte work
of this argument. And I thought good to make it Dialogue wise for that it is
most apt to teach and instruct by. For by this means, all doubts may be
both demanded, and also answered fullye. And for because it is the first
Book that one must read which will learn the art, I have named it the
Institution of a Chirurgian, in which he shall see not only what his art
is, but also what manner a person he must be him self: and what conditions are
in him required. further more what instruments he must be garnished with, and
how he shall in time and place use them rightly to the profit of the
paciente, honor of this art, and his own worship. Wherefore their rests
no more, but that you take these my labors tha^kfully, and read them
diligently. Far hartelye well: and forgette not to spend thy time to the
profit of the common weal.

At my house in London the 20. day of May. 1563.
AN INSTITVTION OF A CHIRVRGIAN, CONTAINING The sure Grounds and Principles of
Chirurgiry, by Thomas Gale. etc.
The Interloquutors. Io. Yates. Tho. Gale. Ioh. Field. Chirurgians. John Yates.
PHoebus who chasith away the dark and vnconfortable night: castinge his
goldyne beams on my face, would not sofer me to take any longer sleep: but
said awake for shame, and behold the handy work of our sister Flora, how she
has reuested the earth with most beautyfull colors, meruaylouslye set in
trees, plants, herbs, and flowers: in so much that the old and wetheryd cote
of winter, is quite done away, and put out of remembrance, at which words of
Phoebus, my heart quickened in me, and all desire of sleep was eftsoon
forgotten, Wherefore I am now cumme into this beautiful mydowe to recreate my
self, and gather some of those pleasant herbs, and flowers, which here do
grow. But let me see? me think I perceive.ij. men walkinge to gether and
reasonynge also very earnestlye. I will aproche nearer unto them, perchance
they be of my acquaintance: Suerly I should know them. I am deceived if the
one be not my friend master Gale, and the other master Feilde. It is so in
dead. Wherefore I will go and salute them. God that has brought us together in
to this place, make this day prosperous and fortunate unto you both.


Tho. Gale, Brother Yates the same we wish unto you, and you are welcome into
our company.


John Feilde. This fair and pleasant morning, will not soffer master Yates to
keep his bed: but leuynge the city, he rometh the feildes, to epsy out some
strange herbs, unto him yet unknown.


John Yates. I must of force confess, that you do hitte the nail on the
head: but sense my hap is so fortunate, as to mete with you both, and that
now in this pleasant morning: I would leave of my former determinyd purpose,
and require you to enter into some talk of Chirurgerye. For sens you both ware
brought up under Master Ferris (being now Sergeant Cherurgian, unto the
Queen's Majesty) one at whom both for his knowledge, and experience, you did
not a lytleprofite: and also that you have had long practice your selves: you
should meruaylouslye pleasure me, and profit other, for so may it come to
pass, that it might be in the place of an Institution unto those that shall
here after desire the knowledge of Chirurgerye.


Tho. Gale. Your request is honest, and reasoble: and therefore not to be denied.


John Field. We wax abought the like thing when as you saluted us, wherefore
renewyng our first talk, we will accomplish your desire.


John Yates, I have read many author in Chirurgerie, and yet find small
profit by them.


Thomas Gale. What be the names of your authors.


John Yates. Theodoricus, Brunus, Lanfrancus, Rolandus, Rogerus, Bartilpalia,
Vvilhelmus, Guido, Brunsvvicke, and Vigo.


John Feilde. What part of Hippocrates, Galene, Auicenne, Paulus, Rhasis,
Albucasis, and Haliabbas, have you read? these be of greter authority, and of
whom you shall learn sound doctrine.


John Yates. With these I have not ben much acquaynted.


Tho. Gale. Well, then the next way is that you do put out such questions
as you would have answered, and stand in doubt: and also answer to that which
shall be demanded.


John Yates. right gladly, for there is no way by which I shall so much, and
in so short a time profit.


John Feilde. Truth it is, wherefore let us begin with out further detractynge
of time.


Tho. Gale. Then seeing our talk shall wholly be the institution of a
Chirurgian, it ware mete, and convenient first to understand what Surgery
is. Wherefore answer me I pray you, what call you Chirurgirie?


John Yates. Guido de Cauliaco (in his book which he calls his Collectorie)
defines it in this sort. Chirurgirie is a part of terapentike helinge men by
infition, vstion, and articulation.


John Feilde. Those words, are taken out of a book ascribyd to Galen, being
entitled Introductio, seu Medicus. But he should not have called it corruptly
terapenticke, but therapeuticke. For Therapeuticon is that part of physic,
which curyth. this part consists either in curyng by convenient diet: either
by medicyne: or else by outward use of the hand. there Galen (or he that was
author of the book above said) affirms how ye which healith by the hand,
is a portion of the curatiue part. this helps men by incisions, vstions, and
reducinge the bones into their natural seat.


Tho. Gale. Yet this is no perfect definition of Chirurgerie, because the
definition does not contain in it so much, as to Chirurgerie is required.


John Yates. Then you shall here an other definition out of Guido. He says
that Surgery is said of this greek word Ciros, which signifies an hand:
and Gyos that is work, or operation: as who sholdd say, Chirurgerie is the
science of workynge by the hand: how like you this definition?


John Feilde. Worse then the other, both for yt it is no definition, but only
the signication of the name: and also for that Ciros and Gyos, be no greek
words, which should show, that either Guido was no grecian, or else that his
works are corruptyd.


Tho. Gale. Truth it is, for Chirurgia, is deriuid Apo tes cheiros cai tou
ergou, but both the description of Chirurgerie, and also the Etymology and
signification of the name, does right well show what Chirurgerye is: although
it be no answer to our demand.


John Yates. Then I pray you let me learn at your hands, what is the true and
essential definition of Chirurgorye.


Tho. Gale. Right gladly. Galene in his book of medicinal definitions, says
that Chirurgerye is the quick and ready motion of steadfast hands with
experience: or an artificial action in physic, done by the hands: whereby is
obtained the desiered scope. So that you may by these words hither to aledgyd
out of the introduction, and the book of medicinal definitions, form a
definition on his wise. Surgery is the art, which curyth those
infirmities, and grefes of man's body, which are to be done by right use, and
application of the hand.


John Feilde. In this definition is to be notyd, that Surgery does not cure
al greifes which require help of the hand: but only such as are curable.
Also it is to be understand, though in the definition is put no other ways of
curing those grefes, but by the right use of the hand, yet Chirurgerie has
need both of that part which curith by diet, and of that which helps by
medycine. As is most evident and clear in great inflammations, and also in
those bodies in which Cacochimia (that is to say ill Iuse) is found, where the
humors are defilyd and corruptyd.


John Yates. Then it should seem that Surgery is so joined to the other two
parts, that it can not be well seperatyd from them: although they be now two
distinct arts.


Tho. Gale. Truth it is, and in the beginning, physic and Surgery ware
both one: and one man exercised both, for so did the princes of physic
Hippocrates and Galene.


John Yates. Then I perceive that Chirurgerie is not so base, as it is taken
for: and that it is of great antiquity, being the most ancient part of
physic, and was exercisyd of Emperors, Kings, Philosophers, and Phisicians.


John Feilde. The baseness of it, and eke small estimation, comyth of the
vnleterrid and rude Emperikes: who takyth on them the office of a Chirurgian,
when as they know nothing less, then what Surgery means. but as
touching the antiquity of Surgery, you shall not beleaue us, but regard the
words of Cornelius Celsus (which are written in his.vij. book) who says.
Haec pars cum sit vetustissima, magis tamen ab illo parente omnis Medicinae
Hippocrate, quam a prioribus, exculta est. This part of Physic (says Celsus
being the most ancient, yet it was more increasyd by Hippocrates (the father
of all Physic) then of al those that ware before his time. Here you may
perceive, that it is the most ancient and eldyst part.


Tho. Gale. The same Celsus also sets out certain noble persons who daily
more, and more, did augment the art, for it did florishe in Aegypte by reason
that Philoxenus did exercise it. Also Gorgias, Sostratus, Hieron, the two
Apollonij, and Hammonius of Alexander. At Rome also Tryphon and Euelpistius,
and Neges ware right excellent in Chirurgerie: and by there learned works, did
cause the art not a little to florishe. Podalirius, and Machaon (the sons of
Aesculapius) being with Agamemnon, in the Trojan wars, cured the woundyd
Soudiours: as Homere the Greek Poet affirms.


John Field. All these as you say ware right excellent in Surgery: and
famous also, chefely for curing of wounds, and ulcers. In like sort, was
Chiron Centaurus, and Achilles, with diverse other.


John Yates. Seeing that I have learned that Surgery is the.iij. part
therapentike, what Chirurgiry also is, of the antiquity, and authors of the
same: I would gladly understand of how many parts it does consist and stand
on.


Tho. Gale. It has.ij. parts: the one called Theorike, containing the
speculation and knowledge, the other Practike, which is the manual operation
and exercise. The theorike part, is obtained by demonstration, and exact
knowledge of the principles of the art, and this, both does inuente, and
teach what is to be done, which way, and also by what means. This part a
man may perfectlye know, although he never does exercise any portion of the
practike. the practicke part is found out and inuentyd by reason and
experience, and it does rightly, and redelye exercise the same things, that
the Theorike has inuentyd. This part no man can exactly obtain, except that
both he does se other which are skylfull in the art to work: and also
diligently exerseth it him self ever bearing firmly in mind, both what he
have seen of other men brought to good end, and what he have also done him
self.


John Yates. Then saying that you have uttered unto me how many parts of
Chirurgirye there are: I pray you first begin with the Teorike part of it,
and let me understand exactlye what it is, and that being finishyd, proceed
to the practicke.


John Field. To set out the theorike it will by profitable: but as touching the
practicke it ware both superfluous and vain, seeing yt the perfect curing of
apostemes, and tumors, are set out in the book of tumoures against nature,
also the true and exact cure of ulcers, is at large opened in an other work,
whose title is a perfect and exact method of curing ulcers. Furthermore the
practice of healing wounds both in similer and isntrumental parts, also of
fractures, and luxations: you shall find in his Enchiridion of Chirurgerie.
And as touching wounds made with the common gunpowder and pellet, you shall
receive the true and methodicall cure, in a tretise berynge name of curing
wounds made with gonshotte, in which treatise is set out, and also
manifestlye confuteted, the gross and fond errors not only of John Vigo,
Alfonce Ferrius, and Hier. Brunvvicke (which make the shote venomous, and
consequentlye the wound therewyth made, and so the cure to be like as is in
venomous wounds:) but also by demo^stration he ouertroweth al those, that be
of that opinion. So that for the practicke part, I do not se what is more to
be desired: except it ware some treatise, in which might be comprehended the
art of phlebotomic or lettynge of blood, and also of scarification, and
boxinge which I hope (God granting him life) he will hereafter set out.


John Yates. These be a number of worthy books, which do contain the
practice of so worthy an art. God grant you long life master Gale, to
accomplish that you have yet behind.


Tho. Gale. Although some perchance more busy then learned: and yet more
learned, then discrete and modeste, and yet parhappes more destrete and modest,
then a favor of those that trauayleth for the profit, and utility of other:
have not a little lifted up the groyne, and bent the brow, and with manifest
words of contumely rewarded me: yet the love of my country, and desire to
profyt those of my profession: shall ever be a sufficient spur, to provoke me
to continue as I have begone, for true it is that the Poet Pertius writes.

Foelix a tergo quem nulla Ciconia pinxit. Which may right well be
englyshed, although not verbatim yet in meaning on this or like sort.

O happy man that such hap have,
Thy path to tread so right:
That no serpentyne tungue will carpe,
Or longbild Storke eke Spite.
But return we to that, from whence we are somewhat digressed, our talk, and
communication at this present shall not further extend then to institute the
Chirurgian in the theoricke part of his art. Wherefore sense you have learned
what Chirurgerie is, with diverse other apt, and needful things: it does
behoue you to know the subject of Chirurgerye. For all Artistes and workmen
have their subjects, and matter on which they do exercise there art. So the
Mason has stones, and bryckes, which according to his art, he heweth,
squareth, cutteth, and proportioneth. In like sort does the Carpenter with
Wood, and Timber and the Smyth with iron. All which be accounted subjects to
these arts. And if the Mason Carpenter and Smythe, be so curious and dilygent,
in knowing, chosyng, and considering of stones, timber, and iron, which be
things of no great valor or estimation: how much more then behooves it the
Chirurgian to know what the subject is on which he must exercise his art?


John Yates. You have ryghtlye said, and by these your words I gather, that
the subject to the art of Chirurgirie, is that which is to Physike: I mean
man's body being apt as well to sycknes and infyrmities, as also to health.


John Field. You have ryghtlye answered, but this is not sufficient to
answer that man's body is that stone, timber, yrone and matter whereon the
Chirurgian must exercise his art: except you also do know the parts of
man's body, there situation, nature, and office. as of bones, cartilagies
ligamentes, Nerves, veins, arteries, muscles, flesh, and skin. For I think
no man is so rude but does consider, that without the perfect knowledge of
these, how easily he shall fall into intollorable errors, especially in
phlebotomye, in fractures, and luxations, and where as occasion is offered to
make incision.


John Yates. The more I here you two speak of Chirurgirye, the further me
think I find my self from the knowledge thereof. And so much the rather,
that by your words I gather how that the subject and matter of Chirurgerye
(being the body of man) cannot be fully known, without the exercise of the
Anotomye. Wherefore I cannot a little marvel at some, who being Chirurgians
in name, do not only neglecte this knowledge of Anotomye: but also Inuieth
those that do therein travail.


Tho Gale. Well let such go with there wilful blindness, and obstinate
ignorance, and let us now consider what the end of Surgery is.


John Feilde. I suppose that master Yates knows that the end or intention
of Surgery, is to heal all such curable infirmities, as are to be cured by
the office and dew administration of the hand.


John Yates. I render to you both hearty thanks, for that by your talk I have
learned what Chirurgiry is, the antiquity of it, and noble authors that did
profess it, of how many parts it does consiste on, also what is the subject
or matter on which the Chirurgian does exercise his art, and what is the end
or final intention of Chirurgerye: now I will further desire you to show me
the way to proceed in learning and obteyning this noble and famous art.


Thomas Gale. Before we set out the way how to attain the knowledge of
Chirurgerie, it is convenient to show what manner a man a Chirurgian should be
whom we should instruct in this art. For manifest it is, that all men are
not to be admitted unto this mysterye.


John Field: Truth it is for according to the proverb. The devil made a
souter a shypman. signifying here by that nature repugning all thing is in
vain How unapt and vnfyte think you, is a swyne to be taught to hunte:
suerly as unapt, as a hounde is apt and fytte: but in the admission of one to
learn our art, is to be noted the gifts of nature, and also education from
his infancye. For if men exercising arts of less estimation and price, do
with dilygent care chose such as are fytte for their facultye and art: how
much more ought he Chirurgian so to do?


Tho. Gale, It is suerly so and the gifts of nature required in him that
should be a Chirurgian Cornelius Celsus does name to be these. He must be a
young man, having a sure and steadfast hand, void of trimblyng, and that he
has the use of the left hand, as well as of the right, a sharp and quick
slighte, one void of all fear, without folyshe pity: so that he be no moved
any thing by the clamor and noise of the patient. but minding to cure him,
whom he takes in hand, he shall neither haste more then is meet, or yet make
less incision then is requisite. Hippocrates in a hook entitled Lex
Hippocrates, speaks of him that shall learn Phisycke in this sort, Quisquis
enim medicam scientiam vere sibi comparare volit, hijs Ducibus, voti sui compos
fiet. Natura, Eruditione, Loco studiis apto, Institutione a pueritia, Industria
and tempore. Primo nanque omnium, natura est opus. Hac etenim repugnante vrita
fiunt omnia. at si ad optima viam natura demo^stret, artis eruditio facile
eueniet: quam quidem prudentia sibi comparet oportet, ita vt ab ipsa pueritia
institutio accedat, atque hoc in loco disciplinis quidem conuenienti. Praeterea
operam sedulo nauare oportet: eamque ad longum certe tempus, quo ipsa iam
insita disciplina, foeliciter satis, and cum profectu fructus suos ferat.
Whosoever (says Hippocrates) will learn the art of Phisycke, following these
guides he shall have his define. Nature, learning, an apt place for stodye,
good bryngyng up from the chyldhoode, diligence, and time. For first of all
nature is to be looked for. For nature repugnynge, all things are frustrat.
But if that nature be inclyned unto the best things, the knoweledge of the
art will easily follow, which it behooves to get through prudence, so that
from the chyldehoode he be well trained up, and that in a place apt for
stodye. further more he must bestow great dilygence, and that for a long
time, so that learning (being now grafted in him) may happelye, and that
with increase bring forth her fruits. And Hippocrates resembles the stody
of Phisycke unto agriculture or tyllage. For (says he) what consyderation is
of those things which the earth brings out, the like in all points is of
the knowledge of Phisycke. For our nature is as it ware the feilde, the
disciplynes of teachers, are like the seades: also the institution and
bringynge up from the childhode, is resembled to the casting of seade into the
ground in dew and convenient time, the place in which he must learn, is as
it were the air gyuinge norishment to such things, as spring out of the
ground. The industry and diligence bestowed in the art, is like the tyllage
of the plowman, and last of all, time does strengthen these, and suffers
them perfectlye to be norished. And of this time speaks also the poet.


Assiduo illisu durum cauat Vndula Saxum.
The watery drops, so moist and Soft
Does pearse hard Stones with falling often.
John Yates. If this should be observed among phisicians, I do not doubt but
their should be more famous men among us, and fewer rude and bussardlye
Emperickes: but this touches nothing the Chirurgian.


John Feilde. As much as the Phisician, for do you not remember, that
Hippocrates comprehended Chirurgirye under Physic being one portion of the
curatiue part?


Tho. Gale. Also as touching education Hyppocrates in his book called De
Medico. would have a Chirurgian follow the wars. For he speaking of the other
parts of Physycke says. Next is the Chirurgerye of wounds received in the
wars, and extraction of darts and things in them fyxed. For seldom cyuill
and instestine divisions chance in all times, yet in externe and outward
wars, these chance most commonly. Wherefore he that will use this
Surgery, it behooves him to frequent the wars, and follow outward armies,
and hosts of men. For so shall he be exercised for that necessitye and use.


John Feilde. In deed so did Podalirius, Machaon, and Achilles, with other more
of whom mention is made.


John Yates. Yea but many Chirurgians will not occupye themselves in learning
those parts of which they have daily exercise. Much less then couit to
follow the wars, they have not such a burning zeal unto their art.


Thomas Gale. The more pitye, not for their cause, but for the commonweals.


John Yates. If all these points are required in him that should be a
Chirurgian (as I must confess they are) how happens it, that their are an
infinite number of Chirurgians in name, which have scarce one of these
fornamed, gifts. And if they have any, it is boldness, for that wants not in
them, they are as boulde, as blind bayerd.


John Feilde. Yea but where Celsus praises bouldnes in a Chirurgian, he
means the virtue called fortitude, which where as necessytie does require,
is not moved with the tears, countenance, and clamor either of the pacient or
of the standers by: but minding the health of the sick, according to art
makes incision, and does such like things.


Thomas Gale. And to answer you, why their are such a sort of rude
Emperickes yea Hosiers, Taylours, fletchers, Minstrales, Souters, Iogelers,
wiches, baudes, and to conclude (an infinite number which hertofore ware
prohibited the exercise of this art) such as other wise cannot get any
living: is for that Chirurgerie is now, as it was in the time of Hyppocrates.
Who says that other arts are not exercised without laws, and penalties: but
Chirurgerye is free for all persons, the more is the pitye, when as so much
hurt and damage do daily spryng, through the abuse of so noble an art. so
that I am more then half persuaded, that Chirurgerye will hardlye, or never
gather strength again, and florishe: except the prince having compassion of
poor deplorated Chirurgerye, does by virtue of laws drive away from her,
these here forenamed enemies.


John Yates. But yet I do marvel at those, which are as it were Chirurgians
by profession, knowing themselves void of a number of the points required in
a Chirurgian, that for love to their contrye, and conscience sake: they will not
yet at the least chose such servants, as had some of the fornamed virtues.
Which if they did, their were yet some hope that Chirurgirie should hereafter
floryshe.


John Feilde. Their answer is, that when the skey fall we shall have larkes.
They think that they should not have servants to serve in that vocation. For
few say they, that have well brough up there son, will put him to the art,
vecause it is accounted so beggarly, and vile. Where as in dead if for a season
they would take the more pains them selves, and admit none, but such as
should be somewhat meet, there would be a nombre glade to study the art, because
it would come to estimation, and be a worshipful living to the professer.
But shall I show you what I think is the chief cause: science has no greater
enymie, then Ignorance, and also the proverb is true, like will always to the
like, and hereof comith it, that such carpenter such chippes, such master
such man.


John Yates. Yet me thinks that one may be a good Chirurgian, though he
have not all the points reconyd of Hippocrates and Celsus. As one might think
himself right happy, though he never did attain to Aristoteles summum bonum,
or Plato his Idaea.


Tho. Gale. It is one thing to say a good Chirurgian, and an other to say an
excellent Chirurgian. But let that pass, I would we had good Chirurgians. And
because the descriptions of Hippocrates and Celsus touching what manner a man a
Chirurgian should be) seems somewhat to strait to you: I will show you what
conditions Guido requires in him. Not for that I do prefer the authority of
Guido, before such fathers and parents of Chirurgirye, as both Hippocrates and
Celsus ware, but because perhaps Crassa crassis conueniunt magis. Guido
requires.iiij. things in him that is or should be a Chirurrurgian. First
that he should be lettered, secondly that he should be expert, thyrdlye that he
be ingenious, and last that he be virtuous and well maneryd. These words you
shall find in his Collectorie.


John Field. And as touching these.iiij. points note first where Guido says he
must be lettered, he does mean he should be learned, and that chefelye in
such doctrine as is in his art requisite. That is at the lest, that he can
wright, red, and understand the mind of latyne author. If he had knowledge
in geometry for making his incision, for curing fractures, and luxations,
and also in curinge malignant ulcers: knowing what figure would most
spedelye unite, and Join the lyppes of the vlcere: it ware very commendable.
Natural Philosophy is a goodlye ornature to the Chirurgian, for it shows
him what resulteth when as there is diverse and sundry simples mixed to gether:
but I will go to the second point, he must be expert, that is he must be
garnished with much and long experience, which is excogitated be firm and
certain reasons, and by them also confirmed, otherwise he is to be accounted
rude, and an Empericke, if he has not reason annexed and joined to his
experience. Thirdlye says Guido. He must be ingenious, unto which there are
five things principally required. First is the redye and good conceyuynge:
then a firm and sure memory, next a sound and right judgment, after a
easey calling things to mind which he have hard or seen, and last a
lyuelye and sharp redynes in finding and inuentynge remedies. The manners
which Guido would have in a Chirurgian are reconed of Hippocrates and Celsus,
which briefelye I will number: they must be bold and with out fear in such
cures as are with out peril, and whereas necessitye requires. Also in cures
that be doutful, not to be to raishe and hasty. to be gentle and courtyous
toward the sick pacient, to be frendlye and loving, toward those of his
profession. Also wise and circunspecte in Prognostications, last of all, he
must be chaste and temperate of body, merciful toward the pore, and not to
gredy of money. and this is sufficient touching the description of him, that
must be admitted in Chirurgerye. Now let us talk of the instruments
wherewith a Chirurgian ought to be garnished.


John Yates. That is well said and of those instruments I would gladly have
understanding.


Tho. Gale. And so you shall, and for the suerer and sounder doctrine, you must
note that instruments are said two manner of ways. for either thy are
medicinal, or else instruments of metal: as Iron, lead, tynne, copper, silver,
and gold, ye medicinal instruments are medicines, as potio^s, emplastres,
cataplasmes, cerotes, vnguentes, oils, Balmes, trochise, waters, and such
other. but principally as touching unguents the Chirurgian (after Guido his
mind) ought always to have in redines, v. sundry vnguentes aunswering to five
intentions curatiue of Chirurgirie, that is to say: for to suppurate and
maturate, he must have Basilicon, to mundifie and cleanse, Apostolicon. To
incarnate and cause flesh to grow, he shall prepare Vnguentum Aureum. To
conglutinate with, he shall use Vnguentum Album. And where as any accidence
chance, as dolor and pain, he shall occupye Vnguentum Dialthaeum. But I
shall not need to make any longer process of medicinal instruments, when as
I have as I suppose abundantlye showed in my Antidotarye not only all the
principal intentions curatiue required in Chirurgirye: but also have set out
medicinal instruments both simple and compounde, required in this art: as
also their compositions use and virtues. Their are also set out proper
medicynes, dicated and apted to the several parts of man's body as head,
breast, stomach, longes, liver, spleen, kydnes, bladder, and such like, as is
proved of Galen in his work entitled Secundu^ locos Although many be of the
contrary opinion. And among the rest I will show you a notable historye, I
think to many known, as well Physicians and Chirurgians, as other
worshipful and honest. It fortuned that in London. 1562. that there was a
fraye made, and the one was thirst through the breast under the pappe, and
out under the left shoulder blade so that of force the longes were persed
through. There ware diverse Phisicions called unto the woundyd pacient, and they
all affirmed constantly death to follow. I also being called unto the same
pacient, did also affirm that death would follow, except he received a
certain potion of which I had experience in the like case in the wars, in
England, France, Scotland, and other places: and he in deed received it, and so
the longes ware preserved from putrefaction and the congelyd blod was expellyd
out, the wound clensyd, and finally by the art of Chirurgirie he was
restored to his perfect health.


John Yates. That man do I right well know, his name is Henry Smith a water
man, he was hurt at queen hiue, and he is yet living and in good health.


John Feilde. Well then, let us speak of metallyne instruments. of which
some of them are general: so called, for that thy do generally serve in all
wounds, and ulcers: and there are particular instruments, serving to
several uses or parts of the body. Yet have I hard that diverse affirm how
that in wounds generallye there nedyth no other instruments then an incision
knife, to dilate and enlarge the wound. and so with the fingers to take out
the things fixid, whether it be pellyt, splente, arrowe head, or what else so
ever it be: but the errouors of these are so gross as requires no answer,
saying that through such kinds of incisions, it happens the great veins,
and arteries to be cut, and so great flur of blood to follow, (beside the
doulour, and pain which follows and many times loss, and mutilation of the
membre) as is in no case tollorable.


Tho. Gale. Truth it is, but touching general instruments, those which are in
most use and ought to be had in redynes of the Chirurgian are these: incision
sheares, an incision knyfe, a flewme, a lance, whose pictures you may here set
out, and all this serve to cut and enlarge a wound: a cauterizin Iron to
cauterize with, and stangh flux of blood: a pair of pincers or nippers, to
take of plastres, splegeants and things fixid in the wound, a probe to search
the wound with. a crockyd hoke: a nedle and a quill to sow and stiche with.


John Yates. And what be the instruments which are called proper?


John Feilde. Proper instruments are these whose figures also follow. as a
trappan, serving to the head when as the scul or cranium is fracturyd,
speculum oris, and speculum matricis, also gossipium, seruyng for luxations and
fractured bones. a siryngie masculine and also femyne setons for the neck,
aleuatorie and long neeles of wood. to draw through the wound. also
gosebilles, crowesbilles, and diverse other described and set out of Albueasis,
Celsus, Tagaltius, and others.


Tho. Gale. These instruments be of meruaylous use, and with out which the
Chirurgian can nether perfectlye, another without great grief and peril do
that is required. and among the rest in my judgment the trappen is most
necessary, and of an excellent invention in hurtes of the head. For with out
it where cranium is fractured, brosyd, or else any of the inward panicles
depressed, you shall little prevail. I my self have used it with great profit
diverse times, and especially ons in Cambridge sheire, which I would declare
unto you, but that I should be somewhat tedious.


John Feilde. Nothing less, but rather pleasant. for by vtterynge of things
done, great profit may insewe, and we have decreed to spend this day in the
talk of Chirurgirye wherefore we desire you declare that history and we will
give diligent ear.


Tho. Gale. Right gladlye. Anno. 1559. a servant of one master Wrothes,
ridynge to the feildes and ledynge a young horse in a halter tied fast abought
the arm of the servant: the horse being wild, and not broken, starkinge
aside unhorsed thy man, and drew him by the arm a bought a great feilde so
long, that what with strikynge, what with drawing, halyng and pulling, being
weried he stood still, until company came and losed the halter, and took up
the man half dead, and conuayed him unto his masters house. Chirurgians ware
sent for, who finding. the servant spechlesse, and with out remembrance of
any on whom he saw: they not perceiving the cause hereof them selves, nether
yet could be showed of the pacient the place affected, departed and left him as
incurable. Master Wroth sent for me, and I saying him spechlesse, and without
remembrance, coniectured the hinder part of the head to be hurt, and
smittyn of the horse, which I was more certain of, when feeling that part I
found it soft. Wherefore I taking of the here, did made first incision and
after that set a trappan on his head, and bored Cranium through, and took out
the peace of bone, which done: there issued out much blod, black in color,
and drawing to putrefaction out of the contused and broken veins. the next
day following, the servant spaeke and came again to his perfect
remembrance, and I vsyng things in this cure as art required, God restored
the man in my hands to his perfect health. I could also show you other
examples where the like chaunses have happened, and the Chirurgians either not
knowing, or wilfullye neglecting this profitable instrument, have brought the
pacients to there last end. so happened it to a servant of master Pagetes
in fylpotte lane. 1538. and diverse other, whom for brevity I do let pass.


Io. Yates. This was a worthy cure, and this is a noble instrument, but the
Chirurgians which neglecte thuse of this or the like instruments, are of the
opinion of that the rude Emperike Smith was, who in a folishe book of him
published, did inuay against Chirurgians which trapened the head in any
grief of the same, and seems to him self as it ware an other Thessalus to
over through the famous authers, and Inuentours of this instrument. when (in
the judgment of the learned) he was no more to them comparable, then the light
of a spark of fire, is equal to the most radiant and shyning beams of
beautiful Phoebus.


Io. Feilde. This now spoken of instruments (which a Chirurgian must have
in redines) shall suffice. now let us show the method and way how the
person being fit to be admitted to Chirurgirye, may learn the art, less
that confusedlye he learn that first, which should be last, and so set the
carte before the horse, to his no small hyndraunce.


Tho. Gale. And for this there is to be followed and observed two precepts:
first, that we proceed from things common, unto those which are particular,
or from things universal, unto more particular. as first to know an
infla^mation, then how many kinds of infla^mations there are. the second
precepte is, that we begin at things known and so proceed unto those which
are less known, as first in the curation of wounds, we must begin with a
simple wound: which done, we shall proceed to the curation of compounde
wounds. so in like manner in ulcers, first to know and cure a simple ulcer,
and then to take in hand compounde ulcers, beginning with those that are
less compound, and have smalest accidents: and so to proceed unto those that
are more co^pound, and have most and greatest accidents joined with them. the
like is also to be observed in other arts, and scie^ties, as in iudgyng of
colors, first to know whight and black, then other colors which are not so
manifest according as they com and spring of ye mixture of these.ij. now
knowing and considering these two precepts, it is necessary for the right use
of his instruments medicinal, and metalline: to consider two things, that is
to say, things called according to nature and things against nature.


Io. Yates. I pray you what are those which are called according to nature?
and how many be they in nombre?


John Feilde. Guido numbreth those things which are called according to
nature to be.vj. that is to say, health, the cause of health, theffect of health,
strength, custom, and complexion. and health is defined to be an effect
according to nature, apt to perform the actions of the same.


Io. Yates. And what do this.vj. things according to nature, teach and
show me?


Tho. Gale. Because the Chirurgian is natures freinde, and minister: these
show you that you must conserve and keep them by there like, and also to expel
there contraries, which would distroy and overthrow them.


Io. Yates. And whereof do these.vj. things spring, and by what things shall I
conserve the^? for although you say unto me, yt they are conserved and kept by
there like, yet is it not sufficient to my understanding, except you two show
me what they are.


Io. Feilde. I will tell you, these.vj. things which are secundum naturam,
spring of, vij. natural things entering the composition of man's body. that is
to say.iiij. Elements, fire air, water, earth. co^plexions, as hot, cold,
moist, and dry.iiij. humors, blod, collar, fleume and mela^cholie, me^bres of
ma^s body. virtues, animal, vital, and natural, with there operatio^s, and
spirits. of these.7. natural springs health and ye other rehearsed which are
according to nature The conservation of health does consist in the right use
of.vj. things named in latin res non naturales. like as in the abuse of them,
the decay of health and bredynge of sycknes and infirmities feloweth.


Tho. Gale. It is right so, and these six are called, air: meat and drink:
motion and quiet: sleep and wachynge: repletion and inanition: and the
perturbations or affections of the mind.


John Yates. I trust I am sufficientlye taught how to use my instruments
according to the indication taken of the things which are according to
nature: now I pray you let me understand what those things are which are
against nature, how many they are in number, and what indication is to be
taken of them: for the further use of my instruments.


John Field. Those which are against nature, are so called: because they are
contrary to the same, and do further destroy and ouercume nature, and are
utter enemies to health, and these are.iij. in nombre: sycknes, the cause of
skynes, and the accident. the cause of sycknes, is that effect contrary to
nature, which goes before the sycknes, and provoke the same, and there are
accoumpted of Galen, and the Gretians whom I follow) two causes of sycknes.
the one being outward, called procatarctike, or cause primative: the other is
with in us, and is named the cause antecedent, or precedent, or cause interne.
sickness also is defyned of Galen to be an affecte against nature: of which
the action of nature is first hurt, and vitiated. and the same Galen does
also make iij. kinds of sickness generallye, according to the parts of man's
body in which they are. as in the similer parts, sycknes is called
intemperature, which is either hot, cold, moist, or dry: or else hot and
moist, hot and dry: cold and moist: cold and dry: and if it be in the
instrumental parts, the sycknes is named, ill constitution or conformation:
but if sycknes happen both to similer and isntrumental parts, then it has
to name, solution or division of co^tinuitie. Also the accident is one effect
against nature in like sort as the cause of sickness and sycknes it self is:
but it differet from them in this, that like as the cause go the before
sycknes and provoke it: so does the accident follow sycknes, like as the
shadow does the man. now this word accident, is taken generally, of which
we will nothing speak, and it is understand more straytlye, or properlye, so
is accidente three ways divided. for either the action is hurt and quite
abolished, as blyndelnes in the eye: or else diminished, as dimnisse of sight,
or else the actions is corrupted as the sight depraved, and for the indication
which is taken of these three things against nature: note these two great,
(and of all men allowed) conclusions. Contraria sunt contrariorum remedia. also,
similia conseruantur similibus. like as things which are according to
nature, are conserved and kept by there like: so also things contarye, are
remedies for there contraryes. and therefore these iij. things against nature,
shows you that they are to be expelled and put away by there contraryes. as
for example, solution of continuitye being sycknes both of similer and
isntrumental parts shows that he must be put away by his contrary, that
is unition and Ioyninge again, also heat is put away by couldnes: couldnes by
heat: drynes by moystnes, and moystnes by drines: and so in like sort in
other sycknesses the indication is taken of the contrariety. do you now
understand this?


John Yates. Right well, so that now I do perceive that the right use of my
instruments medicinal, and metallyne, is taking of things according to
nature, which shows the conservation by like and agreeable medicynes: and of
things against nature, which teaches me to apply things contrary where by
I may take away all that which is against nature. but if you will be so good as
to set out (though it be in breafe words compendiouslye) those things
against nature, which falls under the hands of the Chirurgian, as you have
made plain to me those things which are according to nature: I should
think my self so much bound, as hardly I shall be able to recompense. for
although I know that things contrary to nature, are to be removed by there
contraryes, yet if I have not the exact knowledge what those things are, I
shall very hardly be able to aplie and use there contraries.


Tho. Gale. It is suerlye so, for how much wide you are in knowledge of the
sycknes: so far wide shall you also be in fyndyng out apt and convenient
remedies, and those particular grefes, or affectes against nature which are
subject to Chirurgirie (as Galen witnesses in the.14. book 13. chapter of
his therapeutike method) are for the most part reduced to.v. Titles or
chapters. that is to wete tumors against nature, wounds, ulcers, fractures,
and luxations, there be other things besides these which require the use of
the hand: but these rehearsyd perfectly known, the other will be easy to attain
unto.


John Yates. Then I pray you begin first with tumors, and those being
fynished proceed to the rest.


John Feilde. First it behooves you to know that this word tumor (called in
Greek onchos) is not that which Auicenne, and the Arrabians name Apostema, and
the Latinistes call Abscessus. For tumor is a general name to all apostems,
and tumors, where as this word aposteme strecheth no further but only where
as phlegmone is turned into matter, and three other tumors called Atheroma,
steatoma, and meliceris. so that this word aposteme, is not so large and
general a name, as tumor is: and therefore abused of Guido, and other, where
they call all tumors against nature, by the name of apostemes.


John Yates. Why sir, be not all tumors against nature?


Tho. Gale. No for sothe, for then it had been for him superfluous to have
added these words, against nature. And Galen in his book De tumoribus praeter
naturam, makes three kinds of tumoures. One that is secundum naturam,
according to nature: as the branes, muscules, and other emynencies of man's
body. The second is called above nature: when as these forenamed parts are
increased more then their natural form, and figure: but yet in such sort
that the parts can do their officies. The last kind of tumor is called
tumor against nature. Because thy hurt the action of the part where it
infesteth.


John Yates. I do now call to rememberance Master doctor Cunyngham who made
also the same division of tumors.1563. when he red the book of Galen of
tumors against ture to the Chirurgians of London in the hall, but I pray you
let me learn what a tumor against nature is?


Tho. Gale. Out of the same book of Galen, you may gather this defynition. A
tumor against nature, is an augmentation, or swellynge, excedyng the natural
figure of the same and hurts the action of the same. But Auicenne says that
an aposteme (for so calls he a tumor) is a sickness co^pound of three kind of
infirmities, that is to say of intemperatures, of ill co^stitutio^, and
solutio^s of co^tinuity: these words you shall find in the first book of his
Canon.


John Yates. How many kind of tumors are there.


Io. Field. Guido and other writers of his time make iii. kinds of tumors:
Apostema, Pustula, and Exitura. Apostema he calls a great tumor in which the
matter (whereof it springs) does offend rather in quantity, then quality.
pustula he does make a lesser tumor, in which the matter does hurt by
qualitye, rather then quantity. And this tumor tharabians call Bothor. the
threid, which Guido names Exitura: is that which the Grecians do properly
call Apostema, and the latinistes: Abscessus.


Thomas Gale. But the Grecians do make differences of tumors, according to
the substance whereof they do spryng. so shall there be but two kinds of tumors
generally. that is to say. humoralis, spryngyng of humors, and flatuosus
coming of wyndye spirits: this Guido terms Apostema ventosum.


John Yates. And how many differences is there of tumors which do spryng of
humors?


Tho. Gale. Two, simple, and compounde.


John Yates. How many simple be there?


John Field. There be also.ij. hot and cold


John Yates. Why are these tumors called simple and compounde?


Thomas Gale. They are called simple, when as they spring of one sincere
humor, with out the mixture of other. and they are called compounde, when the
tumor comes of two or more humors.


John Yates. Wherefore are the tumors called hot, or cold?


Tho. Gale. They are called hot, because they spring of hoote humors: and
named could by the like reason, because thy are ingendryd of could humors.


John Yates. How many hot tumors be there, and how many cold?


John Field. Diverse, and sondrye, as you shall perceive by the process of our
talk. but the most famous are four: spryngynge of the iiij. humors simplye,
with out the myxture of other of these two etc.


John Yates. Which be they.


John Feilde. One comyth of blood, and is called Phlegmone, in English,
inflammation: an other springs of collar, and is called Erysipelas, or. S.
Anthonies fire: and these be hoote tumors. an other comes of fleume, and is
named Oedema: the forth is engendered of melancholy, and has to name Scirrhus.
This two tumors, are cold, all other simple tumors are aptly reduced to
these.iiij.


John Yates. And what be the compound tumors?


Tho. Gale. They be diverse and varieth there names according to the mixture of
humors. and the humor are mixyd, equally, or inequally, if they be myxed
equally: then the tumor is called Phlegmone and Eryspelas. but if they be
inequallye mixyd, then the tumor, takes name of the humor which surmounteth,
as blod surmounting choler, in a tumor: it is called Phlegmon Erisipelatodes,
if fleume be myxed with blood instead of collar in form as is aforesaid: then
the tumor is named phlegmone Oedomatodes, and if blood myxyd with melancholy
surmounte it is called Phlegmone scirrhodes. so in like case there are.iij.
tumors which take names of the humors myxyd with collor, collar having the
dominion as when blod is with collor they call the tumor Eryspelas
Phlegmonosum. If fleume, Eryspelas Oedematosum, and if melancholic then the
tumor has to name Eryspelas scirrhosim in like manner, fleme having dominion in
the moisture with any of the other three humors, the tumor is first called
Oedema, and then if collar be mixyyd with it they add this word
Erysipelatosum. If blood the tumor is called Oedema Phlegmonosum, and if
melancholy, then is it named Oedema scirrhosum. and to conclude, the like is
to be said of melancholy when as any of the other.iij. are mixed with as
scirrhus Phlegmonosus, scirrhus Erysipelatosus, and Scirrhus Oedematosus: blod,
collar or fleume being vnequallye mixyd with melancholye.


John Yates. What profit insueth to the Chirurgian by knowing the mixtur of
these humors, in tumors against nature?


John Feilde. Great profit, for by knowing the true mixture, he is taught
thereafter accordingly to vary his medicines. for like as a simple tumor has a
simple cure and is curyd by his contrary: so a compounde tumor has a
compounde cure and is curyd by his contrary. as for the more plainer
understanding, if ye tumor be mixyd of fleume and melancholy equallye: then
shall you equally mix such medicynes together, as are conuenientlye used in
Oedema and Scirrhus, But if fleume, and melancholy be inequally mixyd: and the
greater portion is fleume, then in the composition you must in like manner put
the greter portion of such medicynes as you use in Oedema, and the lesser of
such as are applied in Scirrhus. and this rule, and precepte is to be
diligently observed in all compounde sycknes. and for because the mixture of
these tumors, is so necessary for a Chirurgian, as you may right well
perceive by that which is now spoken: behold this table which shows you
all the mixture and names of tumors against nature. Which for the great profit
would be committed to Memory, of him that will have the Method of curyng
co^pounde tumors against nature.


John Yates. You promised to show the tumors which are refered to the.iiij.
principal simple tumors, Phlegmone Erisipelas, oedema: and scirrhus.


John Field. And that we promised, we will perform, first uttering there names:
and that being done, we will show you there definitions. And we will begin with
sanguine tumors, which are referred to Phlegmone: and then proceed to the
rest. There are referred to phlegmone: Phygethlon, Bubo, Phyma, Dothienes,
Anthrax, gargareon, Paristhmia, aneurisma, Gangraena, and Sphacelus.


John Yates. What is Phlegmone?


Tho. Gale. Galen affirmith phlegmone (or as we call it in English, an
infla^mation) to come of the flux of blood by the greater veins, and arteries,
unto those which are lesser: and from them unto those veins which are lest of
all (which because they are no greater then here is, are) called capillares.
These veins being filled with this contynual flux of blod, part yssuith out be
ye mouths of the veins: and part by ye cotes of ye same, whereby the void
spaces are filled, inflamed, distended and streched out. And this tumor galen
calls the inequall intemperature of the muscle. And note, that there are two
kinds of inflammations. One which is called vera inflammatio, and this
springs of good and natural blood. The other is named Non vera, coming of
ill and unnatural blood, and this is common to all inflammations.


John Yates. What call you Phygethlon?


Tho. Gale. That which Celsus names Panus and this tumor is an inflammation
of the glandilous parts in the neecke armpites and grine, which if they be
indurated after this inflammation, there comes tumors which is named Choerades
in latin strumas and Guido names them scrofulas and then this tumor is
numbered among flegmatike tumors. And is with us usually called the kings
evil: because the kings and Queens of England (by a divine and peculer gift
of God) do cure such as are molested with this infirmity, when as no art of
Chirurgerye can take place. And this differs much from that syckenes which
the Latynestes name Regium morbum.


John Yates. Wherefore is it called in Greek Choeras?


John Feilde. Either of stones apearing by the Seas, or else of swyne which are
often vexed with this tumor.


John Yates. As touching Bubo, Guido calls it a flegmaticke aposteme,
wherefore I will let that pass until we come to the reasonynge of the same.


Tho. Gale. You seame to accuse us of error, or ignorance when as we should
number flegmatike apostemes as you call them among sanguine tumors. But I
will this affirm boldlye that Guido either means some other tumor which he
so calls: or else he repugneth manifestly with Galens authority. for Galen
makes Bubo a simple inflammation of the glandelous parts in that flanks.


John Yates. I do not accuse you but rather show you Guido his mind: which
seeing that it does not agree with Galenes I must give place and always
prefer Galen before Guido. Wherefore I pray you proceed with the other
inflammations and show me what the tumor is which the Greeks call Phyma.


Io. Feilde. This tumor is a pushe which will presently as yt ware come to
suppuration, and it is called Phyma by similitude it has with puffes or
mushrumes spryngyng out of the earth. and there be two kinds of these tumors,
one coming of heat, an other of could but we in this place do nombre only
the hoote tumor among inflammotions.


John Yates. Dothienes follows next in order.


Tho. Gale. Dothienes in Greek, is called of Auicenne, Aldemurenul, of Celsus
furunculus, with us a felone or cattes hear, and is a sharp swllynge with
inflammation chancing in the fingers with dolor and torneth to matter
spedelye, and these often have a fever joined with them.


John Yates. What is Anthrax?


Io. Field. That same which we call Carbunculus. and is an vlcerous tumor
springyng of gross melancholycke blood putrifyed. This tumor follows great
inflammations, and there are two kinds of carbuncles. the one more Ientle and
benign: the other pestilential, and mortal, and the carbuncle is both with
pustles and also without.


John Yates. Guido makes difference betwixt anthrax and carbunculus.


Tho. Gale. There is no difference at all, but that anthrax is a greek word and
Carbunculus a Latyne. For Guiddes difference where he makes anthrax a malignant
tumor, is no other thing then the pestilential carbuncle. but his diriuation of
the name is more ridiculous where he says that Anthrax is said of Antra,
which he says signifies the heart, but in what tungne Antra is used for the
heart that he left vnwritte^, sure I am, that it is neither latyne, Greek, nor
arabicke word.


Io. Yates. Well then I am herein satisfied touching the Carbuncle, what defyne
you Gargareon to be?


John Field. Gargareon called in latyne Columella is an inflammation of vuvla,
like as Paristhmia or tonsille are inflammations of the kernelles situated in
the beginning of ye jaws. Guido and other of his sect call them Amygdalas.


John Yates. Anecurisma is next.


Tho. Gale. This tumoure is no other thing, then a dilatation or rather
relaxation of the arteries, whereby the blood and spirits are dispersed
making a soft tumor which being pressed, with the fyngers seems to vanish
away: but the fyngers taken again away, The tumor comes to his wonted
bygnes again.


John Yates. If you do in like sort set out what Gangraena and sphacelus are
then you have finyshed all such tumoures as are referred to flegmone.


John Feilde. Galen in his second book which he wrotte to his friend Glauco
defyneth gangraenam to be a mortifycation of the member vnconfyrmed, sprynging
of great inflammations. And Sphacelus called of diverse writers Aschachilos.
and of the latinestes syderatio is the exact and confyrmed mortification of
the member.


John Yates, Then by your words I gather that both Gangrena and Sphacelus
follow after great inflammations: and that they two differ in this, that
Gangrena is as it were in growing and increasing ever more and more toward
mortification of the member: and sphacelus is when as Gangraena ceasith to
corrupt further the member, and that is now perfectlye mortifyed and dead
void of all natural heat, blood, spirits, and feeling.


Tho. Gale. You have rightly said.


John Yates. Then seeing we have thus ended such sanguyne tumoures as are
referred to Phlegmone, I pray you in like manner proceed in the coloricke
tumors which are of like affinite with Erysipelas?


Tho. Gale. We will so do. Unto Erysipelas are referryd Herpes, Phlyctaenae,
Epinyctides and Hydroa. But first we will define what Erysipelas is, and then
proceed to the rest.


John Yates. I thank you that you will accomplish my request and desire.


John Feilde. Erysipelas being of much affinity with Phlegmone, called also
of the Latinestes ignis sacer, of us wild fire or Saint Anthonies fire, is a
flux of collar staying about the skin nothing molesting the flesh. And it
differs from Phlegmone first that there is no pulsatiue dolor in it, then
that in the inflammation of blood the color is always read: in Erysipelas
the color is yelowyshe pale: last that Phlegmone is an affecte of the
muscules: and Erysipelas is only of the skin and this is to be understand
of Verum Erysipelas.


John Yates. Is there any more then one kind of Erysipelas?


Tho. Gale. Have you forgotten that which was before rehearsed of compounde
tumors? And that there was Erysipelas Phlegmonosum, Oedematosum, and
scirrhosum? These be comprehended in deed under the name of compounde
colloricke tumors or Erysipelas illegittimum.


John Yates. So then you make two kinds of Erysipelas verum: and also
illegittimum.


John Feiid. It is right so. And that which is illegittimat or not right
Erysipelas is also divided into two kinds. The one coming of the groser and
thicker sencere collar and is named Erysipelas with vlceration and the other is
collar having other humors mixed with it as I said before.


John Yates. Seeing then that I understand what Erysipelas is, and how many
kinds also there are of them: I pray you let me understand what herpes, is for
that follows next in order.


John Feilde. Herpes is that tumor and affection of the skin which
Hippocrates so does name of corrodyng and devouring the skin: for herpo is
that which is called in latyne Serpo whereof comes herpys quasi serpens. And
there is two kinds of herpes, one called herpes Estiomenos, so called because
it eats and deuoureth: the other is named Cenchros in latyne miliaris for
that the tumor is like Millit seade.


John Yates. Guido does speak of Estiomenus in this wise. Estiomenus est mors
et dissipatio membri: et propter hoc dicitur Estiomenus, quasi hominis hostis,
cum putrifactione and mollificatione membri.


Tho. Gale. where Guido says that Estiomenus is the death and dissipation of
the membred and for that is called Estiomenus as who should say the enemy of
man, coming with putrefaction and mollification: I do little in my Judgment
allow him, first that he leaves the princes of Physic Hippocrates Galene and
Paulus, and follows those of small learning and authority: and then that he
will seame to interpret that tungue in which he had small knowledge. for where
ded he ever red among the Grecians that the tumor Estiomenus was confoundyd
with Sphacelus, which in deed is the mortification of the membre. and again
where learned he the deriuatio^ of Estiomenus to be hominis hostis. But this may
yet seame tolorable in Guido, when that Auicenne gyuynge occasion of error to
other, comprehendynge both kinds of herpes, under the name of formica, does
also most absurdlye comprehend myrmecias (that is to say formicas and is a
kind of wartes) under the name of herpes and so confounds both to gether.
but this shall suffice touching herpes.


John Yates. Then let me learn what Phlyctenae are.


John Feilde, Actius in his.xiiij. book and.63. chapter says that they are
pustules coming of sharp collar: like to the blestres which comes of
scaldynge water, and, bring no vehement dolor or pain, which being broken
there flows out a yeloushe humor, continuynge unto the third or sometime
forth day.


John Yates. And what does these kind of pustules differ from those which are
called Epinictides?


Tho. Gale. Very much. for epinyctides be the most ill and malignant kind of
pustules. be swarte, and leady in color with great and vehement inflammation
abought them. and these being opened there is found a flymye exulceration in
them. this tumor is never greater then a bean: and is called Epinyctis because
comonlye they spring in the night season, and then most molesteth the
pacient. The Arrabians call this tumor essare, or saire. and Plynie names it
Pustula lyuens.


John Yates. There yet remains those tumors which the Grecians do call
Hidroa and the Latinistes Sudamina.


John Field. Auicene names them planta noctis and Rasis Alhasaphum. These are
certain colericke pustule coming of much and abundant swette which through
the sharpnes thereof do exasperate and vlcerate the skin: and thus have you
learned the most famous and notable colloricke tumors wherefore we will now
convert our talk to such as are phlegmatike.


John Yates. You do mean such as are referryd to Oedema do you not?


Tho. Gale. Yes verily and they be called by their names. Atheroma, Steatoma,
Meliceris, Hidrocele, Ascites, Leucophlegmatia, chaeras, Bronchocele, and
Hydrocephalon: and as touching Oedema it is thus defyned. Oedema is a tumor
soft, lose, and with out dolor or grefe, springynge of fleume. and it is
divided into Oedema that is a deseace, and into that which is symptoma or
accident. of this Galen makes mention in the.xiiij. book.iiij. chap. of his
therapeutike method. the true Oedema is that which folyshly the Barbarous
Cirurgians call vndimia.


John Yates. I remember Guido names it both vndimia and also ydemea, and
cimia: but let that pass. I pray you set out those three famous apostemes
flegmatike which you call Atheroma, Steatoma, and meliceris.


John Feilde. This aposteme called in Latin abscessus and of Haliabbas, Selaa,
of Auicenne Nodi, have diverse names after that thing which is in every of
them contained. For Atheroma which is a tumor of like color on all parts and
with out pain and dolor, conteyneth in the neruous cootes a shlyme humor and
like a pultesse in substance. and sometime there is found in it here is, skales
like bones, and hard things as they ware stones. and Steatoma that is to say
adipinus nodus, or a fattye knote or a tumor, is an augmentation of fatnes
against nature gathered in some part of the body. Meliceris or Nodus
mellaeus, is a round tumor hard and void of grefe in which the neruous
coats do conteyne an humor like in substance to honye. and all these iij.
effects are first small and little. and so by little and little augmente and
wax. and are contained with in there several fylmes or coats.


John Yates. What defyne you hydrocele to be?


Tho. Gale. Hydrocele is that which in Latin is called hernia aquosa or
humoralis, and is a tumor springynge of a watrye humor gathered in the purse
of the testicles.


John Yates. And what is ascites?


John Feilde. It is one kind of the dropsy. and this tumor is when that a
serose humor is contained betwixt the inward coat of abdomen and the
intestines. This coat is called peritonaeum.


John Yates. Leucophlegmatia follows next.


John Field. It is also named Anasarca and hypostarca and is an inequall tumor
going through the hole body. this may in my conceypte be aptlye termed an
universal oedema of all the body, as touching cherades we have spoken among
sanguine tumors.


John Yates. There yet remains two tumors Bronchocele, and hydrocephalon.


Thomas Gale. Bronchocele is a tumor in the throat called also Bocium, and it
is a great and round swellynge of the neck betwixt the skin and aspera
arteria, in which is contained some time, flesh, some time like honey, fatnes,
or a pultesse. and sometime says Celsus there are found hears mixyd with bones
also Hydrocephalon is a watery tumor engendered for the more part in the heads
of children. or else it come of gross blood collected in any part of the
head, there be.iiij. kinds of this tumor. one when the humor is betwixt pia
matter and the brain. the second when the humor is collected betwixt the
coats and the bones: the.iij. is betwixt pericranium and the bone, the last is
betwixt the skin and the bone. and thus we have set out the most notable
kinds of flegmatike tumors.


John Yates. Saying that you have fynyshed three kinds of tumors sanguine
coloricke and flegmatike, now I pray you let us speak of melancholicke in like
sort.


John Feilde. Unto Scirrhus are referred. Cancer, Elephantiafis, Satirasmus
Psora lepra, Enchimoma, melasma, varices, sarcocele, Polipus Verruce,
acrochordines, myrmeciae, and such like. and first we will take our
beginnynge with Scirrhus, you shall note that there are reconyd of Galen.ij.
kinds of Scirrhus. one that is exquisite. the other not exquisite. The
exquisite Scirrhus is definyd to be an hard tumor against nature, with out
dolor or felyng and is incurable. The second kind of Scirrhus is also a
tumor against nature hard, but not al together insensible and therefore
curable. although it be not with out difficulty.


John Yates. Now seeing I have learned what Scirrhus is and also how many they
are, I pray you proceed to Cancer.


Tho. Gale. Cancer called of the grecians Carcinoma, and Carcinos, is an
inequal tumor against nature, horrible to beholde-of swartishe color and with
great pain. It is called cancer of figure and similitude it has with the sea
crabbe. for like as in that, the feet are on both sides of it: so in this
tumor the veins being filled with a gross melancholic humor, they are
swollen and descended like as it were the fet of a crabbe or this tumor may
otherwise be called cancer because it does so inseberablye cleave to the place
where as it once is fyrmely fyred. and there be two kinds of Cancer. one that
is with vlceration and is called Cancer Vlceratus, an other that is without
vlceration and is named Cancer Occultus.


John Yates. What is Elephantiasis.


John Feilde. It is an universal Cancer of the body, and is that which the
latter writers of the Arabians name Lepra, and. S. Lazarus sycknes: it takes
name of the beast called an Elephant be cause of the greatness of the affecte
length and rughnes of the skin. It is also named Leontiasis because of the
lose and rugose tumor of the skin. This sycknes is terrible, contagious and
in the number of those infirmities placed which are contagious.


Tho. Gale. And when this tumor is but yet in the beginning. it is not called
Elephantiasis but Satyriasmis. taking that appellation of the satyrs whom
the Poets describyd to be deformyd and monstrous.


John Yates. Seeing that Elephantiasis is not lepra Grecorum, I pray you: show
me there difference.


John Feilde, Galen in his book of difinitions does difine it in this sort.
lepra is mutation of the skin into an habit against nature, with asperitie
and ychyng, dolor and skales and occupies diverse parts of the body. and
there is no small affinity betwixt lepra and scabies: both being affections of
the skin, both springynge of melanckolicke Iuse. and they differ in figure.
for lepra occupyeth and deuoureth depely the skin in round figure, and
casts skales like fish: and scabies called also psora infestyth rather the
upper part of the skin and is diversely figured.


John Yates. Enchymoma follows next. and melasma.


Tho. Gale. Galen in his book de tumoribus praeter naturam.10. cap. says that
they are tumors happenyng to old men through the contusion of the veins:
whereby the blood flow out of the coats of the veins. of these some be
black, some betwixt black and read in color. and they come of small and
light occasions


John Yates. The next tumors are varices in greek called Cirsous which I take
to be ye swelling of the veins through to great flux of gross and
melancholic blod. And I have most commonly seen them in the shankes and
testicles.


John Feilde. And those be the proper places for this tumor: like as the two
tumors next following sarcosele and Polypus have there peculier parts which
they do infest, as sarcosele is a fleshye tumor growing in the testicles,
and is called in Latin hernia carnosa: the other is a fleshye branche
springynge in the nosthrilles, and lets the operation of the same. and it
takes name of a flesh called Polypus. for like as that fish has many
legs, so also has this tumor many roots whereby it cleueth and grows to
the nosthrelles.


Tho. Gale. It is right so, and verruca which is next in order, is a certain
tumor apperinge in the uppermost part of the skin it is named with us a
warte, of this sort be acrochordones, and myrmeciae. Acrochordon is a round
warte hangyng as it ware by a threde and thereof takes name. and is called in
Latyne verruca pensilis. and myrmecia is also a kind of wartes which grows
deper and is hard and fixed to the skin, narowe above, and broad beneth,
prouokyng dolor and pain and is black in color. and thus have we finished
and declared unto you all the notable tumors which are referred to the.iiij.
simple Phlegmone, Erysipelas, Oedema, and Scirrhus.


John Yates. Yet among all these I here you make no mention of morbus, which
I think is to be numbered among tumors against nature?


John Field. I do not well understand your meaning, for many a tumor is
called morbus. for morbus is a Latin word, and all sycknes and infirmyties be
called morbi


John Yates. Yea but I mean that scabbe which the common Chirurgians calls
the morbus, and the morbus cause, and the better learned names it morbus gallici


Tho. Gale. It it is a great thing to be trained up in ignorance or Barbarous
doctrine at the first, for ever after do what you can they will have some taste
thereof, as right excellently the Poet Horatius said.

Quo semel imbuta recens seruabit odorem. Testa diu etc. Which is as much in
effect to be uttered in our usual language as With what thou first filste
thy vessel.
Of the same long time it will smell.


And this may right well be verifyed with those of our time: one rude Emperike
called it the morbus and a number follows him in his folly. and an other
because he would seem connynger then the rest, with as much ignorance names
it morbus, Gallici brekynge the old Pricians head, and yet will not, or can not
give him a plaster. But if you will use that usual name you might have named
it morbus Gallicus, or Lues venerea, and so have observed co^gruitie in
spekyng. but as touching the names of that contagious infirmity, which is
usually named morbus gallicus: in my opinion they all do nothing express the
nature of the sycknes. and like as the authors, which wright of it varieth in
the names: so do they both in knowing the disseace, and cure of the same.


John Yates. What then shall I properlye call it?


John Field. That same that Master Doctor Cunyngham has invented a
similitudine cum chamaeleonte bestiola. That is he calls it Chamaeleontiasis.
the reasons hereof, the definition, cause, signs, prognostications, and new
kind of curation, he has expressed in a book thereof written, which I trust
he will hereafter publishe.


John Yates. And does he not number chameleontiasis among tumors against
nature?


Tho. Gale. Nothing less, for he accompteth all those tumors, swellyng,
knottes, ulcers, and such like infesting the body of man: but as accidents.
and no part of the infirmity, neither labors he so much in these as in
expellynge the sickness which brings forth these accidents. for these are to
be removed with out difficulty or great travail.


John Yates. I judge his new invented way of curation to be extreme and
dangerous to the pacient. for both the fumes, unguents, and strayte order of
diet with the wood, are well known to be dangerous, and yet many times does
not that which they promise. but yet if his way be perfect it is the more to
be likyd and he worthy praise.


John Field. His way is void of danger, easy to the pacient, exact also and
perfect.


John Yates. Saying then that Chamaeleontiasis vulgarlye termyd morbus gallicus
is not to be numbered among tumors against nature I: pray you proceed to the
other part of your division, for I remember that you said there ware.iij.
kinds of tumors, the first you called humoralis because it does spring of
humors. the second ventosus, for that it is ingengendryd of spirits. The
third you termyd. tumor varius, because they hae miryd causis. sometime of
humors and spirits myxyd, and sometime of other causes. Therefore I pray you
now let me learn how many tumors are referryd to ventosus tumor.


Tho. Gale, The most fomous are two. Tympanites and priapismus.


John Yates. What is tympanites?


Tho. Gale. That which Hippocrates names a dry dropsy. and is a tumor
spryngynge of wyndye spirits, collected betwixt peritonaeum and the
intestines. and if you smite the body of the pacient vexid with this tumor it
will give forth a sound like to the tympanie and hereof it first took name.


John Yates. And what tumor is that which is called Priapismus?


John Feilde. Priapismus is a tumor of the yard, whereby it is deste^dyd out
in length and breath through vaporous spirits fillyng the nerve called neruus
cauernosus constituens colis substantiam.


John Yates. There yet remains to to speak of those tumors which you term
tumores varios.


Tho. Gale. There do so as you say. and these be the notablest of those
tumors. vitiligo, exanthemata, parotides, mentagra, Epiplocele, Enterocele,
Enteroepiplocele, Bubonocele, exomphalos, Arthritis, podagra. Chiragra.


John Yates. What call you vitiligo.


John Field. If you will generallye take it, it signifies a foulnes and
staynynge of the skin, coming of the ill disposition of the part, which can
not make good assimulation of the norishement. and there be two kinds of this
tumor, the one named in greek Leucae of the Arabians Albaras, and in Latin
vitiligo alba which is a mutation of the skin in to more whightnes. the
other is named alphos, and of Auicenne morphea, and we vsuallye call it the
morphew. and there are two kinds of morphew, the one whight called of Celsus
Leuca Alphos, the other black. and he terms it mela. and alphos, is deriuyd
of this Greek verb Alphenein, which signifies to alter or change. and so
does the morpheu alter and change the color of the skin.


John Yates. And what tumors are those which the greeks do call exanthemata?


Tho. Gale. They be pustules and tumors breaking out of the skin, bringing
with them fevers and many other accidents. And there are two sorts of them:
one higher springing of thimne and cholorike blood, the other broader and
comes of melancholic and gross blood. the first kind we call the small
pockes, in Latin Morbilli, the other the measelles, and Variolae in Latyne.


John Yates. Parotides folowethe next in order.


Io. Feilde. Parotides be inflammations which happen to the karnelles that are
behynd the ears. And they spring sometime of sincere blood, sometime of
fleume, sometime of choler, and sometime of melancholy. And herein note the
providence of nature. For she has made the rare and lose parts called
karnelles to be as emunctories for the noble parts. As the karnelles behind
the ears, serve to the brain. Under the armpittes serving to the spiritual
members. And the karnelles in the gryne does receive the superfluities that
comes from the liver, when as it does exonerate and purge it self, and this
is most manifest in pestilentiall constitutions in which theys noble members
thurst and expel the venom to there purgien places.


John Yates. As for Mentagra you need not to speak of, for I know right well,
it is no other thing then Morbus gallicus, or Chamaeleontiasis, as the book
bearing the name of Mentagra does testifye.


Tho. Gale. And yet both you and the author of that book do herein mysse
the quishynge, as suer as you make your self of this. For this tumor which
Plinius calls Mentagra, and impetigo in Greek Leichin sprange first among
the Italians in the time of Tiberius and is a deformity of the skin
beginning for the more part at the chynne and will spedelye turn into leprye
and cast of skales like fyshe. And Galen witness in the v. book and v. Chap.
Secundum loca. That impetigo will turn into Lepram. Therefore what difference
is betwixt Mentagra and Chamaeleontiasis it is easily conceived, the one having
Causam occultam as I may term it, and the other manifestam.


John Yates. And what Judge you epiplocele to be.


John Field. I will not only speak of that, but also of the other kinds of
hernia, which follows next. And first you must note that epiplocele is a
Greek word compounde of epiploon which the latinestes call Omentum and we
name it the caul, and cele which signifies ramex or hernia. So that
epiplocele is a tumor coming when as omentum falls in to the purse of the
testicles. And by the like reason Enterocele takes name, when as the
intestines falls into the foresaid place. And Enteroepiplocele follows when
as both Omentum and the intestines fall in scrotum, or purse of the testicles.
Furthermore Bubonocele is a tumor called in latyne inguinis ramex and happeth
when as Peritonaeum is ruptured or wounded by the flanks. Exomphalos is a
tumor perteining to the ouertwart muscules of abdomen, which being relaxed
there follows a sterting or emynency of the nauel.


Tho. Gale. My brother Yates does the redierly conceive the differences of
these kind of Hernia, for that he has a peculer way of curyng some of them,
especially of Enterocele or Hernia intestinalis, as Guido terms it
wherefore we will no longer stand in uttering the differences of them, but
proceed to arthritis Podagra and Chiragra. For I think the day will scarslye
suffyce to declare, that which yet remains, and therefore as touching
Arthritis you shall note and consider that it is a tumor coming of the flux
of humors into the Joints: and is named in Latyne morbus articularis. And so
is this tumor common to all the Joints of the body except it be the hands
and the feet.


John Feilde. Yea for if this flux happens to the hands, it is named
Chiragra. And if to the feet, then it is called properly of the place, Podagra.


John Yates. Theys dyseases of the Joints be grievous and paynefull, have they
no other cause but the flux of humors?


Tho. Gale. The flux of humors is but the interne or antecedente cause,
which comes of the primatyue, but it is no part of our minds to set out
either the causes signs, or curation, of tumors, seeing that we have done
that in our book of the methodicall cure of tumors against nature.


John Yates. Seeing that you have now spoken of all the notable and famous
tumors against nature, I pray you turn your talk to wounds, which
Auicenne and those that follow him calls Plaga.


John Feilde. Before we enter further Herein to set out the differences of
wounds, it is conuenente to know what a wound is. and the most part of
writers do agree that a wound is the solution of continuitie newly made in
the parts of the body with out putrefaction or matter.


Tho. Gale. Yea for when as putrefation or matter does follow, then it leuyth
the name of a wound and is called an ulcer.


John Yates. And may a wound degenerat into an ulcer?


Tho. Gale. Yea for sothe, and so does most parts of wounds especially if
they be great and in such parts as may not be cured with balmes.


John Yates. And how many differences be there of wounds?


John Field. Many, but the chief and principal and that also are necessary,
are numbered to be three, and we will show you whereof the differences spring.


John Yates. Do you so.


Thomas Gale. Guido and other famous writers of his time, takes the difference
of woundee of three things. The first is taken of the nature of the part, in
which the wound is made. The second difference springs of the substance or
essence of the solution of continuitie. The third difference springs of the
difference of the division, or solutio^ of co^tinuitie.


John Yates. And how are the wounds called. those difference comes of the
nature of the part in which that wound is.


John Field. It is called a wound in the similer part, and a wound in the
isntrumental part.


John Yates. Then to know these wounds exactly it does behoue to know these
parts of the body which you called similer, and instrumental.


Tho. Gale. It does right so. and it is called a similer part because it is
simple and may be divided in to like parts. and that also which is required
to the constitution of the organicke or isntrumental parts. Such parts of
the body are flesh, fatnes, arterye vain nerve, tendon, ligament, bone, and
such like. and those be named isntrumental parts, which are made of these
simple or similer parts. And the isntrumental parts are the head, eye,
nose, tungue, heart, liver, longues, arms, feets, and a great number of such
like, and every of these parts have there several use and office, as more
largelye appears in the book of Galen entitled de vsu p^rtium.


John Yates. And how many sondrye wounds are there in the similer parts.


John Field. There be three, which are taken of the substance of the similer
parts. for it may be in the similer part which is soft as wounds made in
the fleeshe, and fattenes, or else in the hard symiler part, as wounds in
the bones, or finally it may happen to the mean similer part, which is
neither hard nor yet soft, such be those wounds in the veins arteries
neruys tendons and ligamentes.


John Yates. And what difference is there of the wounds in the organike or
isntrumental parts?


Tho. Gale, There is a threefoulde difference of those wounds according to the
part affected. For either the wound is made in the principal parts, as in
the heart, liver, or bryane: or else in those parts which serve these principal
parts, as wounds in Aspera arteria, the throat, and bladder. Or it is in the
organike parts which are not seruisable, to any of the principal, as wounds
happenynge in the nose, eye, ear, hand, foot, and such like.


John Yates. Then there be six differences of wounds taken of the nature of
the part, three in the simyler, and three likewise in the isntrumental
parts. Now let me understand the difference of wounds taken of the
essence of the solution of continuitie.


John Feilde. There is a twofoulde difference. for either it is a simple
wound, or else it is a compounde wound.


John Yates. What is a simple wound?


John Feilde. A simple wound is solution of continuitie, newlye made being
void of accydentes or other affectes with it complycated and joined.


John Yates. And what is a compounde wound?


Tho. Gale. The contrary to a simple wound. For it is solution of continuitie
having one or more affectes and accidents complicated and Joined with it.


John Yates. You have now showed two kinds of wounds the one taken of the
nature of the wounded part, the other of the essence of the solution of
continuitye, there yet remains to set out, such as spring of the proper
difference of solution of continuitie.


Tho. Gale. There does so as you say. And the proper differences are taken of
two things. That is to weete of the quantity and of the figure?


John Yates. And how be the wounds named, which have there dyfference of
quantitye.


Tho. Gale. They are called by these names. a great or little wound: a long or
short wound: a broad or narrow wound, a deape or shalowe wound: and an
equal or else an inequall wound.


John Yates. And how be those wounds named which are taken of the figure of
the wound?


John Feilde. They be thus termed. a right wound an obliquike or crooked
wound, and a retorte wound. There are besides these three principal
differences of wounds: other wounds, although they be not proper. as a
wound disrupted or broken, a wound which is cut, a wound partlye broken,
and partlye cut: also, a wound in the beginning, mids or end of a muscle,
and such like, but these differences alredye numbered shall suffice, as
touching the Institution of a Chirurgian in this part.


John Yates. I suppose no less. but what utility springs by knowing these
differences of wounds?


Tho. Gale. Right great, for you shall not rightlye and methodicallye cure
them, except you know there differences. For of them is taken the
prognostications, the intentions curatiue, the invention of medicines, and
manner of curation. for you will not a like prognosticate life and death to the
pacientes, of a simple and wound made in the flesh. and of a great wound
made in the ventricules of the brain.


John Yates. That is verelye so, for the one is with out peril and danger, and
the other ever mortal and deadlye. Although Galen affirms that his master
Pelops yet being a live) he saw a young man wounded in one of the former
ventricles of the brain, and that he was restored to health.


John Field. In deed those wounds for the more part are deadlye. and where as
Galen in his.viij. book de vsu partium, reherseth that history, he makes it
miraculous, and that the young man came to health, rather by the goodness of God
then help of art. But let us return from whense we are digressed. A grene and
shalow wound void of accidents, have not the same curatiue intentions, that
a deape and holowe wound has, with which is also annixed inflammation, flux,
dolor, and pain.


John Yates. That is more clearer then son at myd day, as the sayng goes.


Tho. Gale. And touching the invention of medicynes how say you, will you
invent like for wounds in the nerves and ligamentes, that you will for those
in the flesh? or in wounds of the brain, that you will in wounds of the
hands?


John Yates. No verelye, nor I think none so rude that will so offend.


John Feilde. I pray God there be not. but to the right use of medicines taken
of ye difference of wou^des, would you in a wound in which is inflammation,
and deperdition and loss of flesh, aplye incarnatiues to cease inflammation
or contrary wise?


John Yates. That ware a point of extreme demency and madness.


Tho. Gale. Well then this last utility springing of the difference of wounds
shows you how to aply your medicynes, and when also, which must be first,
and which next.


John Yates. No man can that deny. Wherefore saying, that we have passed over
the differences of wounds, it follows next in order that we do proceed to
ulcers.


John Feilde. And that you may the better understand those things which
hereafter shall follow, it is requisite to learn first what an ulcer is.


John Yates. Then I pray you define what an ulcer is.


John Field. An ulcer is defyned to be the solution of unity in the fleshye
parts, having more dispositions lettynge and hindringe the adglutination of
the same, of which comes matter, and other like fylthines.


Tho. Gale. You may also brieflye define it, following Auicen, in this manner. an
ulcer is the solution of continuitie made in the flesh, conteynyng matter and
pus.


John Yates. And whereof are ulcers engendered?


Tho. Gale. They spring of wounds ill handled, of pustules, and apostumes
coming to vlceration.


John Yates. And does ulcers spryng of wounds?


John Field. They do: for when as a wound does ons conteyne matter, it is no
more called a wound, but an ulcer.


John Yates. How many kind of ulcers be their?


Thomas Gale. There be two kinds, a simple ulcer, and a compound.


John Yates. And what is a simple ulcer?


Tho. Gale. A simple ulcer is a solution of continuitie, with matter, void of
accidents and complication with other affectes. and here you must note
according to our supposition, that when I say a simple ulcer, I mean not one
simple infirmity or sycknes: for I am not ignorant that every ulcer does
consist of intemperatnes, solution of continuitie, and sometime also of ill
composition. And therefore when I speak of a simple ulcer, I mean that which
is opposite or contrary to that vlcere, which is complicated with many
affectes.


John Yates. Then by your words I gather, that a compounde ulcer is solution
of continuitie in the flesh having matter, and diverse affectes with it
joined. Now I pray you let me understand how many differencis there be of
ulcers.


John Feilde, The most notable ulcers are.vj. in number.


John Yates. Which be they?


John Feilde. Their names in Latin be these vlcus saniosum, virulentum,
sordidum, cauermosum, putridum and corrodens. And we must by circunlocution
make them plain unto you, for the deffecte of apt words in our language.


John Yates. And can these have no other names?


Tho. Gale. Yes forsooth.


John Yates. How many ways?


Tho. Gale. Five principal ways.


John Yates. Which are they?


Tho. Gale. First an ulcer may be named of humors, next of sanies or matter,
then of accidents, after of the sycknes, last, of similitude with some lyuinge
thing.


John Yates. Which way name you ulcers of humors?


John Field. Those which spring of blood are called sanguine, of choler,
choloricke, of fleume flegmaticke, and of melancholy, melancholicke.


John Yates. And how are they called which come of sanies or matter.


Tho. Gale. You must note that ulcers be named of sanies, four sundry ways.


John Yates. How so?


Tho. Gale. Because sanies is called by four names,


John Yates. Which be they?


Tho. Gale. Sanies, pus, sordicies, and virulentia, and hereof comes that of
sanies, the ulcer is named a sanious ulcer, of pus, a purulent ulcer, of
sordicies, a felthie ulcer, and of virulentia, the ulcer is named a virulent
ulcer.


John Yates. Before you proceed further here in, I pray you define me what
sanies or matter is.


John Field. Sanies is a norishement corrupt, which nature could not
digeste. and note that there is two kinds of sanies, good and laudable, and
also ill and naught.


John Yates. What call you good matter or sanies?


John Field. It is called good when as it is whight in color, light and
equal, void of stincke and horrible smell, and is also digested.


John Yates. And what define you ill matter or sanies?


John Feilde. It is that which is contrary to the good. A corrupt norishement
in which the substance is inequall, indigested, ill smellinge, and diversely
discolored.


John Yates. What is that you call pus, of which the ulcer is named purulent.


Tho. Gale. It is ill matter or sanies coming of norishement and superfluites
of the weke membre, which tends to corruption, through the natural heat
altered into an unnatural state.


John Yates. I pray you let me learn what virus is.


Tho. Gale. It is subtle and thin sharp sanies, engendered of thin watery
humors, which through the abundance, the heat can not digest and overcome.


John Yates. There yet remains to speak of that kind of sanies which you
called sordicies.


John Feilde. It is gross matter engendered of the grosnes of humors.


John Yates. Well, now return again to the names and appellations of ulcers.
How I pray you are ulcers called after accidents, which the greeks call
Symptomata?


Tho. Gale. It is called of corrosion a corrodynge ulcer, in greek
Phagedenicum, of putrefaction vlcus putridum, of dolor and pain, it is called
vlcus dolorosum.


John Yates. And how is the ulcer called of sycknes.


John Field. It is called in this manner of cancer a cancerous ulcer, so in like
manner of fistula the ulcers is called fistulosum or ulcer fystulate.


John Yates. Seeing you are come to that talk of a fistula in knowledge of
which, and also exact curation you are not a little commended: I pray you
define what a fistula is.


John Feilde. It is an holow and deep ulcer having a straight orifice. and the
halownes of the same is hard, out of which many times flows matter, and the
fistula has many denominations according to the place in which it is, for
when it happens only in ye flesh, it is called fistula carnosa, in the
veins venosa, in the arteries: arteriosa: in the neruys or senowes neruosa, in
the cartilagies cartilaginosa in the muscules musculosa, in the bones ossea,
and also of tears and droppis which it puts fourth, it is named fistula
lachrimalis. so in Ano it is called fistula Any.


John Yates. Well now turn we again to the last part of the division and
show me how ulcers are called of similitude.


Tho. Gale. I will, the ante or phishmere in Latin formica crepeth and makes
holes. and of like sort, the ulcer which crepith and makes many holes in
man's body, is hereof termed formicosu^ vlcus. and also of the holow caves of
the ground called cauernae, the holow ulcer is named cauernosum: and so in
like sort of other things, for of the similitude the ulcer takes name.


John Yates. I here you not make any mention of those famous and notable
ulcers called Teliphea and Chironia vlcera. neither can they be comprehended
under any of the.vj. principal kinds of ulcers.


Tho. Gale. Yes forsooth, but Galen who^ I follow, accompteth those differences
of Teliphea and Chironia vlcera, superfluous, and he comprehends them under
the name of phagaedenicum, or corrodens vlcus. Therefore we may aptly place them
among corrodyng ulcers, which is the syxte kind of the notable vlceres before
rehearsed.


John Yates. And be all these kinds of ulcers of like facility in curyng?


John Field. No verily, for there be some which are easelie cured, and other
also which will hardlye or not with out great difficulty receive curation.


John Yates. Which be those that will easelye be cured?


John Field. Such ulcers as happen in persons of good complexions, whose bodies
are norished with good blood, and have no abundance of superfluous moistnes.
for Auicene says that in bodies of the best complexion, the ulcers are more
spedely healed.


John Yates. Which ulcers are hard to be cured?


Tho. Gale. All those ulcers which fofoweth after any sycknes.


John Yates Wherefore should those ulcers be so rebellious, and hard to receive
curation?


Tho. Gale. Because nature does exonerat and unburden her self of the
dregs and reliquies of ill, and vicious humors.


John Yates. Are there no other ulcers: but these that be hard to cure?


John Feilde. Yes, and such be all ulcers which happen to persons having
accidentaly there bodies most or dry.


John Yates. Give me an example of those bodies which accidentally are moist.


Ihon Feilde. You need no other example to set before your eyes, then persons
having dropsies, and women with child. where ulcers happen in such bodies
they, will not cicatrize because of abundance of superfluous moisture.


John Yates. I think it so. But if that the great moystnes, do let the ulcer
to be cured: the^ in bodies that be dry, it follows the ulcers to be easelye
healed. How happens it, therefore that you affirm ulcers in dry bodies to
be hard of curation?


John Field. And yet in theyse my words I do not commit any error. For I
speak not simplye of all dry bodies: but of those that ware dry
accidentally. such be the bodies of them that have hecticke fevers, and
marasmus. In these the ulcers, for defecte of good blood can not consolidate:
but with great difficultye.


Tho. Gale. And you have also the like example in old men whose ulcers will
hardly receive cure for the defecte of good blood, they being not able, for
the imbecillitie of natural heat) to concocte and digest, there meat.


John Yates. Then by your words I do find: that in three sorts of people the
ulcers will not with out difficulty be cured, that is to say in those, where
ulcers follows great sickness, and in bodies which are accidently moist, and
those also which are likewise dry. Now before we fynishe our talk of ulcers,
I would learn of you what putrefaction, corrosion, and digestion is. the
knowledge of these is right profitable in ulcers.


John Eeilde. It is so, and note that, putrefaction according to our Authors
Chirurgians, is defined to be a transmutation of the hole substance of the
body or part of the same, springynge of outward and unnatural heat? which
being contrary and deadlye ennemy, to natural heat, does corrupt, and
destroy the same.


Tho. Gale. And corrosion is a consumption of the flesh which comes through
sharp humors, which resolves consumes and dries the substance of the
norished part: which being resolved the substance of the flesh is diminished
and vlcerated.


John Yates. These two, putrefaction and corrosion seameth to be as you say,
although. for want of natural Philosophy I can not herein judge, but it
behooves the lerner always to believe and credit the teacher: but what is
digestion?


John Field. Digestion is taked in two ways, one way it is taken for an
orderly distribution of the work of natural heat made for the augmentation
and norishement of the parts. The other way it is a dispositin of natural
heat ordained to the preperation of huhumours whereby the humors are made
ready to be thrust out by the virtue expulsive. and this last away is that
which the Chirurgian ought to consider.


John Yates. Now you have thus finished tumors against nature, wounds, and
ulcers, it is time to entreat of fractures. Wherefore I pray you let
understand what a fracture it.


Tho. Gale. A fracture called in Greek Catagma is a solution of continuitie
made in the bone. But the later grecians as Aetius and Paulus names a
fracture, the division of the bone or else rupturynge or breakyng of the same or
any solution of the bone violentlye coming of any outward cause.


John Field. Yet Guido de Caulico and other of his time defyneth a fracture to
be solution of continuitie of the bone not coming of every cause, but only
when as it comes of contusion, and this difference he puts, for that says
he a bone broken and a bone cut may be known a sonder. For because a cut bone
is not to be properlye named a fracture, but rather a wound in the bone.


John Yates. There is no great repugnancie among them neither let us be
curious about words, so the thing whereof we entreat may be evident and
plain. Wherefore I pray you show me now how many kinds there be of
fractures.


Tho. Gale, There be two kinds of fractures. a simple fracture, and a
compound.


John Yates. What is a simple fracture?


John Feilde. A simple fracture is solution or division of continuitie made in
the bone without any other affecte joined with it.


John Yates, What is a compounde fracture?


John Feilde. It is also a solution of unity made in the bone having one or
more affectes to it connected and joined.


John Yates. How many differences be there of fractures?


Tho. Gale. You must note that like as there be simple and compounde fractures,
so in like manner there be differences of fractures both simple and compounde.
Wherefore let me know of which fracture you would know the difference.


John Yates. I would right gladly understand all the differences, although for
want of knowledge I can not orderlye demand of you. Wherefore, I pray you
first to begin with the differencies of simple fractures, and then to the
compounde.


Thomas Gale. That we will gladly. and first it behooves you to consider that
there be many and diverse kinds of fymple fractures. For some fractures are
overthwart and diuides the bone in sonder and they are three, Cauledon
Raphanidon, Sicyedon, that is to say the bones are broken like unto the
similitude of stalks of herbs, radish, or cucumers. There are besides these
fissures or ryftes made in the bone longwyse called in Greek Schidacidon. Also
there is an other kind of simple fractures when as the bone is broken into
many small and little pieces, and this is named Alphitidon. These be the
principal differences of simple fractures.


John Yates. And what are the differences of compound fractures?


John Feilde. The chief and notable being accompanied with sycknes and
accidents are these. a fracture with a wound, a fracture having with him
joined gangraena, a fracture with inflammation, a fracture with dolor and
pain, a fracture with co^tusion, a fracture with callus to much increased and
grown, a fracture with to much dryenes, and also hardness of callus. and a
fracture with superfluous moisture of callus, and such like.


John Yates. Are there no other kinds of fractures besides these two simple and
compounde?


Tho. Gale. There be no other proper kinds. for of necessity, it must be
either simple or compounde, and Galen makes but two kinds of simple
fractures, a fracture made secundum longitudinem, and a fracture made per
transuersum. But Cornelius Celsus adds the third difference to it: his
words are these lib. 8. cap. 7. omne os, modo rectum, vt lignum in
longitudinem finditur, modo frangitur transuersum, interdum obliquum, etc.
Which is as much to say, as every bone is fractured either in length as
wood cleauen, either it is broken ouertwharte, and some time it is fractured
oblique or crokid.


John Yates. Albucasis names other kinds as fracture in cranio, a fracture in
the Jaws, a fracture in the nose, a fracture of the spine of the back, a
fracture of ye fossiles, and so of other bones. so of other bones.


John Field. He does right so as you say, but in my opinion these be no
differences of fractures: but rather notes the part affected


Tho. Gale. That is most manifest and hereof we have spoken in our
Enchiridion of Surgery, more at large, where we set out the differences of
fractures, and the exact manner of curinge them. But because you may the suerer
bear these differences of fractures seurer in memory, behoulde this table
which sets out all the divisions of them, and if you take pains to comitte
them to memory, then you have in effect the whole theoricke of solution of
continuitie, made in the harder parts of man's body.


John Yates. I thank you sir, and I will not omit the great profit, which
will follow for the present pain. For the gain will remain, when at the
pain shall be quite forgotton. Now for the time of the day which yet
remains: finishe luxations, and what else you think convenient, for the
institution of a Chirurgian.


John Feilde. We will accomplish your request, and first note that a luxation
or dislocation (which the grecians also call exarthrema) is a displacynge of
the ioynte, and mouyng of it out of this natural seat into an other place
unaccustomed whereby the voluntary motion of the same is hindered.


Tho. Gale. And this luxation is either perfect as when the bones are quite
divided, and put a sondre, or else it is an imperfecte luxation, when the Joint
is but only wrasted, and not altogether diflocated, this the Grecians call
pararthrema.


John Yates. How many kinds of luxations are there?


John Feilde. There be two kinds of luxations, a simple luxation with which
there is no other affecte joined: and a compounde luxation having one or more
effects to it connected and complicated.


John Yates. What effects be those which are joined with compounde luxations,
or rather to speak properlye, what effects do make the luxation compounde?


Tho. Gale. The most common are these, a luxation with a fracture, a luxation
with Pleghmone, a luxation with a wound, a luxation with dolor, a luxation
with hardness, a luxation with flux, and so in like sort you may number other
effects, as they are with the luxation connected.


John Yates. You have now fynished your talk touching the definitions and
differences of tumors against nature, wounds, ulcers, fractures and last of
luxations. and among the rest you make three of them, to be solutions of
continuitie, that is to say, wounds, ulcers and fractures: I pray you
answer me, be there no more kinds of solution of continuitie then these?


John Field. There is no solution of continuitie: but is comprehended under one
of these three. as you may perceive by the differences of solution of unity,
set out in the.iiij. book of Galens therapeutike method.


John Yates. I pray you rehearse those differencies.


John Field. There is a solution of continuitie, left in the fleshye part after
a wound called Thrauma. There is a solution called Helcos, where as there is an
ulcer in the flesh, there is solution of unity in the bone named catagma.
also spasma is a solution of continuitie in the nerve by conuulsion or
distension, Apospasma is like wise in the lygaments. Rhegma is a rupture of the
flesh. There is also a solution of continuitie called contusion, in Greek,
Thlasma, and is properlye in the vessels. These are the principal kinds of
solution. But now saying we have plainly made discourse of all such sycknes,
as fall under that portion of the that curatiue part, which is called
Chirurgirye, whereby you are taught to apply contrary remedies, for the
expellynge of the fornamed grefes: it is requisite to understand the
operations, which a Chirurgian must use in obteynynge his desiered scope: I
mean in restorynge health to his pacient.


John Yates. I pray you then let me learn what those operations are.


John Field. They in number three. First to divide or separate the continuitie.
secondly, to unite and join together, that is divided and separated. and last
of all to take away that is superfluous.


Tho. Gale. And we divide the continuitie, by making incision, letynge of
blood, and scarification: where as neade requires. as also we unite and join
together, that is divided when as we consolidate and conglutinate wou^des, when
as we heal factured bones causyng callus to grow out the fracture, and when
we repose and put bones luxated and dislocated into the natyue and wounted
seat. Last of all we do take away, that which is superfluous when as we
take away tumors against nature. as ganglia, Cancers, nodos, strumas, and
wartes called achrocordonas, also taking the water out of the bodies of those
which have a dropsy: or taking away the sixte finger or to a of the hand or
foot.


John Yates. All this I will keep well in memory.


John Field. The Chirurgian must also in these his operations observe six
things principally. First, that he does it safelye, and that without hurt
and damage to the pacient. secondly, that he do not detracte time or let sleep
good occasions offered in workyng, but with such speed as art will soffer,
let him finishe his cure. Therdly, that he work iently, courtyously, and with
so little pain the pacient, as conveniently you may, and not roughly,
butcherly, rudlye, and without a comblenes. Forthly, that he, be as free from
craft and deceyte in all his workings, as the East is from the Weast. Fifthly,
that he takes no cure in the hand for lucre or gaynes sake only, but rather
for an honest and competent reward, with a godly affection, to do his
diligence. Last of all, that he makes no warrantyse of such sickness, as are
incurable, as to cure a Cancer not vlcerate, or elephantiasis confirmyd: but
circumspectlye to consider what the effect is, and promise no more then art
can perform: and you shall do these things much the better, (yea with out
these, you can not any thing profit your pacient) if you understand the
manner, and exact ways of stichynge wounds, of making tents, splanes,
stuphes, bolsters, and convenient rollynges, wherefore if the day will thereto
suffice, we will declare and make plain these things unto you, and so finishe
our talk of the institution of a Chirurgian.


John Yates. I pray you let no time be herein lost, for loathe I ware to
depart with out the knowledge of them, and for that you first made mention of
stichynge, I pray you first begin with it.


Tho. Gale. Then you must well mark and diligently consider, that there are
three kinds and manners of stichynge taking names of there effects. The first
is called conglutinatiue or incarnatiue, the second is named compressiue, the
third is reseruatiues of these, we will orderlye entreat, and first touching
incarnatiue stichynge, note that the use of it is in all grene and fresh
wounds made in the flesh, whose lyppes or sides can not be conserved and
kept together, only with rollinge and ligature.


John Yates. And may not this kind of stichynge be used also in old wounds?


Tho. Gale. If you will use it in old wounds whose lipppes are hard and
thick it behooves you first to make scarification of skin abought, and so
let blood flow out, and then you may use it. and note that there are v. sundry
kinds of stichynge incarnatiue.


John Yates. Which are they?


Tho. Gale. I will set them out unto you. The first kind is done with an even
strong and soft threid of sylke, making the first stiche in the myddds of the
wound, then the second stiche in the mydde space betwyxte the first stiche
and the one end of the wound, and the threide stiche shall be like the second
in the other side of the wound. And so ever betwyxte two stiches in the
mids, take an other until the sides of the wound be aptlye and decentlye
joined together. And you must also take heed, that your stiches be not to
thick or thynne set. For if they be to thycke, you shall as Celsus says,
provoke dolor and pain, and cause inflammation, and if they be to thynne and
rare, then it can not conteyne the sides of the wound to gether. The second
kind of incarnatiue stichynge is used in great wounds of the these and
shoulders: and is in this manner. Join the sides of the wounds together, and
mark how many stiches it requires, and for every stiche you must provide a
nedly and a threid, and put a nedle in the mids of the wound, and wind the
threid round abought the nedle many and sundry times, and the nedle remain
still in the wound, until the consolidation of the same. You must in like
sort do with the other stiches, which are to be made, according to the
quantity of the wound. The theird kind of incarnatiue stichynge, is done
with quylles or rolls made of stupes in the bygnes, and form of quilles,
being writhed, and made even and smothe. And this way of stichynge is thus,
You shall draw the sides of the wound to gether, putting your nedle and
threid through both sides of the wound, and again put the nedle back
again through the same hole, and so leave a loupe of the threid behind, into
which you shall put the one end of the quytle, then draw strayte both ends
of the wound to gether, and fasten them to the other end of the quylle, and
cut of the threyde, and let the quylles so remain until the wound be
perfectlye healed. The forth kind is done by hooks, great or little,
according to the bygnes of the wound, and the hokes must be crocked and bowed
at both ends. You shall fast an hoke on the one side of the wound, and draw
the other end toward the other side, in which you shall fasten the other
hook. This kind requires no violence, but only serves whereas the wound
will easelye come to gether. The fyfte and last kind of stichynge is with
clothes threcornored being of such bygnes, as may suffice for the hurt
membre. which kind of stichynge is very convenient in those wounds where as
we will not have the cicatrize to be seame, as in the face. and these clothes
must be wette in some viscouse, and glutinous lyniment and lay them to on
either side of the wound, and when they be dried, you shall make your stiches
in the clothe conuenientlye, and aptlye, and so join the sides of the wound
together, and these be the fine kinds of incarnatiue stichynge.


John Yates. There be two things touching these stichynges that I must
require of you. The one is what manner a nedle we must use in our stichynge:
the other with what things we shall make our linyment which must be extended
on the lynynge cloth used in the fyfte kind of incarnatiue stiching.


John Feilde. The nedle must be long and small, being thresquare, the eye
holowed in, that the threid may the easelyer follow. to the which neadle there
must be a quille made holowe, called in latyne canulla, this serves to hold
the sides of the wound to gether stedfastlye whill you make your stichynges.
as touching the matter whereof you shall make your liniment, it consists one
myrrh, franckensence, sanguinis draconis, mastick, sarcacolle, pich, mylldust,
al these, or part of them, must be myxed with the whight of an egg, and so
extended on the clothes.


John Yates. This I understand right well: wherefore proceed to the second
kind of stichyng which you call compressiue.


Tho. Gale. That stichynge which we call compressiue used to stay and stanche
great flux of blood, is in this sort. foulde in the sides of the wounds, as
the skynners use in sowynge there skynnes: and stich the, mouer castyng them.
and we use this also in wounds of the intestines, and panicles wounded. But
this kind of stichynge, in my opinion is not so good and safe, for that if one
stiche break all the other are losoned.


John Yates. Then I pray you proceed to the third kind of stichynge, called
reseruatiue.


John Feilde. This last kind serves only to keep the sides of the wound to
gether until it be made hole. and is in like form, as other common stichynges,
sauinge that the sides are not so strait drawn to gether, as in other
wounds. and is right good in wounds ruptured and torn, and whereas things
are afterward to be taken out, and when as the wound must be purged, and this
shall suffice touching the knowledge of stichynge. there be other inventions
and ways of stichyng, which are to be learned rather be saying the conning
Chirurgian work, then by many lines set out in books.


John Yates. Then I pray you proceed to lynimentes and tents.


John Field. Tents, and lynimentes to be profitable, no man seen in
Chirurgerie douteth. but at this present, it shall be sufficient to show when,
how, and to what ends, they be used: and also of what matter they are made,
and of there diverse forms.


John Yates. I pray you unto how many ends does it serve?


John Field. Unto.viij. sundry uses.


John Yates. Which are they?


John Field. First we use tents to enlarge and ampliate a wound, or to
mundifye the same, and whereas matter and sanies is to be taken out of deape
wounds. Secondlye we are constrained to use tents in profounde and deape
wounds, which of necessitye require a new regendrynge of flesh. Thirdlye in
wounds which through the air are altered, and therefore are made fylthy and
sanious, and require mundification. Fortlye we must use them in contused
wounds. Fyftlye the use of them is right profitable in wounds, that has
inflammation or are any tumor against nature joined with them. Sextly, in
wounds which come of bytynge. For such wounds are not spedelye to be
conglutinated: but rather kept open. for that (if we believe Cornelius Celsus)
all bytynge does participate of venom: and therefore that must be drawn out,
and not kept in through to hastye cicatrizynge of the wound. Seventhly, we
occupye tents and lynementes in those wounds, in curing of which we must
handle the bones. Last of all, we use tents in old wounds which are
digenerated into the nature of ulcers.


John Yates. Seeing you have showed to what ends tents serve: I pray you
set out the matter and substance whereof they do consiste.


Tho. Gale. For the better understanding hereof it behooves to consider, for
what cause and intention they are made. for some time they be used to cleanse
and purge the wound, and then they are made of soft and old lynnynge clothe,
some time they are used to keep the wound open and wide, and then they are
made of stupes clean and well kempte, or else of coton woll. And for that cause
also there are tenies made of silver or copper, being made holowe, and put into
the wound. as for examples sake, in wounds of the nose, whereby he may both
aptly draw in the air, and also the wound be purged of such fylthynes as
grows. Further more when as we will ampliate, and enlarge a wound, than we
make tents of spongies, or the root of the gentian. for these suckynge the
moisture in the wound do therewith swell and wax bigger, whereby the wound is
enlarged. And as touching the form and figure of tents, they are made long,
short, bygge, and little, according as necessity require but. yet this is
general, that all tents be made bygge at the one end, and lesser ever
toward the other: less that they might slyppe into deape wounds. and these
tents are sometime dipped in vnguentes, and sometime put into the wound or
ulcer dry, according as occasion is offered, and this shall suffice, touching
tents, there use, form, and matter on which they are made.


John Yates. Boulsters follows next.


John Feilde. Boulsters called puluilli or plumacioli, are much profitable and
necessary in wounds: for they compresse the membre divided, and norishe, and
conserve natural heat, and keape the membre from the wait and pain of the
rollers. and in the old time they used to sow betwyxte two clean and whight
lynnynge clothes, feathers, and so made bolsters, which they used as is
aforesaid. But for because they ware compelled eftsoon, and often to alter
there boulsters, being weried through continual making new, they invented
to make boulsters of stepes, made with flax, sometime they make these bolsters
of woll or cotton fynly carded, and now it is in common use to make boulsters
of fine and soft lynnyng clothes thrice or more timner dubled, as necessitye
requires. also many do make and ordain boulsters of spongies. of these
boulsters some be applied wette, and some be used dry, and there be for the
more part.vj. kinds of boulsters.


John Yates. Which are they?


Tho. Gale. Retentiue, conglutinatiue, expulsive, restrictiue, confortatiue and
conseruatiue. These take these names of there use and office. for those bolsters
which be retentiue serve in wounds, for to stanche blod, being but little and
small, and laid on a stupe or splegiant mixyd with the whight of an egg, and
some restrictiue medicine. The conglutinatiue bolster serves to keep the sides
of great wounds to gether, after that they be stiched, and the form of these
boulsters according to Auicenne is threcornord, and so adapted to the member
that one of the corners of either bolster lay on the wound. The expulsive
bolster is ordained to put out matter or sanies in ulcers and wounds, which
be deep and holowe, and these be made either of lynnynge clothe, or else of
spongies. The restrictiue boulster is made of lynnyng clothes dubled two or
three foulde dypte in wine or vinegar, or other decoction, and so wrong out
and laid on either side the wounded part: and this does restrain the flux
of humors flowynge to the part, and keeps back inflammation and other
accidents, which might infest and grefe the weak membre. and the use of these
boulsters is right profitable in fractured bones or luxations. The confortatiue
boulsters serve to conforte and strengthen the weak membre and are diversely
made, some of fine lynnynge clothes in which is sowed feathers, and this is
made like a twilte, and serves for the arms or legs to keape them warm,
and norishe natural heat. There be also some made of towe, which are
accustomably used in wounds of the head. Other are made of spongies, dipped
in some hot liquore, or oil, and after wrong out and applied to the
joints and could parts: the conseruatiue bolster serves in luxations, to
keep the membre reduced to his natural form, in the same state. as the
shoulder bone being reduced to his wounted seat, we lay a bolster under the
arm, or as they commonly say in the arm pit, and these be the most notable
and usual kinds of boulsters used in the art of chirurgirye.


John Yates. If you in like manner make plain unto me the manner of ligature and
rollynges, I shall think my self satisfied for this present.


John Field. We will fulfill you request, and first following Auicenne in his
fourth fen. of his forth book, we make.iij. sundry sorts of ligature or
rolling, that is to say incarnatiue, expulsive, and retentiue. the incarnatiue
or rather conglutinatiue, is used in grene wounds, or fractures. And the
roller must be rolled up one both ends of the same, and the beginning of
the ligature must be on the contrary, or opposite part of the wounded place,
wyndynge the one part of the roller, toward the hyegher part of the membre,
the other toward the lower part. The breath of the roller must be such, as
may cover all the wound, besides some parts of the sound flesh. the roller
must be drawn strayter upon the wound, then in the other parts. but yet
not so strait, as may cause dolor or pain, inflammation and flux of humors,
and let the ends of the roller be stiched and sowed, and not tied on a knot.
The second sort of rollynge, called expulsive, is properly used in old and
holowe ulcers: and this does expel the matter, and filthiness gathered in the
botome of the ulcer unto the mouth and orifice of the same. This is with a
roller beginning at the lower part of the affected membre, and so making the
ligature straighte, and so proceed to the upper part of the membre, making
your rolling lesser, until you come to the orifice of the ulcer.


John Yates. Be not offended I pray you, though I seame to break of your
talk, and or you proceed further, let me understand what you call the hyer
part of a membre.


John Field. I call with Galen the hyer part of a menber that which is most
near the liver or heart.


John Yates. Then I pray you return to your former talk.


John Feilde. There yet remains to speak of the third kind of ligature,
which is called retentiue, and this only does serve to keep on medicines on
the wound, ulcer, or part affected, and in apostemes and other ill
dispositions, and this is done with one only roller beginning first on the
part affected, and so prosede according to use. fasting the roller with
stichyng, and this kind of ligature must be done softly, iently not to hard or
straight but without doloure or pain, and must be losed when necessity does
require. and if that it fortunyth the roler to cleave fast to the medicine or
member, take it not away with violence, but wette it so long with wine made
warm until it will of the one accord lose and be taken away without grief or
pain, and note, that your roller be made of fine and soft lynninge clothes,
not to much worn, and unable to hold, let it be also of that length and
breath, that the part affected does require. as for example rollers, for the
thigh must be.v. fyngers in latitude. for the arm three fingers broad, for the
finger the roller being a finger broad shall suffice, as touching the longitude
or length of the roller, it is to be made as necessity require, and occasion
is offered,


Tho. Gale. Well then, saying that we have ended this talk of stichyng, tents,
boulsters, stupes, and rollynges, we will here conclude for this present. for
behoulde the son draws far west, and the time will scarce suffice for
our iornye homewarde, and what you hear do want, you shall find in other of
my works. but in our goinge toward the City, let me hear what you have
borne away of this days talk.


John Yates. I will repete in brief words so much as I can remember.

1 First when as I met you in the morning, being in talk of Chirurgirye you
showed me what it was and gave me thereof diverse definitions.

2 Secondlye you proved it to be the third part therapeutike and showed the
antiquity and worthynes of the same with certain noble princes and capitaines
who exercised Chirurgirye.

3 Then you said that Chirurgirye did consist of two parts, the one being
called the theoryke, the other the pracise.

4 After that you declaryed what was subiectum Chirugiae the thing on which
the Churugian does exercise his art and also what was the end of Chirurgirie.

5 Further you sete out what manner a person he should be that must learn the
art of Chirurgiry, and what conditions are in him required, and what the cause
was that there is so many rude Emperikes and vnskylful professors of
Chirurgirye.

6 Consequently you did make mencyon of the chief and most necessary
instruments where with a Chirurgian ought to be furnyshed, both metalline
and medicinal with there proper office and use.

7 Then you sete out the method and way to be observed in learning the art of
Chirurgirye and of the right use of instruments both metallyne and medicinal.

8 Next folowyth such syckenes as fall under the hands of the Chirurgian that
is to say, tumors against nature, wounds, ulcers, fractures, and luxations
with the definitions diuisyons differences, and diverse names of every of them.

9 After these things finyshed, you set out certain kinds of solution of
continutye taken out of Galen.

10 Also you sete out the operations of the Chirurgian, which are required in
curing the fornamed grefes and what things are herein to be obseruyd or fled.

11 Finallye you set out the art and manner of styching, tents, plumacyes,
stupes, boulsters, and rollynges: with there differencis, substance, figure
use and comodytye. theys seem to be the arguments of this days talk except I
be deceyuid.


Thomas Gale. They be so indede, and now behold, we be come to the City.
Wherefore we will now leave of talk here, and you both shall this night take
part of such cheer as God has sent me, and let us recreate our spi-rites,
and be merye I pray you.


John Feilde. I thank you hartly sir, and I rejoice that my brother Yates have
so firm and perfect a memory, God send more such to follow Chirurgirye.


John Yates. I think you both for the great benefice I have received at your
hands. and God grant me to spend many days in this sort.


AMEN.
The.ij. kind of forceps called also Rostrum Coruinum, or Serpentinum.

The first kinds of instruments which are called forceps, seruyng to take
out thing fyxed in wounds.



Terebra inuersa seruyng to take out things fixed in wounds.

Terebra directa, serving to enlarge bones when things are therein fyxed.



An other kind of Forceps Denticulata: and are used for to take out shot
pelletes, arrovve heads, and other things fixid in wounds.



Forfex excisoria, or incision sheares, to enlarge a wound with.

Synrigies to make Iniections into wounds.



Trapan^, or a trapane to boore holes in cranio when necessity requires.


Gossopium, seruyng to lay the fractured leg in, broken with a gonneshot.
etc.


An Enchiridion of Chirurgerie, containing the exact and perfect cure of
wounds, fractures, and dislocations, newly compiled and published by Thomas
Gale, Master in Chirurgerie.

printer's device of Rouland Hall

PRINTED AT LONdon by Rouland Hall, for Thomas Gale. 1563.



Richard Ferris Seargeant Chirurgian unto the Queens most excellent Majesty,
unto his loving friend master Gale sends greting.
TWO things there be at this present which moves me to address my letters
to you master Gale, of which the one is the ancient and famous art of
Chirurgerie, which was in times past not an art of it self, but one portion
of the curatiue part of Physic, called Therapeutice: the other is my native
country. These two by your labors and pains: I trust shall receive no
small profit and gain, and these make me to write my letters gratulatorie
unto you. First that the art of Chirurgerie, who being now so decayed, whose
fame so obscured, her beauty eclipsed and utility of it diminished, shall by
you be somevvhat brought to her wonted and pristinat state. For it is in far
worse case now in this our furious and raging season (in which good arts
are contemned, or else little esteemed and had in price) then it was in the time
of Mantuan the Poet, who exclameth in this wife.

Fama quidem manet, vtilitas antiqua recessit. The Poet speaks of Physic
generally vvaying the excellency of it, and the great utility that has come
to mankind by it in the old time, as the works and volumes of the Greek
vvryters, do testify and bear witness: and conferring further their
testimonies with the poor fruits of it that did spring in his time, as one
lamenting the decay of so noble a science, and great gift of God to mankind,
said in effect.

Her noble fame yet still remain,
But few does health by her attain.
He speaks it in the way of comparation, that there did not so many by the
benefit of Physic receive their health as did in the old time. But I leave
Physic, and will speak of Chirurgerie both our professions. Surely I dare
boldly affirm that if Mantuan were now living and did behold the state of
Chirurgerie, he would not say that her fame did yet remain, but rather that
another fame nor yet great use remained: I had almost said that it was known
but only by name. And what be the causes that she is brought to this
miserable estate? If I shall say that which I know there be two principal
enemies. The one is the Chirurgian himself, who neither knovveth nor yet
labors to learn his art, but being inflamed with the love of turpe
lucru^, rudely and blyndely exercises his art. The other enemy is the
Pacient who has need of Chirurgeries aid. For he will have in like
estimation, a Cobbler, a Ioyner, a Minstraile, a woman, yea a Horseleache, that
he will an expert Chirurgian, yea and revvard them as well, if it be not
better. The remedies for one of these mischiefs you have, I hope, in time
provided. I mean in setting out your Enchiridion. For there shall those that
in deed are licensed to exercise Chirurgerie, find no small portion of this
art compendiously and faithfully gathered together. Wherefore leaving other
their authors in which many errors are hidden, I do exhort them that both
for the fame of Chirurgerie, which they ought to their vttermoste to
maintain: and also for their own gain and profit they will not only read
this Enchiridion: but read and read it again, not leaving until they be made
well acquaynted with the same. And if any places do remain obscure and
dark: they yet have you the author to resort unto, who will as gladly I am
sure open the meaning of them, as he has willingly for their gain and
profit compiled the same. As for the other enemy I mean the sick pacients,
it does not much force, for they are enemies chiefly to them selves, when as
they fall into the hands of such rude and bussardly clouters. And although
the pacients being maimed and brought in peril of death by such, do exclame
against Chirurgerie and Chirurgians: yet if the Chirurgians themselfes study to
be learned and excel such rude Emperikes, the slander shall return to the
authors thereof again. The second cause of my vvriting was for my native
countries sake, that like as you have labored from the time that you were in
my governance and teaching to profit the same, and have now shevved an
evident sign and token thereof in this your Enchiridion: so you will not
cease to continue in these your good enterprises, and your country shall
revvard you with honest report and perpetual fame. Thus I cease to trouble
you further, looking shortly for the publishing of this and other your works.

At my house in Paddinton, the second of July. 1563.
CHirurgerie whose perfect light
all other realms do know,
Whose learned men with diligence,
does make it shine and show,
In our cost has not yet apperd,
save in most obscure wise,
Thorovv duskye clouds of ignorance,
that science does dispyse.
But maugre now the malice great,
of Momus and his sect,
A most clear Gale does blovv away,
those clouds and them detect.
As after rude and cloudy air,
the vvelkyne hiecinthe blevve,
Is sometime seen, when vvynds most dry,
have changed so the hevve.
Therefore to this excellent Gale,
see that ye thankefully,
Give condinge praise, and pray that he
may more such blasts apply.
That the armade of learned ships
belonging to this art,
May way the ancres spread the sails,
and from rough seas depart.
While this gale blows, that some of them,
ariue may at our port:
That to the fleet of knowledge ons,
young learners may resort.
Purchasing there with diligence
science that will remain:
Leuyng aparte vile ingnoraunce
the mother of disdain.
Ihon Hall Chirurgian.

Thomas Gale Chirurgian unto the young men of his company, students in the
noble art of Chirurgerie, wishes the grace of God, perfect knowledge in their
art, and most happy and prosperous success in the same.
WHen as I had for your sakes (dear brethren) finished my book entitled the
Institution of a Chirurgian, and thought to have proceeded no further touching
the practike part, but minding to send you to Guido de Cauliaco, Brunus,
Lanfranke, Vigo, or some other of our Authors in Chirurgerie, which do
thereof entreat: I could find no one that might answer my desire. For either
they write in the tongue which the most of you understand not, either use they
corrupt and barbarous names of sickness and medicines, or they be to tedious and
long. or else to concise and brief. Furthermore they welney al are so full of
errors, that they are only for the learned to read, who can discern betwixt
truth and falsnesse. Wherefore knowinge your desire to learn, and seeing the
want of such Authors as you should profit by: I lamenting the case, and
tendering your wealth have taken the pains to compile you this brief
Treatise, called hereof an Enchiridion, in which you shall find the method
and way how to cure all wounds both in the similer and isntrumental parts.
Also how to unite and heal fractured members, and to reduce and repose again
into their wonted and natural place such bones as be dislocated. Diverse
secret and perfect experiments I have made open unto you. Wherefore be bold to
work after the doctrine set out in this book, and take these my labors as a
pledge of my good will toward you all: and love me still as you have begone.

At my house in London the.ii. of August. 1563.
The first book of the Enchiridion of Chirurgerie, containing the exact and
perfect cure of wounds made in the similer parts by Thomas Gale. The first
book.
FOr as much as in this present treatise (which I do compile for the
instruction of those that profess Chirurgerie) I do purpose to entreat orderly
of wounds, fractures and dislocations: I think good first of all to set out
what a wound is, and how many differences there be of wounds. How be it my
principal scope tends rather to teach the practice then the theorike at
this present. Therefore a wound is named a solution of continuitie, newely
made in the softer parts of the body, without putrefaction, corruption, or
matter. For if any matter, putrefaction, or corruption follows, then is it no
more called a wound but an ulcer. Of wounds I do make two differences: for
either it happens in the similer parts, as in flesh, artery, vain, nerve,
bone etc, or else in the organicke or isntrumental parts. Of these two sorts
of wounds we will now severally entreat. And for because the least and
smalest wounds, require least labor, diligence and connyng, and that the
studient must in most easiest things be first exercised and trained up: I will
show you briefly the cure of a simple and small wound, where the skin
only is divided or cut. You shall aptly join the lips or sides of the
wound together so even as possible you can: then make a stufe with towe and
the white of an egge-mixed with a little salt, and apply it to the wound, then
roll and bind it according to art, and this is sufficient in such kind of
wounds. You must also command the Pacient that he exercise not the wounded
member, least that he causes accidents to fall to the wound, as inflammation,
flux of humors, dolor, and pain. etc.

The cure of great and deep wounds, and of diverse kinds of stiching. Cap. ii.
IF the wound be great in the flesh, and yet without accidents, you shall
begin your cure as in the chapter before, that is by comprisyng and joining
the sides of the wound together, and than rollynge and byndyng it. But if the
wound be big, wide, or else ouerthwarte the member, so that rollinge and
binding are not sufficient: than you are compelled to use stiching, of which
there be diverse sorts, and I will set out those which are most in use. But
or you go about the stitching of the wound, give diligent heed that it be
mundified and made clean, that there remain not in it either any uncleanness,
as hear, duste, oil, or such like: which may hinder the adglutination of
the wound. You must for your stiching prepare a three square Needle made holow
in the eye, that the threde may the easier follow, and let your threede be
even without knottes, well twyned and waxed. Then your stiching shall be in this
sort. Make your first stiche in the mids of the wound, than a fingar
breadeth from that make another on both sides of the middle stich, and so
leaving the space of a fyngar breadeth, make so many stiches as the wound
requires. And take this for a general rule that you never begin your
stiching at the end of the wound, because through that occation the wound
might be drawn awrye, and the member lose his beauty, and sometime part of
his office. And beginning your stiches in the mids, this follows of
necessity, that your stiches shall be odd, if there be more or less than
twain. And if the wound be deep and ouerthwarte the member, then you must
make your stiches deeper and that for two causes, the one for that it should
not break out again the other that the wound might have less matter and
better take consolidation. And when you have thus stitched the wound you must
over cast the threide twice or thrice or you knit your knot: otherwise it will
break out or you can knit your knot the proof of which I have seen among the
unlearned surgeons. And when your wound is thus stiched then take tow and make
a stufe with the whight of an egg and this powder following and lay it on the
wound, and though it has not been used before this time, yet it is both
better and more convenient then that which is mentioned in the last chapter and
this is the first kind of stiching.

The description of the powder.
Rec. Olibani p. ij. Sanguis draconis p. j. Calcis ex ouorum testis, p. iij. Ex
his fiat puluis subliss. secundum artem.
THe second kind of stitching is to sow over the hand as the skinners do,
which is used in wounds of the intestines or where as Siphach is sowed to
Mirach. The third kind is to put the needle through both the lips of the
wound letting it so still to remain and wind the threede six or seven times
about the neadle and this is used in wide and large wounds. The fourth manner
of stiching is when as a vain or artery is cut and we use to stay the flux of
blood especially when as vene iugulares is cut. Then we thurst the needle
through that vain or arterye and then knit the same with the thried, then draw
out the needle and let a portion of the thread hang out so long until it
falls away. The fyft sort of stiching is used in wou^des of the face or
delicate and tender bodies which are not able to sustain the pain of stiching
with the needle. And the stiching is in this sort. Take little pieces of linnin
cloth three square and spread on them this unguent following. And lay on every
side of the wound the pieces of cloth every one from other an inche and when as
the clothes are dried well, then stich them and draw them together and use the
wound in all other points as is before said.

The making of the unguent.
Rec. Dragaganti ana. a dragme. Sang. draconis ana. a dragme. Olibani ana. a
dragme. Mastiches ana. a dragme. Sarcocollae ana. a dragme. Pulueris volatilis
molaris iij. dragmes. Albuminis ouorum q. s. ad incorporandum.
Of wounds in veins and arteries. Chap. iii.
WHen as it happens that the veins are cut and wounded you must diligently
mark whether they be Venae capillares (that is to say) small veins like
hear, or else any of the greater veins. If they be the small veins it shall
suffyce to stiche the wound and use the powder desiccatiue mentioned in the
chapter going before, with twoe and the whighte of an Egg. But if any of the
great veins be wounded, then the cure aforesaid is not sufficient. Wherefore
you may attempt to stay the flux of blood with binding the contrary side to
the place wounded: or with letting of blood in another place whereby there is
made diuersion of the flux. Also with frictions and rubbing the contrary
parts. If these suffice not then you must apply causticke pouders as
Arsenicum sublimatum, Vitriall burnt, vnsleked lime, or such like, or else make
cauterization with an iron, or stiche the end of the vain. And lay some
deficcatiue powder on it and so dress the wound lettyng it so remain four
days. And if there be any asker, you must apply to it the whight of an egg
and oil of Roses well beaten together. And the cure that is hear spoken of
veins, is also to be understand of arteries: and the way to know whether a
vain or artery is wounded: is by the yssuing out of the blood. For in an
artery cut, the blood comes leping and springing out with sum stay
according to the dilatation and compressyon of the arterye.

A powder desiccatiue.
Rec. Olibani ij. ounces. Aloes hepaticae. j. ounce. Pilorum leporis minutim
consciso. albuminis ouorum ad incorporandum.
LAnfranke gives great praise to this medicine, and makes mention of a child
three years old bearing a knife in his hand fell on it, and wounded his
throat so that through flux of blood, the pulce began to cease and the
childs fight to decaie. Lanfranke coming by, laid his finger on the mouth of
the wound to stay the flux of blood: then he tempered the powder with the
wheight of an egg, and laid it to the wou^d, lettyng it so remain four
days: and when he would have taken it away: it was so dry and cleued so fast
to, that it might not be removed without pain, wherefore he applied the white
of an Egg and oil of Roses beaten together to the place until the next day,
and the wound was found perfitely healed, to the great admiration of the
people which did behold it.

An other desiccatiue powder.
Rec. Calcis viuae ana. half an ounce Sangui. draconis ana. half an ounce Aloes
hepaticae ana. half an ounce Fiat puluis. ana. half an ounce
But if you will have another, which dries and restrayneth more, use this
following.

Rec. Gallarum ana. ij. dragmes. Sangui. draconis ana. ij. dragmes. Boli armeni
ana. ij. dragmes. Thuris ana. ij. dragmes. Aloes hepaticae ana. ij. dragmes.
Mastiches ana. ij. dragmes. Pilorum leporis iij. dragmes, fiat puluis crassus.
Rogerius and Iamerius used another powder, which is not only excellent in
staying the flux of blood, but also does exiccate and dry, whose composition
is in this manner following.

Rec. Colophonij vj. ounces. Boli armeni iij. ounces. Mastiches ana. j. ounce.
Sang. draconis ana. j. ounce. Olibani ana. j. ounce. Radicis co^solidae maioris
ana. j. ounce. Rosarum persicarum. ana. j. ounce. Fiat ex hijs omnibus puluis.
Vsus, vt supra.
Brunswike remembers a stone which he calls a bloudstone, (but yet not that
which are named Iaspis and Hematites) and it is in color pale whitich with
small red veins, and is found in Spain, whose powder he prefers before all
other things in stayinge the flux of blood in wounds, veins, and arteries.

Of the wounds in Nerves or Sinowes. Chap. iiii.
IN a wound it may happen the nerve to be divided in length, and sometime
ouertwrat which is very perilous. Also sometime the nerve is pricked with a
nedle, bodkin, all, the one or such like. Unto all this to cease the doloure
and pain of so sencible a part, you shall use oil of Roses made with Oleum
omphacinum, somewhat warmer then the pacient can well suffer. Also you may make
a good digestive of fine Turpentine well washed in the waters of plantyne, or
Hipericon, and apply it to the wound. And if these with often application
cease not the dolor and pain: then take Olei rosacei two Ounces, Boli armeni
two dragmes, and opij a little: mixed these together and apply it warm to the
wound. And when the pain is ceased and the wound draws to maturation: then
you may heal it with the drink and plaster used in green wounds, which you
shall find in the antidotarye. You shall also not only in wounded Neruis, but
also in all other wounds use Vnguentum de vermibus, whose composition is in
this manner.

Rec. Centaurij minoris ana. M. j. Cynoglossi ana. M. j. Consolidae minoris
ana. M. j. Consoldae mediae ana. M. j. Olei omphacini lib. j. Lumbricorum
terest. ana, half a pou. Vini albi ana, half a pou.
Stamp all these together and let them stand infused vii. days, then stamp
with that.

Seui Oiuini. lib. ij. Picis ana ounce iij. Resinae ana ounce iij. Ammoniaci
ana, v. dragmes. Galbani ana, v. dragmes. Opopanicis in aceto soluti ana, v.
dragmes.
Boil all these together until the wine and vineiger be consumed. Then strain
it and when it begin to wax cold add to it.

Thuris ana dragmes iij. Mastiches ana dragmes iij. Sarcacollae ana dragmes
iij. Croci dragmes.ij.
These being made in fine powder, in the puttyng them in, stir them well with
a splatter or slyse that they grow not into cloddes and lumpes. Also to
defend the wound of sinowes yea and all other wounds from accidents which
do commonly chance, all excellent Chirurgians use to have in readynes this
defensive following.

A defensive.
Rec. Olei rosarum. ij. ounces. Boli armeni. ana. i. ounce. Terrae Sigillatae.
ana. i. ounce. Aceti. ana. i. ounce. Camphorae. j. dragme. Solani ana. M.j.
Semperuiui ana. M.j.
Make of all these in a mortar a perfyte unguent. And if the wound be to moist
and has to much superfluous matter whereby it can not come to adglutination
and cicatrization. Then use this medicine next ensuing.

Rec. Mellis rosacei. ounces. vj. Farinae Hordeaceae. ounces. ij.
Temper these together and boil them, but suffer them not to burn, then put
to it fine turpentyne (washed in the water of Hypericon) two ounces, mix them
and use it to the wound.

Of wounds in which are fyxed thorns, splinttes of wode, arrow heads,
gonneshotte, or such like. Chap. v.
WHen as in wounds their happens to be fixed thorns, splentes of wood,
arrowe heads, gonshotte or such other like, and the orifice of the wound is
so narrow that with instrument it cannot be taken out, you must of necessity
labor to enlarge the wound, which you may do two sundry ways. The one is
with tents as of the root of gentian, pithe of elder, or a piece of a sponge:
the other is to make incision with a pair of cisers or with sheres whose
figure is in the institution. There be also when as the wound is enlarged
diverse and proper instruments to take out with such things as are there infixid
as to^ges or nippers, and teribillis, whose pictures are in the Book before
named. Also you shall know in deape wou^des what part is hurt by these signs
following. As the brain being wounded he shall void scomme and foam at the
mouth. If the heart be wounded, their yssueth out blood black in color. Also
if the longs be wounded, the blood is like a scu^me. But if the stomach be
perced the meat indegest comes out. In like manner the intestines being
wounded, the odor issues. Further more the urine flows out in wounds of the
bladden and so by that which is contained in the member, you shall conjecture
the wounded part. Now as touching the taking out of such things as be fixed
in the wounded member, you may proceed principally three sundry ways. First
you may use such instruments before set out as shall seem most necessary.
Secondlye if the thing fixed be forkyd as a broad arrowe head or such like,
and be perced through the greater part of the member: then it shall be much
better to thurst it through the member then to take it out at the orifice of
the wound. Last of all if these two ways will not serve, because of the
wounded place, then as much as you can make the wou^d wider by tents or
incision, and lay maturatiues to it certain days, and then that which is
contained in the wound will with less difficultye come forth. You shall
command the pacient to lay on the wounded side, because the drink which I
use in such wounds may the more readely come to the wounded part. The
composition of this drink you shall find in the antidotarie. Also you may use
this plaster following to the wound which is right good in extraxion of such
things as are fixed on wounds.

The empastre.
Rec. Apostolico^ descrip. Nicholai iiij. ounces. Magnetis orientalis. ij.
ounces. Polipodij. ana half. ounce Dictami albi. ana half. ounce Pinguedinis
leporinae. ij. ounces. Olei canabis. j. ounce. Terebinthinae. half an ounce.
Of all these make an emplastre. Also there is another composition of
marvelous virtue in drawing out rotten bones, thorns, and other like
things.

Rec. Nucleorum palmularum. ana v. drams. Stiracis rubei. ana v. drams. Salis
ammoniaci. ana v. drams. Aristolochiae longae. ana v. drams. Radi. cucumer.
asinini. ana v. drams. Teribinthinae. ana v. drams. Piperis albi. ana ij.
dragmes and a half. Piperis nigri ana ij. dragmes and a half. Armoniaci. ana
ij. dragmes and a half. Amomi. ana ij. dragmes and a half. Xylobalsami. ana
ij. dragmes and a half. Thuris masculi. ana ij. dragmes and a half.
Colophonij. ana ij. dragmes and a half. Fecum olei liliacei. q. s. Cerae iiij
dragmes fiat vnguentum,
But in arrow heads or shot poisoned the medicines rehearsed are not
sufficient. Wherefore you must give the pacient some antidotum or
Alexipharmacum, against venom both inwardly and outwardly, inwardly you shall
give him every day this potion.

Rec. Vini cretici ana ounces. iiij. Sublimatae rutae ana ounces. iiij.
Tormentillae. ana ij. dragmes. Dictami. ana ij. dragmes. Theriacae opt. i.
dragme. Bulliant ad consumtionem tertiae partis.
Outwardly into the wound you shall put oil of violettes warm, which oil
must be made of line seed oil. You may also weate you tent in the same oil
and also myxte it with your other medicines that you apply to the wound.

Of contusyd, brosyd, or crusshyd, wounds. Chap. vi.
IN contusyd wounds the method curatiue differs from that which hitherto is
mentioned. For in these wou^des first you shall apply maturatiues, whereby that
which is brosid and separated from the unity of the part may be turned to
matter (they call it in Latyne sanies vel pus) and when it comes to
maturation: then you must use mundificatiues to mundifie the wound, until it
be clean and void of matter. Then your next intention is to engender flesh
which you must do wc incarnatiue medicines, and ever be diligent to defend
the contusid member from accidents with oil of Roses warm applied to the
same. As touching maturatiues, mundificatiues, and incarnatiues, you shall find
them in my antidotarye and in diverse parts of this work.

Of deep and hydden wounds which can not be well perceived. Chap. vii.
IN this kind of wounds the cure is done two sundry ways. First if the place
may suffer it without hurt of veins, arteries, and nerves, is to delate the
wound with tents of gentian or of a sponge and after make it open and large
with inficion. The other is if the first way cannot be done without danger,
to put into the wound a probe or wax candle, until you come to the end of the
wound, and make there an issue that by this way the matter in the wound may be
cleansed with some mendificatiue lotion conuaied in to the wou^d by a syring.
Let your rolling also be such yt it be lose at the orifie of your wou^d, for
otherwise you shall keep ye matter still in ye wou^d. Neither shall you in
mundifiynge the wound thurst out the matter, for so doing you shall thurst out
the indigest matter in color of blood and hinder much the cure of the wound.
As Brunswik makes mention of a certain Harbor who had no knowledge in
Surgery, and yet would take upon him to practice. This Harbor (having a
pacient wounded in the arm) did every day thurst out so much blood and
brought such accidents to the part, that if Brunswyke had not fortunatly
come, the Barbours pacient had lost his arm. Such is the fruictes of blind
Emperikes. You shall also above the wound apply some defensive, and on the
wound some mundificatiue, and make your iniections with a syring until the
water come forth of the same color it was put in. The water used for
iniections is made in this manner.

Rec. Mellis rosacei. vj. ounces: Rosarum rubearum. ana iij. ounce. Florum
camomilli. ana iij. ounce. Mastiches. ana j. ounce. Ireos. ana j. ounce.
Thuris. half a ounce. Mirrhae. i. dragme. Vini albi. ij. pound. Aquaru^
pla^taginis vtriusque. ana, 2 pound. Rosarum. ana, 2 pound. Caprifolij. ana, 2
pound. Foliorum quercus. ana, 2 pound.
An other more vehement.

Rece. Aluminis. j. ounce. Balaustij. ana. j. dragme. Nucum cupressi. ana. j.
dragme. Orobi ana. j. dragme.
A drying water.

Rece. Consolidae maioris. viij. ounces. Peucedani. iiij. ounces. Aluminis. ij.
ounces. Aquae fabrilis per filtrum destillatae. iij. pound.
Boil al unto the consumption of the third part.

Amundicatiue.
Rec Vnguenti egyptiaci. ij. ounces. Aluminis. i. ounce. Olibani. half a ounce.
Mirrhae. j. dragme. Vini rubei two pound, bulliant pulliant.
Of wounds in the bones. Chap. viii.
THe solution of continuitie in the bone is in diverse sundry wise as fractures,
splentes caries, and by wound: of which last we will only in this chapter make
mention. If the bone wounded does hang to the panicle which invested and
covers the bone, then do what you can to cause it to join. But if this
panicle be also cut, then will not the wound be filled with flesh except the
pieces divided be taken away. And to the wounded bone you shall use Vnguentum
aureum ex mesues praecripto. After you must apply mundificatiues and
consoladatiues set out in the antidotary, and see that you use in this wound
apt ligature and that it be open upon the wound, that you may daily apply
medicynes to the place without loseinge of the roller. Furthermore you must
lay about the wound some defensiatiue whereby the part shall be preserved
from diverse and sondrye accidents which might fall to the wound. The
Chirurgian must also have regard that the pacient keep a moderate diet and
that he be soluble in body. Which if it cannot be by nature, then procure it
may be done by art. As by purgation, clister or suppositorie. And in all other
things the cure of this wound differs not from the cure of other wounds.

Of a new kind of curyng grene and freeshe wounds with balm. Chap. ix.
THe healing of green wounds by balm artificial is in this wise. Close the
wound and stiche it make it clean with a dry sponge and put of the baulme into
the wound very hot and dress it twice every day. And here you must note that
this balm takes not like effect in all green wounds. For the cure differs
according to the country, complexion of the party and place that is wounded.
For if the country be hot, the pacient colerike and the wound in the head, the
baulme takes not like effect nor is to be ministered as before is said. For the
country being whote, and the pacient whoote the wound can not be curied with
balm which is also hoote. And it is a maximum in physic, that infirmities
are taken away by their contraryes. How then shall the medicynes like in
qualityes to the region and complexion, cure the infirmity? Except you will
answer me it does it aproprietate totius substantie, which is nothing so.
What then, shall not Balm cure wounds in the fore named pacientes? Yeas
verylye, and I will show you in what manner. Stich your wound as is before
mentioned, and mundifye it with a dry sponge not dypte in water and take away
all the blood about it: then take Cotton and make a stuphe and dip it in
Oil of Roses and Balm not heat, of each equal portions and apply it to the
wound. And defend the wounds with all diligence from accidents with some
defensive: for to Colorike persons in whote regions there comes accidents
spedelye. The like cure shall be in wounds where as the boon is seen.
Except that you must add to the Oil and Baulme, Turpentyne well washed and
the stuphe being laid on the wound, you may further use the emplaster which
customably is occupied in grene wounds. And if the region be could, the
pacient flegmatycke, and the part fleshye then apply your Baulme whote, for
in those there follow of course small accidents, except it be by disorder of
the pacient and fault of the Chirurgian and great wounds in these persons will
sone be curied. For this artificial balm has in him the virtue attractiue,
conglutinatiue, and desiceatiue: his description you shall find in the
antidotarie. Also in whote regions, cold complextions: and in cold regions,
colericke persons shall sooner be curied: then where both region and temperature
of the pacient agree in whotnes. The like is to be understand of the time of
the year. For ye colerik person being wounded shall sooner be curied with balm
in winter, then somer. Also the wound being dressed, there are three kind of
ligatures or roillings used as necessity requires. The first makes flesh in
the wound to grow and is called incarnatiue. The second does expel such matter
and superfluity as combreth the wound and this rolling is named expulsive. The
third reteineth and keeps the sides of the wounds together, and such medicines
as are applied thereto and is called retentiue. Of them in our institution of
Chirurgerye we do make a most ample discourse. And thus briefly and
compendiously we have passed over the principal wounds which may happen in the
similer parts? Now time and order requires that with the like method we
entreat of wounds in the isntrumental parts.

FINIS.
The second book of the Enchiridion, containing the curation of wounds in the
isntrumental parts: By Thomas Gale Master in Chirurgerie.
Although it might seem sufficient for the general cure of wounds to have
made mention of those which are contained in the first Book: yet seeing
particular exercise in the isntrumental parts is both delectable and
profitable: and is as it were a master which teaches: I will endeavor my self
to set out perticulerly the cure of wounds in the isntrumental parts. And I
call an isntrumental part, which is not simple but compounded of the similar,
as the head, the eye, the hand, the arm, and such like. And for because I will
orderly entreat of them: I do divide the body of man into.iiij. parts, that
is to say, into three ventricules, and that which the anotomistes do call art
us, containing the arms and legs. The first ventricle containyng the
aninimall spirits giving sense and motion to the whole body is the head. The
second comprehending the vital spirits is from os furculae until Diaphragma:
where the inferior ventricle receiving the liver stomach, spleen, kidnyes,
intestines, bladder and diverse other parts does begin: and ends at os
pubis. And for because the soul is the most noble part of man and has his
seat in the head, I will begin with the wounds of the head first, and set
forth such things for the preservation of this so principal a part as my
poor knowledge and experience will extend unto. And here look not that I will
waste time in rehearsing of weapons wherwyth the part is hurt as diverse do. For
it helps nothing to the cure of the wound, to say he was hurt with a staff
clubbe, sword, shot, fall, or such like: but rather to look to the wound
self: whether it be a simple wound, or that it be compounde: whether it be
contused, or else but cut: and so following the differences set out in the first
Book.

Of certain general precepts, necessary to be followed in the cure of wounds
of the head. Chap. i.
WOunds in the head are diverse and sundry, some are but simple wounds, being
cut without any accidents or hurt of Cranium, some be with cutting also of
Cranium. Some be contused and yet Cranium perfyte, other happens with the
breaking of Cranium, some are with perishing of Dura, vel Pia matter, and loss
of some substance of the brain, and others are without. But for that I would
you should know whether the Cranium, be fractured or not, I will give you
certain proper precepts. If the contusion be great, if he fall from any high
place, or have a great stroke, if when he reteyneth his breath there comes
out moistnes through the division or fracture of the bone, also vomitinge,
vertigo, bleding at the nose or ears, the eyes red and swollen, want of speech,
a sharp fever, and difficulty of making his urine: all these show Cranium,
to be fractured. There is also another note to know Cranium fractured, and that
is to streke on Cranium, ynke or Mastick and if there be any fracture, then in
the place there will appear blacknes, which is a most certain token that ye
Cranium, is fractured. Also in your prognostication you must consider these
brief sentenses. Great breaken of Cranium, is perilous, and the wound in the
brain or corruption of the Dura, vel Pia matter, is deadly and mortal. If the
blacknes of Dura matter, when it happens cannot be taken away with Mell
rosaceum, it is a token of death. Also the Cranium, or brain wounded at such
time as the moon is at the full (that is when she is in opposyon of the sun)
it is very perilous. And in curinge the wound if there be a tumor or swellyng
and that same soddenly vanishe, it is perilous. But in the consolidation of
Cranium, if the flesh appears read it is a good sign. Like as if in the
wound there be good digestion and no acidentes coming to the same. And for
because in curing the wounds of the head there is diuersytie in workynge and
diverse opinions: I think it good to set out certain documentes which I take
out of the famous Guido, whose words are these following. First says he the
wounds of the head wc breaking of the bone have much difference from the
wounds of the other members both for the nerves to Cerebalis Medullae so noble
a part, Tract. 3. Doct. 3. Chap. 1.
and also for the round and spherelike figure and form of the head, which
hinders unition and is unapt for ligature and rolling. Secondly that in great
wounds of the head it is nedeful for to observe the common intentions
mentioned before in the treatise of Phleubotomie and purgie^. That the body be
soluble which if naturally it chances not, then by suppositorie, clyster, or
ientle lenytiue, you must make it lose. Also ye diet thin. etc. Thirdly that in
wounds of the head the hear be shaven and take heed that no hear oil or
water fall into the wound which may let consolidation of the wound, and that to
resist dolor both above and under: apply the white of an egg. And after the
beginning let things be used as is aforesaid to mundifie and incarnate. And
round about the wound alwais use the unguent with bole armoniake and oil of
Roses, that the dolor and distemperance of the part be asswagied and al ap
ostimatio^ put back. Forthly as you have often hard of Hippocrates, that all
couldnes is hurtefull to nerves, bones, and marowe, and also the air does hurt
and alter the principal members. And therefore in winter when the pacient is
dressed let the windows be close shut and a good fire of coals, and dress
him with a candle and when he is dressed put on his head a coyfe or cap made of
a shepes skin. Fifthly if the wound become to digestion and has matter
contained in it, that it be removed away with fine linte or cotton so softly as
may be, and this in winter must be but ones, and in somer twice. Sextly that
upon the tents there be laid a soft spong to suck and draw and receive out
the matter that it falls not to the brain. Seuently that you have a role a
yard long and four fyngers brood, and that you shall roll it up within ij.
handful of the end and begin the ligature at the forehead, and extend it
toward to ears opposite to the wound and the other part to the ear next
the wound leauyng the ears uncovered. And let the rouller come downewarde to
the first byndynge and do it so many times until the head be covered. etc.
Eyghtly take heed if there remain any skale of a bone, wasshe the wound
with Wine. If there be no fever give him this powder following.

Rec. Pinpenellae ana. Betonice ana. Gariophillatae ana. Valerianae ana.
Osmundae ana. Pilosillae, quantum de omnib. fiat pulius.
Last of all that the pacient lay on the side which least greueth him unto
there be found matter in the wound: and then he must rest on the wounded
part that the matter may the more redily void. Thus much in effect touching
Giudo his counsel. Also I wyshe from the first beginning of the wound until
such time as there is no fear of apostimation yt you use some mitigatiue as
oil of Roses three Ounces, Honnye one dragme mix them together. And then you
may also use this powder which dries without corrosion or pricking.

Rec. Irios j. dragme. Thuris ana ij. dragmes. Aristolochiae rot ana ij.
dragmes. Corticu^ radicu^ papaueris. half a drame. Sarcocollae ana, j. dragme
and a half. Sang. draconis ana, j. dragme and a half. Mirtillorum ana, j.
dragme and a half. Nucum cupressi ana, j. dragme and a half.
Make these in a powder. Thus much I thought good to write before I entered the
particular cure of organike wounds, being as guides and counselers to be
followed through this holeboke. Now will I begin and show their methodicall cure.

Of simple wounds in the head with cutting, which happens without hurt of
Cranium, chap. ii.
IF the wound be simple without hurt of Craniu^, or loss of substance: then
is the cure of it like the cure of other wounds to stiche, roll, incarnate,
and cicatrize. But if the wound be with the loss of substance then you must
dip your tents and cover your plegeantes with incarnatyues, and Cicatrize the
wound with your accustomed pouders. vnguentes, emplasters, and other things
thereto belonging. As touching stiching in the head because many speak
against it: I affirm it to be not only profitable in small wounds, but
also in great, most necessary. For it keeps the parts separated together,
which rolling can not, it also causes that the air does not alter the part,
which where it chances it is very hurtful. And here I except great wounds
in the fore part of the head which may not be stiched but on the side. And
putting in it oil of Roses which does both take away the pain of the neruous
panicle inuestynge and covering Cranium, if the wound be so deep and also it
makes the bones more easy to be taken out, and takes away the sharpenes of
Mell when with it we intend to mundifie any inward panicle and defends from
accidents.

Of wounds in the head with cuttynge and fracturynge or breakyng of Cranium,
but not through percyng. Chap. iii.
THe wounds chaunsing in the head by cutting and fracturing of Cranium, going
not through the whole substance of the same is called Rimula. This wound
either is great or small, if it be small it shall have the same cure
mentioned in the Chapter next going before this. For in such a wound there
is small generation of matter, and that ngendred through his gross substance,
cannot discende in the cut or ryfte. But if the wound be great then is it
either in the sides of the head or upper part of the head. If it be in the
sides, it has also the same cure that the wounds in the Chapter going before
receives. Except that in the lower part of the wound there be put a tent
whereby if any matter be retained in the wound it may the easyer come out. But
if the wound be in the upper part of the head it may not be stiched for
that nature there cannot purge her self. If the fracture comes to the mids
of of the two Tables of Cranium, it is needful to take sheres called Rugines
of diverse bygnes. And as the bone of the pacient is uncovered you shall use the
greatter Rugynes, then after take those that are narrower and so at length the
narowest of all, and this shall you do at all times in the mids of the two
Tables. Thus shall you speedely cure this wound with drying medicynes and
tents that shall suck and draw out the matter.

Of wounds in the head in which Cranium is cut unto the inward panicle,
without loss of substance. Chap. iiii.
This kind of wound will have sometimes sparankes or sharp peaces of bones
and some are free from them and are even without sharp peaces of bone. Those
that have the sparankes do hurt and offend that panicle which is called Dura
matter. Therefore they must be taken away with a lenticulerand made smothe and
even and then is the cure of this wound like the other wounds in the former
Chapter. For if it be in the upper part of the head you shall use to mundifye
and desiccate without stichen, if it be in the sides, then in the lower part
of the wound you must put a tent as is aforesaid that the matter may the
easier come out.

Of wounds in the head contusyd with out fracturing of Cranium. Chap. v.
IT is the proper scope of curyng this wound to apply to it medicines that
resyst flux and repel the matter back. Vsyng in the beginning after the
accustomed manner ye white of an egg mixed with oil of Roses. And so
resoluynge the matter gathered, you shall use Honnye and wine in which salt
has be nput. But if it come to maturation then you shall open it and use the
cure to it that is proper for apostumes and such medicynes as are mentioned in
the general chapter of contused wounds.

Of wounds in the head with contusion and where Cranium, is little fractured.
Chap. vi.
YOu must diligently look whether in the place whereas Cranium is fractured,
there are any sharp pieces of bones, which if there be, they must be removed
with the lenticuler as is before mentioned. Then you shall dress the wound and
lay thereon soft silk wette in Honny of Roses and oil of Roses and with
your instrument you shall put in the lynnen cloth betwixt Dura matter, and
Cranium. And lay on it soft tents wette in mel ros. and oil of Roses and
apply there on a lynnen cloth wette in the same, and on the wound of the
flesh put either dry linte or a soft spong to suke up the matter and apply an
head plaster that the matter, close not with in. After which you shall in Wine
made whoote, weete towe and press out the Wine with your hand, and lay that
also on then upon that put dry towe and roll it softely that the things
applied, may abide on the wound. And when the wound is mundifyed then leave
of the first clothe, and use the head powder to make the wound incarnate and
so with consolidatiues and medicines inducing a cicatrice you shall proceed
until the wound be perfytely cured.

Of wounds contusid with great fracture of Cranium, Chap. vii.
COntusyd wounds with great breaking of Cranium must be cured after this
method.

First you must shave the here away, then with an incision knyfe you shall cut
the place cross wise or as other do use, which is not so good after this
manner. Then raise of the flesh and make the fractured bone open and bare. And
if there follow any flure of blood, you must clence the wound with lynnen
clothes dipped in water and Vinegre or the white of an egg an if there be no
flux of blood fill the wound with dry lynt and dippe clothes in oil and
wine and apply it to the place and bynd up the wound as thereto belongs. Then
if there follows no accidents which may hinder the cure of the bone: open
the wound and let the pacientes ears be stopped with lint or cotte^ that he
hereth not for making him faint hearted and afraid. And let two me^ stay his
head with their hands, and then with your knife depart the bone or with the
lenticuler. But if this cannot be done both spedely and with out great pain:
then set a trappen and bore it through so many times until it be separated
from Cranium, and you shall take away this bone fractured first lifting it up
with an eleuatory until you may take it away with your nippers or fingers.
Then you must make ye edgies of the bone smothe and even. And after cure it in
all cases as you cure wounds where Cranium is fractured with the taking out
pieces of bones.

Of wounds in the face. Chap. viii.
WOunds in the face are either in the fleshy parts or not, if in the fleshie
parts, the wound is either dry or moiste. If in thy fleshye part and the
wound moiste, you must of force stich it with a fine small round nedle and fine
thread: but if it be in the fleshy part and dry you shall in the place of a
round nedle use a square If the wound be not in the fleshy parts then in any
case you must leave of stiching and in the place of it to join the lips of
the wound together you shall do in this manner. Take Sanguinis draconis calcis
ex testis ouorum, Mastiches, as much as is sufficient make in powder and temper
them with Honny until it come to the substance of honey. Then prepare.ij.
linen clothes according to the length of the wound and spread of it upon the
clothes, and then unto either side of the wound apply a clothe and suffer it
to dry. Then with your needle take your stiches on both clothes and unite, and
join the sides of the wound so even and right as may possible be, which
things done lay on the wound this powder following.

Rec. Sanguinis draconis. j. dragme. Olibani. ana. ij. drams. Cacis e testis
ouorum. ana. ij. drams.
Make these in fine powder and temper them with the white of an egg and lay
it on towe. And aplye it to the wound. After you shall heal it with the same
plasters, unguents, pouders, or balm as you accustomably do another wound.

Of wounds in the eyes. Chap. ix.
ALl wounds in the eyes or about the eyes are dangerous both for the nerenes
of the brain, and also for perrill and loss of sight. Yea it happens often
that through wounds about the eyes the nerves optic have been stopped and
there have also followed sometimes a cataracke. What is then to be looked for,
when as the wound happens in the substance of the eye? Galene makes mention
of one hurt in ye white of the eyes and much moisture flowed out and yet the
pacient restored to his sight. In like sort does Brunswycke rehearse the like
historye of two children wounded in the eye and much moisture came forth and
he curyed them with this water following. But these cures are de raro
contingentibus.

Rece. Aquarum faeniculi ana half a ounce. Rosarum ana half a ounce. Polij ana
half a ounce. Eufragiae ana half a ounce. Rutae ana half a ounce. Albuminum
ouorum. q. s.
These did he temper and myxe together and applied it to the eye? As he
affirms to the great comfort and restoring of sight in the children
aforesaid. But I will go to the cure of wounds of the eyes which is without
perishing of sight. If any be wounded through the upper or nether part of
the eye so that it hang down, then with a needle being bent crooked, aptelye
for the eye and a sylke threede well waxed you shall very Fynele styche it up
that the tumor of the eye may be the lesser.

And put into the sight of the eye the water before mentioned, and make a
Plaster of the white of an Egg, Sangui. draconis, and frankencens and lay it
round about the eye, but beware that it touch not the eye self. Also you
may heal it with Baulme, but be diligent none fall into the eye, and ever use
the water aforesaid, which is a wonderful defensive and lets accidents to
come to the place.

And this shall you perfitly cure the eye. And if the wound come with arrow
head, or sword, you shall proceed with oil of Roses, and if any thing be
fixed in the wound, work after the doctrine set out in that Chapter. And when
the thing fixed is out, fill the wound with oil of Roses, tempered with the
yelke of an Egg warm, and mundifie the wound with mel Rosarum, farina Hordei,
and Fenograeci, after apply incarnatiues, and heal the wound with the plaster
used in green wounds. But if it be wounded with nedle or thorn, use the
mundificatiue and defensive about the eye, and wash the eye with this
colyrium following until he be healed.

Rec. Boli armeni. ounce. ij. Thusiae ana. ounce. j. Sangui. draconis ana. ounce.
j. Gummi arabici ana. ounce. j.
Make these in powder, and put it into a quarte of good rose water, and set
that glass in warm water three hours. Then put to it wine of pomegranettes,
and let it remain in the warm water (the Alchimistes call it Balneum Mariae)
a whole day. After strain it, and put of it morning and euenyng into the eye.
Also put on it this plaster following.

Rec. Succi Semperuiui ana. iiij. ounces. Solatri, ana. iiij. ounces. Boli
armeni, ana. iij. dragmes. Dragaganti, ana. iij. dragmes. Myrrhae, ana. iij.
dragmes. Gummi arabici, ana. iij. dragmes.
Make that is to be brought into powder, into powder: and disolue the Gummes in
vinegre, and make thereof a Plaster, and if through chance there falls into
the eyes, hear, dust, motes, or such like, open the eye, and milk into it
the milk of a woman. Also it is very good to use this medicine plasterwyse,
as the other before mentioned.

Rec. aquarum solatri, ana. ij. ounce. Semperuiui, ana. ij. ounce. Tutiae
praeparati, half a dragme. Coralli rubei, ana. j. scrup. Margaritar. no^
perforat. ana. j. scrup. Camphurae, x. grains. Dragaganti, ana. viij. grains.
Gummi arabici, ana. viij. grains. Cerusae lotae, v. grains. Lactis mulieris,
ana ij. dragmes. Albuminis ouorum, ana ij. dragmes.
Mix these together and use it plasterwyse, as is before said.

Of wounds in the ears and lips. Cap. x.
THere is nothing in these wounds proper to it self, but is cured as other
green wounds, that is to say: First stiche it and lay thereon the powder
mentioned before, made of Frankencense, sangui. draconis, and lyme of Egg
shelles, etc: and about the place lay some defensive. And the iij. day apply
oil of Roses and the yelkes of Eggs. After mundifie the wound with Mel
rosarum, farina hordei, Turpentine, Sarcocolle, and Myrrh. Then heal it up
with balm, or the plaster used in green wounds: regarding always if need
require to purge, let blood, box, and scarifie.

Of wounds in the nose. Cap. xi.
THe Nose is sometime cut of, and sometime hangs by the flesh of the lips.
If it be cut of, there is no cure to be used, for the organicke parts divided,
will not receive unition and joining again together. If it hang by the flesh
of some other part, then stitche it aptly and reduce the nose to his natural
form. Then put into the nostrelles tents of Wolle, or Goose quilles, that the
head may both purge it self the better, and also that he may the easier
draw up the air. And on the wound self, lay the powder hereafter following.
Then lay thereon the white of an Egg with towe tempered with some of the
foresaid powder, and after bind and roll it, which thing that you may the
easier and more aptlye do, let him put on his head a cappe or queyfe, and sow
thereto your band, and so may you proceed in the curation of this wound,
with the balm or plaster used in green and fresh wounds. The powder applied
to the seame of the wound is this.

Rec. Thuris ana. ij. dragmes. Calcis ex testis ouoru^ ana. ij. dragmes.
Sangui. draconis ana. ij. dragmes.
Mix them with the white of an Egg tempered with oil of Roses, the defensive
may be in this manner following.

Rec. Succi solatri ana. vj. ounce. Semperuiui ana. vj. ounce. Olei rosacei,
iiij. ounces. Boli armeni. ij. ounces. Aceti j. ounce. misce.
An other defensive.

Rec. Vitellos ouorum. ij. Sang, draconis ana, ij. dragmes. Dragaganti ana, ij.
dragmes. Gummi arabici ana, ij. dragmes. Boli armeni. ana, ij. dragmes.
And if you would have the skin fair, then you may lay on it this unguent
following.

Rec. Thuris, ana. j. ounce. Myrrhae, ana. j. ounce. Farinae faenograeci, ij.
ounce. Resinae, vj. ounce. Lithargyri auri, half an ounce. Olei oliuarum, ij.
pound. Cerae, iiij. ounce.
Mix these, and make thereof an unguent, and use it, as necessity shall
require and the discrite Surgian think convenient.

Of wounds in the mouth. Chap. xii.
THe wound of the mouth has nothing proper to it self, but is stiched,
defended, mundified, incarnated and cicatrized, after the manner of other green
wounds, therefore it were superfluous to make a vain rehersall of the cure
and medicines, seeing it is plainly set out before, and medicines prescribed
which are thereto convenient.

Of wounds in the neck. Chap. xiii.
WOunds in the neck sometime are made in the fleshye parts only, sometime in the
ligaments, cords, and nerves, sometime in ye great veins and arteries, and
sometime in the passages where as brethe, meat and drink, goes in. If it be
in the flesh, it differs not from the cure of other green wounds, but wc
stiching powder wine and other accustomed medicines it is cured If it be in the
ligaments, cords and veins, take deep stiches in the fleshie parts about the
ligaments, cords and nerves, and then cure it with oil of ground worms, and
the plaster used in green wounds. If it be in the great veins and arteries
there is great peril, through the great flux of blood, stiche the veins and
arteries, and upon them lay this powder, which Galene used in the like great
fluxes of blood.

Rec. Thuris, j. ounce. Aloes, half an ounce.
Make these in powder, and incorporate them with the white of an Egg, until
it come to the thicknes of honny, then put to it the hears of an hare, and
apply it to the wounded veins or arteries. Or you may use in place of it,
this powder following.

Rec. Colophonij, iij. ounces. Consolidae maioris, ana. half. ounce. Lapidis
aematitis, ana. half. ounce. Mastiches, ana. half. ounce. Sang. draconis, ana.
half. ounce. Olibani, ana. half. ounce.
Make these in fine powder and use it as the other before. Afterward you shall
in all cases cure this wound as is mentioned in the first book of veins and
arteries wounded.

But if the wound be in the passages of air, meat and drynk, you shall stich
it and use the powder, and use it outwardly as other wounds: but inwardly you
shall give them Diasymphiton and Diadragacantum to lick with their tongue, and
when the wound begins to digest, then mundifie and incarnate it with this
medicine following.

Rec. Mellis rosati colati, iiij. ounce. Farinae Hordei, v. ounce. Terebithinae,
iij. dragmes. Cerae, ana. ij. dragmes. Resinae, ana. ij. dragmes. Thuris, ana.
j. dragme. Mastiches ana. j. dragme. Mirrhae, ana. half a dragme. Sarcocollae,
ana. half a dragme. Mumiae, ana. half a dragme. Olei Mastiches, iiij. ounce.
fiat emplastru^.
Hitherto have we showed the cure of wounds organicall, which may happen in the
first or uppermost Ventricle: Now in like manner we will direct our pen, and
set out the cure of wounds which commonly chance in the second or middle
ventricle.

Of wounds in the breast. Cap. xiiii.
Wounds in the Breast either are without percing through the same, or else
they are into the breast. If they be without percing into the body, they are
cured as other green wounds, with towe dipte in the restrictiue powder, and
laid to the wound, and with the Jews plaster, or the plaster incustomed in
green wounds, or else with Balm. But if the wound be percing through, then
it is either with blood falling inwardly and hurt of some inward part, or
else it is without flux inward, or percing of any inward member. How you
shall by signs know if any of the inward parts be hurt, I have set out
at large in the fyfte Chapter of the first book. As touching the cure of
wounds in the breast, which are without hurt of any inward part, you shall
in no wise tent them, but stiche the wound, and with stufes dypt in wine,
vnguentes incarnatiue, emplasters, and convenient rollyng, heal it up like
another wound. But if it be percing through, and he bleed inwardly and some of
the inward parts are hurt, then with all expedition and haste, you must labor
to bring out such blood and matter as is within contained, and you must put in
a tent large and long, on which you shall streke oil of Roses, and fasten a
threde to the tent that it go not in, and so put the pacient to great pain.
The pacient must be laid upon a board on the wounded side, and so moved to and
fro that the matter may come out at the wound, and make iniections of wine or
Mellicratum with a syringe, diligently markinge the quantity and color of
the wine or Mellicratum when it comes out, for if it be like in quantity and
color, then you need no more to make iniections for all the matter within
contained is quite voyded at the wound: Or you may boil in oil of Camomile,
Lupines, mel rosarum, and Myrrh, until the iij. part be consumed, then
strain it and make iniections with a syring as before, and then shorten your
tent, and apply this mu^dificatiue following to ye wound.

Rec. Mellis rosati colati, half a pound. Mirrhae, ana. half an ounce.
Thuris, ana. half an ounce. Sarcocollae, ana. half an ounce. Teribinthine, two
dragmes. Farinae hordei q. su. fiat emplastru^. Faenograeci. q. su. fiat
emplastru^.
Then you may give him every morninge half a pynte of the potion warmed,
which is used in these kind of wounds, whose composition is in this sort.

Rec. Centaurij minoris, ana. vj. dragmes. Costi, ana. vj. dragmes. Nepitae,
ana. vj. dragmes. Garyophillatae, ana. vj. dragmes. Pinpinellae, ana. vj.
dragmes. Polosellae, ana. vj. dragmes. Summitatu^ canabis, ana. vj. dragmes.
Caulium rub. ana. vj. dragmes. Tanaceti, ana. vj. dragmes. Rubiae, ana. vj.
dragmes. Glycirrhizae, ana. vj. dragmes.
Boil all these together in fair runnyng water until the consumption of the
third part. Then strain it, and put thereto of clarified honnye so much as
shall be sufficient to make the potion pleasant in taste. You must also give
him to lick of Diasparmaticon, Diadragagantu^, Diasympiton, or Diacodion, all
do comfort and strengthen the Breast. And when the wound is mundified, and the
matter digested, then you shall heal it with the plaster called Diapalma or
Phenicinum, and with this powder following vsyng apt and convenient rollynge,
according to art.

Rec. Mastiches, ana. j. dragme. Mirrhae, ana. j. dragme. Thuris, ana. j.
dragme. Sarcocollae, ana. j. dragme. Sangui-draconis ana. j. dragme.
Make them in fine powder, and thus have I showed you the proper cure of such
wounds as may happen in the middle ventricle, being not deadly and mortal,
which do utterly refuse all kind of curation.

Of wounds in the third and lowest ventricle, called usually the Belly. Chap.
xv.
THere are properlye three sundry simple wounds in the region of the belly
according to which there is three diverse cures. For either it is a small wound
not percing through: or else it perceth through, and so does hurt of
necessity some of the inward parts, but yet they come not out: Or else it
perseth through with hurt of the inward parts, by reason of which they come
forth. You shall know what part inwardlye contained is wounded by their
proper signs set out in the the fyfte Chapter of the first book.

As touching the cure of these wounds, I will severally entreat. If the
wound in the Belly be but in the fleshye parts, without persyng through,
then you shall stiche it, and heal it with Balm, or the plaster accustomed in
green wounds, without further difficulty. But if the wound perseth through
Siphac and Myrack, and yet hurts no other of the inward members nor they come
not out, then the cure of this wound shall be as is aforesaid in all things
except stitchyng. For in the first stiche put the needle through the one lyppe
of the wound, but touch not Siphack: and after put the Needle through the
other lyppe, and through Siphack and Myrach, and make a knot upon the threede.
In the second stitche thrust the Needle through the one lyppe, and and through
Mirach and Siphack, but in puttyng the Needle through the other lyppe, you
shall not touch Siphack but Mirach, and make a knot without, and so proceed
orderly until the hole wou^d be stiched. And this is it that Galene says,
sow Siphacke to Myrach, because it is a neruous panicle, and without blood it
can not of it self take consolidation. But if any of the inward parts, as the
stomach, Liver, Spleen, Intestines, or Bladder, be wounded, and yet by reason
of the smales of the wound, they come not out, nor can not conveniently be
taken forth, then you must with much wisdom and discretion amplyat and make
the wound larger, and if the wound be in such parts as are to bestitched, as
the bottom of the stomach, or intestines, then they shall be sowed as the
Skinners do accustom over the hand, and put upon the seame this powder
following.

Rec. Olibani, ana. j. dragme. Mastiches, ana. j. dragme. Dragaganti ana. j.
dragme. Gummi arabici, ana. j. dragme. Sang. draconis ana. half a dragme.
Mumiae, ana. half a dragme. Misce fiatque puluis subtilis.
And then you may proceed to the outward wound and stiche it and let the
threede of the inward wound hang out at the outward wound, that as
inwardelye it does consolidate, so you may take away the threede and apply
to the outward wound this powder following.

Rec. Sanguinis draconis, ana. half a ounce. Olibani, ana. half a ounce. Calcis e
testis ouoru^, ana. half a ounce.
Make these in powder and use it as is aforesaid, and in all wounds of the
inward parts give the pacient the wound drink specified in the xiiij.
Chapter of this book. Also Glisters made with stipticke wynes, are
merueylouslye commended, in like manner is this potage or brothe much commended.

Rec. Aquae pluuialis vel fontanae, Furfuris treticei, q. su.
Let these boil one hour then strain it, and put to it these pouders
following, and give the pacient to eat thereof.iij. or.iiij. times a day or
you may prepare him brothe made with a chicken if he be much infebled and
weak, and put of the foresaid powder into it, but if Zirbus be wounded and
corrupted, then says Galene, let the black and corrupted parts be bound
with a threde or cord, and cut away all that is so bound, and after the
stiching of the belly, let the ends of the cord hang out, at yt neither part
of the wou^d. But if the wound be through percing without hurt of some
inward part, and coming forth of the same, then in this cure there are
iiij. ententions to be obeserued.

The first is to put such parts in their proper places as are come forth.
The second to stiche or sow the wound. The third is to apply apt
medicines. And the fourth is, that none of the inward parts suffer dolor or
tumor, but be defended from accidents. The first intention is brought to
effect, if the wound be big and wide enough, that with soft and gentle
handlyng, they may be put in their due place. But if by this means they may
not be put in, either for the strayghtnesse of the wound, or else because the
parts be swollen or inflamed, then you must work in this manner. That is to
say, if the wound be to strayte, then you shall enlarge it aptly with a
conueninnt instrument. But if they may not be put in, because the parts are
swollen and inflated, then you shall labor with continual fomentations to put
away the same, which spryngeth for the more part of coldness of the air.
Then take soft Sponges dipte in warm water, and foment the intestines, and
after foment them with astringent Wine, which is much better then the water,
and does a great deal moore strengthen and comfort the intestines. The
second intention is performed with soft and gentle handlinge and compressing
the Bellye being certain that the members without be rightly placed, then
conveniently to sow and stich up the wound according to art. The third
intention which is done by application of medicynes, is to lay that comfortable
powder on the wound whose description I showed in this chapter above. Also
stufes with wine, incarnatiue medicines, emplasters, and other convenient
medicines and roling as are according to art. The fourth intention of the cure
is done with soft wolle wette in warm oil and lay it about the region of the
flanks, and give him clisters of oil Dille or Camomill: and also upon the
wound self to power of the same oiles and apply emplasters made with
fenegreke, Linesede and althea. Or you may boil wine and salt with as much
flower as will suffice to make it thick, and apply it as hot as he may suffer
it upon his rolling and over all the parts that suffers pain. And when this
is cold then use an other, and so do so many times until the dolor and pain
cease And as touching the matter if any remain within after the stiching
and curing of the wound, there is no great regard to be had because nature
does digest and resolve it: and if there be any multitude she sendeh it to the
flanks, an then the cure of it, differs not from the cure of other apostumes
which happen in the flanks.

Of wounds in the bladder, yard, and testicles. Chap. xvi.
Wounds in any part of the bladder except it be in the neck of the same
(which through his fleshines will receive consolidation) are incurable. But
those that are in the neck of the bladder, yard, or testicles, have the same
cure that other grene wounds have. You may very well lay on the wounds of
these parts, this medicine following.

Rec. Mellis rosarum.ij. ounces. Olibani ana.ij. dragmes. Mastiches ana.ij.
dragmes. Dracaganthi ana. ij. dragmes.
Make these in Powder and myxe it with the Mel rosarum, and lay it upon the
wound: for it does both mundifye and does also defend the part from accidents
yet if for the sensibilitie of the part, there happen great dolor and pain,
foment the part with Oil of Roses warm. And do in all other things, as in
the cure of green wounds.

Of the wounds in the parts called Artus, containing the arms and legs:
and first of the wounds in the arms. Chap. xvii.
THese parts named Artus has their beginning at the shoulders and so
streacheth unto the hands: and begins again at Ischion and extends unto
the end of the toes of the feet. The wounds in the arm have no peculier
cure to it self from other wounds, more then that the wounds in this part must
have ye most suerest and strong kind of stiching you ca^ divise, because of the
bygnes and ponderousnes of the arm. If the wound be in the flesh, then cure
it after ye second chapter of the first book. If in the veins and arteries,
then follow the method set out in the second chapter of the same book. Like as
if the nerves be wounded, or else the neruous places as the joints, and heads of
the muscules, the ligaments and tendons and such like. etc. you must observe
the doctrine contained in the forth chapter: and if the wound be in the bone
you may use the like curation, that I have taught in the, 9. chapter of the
same book. Furthermore if the wound be both in flesh, vain, artery, and
sinow, then you must follow all the precepts set out in the.2.3.4. chapters.
And compound and mix your medicines together, according as the wound is in
more parts then one. And if after the cure of the wounds in the joints (as
many times it fortuneth) there are any knots or hardness left whereby the
joints have not their free motion, then you shall take away this accident
with this plaster following.

Rec. Lithargyrij iiij. ounces. Muscilaginis faenogreci ana viij. ounces Sem.
lini. ana viij. ounces Muscilag. Maluiscici vj. ounces. Resinae xvj. ounces.
Oleorum camomillae ana, j. pound and a half. Olu iarum ana, j. pound and a
half. Cerae vj. ounces Farinae faenograeci ana, ij. ounces. Sem. lini. ana, ij.
ounces. Mastiches ana, j. ounce. Thuris ana, j. ounce. Axungie ana. ij. ounces.
Pingud. gallinaceae ana. ij. ounces. Anserinae ana. ij. ounces. Anatis ana. ij.
ounces.
Make of these a plaster according to art, and apply it to the knottes and it
will resolve them and put them away.

Of wounds in the thighs knees and legs. Chap. xviii.
THE same cure that is required to the wounds in the arms, is also used in
wounds of the thighs and legs. But the wounds that happen in the joints as
in the elbowes, knees, and other like be most perilous and dangerous, because
of the cords, ligaments nerves, and sinowie parts which being wounded bring
most grievous pains, and dangerous accidents. Wherefore beside the cure set out
of wounded nerves and sinowie parts in the forth chapter of the first book:
you must with all diligent skill, labor to keep the wound from pain and
accidents: by purging, letting blood glisters, diet, repercusiues, and
defensatiues and medicynes that do cease dolor: among other this is one.

Rec. Olei rosacei iij. ounces. Lumbricorum terrae ij. dragmes.
Make the worms in powder, and mix it with the oil and being made hot dyp
cotton in it and lay it to the wound so hot as he may suffer it. Then upon it,
you shall lay a linen cloth.iiij. fold dipped in wine in the which these herbs
following are boiled: then wette your roller also in it and roll the member
according as it is showed in our institution of Chirurgerie.

Rec. Pilosellae ana. M. j. Arthemisiae ana. M. j. Betae ana. M. j. Herbae
candelae ana. M. j. Vini. optimi. iij. pound.
Also to defend the place from accidents this defensive following is right
precious and good.

Rec. Olei rosacei iiij. ounces. Boli armeni. j. ounce and a half. Terrae
sigillatae ana half an ounce. Aceti ana half an ounce. Caphurae half a dragme.
Succi Solatri ana j. dragme. Semperuiui ana j. dragme.
Mix al these together in form of an unguent and use it about the wound. The
other medicines hereto belonging you shall find in the antidotarie and also in
the forth chapter of the first book. and thus I have set out to you both
briefly and plainly the cure of wounds in the instrumental parts: and also
wherein they differ from the wounds in the similer parts. Now will I show you
the cure of wounds which happen through biting of a mad dog, or stinging with
a snake, adder, scorpion, or such like: and then will finishe this second book.

Of wounds coming through bittinge of a mad dog, stinging with a snake,
adder, scorpion and such like. Chap. xix.
Although the cure of this wound rather does appertain to the Physician then
to the Chirurgian, yet (requiring no small part of this art to the cure of the
same) I will show the cure of it according to the most approved authers
Greeks, arabians, and Latinestes. And for because all virulent bytynge of
venomous beasts and serpents have well near one cure, I will show the way and
manner to cure the biting of a mad dog, using it for an example to follow in
the curation of the rest. Galene in the.13. book of his therapeutike method,
shows two indications in curing these wounds, the one is the euacuation of
that virulent liquor, the other is the alteration of that which causes dolor
and pain. The euacuation of the virulent liquor, is done by whoote medicynes,
which do attracte and draw. Among which Aetius does meruailously praise
theriacam Andromachi, made plaster wise and applied to the wound. Also he
uses a plaster unto the same being of meruaylous effect whose composion is
in this sort folowinge.

Rec. Argenti spumae ana, j. pound. Cerusae ana, j. pound. Resinae. ana, j.
pound. Olei veteris. iij. pound. Cerae vij. ounces. Ammoniaci ana, iiij.
ounces. Galbani ana, iiij. ounces.
Make of these a plaster according to art and apply it to the wound. Also
they use to box the wound and to cauterice it, either with an hot iron, or
with some cansticke medicine. Also many use to pull of the feathers from the
rumppe of an hen, and hold the rumppe to the wound to suck and draw out
the venom. Cornelius Celsus, does much commend salt to be rubbed on the
wound. Guido has a plaster very sharp, but yet much commended, and is made in
this manner.

Rec Galbani ana, half an ounce, Sagapeni ana, half an ounce, Opopanacis ana,
half an ounce, Assae fetidae ana, half an ounce, Myrrhae ana, half an ounce,
Piperis ana, half an ounce, Sulphuris. ana, half an ounce, Stercoris columbini
ana, ij. ounces. Anatis ana, ij. ounces. Calaminthae ana. j. ounce. Mentastri ana.
j. ounce.
Disolue the Gummes in wine, and with honye and oil make hereof an emplaster.
Take also diligent head to enlarge the wou^d and keep it open at the lest xl.
days. And prouok matter to flow out as much as is possible: and when you
suppose the venom to be all drawn out, then you shall with mundificatiues,
incarnatiues, and medicynes that do cicatrize, heal the wou^d. But you must
not forget to apply medicynes inwardly against venom called Alexipharmaca,
which of their property do resist poison. Among which Galene in his.xi. book
entitled de facultatibus simplicium medicamentorum, resyteth this medicine
following to be of most marvelous virtue against the biting of a mad dog.

Rec. Thuris. v. ounces. Gentianae x. ounces. Cancrorum fluuiat. xx. ounces.
Make these in powder and give him ij. sponefull of this powder in fountain
water for the space of fortye days. And unto the wound self Galene says,
his master Aschrion used this plaster following.

Rec. Picis. j. pound. Aceti acerrimi Sextarium italicum. Opopanacis. iij.
ounces.
Myxe them and make them in a plaster according to art. This is the method of
curing these kind of wounds, and these be the chief and principal medicines:
which like as diligently I have collected and gathered out of the principal
authors writting of the cure of these kind of wounds: so wish I them to put
it in proof when necessity requires, and also to take thankefully these my
labors and pains.

FINIS.
The third Book of the Enchiridion. Setting out the removing of such
accidents as happen to wounds: by Thomas Gale Master in Chirurgerie.
NOw that we have brought to an end and showed the methodicall cure of wounds
as well in the similer as also in the organicall members of man's body: and have
set out diverse and those both excellent and also approved remedies for the
same: I think convenient in this thryd book to show the perfect curation of
such accidents as do accustomably follow in wounds, either through the nature
of the wound or indiscreet usage of the pacient, or else through the error of
the Chirurgia^. These accidents are called of the Greek writters Symptomata,
And be such, as when they happen in wounds you shall never cure the wound
before you have quite put the^ away. And the accidents which commonly happen
in wounds, for the most part are these folowinge. That is to say. Dolor,
Inflamatio^, Distemperance, a fever, pruritus, conuulsio^, the palsy, Sincope,
and alienation of mind. Of these, so briefly and exactlye as I can, I will in
order make mention willing this book to supply only the place in time of
need, where the learned Physician cannot be had. And first we will begin with
that accident which is called dolor or pain in wounds.

Of Dolor in wounds, and the aswaging the same. Chap. i.
THis accident called dolor, pain or grefe, brings a flux of humors to the
wounded part, and stereth most grievous accidents, as phlegmone other wise
called infla^mation, aposthemes, and such like. Yea and that in those bodies
which are pure and free from excrementes. wherefore with all diligence you must
labor to cease the Dolor, or at the least to mitigate it somewhat, appliyng
to the place, fomentations with oil of roses warmed, mixed, and tempered with
the white of an egg. But if the pain be so vehement that with this medicyne it
will not be mitigated: And that you are constrained to use some stupifactiues,
you shall make your fomentations with oil of popie, and if great urgent cause
constrain you, you may add a little opium to it or Oil of mandrage. There are
other who do much commend this emplaster following.

Rec. Radicis Solani ij. ounces. Foliorum maluae M. ij. Furfuris triticei iij.
ounces, Olei rosacei, q. s. fiat emplastrum:
Also other do apply to the affected part an emplaster made of bread or whete
flower boiled in milk and some oil of Roses. And these cease the dolor and
pains two ways. Both in resolving some part of the matter gathered by reason
of the flux: and also in aswaging some what the vehemecie of the pain by the
quality of the medicine. But of the medicynes, which do aswage and cease
dolor you shall have it more at large set out in the antidotarie.

Of inflammation and apostemation. Chap. ii.
THat which the greeks call phlegmone, we usually term in our language
inflammation. And is no other thing then a vehement heat stirred in any part of
the body through the force of the humor flowing to ye part. There are iiij.
intentions to be followed in the cure of an infla^mation. The first stands in
the right order of diet, the second in ceasing the flux or diuersion of the
anticident matter. The third is in euacuation of the matter collected and now
impacte in the part affected. The fourth stands in the corretting and putting
away of accidents. The first intention is fulfilled in the right use of the
six things called Non naturales, as in the pureness and temperatnes of the
air. The meat and drink could moist and small. To flee exercise, and to
use quiet and reaste of body. to use moderatnes in slepinge and watching, to
beware of surfiting and layng as they say gorge upon gorge. To keep always the
body soluble and lose. To flee all vehement perturbations and affections of the
mind, as anger, contention chiding and such like. Last you must abstain from
Venus service as from the greatest pestilence that may be in this diseace. The
second intention which is in ceasing and diuertion of the matter that flows,
is by opening a vain in the contrary side, if the age and strength of the
pacient can suffer it. Also apply medicines to repel and drive back, among
which Galene prayseth Oxycraton (that is water and Vineigre boiled together)
and foment the place with a spong dipped in it, also you may boil in some
astringe^t wine, the rine of a Pomegarnet and foment the place therewith. Or else
to apply to the place inflamed cataplasme which Galene in his second book ad
Glauconem does so much commend whose composition is in this manner.

Rec. Semperuiui sing q. s. Maliconj. sing q. s. Sumach. sing q. s.
Boil this in wine until it come to the form of a cataplasme. Also Auicenne
in his 3. fen. forth book. First Tract. Chap. 3. describes another of much
effecacitie. His composyton is in this form.

Rec. Succi Semperuiui j. pound. Vini nigri half a pound. Farinae Hordei iij.
ounces. Malicorij ana. half an ounce. Sumach ana. half an ounce.
Boil these and make thereof an unction. But or you boil these, you must make
the malicorium and sumach in powder. The third scope in euacuating that is
collected in the beginning of inflammation, is done with repercussyue medycines,
and to mix with these such as do digest the matter, among which this is one.

Rec. Rosarum. ana. iiij. ounces. Florum camomillae ana. iiij. ounces. Sapae j.
ounce. Aquae fontanae. j. pound and a half.
Boil these and make an emplaster of them. But if the inflamatio^ be in
augmento then you shall mix with your digestive medicines that repress and
lets the flux. But when the inflammation is in statu then mix with the
foresaid medicines, medicines that does somewhat mitigate. As oil of roses.
Also you may use this emplaster which in this sort following is described.

Rec. Parietariae ana, M. j. Maluae ana, M. j. Furfuris ana j. ounce. Farinae
volatils ana j. ounce. Fenograeci ana ij. ounces. Anethi ana ij. ounces. Olei
camomillae vj. ounces.
Boil all in wine while they come to the substance of an emplaster. There is
also another excellent plaster which Galene uses in the Vigor of an
inflammation and is thus made.

Rec. medullae panis frumentacei j. pound.
Let it stepe in whote water for the space of an hour, then strain it and put
to it.

Mellis optimi iij. ounces.
Make of these an emplaster and apply it to the infla^mation. But if the
infla^mation be as they call it in declinatione you must only use medycines to
digest which may euaporate the matter remaining: if the infla^mation does end
by euaporation or discussion. But if it turn into an aposteme then you must
use medycynes to suppurate, to open, and to mundyfye, of which you shall have a
large discourse in my book of tumors against nature: and also in my book of
curyng ulcers. The fourth scope of removing or rather defending the
inflammation from accidents, as dolor, fever, aposteme, and such like,
requires diverse and sundry remedies, which because they be accidents also
chauncing in wounds, I will entreat of them in their proper Chapters.

Of remouinge and taking away distemperaunce in wounds. Chap. iii.
THat distemperaunce which happens to man's body, whether it be hot, cold,
moist or dry, or else co^pounded of these simple, Galene and all the Grecians
comprehend under and name of Dyscrasia. Of which if to the wound there comes
a whote disposition, which you may easily conjecture by the great redness and
vessication you must infrigidate the place not with Henbaine, or Mandrake, but
rather with Roses Plantaine and vngnento albo, which do as well desiccate as
moderatly make could. But if the distemperaunce be cold, which you may Judge
by the softnes and leadye color of the skin: You shall put these away by
medicines contrary in quality, which do moderatlye heat. So that you may
not apply Rosen, Piche, or Aspaltum, but wine, vnguentum nigrum, or fuscum, or
Basilicon. So in like manner if the wound be to moist or to dry, they must
be cured by their contraryes. And here is to be noted that if the
distemperaunce be in hear and moisture, or in heat and drynes: in cold and
moystenes, or cold and dryness, then your medicines used in the simple
distemperatnesse, must be mixed together contrary to the compound
distemperaunce.

Of conuulsion which happen in wounds. Chap. iiii.
SPasmos which we call conuulsion is no other thing then a deprauate motion
chauncing to the voluntary faculty of mouyng through sickennes. Conuulsion
chances three sundry ways. By repletion, by inanition, and by society or
participation with the brain. The general method in curing these three
sorts is to hold strongely, and to chafe and annoint them with oil of
Lilies, or else with common oil in defecte of it. The conuulsion springyng by
inanition is cured in this manner. First foment the place with oil, or else
with Hydreleum made warm. Also if no other thing be let or impediment, you
shall use a bathe in which is boiled the head and feet of a sheep, goat,
calfe, or lamb. Also in which is put Malowes, Althea, Violet leaves, Beats,
and Mercurye, putting to it the third part of oil. Some there be which
with great profit do use this linement following, annoynting with it the
ridge bone or spine of the back and all the joints.

The liniment.

Rec. Olei violarum, iiij. ounce. Amygdalarum dulcium, ana. vj. drames
Pinguedinis gallinae, ana. vj. drames Medullae crurium vituli ana. vj. drames
Pinguedinis vituli, ana. x. dragmes. Haedi, ana. x. dragmes.
Boil all these in the decoction of Malowes and roots of Althear, unto the
consumption of the said decoction, then strain them and make aliniment of
them, and use it as I have aforesaid. But if the conuulsion come of fullness,
you must cure it by euacuation of the whole body. But there be two ways to
euacuate, that is to say by lettinge blood and by purgynge. But we let blood
in those bodies in which there is abundaunce of blood or else where
inflammation has caused conuulsion, although there be no abundaunce of blood.
But if the fullness be of humors, then you must purge that which does offend
whether it be fleame, collor or melancholy. But gross and viscous humors are
to be expelled with Hiera, Picra, and Agaricke. You must also use sharp
Glysters, also Gargarismes, Apophegmatismes and neesing, that the gross fleame
may come forth by the nose and mouth. The body being thus purged and let
blood, annoynte the neck, armepittes and flanks with this lynement following.

Rec. Oleorum liliacei, ana. ij. ounces. Costini, ana. ij. ounces. Spicae, ana.
ij. ounces. Laurimi, ana. half a dragme. Castorei, ana. half a dragme.
Euforbij, ana. half a dragme.
Mix these together and use as is before said. Also Rogerius and Theodoricus
do much in this sickness praise the unguent, whose composition as in this
manner.

Rec. Olei muscellini, j. ounce. Petrolei, half an ounce. Olei communis, ana.
iiij. ounce. Butyri, ana. iiij. ounce. Styracis calamitae, ana. ij. dragmes.
Rubrae, ana. ij. dragmes. Mastiches, ana. half an ounce. Olibani, ana. half an
ounce. Gummi haederae, ana. half an ounce. Cerae, an ounce,
Make these in an unguent according to art, and with this unguent moderatly
heat, anoint the whole neck, and all the spine of the back. Last of all if
the conuulsion comes by consent and society of parts, and springs of
dolor, you must cure it by medicines called Anodyna, of which we have made
mention in ye first Chapter of this third book, and also in our Antidotarie.
But if it appear by the bytyng or sting of any venomous beast or Serpent, you
shall apply boxes to the wound, and make a plaster of Triacle and lay to the
place, and use the same method of curyng that is set out in the last Chapter
of the second book. And if conuulsion insueth because sharp and corrodyng
humors do byte and fret the mouth of the stomach: then with all diligence
you must provoke him to vomit, and after strengthen the stomach both
outwardlye and inwardlye with apt and convenient medicines, following the
counsel of some expert Physician.

Furthermore in all conuulsions this is a general rule, you must strengthen
and corroborate the brain. Therefore shauynge the hear, you shall foment the
head, neck, armepittes, flanks, spine of the back, and joints with oil of
Lilies. If these do not take place, then according to Galenes doctrine, you
shall cut the nerve a sundry. For (says he) it is better to suffer hurt
and loss of one part, then to look for a certain and inevitable death.

Of the the Palsy coming of a wound. Chap. v.
PAralysis, which we in English call the Palsy is the relaxation and
molifiynge of the nerves, with loss of feelynge and mouynge of one side or
part of the body. This accident sometime follows vehemente conuulsions, and
chiefelye after great wounds in the head, and in the spine of the back. It
does show forth his might. The cure of the Palsy is this wise. First you
must euacuate the body by purgynge of the humors, and euacuating the body.
Yea by letting of blood also if necessity requires. Further to diuerte the
flux which goes to the resolved part, using also a convenient diet, in all
which it is necessary to consulte with the learned Physician. These things
being done, then let the Surgian with all diligence apply local medicines,
among which many do use emplasters, cataplasmes, unguents, fomentations,
boxinge, and diverse other remedies. But Guido (out of Mesue) has chosen a
most precious liquour, and against this accident of most wonderful effect,
with which he annoynteth the spine of the back, the neck, and the part
resolved, and surely there is no remedy comparable to it. Yea, and Guido
leaving all other medycines held him self well satisfied and pleased only
with this so precious a treasure. But I will omit the praise of so noble a
lyquour seeing my wit is to simple, and my pen to rude to do that herein is
required, and therefore I let that pass, and will show you the composition.

Rec. Myrrhae electae, ana. ij. dragmes, Aloes hepaticae, ana. ij. dragmes,
Spicae nardi, ana. ij. dragmes, Sangui. draconis, ana. ij. dragmes, Thuris,
ana. ij. dragmes, Mumiae, ana. ij. dragmes, Opopanacis, ana. ij. dragmes,
Bdellij, ana. ij. dragmes, Carpobalsami, ana. ij. dragmes. Ammoniaci, ana. ij.
dragmes. Sarcocollae, ana. ij. dragmes. Croci, ana. ij. dragmes. Mastiches,
ana. ij. dragmes. Gummi arabici, ana. ij. dragmes. Styracis liquidae, ana. ij.
dragmes. Ladani electi, ana. ij. dragmes. sc. Succi castorei, ana. ij. dragmes.
sc. Musci, half a dragme, Terebinthinae optimae ad pondus omnium.
Beat all those to powder, that are to be brought to powder, and mix all
these with the Turpentyne, and put them in a vessel of distillation and with a
soft and gentle fire draw out this most precious liquour, and if to this
composition you did add such Herbs as are used in curing the Palsy, you
should make your medicine so much the moore precious.

Of Syncope or swouding through cause of the wound. Chap. vi.
GAlene in the twelfeth book of his Therapeutike method says, that Syncope
is a sudden decay of strength, coming through imoderate euacuation,
vehement dolor, continual watchynge, intemperatenesse of the principal
parts, or vehement pertubations of the mind. But Syncope which follows in
wounds spryngeth for the moore part of great effusion of blood or else of
vehement dolor. And you may easelye conjecture the coming of it, by the
weakness, pulse, palenesse of face, cold sweates about his neck and
temples. And this accident is not lyghtlye to be regarded because it so
sondenlye commmeth, and is as it were the image of death. Therefore comfort the
wounded man by all means possible. Suffer no great company to be where he is,
and before this accident come, give him a pease of fine White bread sopped in
the best Wine you can get, into which Wine you shall put Rose water Borage
water, and a cake of manus christi perlati, and after you have tosted of the
bread, give him of the Wine to drink, and comfort him with sweet smelles,
and chafe his temples with Rose water, and if he begin to sownde cast cold
water on his face, and chafe and rub his temples with your hands, pull him
by the nose, exclame and call him loud by his name, rub his hands, and pull
him by the ears, and do what you can to revive and quicken his spirits as is
the accustom of learned Physicians.

Of alienation of the mind coming by the reason of the wound. Chap. vii.
DElyrium or alienatio^ of the mind is a motion deprauate of the principal
faculty: taking his beginning of evil fumes ascending to the head, and also
of intemperatnes of the brain: it does diverse times fortune the brain to
suffer of it self, and sometime by consent with other parts. But I will
speak only of that alienation of mind, which comes by consent of parts.
Therefore if that alienation of mind apprehends the pacient after he be
wounded, you must call some skillful Physician, which with potion, frictions,
binding of the hands and feet, sharp glisters here to apt to attracte the
fumes and vapors from the head, and when the vigor of this accident
infesteth, it is good to power on his head the decoction of Popie. For Galene
says we must labor to astoyne somewhat the brain, and provoke sleep by all
means possible. Auicen says that many have been delivered of this accident
by vsinge certain days the decoction of Brionie roots. And thus I have set
out the most notable and peryllous accidents, which happen in wounds, with
their intentions curatiue, and proper medicines used in the same. Wherefore I
think it good here to finishe this third Book.

FINIS.
The fourth book of the Enchiridion comprehending the manner of curinge
fractures, and luxations: by Thoma Gale Master in Chirurgerie.
Seeing I have hitherto in their proper books set out the cure of all those
wounds, which may happen in the softer parts of man's body, as in the
flesh, muscles, veins, arteries, nerves, tendons, ligamentes, and such like:
and have further showed sufficiently the method to put away such accidents
as happen to great wounds (for to great wounds comes great accidents)
time now takes me by the sleeue, and says direct thy pen, and address
thee to write of those wounds, which happen in the hard parts of man's
members, that is to say, in the bones. Such be those wounds which are
called fractures or breaking of bones, in Greek Catagmata, and also of
luxations and dislocations of the same, which because both are affections
coming to the bones, I will write of both in this fourth and last book of
this Enchiridion, beginning first at the fracture of bones, which done, I
will also entreat of dislocations.

Of the true and perfect cure of bones fractured. Chap. i.
BEfore I do take in hand to entreat of the cure of bones fractured, I will
set out what a fracture is, that thereby it may be the better understand,
that hereafter shall be written. Therefore a fracture is a soluition of
continuitie made in the bone. Of bones fractured: There be there differences.
One when the bone is broken in length, another when the bone is fractured
ouerthwarte, the third when as the fracture is oblique or crooked. Albucasis
and other latter writers make the differences of fractures, not according to
the bone fractured, but after the place affected, as if the nose be broken, or
the brain pan, or Jaws, ribs, backebone, arms, thyghes, legs, fyngers,
or other part: which in deed be not differences of fractures, but as I said,
of the place affected, according to the nature of which the bones broken have
spyder or longer time or they can be united again together. For the Cranium
is joined together in five and thyrtye days, the arm or leg in the space of
fourtye days, the fossilles about thyrtye days, the nose takes perfect
consolidation in eyghtene days, the ribs in one and twentye days, the
Jaws, the bones in the hands, and feet, about twenty days. And so in like
sort is to be spoken of the time of curyng other bones fractured according to
their natures, also the time may be longer or shorter, according to the age
of the Pacient, time of the year, diet and order of life. All which must be
diligently considered of him that will appoynte any time determinatelye in
curyng of bones. But now to the true and perfect cure of bones fractured. And
for because the fracture is a solution of continuitie, there is required the
unition again of the same. But to the unition of the fracture are required
four scopes or intentions. The first is that the parts of the broken bones be
joined and put together in their proper place. The second intention is that
they being so reduced to their natural form may so be conserved, and kept
without motion. The third scope is that the parts of the broken bone may be
conglutinated and joined together by engendring of callus. The fourth and last
intention is to correct those accidents, which do come after the fractures of
bones. Of these four scopes and intentions according to my poor knowledge I
will severally entreat.

How the parts of the bone fractured are to be united together and put in
their proper place. Chap. ii.
First of all it behooves to note diligently whether bone broken be out of
the natural place or not, which you shall know by these signs says
Cornelius Celsus. For if the member where the bone is fractured does extend
it self and stand upward, and is with pricking, and when it is touched it
shows an inequality: These be sure tokens and signs that the bone broken
is out of his natural place, wherefore after the counsel of Guido de Cauliaco,
the member is decently to be extended, and that part of the bone that is
depressed is to be lyfted up, and that other part which is standing upward
must be put down, and this with so much lemtie and small pain as is
possible, until the ends of the bone fractured do meet and be united and
brought to their natural form and place. Neither is this possible that the
bones fractured and brought out of their natural place can be reduced and
rightly united and placed but with some force more or less. So that if the
member be small and of no great strength, as the finger or other like member,
one man may well extend and stretch it out applieng his one hand on the one
part, and the other hand on the other part of the broken bone, until both
ends of the bone fractured do meet and join together. But if the member be
great, having strong nerves and tendons, then one man is not sufficient, but
there is required two: specially where the fracture chances in the thighs,
legs and arms, of strong and robuste persons. But you must diligently
take heed that the member be never to vehementlye or imoderately extended and
drawn out, for that does bring (specially in hard and dry bodies) vehement
dolor, fevers, conuulsions, and sometimes the Palsy: Yea it happeth often by
this means, that the fibers and threedes in the heads of the Muscles be
broken. Wherefore there is much wisdom and discretion herein to be used. But
now to that from whence we are digressed. First the sick man is to be set in
a chair, or else if it be moore convenient, laid on his back on the bed.
Then two men for this use prepared, you shall command the one to hold with
his hands the part of the member above the fracture: and to the other, to
lay his hand on the neither and lower part of the member, under the
fractured bone. And this being done, willing them so long to stretche and
put out the member until both ends of the bone do meet, then thou with
thy hands shall hansomly form it and put it in together, laboring to bring it
to his natural figure and form. But if the member be such as that with their
hands only, they are not able to extend the same then you must have hands of
which the one shall be fastened above the broken bone the other under: and so the
one man placed at the sick pacientes head and the other at his fete. They shall
strech and extend out the member as is suffycient with the bands in their
hands. And this is a sufficyent token ye the bone broken is reposed in his
right place, and that both ends be united together: when that the pacient
feleth a relesing of his pain and Dolor. The bones being thus joined
together, lest that they should go a sunder again, it is necessary to roll
and bind it in such wise and manner as shall here after be set out. And if it
fortuneth that the broken bones be not united but remain out of their place a
few days there accostomably follows great inflammation and no small peril
and danger to the nerves and tendons. And thus brefly and sufficiently I have
set out the first intention. There is also an instrument used to extend out the
member with, of which Hippocrates and Paulus makes mention: which you may
prepare and use, but I omyt it and use the way above said as more apt and
without peril.

Now the broken Bones united and joined together aptly: may be kept and
remain in the same figure, so that they may come to their former estate.
Chap. iii.
WHen as the broken bone is reduced to his right place and is formed according
to his natural figure: it is very expedient to keep it in the same, which
cannot be in any wise if that the member be moved. Wherefore it is necessary by
all means possible to keep the members with out motion. Which thing although the
pacient perhaps in the day time will carefully regard: yet at night when deep
sleep does occupy his senses he shall of force neglect. Therefore yt as well day
as night: sleping as waking, the member may be conserved without motion, it
shall be necessary to use apt and convenient ligature and rolling. But before
you do go about to roll the member, it is very good to mix the white of an egg
and oil of roses together and wet therein a soft linen clothe of such bigness as
may compass not only the place where the bone is fractured, but also some what
of the sound parts. Then this being applied to the affected part, you shall
next bynd and roll the membre: in which you must diligently regard that you
compresse not the member by to hard rolling: and so the norishment cannot come
to the part, and also dolor and pain may cause flux of humors and
infla^mation: neither must you bind it to flacke and lose, for then the broken
bones will separate again and go in sunder. Therefore you shall use a mean
herein that you bind not the member to strait nor to lose, but follow herein
both your own discresion and also the feling of the pacient. And as touching
your rollers you must have two made of soft cloth, whose breadth and latitude
must be such as in rolling there be no losenes, widnes, and plaits: the lenth
of these can not certainly be showed, but must be according to the bigness of the
fracture and thicknes of the membre. The beginning of the first roller must be
upon the fracture, and so rolled about iij. or iiij. times, and then rolling
upward until you com to the sound parts which must also somewhat be rolled. So
by this means the bones united shall more firmly remain together and the flux
of humors stayed yt they cannot come to ye affected part. The beginning of the
second roll must also be upon the fractured place, going iij. or iiij. times
also about the same, and so continuing downward until you have compassed the
sound parts: which done, you must with the same roller ascend upward again until
you come somewhat above ye first roler. Therefore this roller must be half as
long again as ye first roller is. The utility of this second rolling is that
it puts that is superfluous unto the lower parts, and suffers not any flux
of humors to infeste and noye the part affected.

These rollers would be wet in water and wine mixed together before you do use
them. And if there be any vehement pain or inflammation then the member would
be wrapped about with fine woll well carded, or else with stufes wet in Oxicratum.
And the ligature or rolling would not be hard but such as may defend and keep
the united bones together. Furthermore because these bindings and rollings are
notable both to defend the member from accidents: and also to keep the member
together and confirm the same: Hippocrates used certain plasters or cerotes,
or such like which must be put upon the two rolers and is as it were the third
ligature or roll. Among which is used ceratum humidum, made of wax melted in
oil of Roses. But if that there be besides the bone fractured, the solution
also of continutie in the flesh then you shall not in any wise use either
cerote or oil because it will make the ulcer filthy and stinking. But in their
place to use plumaciols that be long, dipped in red and stipticke wine. And one
thing which keeps the member from dolor and pain is after that the same be
rolled and aptly put together to place it in his natural form so near as you
can. And it is most nigh unto the natural form and figure, when it is so
laid as is with lest pain and grief. But because this form and figure
should be surely conserved and kept and, accidents put away, the later
Chirurgians have used to put about the ligatures certain splentes at the
first dressing: binding them so about the member as the patiente, or accidents
may suffer. Galene and the old writers used not splentes before the vii. or ix.
day: notwithstanding it is convenient to use the splentes at the beginning, so
that they through strait bindyng compresse not the member, and make Dolor and
inflammation. The splentes must be equal, smothe, even, not crooked or rugged,
and in the mids thicker then in the other parts that they may be the more
able to strenthen the member in that place whereas the bone is fractured. The
way and order in appliynge splentes is in this wise. There must be clothes iii.
or iiij. fold dypte in Rose water and laid upon the rollers according as the
member requires. Then the splentes inuolued, and wond about with wolle or
cotton must be placed round about the member a finger breath a sonder, and bynd
them moderatly and iently that you compresse not the member. And in any case
take heed that none of the splentes touch any joint, if any be near the
fractured bone: for that will make vlceration and inflammation in the same
joint. Therefore if the fracture be nere to any iointe you must in that part
make your splents shorter smaller and lighter. And if no dolor, no
infla^mation, no itching, no vlceratio^, comes to the fractured part, then
you may let the splents remain on unto the xij. day or.xv. day yea or unto
the.xx. day. But if any of these happens then it shall be convenient to vnrolle
the membre the third day and foment it with luke warm water whereby both the
sharp and according matter is washed the pain ceased and the itchinge put
away. And thus much touching the second intention.

How the parts of the bones broken may be conglutinate and joined together.
Chap. iiii.
Seeing that the fractured bones cannot be co^glutinated and made to grow
firmly together nether by apt and convenient rolling nor splenting nor by
puttinge of them in there natural form and figure except there be made
somewhat to grow out of the norishment of the bone which may cause them to close
and grow together they call this callus, which like a glewe does glewe them
together: therefore the thryd intention is to make this callus to grow by all
means possible. But this must be engendered of gross and earthy parts such is
the norishment of the bones. This callus after the mind of diverse do begin
to grow about the tenth or fortenth day. And that it does begin to grow you
shall perceive and judge by these signs and tokens. The Dolor and pain is
aswaged: the inflammation cease: the tumor vanishes away: the natural
color of the member comes again to the same. And for that the chief and
principal way to make callus grow and engender stands in apt and convenient
diet, I will brefely utter the same unto you. Although at the beginning of the
fracture, Hippocrates counsels that the pacient do use a thin and small
diet: and that he do abstain from flesh and wine for the space of x. days,
yet now when as our scope is to engender callus you must license him to use a
more large diet and meats that make good juice, and that gross and somewhat
viscous for of such nutriment the bones are norished and callus grows.
Therefore they come^d much fine and pure wheat boiled in clean fountain water
while the wheat do brust, and the water being so concocted is somewhat thick.
They call this wc us in england frumentie potage. And I suppose it to be that
which diverse call Alica. Also the heads and fete of beasts are very good in this
case, cheflye of a kid or else a wether. For these do much norish and be of
gross and viscous juice. Also give him to drink good red wine when as he
goes to meat, but let it be moderatly taken. The bigness of callus must not
be either bygger or lesser then is requisite, for being bygger it brings
pain to the muscules: and if it be lesser then is it unable to defend and
strengthen the fractured bones.

How callus shall be kept that it be nether to byg or little, you shall see set out
in the chap. following.

How the accidents which happen to fractured bones are to be removed and put
away. Chap. v.
THis fourth scope and intention although it be the last in order, yet is it
not the least in virtue and use. For it does show how to remove all accidents
and things against nature which does let and hinder the curing of the
fractured member. Such accidents for the most part are dolor or pain,
inflammation, itching awound, immoderate drines or moyster, letting and
hindering the generation of callus, gangriena, hardness, and the quantity of
callus to much or little. These as I said be the chief enemies to hinder natures
work, and I will set out the way to expel and put away every of them
beginning first with the accidents called dolor or pain, and with
inflammation, named of the Grecians phlegmone. Therefore if these accidents do
infest and besege the fractured member, after it be bound rolled and dressed:
you shall with speed lose the ligature and take away the roller, and then the
member being bare and naked, you shall foment it with oil of roses, vinegar and
with other like medicines before remembered in the theird book where I writ
perticulerly of the cure of these accidents. Nether shall you use again
either ligature or splentes before the dolor be aswaged and the inflammation
ceased, except it be only to strengthen the member and keep it together. But
these accidents being expelled then use your sple^ts and rolling as you did
before. But if this itching or as they call it in Latyne pruritus with sanies
or matter happens, then Hippocrates and Galene use to foment the place with
water temperatly hot. And the later Chirurgians in the like case do apply
salt water, vnguentum album, vel vnguentum populeon. And bind the member as is
aforesaid. Further more if to the fractured member there happens a wound
either at the breaking of the bone, or else made of the Chirurgian, that he may
take out the shiuers of the bone molesting the muscules, or how so ever it
does happen you must if there be any flux of blood labor to stanch and stay
the same with apt and convenient remedies set out in this book. If
inflammation follows to the wound it must be repelled. If the flesh be brosed
and contused, then scarifie the parts for fear that gangrena does follow. And
if it so happneth that gangrena does follow, or any devouring putrefaction, then
you must cure it as is set out in our method of curing tumors against nature,
And if none of these happens then you shall use the like medicines to the
cure of the wound that you do to grene and fresh wounds. Furthermore if the
bones be immoderatly dry whereby the growing of callus is hindered, it shall be
convenient the third or fourth day to foment the place with water: and when as
the flesh do rise in a tumor then cease further to use fomentation except you
do intend to euaporate and digest the multitude of matter, then cease not until
the tumor goes away. And if moistnes follows in ye fractured membre and
leteth the ingendring of callus, you shall put it away with convenient ligature
and roling and things that does moderatly exicat. Furthermore you shall give
diligence when callus does grow that it may be stayed lest that it wax to
great: or increased if you think it will not be of convenient bigness. And both
these points do consist in diet, in the quantity and quality of fomentation,
and in convenient medicynes. Of medicines those are to be used which do
moderatly heat and is made plaster wise. Among which the piched emplaster is
not the lest of price, for both does augment the callus and draws norishment
to the broken member. This is to be used when as we think to make the callus
bigger: but if callus be to big then you must make it less with medicines which
do digest and be astringent. Also with co^pressing ligature and a plate of lead
applied to the callus. Also frications and fomentations made with oil salt and
salt peter, or with salt water made hot. But if the callus be growe^ to much and
that into a hard and stony substance, then you must cut the flesh and with knifes
and other convenient instruments, the callus it to be minished. Also it
fortuneth yt the callus does not grow at the accostomed time, which comes of
sundry causes, yt is to say either of immoderate fomentations, or untimely
motion, or through the multitude of rolling, or for yt the body is not
sufficiently norished, which apereth when as the member affected is lener and
slenderer then it was naturally. Therefore with al diligence you must look to this
thing, aplying hot atractiue medicines to ye part and cause his diet to be
more larger and causing the pacient to embrace mirth, and banish heuines and
such passions of the mind as may bring the body into a melancolike disposition.
And this shall be ye sign and token yt the bones fractured be conglutinated with
callus, when as the rollers and things wrapped about the member do apere blody
no wou^d being in the member. Which thing I suppose do spring when as the
substance of callus comes together and going into the holow parts of ye bones
some drops of blood are thurst out. And thus much shall suffice touching, the
method and way to cure the bones fractured now will I speak in like sort of
luxations, and dislocations.

What a luxation or dislocation is, and of their differences. Chap. vi.
ORder ever requires that what so ever any do take in hand, that first or he
proceeds further, he do exactly know the nature of the same, which he cannot
do otherwise then by difinition and description. Therefore a luxation is the
goinge out of a joint from his natural place, whereby the voluntary motion of
the member is hyndred: the Grecians do name this affection exarthrema. There
are two only differences of luxations which are taken according to the bigness
of the luxation. For if the joint be quit out of his socket and place, then it
is properly called a luxation: but if it be but only a little removed, it is
then not named a luxation but a wrynche in latin Subluxatio, and pararthrema in
Greek. It fortuneth that a joint may be four manner of ways dislocated or
wrinched: that is to say, forward, backward, higher, and lower. Except
certain which cannot be put out of their place, or else but one or two of these
ways. But for as much as there ryseth no great utility by numbryng of such
joints I will leave of to make mention and will entreat of the reducynge of
joints dislocated into their proper places. And to this there are four
intentions to be observed. The first to bring ye joint into his natyue and
prestinate place. The second is the conservation and keeping the joint so put
in, that it does not slyppe out again. The third is to defend the member from
accidents as dolor inflammation flux of humors and such like. The last scope
is to put away those accidents if any do follow: these in their proper places
I will set out beginning with the first intention.

How the luxated ioynte is to be reduced to his natural seat and place. Chap.
vii.
Seeing that the joint dislocated and out of his natural place requires the
reducing again of the same into his wonted seat: you shall extend the member
into diverse parts decently as is required, until such time as the space betwixt
both bones is empty and void. Then the bone which is out of his place is to be
put into the contrary part from that where as he is and so placed in his
natyue seat, that the emptines of the socket may again be filled with the
bone. But this extension and streaching out of the member must be done
tenderly and with so little pain as is possible. Neither is there one way of
extending and streaching out of the luxated member, for sometime it must be done
with the hands only, some time with hands, and some time with instruments apt
and convenient for the same, as appears in Hippocrates book De luxatis and
fractis.

How the member luxated and brought in the natural place: may be conserved and
kept in the same. Chap. viii.
WHen as the member luxated is brought in to his natural place you must with al
diligence possible labor to confirm the part and keep the member from
slypping out again. Wherefore you shall anoint the place with oil of roses and
then a fine and old linen cloth wet also in oil of roses shall be applied to
the member which done you shall use stufes and clothes wet in the white of
eggs and lay them also on the joint. Last you shall wet your rollers in water
and vinegar mixed together and roll the member therwt. And if necessity does
require you may furthermore make splents of lether or pasted paper and apply
the^ about the joint. But give diligence lest the part be to strait bound and
rolled for fear of infla^mation. These things thus finished lay the member
in his natural figure and shape. Neither shall you (except some great and ill
accident happen) lose the roller and open the member, before the vij. or tenth
day at the lest. Auicenna wills that in this case you shall not use hot
clothes or medicines for fear of flux and inflammation but rather some
refrigeratiue cerote.

How to defend the member from accidents and to put them away if they happen.
Chap. ix.
THe member luxated being reduced to his natural place and confirmed in the
same, and also having his perfect shape and figure: there remains to defend
the same from ill accidents, or if such happen or thou be called to the cure
to put them away. In the defending the member you shall labor to keep the
member from flux of humors for if there be a flux, then shall there follow both
Dolor and inflammation. Therefore strengthen the member with apt and
convenient, medicines set out in diverse parts of the work. Also let him use
thin and small diet, purgien, and letting blood: for these do meruailously auert
the flux from the affected member. But if it chance that there is already
accidents or thou come to the pacient, as dolor or inflammation, then thou
shall not put the member luxated into the place before thou haste cured the
accidents. Therefore these things sufficientlye declared as much as the
nature of an Enchiridion requires touching the methodicall curinge of wounds
both in similer and isntrumental members, also of fractures and dislocations
I will speak brefely and taken of members and then seace my pen for this
present.

The method and way how to take of a member when it is mortified and deed:
and of a new powder by me devised to stay the flux of blood. Chap. x.
IT happens often times that through great accidents which falls unto
wounds through gonneshote, that the hole member comes to mortification. So
that of necessity it must be taken away. The same accidents also I have
known to chance unto fractured members: and many other ways it has happened
the members to come to gangrena and sphacelus by diseases of which you shall
find in other of my works a more ample discourse where as I entreat properlye
of those grefes. But for that my whole intention at this present, is only to
set out the way how to take of corrupt and mortifyed members, I will leave
them, and go to my purpose. If the leg chance to come to such corruption,
beneth the knee, that of necessity you are constrained to take it of from the
other part: It is best to cut it of, one good hand bred beneath the knee: So
shall the party have a restinge place for a stylte to go upon? And although
it needs no more but to take of his foot only, yet for as much as the rest
of his leg should be but a trouble unto him. It is better to take it of
under the knee as I have said before, for the pain will be al one, and the
danger is lest in that place. And further you must take diligent heed that
you make your insition above the corrupted parts, for else the flesh or bones
being corrupted above the place where as you make your incision might cause you
to have a new work, to the great grefe and pain of the pacient, as I have
seen often times. And therefore if the corruption have taken the joint of the
knee so that it cannot be cured but that of force the member must be amputated
and cut of, then take it of three fingers above the knee. For in any wise take
it not of in the iuncter of the knee, for that is very dangerous and contrary
to the opinions of all the ancient writers: and that order you observe in
taking of the leg, ye same shall you follow in taking of the arm. But before you
begin this work, you ought well to consider with your self, and also to
call other expert men to you, to see the pacient, conferring with them, whether
there be any way to keep on the member and to cure it by any way possible, for
it is great slander to the art of Chirurgerie, and also matter in conscience,
to take away any member, which other ways might by art be cured, although
it be both paynefull and long or it be done. But if there be no other way but
that you are constrained to take away the member, or else the party cannot be
cured, and that in process of time death must follow, then it is better to cut
of a leg or arm, then all the whole body should perish. Now when you intend
to take of a leg or an arm, first prepare the body, that is to say, if it be
full of ill humors to purge it with convenient medicines, and also to give the
pacient such diet before, as is convenient. That is if the pacient be feeble
and weak and has been long sick, then give him meats of good norishment to
make him strong, that he may be the more able to suffer the pain when as he
shall be dysmembred, lest he faynte and fall into swonnynge, and thus doing five
or six days you may proceed to the taking of, of the member, which is done
in this manner, first you shall make a defensitiue as hereafter follows.

Rec. Boli armeni viij. ounces. Farinae hordei iiij. ounces. Sanguinis draconis
ana. ij. ounces. Terrae Sigillatae ana. ij. ounces. Olibani j. ounce and a half.
Aceti iiij. ounces. Albuminis ouorum. q. s.
Make all these in powder, that are to be made in powder, and incorporate them
with the venegre, and whites of eggs. Then sprede this upon a cloth iiij.
fingers brood, that it may go.ij. or.iij. times about the member. This
defensitiue must be laid on so nere about where as you will take of the member
as is possible, so that when you make your insicion, you must cut so ney this
defensive as within the breath of one straw, or half an inch at the furdest.
This defensive must be very hard rolled about the member the night before you
intend to take it of, and the harder it is rolled the better it is, for the
hard rolling stays the blood and makes that in taking of the member there
comes no great flux. And furthermore by reason of the hard rolling it lets
both the animal and vital sprites to pass to the affected part, by means
whereof it is so astonished, that the pacient feels not half so much pain,
as he should if this were not done. Then when as you come to take of the member,
you shall prepare all things ready that serves for his dressynge, and before
you make any Insicion put the party in very good comfort, declarynge unto
him that the fear is much more then the pain. And if you be disposed to take
of any member without actual Cauterization: You may aptlye do it, by
potentiall Cauterization?

Among which I have devised one that by continual proof I have found
profitable and therefore I will show the composition as follows.

Rec. Aluminis succarini ana. ij. ounces. Thuris ana. ij. ounces. Arsenici ana.
ij. ounces. Calcis viui vj. ounces.
Make them all in fine powder, and put unto them one pynte of strong veneiger,
and boil them on the fire, continually sturryng it, till the venegre be
consumed, then let it be set in an oven or in the sun till it be perfytely
dry, that you may make it in powder, and when you will use it, take of this
powder, iij. Ounces, of Bole armoniack half an ounce, of Puluis alcamisticus one
ounce. Put al these together and make them in very fine powder, and so you have
the powder sublimed and prepared to restrain blood when you will take of a
member without hot yrons. And this medicyne I have found to be most sure of
al other not only in taking of, of members: But in many other grefes cured by
the art of Surgerie, and I have named it in all my Books Puluerem secretum. And
before you make your Insicion take.iiij. ounces of this powder and incorporate
it with whytes of eggs, then make a stufe of towe as large as the end of the
member that you will take of. And dip it in Veneigre and press it out
again. Then spread your medicine, made with the powder and the white of
Eggs, open the same towe, after strowe a little of this dry powder upon that,
so making many little bolsters of towe, to lay upon this great stufe as need
does require, for the better restraynyng the flux of blood. Now when you have
all things prepared, with bolsters and rollers, and other things thereto
pertaining, you shall go to the pacient and comfort him as I have said before
covering his eyes and setting him in some place convenient, having certain
persons meet for the same purpose, to hold his body and his arms that he
let not your operation, and other apt persons to hold the member that you
will take away. You shall then quickly and rely with a sharp insition knife,
cut the flesh round about to the bone, within half an ynch of the defensive,
that was before laid on. And one thing you must take heed of: there lies an
nerve betwyxte the two bones of the leg beneth the knee, which you must cut
a sunder with your insicion kinfe, lest that in sawing of the bones, (this
being not cut a sonder with you Insicion knyfe as I said before,) it might be
so plucked and torn with the saw, provoking great accidents as sincope,
spasmus, dolor, yea and death also, which I my self have often times seen. Then
when you have made your insicion perfect, with a fine saw you shall cut a
sunder the bones spedely, and with as little shaking of the member as you may,
then lay upon the ends of the bones a little lint dypped in oil of Roses and
so wrong out again, the oil being first made warm. And next lay on your stufe
prepared as I have said before wc your powder and the whit of eggs, laying
upon that other stufes and bolsters to restrain blood as you se cause: then
must you roll it according to art, to keep on the stufe very close that it may
the better restrain blood. Provided always that ye lay a defensive above the
knee, to defend that no humors fall done to the sore place, which defensive you
shall every day keep wette, with Veneger and water. So that you shall not need
often to remove it. In like manner you must wette your first defensive that
was laid under the knee and so keep it wette for the space of six or seven
days before you remove it. And for as much as we cannot come a to finger, or a
tooe to take it of with a saw, as we may do a leg or an arm, therefore I
have devised pinsons to nyppe the bone a sunder after that you have cut the
flesh round about to the bone, with your inficion knyfe, using your powder
with the white of an egg for the restraining of blood, and other defensyues
to defend humors as I have before aleged. Now for the rest of the cure,
first we must proceed with medicines to cause the asker to fall of, and I have
found none better then this.

Rec. Terebinthinae ij. ounces. Butnri recentis iiij. ounces. Cerae j. ounce and a
half. Vnguenti populeon. viij. ounces.
Make hereof an unguent according to art.

This unguent does not only louse the asker, but it cease the great pain,
and keeps the member from evil accidents which is requisyte in this manner of
cure. I have not known two die, that has had there legs or arms taken of
with this powder aforesaid, and vsyng the method or way that I have here
before declared. And for the rest of the cure you may use medicynes
incarnatyue and desiccatyue as you do use in other wounds, and as is required
in the art of Chirurgerye.

Now my brethren for as much as that the taking of, of members, is one of the
principal things that you have desired of me, and to do it with out actual
cateriseng yrons which sore ^e^red the people with the error of cauterization
or burning, as we call it, that many of them rather would die with the member
on, then to abyd the tirreble fire by means whereof many people peryshed.

And other some, that put themselves to surgerie and had their legs or arms
taken of with whote yrons, many of them perished as you your selves knows
right well. And specially you that be of the Hospitalles of London: wherefore I
have devised and compilled (by the merciful help of god) this manner and way
to cure those meserable afflicted people, without any whote yrons or great
peril of death, as you your selves have had experience now of late time, by
the dismembrynge and taken of, of many members, to the great relefe and
comfort of the poor people, and to the great honor of the noble art of
Chirurgerie. And I trust also, being thus mayntained, it shall be highly to the
glory of God, to the commendacions of this noble City, where as these
Chiritably deeds are done, unto the poor afflicted members of Jesus Christ, in
the Hospitalles of London where as daily these works o^ mercy are done?

Now brethren I have opened unto you this noble Powder which I have invented to
your honor and profit, but chefely for the commoditye of the poor: Requiring
you, for as much as it has been your own desire, to have the making of it, to
take it in good part and give God the chief maker thereof thanks therefore, and
use it well. For I have hard say of a late time, that there is some, that
says they have the same Powder, and makes a mock and a gaude at it, going
about to deface me the author thereof for my good will and paynefull
diligence. But I warn thee (what so ever thou art that so says) to hold thy
tongue with shame, for neither thou nor I had it, but now of a late time:
Invented by me and one Master Peirponte and first put in use and practice by
the Surgians in Saint Thomas Hospital in southworke. And sense that time put
in use of many more, both young and old, not only in taking of members, but in
restayning of blood both in veins and arteries, which could not be done with
whote yrons, and many other things has been done with this powder, which
is more to be merueled at, then to be believed. And I for my part have read no
small number of authors and that of the best, and yet I never could find
this powder in any of them all. And if any other man be able to show it me
in any other author, then I will give him place, or else hold thy tongue as I
have said before, for if thou or any of us all had, had this powder, we had
showed our selves evil members in a common wealth that would suffer so many
poor people to perish in the Hospitals and in many other places for lack of
help. And thus brethren to sertifie your request, I have finished this
Chapter, and ended my Book called the Enchiridion, or a short and brief
manner of curing, as we call it, of wounds, fractures, and dislocations. etc.
But for as much as the medicines therein contained are put in the latin tongue,
peradventure you will meruayll thereat. Seeing that the rest is in the English
tongue. But to you my brethren that exercises the noble art of Chirurgerye, I
answer, I trust I have done it both for your commodity and also for your
profit. There are two special causes why they are put in the latin tongue, the
first cause is for that we cannot aptly give all those simples English names,
and therefore for as much as herbs and other symples are called by diverse
names, according to the use of the country in our English tongue, that they
grow in: therefore if I should have put them in any of these Englshyes
aforesaid, an other part of our country should not have understand it. And
furthermore if I should have put part in English and part in Latyne, it
should have been a defasynge of all the whole composition of medicynes. The
second cause is, that I have done it for your commoditye, for it shall cause
you to understand your recytes or medicynes in the Latyne tongue, not only by
use of compositions but the symples also, for there is no medicyne set forth
in this Book, but if ye go to any Pottecarye he will make it you presentlye,
and declare unto you every Simple thereof, which shall cause thee in short
time, if thou be dilygent to understand the whole scope in making of
medicynes out of any Author in the Latin tongue. And for you my brethren in
London, this shall be to you a more commoditye, for it may move you every
lecture day, to put a question for one medycyne, So that within short time,
you shall gather the whole knowledge both of symples and compoundes, and also
apt terms pertaining to the art of Surgerye in the Latin tongue, in which
the most part of the art is wryttynge.

And hereafter if god spare me life, and this my simple works taken in good
part, I shall not seace, but set forth unto you one herball with the true
pyctures of herbs and trees, with many other simples appertaynynge to the
art of Chirurgerie: with so many names, as well in English as in all other
tounges that I can learn or understand, with their virtues, properties, and
places where they grow in. etc. Which book may be such a doctrine that you
shall in short time understand all these simples contained in this book and
many more, not only their qualities, but all their hydden properties which
has been found out by long experience. And al though this little Book named
the Enchiridion is very brief and short, yet shall you find therein contained,
a true and right method of curyng according to both old and new writers with
the whole scope and intentions curytiue how to apply your medicines, when to
apply them, to what place they ought to be applied, and at what time. And
although many Surgians have good medycines that may serve for the like
purposes of these that I have made mention of before, yet notwythstandynge for
an example I have set forth these, that ye may the better understand the
true method and way of curing by the nature and operation of them.

Thus I take my leave of you dear brethren in Jesus Christ wishing unto you
the perfect knowledge of this noble art, which is only the gift of the holy
ghost, and you well to use it, that almyghtye God may work with you to the
comfort of the diseased or hurt person: let us all pray, lord increase our
knowledge in all virtuous arts and science, that we may use them, to the glory
of God, to whom be all honor and praise world without end,

Thus ends the fourth and last book of the Enchiridion of Surgery
compelled by Thomas Gale Master in Surgery. FINIS.
An excellent Treatise of vvounds made with Gonneshot, in which is confuted
both the gross error of Jerome Brunswicke, John Vigo, Alfonse Ferrius, and
others: in that they make the wound venomous, which comes through the
common powder and shot: And also there is set out a perfect and true method
of curyng these wounds. Newly compiled and published by Thomas Gale Master in
Chirurgerie.

printer's device of Rouland Hall

PRINTED AT LONdon by Rouland Hall, for Thomas Gale. 1563.



MIcrocosmos (whom Man we call)
of two right noble parts is made:
The soul, whose life is eternal,
and body eke which hence must vade.
This last part, does the first contain
so long as it in health endure:
Until Sickness, and all her train
does proclaim war, and death procure.
Now Sickness quite for to expel
Apollo have the art out set:
What art, lo master Gale does tell,
Whereby Sickness forse we may let.
The Canon shot (dreadful and fell
like thonder boltes and fyry flame)
How to remove the ways he tell
in this treatise of worthy fame.
His name of right, Gale we may call,
for Gala, milk does signify:
And as milk noryshe above all,
so does this Gale right perfectly.
His sugared milk of learning sweet,
does the mind foster and eke feed:
Showyng the way that is most meet
Microsmos to help at need.
Now, what reward for him is dew
that for man's cause does such things show
The wounded man shall be judge true,
and learned heads which it does know.
John Field Chirurgian.

THOMAS CALVS CHIRVRGVS. ANGLVS AETATIS SVE 56:
portrait of Thomas Gale

Thomas Gale Master in Chirurgerie unto the friendly Readers.
I Am not ignorant (friendly reader) but many, yea the greater sort will not a
little merueyle that I should go about to overthrow that, which for a
manifest truth of no small time has been received, and embraced: yea and not
only received, but also with the pens of diverse (otherwise well learned)
confirmed and established. Me think I hear them say, what kind of fellow is
this? What a Paradoxe has he published? Is his knowledge and experience
passing those famous writers, that have left so noble works behind them? To
all which I answer, that the matter must be tried, judged, and determined, not
by antiquity only, not by authority, but by reason and truth. And yet I will
attribute as much to their authorities, as some other will, knowing my self
far unable to match with any of them. And although they be such as I have
profited by, yet the truth is to be preferred before their authorities.
Wherefore I beseech thee loving Reader, not to condemn me, before thou have
read my work, and wayed the forse of my arguments wherewith I do mainteyne my
assertion: and confer them indifferently with my adversaries, and let the
touchestone be Ratio et Experientia, so I do not mistrust, but at the length
this my opinion shall not seem so straung and new, as true and worthy to be
received of other. Thus I bydde thee well to fare, and favor my doyngs (which
for thy sake I take in hand,) as I wish thy knowledge in this my profession.
At my house in London the.xxvi. day of Iulye. 1563.

The proposition or Thema.
The usual Gonneponder is not venomous, another the shot of such hotenesse as
is able to warm the flesh, much less to make an ascar. Chap. i.
BEfore I do any thing entreat of the cure of these wounds with Gonneshotte:
I will somewhat search out the nature of the usual powder and shot, whom
many Surgyans (other wise learned) have affirmed to be venomous, and so
consequently the wound made with that powder and shot, to have the cure of
venomed wounds. And here I would no man should judge that I deny there may be
Gonnepouder venomous: but my talk shall not further extend then to the usual
powder, made of Sulphur, Saltpeter, and Cole. And that the thing following may
be the more evident and plain, it is requisite to consider what that is which
is called venom, what the usual Gonne powder is, and what the shot driven
violently forth with the powder can do.

As touching the first, what venom or poison should be (which is called in
Latin Venenu^, and in Greek Pharmacon, it is no other thing then res non
naturalis, a thing not natural, which being applied to man's body any kind of
way, either inwardly or outwardly, through his malign quality, property, or
both: does corrupt and destroy the same. Now then seeing you know what venom
is, let us diligently consider whether the usual Gonnepouder does answer to
this definition: if not, then certainly it is not venomous as diverse persons
have hitherto dreamed. And for because it is compounded of simples (Sulphur,
Saltpeter, and cole) it is requisite to set out what these three are, for so
shall we the moore assuredlye conjecture what the compounde is, and whether it
be venomous or not. And herein for the perfect knowledge of these simples, we
will resort only to the authorities of Dioscorides and Galene, the principal
writers of this matter: least in rehearsinge all the authorities of those
which write of the nature of simples, the work might grow greater then I
have determined. Then if these writers favors our opinion, we will further
wade and consider what daily experience says hereto: or whether that there
resulte a venom, the simples being mixed: or else that through alteration in
time of the shot, it tourneth to venom. I think these be the principal
arguments they have to maineteyne their fond fantasy. And now touching the
authority of the ancient writers, I will begin with Dioscorides, who in the
fifte Book.lxxxiij. Chapter, writes of Sulphur in this manner: Sulphur viue
is thought the best, which is called Apyron, shininge like a glowe worm, and
nothing stony. And in general that Sulphur is allowed which has not tasted
of fire, waxinge green and fat. There is great store of it growing in Melo
and Lipara. The foresaid Sulphur, does heat, dissolve, and concocte spedely:
It is good against the cough, short brethe, and purulent excretion taken in an
Egg, or using the fume of it. And the savor of the same burnte brings out
the child in birth time, it does take away leprye, Mentagra, and Scabros
vngues, mixed with Turpentyne: but tempered with Venigre it is of force
against the leprie, and takes away vitiliginem, it heals the stinge of the
Scorpion, Resine being put to it. And with Vnegre it is good both against
the wounds of Draconis marini, and also of the Scorpion, with Saltpeter it
takes away the ichinge of the body, it helps the Iandiers sprinkled on
his forehead, or else taken in a rere Egg, it profits much in
distillation, and stays sweatyng, with water and Saltpeter it is good for
those which have the Gout, the member being washed in the same. It helps
the thicknes or rather difficulty of hearing, the fume of it being received
by some hollow Pype: it rayseth those which are called Lethargos, it stays
the flux of blood. Brosed ears being anointed with it mixed with wine and
honnye are by it cured. These be the words of Dioscorides touching Sulphur.
His mind in effect concerning Saltpeter in the fyfte Book, lxxxix. Chapter,
are these Nitrum is the best which is light, of Rose or white color, full of
holes like to a Sponge, such is brought from Bunys. It brings out humors
fixed in the deep parts. The spume of Nitre is Judged best, which is most
light, fryable, in color almost Purple, or spumouce and bytinge, such is
brought out of Philadelphia in Lydea. The second of Egypt. Also in Magnesia.
Both Nitrum and eke his spume, has the strength and vstion of Salt.
Furthermore Nitrum helps the Collicke if it be taken with cummyne in
hydromell, or new wine boiled, or any thing which does losen wind, as Rue or
Dyll. It is also used in fevers, to annoint them before the fit suspected. It
is mixed with emplasters, which do extract and dissolve, it does extenuate and
put away the leprie, with warm water or wine, it does away the noise of the
ears, inflations and perulentnes, the fylthynes of the same it does purge and
cleanse, tempered with Vinegre instilled and put in, it helps the biting of
dogs put with the grese of an ass or swine, it does open felons mixed with
Resyne, Terebinthine, and in the dropsy rubbing the skin with a fig: it
causes clearenesse of fight tempered with honnye, and the venom of Mushrumes
being drunk with Posca, or else with water if they have been bitten with
buprestis, also to those which have drunk Bulls blood with Laserpitium, and
it is to be given also to them which can not taste their meat. It is to be
used in opisthotinis remissioribus et luxatis cum cerato, and in resolution of
the tongue mixed with bread. Some do burn it on the coals putting under a new
test or pot until it ware red hot: thus much also out of Dioscorides touching
Nitrum. Now let us hear Galene, who speaks of Sulphur in this manner. Al
kinds of sulphur (says he) has a power attractiue, and is of hot
temperament, and of subtle substance, in so much as it resist the poison of
many venomous beasts: for I often times used it against the venom of turtur
marinus, and draco. And when I had taught it certain fishermen, I after a short
time returning, they merueylously commended this medicine to me. The use of it
is, that being dried, strowed on the wound, and also tempered with spittle,
for when I had excogitated these things, I found them true by experience. In
like sort it works being mixed with urine: for I taught the fishers such
medicines as might redilye be prepared, and I said they might aptly use it
both with old oil, and honnye, and turpentyne, and suerelye experience
showed all these so to be. Also I have not a few times (with this medicine of
Sulphur mixed with Turpentyne) healed Scabbes, Mentagra, and Leprye, for it
cleanses all such diseases, and does not repel them into the inward parts,
where as diverse other medicines which cures these sickennesses have a mixed
property, that is to say, they do both digest and also drive back.

Hitherto Galene of Sulphur. Now let us hear him of Nitrum, Lib. eodem
called with us vsuallye Saltpeter, Nitrum (says he) is in a mean in
strength betwixt Aphronitrum and Salt: But being combuste, it goes nearer
the nature of Aphronitrum, for by vstion it is made of moore subtle and thynne
parts. Therefore it does dry and digest. And if it be taken inwardlye, it
does cut and extenuate gross and slymye humors, much moore then Salt:
Aphronitrum except great necessity inforseth, is not to be taken inwardlye,
because it hurts the stomach, and does extenuate moore then Litrum. Truly a
certain rustical man used Nitrum as a remedy against suffocation or choking,
when any had eaten Moushromes (they call them in Latyne fungos) and it ever
profited him. And I my self have accustomed to use Nitrum both combuste and
crude, and chiefly the spume of it, in the like effects. Thus much out of
Galene also touching the qualities of Nitrum. The like words both of Sulphur
and Nitrum has Aetius well near. Now by their authorities you may easily
judge that neither these two are corrupters of man's body, either inwardlye
taken, or else outwardlye applied. So that they nothing agree with the
definition of venom. Yea, Dioscorides, Galene, and Aetius, found Sulphur and
Nitrum so far from any venomous quality, that they used them as approved and
excellent medicines against venom. Therefore another John de Vigo, Alphonce,
nor Brunswicke, shall be able by any approved author, old or new, to prove
that the simples (entering into the composition of the usual powder) are
venomous, except they will affirm the Cole to be venom, which were to
ridiculous, seeing that women with child, or those which labor with that
sickennesse which is called Pica, and also children daily eat coals without
danger. Furthermore daily experience shows the use of Sulphur to be
profitable. For it is a common practice to give it in milk to children vexed
with worms. And as for gonnepouder it self, in defect of other medicines, I
have put of it in these wounds, to dry and excicate, to the great comfort of
the Pacient. And therefore it is not in mixture and composition venomous, but
medicinable, and has in him the virtues abstersive and desiccatiue. Neither
in those that are wounded with shot of this powder do you see any of those
accidents to follow, which are as inseparable in venomous shot. Although
Alphonsus Ferrius, would that putrefaction, corrosion, vlceration, and
corruption, should be the proper accidents in venomous wounds. As who
should say, that perspiration let of hot and moist humors, there followed
not putrefaction, or that there appeared not in ulcers corrosion, called
thereof vlcera phagedenica. How aptly therefore does he apply these as
proper accidents in venomed wounds, when they are found in moore then an
hundred diseases, I do make him self Judge. Furthermore the cure it self of
these wounds, agrees with those that be contused and brosed, without the
addition of any medicine or alexipharmacon against venom: yea and Alfonsus
himself did little consider his assertion, when in the curation of wounds made
with Gonneshot, he forgets to use remedies against venom, which should be
his chief and first scope, if the wound were as he affirms. So that it is
more clear then midday that the powder does not receive any venom through
the fire in shotynge, and that also is evident in those that are burnte with
powder, for there appears no memcion of venom in them. And the burning is
easily cured and that with light medicines. Another argument that Alfonse
brings, is that the compounde medicine comes to the fourth degree in heat,
and therefore is denomous, and so consequently the shote, and therefore the
wound with it made. But let us see I pray you the force of this argument:
Sulphur is hot in the iiij. degree, and saltpeter hot in the end of the.ij.
degree. Now in the composition there is put one part of sulphur, x. parts of
saltpeter, and one part of cole, the cole is cold and dry, and therefore
adds not heat to the composition, neither the x. parts of nitrum, being but
in the ij. degree hot. How then should this powder be hot in ye.iiij. degree?
as for the like example, if you put to one part of boiling water.x. parts of
water but half so hot, will it abate the heat of the one part or make it
greater? I suppose none is so rude to confess that it will increase the
hotenes of the one part.

But in the way of disputation I will grant this absurdity. What than? Will
he conclude all things that are in the fourth degree whote, to be therefore
venomous? Then surely whote iron, fire, burning coals, Pepper, Pelitorie, and
a great number of healthful simples, should be numbered among venomes. True
it is that venomes are deadlye in themselves. But it does not therefore follow
that what so is deadly that same is also venomous: this is no true conversion.
But leaving this as a thing to manifest to make more words of: we will
consider whether the shot receive such heat that it can make an asker in
the wound as they affirm. Surely I in the wars have asked diverse wounded
Soldiers what heat they perceived in the time of the percinge of the shot?
Who all answered they felt no heat, but a certain contusion, and I my self
have presentlye taken up the Pellet when it has fallen at the mark, and felt
no heat at all to be made account of. But that you shall perfectlye
understand and be Judge your self in this case. Hang a bag full of
Gonnepouder on a place convenient: and than stand so far of as your piece will
shote leauell, and shute at the same, and you shall see the Gonnepouder to be
no moore set on fire with the heat of the stone, then if you cast a cold
stone at it. But say they how happens it then that there is an asker in such
wounds? For there is never asker but comes of Cauterization either actual or
potentiall. To this I answer, that it is no asker, for then it were not
possible there should be flux of blood in these wounds. For Galene says,
things adurent and burning does stay and staunche blood. But you will
replye, and say there comes no great flux of blood. To which I answer,
the cause of that is, the great contusion which repelleth the blood and has
so dried the part wounded, in thrustinge the blood to the other parts that
there is the less flux. But this is most evident, that there ever follows
flux more or less: and therefore it is no asker but co^tused flesh. This
might also be a reason manifest to the senses, that if the Pellet be a
cauterise (which of force it must be, if it do make an asker) how happens
it, that it burns not garments when it perseth them first, and then the
body? Nay you shall neither see, neither smell any token of adustition or
burning: where as if the shot had no moore heat then a little spark of
fire, it should in like case easelye burn the garments.

But I think these arguments sufficient. Therefore seeing yt neither by
authority of any learned author, nether by experience, neither yet in
composition and mixture: And to conclude another in the shoting the usual
gonnepouder is found to have any venomous quality, or the shot any such
heat as is able to make an asker: Let them cease (I pray them) henceforth
their found opinion, and not obstinatly persist in their error conceived.
Seeing that the senses does otherwise judge: and not be ashamed to embrace a
truth, and from henceforth confess the usual powder not venomous, nor the
shot of such heat that can make an asker. Which if they do, they shall not
be tormented with such care to take the fire (as they commonly call it) out of
the wound. But consideringe that this wound made with Gonneshotte, is to be
numbered not among green wounds, not among venomous, but only among those
which are called contused, brosed, or crushed wounds: They shall with great
gain to the wounded man, and much profit and fame to them selves, have as
prosperous success in their cures, as some of them have sustained shame and
reproach. But now to the general cure of those wounds made with Gonneshotte.

The general Method and way to heal such wounds as are made with
gonneshot. Chapter.ii.
Now seeing (as I suppose) I have sufficiently proved the powder nor shot
venomous: it is convenient to show the methodicall cure of these kinds of
wounds. And there are two intentions properlye hereto belonging. The one is
to deliver the wound of all such things as are not agreing to nature: The
other is restoring of such things as are lost and perished. I call things not
agreyng with nature, not only shot, iron, splintes, or shyuers of wood,
cloth, dust, oil, or such like: But also the cloddes of blood, matter,
brosed flesh, and such like as have no society with nature. The way how and
in what sort these things are to be removed, you shall find in the.v. Chap.
of the first book of my Enchiridion. The restoring of that which is lost is
properly the office of nature, as to engender flesh, blood, and such like
parts as are to be engendered. Notwithstanding the Surgian herein is natures
Mynister, and shall labor to bring the part to his right temperature: And
it so reduced to conserve it in the same estate.

And although in the.vj. Chap. of my Enchiridion, I have showed a general
method of curing contused wounds: yet I will not refuse for the help of the
inexpert, to set out in this place a more ample and large manner and way of
workynge. Therefore the cure of these kind of wounds, is to remove things
fixed in the wounds with instruments thereto convenient. As Crow bills,
Goose bills, Terribilles, Nippers, or Tongues. And then to do your endeavor to
cure this wound, as you would do contused and brosed wounds. And for
because the brosed flesh must of force be taken away, and that with so much
expedition as you conuenientlye may, without sharp and biting medicines:
Therefore you shall to this wound contused take of precipitate Mercurye
Dragme, j. or according as you shall see cause, and mix it with simple oil,
or oil of Roses, or with Butter, or fresh Barowes grease, and lay it to the
contused places. Bartholomeus Maggius an excellent Chirurgian, in these wounds
after ye things fixed in, be removed, the flux of blood stayed, and the wound
cleansed, uses to put into the wound, of his oil one drop, unto which oil
he gives great commendation, in all contused wounds, and the description of
it is as follows.

Rec. Resinae abiectinae, v. ounce. Olei rosacei, ij. ounce. Sem. Hypericonis, v.
dragmes. Sem. Momordicae, iij. dragmes.
The seeds shall be brosed, and put in a duble vessel with the oils, and
let them boil half an hour. Then strain them, and keep them to thy use.
This oil does assuage doloure and pain, it does concocte and digest, and
preserves the sound flesh from corruption and putrification. There are also
other medicines apt and conueniente for these wounds, but I will repete one
which is singular, and as I might term it merueylous: For it seperateth the
contused, swellynge, and putrified flesh, and that without dolor or pain.
And furthermore it so concocteth and digesteth, that you shall not perceive
any kind of cruditie in the wound, and this medicine is called vnguentum
Egypsiacum. Wherefore I wyshe that the Surgian does both dip his tents
therein, and also lay it on his splegeantes. For in two days or three at the
most, yea in great contused wounds, it works his effect. And here by the
way I must put the Surgian in memory, that his tents be not to bygge or
long, that they be not rough and hard, for the big tent does extend the
member, the long does prick and induce dolor: the hard and rough does as it
were tear the flesh. Let the tents and splegeants therefore be made of old
and fine linen cloth, that it brings not pain to the affected part. After
the contused flesh be removed by the use of your Egipsiacum: then apply to
the place things that will mundifie, and moderatly dry, as Honey of Roses
tempered with the flower of Barlie mealle, or Bean flower, unto which you may
add, Aristolochia rotunda, Centaurium minus, Euphorbium, Aloes, Turpentine,
Frankensence, Plantaine in powder or juice, flowers of Pomgranates, Cipresse
nuttes, and such like according as the nature of the part, and time of the
year does require, And here I speak not either of purging, letting of blood,
scarifieng, and boxyng, more then to admonyshe them, that these are necessary
and must of force be used in these wounds: Because I would the surgian should
not raishly attempt herein any thing, for the great peril that may follow.
But rather use the discreate counsel of the learned Physician. Another in those
wounds which are great and perilous with shot, I would have them strait
ways to dysmember the paciente (as many raishe Emperickes now in these days
use to do) except Sphacelous or gangrena have utterly mortifyed the part. For
I my self have cured a certain Souldyour who was shot with a base, through
the thyghe: and there was more then three fyngers bredthe taken away of the
bone in length, with the shot, and yet (God be thanked) through diligence
and pain the paciente was restored to health: and has the perfyte use of the
leg without any pain or grief more then that it is shorter then the
other. And thus much touching wounds of Gonneshotte in general. The rest
where as the particular cure varieth from the general method set out
according to the part wounded, you shall have in their proper places following.

Of a simple wound in the head made with gonshot. Chap. iii.
IN wounds made in the head with gonneshotte you shall diligently consider
whether the wound be simple or that it be compounde. For according to their
diuersitye, the intentions curatyue do much varye and change.

And for because there may be these two kinds of wounds, I will seuerallye
of them entreat, beginning with a simple wound first. Therefore if the wound
be simple, the cure is easier, and without danger: If that the Pacient have
not a body replete with evil iuse, or have tasted of that contagion, which
Master Doctor Cunyngham in my judgment does of all other most aptlye give
to name, Chamaeleontiasis (vulgarlye it is called morbus Gallicus) as appears
by his book written on the same. In which he shows the errous of such as
have hitherto hereof written: and sets out a most perfect method, and new
way of curing, without fumes, guaicum, vnguentes receiving into there
composition Hydrargyron, or such like. But now to that from whence we are
digressed. If the body of the wounded pacyente be affected as is aforesaid:
although the wound be but small and simple, yet most triflyng wounds in such
bodies are not cured without much diligence. Wherefore in such bodies you must
labor to purge the ill Iuse, or in Chamaeleontiasi, both to let blood,
purge, and sweet, and by diet, and things convenient rectify the body and
principal members of the same. So shall the cure of the wound be moore
spedye, and also prosperous. But now to the true cure of such wounds as are
called simple. First let the hear be shaven round about, after apply this
unguent following.

Rec. Praecipitati optimi, ij. dragmes. Butyri salis experti, ana. dragme.j.
sc. Olei rosarum, ana. dragme.j. sc. Croci, ij. grains.
Mix these and make an unguent which you shall lay on your splegeants being
made of soft linen clothe, and apply it to the wound. Then you shall lay on
the wound also Bolus armenius tempered with oil of Roses and the white of an
Egg, like an unguent, to defend the part from accidents. And this shall
suffice for the first day: You may also at the beginning, use in stead of
the second unguent, this comfortable cataplasme following.

Rec. Oleorum myrtillorum, ana. ij. ounce. Rosarum, ana. ij. ounce. Baulastiaru^,
ana. j. ounce. Rosarum rub ana. j. ounce. Boli armeni, ana. j. dragme. Sanguinis
draeonis, ana. j. dragme. Myrrhae, half a dragme.
Make of all this a cataplasme according to art. The second day you shall
use some medicine that both does digest, and also moderately dry the wound
of which sort this is one.

Rec. Terebinthinae lotae, j. ounce. Mellis rosarum, ij. ounce. Butyri salis
experti, iij. dragmes. Farinae hordei, ana. j. dragme. Aristolochiae rotundae,
ana. j. dragme. Radicis ireos, ana. j. dragme. Aloes, half a dragme.
Mix these and make all in an unguent, and use this until such time as there
appear signs of concoction in the wound, at which time, you shall no more
use Butter in the unguent, but instead hereof mix with it this powder
following.

Rec. Sarcocollae, j. dragme. Corticu^ radicis papaueris, half a dragme.
Farinae orobi, ana. dragme. j. se. Myrrhae, ana. dragme. j. se.
Make this in powder, and temper it with the other unguent. And use this until
the wound be perfectly cured. And this is the cure of a simple wound in the
head.

Of wounds compounde, which chance in the head through shot. Chap. iiii.
IN the cure of compounde wounds of the head, you must first of all (because
you may the suerer iugde and discern) use insition and make Cranium bare: the
form of cutting most apt, is to make it in form of two right lines crossing
themselves in the mids: as in the picture appears. After which infition
made, you must with some instrument sharp and flat, raise the skin and
flesh from Cranium. And if you see any shot or piece of bone, which may
easily be taken out: you may do it with some convenient instrument.

But if it will not without difficulty be taken away, then weate your
stuphes in astringent wine and venegre mixed with Bole armoniake, and sanguinis
draconis: and lay it to the wound. The next day following you shall use this
recept next ensuing four or five days, for fear of inflammation to follow.

Rec. Boli armeni, ij. ounce. Albumenu ouorum, 2. Olei rosacei omphacitis, iij.
ounce. Croci, iij. grains. misce.
Then you may very well use this digestive following so long as shall be
thought convenient, and that until the thing fixed will easily be taken out.

Rec. Terebinthinae lotae in vino, iij. ounce. Ouorum vitella, nu. 2. Olei
rosati, ij. ounce. Aloes, ij. scruples. Croci, iiij. grains. misce.
In other things the cure of it does not differ from the cure of simple
wounds.

But if any vain under Cranium be broken, and makes effusion of blood: If
dura matter, or pia matter be rent or torn, if Cranium be broken, and thereby
the brain is depressed, then you must with all expedition set a trappan on
Cranium, and give the wou^d vent, and take out the blood, or matter, or what
else does trouble and depresse the brain. And for because you may know
perfectly, whether the brain is hurt or not (although your senses outwardly
can not discern any thing) note these signs following. If he have
vertiginem, or thinks he sees many lyghtes, if he have alienation of mind,
or swellynge and tumor of the eyes with redness, or bleeding at the
nostrelles or ears, also vomityng, resolution of some one part, and
appoplexie. These be infallible signs that the Brains suffer, when as they
consequently follow after the head be wounded. And when you are constrained to
use a trappan, you shall make tents of Cotton, Wolle, or Lynte, and put into
his ears, and command a man to compresse with his hands the Pacientes
ears, less the noise make him to much affrayed, and faynte hearted. And
look that you have always in readiness soft and fine clothes wherewith you
may mundifie Cranium, and wype away the blood. Then look you have a piece of
sylke or sendall aunswerynge to the opening of Cranium well wette in auster and
stipticke wine, or in oil of Roses, if there does appear any cloddes of
blood to lay upon the pannicles, and put this sylke upon the pannicle and
with an instrument put it under Cranium. Then put stuphes made of the finest
carded woll you can get, and wette them in oil of Roses, and lay them on the
place. After that, fill the rest of the wound with clothes dypte in the same
wine and oil, then with your hands thrust it out, and lay upon the same
clothe Bole armoniake myred with the white of an egg and apply it upon the
same wound, and for to defend the member from dolor and inflammation, you
shall lay round about the wound this medicine made of Mel rosaceum, Farina
hordei and Iris. And when the hole made in Cranium does begin to be filled
with flesh: then with a raspitorie take away the sharp edges of the bones,
and bring the lyps of the wound by little and little into their proper places.
And if through the negligence of the Chirurgian, or the ill habit and
disposition of the pacientes body, or any diste^perature, there follows
corruption to any part affected of the brain, then you must again return to
the use of precipitate or Vngue^tum Egyptiacum, which is most excellent in this
case. And ever after the doctrine of Hippocrates and Galene be mindful that
thou work safly, spedely, and with so little pains to the pacient as possible
you may. Wherefore handle the parts tenderly, and wype al filthy matter away.
Let ye rollings only serve for to keep on the medicines, wherefore let them not
be to strait and so to provoke pain. Let the belly be fluxible and lose by
clysters, suppositories, or purgation: If that it be not naturally soluble. And
in this case you may give the wounded pacient every day or else every second
day, one pille of Agarike or Aloes. The diet must be most small and slender
from the time of the receiving the wound until the.vij. day. The meat shall be
the brothes made with a chicken, the drink shall be water boiled with sugar and
a little cinamom, or else small ale and bear. From the.xi. or.xiiij. day you
may give him at meat a little french wine, or if the wine be to strong mix it
with fountain water, or water of buglosse and borage. His brothes made as before
with chickens or a capon. And you may thicken the broth with bread, with almones,
or such like things that do norishe. Notstanding let al be done with great
discretion. And that the pacient observe his due hours of diner and supper.
Other things required for the order of. 6. rerum non not. Let the Chirurgian
learn of ye skilful Physician.

Of wounds in the Breast. Chap. v.
ALthough the wounds made with gonneshotte are in all parts of the body one
in effect and grief: yet does the cure differ according to the place wounded.
Which thing provoke me to describe here also the several cure of wounds
made in the Breast. Wherefore if the wound in the Breast perseth not through,
you shall cure it like other wounds. And the first two days apply vnguentum
ex praecipitato, or some other, which has the like faculty. And after ye use
some medicines which will gently excicate and mundifie, as mel rosarum simplex,
or else mixed with Turpentyne, Aristolochia, farina hordei, and such like.
And it shall be right good from the second day, unto the fourth or fifte day to
put to your abstersive medicines, fresh and new Butter. So you may make your
compound after this manner.

Rec. Mellis rosarum, j. ounce. Terebinthinae, ana. ij. dragmes. Butyri
recentis, ana. ij. dragmes. Farinae hordei, ana. j. dragme. Aristol. rotundae,
ana. j. dragme.
Myxe these together and dip your tents and spleageants in them. But upon
the wound you shall use to lay this medicine following.

Rec. Album. vnius oui. Olei rosati j. ounce. Boli armeni j. ounce and a half:
misce.
But when as that matter does begin to appear in the wound, then in the
stead of this last remembered, you shall use Emplastru^ ex Chalcitide, vel
Triapharmacon, made of Oxeleum and argenti spuma, spread on a linen clothe
and laid on the wound. And when the wound is cleansed from superfluous
humiditye, you shall cure the wound like those, whereas wants some
generation of flesh wherefore for this intention dip your spleageantes in
this medycyne, to whose composition is required.

Rec. Succi Myriophylli ana. j. ounce. Mellis rosati ana. j. ounce. Terebinthinae
ana. j. ounce. Farinae fabarum ana. ij. dragmes and a half. Hordei ana. ij.
dragmes and a half. Thuris ana. j. dragme. Aloes ana. j. dragme. Aristolochiae
rotundae ana. j. dragme.
Mix them together, and with a slyse stir these on the fire, until they be
well incorporated: and reserve it to thy use. Now if the Pellet or shot have
pearsed the inward parts it is deadlye and mortal both for breaking some
bones in the breast, or rybbes (for the pellet can not press betwixt the
rybbes without breakinge of some of them, except the shot be small like
hayle shot) and also for pearsynge the inward parts. Not withstanding where
the Pellet or shot moves in the capacity of the Breast, you shall with a
Probe handsomely bent for the use, search where it is, and it being found,
bring it up to the orifice of the wound: and then with your Forcepes, take it
out, as also the blood. This being done you shall use this unguent following,
two days only.

Rec. Olei rosati omphacitis, iij. dragmes. Terebinthinae j. dragme. Pulueris
praecipitati iiij. scruples.
Mix al these well together, and dippe your tent in it. But here you must take
heed that the tent be made of most fine and soft linen clothe, and that the
length of the tent be no more then the thicknes of the ribs: nether the
bigness more then serves the orifice of the wound.

And upon the wound you shall apply in manner of an emplaster, Bole Armoniacke
the white of an Egg and Oil of Roses, until there appear concoction in the
wound: at which time you shall no more use it but in ye place thereof you shall
use emplastru^ Barbarum, or else ex Chalcitide, whose co^positions you shall
find in my antidotarie. After the second day, you shall use this unguent.

Rec. Butyri recentis ij. dragmes. Mellis rosati. half an ounce. Glutinis
albotin iij. dragmes. Aloes ana. j, dragme. misce. Farinae hordei ana. j,
dragme. misce. Pull. ireos ana. j, dragme. misce.
When as you have used this medycyne the space of eight days, you shall leave
out the butter and in place thereof duble the quantitye of honny. And you may
make an iniection to mundifie the breast with water in which is boiled
liquirice, Figs, Raysens, and the less centaurye, or lupines. The rest of
the cure of these wounds do not differ from the method set out in the
second Book of my Enchiridion.

Of wounds with shot made in the third ventricle or bellye. Chap. vi.
THe wounds made with gonshote, if they be only about the belly or flanks,
with outpearcing through, and hurtynge the spine of the back, are cured as
other simple wounds made in the flesh. First taking out the shot, then to
remove the brosed and contusid flesh with medicines convenient, as you se set
out in the curyng of wounds of the head, and breast. Then the iij. day to use
some abstersiues which also do somewhat exiccate and dry. But if the shot
have persed through the belly and have wounded either the stomach, liver,
spleen, kydneys, intestynes, bladder, or any of the great veins or arteries:
then there is no hope of life to be looked for. But if the shot have persed the
belly, and yet not wounded any of the forenamed members, then the shot being
taken out there is some hope of recovery: but yet the pacient is not free from
peril and danger. Therefore you shall labor to get out the shot, placyng the
pacient upon the wound, and roll him from part, to part, prouokyng thereby the
shot to come to the orifice of the wound. Then with a probe made apt and
convenient for the same use, take out the shot. But if so be that you cannot
without great pain and much searching find the shot, it is much better to let
it remayn within, then with provoking of mortal accidents labor the taking
of it out. For there is no danger in letting the shot remain in. And there is
great peril in long serchyng for that the air does alter the inward parts:
and in searchyng, some inward part may be hurt with the probe. I my self
seruyng at muttrell under the mighty and puisant Prince Henrye the eyghte
about the year of Christ's incarnation.1544. had the experience of eleven
sundry soldiers shot into the body without persyng of any inward member.
And I could not get out the shot with out great difficulty and making
incision: and therefore I letting the shote remain within the body did
perfitely cure the pacientes. And they lived long after without any grief or
pain provoked by the shot. In like manner about the year of Christ.1557.
when as Philip king of Spain beseiged saint Quintynes, I then seruyng under
him, had diverse soldiers in cure wounded in like sort as is rehearsed: and
the shot still remaining in the body, they were (thanked be god) restored to
health. I also do now call to remembrance that there came a souldyour to
London when I first practiced the art of Chirurgerye, who was shot in the
bellye at the seege of Pauia. And made perfectlye hole the pellit remaining
within. This Souldour.xii. years after he was thus cured coming to the
city, had a great apostume in the flank. I then among other being called to
the cure, we applied such medicines to the aposteme, as we accustomablye do,
to apostemes named Bubones, engendered in that part. And when the aposteme
brake, and came to suppuration, we took out a Pellet of Lead, and after did
cure the Ulcer, and made the man whole. These I do, bring only for examples
sake that other Chirurgians being in the wars should not to much busye
themselves, or put the Pacient to pains and in danger in taking out the
shot. But now to that from whence we are digressed. The shot being taken
out (if it may easily be done) the confused and brosed flesh removed, and the
abstersive medicines applied: you shall proceed with incarnatiues, and
consolidatiues, as is set out in the cure of wounds of the bellye, in the.ij.
book of my Enchiridion. And if blood or matter be in the belly, use wine
warmed, and make iniections. But how much the sooner thou do haste the cure
of the wounds in the belly, so much thou make the pacient surer of life, and
thy self of woshyppe of the cure. Thou may use well in these wounds when
need shall require, this incarnatiue following.

Rec. Thuris, ana. j. dragme. Aloes, ana. j. dragme. Farinae hordei, ana. j.
dragme. Terebinthinae ana. ij. dragmes. Mellis, ana. ij. dragmes. Succi
myriophylli, ana. ij. dragmes.
You shall mix the flower with the iuise, then dissolve and melte the honnye
and turpentyne at the fire. Then put all together and make an unguent. With
this you shall sprede your spleageantes and dip your tents in. And when the
flesh do grow well, and that the wound begin to be filled: you shall apply
such medicines as are astringent, and does dry: as honny mixed with powder of
Bay berries, Masticke, flowers of Pomgranettes, and Turpentine. And for an
emplaster you may use emplastrum Chalcitidis, set out in the second book of
my Antidotarie. You may not forget in these wounds of the bellye to open a
vain in the arm on the same side: and command the Pacient to use quietness
in body, and flee perturbations and affections of the mind, so much as in him
is possible.

Of the cure of wounds made with gonneshotte in the parts called Artus,
conteyninge the arms and legs. Chap. vii.
THe cure of such wounds as happens to the arms and legs, is after the
method set out before, For first you shall (the wound being made in the
fleshye part) with your probe search out the shot and with your crows
belle take it out.

But if it have well near persed through the member, and that you may feel
it in the oppositye part, then cut the place, and take out the shot,
regarding always that you cut none of the great veins which lays toward
the skin. But if the shot cannot easelye be found, you may not therefore
cease the cure of the wound, but proceed in this manner. If the holes of the
shot do differ and are distaunte, you shall roll fine Lynte together, and
put it into the eye of your Probe made like an Needle, and draw it through the
wound. But if the Muscules do not suffer this: Then you shall instyll and
power into the wound the unguent made with Butter, Precipitate, and my
Egyptiacum (whose composition is in the Antidotarie) and let it pearse into the
wound. Then you shall make Tents and dip them in the same, and put into the
orificies of the wound, and upon the parts round about, you shall apply
the medicine made of oil of Roses, Bole armoniake, and the white of an Egg
mixed together. This medicine you shall so long use until you be paste
suspicion of inflammation, and other accidents. And when there appear signs
of concoction, you shall put but one part of Butter, and two parts of Honnye.
After which things done, the use of this medicyne is convenient.

Rec. Succi apij ana. j. ounce. Myriophylli ana. j. ounce. Terebinthinae ana. j.
ounce. Mellis ij. ounces. Farinae fabarum ana. ij. dragmes. Hordei ana. ij.
dragmes. Aristolochiae rot. j. dragme and a half. Aloes. j. dragme.
First mix the pouders with the iuyces and Honny on a soft fire: then put in
Turpentine. And in summer or whereas the paciente is of colorike nature, in the
place of apium you may put the juice of plantine: or if you will more spedely
exiccate and dry, put to it Lithargiru^ made in most fine powder, or else lyme
washed many times, and dried and made in fine powder. And when as the wound is
well mundifyed: you may use some incarnatyue as this for example.

Rec. Terebinthinae, ij. ounces. Mellis j. ounce. Aloes ana. j. dragme. Thuris
ana. j. dragme. Farinae hordei ana. j. dragme. Aristolochiae half a dragme
And now you must have regard to your tents that you daily make the^ shorter
and lesser. And so cure the wou^d. But if it happens that through the violence
of the shot, not only the fleshy parts be wounded, but also the bones fractured
and broken: then you shall use a duble kind of cure. For the co^tusion must be
cured as I have here before made mention: and the bone fractured must be united
and used as is set out at large in the fourth book of my Enchiridion. Saving ye
you shall not use ligatures and splents in this kind of wounds. But first you
shall labor to take out the shot. Next to remove the contusid and brosed
flesh, then to procure the generation of new flesh. After which, shall come the
unition of the bone. And because you may keep the part without motion when as
the bones are joined: you shall use the instrument which is set out for
fractured legs in the end of this book. And then cover the member with soft
clothes that it may be defended from the iniurye of the air.

Of the cure of those that are burnt with gonnepouder. Chap. viii.
THe cure of those that are burnt with gunpowder do require none other cure
then if they were burnt with fire, or other flames Wherefore it were
superfluous to make mention of the cure of it in this place, if it were not
that those which use shottyng in gonnes as subject to the flambe of powder: and
therefore I have placed it with this book. Wherefore if the skin be not yet
vlcerate, you shall apply to the part, oil of bitter almondes, oil of Olives
with salt, or that which is in common use, to take two parts of the juice of
Onions, and one part of varnishe. But if there be vlcerations then you must
make this unguent following.

Rec, Olei oliuarum ij. pound. Secundae corticis Sambuci iiij. ounces.
Boil these on the fire, then strain them strongly, after add to them.

Cerussae half an ounce. Plumbi vsti ana. iij. dragmes. Lithargyri ana. iij.
dragmes.
Myxe these with a leaden pestell in a mortar, and make thereof a Lynimente
according to art. But you must take heed that you open not the bladers, for
the space of.ij. or iij. days: for when as they are opened at the beginning
they bring dolor and pain. The inflammation ceased and the accidents which
may happen being put away: he rest of the cure is as the cure of ulcers:
which varyeth according as the ulcer is simple, or compounde.

Thus ends the treatise of Gonneshotte, compiled and pubshed, by Thomas Gale
master in Chirurgerie. FINIS.
These instruments be called Forcepes and are used for to take out shot or
pelletes in wounds. etc.


These Syringies serve to make iniections into the vvondes.

These are the insition sheares to enlarge a wound.



This instrument is called Gossopium and serves to lay the fractured leg in,
being broken with Gonneshote. etc.


An Antidotarie containing hid and secret Medicines simple and compounde: as
also all such as are required in Chirurgerie: faythfullye gathered and
published by Thomas Gale Master in Chirurgerie.

printer's device of Rouland Hall

PRINTED AT LONdon by Rouland Hall, for Thomas Gale. 1563.

Antidotarie. WHy with so coye, and straung a look,
do thou me thus behold?
Am I unknown unto thy sect,
or my use manifold?

Chirurgian. Where as acquainted men be not,
what should they faune and smyle?
I know you not my looks it shevve,
I will you not begyle.

Antido. My master has sent me abroad,
to his great cost and pain:
VVilling me with Surgians to dvvell,
to their vvorshippe and gain.
If that but ons my name you hear,
you will me know certain,
Antidotarie called I am,
which great treasures contain.

Chirurg. Antidotarie should I know,
but thy speech, and array,
(Which yet I have not hard or seen)
does conterary say.

Antidot. In deed I was naked and bare,
with errors eke infect,
And barbarous names of medicines,
to which I was subject.
But lo, I am now garnished,
with medicines of price
Which old Hippocrates did use,
and Galene did devise,
Auicen, Rasis, Mesue,
Guido, Brunsvvike, Vigo:
And all my masters travails eke,
he has added me to.
And though my speech for want of use,
semth somevvhat strange to thee,
Yet if learning thou vvylt embrace,
and acquaint thee with me,
Familier thou shall me find,
easy to entertain.

Chirur. Then give me leave thee to embrace,
do thou with me remain,
And for thy sake I will not spare,
labor, and time, to spend.

Antidot. If thou so do, great gain will spring,
and men vvil thee commend.

W. Cunyngham.

THOMAS GALVS CHIRVRGVS. ANGLVS AETATIS SVE 56*
portrait of Thomas Gale

Thomas Gale Chirurgian, unto the frendlye Readers, Salutations.
WHen as I had finished my Institutions, Enchiridion, and Treatise of wounds
made with Gonne shot (loving Reader) I did right well perceive that the
precepts of the art in them contained, should not so far extend and serve
so well thy use, except I did set out such medicinal instruments, as both
are mentioned in the same books, and of necessity are required in the art of
Chirurgerie: as vnguentes, oils, Baulmes, lotions, wound drynkes, Emplasters,
Cerotes, Cataplasmes, Trochisce, Pouders, and and such like. For although I
have set out diverse approved medicines in other my works, yet they be but as
an handefull in comparission to this Antidotarie, and put forth there only
for example sake. Wherefore I have drawn out of the most approved Authors
old and new, such medicines as be both easily prepared, and of most
effect and virtue: adding hereto what I have found profitable and necessary
by long experience and practice. And although perchance at the first it may
seem somewhat obscure and hard (because I put the receptes and compositions in
the Latyne tongue) yet if you do accustomablye use to read them, and confer
either with the Apothecarie where as you do not perfectly understand the
same, or else use the help of a Dictionarie, they will be unto you both
familier and plain. And think not that I have done this (loving Reader)
because I would make it moore heard and difficulty: But I did it chiefelye
for that the Latyne names are universally used, and that there are an infinite
number of simples which want English names, and those (for the more part) that
may be Englyshed, are not universally known through England by that same name:
because of the diversity that is used in calling of simples, according to
the country. And yet I do not omit to set out in the English tongue as well
the method and way of composition of such medicines, as I have placed in this
Antidotarie: as also faithfully declared their virtues and use, for what causes
they are invented, and for what infirmities they serve. And although it seem
hard, obscure, and difficulte at the first face, yet follow thou still the
counsel of the wise Poet who says: Assiduo illisu durum cauat vndula saxum.

Which Verses may be englished with us in this manner.

The watrie drops so moist and soft,
Does perse hard stones with dropping often.
So in like case (dear reader) the hard names of medicines by often reding will
be persed, I mean they will be as facile and easy unto you as possible may be.
Now there rests no more but that thou will with the same good will and
mind receive these my travails and expenses, that I freely do offer them unto
thee. So doing I will not here stay God wyllyng, but perticipate other of my
labors with thee. Fare most heartely well in Christ our Savior. At my house
in London, the first day of August. 1563.

The first Book of the Antidotarie containing briefly the simples and
compoundes answering to all the intentions curatiue required in the art of
chirurgerie, by Thomas Gale, Master in Chirurgerie.
Of medicines repercussiue both simple, and compounde. Chap. i.
MEdicines which do repel and drive back, be of quality cold and such as
have an adstringent faculty, although they be whote. The utility springinge
by the right use of these is great. For we stay by them the flux of humors
in their beginning. Hereof does it follow, that we let the generation of
inflammations, apostemes, ulcers, fevers, dolor, and pain. Of simple
medicines repercussiue these are some in most use. Waters either fountain or
distilled, Lectise, Bursa pastoris, Myntes, Purselane, Plantyne, Colewortes,
Wormewode, Centaurie, Melilote, Pentaphyllon, Knotgrasse, Houseleeke both
great and less: the leaves and tops of Bramble tree, the Myrtle tree,
Balaustium, Galla omphacitis, omphacium, Vinegar, wild Apples, and Pears,
Meddelers, Seruise tree and fruit, Alume, atramentum sutoriu^, cerusa,
Litharge, acatia, bolus armena, terra sigillate, Hypocisthis, aloes, amomum,
agaricke, Calcanthum, Crocus, Coral, Haematites, Ladanum, Myrrha, Chrysocolla,
Cadmia, Cinabaris, Sanguis draconis, Spodium, Tragacantha, the Oak, Cypress
leaves, and Myntes, Mandrage apples, and iuse, Henbaine, Popie, whytes of
Eggs, and such like. Among compoundes these are numbered which do drive
back and stay the flux of humors. Oil of Roses, Cataplasmes made with the
iuse of these herbs, and with flower. Also cerotes, as cerotume Psyllio,
ceratum rosaceum, ceratum myrtinum, dracalcitis, oleum rosatum vulgar, oleum
rosatum Mesuae, oleum rosatum omphacium, oleum Cydoniorum Mesuae, vnguentum
santallium Mesuae, hydrelaeon Galeni, Cataplasma Guil. Buttes ad phlegmones,
vnguentum contra phlegmones and pruritus, vnguentum Pomphologos.

Of medicines attractiue simple and compound. Chap. ii.
MEdicines which do draw and attracte be of whote temperature and subtyle
parts, they do draw out of the inward parts, as when as any venomous matter
is in the body. Also when splents, bones, scales, thorns, arrowe heads, are
fixed in any parts, it sucketh out superfluous moisture in dropsyes, and
such like sycknesses. Medicines simple attractiue be, Propolis, Sagapenum,
ammoniacum, Opopanax, Galbanum, Euphorbium, Calx viua, aristolochia rotunda,
lepidium, Musterd seed, Tithymallus, Pyrethrum, Cantharides. Also stercus
columbium, Gallinaceum, anserinum, arietinum, and all such like fymes. Old
oil, also Turpentyne, Larigna, picea abiectina: and such like as have a
great virtue attractiue: Of compounde medicines they use oil of Musterd
seed, Emplastrum apostolicon Nicholai, Oxycroceum, Emplastrum ex allijs Aetij,
and diverse other, which you shall find in the second Book of the
Antidotarie.

Of medicines abstersive, simple and compounde. Chapter. iii.
SVch medicines as do mundifie, and cleanse wounds or filthy ulcers: are called
abstersiues. Of which simple commonly used be Smalag, Roses, Plantayne,
Scabiouse, Nettles, Selondyne, Radix dracontij, Lupines, aristolochia longa,
and rotunda, Alume, Barley and Bean flower, Flos iris, anagallis, Almones,
Sotherne wode, Sperage, Asplemos, Wormwood, Betes, Camepytis, Hearts horn,
cortex Capparis, Eleborus albus and niger, Horehound, Parietarie, Valerian,
whaye, Honny, Staphisagre, Nitru^, the compou^ds are Melicratu^, Oxycratu^,
Oxymel, Oemel, Praecipitatis puluis, vnguentum Egyptiacum nostrum, veride
andromachi, vnguentum apostolorum, vnguentum mundificatiuum Magistrale, and
diverse other like.

Of resolving medicines: Simple and compounde. Chap. iiii.
WHen as through great fluxis there are humors impacte in any part, then we
use resoluetiue medicines: the Greeks call them Diaphoretica and they be of
whoote and moist temperature. The simples Diaphoretik are these. Whote water,
whote wine, Oils that be whoote in quality, anthemis, Linesede Fenegreke,
Myntes, Neppe, Calaminth, Peneriall, Netles, Balm, Mugworte, Camomil Malowes,
Melilote, Dill, Stichados, Maioram Fumiterry, Wormewoode, Enula Campana,
Walworte, Helder, Valerian, Horehounde, Smaleage, Colewortes, Bean, and Barlye
meal, Turpentine, Ladanum, Sagapenum, Galbanum, Opopanax, Bdellium, ammomacu^
Coliphonium, Myrrh, Frankensence, and the grese of Geese Capons, He^nes,
Cranes duks, and such like. Among compoundes specified in the second Book
these are numbered.

Barbarum emplastrum, Emplastrum ex chalci tide, Triapharmacon, Diachilon
album, oils of elder, Lilies, Dill, Camomille, Oleum Rosatum compositum
Mesuae, Oleum Nardinum compositum Mesuae, Emplastru^ Henrici octaui, Emplast.
Gul. Firmigonis militis.

Of medicines mollificatiue, simple and compound. Chap. v.
MEdicines molificatiue which properlye in Greek are named Malactica, are
temperately whote without any manifest quality either of moisture or
dryness. We use these medicines when as we will mollify and make soft bodies
which be scirrhous and hard. Of the simples which do mollify these are:
all fatness, Butter, Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Atriplex, the roots of Althea,
Wax, Colophonie, Fengreke, Cinamome, Saffran, Cypress, Galbanum, Lyneseede,
Laudanum, Lorrell, Lilies, Mallows, Opopanax, Oesipius, Piche, Psyllium, al
Resines, the marrowe of a Heart, a Calfe and Ox, Storax and Prepolis, and
Mescelto.

The chiefest compoundes herein used, be Diachylon magnum Mesue, Dialthea cum
gummis Nicholai, Emplastrum de Mellioto mesuae, Diamelilotou Andromachi ex
Galeno, Emplastrum ex allijs Aetij, Diachalceteos Galeni, Dia chylon mesuae
primae descriptionis, Ceratum e styrace, Ceratum gratia Dei, and such like set
out in the second Book.

Of medicines which do suppurate, simple and compounde. Cap. vi.
WHen as all hope is paste by other medicines, then we take those in use which
do suppurate. And note that generallye the great inflammations for the moore
part do induce pain, and palsatiue dolor, and come at length to
suppuration. The simples which do suppurate for the moore part, are Althea,
Branckursine, Axungia, Butter, Calves talow, Saffran, Wax, Ammomu^, Fengreke,
Wheat, Barley, Cocle flower, the roots of Brionie, white Lilie heads,
Ladanum, Line seed, Mastiche, Oesypus, Piche, Frankensence, Rosyne, Styrax,
Figs, Stichados, Smyrnium. Of compoundes which be of forse in this case: are
Picatum ceratum, tetrapharmacon, Basilicon, viride Andromachi, Pastillus
Musiae, Emplastru^ ex freme^to Democrati, and diverse other which need no
rehearsal.

Of medicines causticke. Chap. vii.
CAusticke medicynes which do remove, and take away fylthines in ulcers, and
superfluous flesh, are precipitate, sublimate, alome, es Viride, Calchanthum,
Sandaracha, arsenicum, Puluis noster secretus, Vnguentu^ egyptiacum, Vnguentum
apostolicon Vigonis, Pastillus Andronius, Pastillus Polyidae, pastillus de
Minio Ioannis de vigo, Ceratu^ Viride Iamerici, aqua corrodens, aqua
mercurialis. and diverse other which were superfluous to rehearse: seeing they
are readelye found in the second Book: or else in the table belonginge to the
whole works. And that I have here in this place remembered the chief and
principal Causticke medicynes, which are most in use in these our days.

Of medicynes which do aswage dolor and pain: both simple, and compounde.
Chap. viii.
MEdicines which do cease dolor and pain (called in greek Anodyna) be dill,
worm wood, Gladine, Agarike, Cardamone, Chamomille, Centaurie, Chamaepitis,
Eringium Daucus, Iris, Persely, Rosemarie, Juniper, Milium, Opopanax, Althaea,
Revv, Serpillum, Lyneseede, Hyosciamus, Fygges, Castorium, Cardamome,
Agallochum, Atriplex, Serpillum, Fengreke, Peucidanu^, the white of eggs, and
such like. Among compou^des these are in use, butter, oil of roses; Violettes,
Nenuphar, Popye, Lettise, Pursulane, Oleum, Mastichinum Mesuae, Oleum Populium
Nicholai, Oleum Hyperici Magistrale, Oleum Mandragorae Nicholai, Oleum
Lumbricorum, Vnguentum infrigidans Galeni, Ceratum Oxycroceum Nicholai,
Emplastrum de Speciebus, Cataplasma D. Gul. Buttes ad dolore^ sedandum. And
such like.

Of medicines incarnatiue: Simple and compound. Chap. ix.
MEdicines incarnatiue, which do also engender flesh: are Aristolochia
rotunda, Frankensence, Ladanum, Aloes, Cadmia lota, Pompholix, Amylon, Manna,
Mirrhe Storax, Spodium, Turpentine, Colophonia Chrysocolla, Piche, Christallus,
Oesypus. Of compoundes they use Viride Galeni, theriaca, Aureum Mesue, Fuscum
Nicholai, Tetrapharmacon, Dia Irios, Puluis Rasis, Vnguentum Basilicon Mesue,
Ceratum Viride Iamarici, Vnguentum incarnatiuum Brunsuicensis. And diverse other
set out both in the Enchiridion in their proper places, and also in this
second Book.

Of medicines which do cicatrize, simple and compound. Chap. x.
MEdicines which are to be used to cicatrize an ulcer, when as it is filled
with fleeshe are these, Aloes, bolus armena, Alome, Aristolochia, amilum,
balaustia, bdellium, anagallis, Centory, Camepitis, Chamedris, cadmia
Eupatorium, es vstum, acatia, gentian, Gipsum, Iris illirica, Licium, Lupines,
Mell coctum, Myrtius, Myrrh, Lithargyrum, Plantain, Pentaphillon, Paper
combust, Sanguis Draconis, Sarcocolla, stymmi, Sandaracha, terra Lemnia,
Symphiton maius, the leaves of elder, Frankensens, Tormentyll, Varuayne,
Ceruse, Cupresse galls, tutia, and such like. The compou^des are Dia cadmia,
Dia ladani, Vnguentum album Rasis, album e Cerusa, Vnguentum Pompholigos,
Puluis Epuloticus, Vnguentum Nicholai, being the seventh unguent set out in the
second book. Diapipereos Galeni, Dia Dictamu Eiusdem, Emplastrum Calisiense,
Emplastru^ Gul. Firmigonis: Militis, Ceratum Viride Iamerici, Vnguentum
desiccatiuum tubrum: and diverse other. etc.

Of medicines Conglutinatiue, simple and compounde.
MEdicines conglutinatiue, simple be: elder Walworte, Syderites, Symphitum,
plantaine, Anagallis, androsemon, copvvebbes, Lana Succida, new chese Isatis,
Myrrh, Sarcocolle Aloes, Barlie combust, Pich, Rosen, and gum arabicke. Of
compoundes they use, artificial Balmes, among which that which is set out in
the second Book after our invention is right excellent and of great virtue.
Barbarum emplastru^ Galeni, and vnguentum e vermibus, Oxelaeum Galeni,
Oeneleum, Ceratum viride Macherionis ex Galeno. And diverse other of which I
need not to make a vain and superfluous rehearsal.

FINIS.
The second book of the Antidotarie, Containing the medicynes compounde: and
their way of composition, with their virtues and properties. by Thomas Gale
Master in Chirurgerye.
IN the former book (loving Reader) of this Antidotarye I have set out
breefelye and eke compendiouslie, such medicines simple and compounde as are
required in the curatiue intentions of Chirurgerye: now I think good in this
second book, to declare the compositions of all such co^poundes as are there
remembered, and be of most price in the art. Unto which I have also added no
small number of unguents oils, Balmes, Emplasters, Cerotes, wound drink, etc,
of mine own invention. And here note, that there is difference betwyxt the
grecians, and the later writers, touching the names of these compound
medicynes. For the Grecians did call vnguentes only aromatic oils, wherewyth
they did annoint the body. The Cerotes they called such medicynes as received
into their composition oil and wax. Emplasters be medicynes which take into
their composition diverse kinds of symples, but chefelye metallyen bodies and
these are so long to be boiled together, until they will no longer defyle,
and cliue to the hands. Cataplasmes, be medicines standing on herbs, flowers
oiles, wheat, barley, ote, bean and other flower. Which are not so long to be
boiled on the fire, as emplasters are. Trochisce, be compositions made round
and were devised to keep long time such symples in their force which do enter
in other compositions. Pouders be medicynes beaten and made subtle and fine
like mootes of the son, as they call them. Waters are prepared diverse ways
by the art of Alchimie. Decoctions, lotions, and iniections, be liquors and
other things boiled together and then strayned. What quantity of every
simple should be admitted to every form of composition can not in general
rules be set out, but does varye according to the curatiue intentions.
Particular forms of compoundes such as be of most price, and used: shall
follow in this second book: as also there way to make them, and to what use
they serve: beginning first with vnguentes.

The description of an unguent called Infrigidans Galeni.
Rec. Olei rosati omphacini i. pound. Cerae albae iii. ounces.
You shall melte the Wax in the Oil, then wash it often with cold water,
until it comes to white color. Last of all wash it with water of roses and
put to it a little protio^ of venegre.

It is good to refrigerate hot burning fevers, and the heat of the liver. It
aswageth the pain in the head. It must be anointed upon the rigge bone or spine
of the back, upon the temples, and on the region of the liver.

Vnguentum ad ambusta
Rec. Olei rosati viii. ounces. Olei ex ouis ii. ounces. Nitri albi puluer. ii.
ounces. Cerae albae i. ounce and a half. Corticis mediani Sambuci M, i,
Make hereof an unguent with a soft fire according to art.

It is very precious in burnings and scaldings and like affectes.

Vnguentum de Artanita Maius Mesuae
Rec. Olei irini ij. pound. Succi Ciclaminis iij. pound. Cucumeris agrestis
j. pound. Butyri j. pound. Pulpae colocinthidis. iiij. ounces. Polipodij vj.
ounces. Euphorbij half a ounce.
Brouse those that are to be broused and let them be infused in a vessel of
glass with the iuyces and oiles eight days: then make them whote in vase
duplici and strain them, then add.

Sagapeni vij. dragmes and a half, Myrrh iij. dragmes.
These must be disolued in veneger and boil all in the decoction aforesaid
until the iuyces be consumed, then add to it.

Cerae v. ounces. Fellis vaccini vij. dragmes and a half.
Make al so whote that the wax may melte: after put into it by little and
little the powder following.

Scammonij ana. vij. Dragmes and a half, Aloes ana. vij. Dragmes and a half,
Colocinthidis ana. vij. Dragmes and a half, Mezerei ana. vij. Dragmes and a
half, Turbith ana. vij. Dragmes and a half, Salis gemmae iiij. dragmes and a
half. Euphorbij ana. iij. dragmes. Piperis longi ana. iij. dragmes.
Zingeberis, ana. iij. dragmes. Chamaemeli ana. iij. dragmes. Misce et fiat
Vnguentum.
It provoke vomit being anointed on the stomach, but on the nauyll it
makes the bellye lose. So that it is good against dropsies, for that it does
much expel serose humors, it does also kill worms. And is used in such
bodies as are not able to take any purgien medicines inwardly.

Vnguentum Rosarum Mesuae.
Rec. Axungiae porcinae. j. pound.
Wash it.ix. or.x. times in hot water and as often in cold. Then you shall
add to it.

Rosarum rubrarum recentium. j. pound.
Macerate them and let them stand together seven days, after boil them with a
soft fire. Then strain them. After put so many new Roses and do as you did
with the first. Then take so many more new and so the fourth time doing
always as with the first Roses. Then add.

Succi rosarum rubrarum vi. ounces. Olei amygdalarum dulcium. v. ounces.
Boil all on a soft fire unto the consumption of the Juice of Roses, then
strain them and reserve it to that use.

Alij addunt opij. i, dragme.
It cease inflammations, Herpes, and erysipelas and is good against the head
ache coming of heat. It does aswage the whote distemperaunce of the stomach
and liver.

Vnguentum album auicennae, Vnguentum de cerusa dictum, Rec. Lithargyri j.
dragme. Cerusae v, dragmes. Cerae albae vij. dragmes. Olei Rosati ij. ounces.
Albuminis ouorum numero. j.
The wax being molten in the oil with a soft fire put in your litarge and
Ceruse well beaten and sersed. Myxe these, and last of all you shall put in the
white of the egg.

This unguent is good against adustion, scabbes, and ulcers.

Vnguentum de Tutia Magistrale.
Rec. Olei Rosati, ana. vj. ounces. Olei omphacini ana. vj. ounces. Olei Myrtini,
ana. ij. ounces. Vnguenti populei, ana. ij. ounces. Foliorum Plantaginis, ana. M.
ij. Solani, ana. M. ij.
The herbs being well cut and brosed, mix them with the oils, lettinge them
macerate together.viij. days. Then boil them a little and strain them. Which
done, you shall add of.

Cerae albae iiij. ounces and a half.
Boil them until the wax be molten, sturrynge it with a slyse. And take it
from the fire adding to it of.

Lithargyri vi. ounces. Pompholigos sieve tutiae preparatae, Cerusae tritae, ana
ij. ounces. Plumbi vsti vj. ounces. Caphurae j. ounce.
Put all in a leaden mortar and let it be stirred two hours continually, after
put it into a vessel of glass. And reserve it to thy use.

Alind simile, Nicolai
Rec. Olei rosati ana. vj. dragmes. Cerae albae ana. vj. dragmes. Succi solani
j. dragme Cerusae lotae ij. dragmes. Plumbi vsti et loti, ana. j. dragme.
Tutiae praeparatae ana. j. dragme. Thuris half a dragme.
Melte the wax in the Oil with a soft fire then put them in a leaden mortar
and put the pouders into them, continually sturring them. And then put to the
iuyces of the herbs sturring still for the space of six hours.

These.ij. vnguentes are excellent in exciccating cricipelas, filthy ulcers,
also for ulcers of the legs, and do fill the holowe and emptye parts, it
does further more refrigerate and cicatrise.

Vnguentum de lythargirio,
Rec. Lithargyri. ij. ounces. Cerusae half a ounce. Aceti j. ounce. Olei Rosati
quantum sufficit.
Make these in an unguent with a soft fire. It cures ulcers and excoriations
made through riding, straytnes of the shoe, or otherwise happenyng.

Tripharmacum eiusdem Mesuae,
Rec. Lithargyri ana, iij. ounces. Aceti fortis ana, iij. ounces. Olei communis.
vj. ounces.
Let the Litharge be finely poudred and put to it the Oil and Vyneygre and
stir them continually.

It is of the like virtue with the unguent going before for it heals scabbes,
and ulcers of the skin, and such like.

Vnguentum ad Scabiem.
Rec. styracis liquidae, ana. ij. ounces. Terebinthnae lotae, ana. ij. ounces.
Butyri loti, ana. ij. ounces. Succi limonum j. ounce and a half. Hellebori nigri
puluerisati, j. ounce. Salis. ij. ounces.
Mix them together and make thereof an unguent according to art.

It has like virtues with ye vngeuent going before

Vnguentum de Minio.
Rec. Minij laeuissime triti ij. ounces. Olei Rosati ana, ij. ounces. Olei
Myrtini, ana, ij. ounces. Coquantur lento igni cum. Cerae albae. half a ounce.
Make an unguent thereof according to art.

Aliud de Minio camphoratum,
Rec. Minij triti iij. ounces, Lithargyri, ij. ounces. Cerusae, j. ounce and a
half. Tutiae, ana. iij. dragmes. Camphorae ana. iij. dragmes. Olei rosati j.
pound and a half. Cerae albae ij. ounces.
The wax being molten in the oil upon a soft and gentle fire, put it in a
leaden mortar and put the other symples made in most fine powder into it and
stir them continually.

This unguent is good against old and malign ulcers, and such as will hardly be
cured. etc.

Tetrapharmacon Galeni.
Rec. Picis nigrae, ana. q. s. Resinae, ana. q. s. Cerae, ana. q. s. Adipis
vaccini, ana. q. s. Fiat vnguentum.
It does heat and make moist the part to which it is aplied, it cease
dolor, and does suppurate, and make matter or sanies. Wherefore it is right good
for to bring apostemes to suppuration.

Vnguentum Basilicon minus Mesuae.
Rec. Cerae flauae ana. j. pound. Resinae pinguis ana. j. pound. Picis
grecae, ana. j. pound. Olei communis quantum sufficit Fit vnguentum lento
igni,
Some put turpentine to it, some in the place of it do put piche.

This Unguent answers to the virtues of Basilico^ minus but it is more
weak. Wherefore it is more apt for green wounds of the head and neruous
parts and ulcers.

Vnguentum Basilicon maius Mesuae Galeni Enneapharmacum est.
Rec, Cerae albae, ana. j. ounce. Resinae pini, ana. j. ounce. Sepi Vaccini, ana.
j. ounce. Picis graecae, ana. j. ounce. Picis nigrae, ana. j. ounce.
Terebinthinae, ana. j. ounce. Thuris, ana. j. ounce. Myrrhae ana. j. ounce. Olei
commumis. s. q. Fiat vnguentum.
Such ulcers as be with out inflammation in the neruous and sinowye parts
this Unguent fylleth with flesh and incarnateth very well.

Vnguentum fuscum Nicolai.
Rec. Olei, one pound and a half. Cerae nouae, iiij. ounce. Picis Grecae, ana.
ij. ounce. Picis nigrae, ana. ij. ounce. Mastiches, ana. j. ounce. Galbani, ana.
j. ounce. Thuris, ana. j. ounce. Sagapeni ij. ounce. Terebinthinae, j. ounce. Fiat
vnguentum.
This unguent has a power and virtue of healing and attracting.

Vnguentum capitale Conciliatoris.
Rec. Gummi eleni, iij. ounce. Hammoniaci, ij. ounce. Terebinthinae, ana. iij.
ounce. and a half. Resinae pini, ana. iij. ounce. and a half. Cerae, quantum
sufficit.
Make of this an unguent. And let the gummes be dissolved according to art,
and so long boiled until they come almost to the form of a Cerote.

Vnguentum e Caprifolio Carpi.
Rec. Terebinthinae, ana. iiij. ounce. Resinae pini, ana. iiij. ounce. Cerae
nouae, ana. iiij. ounce. Olei rosati, viij. ounce, Mastiches, ana. j. ounce
Thuris, ana. j. ounce Gummi eleni, ij. ounce. Caprifolij, ana. iij. ounce.
Betonicae, ana. iij. ounce. Vini optimi, ten pound.
The Woodbyndes and Betonye being stamped, let them stand infused in Wine
four and twentye hours. Then add to them all the other percelles, except
the Gummes, Frankensence and Masticke, boil these on a clear fire until the
half part of the Wine be consumed, and that it begins to wax green, then
strain it, and let it cool. Then boil it again until all the Wine be
consumed, then strain it again, and then boil it, and add the rest of the
percelles in fine Powder. And then put it in a cold place, and reserve it to
thy use.

This is a right excellent medicine in wounds of the head.

Vnguentum e Calce magistrale,
Thou shalt every day ons wash the Chalk, and let the water be taken
away with a Sponge, do this ten days. Then wash it with Rose water, and
let it dry, and then Rec. Huius calcis ita extinctae, three ounce, Olei rosati,
one pound Cerae albae, three ounce.


Melte the Wax in the Oil, then taking it from the fire, put the Chalk made
in most fine Powder, unto the Oil and Wax, and make an unguent of them
according to art. This vnguente is good for burnynges and scaldynges.

Vnguentum populeon Nicolai,
Rec. Oculorum Populi arboris recentium mense Martio collectorum. a pound and
a half. Axungiae porcinae praepartae. iiij. pound.
The Pople buddes must be broused, and mixed with your Axungia until your
other herbs may be prepared, then add to it, Foliorum.
Papaueris agrestis, ana. iij. ounce. Mandragorae, ana. iij. ounce. Hyoscyami,
ana. iij. ounce. Solani, ana. iij. ounce. vermicularis aut crassulae ana. iij.
ounce. Lactuae, ana. iij. ounce. Semperuiui, ana. iij. ounce. Bardanae, ana. iij.
ounce. Portulacae, ana. iij. ounce. Violariae, ana. iij. ounce. Vmbilici Veneris,
ana. iij. ounce.


The herbs must be mixed and tempered with Arungia, then take of Wine a
sufficient quantity: Boil them to the consumption of the wine, then strain
them and make of them an unguent according to art.

It is merueylous precious against ragynge heat in Fevers, and it provoke
sleep, the temples being anointed with it. etc.

Vnguentum Dialthea simplex Nicolai.
Rec. Radicis altheae, two pound. Seminis Lini, ana. j. pound. Foenograeci,
ana. j. pound. Olei, four pound. Cerae, j. pound. Terebinthinae, two ounce,
Resinae, vj. ounces.
Let the roots be cut and broused with the seeds, and stand three days
in eyghte Pintes of water: then boil them and take two pound of the Musilage
and boil it with the other things until all that is waterye be consumed.
And make thereof an unguent according to art.

This unguent does molifie, heat, and make moist.

Vnguentum Dialthaea cum Gummis Nicolai.
Rec. Radicum altheae, ij. pound. Seminis Lini, ana. one pound, Foenograeci,
ana. one pound, Pulpae scillae, vj. ounce. Olei, four pound Cerae, one pound
Terebinthinae, two ounce, Resinae, ana. vj. ounce. Picis Grecae, ana. vj. ounce.
Make an unguent as is aforesaid, then add to the Gummes following, first
being dissolved in Vinegre.

Galbani, ana. two ounce. Gummi Hederae, ana. two ounce.
Mix them well, and reserve it to thy use.

This unguent properlye helps the pain of the Breast coming of cold, and
the Plurisie, and heals all parts of the Breasts, which are refrigerated,
it does moysten, molifie, and make whote.

Vnguentum Santalinum Mesuae.
Rec. Rosarum rubearum, one ounce, Sandali rubri, j. ounce. ij. dragmes Sandali
citrini, ana. vj. dragmes. Sandali albi, ana. vj. dragmes. Spodij, half an
ounce. Caphurae, ij. dragmes Cerae albae, iii. ounce. vi. dragmes. Olei Rosati,
j. pound, Boli armeni, vij. dragmes.
You shall melte the Wax in the Oil, and wash it often times with cold
water, after that all your other percelles being made in fine powder, you
shall put them together, and make a fine unguent according to art.

It does extinguishe and put away all inflammations of the liver and
stomach, and other parts of the body.

Defensiuum magistrale.
Rec. Boli armeni, ana. i. ounce Sanguinis draconis, ana. i. ounce Terrae
sigillatae, ana. i. ounce Olei Rosati vi. ounces. Cerae j. ounce and a half.
Aceti iiij. ounces.
Boil the oil, Veneyger, and wax together until the Veneygre be consumed.
Then taking it from the fire when as it begin to refrigerate and wax cold,
put to your other percelles made in fine powder and reserve it to thy use.

Mundificatiuum, magistrale.
Rec. Mellis Rosati colati i. ounce and a half. Terebinthinae clarae iij.
ounces. Succi Apij ana. six dragmes. Prasij ana. six dragmes.
Succi absinthij ij. dragmes.
Simul coquantur, deinde addentur.
Farinae Hordei ana. vj. dragmes. Fabarum ana. vj. dragmes. Lupinorum ana. iij.
dragmes. Orobi ana. iij. dragmes.
Sarcocollae ana. j. dragme and a half. Myrrhae ana. j. dragme and a half.
Bring them into powder and make an Unguent according to art. And this
Unguent is right excellent to mundyfie a wound or filthy ulcer, and thereof
it is called mundificatiuum magistrale.

Vnguentum viride Andromachi ex Galeno.
Rec. Resinae Pini ij. pound. Cerae j. pound and a half. Olei communis viij.
ounces. Aeruginis aeris iij. ounces.
You shall put the Rosen and wax into the oil and melt them together, then
put to your Erugoeris made in fine powder, and make thereof an unguent as art
requires. It heals green and fresh wounds and such like. etc.

Vnguentum apostolorum Auicennae,
Rec. Cerae albae ana. xiiij. dragmes. Terebinthinae ana. xiiij. dragmes.
Resinae, ana. xiiij. dragmes. Hammoniaci ana. xiiij. dragmes. Aristolochiae
longae ana, vi drames Thuris ana, vi drames Bdellij ana, vi drames Myrrh, ana
four dragmes, Galbani, ana four dragmes, Lithargyri viij, dragmes
Opopanacis ana, ij, dragmes Aeruginis ana, ij, dragmes Olei communis ij, pound
Hyeme vero iij, pound
You shall dissolve your Gummes in good white vinegar, then put them to your
oil wax Rosen, Turpentine, and Litharge, and boil them on the fire unto the
consumption of the venegre. Afterward the other percelles being made in fine
powder you shall also add: and make an unguent according to art.

It is of great force against wounds and ulcers which are hard to be
cured: also for fistulas, it takes away dead fleeshe and restores in the
place sound and new. It does molifie and heal. etc.

Vnguentum Aegyptiacum Mesuae,
Rec. Aeruginis, five dragmes. Mellis, fouretene dragmes, Aceti albi, seven
dragmes,
Boil these on the fire, and stir them so long until it be Read. Other
take of this unguent, six ounce.

Calcanthi vsti, ij. ounce. Olei rosati, iij. ounce. Cerae, quantum sufficit.
Make all in an unguent according to art. This is right good against old
wounds, Fistulas, and also it takes away superfluous flesh, and does
vehemently excicate and dry.

Aliud Ioannis de Vigo.
Rec. Aquae plantaginis, ana. ij. ounce. Vini maloru^ gran. ana. ij. ounce.
Mellis, ana. ij. ounce. Aluminis rupis, ana. x. dragmes. Aeruginis, ana. x.
dragmes.
Boil these together, and stir them so long until that it wax read, then
reserve it to thy use.

It serves to the like effects as the other before.

Aliud Guidonis.
Rec. Mellis, one pound. Aceti optimi, six ounces. Aeruginis, one ounce.
Aluminis rupis, five dragmes.
Boil and stir them so long together until they wax read. Then let it
cool, and keep it to thy use.

Vnguentum defensiuum and repercussiuum Brunsvvicensis.
Rec. Olei rosacei, iiij. ounce. Boli armeni, ii. ounce. Terrae sigillatae, ana.
j. ounce. Foenograeci, ana. j. ounce. Caphurae, j. dragme Solatri, ana. j. M.
Semperuiui, ana. j. M. Cerae, two ounce,
Brouse the herbs and strain them, and put them to the other things: and
make of all an unguent according to art.

This unguent is used to defend wounds from accidents. Also in the
beginning of inflammations, to cease or rather let the flux of humors.

Vnguentum incarnatiuum eiusdem.
Rec. Terebinthinae, iiij. ounce. Mellis, half an ounce. Olibani, one dragme.
Croci, one scruple. Olei rosacei, quantum sufficit. Cerae, quantum sufficit.
Make hereof an unguent according to art.

It is a right good incarnatiue, provoking and causynge flesh to grow in all
manner of wounds. etc.

Vnguentum ad phlegmones and pruritus.
Rec. Olei rosati three ounces. Infrigidantis Galeni ana j. ounce Vnguenti rosarum
ana j. ounce Populionis ana j. ounce Succi plangtaginis, ana half a ounce
Semperuiui ana half a ounce Vini granatorum ana half a ounce Aceti rosarum ij,
dragmes, Lithargyri auri ana, j ounce and a half Argenti ana, j ounce and a
half Cerusae five dragmes, Tutiae one dragme
Put the oil the iuyces veneger and wine into a mortar of lead, and labor
them well, and put thereto the meneralls in fine powder, and when they are well
wrought, put thereto the vnguentes and work them all together and so make your
unguent.

This unguent is for iche of the legs and inflammation, excoriation, burning
and blisteringe, coming of whote humors, and for whote and sharp
vlcerations. etc.

Vnguentum Phomphligos,
Rec. Olei rosati ten ounces. Cerae albae three ounces. Succi Solatri viij,
ounces, Cerusae lotae three ounces, Plumbi vsti, ana ii, ounces Tutiae ana ii,
ounces Thuris, i, ounce
Boil the juice of nightshad with the oil, till the juice be consumed, then
put to the wax, and when it is relented, and set from the fire so that it be
near cold, put thereto the Cerusa, brunt lead, Tutia, and Thus made in fine
powder, and searsed through a fine searce, stir them well together and keep
them in a tin pot. etc.

This unguent is not only good in drying up of vlcerations of the legs and
other places of the body, but it is also an excellent remedy, to preserve a
canker vlcerat, that it go no further, and also a singular good remedy, for
all other Canserous vlcerations, both in the breast and in all other places of
the body.

Vnguentum Nicolai Florentini.
A special unguent for the crampe, if the Pacient have no Fever, it was
practiced by Nicholas Florentine.
TAke a fat Gose, and take out her bowels then take a Catte and cut her in
small pieces, and put the same pieces into the bellye of the Goose, with small
pieces of Bacon, Myrrh and Frankensence mingled all together, then sow up the
bellye of the Goose, and put her on a spytte, and roste her at a soft fire.
Set a dripping pan under her with Vinegar and white Wine, and when the water
of the Goose is dropped away, then let the fat drop into the Vinegar and
the Wine. After take the fat that swymmeth above the Vinegar and Wine, and
keep it in a vessel, and boil the Goose again in the fore said Vinegar and
Wine, and much fat will come from her again, and then take this fat and
mix it with the first, that dropped from her. And with this unguent annoint
the member which has the crampe, for it is very precious, and has virtue to
seace pain, to waste, consume, and dry up evil humors, and to comfort the
members, if some of this unguent, be put into the unguent, used in
Chamaeleontiasi, it helps very much, and does seace the pain of that
contagious sickness.

Vnguentum Ioannis de vigo Contra Chamaeleontiasin.
Rec. Olei spici one ounce. Vnguenti pro spasmo two ounces. Axungiae porcinae
iiij. ounces. Olibani half a ounce. Euforbij one dragme and a half. Vnguentu^
de althea ana. j. ounce. Vnguentu^ Agrippae ana. j. ounce. Argenti Viui iiij.
ounces.
LEt all these be beaten to gether in a mortar of Iron or stone till no part
of the Argent Viue, be seen, but see thou mortifye the same first in a little
glass with Veneyger and fasting spattell, that it may the more easelye
myngle with the foresaid things, and do less hurt in the workynge, let
your Olibinum and Euphorbium be made in fine Powder, and searsed fine before
you myxe them with the foresaid things. Provided always that the matter
antecedent be dygested, and sufficientlye purged, before they lay this unguent
on the body.

Aliud Vnguentum pro eadem Chamaeleontiasi.
NOte that this unguent according as Nicholas Massa, and other notable writers
both old and new does testifye, it does heal not only the pains of that
same contagious sycknes, but also the breaking out of those that be scabed, it
resolves hard Apostemes which is called grumas, bunches, or hard knots of
the sinews of the arms and of other places, also it heals ulcers of evil
curation or hard to be cured. This unguent must be applied upon the legs,
the arms, and upon the joints, cheflye in the hammes in the bowynge of the
arms, the wreste of the hands, the wreste of the foot, and the sooles of the
feet. Also you must annoint the soores therewythall, but beware ye lay not
this unguent nie the principal parts: as the breaste and the stomach, but
you may annoynte the shulder blades the buttockes with it, and if need be ye
may lay a little on the foreheade and this is the makyngs of it.

Rec. Axungiae porcinae the little skynnes taken from it without meltyng of
the fire.ii. pound.
Argenti viui ij. pound Litargyri iij. pound. Cerusae iij. ounces. Olibani j.
ounce.
Myxe all these together and make thereof an unguent, in a mortar, but first
of all you must beat the swynes grease and the Argent viue together very
stronglye, then put in the other things in fine powder, and labor it well
with your pestell until it be so fine that none of the Argentum viuum be
seen. Note that this unguent is the chief matter of all the curation of this
desease, for because you may myxe other medicynes, with this medicyne
according to the diuersytie of the sickness that the pacient has: as an
example. If the syckenes came with hard swellynge, add Capons grease, Duckes
grease or Gouse grease, and sometime you may add all these things, and
sometime one, as you see cause, for with their whotenes and moystenes they do
resolve the hardness, and so comfort the hurt member, and if it chance that
there be swellynge with great pain, you may add Oil of Lilyes, of Bays, of
Dyll, and Turpentyne, either one of them, or moo as ye see cause, for they be
stronger in operation, and their virtue is great. And if the desease be
malygne or Virulent, that the Paciente may not be altered or helped with a
light medcyne, put in more of the Argentum V^uum, and add thereunto Aqua
vitae, Sage, Stichados, treacle, Myrrh and Masticke. It is to be feared of
excoriacion that may come, by the strength and Corrosion of the Argentum Vinum.
Therefore we correct this vnguente with Lithargyri and Cerusa, as we have
written here before in this unguent. And as you do find diverse things added
unto this Unguent, So does it remove diverse accidents and sycknesses. But
beware you mynyster not this unguent without descretion, for even as it does
help this contagious disease being ryghtlye used: So being used without
discretion it does kill and destroy.

Provided always that this be not mynystred without purgation and digestion of
the matter antecedent. The Pacyente may not go abroad after his swettynge
until such time as his mouth be hole, and must use good lotions, or
washynges for his mouth until it be hole.

Tertium vnguentum pro Chamaeleontiasi.
Rec, Laureolae ana. M. s. Absynthij ana. M. s. Fumariae ana. M. s. Centaurij.
ana. M. s. Euphorbij ana. iij. dragmes. Elebori albi. ana. iij. dragmes.
Colocinthidis. ij. dragmes.
Boil your Herbs, your Powder and Coloquintida altogether, your Herbs being
a little broused in a mortar, and your Coloquintida broken in small pieces in
one Quarte of good Maluiesie, till the half be consumed, then let it stand
a day and a night infused, and strain it and add thereunto, Succi Rutae,
ana. ij. ounce. Saluiae, ana. ij. ounce. Ebuli, ana. ij. ounce. Then take
Axungiae, xii. ounce. Ping. Anatis, ana. iiij. ounce. Caponis, ana. iiij. ounce.
Oil de Bay, vj.. ounce. Lithargyri auri, ana. ij. ounce. Olibani, ana. ij. ounce.
Mastiches, ana. half an ounce. Aloes cicatrinae, ana. half an ounce.
Scammoniae, ana. half an ounce. Argenti viui, viii. ounces.


Make all those things that are to be made in powder: in syne powder, and
mortify your argente viue with fasting spatell or with iuse of Lymons. Then
beat all your foresaid things together, putting in your iuyse and your
decoction together by little and little, continuallye labourynge it in a mortar
until it be brought to a perfyte unguent.

This unguent must be applied upon the legs, and arms as other vnguentes
be that serves for the same disease. And if you will have them more laxatiue,
annoint the nayuyll therewyth. It takes away apostemes, vlcerations and
breakinge out of the body, and dolor and pains springing of the same sickness.

Aliud vnguentum pro eadem Chamaeleontiasi.
Rec. Maceris, ana. half an ounce. Cinamomi, ana. half an ounce. Garyophil ana.
half an ounce. Granorum paradisi, two dragmes. Folioru^ rosarum rub. ana. v.
dragmes, Corticum limonum, ana. v. dragmes, Nucum musc numero. iiij.
Let all these be beaten together and laid in stepe in Rose water, the space
of one day and one night, then put unto the same water and spyces, of swynes
grease and new suet, five pound. Boil them together until the water be
consumed, and strain it. Than take of that same, two pound.

Argenti viui, seven ounce. Olibani, two ounce. Mastiches, ana. an ounce and a
half. Cerusae ana. an ounce and a half. Litargyri, ana. an ounce and a half.
Soechados, ana. half an ounce. Myrrhae, ana. half an ounce,
And in the end put of Musk resolved in oil of Roses, half a Scruple. And
let these be mixed together, and make thereof a fine unguent according to
art, as is aforesaid. And this unguent is for rich and dilicate persons,
and is also merueylous in operation, and must be used as these are, which
serves for the same infyrmitie.

Vnguentum Agypsiacum.
Rec. Mellis, two pound Aceti fortis, one pound Viridis aeris, four ounce
Aluminis, three ounce
Boil all these together on a soft fire, until it be Redd, for if you boil
it to much, it will be Black, and if you boil it to little, it will be
Green. Therefore when it is boiled enoughe, it will be perfitely Read. This
unguent I have found great profit in, to mundifie sores, for it takes away
rotten flesh without any great pain, it does also profit much in
Fistulays, and hollow Ulcers, if it be mingled with some convenient lycour,
and conveyed in with a syringe. It does also abate and take away spongious
flesh both in wounds and in ulcers, and makes them come to easy
Cicatrization, and this unguent is much praised, both of the old writers,
and of the new in many other things.

Vnguentum Dealtheae
Rec. Radicum altheae ij. pound. Sem. Lini ana one pound. Foenograeci ana one
pound. Olei communis iiij. pound Cerae j. pound. Terebinthinae, ana. iiij.
ounces Galbini ana. iiij. ounces Gummi hederae ii. ounces. Colophonij ana half a
pound. Perrosin ana half a pound.
Wash your roottes clean and bruise them in a mortar, and bruise your Line
seed and Fengreke also, and put thereunto of Scylla, bruised, half a pound
put unto all this, eyghte pintes of water, and let them stand three days,
and the fourth day boil them upon the fire till they begin to wax thycke.
Then put them into a pot and when you will strain it, put thereunto some
whote boiling water, that it may the better be strained, then take of this
mucylage or straynynge two pound and a half, and put unto your oil
aforesaid, and let them boil to the mucylage be consumed. Then put thereunto
your wax, your Turpentyne your Galbanum and Gum Edere, desolued in Veneyger
and strayned, then your perrosin molten with a little oil of Lilies, and last
of al put in your Colophonium in fine powder: continually sturring al these
together till they be cold and so keep it. This vngue^t called Dealthea, is a
special remedy for all pains of ye breast, that comes of cold, if the breast
be therewt all anointed and warm cloese laid thereupon. It is good also for the
pluricie, for it does resolve and molifie, which are required in both these
deseases, it is good also for shrynkynge of synowes and tendones, and also for
crooked joints, for it mollyfieth and supplyeth them gentillye so that it
makes them easily to stretche furthe again. Many other good properties it
has in doing of such like things.

Vnguentum desiccatiuum Rubeum.
Rec. Lapidis calaminaris, ana. iiij. ounce Terrae sigillatae Rubeae ana. iiij.
ounce Lithargyri auri, ana. three ounce, Cerusae, ana. three ounce, Camphorae, one
dragme, Cerae, five ounce. Oleorum rosarum, ana. vi. ounce. Violarum. ana. vi.
ounce.
Wash your Lapis calaminaris, Litharge, and Ceruse, and dry them again, and
make all these in very fine powder, that is to be made in powder. Then melte
your Oils with your Wax, and in the coolynge put therein your pouders,
continuallye styrynge it with a splatter until it be cold, and so keep it
to your use. Some do add unto this unguent, Oil of Nenupher one ounce,
Olibanum and Masticke ana. one ounce, and if you so do it is the better.

This unguent is very good to dry up vlceracions, and cheflye of the legs
after that they be mundified, and the flesh well incarnat, for other wise it
profits not, for it serves for no other purpose, but only to dry and to
defend humors and to make perfect Cicatrization.

Oleum rosatum.
Rec. Olei communis iij. pound. Rosaru^ rubrarum purgataru^.xvi. ounces
Materate them and let them stand in the sun eight days: then take out the
Roses and strain them. After put in new Roses and let them in like manner
stand eight days and strain them as before. And do so the thryde time. And
reserve this to thy use, some use to let the Roses remain in the oil the
last time.

It does refrigerat and is astringent, and helps inflammations in the parts
of the body, and it cease the corrosion of the intestines ministered in
glisters, and heals the pain of the teeth, they being washed therewith.

Oleum Rosatum completum Mesuae.
Rec, Olei ex oleis maturis, aqua fontana multoties loti quantum voles.
Put into this Oil of red Rose leaves so many as you shall think
convenient, set these in the sun eight days, then boil them in a duble
vessel on the fire three hours. Then strain them. After take new Roses, and
do as before is said. And do so also the third time. After put to the fourth
part of water of the infusion of Roses and let them stand in the sun.xl.
days. Then strain it and again put to the juice of Roses, and let it stand
in the sun.

It does strengthen the parts of the body, it resolves, and seaceth dolor.

Oleum Rosatum Pauli
Rec. Rosarum exemptis vnguibus iij. ounces. Olei omphacini vj. ounces.
Put these in a glass and stop them well that they breath not out and let
them stand in the sun.xl. days. Other do not set the glass in the sun
but hang the glass in a well nere to the water for the space of.xl. days.

It does extinguishe inflammations, it does coroborate, restrain, and sease
fluxes, it kepeh back the humors which flows through the body. etc.

Oleum Rosatum omphacinum.
Rec. Olei Oliuarum immaturarum loti. j. pound Rosaru^ rubrarum purgataru^
iiij. ounces.
The roses being bruised and myxed with the Oil put them in a glass, and do as
is aforesaid in the composition of the other oils. And change your Roses
three times.

The virtue of this oil is all one with that which is mentioned before.

Oleum Chamaemelinum Pauli.
Rec. Florum Chamaemeli, demptis Foliis Albis, iiij, ounces, Olei oliuarum ij,
pound and a half
The flowers must dry in the shadow.xxiiij. hours: then put them with the
Oil into a glass with a narrow mouth being well stopped and let it stand
in the sun.xl. days.

It is of right good effect in the passions of the joints, and for the the
collicke and many other infyrmityes; for it does repel and moderatelye digest.

Oleum Cydoniorum Mesuae,
Fiat ex carne cydoniorum praematuroru^ cu^ cortice. Succi cydonioru^. ana, vi,
ounces, Olei oliuarum immaturaru^ iii, pound
Put all in a Glass well stopped and let it stand fyftene days in the
Sun. Then boil it by the space of four hours on the fire in a double
vessel. Then strain it, and press out the iuse. Then put new into the Oil,
and set into the Sun, after boil it, and express it as before, and do so
the third time, and reserve it to thy use.

It does refrigerate and stays fluxes, and does also strengthen the bellye
and Nerves, being applied unto them. etc.

Oleum populeon Nicolai,
Rec. Olei, vij. pound, two ounces, Vini, iiij, pound. Gemmarum Populi
arboris recentium, iij, pound
The Buddes of Pople must be broused and macerated in Oil and Wine, the
space of seven days. Then boil them in a double vessel until the Wine be
consumed: then strain it, and reserve it to thy use.

It helps pain in the head, in the joints, and is good against the gout,
and where as dolor and pain is. etc.

Oleum Nardinum compositum Mesuae.
Rec. Nardi Indicae, four ounce. Sampsuchi, id est, maioranae, ii. ounce. Ligni
aloes, ana. ounce. j. sc. Enulae, ana. ounce. j. sc. Folij indi, ana. ounce. j.
sc. Calami aromatici, ana. ounce. j. sc. Foliorum Lauri, ana. ounce. j. sc.
Cyperi, ana. ounce. j. sc. Schoenanthi, ana. ounce. j. sc. Cardomomi, ana. ounce.
j. sc.
Brouse all these, and put to it of, Vini, ana. q. su. Aquae, ana. q. su.
Olei loti, vj. pound,


Let them be macerated twelve hours together. Then boil them in a double
vessel, and make an Oil according to art.

This Oil does heat, attenuate, and digest, wherefore it is right good in
all cold and wyndye infirmities of the brain, stomach, Liver, Spleen,
Reins, Bladder, and Matrice. It does also cause good color of the body. etc.

Oleum Sampsuchinum.
Rec. Foliorum Sampsuchi, id est, Maioranae, M. iiij. Serpelli, M. ij. Foliorum
Myrti. M. j. Abrotoni, ana. M. half. Sisymbrij seume^tae aquatice, ana. M.
half. Caciae, two ounces. Olei omphacini quantum sufficit.
Cut and bruise the herbs and put them in a glass and set this glass in the
sun eight days: Then strain it, which done put other new percelles and
boil it again and strain it and do this the third time.

It helps lassitude and werynes and is right comfortable in passions of the
brain and nerves. Therefore the spine of the back being anointed with it, it
helps the Palsy and crampe and is good against the sting of Scorpions. etc.

Oleum hyperici magistrale.
Rec. Olei veteris four pound. Vini albi potentis one pound. Florum Hyperici
cum semine recentium, M. iiij.
Bruise the flowers and macerate them in the wine and oil being put in a glass
well stopped two days. Then boil them, strain them, and put new flowers to
them, this do thrice then put to every pynte of this of.

Terebinthinae six ounces. Ol^^ absynthij three ounces. Dict^mni, ana two
dragmes. Gentia^ae, ana two dragmes. Car^^ benedicti, ana two dragmes.
Tormentillae ana two dragmes. Carlinae ana two dragmes. Calami aromatici ana
two dragmes. Lumbricorum in Vino pluries Lotorum, two ounces.
Bruise all and let them stand in the Sun fortye days. And stop the glass
well and receive it to thy use.

It has the virtues with those going before. And is of more force in the
same infyrmityes. etc.

Oleum Castorei magistrale.
Rec. Castorei, ana two drames Styracis calamitae ana two drames Galbanj, ana
two drames Euphorbij, ana two drames Casiae, ana two drames Croci, ana two
drames Opopanacis, ana two drames Carpobalsami, ana two drames Spicae nardi
indicae ana two drames Costi, ana two drames Cyperi, ana. ij, drames and a
half. Schoenanthi, ana. ij, drames and a half. Piperis longi, ana. ij, drames
and a half. Piperis nigri, ana. ij, drames and a half. Sabinae, ana. ij, drames
and a half. Pyrethri, ana. ij, drames and a half. Olei, four pound. Vini,
two pound,
Dissolve the Opopanax and Galbanum in some part of the wine. Then brouse the
other things and put them to the oil and rest of the wine. And boil them
until the wine be consumed. Then strain it and put the Gummes and Wine in
which they were dissolved to it, and boil them together until the wine be
consumed and reserve it to thy use.

It is a singular remedy for all cold passions especially of the joints and
neruous parts. It heals the palsy crampe and rigoures in fevers if you
anoint the back with it. etc.

Oleum Costinum Mesuae.
Ree. Costi, two vnccs. Casiae one ounce. Summitatum sampsuchi, viii. ounces.
Vmi quantum sufficit Olei oliuarum, three pound,
Brose these and macerate them.ij. days, then boil them in a duble vessel
until the consumption of the wine and reserve it to thy use. etc.

It opens obstructions helps the sinowye parts muscles tendons and
ligamentes. Also the stomach, and liver, and helps much to the increasyng
of good color in the body. etc.

Oleum papauerinum.
Rec. Capitum papaueris, ana parts aequales. Foliorum papaueris ana parts
aequales. Florum papaueris, ana parts aequales. Olei quantum sufficit.
Put these in a Glass, and let them stand seven days in the Sun, then
strain them, and put new to the Oil, this do three times.

It takes away whote distemperaunce, and pains and grief spryngyng hereof.

Oleum Lumbricorum.
Rec. Lumbricorum terrestrium, half a pound: Probe lauentur in vino, deinde
immittantur in olei rosati omphacini, ij. pound. Vini, two ounces.
Boil all in a double vessel unto the consumption of the wine, then strain
them, and reserve it to thy use.

It cures the cold passions of the Nerves, and is profitable for dolor and
pain of the joints. etc.

Oleum Balsami Petri de Ebeno.
Rec. Myrrhae, ana. ij. dragmes. Aloes, ana. ij. dragmes. Spicae nardi, ana.
ij. dragmes. Sanguinis draconis, ana. ij. dragmes. Thuris, ana. ij. dragmes.
Mumiae, ana. ij. dragmes. Opopanacis, ana. ij. dragmes. Carpobalsami, ana. ij.
dragmes. Bdellij, ana. ij. dragmes. Hammoniaci, ana. ij. dragmes. Sarcocollae,
ana. ij. dragmes. Croci, ana. ij. dragmes. Mastiches, ana. ij. dragmes. Gummi
arabici, ana. ij. dragmes. Styracis liquide, ana. ij. dragmes. Ladani, ana. ij.
dragmes, and a half. Castorei, ana. ij. dragmes. and a half. Mastiches, half
a dragme. Terebinthinae, ad pondus omnium.
Brouse those that are to be broused, and mix them together, and destill them
in a glass a lembike according to art.

It is of great forse and strength against those infirmities, which spring
of cold causes. etc.

Oleum Balsami Brunsvvicensis.
Rec. Ligni aloes, two ounce. Opopanacis, ana. iij. ounce. Resinae de Pino, ana.
iij. ounce. Bdellij, ana. iij. ounce. Galbani, ana. iij. ounce. Ammoniaci, ana.
iij. ounce. Mastiches, ana. iij. ounce. Sarcocollae, ana. iij. ounce. Gummi
elemij, ana. iij. ounce. Olibani, ana. iij. ounce. Myrrhae, ana. iij. ounce. Gummi
cupressi, ana. iij. ounce. Olei Laurini, ana. iij. ounce. Olei Benedicti, ana.
iij. ounce. Laudani, ana. iij. ounce. Carpobalsami, ana. j. ounce. Xylobalsami,
ana. j. ounce. Opabalsami, ana. j. ounce. Sanguinis draconis, half an ounce.
Castorij, ana. j. dragme. Spicae nardi, ana. j. dragme. Cububae, ana. j.
dragme. Maceris, ana. j. dragme. Cinnamomi, ana. j. dragme. Granoru^ paradisi,
ana. j. dragme. Corticis citri, ana. j. dragme. Olei Terebinthinae, omnium
pondus.
Put all these together, and distill them by a Glass alimbecke, and reserve it
to thy use.

This is the Baulme wherewyth green and fresh wounds are spedilye cured and
healed, and it has merueylous virtues as shall appear to him that puts it
in practyse.

Balsamum viride nostrae inuentionis.
Rec. Olei Rosarum, one pound and a half. Put it in a pan, and put thereto
Rorisemarinae, ana. iij. ounce. Capharae, ana. iij. ounce.


Let them be brosed before you put them in, then take.

Malicorij j. ounce and a half. Ligni vitae two ounces.
Being made in fine Powder then boil all these together the space of an
hour, strain them and put to the streanyng.

Terebinthinae i. pound. Aquae vitae iiii. times stilled, one pound put into
your aqua vite. Aloes Cicotrinae, i. ounce. Rubarbarae, i. ounce and a half.
Let these be made in fine powder and let it stand two days infused, then
strain it, and put the Aqua vite so strayned to your oil and Turpentyne
aforesaid, then set it on the fire and let it boil a little, till the most
part of the Aqua vite be consumed, then take powder of.

Mastiches ana four ounces. Olibani ana four ounces. Viridis eris ana. ii.
ounces. Lumbricoru^ puluerifat ana. ii. ounce.
Wash your worms first in white wine, then boil all these things together
a little space, then take it from the fire and stir it till that it be cold,
and so used according to art.

Balsamum artificiae Lullij.
Rec. Terebinthinae j. pound and a half. Galbani, two ounces. Aloes cicotrinae,
ana. i. ounce. Mastiches, ana. i. ounce. Caryophil, ana. i. ounce. Galangae ana.
i. ounce. Cinnamomi, ana. i. ounce. Nucum mustat. ana. i. ounce. Cubebarum ana. i.
ounce. Gummi hedere, half an ounce.
When all these is well beaten, myxe them and destyll them in a Limbecke of
glass with a slow fire first, and receive the first by it self severally:
then increasyng the fire, a water somewhat reddishe will come, and after
increasyng it more, an oil of read color, and so do till nothing run any
more, chaunginge the reseiuer thrice. This oil has all the virtues of true
Balm; for it sinketh in the water, and courdeth milk by and by: for if one
drope of it warm be put into a pynte of milk, it shall forthwith become
courded. The first liquor is called water of balm, the second oil of balm
the third Balm artificial. The first is profitable against the runninge of
the ears, if two or three drops morning and evening be put into them, also
dropped into the eyes, it amendeth the blearednes, and consumes the tears, it
does meruelously restrain superfluous humors in any part of the body. It
takes away the tothach if they be washed therewith, and kill the worms if
there be any in them. The third liquor will suffer no venom: for it is an
utter enemy and destruction to spiders and Serpents, two or three dropes
being let drope into any vnemous bytting, do make it hole strait. If thou draw
a circle with this liquor, and shut a venomous beast therein, it shall dye there
rather then go out of it. To be short, it does all the same things that
triacle does, but more effectually all things. Being powered or put upon any
inpostume, with in.ix. days it heals them, and likewise a fistulaye, be it
never so ill: and also, Noli me tangere all diseases bread of steame and cold
humors it heals them, if a linen cloth dypped in it be laid upon the place
where the grease is, it puts away utterly the palsy and all trimblinge of
members, it strengthens meruelously the sinews: it is whotter then the first
and second, if a man put a drop of it in his hand, it perceth strayte without
grief. To conclud, it does many other things, and all diseases risen of a
cold cause, it health them, if they use it right according to art. All this is
Lullius sayng.

Aliud Balsamum Dorantij.
Rec. Ammoniaci, ana half an ounce, Opopanacis, ana half an ounce, Resine
pinae, ana half an ounce, Bdellij, ana half an ounce, Mastiches, ana half an
ounce, Galbani, ana half an ounce, Gummi eleme, ana half an ounce, Olibani, ana
half an ounce, Myrrh, ana half an ounce, Sarcocollae, ana half an ounce.
Xylobalsami, i. ounce. Olei benedictae, ana one ounce and a half. Laurini ana
one ounce and a half. Balsami Gul. Pl^centini, half an ounce Sanguinis draconis,
ana. ij. dragmes Laudani puri, ana. ij. dragmes Spicae nardi, ana. j. dragme.
Castorij, ana. j. dragme. Galangae, ana. j. dragme. Cubebarum, ana. j. dragme.
Cinamomi, ana. j. dragme. Cardomomi, ana. j. dragme. Granorum paradisi, ana. j.
dragme. Corticis citri, ana. j. dragme.
Olei Terebinthinae, ad pondus omnium.
Let all those be made in powder that are to be made in powder, and the
Gummes that can not be made in powder, let them be cut in small pieces,
and put into a Glass vessel, with the Oil and Balm aforesaid, and let
them lie in steep nine days, then destill them in Balneo mariae, the the
space of four hours, then let them stand seven days more, and destill them
again as is aforesaid, then strain them. So have you a precious Balm,
which you may keep to your use, for the curing of wounds, both in the
similer and isntrumental parts.

Balsamum ex intestiniae terrae, nostrae Inuentionis
Rec. Lumbricorum half a pound. put them in white wine to purge them one
day, then slet them and make them clean from all earthye matter, then stamp
them finely and put to the^ one quart of good Malmesie, and one quart of oil
of Juniper, boil them all together till the wine be consumed, then strain it,
and add to the strayning.

Opopanacis ana i. ounces. Ammoniati ana i. ounces. Gummi Arabici, four ounces.
Desolued in venegre according to art.

Olibani, ana ii. ounces and a half. Mastiches, ana ii. ounces and a half.
Myrrhae ana. j. ounce Sang. draconis ana. j. ounce Olei Hpyrici, ana, vi. ounces.
Terebinthinae ana, vi. ounces. Boracis, iiij. ounces. Aquae vite fortissime,
iiii. ounce and a half. Croci, ij. dragmes Terebinthinae. twelve ounces.
Boil all these together in a body of glass, in Balneo mariae, unto the wine
and Aqua vite be consumed, then let it stand twentye days infused, and after
that boil it again two hours and so strain it, and keep it to your use.
This Balm is most precious in wounds of nerves and iunctures of all other.

Balsamum ex Croco nostre inuentionis.
Rec. Folioru^ consolide maioris ana. M. i. Consolidae minoris, ana. M. i.
Marrubie, ana. M. i. Centaurij ana. M. i. Hiperice, ana. M. i. Florum
Rorismarini, ana M. i. Chamamille, ana M. i.
Let your flowers and herbs be dry and gross beaten, and put to them one pynte
of Oleum Lumbricorum, and one pynte of Malmesye. Then let them boil all
together softelye, the space of two hours in a pot very closely stopped,
then strain it and add to the straining.

Mastiches, ana one ounce. Myrrh ana one ounce. Olibani, ana, i. ounce and a
half. Croci ana, i. ounce and a half. Sang. draconis. ana half a ounce. Gummi
dragagant ana half a ounce. Sarcocollae, ana half a ounce. Laudani ana, two
dragmes. Castorij ana, two dragmes. Bingemj, ana, two dragmes.
Make all these in powder then add to them Oleorum Terebinthinae, iiij, ounces,
Spicae nardi, one ounce. Terebinthinae lotae, vi. ounces.



Boil all these in Balneo mariae, according to art.

this Balm is most precious in wounds of the breast that perceth through into
the body, as I have many times proved my self.

Emplastrum de meliloto Mesuae.
Rec. Meliloti. vj. ounces. Florum chamaemeli ana two dragmes. Foenigraeci, ana
two dragmes. Baccarum lauri, ana two dragmes. Radicum altheae ana two
dragmes. Comarum absinthij ana two dragmes. Seminis absinthij, ana. j, dragme
and a half. Cardamomi ana. j, dragme and a half. Iridis ana. j, dragme and a
half. Cyperi, ana. j, dragme and a half. Spicae nardi. ana. j, dragme and a
half. Casiae ana. j, dragme and a half. Saeminis ammi ana. j, dragme and a
half. Foliorum persici three dramges. Hammoniaci, ten dragmes. Styracis ana.
v. dragmes. Bdellij, ana. v. dragmes. Terebinthinae one ounce and a half. Ficus
pinguis numero, xii. Sepi hircini ana. ij. ounces and a half. Resinae ana. ij.
ounces and a half. Picis, Cerae vj. ounces, Olei sampsucini ana. one pound,
Olei nardini ana. one pound, Confice, sic Fit decoctio, Meliloti ana. q. s.
Foenigraeci ana. q. s. Chamaemeli ana. q. s.
Boil these unto the consumption of the half then strain them and put thereto
your percells fynely made in powder and boil them again adding the oils
Turpentyne and Gummes dissolved in Veneger. Then put to the roottes and fygges
being well bruised and well boiled together. And myxe all these together and
make an emplaster according to art.

It does mollify all hardness of the stomach liver spleen and other intrayles.
It does also cease vehement dolor and pain. And heals flatulentnes of
Hypochondria. etc.

Dia Meliloton Andromachi ex Galeno.
Rec. Nardi gallicae, ana, eyghte dragmes. Cyperi ana, eyghte dragmes. Iridis,
ana, eyghte dragmes. Myrrhae, ana, eyghte dragmes. Croci, four dragmes.
Meliloti, five and twenty dragmes. Hammoniaci ana, one dragme. Terebinthinae,
ana, one dragme. Cerae one hundred dragmes, Olei Cyprini, six ounces. Aceti, q,
s, Fiat emplastrum.
This emplaster is of like virtue with that which is next before discribed.
etc.

Emplastrum ex fermento Democriti ex Mesuae,
Rec Mellis ana one pound, Fermenti, ana one pound, Visci quercini, four
ounces, Ha^moniaci in aqua foenigraeci, ant lacte mori arboris, three ounces,
Faecis olei veteris, q, s, Fiat Emplastrum,
This emplaster is of great virtue in drawing out thorns and things fyred in
any place. Also in taking out the bones broken of Cranium fractured yea
although they befyxed in Dura and Pia matter.

Aliud Simile.
Rec. Fermenti, ana i. dragme. Mellis, ana i. dragme. Olei Communis ana i.
dragme. Lactis muliebris ana i. dragme. Vitelli ouorum ana i. dragme. Fiat
Emplastrum,
It does digest and maturate inflammations and breaks apostemes. And if to
this recepte you add Bdellium and Farina hordei it draws out thorns fyxed:
yea and so much the better if you put to it of Galbanum dyssolued in Veneyger.
etc.

Dia Chalciteos Galeni, palmeum vnguentum dictum.
Rec. Axungiae porci veteris a membranis per Liquationem et Colationem
purgatae, two pound. Olei veteris, ana three pound. Lithargyri triti ana
three pound. Chalcitidis vstae four ounces.
Boil all on the fire and stir them with a stycke new taken of the date tree
(you may in the place hereof use a sprigge of the Oak) and when as it is well
near boiled add thereto of the tender croppes of the Date t^ee new gathered
and cut small four ounces (you may in the place hereof use the young buddes
and twigs of the Oak) boil all these unto the thyckenes of a Cerote.

This is right good against grene wounds, pestilentiall tumors, apostemes,
burnynges, ruptures, contusions, and ecchymomata. etc.

Dia chilon Mesuae primae discriptionis.
Rec. Muccaginis, Seminis foenograeci ana. j. ounce. Seminis lini, ana. j. ounce.
Radicu^ altheae, ana. j. ounce.
Lithargyri, one ounce, and a half. Olei antiqui clari, three ounces.
The Lytharge must be made in most fine powder and tempered with the Oil.
Then boil them on a soft fire, styrrynge them always with a slyse until
they be well bodyed and incorporate together. Then put to your mucilages, and
boil them again unto a sufficient thicknes.

It is good against scyrrhous of the Liver, Spleen, Stomach, and other parts,
it mollifieth all hardness. etc.

Alij addunt pulueris iridis, ana. j. ounce. Mucaginis Meliloti, ana. j. ounce.
Then it does moore vehementlye resolve and maturate, and is a greater ceaser
of dolor and pain.

Alij Olei veteris loco accipiunt. Olei chamaemelini, ana. j. ounce, and half.
Olei irini, ana. j. ounce, and half. Praestantius quoque fit, Adds etiam si
voles. Galbani, ana. parts aequas. Hammoniaci ana. parts aequas. Sagapeni,
ana. parts aequas. Diachylon gummatum vulgus appellat.
Emplastrum Diachylon magnum Mesuae.
Rec. Lithargyri, one pound. Chamaemelini, ana. viij. ounce. Olei Trini, ana.
viij. ounce. Anathini, ana. viij. ounce. Seminis leni, ana. dragmes, xij. sc.
Muca-ginis, Foenigraeci ana. dragmes, xij. sc. Altheae, ana. dragmes, xij. sc.
Ficu^ pinguiu^, ana. dragmes, xij. sc. Vuaru^ passaru^ ana. dragmes, xij. sc.
Iridis, ana. dragmes xij. sc. Succi, Scillae, ana. dragmes xij. sc. Oesypi,
ana. dragmes xij. sc. Ichthyocollae ana. dragmes xij. sc. Terebinthinae three
ounces. Resini pini, ana. ij. ounce. Cerae flauae, ana. ij. ounce. Fiat ceratum vt
prius.
It does digest and molifie all hardness, and therefore may with great
profit be applied unto schirrhous, and all other inflammations and tumors.
etc.

Emplastrum Diachilon paruum Mesuae.
Rec. Lithargyri, vi. ounces. Olei veteris, one pound. Mucaginis Psyllij, iiij.
ounces Mucaginis Seminis Hiosoyami. j. ounce half, Mucaginis, Seminis lini, ana.
ij. ounce. Radicum altheae ana. ij. ounce. Fiat vt primum,
It does digest and maturate tumors and apostemes which be whote. etc.

Emplastrum ex allijs Aetij.
Rec. Cerae, two pound. Picis Grecae, ana. vj. ounce. Medullae ceruinae, ana.
vj. ounce. Nitri albi, viij, ounces, Olei, four pound. Allia, number. xx,
The Garlyke being pylled, boil in Oil. Then strain them, and add to it
Wax, then Nitrum, and make Emplaster according to art.

It is of virtue against all hardenesse, apostemes, felons, bubones, fistulas,
impetigines humidas, and hardenesse of the pappes.

Emplastrum ad vulnera recentia.
Called in the Enchiridion, the green wound plaster.

Rec. Refinae, e Pino, ana. ii, pound Cerae virgineae ana. ii, pound Resinae,
ana. xij. ounces Seui ceruiui, ana. xij. ounces Colophonij, viii. ounce
Sarcocollae, iij. ounce Terebinthinae, half a pound. Mastiches, ana. iiij.
ounce. Olibani, ana. iiij. ounce. Dragacanthi, ana. j. ounce. and half. Gummi ara
bici, ana. j. ounce. and half. Galbani, ana. j. ounce. and half. Ammoniaci, ana.
j. ounce. and half. Storacis calamitae, ij. ounce. Storacis liquidae, iiij. ounce.
Succorum Pyrolae vtriusque ana three pound Saracenicae, ana three pound
Diareusiae, ana three pound Veronicae, ana three pound Solisessequij, ana
three pound Consolidae minoris, ana three pound Arthemisiae, ana three pound
Pla^taginis vtriusque ana three pound Betonicae, ana three pound Agrimoniae,
ana three pound Matrissiluae, ana three pound Cerefolij, ana three pound
Saluiae, ana three pound Verbenae, ana three pound Pilosillae, ana three
pound
Boil the iuses of these herbs, with the Wax Rosine Colophonium and hearts
suet on a soft fire, with coals until two parts be consumed. Then put to it
Turpentyne, and the gummes being dissolved in Vinegar of Roses and let them
boil a space. Then put to it Stirar liquida, and Calamita, and if you will
have it sweet smelling you shall add moschi ii. scruples. Strayn these
through a cloth and let it stand a night, and the next day make it in
rolls with Oil of Roses. But if you will have the Plaster greener, put to it
Succi solatri, Sambuci, chelidonij, ana. iij. pound. And boil your Plaster
again therewyth, but not long.

This is an excellent Plaster in all green and fresh wounds. For it does
mundifie incarnate and consolidate without manner of tents, it is of merueylous
virtues, and therefore had in these days in more frequent use. There be
diverse compositions: But in my opinion this is the best.

Emplastrum Iudaeicum, called the Jews Plaster.
Rec. Cerae albae, four pound. Resinae de Pino, ana. ij. pound. Resinae
Terebinthinae ana. ij. pound. Olei rosati, one pound, Mastiches, ana. two
ounce. Olibani ana. two ounce. Myrrhae, ana. two ounce. Rosarum recentium, iiij.
ounce. Vini rubei, iii. pound. Succorum pirolae, ana. quantu^ sufficit.
Diapensiae, ana. quantu^ sufficit. Matrissiluae, ana. quantu^ sufficit.
Saracenicae, ana. quantu^ sufficit. Herbae tunici, ana. quantu^ sufficit.
Solissesquij, ana. quantu^ sufficit. Bethonicae, ana. quantu^ sufficit.
Consolidae minoris ana. quantu^ sufficit. Fumariae, ana. quantu^ sufficit.
plantaginis vtriusque ana. quantu^ sufficit. Valerianae, ana. quantu^ sufficit.
Brouse the herbs, and take of the iuses, and put to the Wine: and boil them
on the syer a good space. Then strain them, and put to it so strayned, Wax,
Turpentyne, Rosen and Oil. Then sethe the Roses: after strain these, and put
them in a Kettle, and seethe them five or six hours. Then take it from the
fire, and let it be cold. The next day following melte it again, and add
to it Masticke, Frankensence, and Myrrh, and suffer it a little to boil
together. After let it cool, and make it in rolls.

This Emplaster has the like virtues that the other going before. For it does
mundifie, incarnate and consolidate all green and fresh wounds, and heals
them without tents.

Emplastrum attractiuum Brunsvvicensis.
Rec. Apostolicon Nicolai, two ounce. Magnetis orientalis, half an ounce.
Pinguidinis leporinae, ana. half an ounce. Olei canabis, ana. half an ounce.
Melte the Oil and the Hares grease together: and then put to it, the
percelles above said, and make thereof an Emplaster according to art.

This Emplaster is much praised in drawrynge out any iron fixed in wounds,
as arrowe heads, mayle, shot, or such like.

Emplastrum gratia dei vocatum.
Ree. Terebinthinae, half a pound. Refinae, one pound. Cerae albae, four
ounces. Mastiches five ounces. Betonicae ana, M. j. Verbanae ana, M. j.
Pimpenellae, ana, M. j.
Stamp your herbs in a mortar, and put them into a quart of white wine, and
boil it well to the.iij. part be consumed, and that it have taking the
strenght of the herbs, then put in your wax, Rosen, and Masticke, into the
iuyse and wine, and let them boil on the fire until the licour be consumed
ever styrryng, and then take it of the fire, and put in the Turpentine, and
boil it, till it come to the form of a plaster evermore styrryng it well.

This plaster is good for wounds that is cut or broused, and for broking
bones, and joints that has been out, and for ache and pain that comes of
cold.

Emplastrum de Minio.
Rec. Olei rosacei, one pound and a half. Vnguenti populei, ana, four ounces.
Olei myrtyllorum ana, four ounces. Pingued. Caponis two ounces. Sepi vitulim,
ana, half a pound. Vaccini, ana, half a pound. Axungiae, seven ounces.
Lithargyri auri ana, three ounces and a half. Argenti, ana, three ounces and a
half. Minij, ana four ounces. Cerusae ana four ounces. Terebinthinae, ana
four ounces. Cerae that is sufficient.
Let all these be boiled together, till it be black, and make thereof a
plaster according to art. This plaster is good for old sores, and is the
experiment of Ioannes de Vigo,

Emplastrum Triapharmacum.
Rec. Olei communis, four pound. Lithargyri auri, two pound. Aceti
fortissi. half a pound,
Make hereof a plaster according to art, Emplastrum triapharmacum. Is good to
make flesh grow in wounds and to consolidare and heal them.

The making of the white mucylage plaster called the Diachilon paruum.
Take first your March malowe rotes and wash them, and pick them very
clean, then slyse them and take forth the pythe and cast it away, and cut
the other in small pieces, then stamp them in a mortar, and put two pound of
that same you have stamped into a new earthen pot, with four ounces of
Lyneseede and four ounces of Fenegreke sede in gross powder: then put unto
them, one quarte of white wine and one quart of water, and stir it well
together, and let the water be boiling hot. Then let it stand four or five
days, till it come to perfect mucylage, every day sturring it, then strain it
and so you have your mucylage.

Then take Litarge of leide in fine powder searsed through a fine cloth.vi.
pound, common oil four quartes. Then boil oil and the Litarge upon a soft
fire till it fall to a plaster, and then take a pynte of your mucylage, and put
it in by little and little, least it run over the pan, and always stir it,
so doing till you have put in one quart of your mucylage, and so stir it a
little space after till it begin to wax cold, then put in the rest of your
muucylage, when you perceive it will not run over the pan, and so
continuallye labor and work it, till it be very white, then make it up in
roules and keep it to your use.

Emplastrum mucilagineum ad Resoluendum humores in tibijs. This plaster was
devised for king Henry the eyghte to amend the swellyng in his legs.
TAke the rotes of March malowes wash and pick them clean, then slitte the^
and take out the inner pithe and cast it away, and take the upper fair white
part and cut them in small pieces, and brouse them in a mortar and thereof
take one pound and put them in a new earthen pote and add thereto of
lynesede and Fenegreke ana. two ounces a little brosed in a mortar, then put
thereto malmsie and white wine ana. a pynte, and stir altogether and let
them stand infused, two or three days, then set them over a soft fire and
stir it well till it wax thycke and slimme, then take it of and strain it
through a new canues clothe, and thus have you your mucylage ready and then
to make your plaster. Take fine Oil of Roses a quarte and wash it well with
white wine and rose water. Then take the oil clean from the water and wine,
and set it over the fire in a brase pan always sturringe it and put thereto
the powder of.

Lythargyri auri ana, viij. ounces, Lythargyri argenti, ana, viij. ounces.
Cerusae, vi. ounces. Corallo. rub. ij. ounces. Boli armoniaci ana one ounce.
Sangui. draconis, ana one ounce.
And in any wise make them in fine powder scarsid, then put them into the oil
over the fire always styrring, and let not the fire be to big for burning of
the stuff, and when it begins to wax thick, then put in of the said
mucylage x. ounces by little and little at ones, or else it will boil over the
pan, and when it is boiled enough ye shall perceive by the hardness or softnes
thereof, if thou drope a little of it on a dishe botome or cold stone then take
it from the fire, and when it is nere cold, make it in roules and lape them in
parchment, and keep them to your use.

Emplastrum pro Chamaeleontiasi nostrae inuentionis.
Rec. Axungiae, two pound. Aquarum rosarum, ana, iiij. ounces. Plantaginis,
ana, iiij. ounces.
Wash it well until the waters be consumed in to the said greafe, then let it
stand the space of xiiii. days, then put it in a pan over the fire and add
to it.

Olei rosarum, one pound, Minij, two pound, Aceti optimi, one pynte.
Let the barks of Elm remain in the vinegar iiii. days infused, make hereof
a plaster according to art. This is a good plaster for scabes for byles and for
sore legs and many other things, for it molifieth and heals gentlye and
takes away pain. This plaster I did use much in ill scabes of
Chamaeliontiasi, after they were mundifyed with marcurye precipitate: And also
in swellyng of joints and in the gout and with this plaster I did great cures
after the body was well purged, and if thou would have it to heal an old sore,
thou must put in a little coperous in powder in to the veneger. And so boil it
according to art.

Emplastrum Cerusae.
Rec. Olei rosati, two pound. Axungiae lotae in aqua rosacia and vino, one
pound. Cerusae puluerisatae, four pound Cerae albae, viij. ounce.
Melte your Wax with your Oil and Hogs grease, then put in your Ceruse in
fine powder by little and little, ever styrringe it for burning to the bottom,
until it come to the form of a Plaster, the which you may know by
droppynge some of it upon a stone, or a dishe bottom, until you have it
according to your mind. This Plaster is good for scabbes in an evil whote
complexion, for it does quickly dry them, and skin them. If you wash it
with white Wine, it will be much the better.

Emplastrum Calisiensae.
Rec. Olei rosati, j. pound, iiij. ounce. Cerae albae, j. pound, Cerusae
Venetae pull. j. pound.
Boil all these upon a soft fire, evermore styrringe it till it come to the
form a Plaster, and than take it from the fire, and in the coolynge put in
of Campher, two dragmes in fine powder, and make it up in rolls.

This Plaster is good to cicatrice vlcerations, after they be well mundified
and incarned. It is good to dry up scabbes, when the body is well purged
before.

Emplastrum de specibus, for ache and pain in the shulders, arms, or some
other places of the body.
Rec. Resinae, ana. j. pound. Peresinae, ana. j. pound. Cerae albae, ana. j.
pound. Colophonij, viij. ounce. Vini rubei, ii. pound. Caryophillorum, ana.
one ounce. Maceris, ana. one ounce. Olibani, iiij. ounce. Mastiches, ij. ounce.
Myrrhae, j. ounce. Croci, half an ounce.
Make those in fine powder that are to be made in powder, and boil your
Rosyne, Pirrosyn and Wax, with four ounce of dear suet, and strain it
through a Canuas clothe. Then set it on the fire again until it boil, and
when it boyleth, take it from the fire, and put in your pouders and stir it,
until it be cold: and in the coolynge, put in the red Wine, and labor it
together, and make it up in Rolls. And if you add unto this, one ounce of the
leaves of Rewe dried and made in fine powder, and fullye searsed, it is then
good for Sciaticus, and other cold sickennesses of the joints, if the body
be well purged before with Pylles of Hermodactolior, or other purgations meet
for the same purpose. etc.

Emplastrum Ianuacense.
Rec. Succi plantaginis ana. j. pound. Betonicae, ana. j. pound. Apij, ana.
j. pound. Picis, ana. j. pound. Perrosinae, ana. j. pound. Cerae, ij.
pound. Terebinthinae, four ounce. Rorismarinae puluerisatae, two ounce.
Melte your Piche, Rosyne, Wax, and Turpentyne together with, Olei Ienuperae,
two ounce.
Then put in your powder of Rosemary leaves styrring it very well, then put in
your iuse by little and little, ever styrryng it continually until it be cold,
and so make it up in rolls, and keep it to your use.

Emplastrum nigrum Ioannis de Vigo and D. Buttes, for blistering, burninge,
ache, and excoriation, coming of whote humors, and for all whote vlcerations.
Take vnflecked Lime, and quench it in water seven times, and in white wine two
times then take of that powder, one once ounce and a half.

Cerusae, one ounce. Tutiae, one dragme. Olei rosati one pynte. Sepi vitulini
four ounces. Succi plantaginis ana, two ounces. Solatri, ana, two ounces.
Lactucae ana, two ounces. Centumnodij ana, two ounces.
Bole all these iuyces with the Oil and the suiet on a soft fire, till the
juice be consumed then put thereto.

Vnguenti rosarum, one ounce. Cerae albae one ounce.
And boil them again ever sturryng it with a splater then put thereto your
meneralls finelye poudred and searched, and when it is sufficiently boiled,
take it from the fire, and when it is cold put it in a mortar of brass and
labor it well, then put it in a box, and thereof make your plaster on a linen
clothe.

Emplastrum Iacobi.
Rec. Lapidis calaminaris ana, ii. ounces. Terrae Sigillatae ana, ii. ounces.
Lapidis Lazulae, ana, ii. ounces. Lapidis sanguinaris, ana, ii. ounces. Lapidis
Emiri, ana, ii. ounces. Sanguinis draconis ana two ounces Boli armeni, ana two
ounces
Let all these be made in very fine powder, then take oil of Roses a pynte
and set it over a soft fire, puttyng thereto.

Cerae albae half a pound, Sepi cerniuae, four ounces
And when they be relented put thereto all the pouders and stir them well and
let them boil a little while, then take it down and put there to in fine
powder.

Mastiches, ana. one ounce. Olibani. ana. one ounce.
And stir it, and when it is almost cold, put thereto, Terebinthinae, ij.
ounces. Champhorae, ij. dragmes.


Made in fine powder and well mingled, and make it up in rolls according to
art, and keep it in leather, and so use it,

Emplastrum desicatiuum, D. Butti militis and medici regij.
Rec. Olei rosati, viij. ounce. Cerusae, ana. ij. ounce. Mindij, ana. ij. ounce.
Lithargyri auri, ana. j. ounce. Sanguinis draconis, ana. j. ounce. Boli armeni,
ana. j. ounce. Camphorae, ij. dragmes.
Make all these mynoralles in fine powder and mix with the Oil, and set it on
a soft fire always styrrynge it, and let them boil, till they be
plasterlyke, and so make it up in rolls. And if you add unto this Plaster in
the boylinge thereof, four ounces of Vinegar of Roses, it will be much better
to dry and defend the members from accidents. This Plaster was well proved
by king Henrye the eight for his legs.

Emplastrum Gul. Firmigonis militis.
Rec. Lithargyri pulucrisatae, j. pound, Olei rosati, one pynte, Cerae albae,
two ounce. Myrrhae, ana. one ounce. Olibani, ana. one ounce. Vini albi, ana. half
a pound. Vrinae, ana. half a pound. Aceti albi, a quar. of a pound. Solatri,
ana. M. sc. Plantaginis, ana. M. sc.
Put the Herbs into a mortar with the Vinegar, and stamp them together, then
wrynge out the iuse, and put unto the Vinegar and Wine aforesaid. And thus
you must make your Plaster. Melte your Oil and Wax together in a fair Pan,
and let it boil. Then by little and little, put in your Litharge, ever styrrynge
it. Afterward put in your iuses by little and little, till you have put in all.
But be sure it be well sturred, for sittynge to the bottom. Your pan must
be of a good bygnesse, or else when you put in your iuses, it will boil over
the pan. So let it boil ever styrrynge it well, till the iuses be consumed.
Then last of all put in your Myrrh and Olibanum in fine powder, and stir it
till it be cold, if it be to hard make it softer with Oil of Roses, if it
be to soft, boil it a little moore according to art.

This is a special Plaster, for all kinds of vlcerations, as well of the
legs, as of other parts of the body, for it has virtue alteratiue,
resoluatiue, and excicatiue. Provided always that the body be universally
purged, as often as need shall require.

Cerates.
Hydrelaeon Galeni.
Rec. Lithargyri argenti, one pound. Aquae limpidae ana two pound. Olei
puri, ana two pound.
The Litharge is to be made in most fine powder, and the other to be styrred in
a mortar of stone, then boil them on a soft and small fire of coals. The
medicyne is to be made in the sun the day being fair that it may be the
whyter, and the fire vanyshinge you must still add fresh coals. And boil
these to the substance and thicknes of a cerote.

It does refrigerate and therefore is the use of it profitable in ulcers, for
it suffers not any humor, to flow unto them, and that which is already
come it puts to the parts adjacent. Therefore it heals ytchinges and
malignant ulcers. etc.

Oxelaeum Galeni.
Rec. Lithargyri argenti, one pound. Olei veteris, ana two pound. Aceti
optimi ana two pound. Confice vt supra. Componitur etiam ex Olei et aceti
two pound and a half: vel ex singulorum three pound, tunc enim nigrius est
et valentins.
It does dry fistulas which have not callus indurated and cures them. And does
conglutinate green and bloody wounds and such like. etc.

Oenelaeum Galeni.
Rec. Lithargyri argenti one pound. Olei clari, ana two pound. Vini albi
optimi ana two pound. Coque et confice vt superiora.
It does exciccate and dry, therefore it is good against flucksces and
reumatike passions: and it heals green wounds.

Dia pipereos Galeni.
Rec. Lithargyri argenti, ana one pound. Cerusae, ana one pound. Olei communis,
two pound. Cerae six ounces. Terebinthinae three ounces. Thuris, one ounce and
a half. Aluminis, six dragmes, Piperis three dragmes, Fiat in hunc modum.
The Lytharge being made in fine powder is to be boiled with oil, in the sun
and so long it is to be boiled until it come to substance of an emplaster
and will not cleave to your hands. Then put to it the Turpentyne and wax.
These being molten you shall add your pepper Frankensence and alome made in
fine powder. Last of all put to your ceruse also finely poudred. And always
in the boylynge stir them and boil them so long until they come to the
thicknes of a cerete.

It heals the ulcers and sores in old men and those that have soft bodies.
And further cures all ulcers which will not without difficulty come to a
cicatrice.

Ceratum e Cerusae.
Rec. Cerusae, one pound and a half. Olei rosati, two pound, Cerae candidae,
four ounces.
The ware being molten, put to the Ceruse made in fine powder and boil it so
long until it comes to black color.

It cures burnynges, skaldynges, erysipelas scabbes and all hot ulcers. etc.

Ceratum e Betonica, Capensis.
Rec. Terebinthinae ana iiij. ounces. Resinae pini, ana iiij. ounces. Cerae
flauae, ana iiij. ounces. Betonicae pulueratae, one ounce, Mastiches, ana half
an ounce. Thuris, ana half an ounce. Mumiae, four dragmes. Misce, Fiat malagma
ad capitis vulnera vtile.
It is right profitable in pains of the head. etc.

Ceratum Capitale, Carpensis.
Rec. Terebinthinae in vino maluatico, sepius lotae, ana, three ounce Resinae
pini, ana, three ounce Cerae albae ana, three ounce Mumiae, one ounce and a half.
The Turpentyn Rosen and wax being molten put to the Mumye made in fine
Powder. Boil them on the fire, and stir them continuallye. Then put these in
a clean vessel in which is rose vineyger made of malmesie four pound. Let al
these macerate xxiiij. hours, then express and wrynge out the veneyger with
your hands and keep it in a vessel of glass to thy use. etc.

Ceratum e Styrace, magistrale.
Rec. styracis liquidae four ounces. Cerae flauae two ounces. Thuris, ana. i.
ounce. Myrrhae ana. i. ounce. Fiat ceratum secundum artem.
It does aswage and cease hard tumores of the neruys and joints and other
parts.

Ceratum Gratia dei:
Rec. Galbani, ana j, ounce. Opopanacis, ana j, ounce. Aeruginis, ana j, ounce.
Thuris, ana j, ounce. Aristolochiae longae ana j, ounce. Mastiches ana j, ounce.
Myrrhae, ana j, ounce. Hammoniaci, ounce j. dragme.ij. Cerae, eight ounces.
Lithargyri ana. 18. ounces Olei communis, ana. 18. ounces Bdellij two ounces,
Lapidis calaminaris ana, one ounce. Lapidis Haematitis ana, one ounce. Olei
absynthij, four ounces. Terebinthinae, six ounces, Fiat Ceratum.
It does mollify, mundifie and conglutynate, and therefore is right excellent
in apostemes, tumors, and such like. It is profitable in filthy ulcers, and
does conglutinate wounds. etc.

Dia cadma Galeni.
Rec. Cadmiae praeparatae ana, 16. dragmes. Chalcitidis vstae, ana, 16.
dragmes. Cerae, lxxx, dragmes Colophoniae, lxiiij, dragmes, Olei myrtini, one
pound,
It is right excellent in ulcers which will not easily come to a Cicatrize, for
it does cicatrise all ulcers. etc.

Ceratum de Salice.
Rec, Misy ana, vj, ounces. Aluminis rotundi ana, vj, ounces. Chalcitidis ana,
vj, ounces. Melantherij, ana, vj, ounces. Aeruginis, ana, vj, ounces. Aluminis
scissilis ana, vj, ounces. Gallaru^ accerbarum ana, vj, ounces. Cerusae, ana two
pound. Cerae ana two pound. Resinae Frictae, ana two pound. Picis brutiae
ana two pound. Bituminis, ana two pound. Olei omphacini, ana two pound.
Foliorum salicis teneroru^ ana two pound.
Boil the leaves in strong vinegar, then dry them and make them in fine
powder. Then melte that is to be molten, and in the coolynge add your other
percelles made in fine powder and make a cerote according to art. etc.

It does heal ulcers malignant and those that will hardly be cured. Also
erysipelas and many other affectes, as fistulas and other.

Barbarum paruum Galeni.
Rec. Picis nigrae, ana one pound. Cerae ana one pound. Resinae pini, ana one
pound. Picis graecae ana one pound. Bitummis, ana one pound. Lithargyri,
ten dragmes. Cerusae, ana five dragmes. Aeruginis, ana five dragmes.
Opopanacis. three dragmes. Olei. nine dragmes.
Let those things that are to be beaten be put in a mortar with strong
Vinegar. The other must be molten on the fire: And all being mixed together,
boil them so long until they cleave to thy fyngers. But if thou wylt have it
apter to cease dolor and pain, add to it of Succi hyoscyami, ana. half a
drag. Opij, ana. half a drag.


It is good to be used in green and fresh wounds, and for the bytynge of
mad Dogs, also for inflammations of the joints and the gout. etc.

Barbarum magnum Galeni.
Rec. Picis, viij. pound. Cerae, vij. pound. viij. ounce. Resinae pini, v.
pound. iiij. ounce. Bituminis, iiij. pound. Olei, j. pound. vj. ounce.
Lithargyri, ana. iij. ounce. Cerusae, ana. iij. ounce. Aeruginis, ana. iij. ounce.
Thuris, vj. ounce. Aluminis liquidi, j. ounce and a half. Aluminis scissilis,
iiij. ounce, Opopanacis, ana. xij. dragmes. Squammae aeris, ana. xij. dragmes.
Galbani, ana. xij. dragmes. Aloes, ana. iiij. dragmes. Opij, ana. iiij.
dragmes. Myrrhae, ana. iiij. dragmes. Succi mandragorae, vi. dragmes.
Terebinthinae, ij. pound. Aceti, v. pound.
Make of these a Cerote in such sort as is mentioned in the description
going before. etc.

It is of the like virtues with the other going before: but that where the
other is used in small wounds, this is applied to great wounds. etc.

Isis ex Galeno.
Rec. Cerae, C. dragmes. Terebinthinae, CC. dragmes. Squammae aeris, ana. viij.
dragmes. Aeruginis, ana. viij. dragmes. Aristolochiae, ana. viij. dragmes.
Thurirs, ana. viij. dragmes. Salis hammoniaci, ana. viij. dragmes. Aeris vsti,
ana. viij. dragmes. Aluminis vsti, vj. dragmes. Myrrae, ana. xij. dragmes.
Aloes, ana. xij. dragmes. Galbani, ana. xij. dragmes. Olei veteris, x. ounce.
Boil them as before, and your hands being wette in strong Vinegar, make of
these rolls according as is the use, and after put them in Vinegar ten
days. Then take them out, and reserve them to thy use.

It is found good for the head. Also against old and rebellous ulcers, and
those that be bloodye. etc.

Ceratum viride Machaerionis ex Galeno.
Rec. Olei rosati omphacini, six ounce. Aristolochiae, ana. i. ounce. Galbani,
ana. i. ounce. Opopanacis, ana. i. ounce. Hammoniaci, ana. i. ounce. Aeruginis,
ana. i. ounce. Myrrhae ana. i. ounce. Iridis, ana. i. ounce. Terebinthinae, vij.
ounces. and a half. Cerae tantundem. Fiat ceratum.
It serves for all green wounds, it puts away inflammations, and is used
in ulcers of the eyes and ears. It does engender flesh on the bones that are
bare, and without flesh, and does conglutinate spedelye. etc.

Dia dictamini Galeni.
Rec. Olei veteris, two pound and a half. Lithargyri, one pound and a half.
Aeruginis, one ounce. Squammae aeris, six dragmes. Colophoniae, vj. ounce. ij.
dragmes. Pollinis thuris, one ounce and a half. Hammoniaci, two ounce. Aeris
vsti, one ounce. Diphrygis, ana. vj. ounce. Gentianae, ana. vj. ounce. Propoleos,
ana. j. ounce. Aloes, ana. j. ounce. Galbani, one ounce and a half. Aristolochiae
rot. ana. j. ounce. ij. dragmes. Dictamni cretens. ana. j. ounce. ij. dragmes.
Cerae, xxv. dragmes. Confice in hunc modum.
Boil your Litharge and Oil so long together until that they are well
boiled. Then put to your Erugo, and Squamma eris, let them a little boil. Then
take them from the fire, and add to them Rosyne and Ammoniacum dissolved in
Vinegar, then put to Wax and es vstum. Then boil them again until it cleave
not to the hands. etc.

It is good in green wounds, punctures of the Nerves, old ulcers, and those
that will hardely cicatrize, also for apostemes, felons, and scirrhous. It
draws out things fixed, as arrowe heads, darts, thorns, etc, and is of
great force against all venomous biting and sting. etc.

Ceratum oxycroceum Nicolai.
Rec. Croci, ana. iiij. ounce. Picis nigae, ana. iiij. ounce. Picis graecae, ana.
iiij. ounce. Cerae, ana. iiij. ounce. Terebinthinae, ana. j. ounce, iij. dragmes.
Galbani, ana. j. ounce, iij. dragmes. Hammoniaci, ana. j. ounce, iij. dragmes.
Myrrhae, ana. j. ounce, iij. dragmes. Thuris, ana. j. ounce, iij. dragmes.
Mastiches, ana. j. ounce, iij. dragmes.
The Galbanum and Hammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar must be boiled until the
Vinegar be consumed. Then add the Piche, Wax, Turpentyne, all molten, after
the Masticke, Frankensence, and Myrrh, made in fine powder. Boil these until
they come to a convenient thycknes, then put in cold water, and press it out
again. After with Oil of Bays your hands being anointed, work this Cerote
and extend it out. Last of all your Saffron being made in fine powder, mix
them together, and make a Cerote as art requires.

It is used in fractured bones, and in the parts of the body, where as dolor
and pain is. It does mollify and make soft al hardenes, and puts it
away quite. etc.

Ceratum ex pelle arietina Arnoldi de villa noua.
Rec. Lithargyri, ana. half dragme. Lapidis Liaematitis, ana. half dragme.
Sanguinis draconis, ana. half dragme. Boli armeni, ana. half dragme. Opij,
ana. half dragme. Mastiches, ana. half dragme. Hammoniaci, ana. half dragme.
Mumiae, ana. half dragme. Galbani, ana. half dragme. Thuris, ana. half
dragme. Costi, ana. half dragme. Lumbricorum, ana. half dragme. Picis nigrae,
ana. j. dragme. Picis graecae, ana. j. dragme. Cerae albae, ana. j. dragme.
Cerae rubae, ana. j. dragme. Radicum consolidae, maioris, ana. iij. dragmes.
minoris, ana. iij. dragmes.
Rosarum rubrarum, ana. xviij. grains. Myrrhae, ana. xviij. grains. Aloes,
ana. xviij. grains. Succi hypocistidis, ana. vj. drag, Gallarum immaturaru^,
ana. vj. drag, Balaustiorum, ana. vj. drag, Aristolochiae rot. ana. vj. drag,
Visci quercini, ana. ij. dragmes. Terebinthinae, ana. ij. dragmes. Sanguinis
hominis rufi. ix. ounce. Fit autem in hunc modum.
Boil the Wethers skin whole with the hear and wolle on it in water until
it be brought into the substance of Glewe, which thou shall strain. Take of
this strayned one pound put it in a new vessel in which the Meselto is
resolved, then put in the Lumbrickes, after the Wax, Turpentyne, and
Masticke, these being molten, put to the Gummes dissolved in Vinegar, and
boil them to the thicknes of a Cerote. Last of all add the pouders, and mix
them together, and make them in rolls. etc.

It is of great force and virtue in ruptures, as has often been tried. etc.

Ceratum D. Guli. Buttes Medici, ad vlcera antiqua and phagedaenica.
Rec, Olei rosati, ana one pound. Cerae albae ana one pound. Cerusae, one
pound and a half.
Set the Oil and Wax together on a soft fire, and relent the Wax with the
Oil, then put in the Lead in fine powder, ever styrrynge it well until it
wax black. Then take it from the fire, and dippe therein pieces of fine
lynnen clothe, and there is your searclothe.

Ceratum D. Gul. buttes Medici ad iuncturarum dolores.
Rec. Olei rosati, four ounces. Aceti, two ounces. Lithargyri, ana one ounce.
Cerusae ana one ounce. Cerae albae, ana one ounce. Scoriae ferri preparatae, six
dragmes.
Set the oil over the fire and put thereto the veneyger and boil them on a
soft fire to the veneyger be clean consumed, then put in all the foresaid
things fynely poudred and searced, ever sturryng it, till it be plaster like,
then dype in your cloutes and when they be cold, stripe them with a sleeke
stone and make them smouthe and use them.

Ceratum viride Iamarici.
Rec. Olei rosati, half a pound. Sepi bubulini, one pound, Chelidonij, ana.
three ounces. Allaluay, otherwise called sorrel de boys vel Panus conkelle ana.
three ounces. Lybistici, ana. three ounces. Thymi, ana. three ounces. Saluiae, ana.
three ounces. Cerae ana, two ounces. Terebinthinae, ana, two ounces. Viridis
eris, ana, one ounce. Aloes, ana, one ounce. Mastiches, ana, half an ounce.
Olibani, ana, half an ounce.
Stamp all your herbs with your oil and talow, and let them stand by the
space of eight or nine days, then boil them till you have taking the strength
of the herbs, and put thereto first your wax, and let it boil till the wax
be molten, then take it from the fire, and add thereunto all the rest of your
things in very fine powder, and last of all when it is almost cold, put in
your aloes, continually sturring till it be cold. This ointment was made by
the noble Chirurgian, Iamaricus, and is of most excellent operation.

Trochisce and pouders.
Trochisci Andronij ex Andromacho.
Rec. Florum mali punici. ten dragmes. Gallae omphacitidis, viij. dragmes.
Myrrhae, ana, four dragmes. Aristolochiae ana, four dragmes, Calcanthi, ana,
ij. dragmes. Aluminis scissilis, ana, ij. dragmes. Mysi, ana, ij. dragmes.
Formentur trochisci cum. Sapae, q.s.
It is good in grene wounds, it heals fistulas, corrupted bones, and takes
away all superfluous flesh, and is aprpoued in eating ulcers called
Phagedenica. etc.

Trochisci Polyidae ex Andromacho.
Rec. Florum mali punici, x. dragmes. Aluminis scissisis iij. dragmes, Thuris,
ana iiij. dragmes. Myrrhae, ana iiij. dragmes. Calcanthi, two dragmes. Fellis
taurini, six dragmes. Aloes eyghte dragmes. Formentur pastilli cum vini
austeri. q.s.
It has the like virtues and properties with the Trochisce before discribed.

Trochisci Musae.
Rec. Alumins scissilis, ana, vi, dragmes Aloes, ana, vi, dragmes Myrrhae, ana,
vi, dragmes Calcanthi, ana, vi, dragmes Croci, ana iij, drag. Crocomagmatis ana
iij, drag. Florum malorum granatorum domesticorum, four dragmes. Formentur
pastilli cum vini odorati et Mellis. ana, q.s.
This Trochisce has many virtues and serves diverse vsys in Chirurgerie it
does relaxe and maturate. etc.

Trochisci de Minio erodentes Ioa^nis de vigo.
Rec. Medullae panis non cocti been fermentati. four dragmes. Sublimati
electi, one dragme. Minij. half a dragme. Aquae rosarum, q.s.
It takes away all superfluous and spongious flesh in ulcers, it mundifieth
filthy ulcers, it mollifieth Callus, and does merueylously heal and cure
fistulas. etc.

Trochisci D. Gul. Cunynghami Medici.
Rec. Balaustiorum, ana. j. drag. and a half Aluminis sciss. ana. j. drag. and
a half Sangui. draconis, ana. j. drag. and a half Mastiches, ana. j. drag. and
a half Mumiae ana. j. drag. and a half Thuris, ana. j. drag. and a half
Myrrhae, ana. j. drag. and a half Lithargyri auri, ana. j. dragme. Cerusae
venetae, ana. j. dragme. Centaurij minoris, ana. half a drag. Helenij, ana.
half a drag. Aristolochiae rot. ana. half a drag. Croci, ij. Scruples. Boli
armeni praeparati omniu^ pondus.
Make all these in most fine powder, and with plantain water, and aqua vite (in
which is dissolved of good triacle ij. dragmes) bring them in to Trochisse
according to art.

This Trochisse made in powder and tempered with plantaine water, and laid on
spleageants, does put away inflammations, cease fluxes, cures herpes both
estiomenus and miliaris, also erysipelas. Further in old and malign ulcers
which will not cicatrize, it does both mundifie them, incarnate and make a
perfect cicatrize, it has many other virtues, which the Chirurgian using it
rightly shall easily perceive. etc.

Puluis.
Puluis contra scabiem communis.
Rec. Sulphuris flaui, ana. j. ounce. Cumini, ana. j. ounce. Baccaru^ lauri, ana.
j. ounce. Staphidis agriae, ana. j. ounce.
Make hereof a powder, and when you will use it against the scabbes mix it with
oil of roses.

Alius Nicolai efficatior.
Rec. Lithagyri, ana. j. ounce. Hellebori nigri, ana. j. ounce. Sulphuris, ana.
ij. dragmes. Nitri, ana. ij. dragmes. Maioranae, ana. ij. dragmes.
Make these in fine powder, and use it as before. etc.

Puluis Cephalicus Lucij ex Galeno.
Rec. Iridis, iiij. dragmes. Aristolochiae rotu^dae, ana. ij. drag. Pollinis
thuris, ana. ij. drag. Corticis radicum panacis.iiij. drag. Fiat puluis.
It heals those paynefull soores called Nomae.

Alius Tryphonis.
Rec. Corticis piceae, ana. vj. dragmes. Squamae aeris, ana. vj. dragmes.
Punicis combusti, ana. vj. dragmes. Thuris, ana. iiij. dragmes. Iridis, ana.
iiij. dragmes. Aristolochiae rot. ana. iiij. dragmes. Resinae pini frictae,
ana. iiij. dragmes. Aloes, ana. ij. dragmes. Myrrhae, ana. ij. dragmes.
Make these in fine powder. It is very good to take away the skales of
corrupted bones. etc.

Alius eiusdem ad omnem haemorrhagian.
Rec. Thuris, one ounce. Aloes, half an ounce. Fiat puluis,
This powder must be mixed with the white of an Egg, and the hears an Hare
small cut, and apply it to the place where as the flux of blood is. etc.

Puluis incarnans, and sanguinem restringens, Ioannis de Vigo.
Rec. Aloes, ana. j. dragme. Myrrhae, ana. j. dragme. Sarcocollae, one dragme
and a half. Thuris, ana. ij. dragmes. Pollinis farinae, ana. ij. dragmes.
Sanguinis draconis, ana, ij. dragmes and a half. Terrae lemniae, ana, ij.
dragmes and a half. Tutiae, ana, one dragme. Lithargyri, ana, one dragme.
Tragacanthae, ana, one dragme. Fiat puluis tenuis.
This Powder does incarnate and cease the flux of blood, and therefore the
Author gave it the same name.

Puluis causticus sanguinem comprimens Galeni.
Rec. Chalcitidis, C. scruples. Chalcanthi, L. scruples. Misyos torrefacti,
xxv. scruples. Aeris vsti, xij. scruples and a half. Fiat puluis,
This Powder takes away proud and spongious flesh, it stays the flux of
blood, and makes an Asker, for it is a potentiall cauterise. etc.

Praecipitatus Ioannis de vigo.
Rec. Salis nitri, one pound and a half. Vitrioli romani, ana. one pound.
Aluminis, ana. one pound.
Destyll these by a Lymbecke and take of this water one pynte of Argent Viue
one pound. Put these in a Glass still with his receptorye well luted, Cum
luto sapientiae, and still it so long until the glass wax read. Put away
the water, and the Argent Viue that is combust (which the Alchymistes call
precipitate) make in fine powder upon a marble stone then myxe him with his
water again and destyll him as before. Then break the Glass and take him
out and make him in fine powder. After put him in some vessel of Brase and
with a slise also of Brass stir it being on a sharppe and great fire until
it look like read lead. etc.

Alius rubeus Brunsuicensis.
Rec. Matris perlaru^ combust. ana i. ounce Pompholigos ana i. ounce Lithargyri,
ana i. ounce Boli armeni, ana i. ounce Terrae Sigillatae ana i. ounce Sangui.
draconis, ana i. ounce Aeruginis aeris ana i. ounce Caphurae, one dragme,
Make these in fine and subtyle powder.

This is a right perfyte exciccatiue powder and will not suffer superfluous or
ill flesh to grow in the wound.

Alius Puluis rubeus eiusdem,
Rec. Sanguinis draconis ana, one ounce Olibani, ana, one ounce Aloes hepaticae
ana, one ounce Sarcocollae, ana, one ounce
Irios half an ounce, fiat puluis,
This powder is used in stanchynge of blood in wounds and is also an
incarnatiue.

Puluis Longobardorum.
Rec. Sanguinis draconis, ana, i. ounce Boli armeni, ana, i. ounce Terrae
Sigillate, ana, i. ounce Balaustiorum ana one ounce and a half. Acatie, ana one
ounce and a half. Hypocisthidis ana one ounce and a half. Nucum cupressi ana
one ounce and a half. Mumiae ana two dragmes, Mastiches ana two dragmes,
Thuris, ana two dragmes, Sang. humani combusti, one ounce. pilorum Leporis
combust. three ounces, fiat puluis.
It is excellent in lettynge of the flux of blood, and does also conglutinate
wounds and join their sides together. etc.

Puluis ad sanguinem sistendum.
Rec. Sanguinis draconis, j. ounce and a half. Olibani, ij. ounce. Mastiches, j.
ounce. Aloes hepaticae vj. dragmes. Sarcocollae, v dragmes. Iridis, ana. ounce.
sc. Pulueris molaris, ana. ounce. sc.
Make all these in fine Powder, and keep it in a Glass.

This Powder does restrain the bleedynge of wounds, if they be stitched
according to the art of Chirurgirie, and laid upon the wound, mixed with
the white of an an Egg, and a little green Balm laid upon lynte and so
applied to the wound, it makes the fleeshe to grow together in short time,
and keeps the wound from putrefaction and pain and such like accidents.
etc.

Puluis Lanfranci pro eodem.
Rec. Olibani, two ounces. Sanguinis draconis, ana. one ounce and a half. Boli
armoniaci, ana. one ounce and a half. Mastiches, ana half an ounce. Pulueris
molaris, ana half an ounce. Aloes cecotrinae, three dragmes.
Make all these in fine powder according to art and keep them in a glass and
myxe it with the white of an Egg and grene Balm when you will use it as is
aforesaid.

Puluis restrictiuuis.
Rec. Pulueris molaris ana. six, ounce Farinae Hordeaciae, ana. six, ounce
Gummi dragaganti, ana, ij. ounces, Gummi arabici, ana, ij. ounces, Olibani, ana,
ij. ounces, Mumiae, ana. j. ounce. Boli armeni, ana. j. ounce.
Make all these in fine Powder according to art.

This powder is good for broken bones of the Legs, Arms, or any other place
of the body. And when you do minister it, it must be mingled with the white
of an Egg, well beaten together, and it must be spredde upon a lynnen clothe
double. And when you have reduced and put the bone that is broken into his
right place again (so that it stand even and strayghte as it did before) you
may apply this medicine upon it, or round about it, as the cause does
require. Layinge the member even upon a bourde, or upon some thing made for
the same purpose. But you must be sure to defend the member with a good
defensive that no evil accidents come unto it, and see that the member be
very well splented, with good and convenient splentes, and take heed that you
bind not the member to strayte or fast, least you stop the course of the
lyuelye spirits, and so the man may both lose his member and his life. This
powder may lie on to the seventh day or the tenth day, if there come no
evil accidents, and then refreshe it again as you did before, and if any
accidents come to the member, you must remove it the sooner, and annoint it
with warm oil as is aforesaid. This powder is good also for wounds for it
stops bledyng and makes the wound quicklye to consolidate if it be laid
upon the other two pouders aforesaid, or on either of them in manner of a
plaster, when they are myngled with the green Baulme as is aforesaid in their
places.

Cataplasma D. Gul. Buttees ad phlegmones.
Take a fat piece of vealle, or a Capon and boil it in water and white wine,
then strain it from the fleeshe, and set the same licour over the fire again,
and put thereto.

Maluarum, M.ij. Fol. Violarum ana, M.j. Solatri, ana, M.j.
Boil them till they be soft and tender, and then take it from the fire, and
power away the licour, and stamp the herbs fine in a mortar and put thereto,
Barley mealle as much as shall suffice to make it like a Cataplasme or Pultis,
according to art.

Cataplasma eiusdem ad dolorem sedandum.
Rec. Maluarum, ana. M.ij. Fol. Violarum, ana. M.ij. Florum chamomillae ana.
M.j. Foliorum rosarum, ana. M.j.
Boil all these in milk till they be soft and tender, then put them in a
mortar and stamp them small and put thereto.

Vnguenti rosarum, ana, j. ounce and a half. Vnguenti populij ana, j. ounce and
a half. Vitella ouorum, numero.ij. Farinae hordei, two ounces.
Incorporate all these together, and when you shall occupy it, sprede it
thycke on a clothe and warm it against the fire, and if there be any hard
indurate matter in the member, then put there to the mucylage of march Malowe
rotes and Seminis psylij ana. half an ounce.

Cataplasma Diaphoreticum D. Gul. Cunynghami Medici.
Rec. Foliorum Sambuci, ana. M.ij. Saluiae, ana. M.ij. Rutae, ana. M.ij.
Altheae, ana. M.ij. Chamomilli, ana. M.ij.
Brouse and cut these small, and boil them in the decoction of Lyneseede
and Fengreeke: And when they have boiled until they be tender and soft, add
to them.

Olei irini, ana. j. ounce and a half. Anethini, ana. j. ounce and a half.
Castorij, ana. j. ounce and a half.
Boil them again together, and make a Cataplasme according to art.

This Cataplasme is good to resolve and mollify all hardness of joints, and
gross and slymye humors which are impacte in the same. Therefore it is
profitable in passions of the joints, Chiragra, Podagra, and Sciatica, and
such like. Also it may right well be used in could tumors infestynge the
musculous parts of the arms and legs.

Aliud valentius eiusdem.
Rec. Radicum and foliorum Ebuli, ana. M. j. Althaeae. ana. M. j. Folioru^
Rutae, ana. M. sc. Sabinae, ana. M. sc. Pulegij, ana. M. sc. Sambuci, ana. M.
sc. Chamaemeli, ana. M.ij. Meliloti, ana. M.ij.
Boil these being cut and broused in one part of Malmesey, and three
parts of Oil of Chamomille until they come to the substance of a
Cataplasme. etc.

This Cataplasme is of like virtues with the other going before, saving that
it is of greater force and strength in the effects before remembered. etc.

Cataplasma anodynum nostrae inuentionis.
Rec. Folioru^ Iusquiami, ana. j. M. Violarum, ana. j. M.
Boil them in water until they be soft, then stamp them fine and add to
them, Panis puriss. one pound, Lactis, one pound, Olei rosati, three ounces.
Vitella. ouorum numero iij. Croci, one scruple.


Make hereof a Cataplasme according to art.

This Cataplasme or Pultas, is very excellent in ceasynge of pains in the
gout of choleric persons, where great inflammation is, and in a sensible
and tender body. For it does both assuage pain, and remove swellyng in
short time, if the body be well prepared before.

Cataplasma Rogerij.
Rec. Farinae fabarum, one pound, Furfuris subtiliter puluerisati, ij. M.
Stercoris caprini, one pound, Chamomilli, ana. M. sc. Meliloti, ana. M. sc.
Absynthij, ana. M.sc.
Stamp your herbs fine, and boil them all together with sufficient white
Wine and Lie of Barbars. Boil it until it come to the form of a Cataplasme,
and apply it so whote as the Pacient may suffer it. This Cataplasme is of
great resolution in wyndye matters of the joints, for it does resolve and
disperse the wind and waterye matter, and specially if you put to it a little
Cummon in fine Powder. Some use to put in moore Wine and Lie, and no Bean
meal nor Branne, and so boil it with herbs and other things as is before
said. Then strain it and with the lycour being whote, and spongies applied
to the iunctures, and so roll it according to art. I have seen this do
very well.

Aliud Cataplasma.
Rec. Folioru^ Maluarum, ana. M. j. Violarum, ana. M. j. Mandragorae, ana. M.
j. Iusquiami, ana. M. j. Radicis Althaeae ana. ij. ounces. Seminis Lini, ana.
ij. ounces. Foenograeci, ana. ij. ounces. Floru^ Chamomeli, ana. j. ounce.
Meliloti. ana. j. ounce.
Boil all your herbs in potage without Salt, then stamp them fynely and put
to the rest of your things in Powder. Then boil all together with the brothe
aforesaid. And make thereof a Cataplasme acccordynge to art.

This Cataplasme is very good to sease inflammations and pain in mixte matter
both of Blood and Choler, if you add to it vnguentum Populeon two ounce.

Waters.
Aqua Balsami.
Rec. Terebinthinae, four pound. Olibani, two ounces. Ligni aloes, two
dragmes. Mastiches, ana, one ounce and a half, Garyophillorum, ana, one ounce
and a half, Galange, ana, one ounce and a half, Nucis muscatae, ana, one ounce
and a half, Cinamomi, ana, one ounce and a half, Gummi elemi, six ounces,
Aloes hepaticae, ana ij. ounce Laudini, ana ij. ounce Castorij, ana ij. ounce
Radicu^ co^solidae minoris and Maioris, ana ij. ounce Foliorum hyperici ana. M.
s. Betonicae, ana. M. s. Chamaepitios, ana. M. s.
Aquae vitae four times stylled, six pound.
Make all those things in powder that you can make in powder and myxe them
well with the rest. Then put them all into a body of glass with the Aqua
vite and let them stand so the space of seven days close covered. Then set
them to still with a soft fire according to art. First you shall have a
clear water called water of Balm. Which you may receive a part. And when
the color of the water changes some thing to yellownes then keep that water a
part. And put under another receauer to take the next lycour, which will be
like to a yellowe water, then you may increase your fire by little and little,
till you perceive drops of oil come forth, which oil will be yellowe also,
then you may remove that receauer and put under another to take the Balm,
which will come after that oil and water, which Balm will be more thycker and
redder then the Oil, and it will come of it self, without water, this Balm
is very precious, and is called Artificial Balm. Now the Oil that I spoke
of before, that came with the yellow water, is called the Oil of Balm, and it
will swyme above the water, so that you may deuyde it from the water at your
pleasure. And this Oil is most precious in paralices, and spasmus, coming
of cold matter, as I have many times proved, the water of Balm is very
precious, and old Alchimistes, did distyll it again with raygne water, so
much of one as of the other, and called it the Lady of all medycynes, for it
is of great virtue in resystynge the plague poison, and many other things,
if it be taken with Aele, Bear, or Wine, fasting the quantite of sixetene or
twentye drops, in one sponefull of any drink aforesaid, but I have used it
for a remedy against the Plague, after this manner, take of the leaves of Rue,
Wormewoode, Scabyous, Turmentyll, Marygoldes and Dragans, of each two ounces, and
put them into one quarte of the water, so dystylled with Rain water the
space of three days, and in that time the water will take all the virtue from
the herbs so that it shall not have the virtue of those herbs, but all the
virtue it had in it self before, and thus I used it to the great profit and
sauegarde of many, if I should write of all the marvelous things, that I
have done with this water, Oil, and Balm, it were to be maruayled at, and yet
most true, As concerning the use and commodytye of them, you shall find in
diverse of my books as cause does require.

Lac virgineum.
Rec. Lytarge of Silver in fine Powder three ounces, of good white Veneyger
half a pynte, myxe them together, and distill them by a fylture or through a
little bag, or by a piece of clothe, take of the same water myngle it with
water of salt, made with one ounce of salt poudred and half a pound of Rain
water or well water, and myngle these waters together, and it wylbe white like
milk, and with this rub the corrupt place. Some adds a little Ceruse with
this Lytharge which is good for all rednes of the face.

Aqua corrodens.
Rec. of Sal alkali, or if ye can not have that, take Sall Armoniacke and
vnsleecked Lyme ana. one pound, and beat them to fine powder, and put them
in an earthen pot which has holes in the bottom like to a collander and
press them stronglye down, so that the water may not swiftlye paste through,
and power upon them, so much water as will cover it a finger hight above the
powder, and so suffer it to drope or strain through, and put under it a
receptacle to keep the water, and when all the water is run through, renew,
or take new lime and new salt as is aforesaid, and let the foresaid water
run through the same, and keep that water for your use. This water is good in
many operations it will cauterise like an whote iron, and it is good in
fistulaes and to many other things, if ye add to this of Marcurie sublimmate
in powder one ounce, it will be the better, and chieflye in Chamaeleontiasi,
where the bones be corrupted.

Aqua Mercurialis.
Rec. Mercurij sublimatj, ana, half a pound. Salis armoniaci, ana, half a
pound.
Grynde them very fine upon a moller stone both together with out any other
lycour, and put them in a strong Glass, that will a bide the fire. Then take
a new earthen Pot, and put ashes into it, the thyckenesse of one finger.
Then shut your Glass in the Pot, and fill up the Pot with ashes round
about the Glass, so that the Glass may stand soft within the Pot. Then
put your Pot with the Glass so set in it, into a Forneyse, and make
underneath it a fire, and close the mouth of the Glass with some lynnen
clothe, not to hard for breaking of the Glass, and sometime open it to give
vente. And you shall know when it is boiled inoughe, by putting in of a knyfe
or some other instrument of Iron, and if it be boiled inoughe, it will cleave
to the knyfe or instrument like to molten Piche. Then take it from the fire,
and let it stand until it be cold, then break the Glass, and take the
substance that you find in the same Glass, and make it in fine Powder ones
again upon a moller stone. Then let it stand a day and a night in an
earthen vessel put a broad very thine that it may take the air and become
moist, then put it in bag and hang it up that it may drop into a
vessel of glass, and that water will be very clear, and is called Aqua
mercurij. This water makes Copper white, and all other mettalles, and is of a
marvelous operation it will cure a fistulay if it be put to the bottom
thereof by art, for it takes away the hard fleeshe which lets the
fystulay to be made hole.

Aqua ad oris Vlcera.
Rec. Hordei excorticatae, M.j. Foliorum Saluiae, ana, M.j. Violarum, ana, M.j.
Rorismarinae, M.s. Mellis. four sponefulls. Aluminis, two ounces.
Boil all these together in one gallon of water till the better half be
consumed, then strain it, and let the sick man continually wash his mouth
with it warmed till he be whole, it is good for those that has a sore mouth
which comes by reason of applying the unguent used in Chamaeleontiasi, in
which unguent Argentum viuum is put, and the more the paciente spetteth and
washes the better it is.

Alia aqua pro eodem.
Rec. Rorismarinae, ana, M.iiij. Saluiae ana, M.iiij. Lupinorum, M, ij.
Aluminis, four ounces. Mellis, half a pound.
Boil all these together in four gallons of water, until the half be
consumed Then let it stand until it be cold, and strain it, and keep it
in an earthen Pot to your use. This water serves for the like purpose, that
the other aforesaid serves for, and is a great excicatiue. It heals Cankers
in the mouths of the children, s in old folks also, if it be mixed with
vnguentum Egiptiacum, moore or less according to the disease. It is good also
to wash cankerous ulcers, if you put thereto a little Egiptiacum aforesaid.
For it preserves the Ulcer from putrefaction, if other convenient medicines
be applied therewithal. It dries up also old soores being mixed as is
aforesaid, if they be not deep in the flesh, many other good properties it
has, which you shall find by experience thereof.

Aqua ad mundificandum vulnera, nostrae inuentionis.
Rec. Agremoniae, ana. j.M. Hyperici, ana. j.M. Centaurij, ana. j.M. Absynthij,
ana. j.M. Scabiosae, ana. j.M. Crassulae maioris, ana. j.M. Radicis Symphiti
ana. j.M.
Stamp all these well, and let them boil with one Gallon of water, and one
pottell of white Wine, and Sugre half a pound, until half of the lycour be
consumed. Then strain it, and keep it to your use.

This Water must be conveyed into the deep places of wounds or ulcers with
a sirynge, made so warm as the Pacient may suffer it. And if you will have it
of great mundification, add thereto Mei rosarum. And if you will have it of
greater excication, and some thing to cool and put away inflammation, add
unto it when you will occupye it, half so much Plantaine water, or Nyghtshade
water wherein a little Alume is boiled. This water is excellent in operation,
for it cleanses from the deep parts all corrupt and filthy humors, and
causes the other medycines that are applied to the sore places to take the
better effect in their operation, you may myngle also with this decoction
vnguentum Egipciacum or the powder of marcurye precipitate according to your
descretion. Provided always that all other good inventions required in the
art of Chirurgerye be observed and kept and chieflye the euacuation of the
matter, that they grow of, or that mayntayneth them, and also to keep such
diat, as is meet for the curing of that desease.

Potio ad vulnera conglutinanda nostrae inuentionis.
Rec. Polipodij quercini, four ounces. Crissulae maioris, ana. ij. ounces.
Pirolae, ana. ij. ounces. Anance, ana. ij. ounces. Pilosillae, ana. ij. ounces.
Veronicae ana. ij. ounces. Solissequij, ana, j. ounce. Agrimoniae, ana, j. ounce.
Chope all these herbs small, and put them into a new earthen pot, and
put thereto one pottell of the best malmesie that you can get, and one
quarte of water of Scabiose, and seethe them in Balneo mariae, by the space of
three hours together, and in any wise let the pot be close covered and
pasted about with some dowe and brene, that no breath go forth, and if the
wound be in the head put in a little Sage, Betonie, and Lauander spicke, and if
it be in the breast and throughs the lounges, put in a little Lycorice, Isope
and Enulacampane root, if it be about the raynes put in a perstay rote and a
fenell rote, when all these things are boiled together Let it stand by the
space of one night after, then open the Pot and strain forth the licoure,
and put thereunto of fine Sugar four pound, and boil it a little again.
This drink is most excellent for the curing of wounds that be in the body
or through the body, for it heals them in short time, and consumes away
the blood that is within the body without any grief or pain, in a manner
they need no other remedies. For if they wash the wound with this same
drink a little warmed, and lay a weate clothe upon the wound four or five
double, weate in the same drink, it will heal it in very short time
without any other medicine, drinking every morning and evening four ounce
at either time of this same drink warmed.

This drink has been well proved in the wars both by sea and land, by me
Thomas Gale Master in Chirurgerie in the City of London. Provided always
that the Pacient be kept soluble, and use a very small diet, until the
seventh day be past, and so to be well governed in all other things
appertaynynge to his health, according to the art of Chirurgirie.

Alia potia pro eodem nostrae inuentionis.
Rec. Hordei excorticati, Agremonie, ana. M. f Hislopi, ana. M. f Bethonicae,
ana. M. f Polipodij, ana. M. f Symphiti, ana. M. f Plantaginis, ana. M. j
Centumnodiorum, ana. M. j
If you may not have these herbs grene, take them dry, you must put in also.

Hypericj, q. f. Scabiosae, q. f.
Boil all these herbs together with your Barley, in three pottells of water
with four sponefulles of Honnye, till the better half be consumed, then let
it stand till it be cold and strain it, This drink must be used morning
and evening warm at each time sire ounces, with this he did maruaylous cures
and healed them in short time, for this drink defends the wound from evil
accedentes, if the paciente keep good diat, and other things necessary for
his health as is said before.

Aqua decoctionis ligni Sancti nostrae inuentionis.
It is to be considered that there be three sorts of this wood, that is to
say that, that is very old, that, that is mean and not old, and that which
is young and the bows of the trees, and every one of these does deffer in
quality from other, for that, that is young with the branches also, are of a
more moist and ayrie substance, then the other two be, and that that is old
is more harder of degestion and and flower in his operation, and longer or any
cure may be done with it, wherefore we do commonly use that, which is young
and whytest with the bark of the same, for it does not dry away, the
natural moisture of man's body, so sone as the old does, and that is by
reason of his moystenes, yet in his property he does as much as the other,
the old and black wood is good to make oils and such like things, either
by decoctions or by distillations, for it is more fat and Gummi then the
other is, except it be rotten and then it is not good in medycynes. This wood
has a synguler property against Chamaeleontiasin, and also against many
other moist and rumiticke sycknesses, for it lets putrefaction, and
alters the evil qualityes of the humors, it comfort the stomach, and
opens the obstructions of the liver, and moves the body to sweat, and
helps nature to put forth many perrilous and contagious vapors by the
powers outwardlye. Also that which is the oldest being boiled in decoctions
and other ways, by art prepared, is very good for vlcerations, fystulayes,
ache or pain, being applied according to the art of Chirurgerye, as is
mentioned in this book in diverse places. And first of all to make the
decoction to drink inwardlye, you shall use the yongeste wood or the
branches with some part of the bark of the same as it follows here.

Take one gallon of fair water, and put it in to a new earthen pot, the
which may hold three gallons of water, or two gallons and a half at the least, and put thereunto of the yongeste wood aforesaid with some of the
bark, one pound in powder, Lycorice broused two ounces. Set them upon a few
coals, the pot being close covered till it be very whote, then take it of
the fire and let it steep twelve hours. Then boil it upon a soft fire,
the pot being close covered, that so little of the air may pass away as
is possible till the half be consumed, then strain it and put it into a
fair vessel. This is the strong drink which they may drink of morning
and euenyng at each time eyghte ounces, and every morning the sick person to
sweat after that he has taken of the same drink, by the space of two hours.
And for the second decoction which he must use with his meat you must put
to the same wood that you strain from your first decoction so much water as
you did before, and let it stand and steep as is aforesaid in the same
pot, by the space of twelve hours, and then boil it till the half be
consumed as ye did the other before. In weak bodies and cold we have used to
put in the first decoction one pint of malmesye or Sack, a little before
that it be taken from the fire, and in the latter drink we have used to put in
rackte Renishe Wine. But in the stronger bodies and those that be not so
weak, we use to give it alone without Wine. The bodies must be well prepared
before they take this drink, or enter into the rules of this diet, by the
space of twelve or fouretene days, in the which those humors may be purged
that do hurt the body or Mainteyne the disease, and then when the body is
well purged, they may enter into the same diet, geuynge them no other drink,
but this same abouesayde, and deminishynge their meat by little and little, till
the six day be paste, then let them have so little meat as they may live
wythall, for if they should take much meat, nature should be so occupied
about the disgestion of the same, that it should not be able to overcome and
digest the sycknes other else, such quantity of humors might grow thereof,
that might still maynetayne the disease. Yet nevertheless those that be
choleric bodies may take moore meat and moyster meats, then those which
be phlegmatic and moist bodies. Generallye their meats must be roasted,
and of good nourishment, and easy to digest, as ^otten, Veal^, Capons,
Rabettes, Chickens, Fesons, Partriches, black birds, Thrushes, and other
small birds of the Wood.

This must be only their meat, and roasted without salt, except in
choleric bodies that be like to fall into some fever, they may have their
meats boiled, and eat them with a little Veriuse. In phlegmatic bodies they
may forbear their supper, and hold them content with one meal a day,
except at night a few Resons and blaunched Almons. But Choleric bodies must
have some meat at night to satifie their stomach wythall, because they will
sooner digest it, and has no such quantity of moist humors, as the
Phlegmatic or Sanguine person has. Their bread must be only Biskitte,
made with a few Anyseedes and Sugre without Salt. They may take of this
bread moore or less according to the strength of their stomachs and
complexion, as is aforesaid. This diet or order must be kept by the space
of forty or fifty days moore or less, according to the necessity of the
sickness, and every sixte day the body must be purged with some gentle medicine
meet for the disease, and for the complexion of the man. That day that they
take their purgation, they may not drink their drink nor sweat in the
morning, nor no time that day, all other days they must sweat, for in
sweating is the chiefest matter, that is required in the manner of cure. They
must use all other manner of necessary things, as sleapynge, quietness good
company and a convenient place, and above all things to be kept close in all
time of their cure, lest that the air might enter in, and stop the powers
and let them to sweat and do them other displeasures.

This manes of curing is most praised of many of our latter writers and
chefly of one, Hutton a Germayne, of Necholas Massa, Ioannes Baptista Montanius
Anthonius Gallus, Alfontius farariencis, Anthonius Musa, Muchellus belogenis,
Leonardus Fuchsious, Ioannes Taegaletius, Dominicus Leanus Luencis, and of
many other more which were very long here to rehearse, they have written all in
the commendations of the wood but in effect, they have concluded in the vsyng
of it, as I have made mention here above. And I my self has found great profit
and gotten great worship thereby, I invented my self a syrope, which I made with
this same decoction stronglye boiled with sugar, so much in weight of one as of
the other, boiled till it come to a syrope, with the which sirope I did many
great cures, and chefly when the patient was very weak, as you shall find
more hereafter in my books. And thus we end this chap. for ye which ye name of
god be praised.

Potio ad vulnera recentia Brunsvvicensis.
Take Iuie leaves or Edera arborea, growing on an Oken tree four ounce, Winter
green, small and great, or Pirola in Latyne, Sanicle or Diapensia, Syndan,
Herba fortis, or Veronica, ana. two ounces. Herba solsequij, one ounce. Choppe
all these together very small, and put them in a Peuter Pot, and put
thereto four pound and a half of the best Wine, and of Water one pound and
a half. And ye shall sees them in Balneo mariae, three hours long without
taking of the leede of the pot, then on the morrow after put thereto
eight ounces of sugar: if the wound be in the head then put thereto Betonie
two ounces, Sage one ounce, Lauander half an ounce, and if the wound be in the
breast, then put thereto, Licorise, two ounces, Polipodij one ounce, Isope
half an ounce, and if the patient be feeble and sore then put thereto buglosse
flowers, borage flowers ana, one ounce Roses half an ounce: then if the paciente
have great heete put thereto Violettes two ounces flowers of nenufar half an
ounce, if the wound be on the left fyde do thereto liver wort one ounce,
matrifilue half an ounce, also if he be not soluble, then it is nedfull to put
thereto, Seen leaves Cassiae fistulae ana, two ounces, and if he be deep
wounded, then put thereto Celidonye roots, four ounces and give it him to
drink at morning at noone and at evening, and at every time four ounces.

Alia potio eiusdem, pro eodem affectu.
Rec. Matrisiluae, ana. M. j. Pilosillae, ana. M. j. Nausturtij, ana. M. j.
Brunellae, ana. M. j. Plantaginis, ana. M. j. Rutae, ana. M. j. Matricariae,
ana. M. j. Chelidoniae, ana. M. j. Herbae sarasenicae, M. j. se. Diarentiae,
ana. M. j. Herbae tunici, ana. M. j. Saluiae, M. sc. Serpentinae, ana. ij.
ounce. Dictami, ana. ij. ounce. Castorij, ana. half an ounce. Mumiae ana. half
an ounce. Myrrhae, ana. half an ounce. Absynthij, ana. half an ounce.
Put all these together in a Pot with good white Wine, and cover the Pot
with a lydde, and close the lydde with Doughe, and in the lydde make a small
hole and stop it with a tappe of Wood, and let it sees till the third part
be consumed, and draw the tappe sometime out, that ye may smell when it is
enough. Of this give the Pacient to drink at morning and evening a
sponnefull, and though the Pacient be metely in health, yet shall he not
drink the less, and he shall in his daily drink meddle three or four
drops of the same.

Aqua imperialis contra pestem.
Rec. Radicis brioniae, ana. ij. ounces. Gladiolae, ana. ij. ounces. Angelicae,
ana. ij. ounces. Turmentillae, ana. ij. ounces. Lapatij, ana. ij. ounces.
Draguntij maioris and minoris, ana. ij. ounces. Corticis fraxini, ana. j. ounce.
Guaiaci, ana. j. ounce.
Gather your roots in March, and pyke them clean, then stamp them with the
Barks aforesaid, and put them in strong Malmesey the quantity of four
pound, or a Pottell in a close pot. So let them stand infuse until the
latter end of May, then gather these herbs following.

Foliorum scabiosae, ana. M. ij. Betonicae, ana. M. ij. Minthae, ana. M. ij.
Verbenae, ana. M. ij. Turmentillae, ana. M. ij. Calendulae, ana. M. ij.
Pimpenillae, ana. M. ij. Rutae, ana. M. ij. Folioru^ Angelicae, ana. M. iiij.
Dragantiae, ana. M. iiij. Absynthij, ana. M. iiij. Saluiae, ana. M. iiij.
Hyperici, ana. M. j. Pioniae, ana. M. j. Valerianae, ana. M. j. Endiuiae, ana.
M. j.
Brouse all your Herbs and put them infuse in one quarte of strong Vinegre,
one quarte of Rose water, and one quarte of good white Wine three days. Then
still them in a common still, and keep this water to your use, for it is most
precious against the Pestilence being mixed with good Metridatum or Triacle,
and given six sponefull every day both to the sick and whole.

Aqua corrodens alia.
Rec. Salis gemmae, ana. iij. ounce. Salis alcali, ana. iij. ounce. Aluminis
scistilis, vj. ounce.
Make these in fine powder, and put them in a Gallon of smithes water, and
boil them on the fire, and reserve this to they use. This is very good
against filthy, and rotton ulcers having inflammation joined with them, as
experience, both has and can testify.

Aqua nobilis in oculorum vitijs.
Rec. Faeniculi. ana. ij. M. Rutae. ana. ij. M. Betonicae. ana. ij. M.
Chelidoniae. ana. ij. M. Verbenae. ana. ij. M. Euphragiae. ana. ij. M. Rosarum
rubearum. xij. M Ligni sancti lib. sl.
Brose these, and put them in a new earthynge pot with a quarte of whight
wine. Let these be thus infused.ij. days, after put to them.

Alumnis. ounce. iij. Salis gemme. ounce. ij. Mastiches. ana. one ounce. Vitrioli.
ana. one ounce. Olibani ana. j. ounce. sl. Myrrhae. ana. j. ounce. sl.
Make these in powder, and put them with the other percelles in to a still of
glass, and put his head on it, and lute them well together, and set a
receptory also to it, well closed to the spoute of the head, so let them stand
one day, after destill them in Balneo Marie, according as art requires.

This water remoueth the whight spots in the eyes, and restrayneth the flux
of humors with have recourse to the eyes, and is right excellent in other
grefes of the same. as has been certeynlye tried not long sens in a child of
the worshipful Master Gunstones of London, which having sore eyes, and
diverse sundry medicines to them applied, did nothing prevail, but brought the
eyes to worse: case in so much that some learned in physic counsiled the
parents to bore the skin of the neck through, with an hot iron, that the
humors ascendynge might breath out, or else to pourge the head with pills,
and at the least to make diuertion of humors. But in fine, nothing prevailed,
and so the child was left to the work of nature. Then maistres Gunstone,
saying her child void of help, and comfort, was yet not in despair, but
hoped that God would send some remedy. So she found an old book, in which
this water abouesayde, was contained, and for the perfecter distillynge thereof
she did require my help: which wyllynglye I granted and distilled the water,
of which.iij. or.iiij. times she did drop a little in to the childs eyes. by
which use and continuance the inflammation was put away: the flux of humors
stayed, the whitte spots and webbes consumed, and the childs eyes restored
(thanked be God) to there perfect health and sight. which water for the
excellency and noble virtues, I thought good to set out for the comfort of
such as shall have the like infirmity. I have with this water done many good
cures sense that time, and have of my self addyd to it, more then was in Sir
William Firmynghames book, who was well learned in Chirurgirye, and author of
this water) the roses and lignum sanctum. he flourished in the year of grace.
1475.

Alia aqua praeciosa in ijsdem oculorum morbis.
Rec. Foeniculi ana. j. M. Verbenae. ana. j. M. Saluiae. ana. j. M. Agrimoniae.
ana. j. M. Betonicae. ana. j. M. Rutae. ana. j. M. Chelidoniae. ana. j. M.
Eufragiae. ana. j. M. Calaminthae. ana. j. M. Pinpinellae. ana. j. M.
Scablosae. ana. j. M. Chamaedryos. ana. j. M.
Brose your herbs, and put to them on quart of whight wine, and a pint of
water of red roses, also add.

Aluminis. iiij. ounce. Tutiae. ij. ounce. Caphurae. iiij. dragmes.
Make these in powder, and destill them in a common still, and when you have ons
distilled them put the water upon the feces, and destyll it again, and then
reserve it to they use. This water is right precious in rumatike bodies, and
inflammations of the eyes, and other like affectes.

Aqua fine pari.
Rec. Aquae vitae quinquies distillatae. iiij. li. Salis vsti. ana. j. pound.
Sulphuris viui. ana. j. pound. Tartari albi. iij. ounce. Nucum Inglandis. ana.
iiij. ounce. Auellanae. ana. iiij. ounce. Nitri. ij. ounce. Myrrhae. ana. j. unce.
Aloes. ana. j. unce. Gariophyllorum. ana. j. ounce. sl. Nucis muscate. ana. j.
ounce. sl. Corticum limonu^. arangiae. ana. vj. ounce. Betonicae. ana. j. M.
Verbenae. ana. j. M. Agrimoniae. ana. j. M. Hyperici. ana. j. M. Faeniculi.
ana. j. M. Valerianae. ana. j. M. Scabiosae. ana. j. M. Rutae. ana. M. j.
Absynthij. ana. M. j. Menthae. ana. M. j. Radicum angelicae. ana. j. ounce and
half. Zedoariae. ana. j. ounce and half. Tormentillae. ana. j. ounce and half.
Acori. ana. j. ounce and half. Florum genestae. iiij. ounce. Rorismarini ana.
ij. ounce. Camomillae. ana. ij. ounce. Theriaces optimae. iij. ounce. Sem. Anisi.
ana. j ounce and half. Peoniae. ana. j ounce and half. Petroselini. ana. j ounce
and half.
Brose those that are to be brosed, and put al together, and let them
stand.vj. days, after distill them according to art, and if that you do
again destill them on the feces ones or twyse, you shall make the water of
much more effect and virtue.

It is excellellent against venom, poison, and pestilence, it does keep the
humors and body from corruption and putrefaction, and that experience can
right well testify. The proportion or quantity is to give one sponefull with a
cake or two of manus Christi, or in cholorike and sanguine complexions, and
hot regions, times of the years, with Syropes of buglosse or violettes. etc.

Thus ends the Antidotarie, compiled and published by Thomas Gale, Master in
Chirurgirye. 1563. 12. August.
FINIS.
A Table to the first Book, called the Institution of a Chirurgean.
GVIDOES Diffinition of Chirurgerie. folio. 2. and 3. Therapeuticon, is that
part of the Art, which cures man's body with medicines either inward or
outward. folio. 2. Galens diffinition of Chirurgerie. folio. 3. Physic and
Chirurgerie, are both one Art, as it appears by Hypocrates, and Galen. fol.
3. The small estimation of Surgery, comes by the reason of the unlearned
emperiks, and rude sort that uses the Art. fol. 4 and 11. Celsus says,
Chirurgerie is the Auncientest part of medicine. fol. 4. No man can be a
perfect Chirurgean except he know the Anotomie of man's body perfectly, with
all their temperatures. fol. 6. and 7. The end of Chirurgerie is to restore
man's body to health. fol. 7. What manner a man a Chirurgean should be. folio.
7. A Chirurgean should be learned, and brought up in experience, from his
youth. fol. 8. Chirurgeans should follow ye wars to learn experience, As
Machaon, Podalirius and Achilles did, which were excellent in the Art. fol. 9.
The rablement of the unlearned does occupy the Art to the ruin of the common
wealth, to ye destruction of many, to ye slander of the noble Art, and the
great displeasure of GOD. folio. 10. Chirurgerie will never recover again,
except the Prince by laws amend it. fol. 10. Science has no greater enemy
tha^ ignorance. folio. 10. Guido requires four things in him that is or
should be a Chirurgean. fol. 11. Instruments both medicinal and instruments of
metal parteining to the Art. fol. 12. 15. Of a man wounded through the breast
with a sword and made hole. folio. 12. A great error of the Empricks to be
noted. folio. 13. Instruments common and proper. fol. 13. 15. A notable storye
of one hurt with a Horse. folio. 14. How a Chirurgea^ should proceed in his
Art. folio. 15. A Chirurgian if he will rightlye cure, must know things
natural, not natural, and against nature. fol. 16. The two causes of
sickness. fol. 16. 17. Of three kinds of sycknesse, according to the parts
of man's body. fol. 17. The accidence of sickness. fol. 17. A Chirurgean
being ignorant in the disease cannot minister a right medicame^t by knowledge.
fol. 18. The principal diseases pertaining to ye Art of Chirurgerie. fol. 18.
The.iij. Instruments to cure these griefs with, as diet, inward medicines and
outward medicines. fol. 3. 12. 13. The differences betwixt a Tumer and an
Appostume. fol. 18. 19. Of the iiij. famous Tumers against nature. folio. 20.
Tumers being myxed has names according to their myxtures. folio. 20. What
profit comes to the Chirurgean in knowledge of the mixture of these humors
in tumers against nature. fol. 21. Of Sanguine tumers that are referred to
Phlegmon. fo. 21. 22. 23. 24 Of colericke tumors, which be of affinity with
Erisipelas. fol. 24. 25. 26. Of phlegmatiketumors that are referred to Oedema.
fol. 26. 27. 28. Of Melancolye tumers that are referred to Scirrhus. fol. 28
29. 30. Timpanites and Priapismus folio. 31. Vitiligo, Leuca, Albaras. folio.
32. Exanthemata, Morbilli, and Variole. fol. 32. Parotides. fol. 32. Mentagra,
Impetigo, Lepram, and Chameliontiasis. folio. 35. Epiplocele, Enterocele,
Enteroepiplocele, Bubonocele and Exomphalos. fol. 33. Podagra, Hiragra,
Arthritis. fol. 33. 34. The diffinition of wou^des. fol. 34. The differences of
wou^des. fol. 34. What a simple wound is. fol. 36. What a co^pound wou^d is.
folio. 36. What profit comes to the Chirurgean in knowing the differences of
wounds. folio. 36. A man wounded in the brain, and made hole again. fol. 37.
A Chirurgean cannot apply a right medicine to a wound, except he know the
nature of the wounded part. folio. 37. The diffinitio^ of an Ulcer. fol. 37.
Whereof an Ulcer does come. fol. 38. Of six kinds of Ulcers and whereof they
take their names. fol. 38. 39. 40. What Sanies or matter is, and how many
kinds there be, and their names. fol. 39. What a Fistula is, and of diverse
kinds thereof. fol. 40. Of certain kinds of Ulcers named Formicosum,
cauernosum, Teliphea, Chiroma and Ph^gedenicum. fol. 40. 41. What Ulcers be
hard to be cured, and which be not. fol. 41. A diffinition of putrefaction,
corotion, and digestion. fol. 42. The diffinition of a fracture, and how many
kinds there be. fol. 42. 43. The differences of fractures and their names.
folio. 43. 44. The diffinition of dislocations, that is, bones out of joint,
and how many kinds there be. folio. 44. 45. The principal differences of
solution of unity or continuitie, that chances in man's body. fol. 45. 46.
The operation of a Chirurgean in man's body. fol. 46. A good Chirurgea^ must
observe vj. things in his Art. fol. 46. 47. The three kinds of stytching
wounds and of their commodities. folio. 47. 48. 49. Of viij. manner of tents
and of their use and commodities. fol. 49. 50. The making of tents, and
whereof they be made. fol. 50. Of diverse kinds of bolsters and their use and
commodity. fol. 51. 52. Of diverse manner of ligatures and rollings with their
profyttes. folio. 52. 53. The conclusion of this Book in a few lines. folio.
53. 54. 55. Of iiij. Notable tables, one for tumers against nature, another for
wounds, and one for fractures, and the last for dislocations. FINIS.

A Table for the.iiii. books called Enchiridion.
First an Epistle to the Reader. The first Book. OF the exact and perfect
curatio^ of wou^des, made in the simyler parts. fol. 1. lib. 1. Of the cure of
great and deep wounds, and of diverse kinds of stitching. fol. 1. lib. 1. Of
wounds in veins and Arteries. fol. 3. lib. 1. Of wou^des in the Nerves and
Synnowes. folio. 5. lib. 1. Of wounds in which are fixed thorns, sple^tes,
wood, arrowheds gunshot, or such like. folio. 7. lib. 1. Of deep and hydden
wounds, which cannot be well perceived folio. 9. lib. 1. Of wounds in the
bones. fol. 10. lib. 1. Of curing green and fresh wou^des with Balm folio.
11. lib. 1. Finis Libri Primi.

The second Book. OF curing wounds in the instrumental parts folio. 12. lib.
2. OF wounds in the head. folio. 13. lib. 2. Of simple wounds in the Head,
without the hurt of the bone. folio. 15. lib. 2. Of wounds in the head with
breaking of the bone called Cranium. folio. 16. lib. 2. Of wounds in the head
with cutting of ye bone to the inward parts, without loss of any substance
of the brain folio. 17. lib. 2. Of wounds in the head co^tused without
fracturing of Cranium folio 17. lib. 2. Of the wounds in the head with
confusion, and where the bone is little fractured. fol. 18. lib. 2. Of wounds
in the eyes and face. fol. 19. 20. lib. 2. Of wounds in the ears and lyppes.
fol. 21. lib. 2. Of wounds in the nose. folio. 21. lib. 2. Of wounds in ye
mouth. folio. 22. lib. 2. Of wounds in the neck. folio. 22. lib. 2. Of wounds
in the breast. folio. 24. lib. 2. Of wounds in the belly. folio. 25. lib. 2. Of
wounds in the bladder, yard, and testicles. folio. 28. lib. 2. Of wounds in
the parts called Artus, containing the arms and legs. fol. 29. lib. 2 Of
wounds coming through biting of a mad dog, stinging of a Snake, Adder,
Scorpion, and such like. fol. 31. lib. 2. Of wounds in the thighs, knees, and
legs. fol. 30. lib. 2. Finis Libri Secundi.

The third Book. OF accidents ye chances to wounds. folio. 33. lib. 3. Of
doloure in wounds and swaging pain of the same. fol. 33. lib. 3. Of
Inflammation, and Apostumation. folio. 34. lib. 3. Of the removing and taking
away of distemperaunce in wounds. folio. 36. lib. 3. Of Convulsion which
happens in wounds. folio. 37. lib. 3. Of the Palsy coming in a wound.
folio. 38. lib. 3. Of Syncope, or sounding, through cause of wou^des. folio. 40.
lib. 3. Of alienation of mind. coming by reason of a wound. fol. 40. lib. 3.
Finis Libri Tertij.

The.iiii. Book of the Enchiridion, comprehending the manner of curing fractures
and luxations. OF the true and perfect cure of fractured bones. lib. 4. folio.
42. How the parts of the bone that are fractured are to be united together and
put in their proper place. lib. 4. fol. 43. How the broken bones united and
joined together, may be kept and remain in the same figure, so that they may
come to their former estate. lib. 4. fol. 44. How the parts of the bones
that are broken, may be conglutenate and joined together. lib. 4. folio. 46.
How ye Accidents which happens to fractured bones, are to be removed and put
away. Liber. 4. fol. 47. What a luxation or dislocation is, and of their
differences. lib. 4. folio. 49. How the bone must be put into his natural
place again, when it is out of iointe. lib. 4. folio. 50. How the member
luxated and brought into his natural place, may be conserved and kept in ye
same. lib. 4. fol. 50. How to defend ye member from accidents, and to put the^
away if they happen. lib. 4. fol. 51. The method and way how to take of a
member when it is mortifyed and dead: and of a new powder by me devised to
stay the flux of blood. lib. 4. fol. 51.
Finis Libri Enchiridion.

A Table for the Book of Gunshotte.
How the common gu^pouder is proved not to be venomous nether the shot able
to burn, so that it may make an Asker. Capitulo. 1. fol. 1. Of the
diffinition of venom. fol. 1. How the nature of Sulphur is against venom and
medicinable for ma^s body. fol. 2. and. 3. Of ye nature of Saltpeter or Nitrum,
and how it is medicinable for man's body. fol. 2. and. 3. The error of
Alphoncius, in forgetting his chief Indication of venom. folio. 5. The
confutation of Alphoncius, for that he makes every thing hot in the fourth
degree, to be venomous. fol. 5. Of the general method and way to heal
wounds made with gunneshot. Cap. 2. fol. 7. Of proper Instruments to take
forth pellettes and other things out of wounds made with gunshotte. fol. 7. Of
an excellent medicine used by Bartholomeus magnus, in the cure of wounds made
with gunshot. fol. 8. How Vnguentum Egiptiacum, is an excellent remedy at the
first dressing for wounds made with gunshotte. fol. 8. Of ye rashenesse of
those Emperickes ye cutteth of legs or arms, before Sphacelus or Ga^grenae
have mortified the part folio. 9. Of a simple wound made in the head with
gunshot. Cap. 3. fol. 9. Of those bodies that are replete with il humors, which
be hurtful to the cure of wounds made with gunshot. fol. 9. Of compound
wounds in the head, made with gunshot. Cap. 4. fol. 11. How a man may know,
whether the brain be hurt in wounds of the head or not. fol. 12. Of the
order of the hurt man's diet and of other things appertayning to his health.
fol. 13. Of wounds in the breast. Cap. 5. fol. 13 Of wounds in the belly, made
with shot. Cap. 6. folio. 15. Of the cure of wounds made with gunshot in the
arms and legs. Cap. 7. fol. 17. Of the cure of those that are burnt with
gu^pouder. Cap. 8. folio. 19. FINIS.

A Table for the first book of the Antidotarie.
OF medicines repercussiue, both simple and co^pound. Cap. 1. folio. 1. Of
medicines attractiue simple and compound. Cap. 2. fol. 2. Of Medicines
absterciue and mu^dificatiue, simple and co^pound. Cap. 3 folio. 2. Of
resolving medicines simple and compound. Cap. 4. fol. 3. Of medicines
mollificatiue, both simple and compound. Ca. 5 fol. 3. Of medicines
suppuratiue, both simple and compound. Cap. 6. folio. 4. Of Medicines
causticatiue, both simple and compound. Cap. 7. fol. 4. Of Medicines cedetiue
which swageth pain, simple and compound. Cap. 8. fol. 5. Of Medicines
incarnatiue, simple and compound. Cap. 9. fol. 5. Of Cicatrizing medicines
simple and compound Cap. 10. fol. 6. Of conglutinatiue medicines simple and
compound. Cap. 11. fol. 6.
A Table for the Second Book of the Antidotarie, containing the making of all
the excellent Medicines that are to be used outwardly in the Art of
Chirurgerie, and their properties and use.
VNguentum frigidu^ Galeni, called Galens cold ointment. fol. 8. An unguent for
burning folio. 8. Vnguentum de Artanita maius. folio. 8. Vnguentum Rosarum
Mesuae. folio. 9. Vnguentum album Auicenae. folio. 9. Vnguentu^ de Tutia,
called Pomfilagose. fol. 10. Vnguentu^ Pomphilagose Nicholaij. fol. 10.
Vngue^tu^ de litergirio. fol. 11. Vnguentu^ Triapharmacum Mesuae. folio. 11.
Vnguente for Scabbes. folio. 11. Vnguentum de Minio Camferatum. folio. 11.
Vnguentu^ Triapharmacum Galeni. folio. 12. Vnguentum Basilico^ minus and maius.
folio. 12. Unguent. fuscu^ Nicho. fol. 13. Vnguentum Capitale conciliatoris.
folio. 13. Vnguentu^ Caprifolio. fol. 13. Vnguente for burning and scalding.
fol. 14. Vngue^t. Populeo^ Nich. fol. 14. Vnguentu^ dialthia simplex. folio. 15
and 25. Vnguentum Dialthia cum Gumis. fo. 15. Vng. Sa^talium Mesuae. fol. 15.
An excellent defe^siue. fo. 16 An excellent mundefecatiue. folio. 16.
Andromaches grene Unguent. fol. 17. Vngue^t. Apost. Auic. fol. 17. Vngue^tu^
Egiptiacu^. fol. 18. 25. A defencesiue of Brunswekes. fol. 18. Vngue^t.
incarnatiuu^. fol. 19. An Vnguente for Itche. folio. 19. Vngue^t. Pomphiligos.
fol. 20. Vnguentum Nicholai Florentini. folio. 20. Vnguentum Iohannis de Vigo
contra chameleontiasin folio. 21. Another for ye same. fo. 21 Two more for the
same. folio. 23. and. 24. An excellent drying unguent called Seccatiuum rubeum.
fol. 26.
Of the making of Oils.
Oil of Roses. fol. 27. Mesuaes Oil of Roses. folio. 27. Oleum Rosatu^ Pauli.
fol. 28. Oleum Rosatum Omphacinum. fol 28. Oleum Chamemelinu^ Pauli. folio. 28.
Oil of Quinces of Mesuaes. fol. 29. Oil of Popeler buddes. folio. 29. Oleum
Nardinum compositum. fol. 29. Oil of sweet Margerum. fol. 30. Oil of Saint
John's Woort. fol. 30. Oleu^ Castor. Magistrate. fo. 31. Oil of Costmary. fol.
32. Oil of Poppy. fol. 32. Oil of Worms. fol. 32 Petri de Ebanoes oil of
Balm. fol. 32. Brunsweekes oil of Balm. fol. 33. Our green balm. fol. 34.
Lullies Artificial balm. folio. 35. Doronius Balm. fol. 36. The most
excellent balm of our invention made with Worms, fol. 37. Another of our
invention made with Saffron. fo. 37.
The making of the most excellent plasters appertayning to ye Art of
Chirurgerie.
The Melilote plaster. fo. 38. Andromachi and Galens melilote plaster. fol. 39.
Emplastru^ ex ferme^to. fol. 39. Dia Calciteos Galeni, called emplastrum
pallum. fol. 40. Diachilon paruum. fol. 42. Diachilon magnum Mesua. folio. 41.
Mesuas Diachilon. fol. 40. Aetijs empla^ter. fol. 42. A plaster for new
wou^des. fol 42. The Jews plaster. fo. 44. A plaster to draw forth iron or
male yt is short in. fol. 45. Emplastru^ gratia dei. fol. 45. Emplastrum de
minio. fol. 45. Emplastrum Triapharmacum. fol. 46. The making of ye white
Mustelage plaster. fol. 46 Emplastrum Mustilagiu^ ad resoluendu^ humoris. fol.
47. Emplastrum pro Chameleontiasi nostrae inuentionis fo. 47 Emplastrum
Ceruscae. fol. 48. The Callis plaster. fol. 48 The spiced plaster. fo. 49
Emplastrum Ianuacense. folio. 49. Doctor Buttes black plaster for hot ulcers,
and excoriatio^s and to dry quickly. fol. 50. Iacobes plaster. fol. 51 Doctor
Buttes drying plaster. fol. 51. Sir William Firmingams plaster. fol. 52.
The making of the most excellent Cerotes, devised as well by ye ancient
writers, as by the latter, and very necessary for this Art of Chirurgerie.
Ceratu^ Hydreleo^ Galen. fo. 53 Oxelaeum Galeni. fol. 53. Oenelaeum Galeni.
fol. 53. Dia Pipereos Galeni. fol. 54. Ceratum de cerusae. fol. 54. Ceratum de
Betonica capensis. fol. 54. Ceratu^ capitale cape^sis. fol. 55. Ceratum de
Stirace Magistrale. fol. 55. Ceratum Gratia Dei. fol. 55. Ceratum de Salice.
fol. 56. Diacadma Galeni. fol. 56. Barbaru^ paruu^ Galeni fo. 56. Barbar.
magnu^ Galeni. fo. 57. Isis ex Galeno. fol. 58. Ceratum very de Machaerionis ex
Galeni. fol. 58. Dia dictamini Galeni. fol 59. Oxicrocenum Nicholai. fol. 59
Ceratu^ ex p^lle arietina Arnoldi de villa noua, for the^ that be bursten or
ruptured. fol. 60. Doctor Buttes Cerat to dry old Ulcers called Phagedenica.
fol. 61. Doctor Buttes Cerat for pain in ye ioints. fol. 61 Ceratu^ viride
Iamarici. fo. 61
The making of ye most excellent Trochisce and pouders, that are to be used in
the Art of Chirurgerie.
TRochisci ex Andromacho folio. 62 Trochisci Polyidae ex Andromacho. fol. 62.
Trochisci Mesua. fol. 63. Trochisci de minio, Iohannis de Vigo. fol. 63.
Trochisci.D. Cunninghami medici. fol. 63. A powder for Scabbes. folio. 64.
Another Powder more stronger. fol. 64. Puluis Cephalicus, ex Galeno fol. 64. A
Powder of Triphones making, for rotten corrupted bones. fol. 64. A powder to
stop blood. folio. 65. An other Powder that does both stop blood, and
causes flesh to grow. folio. 65. Galens Caustek powder to stop blood. fol. 65.
The making of Marcori precepitate. fol. 66. Brunswekes read powder to keep
down proud flesh and to Cecatrice. folio. 66. Another excelent powder to
stop blood in wounds, and to cause ye flesh to grow together again folio. 66.
Puluis Lo^gobardorum. fol. 67. My own powder that I do use in stopping blood
in wounds. fol. 67. Lanfranks powder to stop blood. fol. 68. The common
restrictiue powder. fol. 68.
Cataplasmaes or Pultasses, to be used in the Art of Surgery.
Doctor Buttes Cataplasma, for Flegmon or Inflammations. fol. 69. Another to
aswage pain folio. 69. D. Cuninghams Cataplasma for pain in the ioints. fol.
70. Another of his more stronger. fol. 70. My own Cataplasma, to aswage pain
and grief. folio. 71. Cataplasma Rogerij. fol. 71. Another Cataplasma, to
cease inflammations. folio. 72.
The making of many notable Waters that are to be used in ye Art of Surgery.
THe making of the excellent and marvelous water of Balm. fol. 73 A water
called Maidens mylk, or Lac Virgineum, folio. 74. Aqua Corrodens. fol. 75 Aqua
Marcurialis, which makes Copper and other metals white. fol. 75. A Water for
sore mouths. fol. 76. An other for the same. folio. 76. An excellent Water to
mundifie wounds, of my invention. fol. 77. A precious drink to conglutenat
wounds, which I have proved. fo. 78 A drink that cures wou^des in the body.
fol. 79 The making of the diet drink. folio. 79. Brunswekes Drink for
wounds. fol. 82 An other drink for the same. fol. 83. A Water for the
Pestilence, called Aqua Imperialis. fol. 83. A Corasiue water. fol. 84. A
Precious Water for Eyes. fol. 85. An other for the same. folio. 86. Aqua sine
pari. folio. 87.
FINIS. Thus we end the first Tome of our works, with the Addition of two
Treatises, one of Tumers against Nature, another of Ulcers. For the which the
name of God be praised. etc.
Imprinted and finished, by Henry Denham, dwelling in VVhitecrosse street, for
Thomas Gale Chirurgean.

Anno Domini. 1564. Mensis Augustij. 29.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

These Books are to be sold by the Printer above named.


