AN APOLOGY AGAINST THE DEFENSE OF schism.

Lately written by an English Divine at Doway, for answer to a letter of a
lapsed Catholic in England his friend: who having in the late Commission gone
to to the Church, defended his fall.

wherein is plainly declared, and manifestlye proved, the general doctrine of
the Divines, and of the Church of Christ, which hitherto has been taught and
followed in England, concerning this point.

Prou. 22. Do thou not pass the ancient bounds which thy Fathers have put.

Ephesians. 4. That now we be not children wavering, and carried about with every wind
of doctrine in the wickedness of men, in craftines, to the circumuention of
error.

Gal. 5. You ran well: who has hindered you not to obey the truth? The
persuasion is not of him that calls you. A little leaven corrupts the whole
past. I have confidence in you, in our Lord, that you will be of no other mind.
But he that troubles you, shall bear the judgment whosoever he be.

Testament of Rhemes. Mat. 10, 32. See how Christ abhors them that deny him
before men. Which is not only to deny any one little article of the Catholic
Faith commended to us by the Church. but also to allow, or consent to heresy by
any means: as by subscribing, coming to their service and sermons, furthering
the^ any way against Catholics, and such like.

Testament of Rhemes in the Annotation upon the 2. epistle of S. Ihon. Though
in such times and places, where the community or most part be infected,
necessity often forces the faithful to converse with such in worldly
affairs, to salute them, to eat and speak with them, and the Church by
decree of Counsel for the more quietness of timorous consciences provides,
that they incur not excommunication or other censures for communicating in
worldly affairs with any in this kind, except they be by name excommunicated,
or declared to be heretics, yet ever in worldly conversation and seculer
acts of our life we must avoid them as much as we may, because their
familiarity is many ways contagious and noisome to good men, namely to the
simple. But in matter of religion, in praying, reading their books, hearing
their sermons, presence at their service, partaking of their sacraments, and
all other communicating with the^ in spiritual things: it is a great damnable
sin to deal with them.

Ephesians. 4
To all true Catholics, careful to keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace: S. Ihon in his second epistle gives this warning. Is any man
(any Priest or Jesuit from Rome, Rhemes, Spain) come unto you, and bring not
this doctrine: receive him not into the house: nor say, God save you, unto him.
For he that says unto him, 2. Tim. 3.
God save you, communicates with his wicked works.

The order of the objections.
A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL THINGS CONTEIND IN THIS Treatise.
The 1. and 2 objection
Whether there be a dispensation lately granted for going to Heretics
Churches.. 1 and 2. The 3.
Whether it be defended and allowed by Priests in England. 3 The 4.
That it is against the authority of all the learned men of our age. 4 The 5.
Of the example of the 3. children in Nabuchodosors Court. 5 The 6.
The objection of Iehues dissimulation is refuted. 6 The 7.
The fact of Naaman and of Valentinian is expounded. 7 The 8.
The extrauagant of Martinus the fifth and the Council of Constance is
examined. 8 The 9.
That for obedience it is not lawful to be present at Heritickes service. 9
The 10.
That fear cannot make it lawful, or not voluntary. 10 The 11.
That by no good intention it can be justified. 11 That the right which
Catholics have to the ancient Churches, cannot excuse it 12 What is
understood by such going unto the Church as is disproued. 14 what goings may
be allowed. 15 what diverse manners of going are unlawful.. 16 whether the
doctrine of recusancy is over scrupulous or rigorous. 17 Of the Precept of
exterior confession of faith.. 19 Of the Precept of not denying our faith. 20
That going to the conuenticles of heretics is an exterior act of heresy. 21
Those which go to heretics service are many ways excommunicate. 22 Wherein
Schism does consist. 23 That they are most properly Schismatickes. 24 That
every heretic is also a schismaticke, and so he which goes to heretics
congregation, is both an exterior heretic and a proper schismaticke. 25 That a
man may be an exterior heretic, and yet not an absolute heretic; but none
may be an exterior schismatike, but he shall be an absolute schismaticke. 26
That all exterior heretics are also perfect schismatickes: yet not
excommunicate as schismatickes, but in two cases: in both which this action of
going to the Church is placed. 27 That going to the Church with heretics, is
superstition. 28 That it is contrary unto Christian obedience.. 29 That it is
in the highest degree of lying, and dissimulation. 30 That it can never be
altogether void of scandal, which is rather increased by Protestation. 31 and
of Protestation, see also 16. and 35 That it is a great deceit, to think it
to be at any time void of danger of insection. 32 Of the greeuousnes of this
sin, and comparison with other kinds of grievous offenses. 33 Of the duty
of Parents toward their children in this point, and of every one toward his
neighbor. 34 That this action of going to heretical service, was always a
sign distinctiue of religion, before any law, statute, or declaration. And of
the variety of signs of religion, and the lawfulnes or unlawfulness thereof. 35
What may by the Canons be permitted in this point. 36 What proceeding must be
observed in discussing the authority of Canons herein. 37 Of the general bond
of avoiding heretics.. 38 What the Canons have decreed of avoiding heretics
service. 39 What they decree of schismatickes service. 40 To the intent that
every one may sully be satisfied in this great and important controversy:
besides the objections which of purpose were propounded at the beginning, here
follow also the answers to other objections which may be made, although not
propounded in manner of objections: yet handled sufficiently in the discourse.
The 12.
The 12. objection, that he which goes to the Church, is not a schismatike,
but rather an exterior heretic. 25 objection The 13.
The 13. objection, that this act is only exterior schism, and not absolute
and perfect schism. 26 The 14.
The 14. objection: that if it were schism, all exterior heretics should be
excommunicate, because they are all schismatikes. 27 The 15.
The 15. objection: that it is not schism, because it is not accompained with
an inward desire of division. 27 The 16.
The 16. objection: that temporal laws or Princes cannot appoint distinctiue
signs of religion. 35 The 17.
The 17. objection: that we have no express Canon, or ancient practice of the
Church, against going to heretics service. 36.37.38.39.40
The Printer to the Reader.
Having made ready for thy necessary preservation against all contagion of
Schism, so present an Electuary, (Gentle Reader) I thought it very profitable
for thy better understanding, and the easier reading of this Treatise, to
advertise the of the general order and method thereof. The wholle book
therefore is fittely divided into five parts. The first answers in order the
objections, which are usually made in defense of Schism: and were the
principal cause of writing this Treatise, according to the occasion ministered
by the letter here confuted although afterward also, through the wholle book,
many objections be answered: either propounded by the author him self, or
touched in the aforsaide letter.

The second part, out of Theological grounds and reasons,. 13.
declares the vnlawfullnes of this kind of Schism.

The third part, entreats of some things annexed unto this Schismatic
action.. 32.
as danger of infection: the greeuousnes of the sin, and comparison with
other sins: and the neglecting of our dewty toward our neighbors in the
reformation thereof.

The fourth part deduceth out of that which went before,. 35.
that this action was unlawful and a sign distinctiue before any statute of
the realm, or late Canon of holy Church: and largely entreats of the nature
and variety of signs distinctiue of religion.

The fifth,. 36.
examineth the ancient practice of Gods Church: and out of the same does
evidently conclude the determined purpose.

This, gentle Reader, did I think good to warn thee of: desiring in
recompense of all my labor, that thou will courteously pardon the faults
escaped: which although they be more than I would, yet considering many
difficulties of a strange language, a strange country, absence of ye
author, and an unready copy: are notwithstanding fewer than I expected. Other
faults thou may let alone, until in reading thou be at a stay: yet in two
places there wanting wholle lines: take the pains at the beginning to amend
them. that so both thy own course in reading may be easied: and those which
shall come afrer thee, may be furthered.

The faults escaped.
P. 4. in the margen. Job. 41. P. 23. there wants the quotatio^ of S.
Augustine in the margen. Tract. 48. in Joan. P. 29. l. 2. in marg. 8.9. P. 35.
l. 15. there wants a full point before, very well. P. 36. in the marge^. at
the beginning note, Tract. in Psalm. 124. P. 40. l. 2. it is not only. P. 46.
l. 17. vnuoluntary. P. 60. l. 7. for undoubtedly, read, vndewtifully. P. 61 l.
25. of this deed. P. 66. in the margen. l. 14. Q. Iniuncti. P. 75. l. 3. in
religion. P. 76. l. 12. in the margen. sense. l. 26. and outward. P. 81. l. 18.
put a comma (after truly) P. 82. l. 30. read thus, all heretics; if such be
indeed inwardly heretics: P. 83. l. 20 which as a visible. P. 85. l. 4. in
the marg. read thus. Psalm. 118. ver. 165. P. 93. l. 8 in marg. in Breuic. P.
95. l. 3. marg. c. 15. l. 18. away. P. 101. l. 23. mortal. P. 112. l. 12.
read thus. S. Agnes, My Angel will keep me that I be not polluted with other
men's filthiness; or with S. Lucy, ibid. in marg. Amb. ser. 90. ad Virgin. P. 113.
marg. See. 16. P. 116. l. 12. Concurrent. P. 123. l. penult. obiectes. P. 127.
there wants the note of. 34. P. 128. l. 26. they be never. P. 129. l. 18.
marg. for 23. read 32. P. 130. l. 11. marg. Honoratur. P. 150. l. 12. for. P.
164. l. 15. to your politic. P. 166. l. penult. Ariminum. P. 173. l. 5. marg.
162. P. 177. l. 5. with Martyrdom. P. 187. l. 20. Donatian P. 188. l. 2. marg.
l. 2. vitae.
The places of S. Cyprian are sometimes cited according to an old imperfect
edition, which the author used at the beginning: but afterward he got the
last edition of Pamelius.

AN APOLOGY AGAINST THE DEFENSE OF Schism.
THe first degree of felicity (as worthily notes S. CYPRIAN) is not to offend:
Lib. 1. ep. 3
the second to know the offense. It is a great misery and most heavy
punishment of Gods justice, after that the innocence and purity of an vnspoted
conscience is once lost, not to know what is amiss: and not feeling the smart
of the disease, to neglect the help of physic. One of the highest degrees of
pride, the root and complement of all iniquity, is the defense of sin: Psalm.
140.
and with very great reason did DAVID ask of God that his heart might not
decline into words of malice, for to frame excuses in iniquities. The not
knowing of sin is so great a plague of Gods indignation, that he has
reserved the same especially for the times of Antichrist, when wickedness
abounding, 2. These. 2.
Gods severe punishment shall also match the same. At which time as says S.
PAVL, to such as have not received the charity of truth that they may be saved,
God will send the operation of error, that they may believe a lie. So did he
punish those which Esa. 3.
preached their sin like unto Sodom, and were so far from the knowing of
sin, that by preaching it they did defend it. Woe unto you (says the Prophet
ESAIAS) which call evil, good; and good, evil: making darkness, Esa. 5.
light: and light, darkness: making bitter, sweet: and sweet, bitter. Woe unto
you which are sage in your own eyes, and wise before your selves. Be not To. 13
over wise, but fear (says the vessel of Election) for To. 11.
the wisdom of the flesh is death. The To. 8.
Prophet Jeremy, in the person of God propounds a question of the obstinacy
of the Jews, what should the cause be, that he which was fallen, c. 8.
did not rise again, and he which was gone back, did not return. But he
answers it in these words: why therefore was this people in Jerusalem
auerted with a contentious auersion? they have taken hold of a lie, and would
not return. I have attended and harkened, no man speaks, that which is good,
there is none which does Penance of his sin, saying what have I done? All are
turned unto their own course as a horse going impetuously unto war. The Kite
in the air has known his time, the Turtle, and Swallow, and Storke have
kept the time of their coming: but my people has not known the judgment of
their Lord. How do you say, we are wise, and the law of God is with us? verily
the lying style of the Scribes has wrote a lie. Thus Jeremy. I may seem unto
you (my dear friend) to forget the familiarity of an epistle, and being carried
away with the vehemence of an extraordinary grief rather to write an inuectiue
against an enemy, then in loving manner to deal with an absent friend. A friend
in deed I always have accounted you, and hope that on my part our frendshippe
shall continue until death, neither can any thing in the world cut a sunder
in me, that which with the two most forceable bonds of nature and grace has
been knitte togeiher. And yet must I needs, although with no small discontment
of my own, accuse here your unfaithfulness, as well toward my self, as also
toward God in both respects if they be sufficiently waighed, and not
according to the corrupt indgement of worldly affection: you have ministered not
a little matter of just suspicion, least our friendship should not be perpetual.
The perfect charity of a Christian to any other, is founded in that capacity
which every one has of eternal felicity: and therefore we must love so long as
this life lasts, with Christian charity, the most desperate sinner in the
world: for so long as he here lives, he is not out of possibility of
salvation. But if that death which depriueth him of bodily life and sense do
entrap him either unready or careless of that bliss for which he was created:
then as he salleth into eternal miseries: so is he cut off from all affection
of whosoever is the child of God, and no more to be beloved the^ Lucifer. You
have sought of late to enter into friendship with this world, you have esteemed
your worldly riches more then God, you have most basely denied him before men:
what can you now expect, but that you acknowledge your self the Iac. 4.
enemy of God, altogether unworthy of him, and even now already denied of
Christ before his Father and his Angels, and except you correct your error) to
be before all his elect at the day of judgment denied for ever? And herin you
not only injured God your creator, but dissolved also the knot of perfect
friendship toward his creatures: for how can there be true friendship, where
charity is lost? or perfect amity, where there is no right of perpetuity? But
that with does most increase your misery and my grief, is, yt you do with
arrogant defending of your iniquity, stubbornly with stand al helps of your
recovery. You are anerted as the Prophet says) with a contentious auersion, you
have taken hold of a lie, yea you have of your self taken upon you the office
of a Scribe, and being your own counsailor, with a most lying pen have set
down unto your self a most perniciouse untruth. The holy Patriach JOB very
particulerly describing the properties of the Devil in the figure of
LEVIATHAN, Job. 14.
says that his body is as it were targettes of melted metal, compact of
scales ioining together. One is lincked upon an other, and not so much as the
wind can get between them. One will cleave unto another, and holding fast them
selves they will not be severed. Greg l. 33. mor. c. 30.
What is this body of the Devil (Pardon I pray you, my true, but friendly
speeches) but your self and such others, as having severed your selves from
the unity of Christ's, body, are now incorporate unto the monster LEVIATHAN? You
therefore are become a brazen targette, whilst with the hardness of your heart,
you drive back the arrows of wholesome counsel, and with the scales of
sophistical reasons, you bear off the fruit full dint of Gods inspirations
Neither are you contented with your own stubbornenes, but (as God has given
you many singular talents, more fit to be converted to better uses) you have
lincked unto your self the iniquity of others, thereby to confirm your own,
and keep away the sacred counsel of godly instructions from your brethren;
least by their recovery, either your pleasant malady should be cured, or your
stifnecked iniquity confounded. Wherein also as your wholle evil does come
from this, that you have received the operation 2. These. 2
of error for to believe a lie: So do you most manifestly imitate the father
of lies, who from the beginning does nothing but lie: I mean that LEVIATHAN of
which I spoke before, who contenting not himself with his own ruin, abused
the excellency of his most bewtifvll nature, to the drawing of the third part
of ye stars Apoc. 12.
of heaven into the like destruction. How unlike are you, I pray you, unto this
Dragon, who abuse so many gifts of learning and nature, not only to sin in
the sight of the wholle world; thereby to give evil example: nor to defend your
sin committed; so to pervert the understanding of many: but also by earnest
persuasions and busy diuulging of your evil hatched opinions, to allure your
acquaintance to so sinful imitation. It is a miserable thing to sin, so to
lose Gods favor: worse to sin openly, so to give a scandal: more
abominable to defend your sin, so to refuse repentance: But most horrible,
with the filth of sin, reproach of scandal, obstinacy of a proud mind
erected against God and his holy spirit, to cause directly the fall of a
number. The damned reprobate souls although in hell they have no good
affection at all, but rather a desire of all iniquity: yet have they a certain
horror of causing the damnation of others: as may appear by the rich glutton,
who knowing how much his torment should increase by the coming to hell of his
wicked brethren, whom he had with evil example corrupted: not of charity
toward them, but of a natural love to himself desired to prevent their
judgment. What may in the like case a Christian expect, who directly fighting
against Christ, seeks to persuade that which he dissuaded, trauaileth to pull
down that which he builded, causes that to perish for which he suffered? This
is your estate (my dear friend) whilst you seek not lawfully to abound in
your own sense, as S. PAVL teaches: but by your own unsound and pernicious
judgment, condemn and despise the wholle consent and authority of holy Church.
But what reason have you least you may seem without reason to go mad for to
defend either your faithless practice, or wicked doctrine of going to ye
Church with heretics? You have as you write unto me, two kind of arguments:
the one consists in authority the other in reasons. Let us examine these
grounds, let us weigh your proofs, if perhaps you may rise again from your
impiety. I say (if perhaps) for whereas from the dead as from one which is
not (as says the wise man) confession perishes: Eccli. 17.
you which by defense of your sin do shut up the only welsping of Gods
grace, wc is confessing and acknowleging the same: must of necessity be dead
and so overwhelmed with earthly cogitations, that without his call who raised
Lazarus you cannot be revived.

. 1.
Your first anb chiefest authority is derived from the very head and top of
all authority. The.1. objection of the Popes dispensatio^
You say that the heife pastor of Gods Church has approved the fact has he
approved it? and how I pray you? by dispensation, or definition? has he
defined it Excathedra to be lawful in it self, neither contrary unto the law
of God, nor unto the positive law of the Church? or has he supposing it to be
only against the second, as one which is the steward of Gods family, dispensed
herein?

Now for the dispensation: That the Pope has not dispensed.
I see not how if there were any, it could avail you, considering the danger of
dispensations from Rome in our country: and that although you would never so
carefully conceal it, yet you might hereafter be put to your oath, whether you
went to the Church upon any dispensation or tolleration from Rome, or no. But
let us scanne the truth of this dispensation. When was it granted? by whom? in
what form, or manner? how passed it the Alps, without our priuitie in these
countries? why are not the Preistes there with you made privy thereunto,
considering that the Mal. 2.
lips of the Preistes do keep knowledge, and men must require the law out
of their mouth? what subordination is there kept, when such things are sent
unto laymen and not unto the Pastors and teachers of your souls? why do we
not in these countries inform those which come out of the Seminaries of this
enlargement? must a few unlearned, timorous, inconstant laymen (and such as
your self are for I mean not all) be the Popes Agentes in so weighty matters,
to have the diuulging of them in the Realm? But how began the Pope so lately
to tender thus prouidently your distresses? and how hard hearted have his
predecessors been all this time, who have not considered them? was Gregory the
13. whom both for corporal and spiritual provision for our country, we may
worthily call an other Apostle of England and heir unto ye first of his name,
not only in his seat, but also in his affections: way yt great Patron, so
kind unto our nation that he would oftentimes weep at the hearing of our
miseries, only in this point unkind? or did he with all his learning, in which
he excelled, forget his authority in this one point? Bring forth the letter,
the messenger, the reporter of his own knowledge of this new grant: which if
you cannot (as I am most sure you cannot) then as I said unto you before out
of the Prophet Hieremy, that you have taken hold of a lie in your erroneous
proposition, which you maintain: So do I now say that you have taken hold of
an other lie to prove the former, and such a lie, as upon my conscience is as
long as between you and Rome, as broad as the way thither, whether you go by
Sea or by Germany, ioining thereunto all the space in the midst: And finally
as loud, (as if lies may be hard farther then true tales) it may be heard from
Westminster hall to the Popes Consistory. So that plainly to deal with you, I
will not say you have devised, for I know your nature too well: but in over
much credulity you have taken hold of a long, large, loud lie: although it
pleased one in chief authority of late to report that such a dispensation was
granted for men and not for women, who surely has been also too credulous:
for it did not beseem his place or person for to lie.

Now for any definition of the lawfulnes of the act: The Pope has not defined
it as lawful.
I say the very same, which for the dispensation. And besides, for them both I
add, that it was never heard of in any age, that the Pope did define or
dispense in a thing which he had no Divines to maintain. It may be that he
define a thing which has been doubtful among Divines, The Pope never defines
or dispenses, contrary to common doctrine of Divines.
or that he dispense in a thing which some affirm; others deny to be
dispensable, as we know he practices in dispensing in some kind of matrimony:
But this is such a point, so necessarily deduced out of Gods word, so confirmed
by the practice of all ages, so resolved in all learned men's judgments of the
world: that I assure you, whosoever taking upon him the name of a Divine,
should propound it as a doubtful or disputable question (I mean practically,
and not only as to exercise men's wits, in disputing of very resolved cases:)
in any university of the world, he would be hissed at: much less it is to be
thought that the Pope would dispense in it.

Yea this I say unto you and am most assured of, The Pope cannot dispense in
this case.
that although this point of going to the Church with heretics were only by
positive laws forbidden (as undoubtedly it is of the own nature and by Gods
law unlawful, as shall be showed hereafter) yet the case so stands in
England that he can not dispense in it. For the action of going to the Church,
going to ye Church is exacted for contempt of Catholic religion: and therefore
(beside many other reasons) indispensable.
is always exacted in contempt of Catholic religion, as appears both by
the vsages of those poor souls which in some parts before the late
Commissioners relenting, were with singular despite and barbarous vsages by the
officers driven to the Church; and also by the ordinary submission which at the
Assizes diverse have pronounced, when they have become conformable, wherein the
principal points of Catholic religion are renou^ced. So that I know who
purposely coming to the Assizes to submit him self, by hearing his fellow
before him to make so shameful a protestation, which also very contemptuonsly
some are like grammar scholars commanded to repeat again, as not having
pronounced it well, or not spoken loud enough: this man, I say, perceiving more
to be exacted then he had stomach to bear withdrew himself and abode the
adventure of the law. And although all which yield to go to the Church do not
make this submission: yet hereby may we see that the intent of going to the
heretics service, is so to obey the Prince, that Gods Church and authority may
be contemned.

Now therefore the Pope cannot dispense in the breach of his own law, The Pope
cannot dispense in the contempt of his own law.
when it is exacted in contempt. For than is not his own law only broken but
also Gods: who says, Luc. 10
he that despises you despises me. So that if the Pope having excommunicated
one of those Emperors with whom he had in times past so great contention,
should fall into the said Emperors hands, and the Emperor should say unto
him, thou have excommunicated me and therefore to Priest will say Mass in my
presence: But in despite of thee I will make thy self say Mass before me. In
this contempt although the Emperor be excommunicate only by the Popes own
decree: yet if the Pope celebrate, he sins mortally. Even so although this
were a positive law of not going to the Church with heretics, yet if you be
commanded of purpose to do contrary unto such law: by doing it, you sin
mortally; neither can the Pope dispense that his own authority be had in
contempt. This is the common doctrine both in matters of excommunications,
Caiet. ver. contem. and verbo. In Festo licita.
which are positive, and also in working of holy days, we also (at the least
besides Sunday) are positive. So that although upon necessity one may work
upon such a day, yet were it a mortal sin, if even with danger of death he
wrought at his Lords commandment, for despite of the Church or contempt of
that particular law. And the like is in diverse cases.

. 2
Thus much therefore of your authority which you fetch from the Pope. Now let us
go to our English Cardinal: of whose authority of dispensing, The second
objection of the English Cardinals dispensatio^, or altering his opinion
I must say no less then I said of his superior. Besides that it being held
by your lawiers there, that it is treason to take meat and drink of so
dangerous a person: you may well suppose that it will be a deeper kind of
treason to fetch from him his dispensations. But he has perhapps altered his
opinion concerning the lawfulnes of this act, His opinion is well known by all
his scholars, and more then 20. diverse places in ye new testament of Rhemes.
and now being sorry that he has heretofore been so rigorous, he has given you
to understand how far you may proceed.

To this I can say nothing more, then I have said before of the rest: but that
you may do well to counsel all Recusants which have hitherto paid the
statute, or otherwise forfeited any thing for their recusancy, to challenge of
him a full restitution of all their damages. For he is not ignorant that who
upon rash decision of a question of justice or injustice of an act, is cause of
any man's loss or hinderance: is by Gods law and man's liable for the same.
besides the offense which he committeh toward God, as well in the same
resolution, as if withal he have thereby caused the spiritual ruin of many
souls, which any man may perceive whether it has proceeded of his former
rigor or no. But the truth is, that these are things which are fit only to
be told or believed by Babes.

. 3
And what marvel if you believe such reports of persons so far off, The 3.
objection of the opinion of Preistes in England
whereas you are ready to believe the same of your Preistes at home? with whom
because you dare not either for the love of your own opinion, or for the fear
of the penalty of the law go forth of your doors to confer: you are easily
drawn to believe every flying false report. For I am very credibly given to
understand, that there is not one Catholic Priest in England, who differs
from the rest of his brethren (one only excepted) of whom I hear that no good
and godly person makes any accounte at all, least perhaps the ministerial
spirit of pride, which must needs have been once in him before he was a
Catholic, should returning unto his former house make the last things worse
then the former. especially whereas I understand that the Superiors of Rhemes,
hearing of his doings, sent word to all other Priests by one coming unto you:
that they should not feed his contentiouse humor by writing against him, but
account him rather as a heathen and Publicane. And diverse of our contrymen
are here resolved, that he will be very shortly suspended for his singular and
perniciouse doctrine. This also I am assured of, that a certain other Priest,
who in England having committed unto writing some fantastical conceits of his
own concerning this point, not finding sufficient credit at home, returned to
Rome whence he first came, with his conceited writings: there freely and
voluntarily making an humble submission and reuoking his dreams, burned his
papers. and I hear also that for desire of perfect satisfaction for his former
singularity and error, he went after his return into England to the aforesaid
Priest, of whose opinion before his departue he had known nothing at all: and
informed him very charitably of the effect of his journey. But very likely it is
that he auailed little. Yet this I do understand that since his return from
Rome this Priest behaved him self very well in England before his imprisonment
(for now they say here, he is in Bridewell) far contrary to the conceit they
had of him with us. For this I know that at Rome to hinder his return unto
you, and to prevent the return unto his vomitte which was feared, they would
have either kept him as prisoner, or proceeded with him even so far as the
inquisition, if it had not been feared least it would have scandalized the
countries there, and discovered too much unto them the imperfections of our
nation. And in the low country he should have been detained by force, if they
could have found of charity who would have discharged his commons. But thanks
be to God he has behaved himself otherwise then we looked for. God grant that
in prison he be the same which he was abrod. It would also have beseemed any
humble spirit, such as it is not like the other singular Priest is endowed
withal, to have repaired also to his Superiors, (if he think he has any) to
enquire their judgment: seeing himself so singular at home. Now then you are
utterly shut off from the authority of your Preistes at home, if you will not
venture your soul either upon the fancy of one who has since becoming soberer
made known unto you the sober judgments of his grave Superiors: or of one
who for his too much learning may perhapps have harbored in his mind his
ancient old acquaintance. And if there be any others: counsel them I pray
you to keep their doctrine secret for fear of what may light upon them.

. 4.
Now against all these autorities which you see notwithstanding how they be
either rotten or colored and painted with a counterfaite show, That going to
heretics service is against the authority of all learned men of our age
I oppose (that I may now say nothing of ancient times in which you will deny
perhaps that your estate was fully resembled) I oppose I say most true and
reverend authority of most singular men, which have flourished in our own age,
and most perfectly vewed and examined our own cause. First the 12. The
Council of Tre^t.
Fathers of the Council of TRENT whose learned judgment in this point is yet
extant. Neither ought it to be called in to suspicion because it was not
generally set down. For both there are sufficient witnesses alive for the
verity thereof, and it was our own suite to have it done covertly, and
perhaps it was a question unworthy of public discussion, none but a few
timerouse Catholics of a small corner of the worlds calling it into doubt.
For in heretics judgments against whom the Council was gathered the case
was most clear and evident: that a man may not go to the congregations of a
contrary religion, and other very weighty matters were put over to diverse
Deputies: as the correcting of the Missall and Breuiarye, the censure of books
forbidden, the ouerseeing of the text of scripture, the making of a Cathechisme
for Pastors and other like. And finally the iminent death of the Pope caused
the^ to leave unfinished many other matters of our faith, as may appear to
who-soeuer considers the wholle course of their decrees.

Secondly I bring the authority of so many Reverend and learned Bishopps and
Prelates, The ancient Clergies doctrine and example we the example also of the
Laity.
as at the beginning of this schism did both refuse themselves; and induce
others to refuse such participation with heretics. For all the world can very
well testify, that from the very beginning there have been diverse laymen who
have refused. and it is a childish distinction of say that those first Reverend
Fathers thought that to go to ye Church was lawful for laymen and not for the
clergy. To this I add that one of them wrote a learned book of the same
argument: and when they began more dilligently to look into the matter, they
admitted none to Mass or Sacraments which did not fully determine to avoid
the profane conuenticles of heretics. And if they were before unwilling to
publish their judgment herein, either it was for fear of the seculer power,
or least that the common people whose sin before had been excusable for their
ignorance, should notwithstanding the knowledge of the truth herein, go
forward in their unlawful course unto farther damnation in which case
charity binds us to omit correction of our brothers fault. Or if there
were some more fearful then others who allowed this action, we must consider
that perhapps they were of that number, which not long before in King Henry's
time, in matters of greater moment had showed greater infirmity.

Thirdly of those which for the confession of their faith did leave their
country: The banished Doctors and Divines.
certain it is that not one was doubtful in this question: that you may see
this to be no Seminary resolution. For one of the most principal of that
company in the preface asa book yet extant of Images, does so fully and
learnedly discourse thereof, that a sincere understanding can require no more.
And this ener since the year 64 which is almost 30 years since. And he
complains not a little of the foul oversight which was in the clergy, not to
control at the first so unlawful an action. Of my knowledge also was he wont
to blame his own and other Preachers negligence, who in Queen MARY'S time not
fearing any such alteration as we since have proved, did not forewarne the
people of their duty in such accidents. The Colleges of Rome and Rhemes.


Last of all I add unto these the whole College of Rhemes and of Rome, and
all those unto whom the managing and government thereof does appertain, their
books and writings in so great number, the wholle multitude of Preistes and
Martyrs which have come from thence: Preistes and Martyrs.
So many devout and constant laymen either Martyrs or otherwise: All which no
doubt being guided by the holy ghost, who dwelled within them, could not but
look into the distressed case of so many weakelings, so many women and
children, so great families: as easily with this new doctrine might have been
relieved. Thus therefore all your authority is overthrown, neither can you bring
any thing to allow your action, but the temporal laws of our country: which
in this case ought to bear no more sway for the crediting of the new religion
professed in England, then in times past the decrees of the Turks for the
reverence of their Mahomet: it being of old condemned Silu. verbo Apostasia..
4 and haero sis primo. 9
as an action of infidelity, to kiss for fear the tomb of Mahomet, though
far against the inward consent.

. 5.
Your first reason is the example of the three children Wc in Babylon were
present at the solemn dedication of Nabuchodonosors Idol although they
kneeled not down to worship the same. The 4. objection of the example of the
children in Babylon. Dan. 3.
whereupon you infer, that a Catholic may be present at heretical service,
so that he do no reverence thereunto, nor receive the communion. To which I
answer. First, that their presence only in that place was not religiouse or
ceremoniouse. for the ceremony of religion began only in the prostration
unto the Idol: at which time they were sufficiently discerned from the others
by their standing up: whereby they showed the contempt thereof, and no way
satisfied the precept of the Tyrant. And according to this solution, that is,
if there were no other ceremony there used but the prostration: they might
although they knew before such a thing to be intended, with great perfection
come thither, and present themselves unto such Martyrdom as was to ensew. But
our case and theirs is not alike: for the very presence at service with
heretics is religiouse, neither is there any thing required of whosoever is
most devoutly and willingly present, but to be in that place in an orderly
manner. And this in Catholic religion also is accounted a participation IN
DIVINIS. to be present in the place. So that he which is at Mass where an
excommunicate person hears Mass, is always judged to participate Wc the
same. this being in Christian religion the nature of all sacred actions, that
the lay people are as it were patients, that is, do nothing solemnlye, but
all action appertains to the clergy, to whom it belongs to purge,
illuminate and make perfect, as both out of ad hebr. 10
S. PAVL and also out of S. De hier. Ecc. c. 5
Dionisius we may gather: And yet if a Catholic came thither, and showed him
self present at the very religiouse actions of heretics, without all
contempt of Catholic Religion, scandal, and show of conformitye, only to
mock publicklye, or disturb the minister, as those holy children did in
Babylon: 3. Reg-13. A like case unto this of ye children.
such a one should (if there were no scandal or tumult to ensew) no more
offend then the Prophet which came into Bethel to denounce Gods threatenings to
wicked Jeroboam whilst he was at his Idolatry. The like unto the case of the
three children were if that in England there were a proclamation that such a
day every one should repair unto the markette town there in the markette
place to subscribe. Now some Catholic perhaps will no come at all. Others for
a very desire of showing their religion, and no way to color themselves,
knowing what the event will be, come thither: and all the rest subscribing
refuse to subscribe. whether part think you has done better? the one, which
has avoided, or the other, which has perfectly sought to viter his
profession? Neither must you think that he which should be present at
heretics service and refuse to receive, had done like the three children: for
he has in one thing denied, and in the other confessed his faith. and we may
not do evil that good may ensew. These children did nothing but in whatsoever
was religiouse plainly show their uncorrupted faith.

Now if you reply: that supposing they knew before that Idolatry was there to
be practiced, A replye.
then consequently they committed an unlawful action in giving the world to
understand that they would do that which was unlawful: After which manner we
condemn such as say they will go to the Church, although they go not in deed
nor intend to go: The answer
I answer that humane actions are specified by the end. And so long as the
means for that end be indifferent, and may be referred as well to a lawful as
to an unlawful end: we may permit even in matters of faith the wrong
understanding in the beholders. Yet so that if we may seem to give probable
occasion of denying our faith, if the end do not presently follow which we
intended than we fatisfie our neighbor by open means and declaration of our
first purpose. For example if one intend to go to preach catholickly in an
heretical Church, Whether a Catholic P. may go to preach in the Church
the means hereunto, are first to go that way which leads to the Church:
than to go into the Church, and so straight into the pulpitte these things
being indifferent, and the declaring of his purpose being ready to ensew: this
man is not to be condemned, and if he should meet one which knew him, he might
say that he was going to the Church. for although this saying were unlawful
alone by it self: yet being joined with many other actions which concur to
make but one wholle action, it is no more a denial of his faith than if a man
making profession of his faith, in one sentence should have the one half sound
heretically which by one word ensueing immediately is turned to a lawful
sense. For as a man's meaning is not to be gathered by half a sentence: so
neither is it by half an action; when the^ action is not morally interrupted.
yet if this man were hindered of his purpose so that he were not permitted to
preach: then were he bound to certesye those which saw him, and knew that he
went to the Church, of his just determination. And yet were it unlawful for
such a one to be in such manner present before his sermon that he might seem
to participate with them in any part of service: as if they song a psalm at
the beginning, at which he should make no show of distinction. for these are not
indifferent means for his end, neither may he do evil that good may follow.

But if any Catholic priuye to his intention should go thither for to hear
him: In what manner a Catholic may go to hear such a Preacher.
he should undoubtedly sin, if he were so present, that his being there were
not known to be no more orderly or favorable then the preachers. For the
preachers presence is sufficiently showed for what end it is: but so is not the
others, but all the rest of the company is esteemed heretical as coming in
show to an heretical sermon. An other like case.


An other like case were if one should go into an Idols temple when they are
present at Idolany, and pull down the Idol: his going in, would no doubt be
lawful and commendable. Even so say I of these children who intending there
to make demonstration of their faith: in an indifferent action of going and
saying they would go to the field DVRA, concealed their meaning to be uttered
afterward, when the action should cease to be indifferent, they being
religiously present at no part of the same: And if there were any other
religiouse ceremony: it is like they showed their dislike therein, as well as in
the chiefest ceremony of prostration.

It might also be that they presently after their coming went unto the Kings
commissioners to certefie them of there purpose, that they would not worship,
but cleave only to the true God whom they acknowledged.

Secondly I answer unto the wholle in this manner. A second answer to the
wholle case.
I say that they knew not of any Idolatry to be committed, or any religiouse
action to be exercised, but only a solemn restiuall erection or public
usage of a most sumptuouse and huge monument of the Kings greatness. And this
is meant by the word (dedication.) For although the Etimology of the word be
taken from an applying or offering or consecrating a thing to an other, and so
there is implied withal a certain religicuse ceremony in the same, when it is
done to God: yet cannot it here signify any such thing. for if the King
accounted it a God as the event showed: did he mean to dedicate God unto him
self? or did he mean to consecrate his God? who would thus conceive of this
dedication? although I confess in profane writers it is so oftentimes taken:
yet in divine scriptures must we always take the most proper signification of
words, when there can no absurdity follow. I say therefore that the King,
although he purposed Idolatry, yet by this word (dedication) did not mean to
show his intent: and that the children by the same word, understood neither
making of a God, nor consecrating of any thing unto a false God, but only a
feast at the new erection, or at the first use of the huge and monstrous Image:
Even as at the rearing of houses, or at the finishing of cities and their
first inhabiting is accustomed. The signification of this word Dedication.
This will I show out of the latin, greek and hebrew word. And first for all
these three languages; the very same word which is in this place, is in two
other manifest places in that profane sense, which I have even now declared
Deur. 20. Who is the man which has built a new house, and has not dedicated
it? let him go and return into his own house, least he dye in battle, and
an other deciate it. (...) What other meaning is in this place then to begin
to inhabit the house which was lately builded? Like wise in the title of the
29 Psalm we read thus. A Psalm of the Song, in the dedication of the house
of DAVID: (...) that is of his house wc he built in Jerusalem, as in the 2
book of the Kings the 5 chapter is recorded.

This being the use in the holy scripture of these words in general: the
greek and hebrew words are more indifferent then the latin. The greek word.
The greek (ENCAENIA) signifies, properlye as much as (INITIALIA) that is the
solemn beginning or renouation of any thing, the word (CAENOS) of which it is
derived importing nothing else then New. But it is better to hear S. Augustine
speak ENCAENIA, says he, was the festiuity of the dedication of the Temple.
for in the greek tongue CAENON is that which is new. for whansoeuer any new
thing is dedicated those are called ENCAENIA. now that very use has this word:
if any man put on a new coat, he is said ENCAENIARE. Thus S. Augustine.
where if we will English ENCAENIARE we must say that he which puts on a new
coat does either dedicate his coat because he begins first to use it, or
at the least that he seems in a certain manner to keep ENCAENIA or a feast
of his new coat. where who sees not that there can be no religiouse meaning
in the word? The hebrew word HANVCCHA signifies as largely as DEDICATIO in
latin, The hebrew word.
but it is also indifferent by deriuation to the beginning of any thing. For the
verb HANACH whereof it is derived signifies to season: and because those
which are taught the first rudiments of art, do begin as it were to be
seasoned: hereupon does it also signify to instruct. And for the same reason
to dedicate. because that which is dedicated, is the^ first used, and than as
it were seasoned. Wheruppon HANICH in the scripture signifies a child taught,
wherein no spiritual dedication is imported: and HANICHIM Genesis 14. is taken for
new The soldiers which Abraham took with him.
soldiers such as had lately been trained unto war, not such as had been
dedicated religiously unto God. In like manner in the 22 chapter of the
Proverbs where we read in the hebrew HANOCH LANAAR: the meaning is not
dedicate religiously, but season or begin to instruct a young man according
to his way: also when he is old he will not depart from it.

But if any one should urge the word of erecting the Image, for why it was
already erected, and there could be no other end now of coming, but Idolatry: I
answer, that although it were set up before, yet might there be some
profane solemnity at the first use thereof. even as at the rearing of houses,
the feast is made after the setting up of the house. Also we may very well say,
that the scripture here uses the figure of Anticipation, as in many other
places, so that when they came together, the Image was not erected, but it is
said to have been already erected in respect both of the time in which the
history was written, and also in respect of the time in which they denied
worship unto it: especial whereas it is credibly to be thought that the King
after the miracle of the fornance, caused the Image to be pulled down: Even as
if we should say: K. Henry commanded all his Lords to come to the
solemnization of the matrimony of Q. Katherine whom he had married: the meaning
is not that she was married before the solemnization, but that in respect of her
divorce following it may be said that he had married her, whom afterward he
putt away. although in the greek and hebrew, this is no more then an ordinary
preterperfectense yea in greek it is the Aorist, which is indifferent to any
time past.

To conclude therefore as well by the circumstance of the place and intent of
Nabuchodonosor as by the signification of the three languages in Wc this part
of scripture is written, it is evident that the children might and did
understand no Idolatry: and so came as it were to a civil feast or triumph, A
3. answer
not knowing what would happen. A third answer we may give. that they might of
ignorance err, and think that to be lawful which in deed was not. For not
all things which are read in scripture even of Saints are to be rules of our
life, Lib. de mend. c. 5.
(as teaches S. Augustine) but those only which the scripture does either
commend expressly or lay before us in them as to be imitated. As for example LOT
did well in keeping him self unspotted in that wicked city, and in harboring
the Angels, for which he is in the scripture it self commended. Also in
dissuading the men of his city from attempting wickedness. yet in seeking to
deliver his daughters unto them thereby to divert them from their purpose, who
will defend him from blame of iniurye to his daughters? The Midwiues of Aegipte
did well and are commended for their piety, but not for their lying. IVDETH is
commended for the affection toward the safety of her country: yet not by all
doctors excused from a lie in speaking unto Holofernes: although her words may
have some mystical understanding. So perhapps may we say that these children
were commended, and approved by God with so great a miracle for their constancy
in withstanding the Kings commandment: yet is not all their other behavior
thereby canonized. Even as if one should with invincible ignorance of this our
question go to the Church with heretics: and yet for refusing to receive the
communion be hanged: he were a Martyr for his fortitude in the one, and excused
for his ignorance in the other. Yet because we are not urged hereunto, having
two other sufficient answers: it is best to excuse them being such singular
holy personages not only from sin in this action, but also from ignorance. A
4. answer.


Fourthly considering what great offices these three persons bore in the
kingdom of Nabuchodonosor, as we read in the same chapter and in the first:
we may defend their going to such place as Naaman Syrus is by diverse defended:
of which we will speak hereafter.

. 6.
Your second reason you bring from the example of IEHV an Idolater, The 5.
objection, of the example of Iehu. 4. Reg. 10.
and very much discommended by the scripture it self. such shifts are you put
unto when you are forced to beg the patronage of wicked men for your evil
course. And yet shall you see in the end that it makes more against you, than
with you. IEHV (say you) was present at the sacrifices of BAAL, although
afterward he killed all the Idolatrous Preistes of BAAL. therefore may we also
for a good end of saving our goods, lives, or families, be present at
heretical service.

Now Sir I return your Argument upon your self. IEHV by Saint AUGUSTINE and
all Catholic Doctors is reprehended for being present at the Sacrifices of
BAAL, though for a principal end of restoring Gods Religion in his wholle
kingdom: therefore by the judgment of all Catholic Doctors you are
condemned whilst you be present at the sacrifices of heretics, although of
your presence might ensew the conversion of the wholle Realm, much less to
serve your belly, and to conserve the Mammon of iniquity. For although there be
difference between Idolatry and heresy, and the service of Idolaters and of
heretics: yet one yielding unto an other in wickedness, they both agree that
they be superstitiouse. D. Tho. 22, q. 92. ar. 2. Two kind of superstitions.
and both in heretics service
For there are two sorts of superstitions the one consists in the worship of
a false God, which is called Idolatry: the other which has retained unto it
self the common name of superstition is found in the unlawful worship of the
true God. which is in service of heretics, and such like, where other
ceremonies are used than which Christ and his Church has ordained. These also
are of two sorts as well notes Caietane. Verbo Supst
For either they be perniciouse, or superfluouse. Those are perniciouse, which
are contrary unto the verity of faith. Those are superfluouse, which are any
ways contrary to the custom of the Church, or otherwise then the Church does
use. The first are always mortal sins: the second also always, when there
is contempt or scandal, although of themselves they were not perniciouse.
Judge you therefore whether both sorts of this second kind of superstition be
not in hereticallseruice. So that out of the fact of IEHV, as you bring an
example of going to heretics service, because you think he did well: So I
out of the same prove such dissimulation to be wicked, because IEHV did evil.
See Aug. l. con. mend. c. 3. See Bannes 22. q. 3. ar. 2 dub. 1.
which I prove by the consent of S. Augustine and all school men, after S.
Thomas the principal ringleader of them all. And I marvel not a little that
you who take upon you Skill in divinity, did so peremptorily bring the example
of IEHV, concealing the school men's opinion of his fact. For you knew
undoubtedly that this Argument was not coined out of your own wit, but
bothpropounded and answered, before either your self or your new confraternity
were hatched. S. Thomas bringing this example against himself to prove
dissimulation lawful, answers it in this manner. 22. q. 111. ar. 1. ad. 2.
The dissembling of IEHV, it is not necessary to be excused from sin, or from
a lie. for he was wicked, as who did not depart from the Idolatry of
Hieroboam. yet is he commended and temporally rewarded by God, 4. Reg. 10.
not for his dissimulation, but for his Zeal with which he destroyed the
worship of BAAL. In ep. ad Gal. c. 2.
Thus S. Thomas. And although S. Hierome seems to allow of IEHVES
dissimulatio^: yet you might have considered that he does it for to prove S.
PETER'S dissimulation in Antioch to have been without sin where. even as that
which he seeks to infer is contrary to S. Augustine and all the Divines,
Ep. 19. Ter l. 4. in marcion. Cypr ep. ad quintu^. Amb. hie. Aug. ep 89.19.
Greg. l. 28. mor, c. 12. 1. Reg. 21.
yea the true meaning of the scripture, S. PAVL saying, that PETER was
reprehensible and diverse other ancient Fathers: So was his antecedent also
false, and not to be followed. although we may also say, that he allowed
dissimulation in general but not in this particular, whereas he brings other
examples of lawful dissimulations: as of DAVID before Abimelech faining
himself mad, and of CHRIST our Savior taking upon him the shape of a
sinner, that condemning sin and flesh, he might make us in himself the
Justice of God. In like manner might IEHV have a lawful intention to dissemble,
and yet in the practice exceed, God permitting for so good an end, either his
sin, if he culpably erred, or his excusable ignorance, if among so many
Idolaters he had none to instruct him: as in secular and warlike men, such
particular knowledge of godly duties many times we see to be wanting.

. 7. 4. Reg. 5. The 6 objection of Naaman syrus.

Your next reason, is the fact of NAAMAN: who after he was converted unto the
true God, yet had (as it seems) leave of ELIZEVS the Prophet to be present at
the Princes sacrifice unto Idols The History is this: NAAMAN returning unto the
man of God, with his wholle company came and stood before him and said. Verily
I know that there is not any other god in the whole earth, but only in
Israel. I beseech thee therefore, that thou receive this blessing of thy
servant. But he answered. The Lord lives before whom I stand, I will not
receive it. And when he was earnest, he would not consent. And NAAMAN, said as
thou will. But I beseech thee grant unto me thy servant that I may take the
burden of two muletts of the earth: for thy servant will not make any more
holocaust or sacrifice unto false Gods, but to our Lord. This only thing there
is, for ye which thou may entreat our Lord for thy servant. when my Lord
shall enter into the temple of Remmon for to worship, and he leaning upon my
hand, if I shall worship in the temple of Remmon, he worshipping in the same
place: that our Lord do pardon thy servant for this thing who said unto him,
go in peace. this far goes the history. Naaman syrus would receive Preistes
if he now lived.
Now Sir I do most heartily wish that you were like unto NAAMAN SYRVS. for then
would you give your blessing abundantly unto ELIZEVS and his scholars: and
carry of the holy land, though it were a burden into your house, erecting there
an Altar to do sacrifice unto the true God, and unto no other. But so
stands the case with you, and such as you are, that when once you go to the
temple of Remmon, you forget ELIZEVS and the holy land, and the sacrifice of
the true God, and at the very first step into heretical synagogues, as it
were take your leave of all goodness. Whether this be true or no, I refer my
self to your own conscience. But to go directly unto the matter: I say that
as well the hebrew as the greek and latin word, is indifferent in holy
scriptures, to signify civil and divine worship, and imports no more then
to bow him self humbly unto the ground. which we read in Genesis c. 23.
Abraham to have done for civil courtesy to the children of Heth, and in the
18. chapter before he did the like to the Angels. And in these places, and
also in many more, do the same words signify either civil worship to men,
or religiouse reverence to Angels or Saints. and so the common doctrine of
Divines is, that NAAMAN did not bow unto the Idol, but unto the King, yielding
him that temporal service or ease of his body, which was convenient unto his
Princelye person and greatness: which was also the known cause of his presence
in that place, he being otherwise known to detest Idolatry after his recovery
from his leper. of which you may read Lyra and other his companions. Of going
to the Church with the Prince. See. 5.15. and 16.
After which manner diverse do say that for a temporal service to a Prince to
be done by a known Catholic, and not exacted in contempt, or more in the
Church then otherwise, as to bear the sword, uphold the Princes person, or
other such like: any person who necessarily is to attend on the Prince, and
cannot by any ordinarye means keep him self from the Court, may accompany
the same Prince of a connary religion unto the Church: because his going is not
as to the Church: neither is he thought to go to the Church, as to a Church:
that is, as it has service and communion: but as to a place where he must
serve his Prince with lawful temporal duties, such as he were to yield him
in any other place: And that by this evident and known temporal service
altogether void of any religiouse ceremony (for why he neither kneeleth nor
shows any reverence at all, more than when he attends in other places) all
signification of religion, union with heretics, and contempt of Catholieke
obedience is taken away: neither is he to be for all that accounted other than
a Recusant. But how far in this matter one may proceed, I need not bear to
set down, for you are no Courtier, and I think there be few Courtiers which
in this point will trouble you, for counsel. To whom if they should ask your
advise, you may say the matter is very doubtful. whereas many say that ELIZEVS
allowed not his petition, but with a doubtful answer dismissed him, saying
go in peace: Seeing perhapps that after the fashion of courtiers he hearing
the truth would not obey it. And surely upon this word the scripture makes no
mention whether he went to the temple of Remmon, or no: so that his practice
cannot show us Elizeus his meaning. But of this place I refer you to the two
books written in our tongue: the one of schism the otherof the reasons of
refusal. Sufficient it is that out of this lace you cannto inserre any formal
presence or going to the Church with heretics, to be lawful.

The like answer unto this, do I give unto the example of Valentinian the
Emperor, Of Valentinian ye Emperor,
who going to a temple with Julian the Apostata (as Theodoret and Sozomenus
reports) being one of his chief captains and always assistant to his
person (by reason that it was an ancient custom as Sozomenus expreslye
notes, Theod. l. 3. c. 15 Sozo. l. 6. c. 6.
that the captains of those soldiers which were called Iouiani and Herculiani
should always follow the Emperor next behind him, as his defenders:) gave the
Porter a blow on the ear for sprinckling him at his entrance with the
Idolatrous water and cut out of his garment so much as the water had touched,
even in the Emperors sight, saying that he was thereby not purged but polluted
with a shameful filth. For which cause as he was by that Tyrannical Apostata
sent into banishment; so, as Theodoret writes, he was by God within a year
and few months for a reward of his confession, exalted to the Imperial seat.
Whose example if you would follow so often as by such base officers your ears
are sprinkled with heretical soundes: I dout not but some Co^missoner or other
to your great benefitte would quickly provide that you should come to the
Church no more.

. 8.
The fourth reason you make out of the Cannon law: which according to the
extrauagant of Martinus. 5. and the Council of Constance gives leave to
participate even in Divine service with all manner as excommunicate persons, The
7. objection of ye extrauaga^t of Martin the fifth
except those which either are by name excommunicate or notoriouse strikers of
a clergy man

This reason verily is so childish that I am even ashamed to answer it. For it
is even as if you should argue thus. The Pope gives me leave to be present at
Mass in a Catholic Church and company with an heretic: therefore he
allows my going to heretical service or communion with the same. When did
you ever hear that by a Catholic mouth, the heretics profane communion
was called Divine service? It were not lawful to go to heretics Churches
although they had true Mass and Pirestes
Yea this I say: that although in the heretical Churches there were very true
Preistes and the same Mass which is said at Rome, with the same rites and
ceremonies: yet a separation being once made from the Catholic union, and the
heretics using a church aparte from the Catholic: for all this decree, it
were a mortal sin, and an exterior act of heresye to go to the heretics
Mass, of which you shall hear Navarre say his mind, c. 27. n. 36.
agreeing herein with all other Divines.

He which for fear of death does participate with an excommunicate person in
Divine services does not sin, so that he participate not with a virtuall
denial of Catholic faith: which would arise through communication with
contempt, See Sotus. 4. d. 22. q. 1. ar. 4. Silu. verb. exco^. 5. dub 14. and
verbo Metus. q. 7 Mayor. d. 18 q. 4. Couar. parag. 3. number. 9. Angles ar. 3
diff. 7. Schismatickes may not be present at Mass. See more of this point. 38.
The 8. objection of Obedience Ser. 6. de ver. Do.
and dispising of excommunication. for it behooves rather to dye then so to
communicate. Whereas he is more bound to defend this article of faith of the
authority and power of the Church to excommunicate, and the value thereof, then
his own corporal life. Now you may judge whether your case were not so in
England even although you had true Preistes and true Divine service. But in
this riffe rasse which you go unto, there is no question. Neither for all this
may such as are excommunicate be present at Mass although they be not of those
two kinds of excommunicate persons. For the Canon intends not to favor them
at all, but only gives leave to the Catholic not to avoid for all the
sinful presence of him which is excommunicate, and for all the prohibition of
the Church, which had been until that time in force, of avoiding the
participation of the excommunicate, not only in spiritual, but also in civil
and temporal things.

. 9.
Now to your fifth reason of obedience to the Prince wherein you trrumph. S.
Augustine shall answer. Who resists unto power, resists unto the
ordination of God: But what if he command that which thou ought not to do?
here truly contemn power, by fearing power. See also.l. 3. confess. c. 8.
Do you consider the very degrees of humane laws. If the governor command
any thing, is it not to be done? yet if the Proconsull command the contrary,
then truly do thou not despise power, but choosest to obey the greater.
Neither herein ought the lesser to be angry, if the greater be preferred.
Again if the Proconsull command one thing, and the Emperor another: is it
doubted but that he is to be obeyed, the other being despised? S. Augustine
would not allow going to ye Church if he were amongst us. Ephesians. 6.
Therefore if the Emperor bids one thing and God an other: what do you
judge? Pay tribute. Attend unto my service very well: but not in the Idols
temple. In the Idols temple forbids it. who forbids it? a greater power.
Pardon me. thou thretnest prison, he thretneth hell. Here now must thou take
upon thee thy faith as a buck ler in the which thou may quench all the
fierye darts of the enemy. Thus S. Augustine. Turn I pray you the words
(Idols temple) into heretics conuentickle, and see how it fitteth your case.
Or show why there is not the same reason in the one as in the other. in ep. ad
Tit. c. 3
If it be good (says S. Hierome) which the Emperor and governor commands?
obey the will of the ocmmaunder, but if it be evil: auswere him out of the
Acts of the Apostles: Act. 5.
It behooves to obey God more then men. This same let us understand both of
servants to their masters, and of wives to their husbands, A lesson for
wives and children.
and of children to their parents: that in those things only they must be
subject to their masters, husbands, parents, which are not contrary unto gods
commandments. Thus S. Hierome. Again S. Augustine. Iulianus was an Infidel
Emperor. was he not an Apostata? wicked? an Idolater? Christian soldiers
served an infidel Emperor. when they came to the cause of Christ: they did
not acknowledge but him only which was in heaven. When he would that they
should worship Idols: that they should offer incense: they preferred God
before him. But when he said, bring forth the Army, go against that nation:
forthwith they obeyed. They distinguished the everlasting Lord from a temporal
Lord, and yet were they subject for the everlasting Lord, even to the temporal
Lord. Thus you see what these holy Fathers do judge of such kind of obedience.
Obedience alone is not intended in this law, but also religion. L. 5. c. 1.


But let us I pray you consider more deeply the nature of obeidence. Although
the very form and wholle drift of obedience be to do according unto the law
or commandment of the Superior: yet as it appertains unto every law in
common to direct us unto all kind of virtues, as Aristotle teaches in his
Ethickes. (for as he says the law commands us to do works of fortitude,
of temperance, and of meekenes, and in like manner of other kind of goodness or
naughtines comman ding the one or forbidding the other:) So is there no
particular precept or law, but besides the virtue of obedience to it self,
intends some act of some other virtue. Hence does it proceed, that one wc
does transgress a law, is not forthwith called disobedient properly, unless
D. Tho. 22. q. 105. ar. 1. ad. 1.
he of purpose did transgress, because he despised the law: but he is said to
have sinned against that virtue which the law or precept intended. An example
hereof we may have in temperance. The law commands that we make but one
repast on a fasting day. If a man overcome with his appetite transgress this
precept: than has he sinned against temperance, not observing that abstinence
which the law prescribed. Neither is he properly in this act disobedient; but
so far as disobedience is materially included in every sin, which in that
it is a sin, must needs be against some precept or other. And this is very
evident: for two causes. For if in every sin there were a formal
disobedience: then could there be but one kind of sin in the world, that is
of disobedience: and the particular obiectes of every virtue, should be but
material in every action, as the particular malice of every vice also
material in respect of one form of disobedience: and so but one nature of
virtue and vice in the world. Besides: one may do contrary unto a law, in such
a light manner and with such want of consideration, that he may only sin
venially against the same. and yet if it were properly disobedience, it were
always a mortal sin, implying in it self contempt of the law, which cannot
be without a mortal deformity, See Caiet. verbo. Contemptus and verbo
Inobedientia.
even in the least sin of the world, although it were but an idle word. For
to work any thing of contempt and hatred of the law and lawmakers, cannot be
without such hainousnes.

Now therefore in every law there is some other goodness intended besides the
goodness of obedience. No law intends obedience only.
For when or in what country was it ever heard of, that there was a law made
for no other end but for obedience? Turn over all Brooks Abridgement of the
law, look upon his titles, go over all your Statutes, which have been from
time to time made under diverse Kings: See whether you can find any title of
any law in the world, only for to be obedient. The law intends always
obedience in every particular statute, and binds the subjects to obey the
same, and never doubts of the subjects obedience, so long as he observes
every law, and behaueth him self orderly in the commonwealth: and having once
accepted the Prince for his superior, and professed his obedience unto him,
follows his direction to all civil virtues. But that a law should be made,
whose end should be only obedience, without anyother reason of goodness, or the
breach of wc should be only a contempt, without the transgression of some
other virtue, of right and equity toward the commonwealth: I confess my
ignorance and that I may be deceived: yet I never either heard or read in any
age or in any author. Yea in the holy religiouse estates where obedience is
vowed, the superior always commands according to the rule professed, which
is for to guide the subjects to all particular virtues, and to mortify the
worldly man, not ridiculously intending bare obedience and nothing else.
obedience being practiced in every particular commaundment.

Than Sir in your statute entitled An act to retain the subjects in their
dew obedience, there must needs be intended some other virtue besides
obedience. For is not the wholle law sufficient to show obidience? or if there
were any doubt of acknowledging that Superior by whom law is administered, were
not oaths of fidelity and homage the ordinary and accustomed way to acknowtedg
the same? or is in this only act obedience to be showed and in none else? in
no place but in the Church? in no manner but by joining with heretics in their
service? where are so many other laws of eating of flesh, and of other actions
either commanded or forbidden, which we know how little these great exacters of
obedience do esteem? So may you evidently see that it is not odedience only
pretended, but some other end, some other reason of that which is
proportionable unto that mark which they shoot at, which if you can devise
any other then religion, conformity in their superstition, The pretense of
obedience makes this actio^ worse than before
contempt of Catholic unity: I pray you imparte your conceit unto me. I my
self can see nothing else. wheof I do infer that by such pretended
obedience, this act is made worse then it was before. For a precept, law, or
commaundment prescribes a matter to that virtue which it intends, of which
it was not a necessary matter before. as the commandment of not eating flesh
upon a fasting day, was not a matter of fasting necessary before the law. for
why, one might have before fasted better with one bitte of flesh, than with a
dainty dinner of diverse dishes of fish. but after the law it is a necessary
observance, and matter prescribed unto fasting. So in like manner, although to
go to the Church before with heretics had not been (as always it was) an act
of religion: now being commanded by the law, as an act of religion, (for that
is the intent of the law, and manifestly pretended in the one or other statute
of going to the Church) it is only a simple act of obedience: but an act of
obedience in such a matter principally intended, as is the profession of a
false religion. For every religiouse act applied unto a false god, or a false
kind of worship, or a false Society of worshippers, is an express protestation
of the same false worship or unlawful fellowshippe. So should you first have
proved this action to be lawful in it self, Obedience is no excuse but when
the matter thereof is first proved lawful.
and then you might have inferred that your obedience had been lawful. and you
should also have showed some end in this law over and besides bare obedience,
other then the end of religion: which surely must needs be yielded to be the
very end and object of the law. And this, long experience has showed in the
Church of God: that when temporal Princes must be obeyed in Churches: Amb l.
5. ep 33. ad Marcellinam.
there is farther danger in it then I list now to speak.

But you shall see an example of Christian obedience. When the Emperor was at
great strife with S. Ambrose the holy B. of Millan about the delivering
certain Churches in the city of Millan unto the Arrians (as always before
this fearful and abject age, Ibid. S Ambrose his obedience to the Emperor.
Catholics would never be found amongst heretics in Churches: S. Ambrose
answered the Emperor in this manner. Trouble not thy self, O Emperor, that
thou may think that thou have any imperial authority over divine things.
To the Emperor, Palaces appertain: to the Bishop, the Churches. To thee, is
committed the right over the public and not over the sacred walls. And when
the same Saint was threatened with death for the same cause by Calligonus the
Emperors Eunuch, even in the Church: God permit (says he) that thou do
that which thou threatnest. for I will suffer that which becomes a Bishop;
thou shall do that which beseems an Eunuch In which controversy the
soldiers sent word as says S. Ambrose, unto the Emperor, that if he would
come abroad he might with good leave. But that they would wait upon him, if
they saw him agree with Catholics: True Catholic Christians were than
Recusants,
otherwise they would pass unto that company which Ambrose should gather.
Such accounte ought Christians to make of avoiding heretical synagogues. I
will conclude therefore this matter of obedience with one short but invincible
reason. You will have it lawful for obedience to go to the Church. An
invincible reason, that it is not lawful to go to the Church for obedience.
Than say I in this manner. Whatsoever is lawful to be done, that being by a
Superior commanded, is a mortal sin to transgress, or to omit. But (as
you defend) it is lawful to go to the Church for obedience: therefore it is a
mortal sin not to go to the Church, when it is so commanded. See I pray you
how many Preistes, Martyrs, men, women, and children, you condemn to hell:
whilst you seek to maintain your own dangerouse and wilful estate.

. 10.
Now let us proceed unto your fear, The 9 objection of Fear.
which you make as one reason amongst the rest, but in deed is the wholl cause
of your forsaking God. Because you have not perfectly learned his lesson which
saidI will teach you whom you shall fear. Fear him, which when he has killed
the body, has power to send both body and soul into Hell fire: yea verily I
say unto you fear him. You say therefore that you do as you do, for fear,
and not voluntarily. But nothing is a sin which is not done voluntarily:
Therefore in your action is no sin at all. Where if you had said thus: that
you do what you do not voluntarily: but nothing not voluntarily done is a
sin: therefore what you do is no sin: then had your argument been good but
your Mayor false: for I would then say you did voluntarily what you did. But
now in your first proposition, where you say that you do a thing for fear and
yet not voluntarily: you include two things most repugnant in them selves. For
it is impossible that a thing be done only for fear and not voluntarily.
Whatsoever is done for fear is voluntary.
And in thispoint we must beg help of heathen Philosophers. For so has
fear darckened our countries understanding, that the very principles of all
moral actions and of goodness or badnes in our doings are called into
question. For what I pray you? if for fear of loasing your own life, you
unjustly take away an others, because of that fear, have you not sinned? If
you have sinned, then have you voluntarilye done it. For Aug l. 3 de lib. arb.
c. 17 and 18. et lib. de vera rel c. 14. lib. 1. retract. c. 13
asinne is not a sin except it be voluntary. If JOSEPH for fear of his
Ladies slander had satisfied her will: had he done against his own? Had ye
three children done against their own will, if they had for fear sacrificed
or done worship to the Idol? And your self shall be judge. When you go to
the Church do you go against your will? does any man carry you? or do you
carry your self in such manner, because of your fear, that you might not stay
your self at home? Surely if fear be so mighty a Passion, that it takes away
the free government of a man's will, and not only threatens, but infers
violenc to the outward members: in vain did our Savior exhort us not to
fear the world, in vain did he with his heavenly instructions animate his
Disciples against incounters whatsoever of the adversaries of his holy truth.
But let us decide this question out of Philosophy. Only violence takes away
voluntary.
In a reasonable creature therefore nothing takes away the nature of voluntary,
but constraint. Now coaction or constraint always proceeds of an
extrinsecall cause using our members contrary unto our own will or desire. For
as in a stone it is violence to be thrown upward, because it is contrary to
the nature of the stone which would go downward of it self, and proceeds
from an external cause which is said violently to move the stone: So in a
reasonable creature which has to govern it self by reason, and knowledge,
whatsoever is contrary to the inclination and propension of the will received
by the same knowledge: is violent and properly called constraint, The will
cannot be constrained
and cannot be any way used but by an external cause. For whenever the will
it self agrees unto a thing for whatsoever respect, than is the action
voluntary, because it proceeds from the will. Yea God himself although he
may move the will of a man (for Pro. 21
the Kings heart is in the hand of God, and whither it pleases him, Aug.
Tract. 26. in Joan. Chrysostom. ^o. 9. in Joan.
he will incline it) yet does he not violente the will at all, but sweetly
draws it and allureth it: For if he drew the will against the will: now a
will were not a will. Most certain then it is that the will it self can not
be constrained, because it is a will, and no way subject unto an external
mouer.

Now the outward powers of man may no doubt be subject unto an outward
strengh, The outward members of man may be constrained, but not by the will.
and moved against the will. For as Aristotle defines l. 3. Eth. c. 1
that is violence or constraint, whose beginning is without the thing, the thing
it self applying no endeavor thereunto. But certainly we know that a man's
hand, or foot, or anyother part whatsoever, yea the wholle body may be moved
by an external cause or beginning; the hand, foot, or body, being not applied
thereunto by the will, which is mistress of the wholle. And when this
happens: then do we say that action to have been done violently and
constrainedly. You go therefore to the Church, if you go carried by force,
pulled, drawn, finally so that your self apply not your members thereunto:
then was this a violent action against your will, and you have not sinned. But
if your self once move your members thereunto, D. Tho. 1.2. q. 6. ar. 5 ad 2
yea ifyou give an inward consent to be so violented: although it be for fear
of loss of goods and liuinges: although there stand a gallows of purpose
erected for you: although the Beadle of Bridewell come behind you with his
staff, fearcely and barbarously threatening you: than have you moved your
self, the beginning of your action is within your self, if not the first
motive, which is outward danger: yet the immediate beginning and natural
cause thereof: you apply somewhat of your own, which cannot be but from the
will: therefore is your action voluntary. For this cause do both Philosophers
and Divines conclude, that what is done of fear, is always simply and
absolutely voluntary. For although in other times or with other circumstances
none would consent unto that which he does for fear. yet with those conditions
being present, he does absolutely yield unto the same. Wherefore concludes S.
Thomas, that whereas every thing is properly said to be such as it actually is,
not as it may be apprehended: that is absolutely voluntary which is done and
consented unto for the present fearful condition which it has annexed,
although as it is imagined and apprehended without the same condition it would
be rejected. He therefore which by constraint is violented, does nothing, but
only suffers: he which is moved for fear, because he does somewhat
himself, is not violented or constrained: but the particular circumstances
considered, does voluntarily what-soeuer he does: although without those
conditions it were vnuoluntary. The humane laws of diverse countreies for that
power which the common wealth has over our civil actions, do commonly
disanull those contractes which are made for fear: yet cannot all the laws of
the world bring to pass but these contractes must be voluntary albeit the
law for to punish the iuiuriouse person does make them void. neither can
fear or any authority make such contract in him which is iniuried to be no
sin, if it were of it self a sin to make it. You therefore may resolve your
self that your going to the Church is voluntary. And because every action
voluntary in a matter which of it self is a mortal sin, deserves
everlasting damnation, although it be done for fear: acknowledge your sin,
that you may the sooner obtain remission. And for all this will I utter
somewhat more in this point, that you may see I conceal nothing which may
stand for you, that if this action of going to the Church with heretics were
only forbidden by positive laws of the Church: than when there were no
scandal it were lawful to use it: the Church like a most kind mother never
intending to bind unto so great inco^ueniences as in our country by ye
omission of the same action may ensew. But this to be no such action as only
humane laws do reprove; shall be proved below. it is sufficient now to have
showed, that only fear cannot make it voluntary, and consequently not
justify it, if it be evil.

. 11.
But your reason following of your good intention either to pray Catholickly,
The 10. objection of a good intention.
or to save your wife and children and goods or lands, is most frivolous.
The end say you is that which makes the action either good or badde: But my
end is good: therefore the action also is not unlawful. Wherein I marvel no
more that you are become a new patron of going to the Church: This reason
serves for the defense of all vice.
for you have taken upon you the defense and maintenance of all other
wickedness. Teach I pray you the murderer; to have an intention of showing his
manhood: the thief, to desire riches, that he may live in his old age
honestly and truly in the commonwealth: the adulterer to procure amity and
frendshippe in his neighbors samely: and then may you upon such intentions, I
will not say dispense with them, that they may seriously apply their trades:
but persuade them that which they do to be sound and perfect virtue. Two kinds
of intentio^s.
There be therefore two kinds of ends, and likewise two sorts of intentions
in our actions. The first is an intrinsecall end, which is the very object and
motive which the will desires: and that act of the will, by which we desire to
obtain that end, is properly called our intention.

There is an other end extrinsecall unto the act and not always pretended,
when we do not only desire that which is the immediate motive of our desire,
but referring that to a farther purpose, desire withal to obtain the same.
and this is also a kind of intention: but extrinsecall and accidentary in our
wholle action and is called a circumstance thereof. An example of this you may
have in all actions. If a man determine to go to dinner: the very object, and
motive, and intrinsecall end of his desire, that is of his intention, is to
dine. But if he refer this his dinner unto obedience, or unto the glory of
God, for whom he intends to keep and increase hiscorporall strength: these
are extrinsecall ends or circumstances of the first intention or end: and his
immediate intention being to dine, he refers the same with a farther
intention unto those ends. Now this intrinsecall end which we spoke of as it
gives the nature and form unto the inward action: so does it also give what
goodness or badnes is in it. For if that object or motive be of the own nature
conformable unto to reason, than is it a good action or desire: If contrary;
contrary: A good action of it self may be corrupted by ye circumstances: but
an evil action cannot be justified by good circumstances or intentions.
If indifferent, so that it has in it self no certain or determinate order
unto right reason: then is the action of the own nature indifferent, neither
good, nor badde. Yet does not goodness or badnes flow into an action only by
the nature of the immediate object or end of the same: but also by the
extrinsecall end: yea by every circumstance, and every means taken for the
obtaining of the same first end or object. So that although the action be good
of it self or indifferent: yet if it be referred to a further end which is
evil, or if any means used for the bringing to pass of the action it self
be evil, or there want any circumstance of time, place, manner, or measure
necessary: than is the wholle action it self naught for some circumstance.
Even in like manner is the action it self naught, when it being unlawful is
done with all possible circumstances or intention of whatsoever farther good.
Dion. c. 4. de diu. nom.
For the general ground both of Philosophers and Divines cannot be infringed:
that good is of the wholle and intiere cause: but the evil is of every
particular defect. Hence is it therefore evident: first, that although your
remote intentions in going to the Church have never so great color of piety:
yet that which immediatelye you do which is to go to the Church is your
intention also: And that you as well intend to go to the Church, although for
those extrinsecall ends: as he which steals for to give Alms intends to
steal, and the dissolute woeman which kills her Infant for fear of giving
scandal, intends the death thereof Secondly that the immediate action of
going to the Church being evil, it cannot be justified by any godly or lawful
circumstance. Even as if it were good of it self, yet might it be made evil
by an evil circumstance. For good requires a perfect cause, and evil is that
which wants any part of the cause. Even as a man is not a perfect man except
he have all his members perfect: yet is he imperfect, if with all other good
pro portion, he do but look awry.

. 12. The 11. objection of yt nature of Churches.

As for your last reason, it is answered in one word. The Churches are ours in
ded But the heretics service and company is not ours. Even as if there were
Idolatry or any filthy crime there practiced, you had no right unto the
Idolatry or other sin, nor might be there present, for all your right to the
Church. But if you have right to the Church: why go you thither at service
time, or so that you may seem to be at service? Greg. l. 3. dial. c. 30.
Heretical Churches are Devils lodgings.
is it not sufficient at any other season? O Sir it is not the Church which
draws you, but the service. And if you knew that Churches profaned by
heretics have other manner of inhabitants in them then the holy Angels. you
would not be very hasty for devotion to go unto them, even when they be emptye.
But you shall hear what S. Hillary says of those which in his time went to
the Churches where heretics were gathered, for love unto the Churches
dedicated before unto God. Lib. cont. Auxent. circa. fin


Wickedly has the love of the walls possessed you, wickedly do you reverence
the Church of God in houses and buildings: wickedly under these pretenses do
you talk of peace. unto me are more safe, the mountains, lakes, prisons and
dongeons. Where you may see a perfect example of our age, and how the most holy
Fathers which have lived in ancient times amongst heretics, accounted no
small matter the joining themselves unto their detestable company. For they
always esteemed it besides a favoring and exterior protestation of their
sects, a most ready way unto the wholle overthrow of true religion. For the
heretics have always endeavored with show of piety, to darken true piety:
The cause why heretics retain Churches.
and with maintaining some outward show of reverend antiquitye, to blotte out
of peoples memory the ancient truth it self. Such was the invention of
Idolatrous Hieroboam who made Israel to sin.

Now says he will the kingdom return unto the house of DAVID, 3, Reg. 12.
if this people do ascend to do sacrifice in the house of God in Jerusalem.
And for this cause he devised new Gods new preistes, and profane temples. Even
so is it with you. For least the people should have desire to resort to the
true house of God in spiritual Jerusalem: longing after Confession, after
Mass after holy Catholic Sermons, and the whollevse of Catholic rites and
ceremonies: you are fed with reverend Churches, with gay painted words, and
service in the vulgar tongue, not for any affection of piety, or inclination of
virtue: (For who knows not how little they seek for piety, or desire for
other respects to keep Churches standing:) but only to nourish the dissension
and maintain the division of ISRAEL from IVDA; To this end do they furnishe
your Tables with such dishes, as are no more comparable with the Catholic
dainties, than the Onions of Aegipt with the most delicate Manna of the Desert.

. 13. THE SECOND PART.

Having now answered sufficiently (as I suppose unto your objections: (for
other objections which I must of force help you withal: I will after bring
forth: Other objections are answered in ye progress of this Treatise.
) there rests the only thing which I have in this wholle discourse supposed
and taken as certain, in wihch in deed our wholle disputation does principally
consist: that is, to prove by necessary grounds, that to go to the Church is
an action of it self evil and justifiable for no circumstance at all. which I
have hitherto supposed not bringing any arguments thereof, other then by
answering your objections must needs be insinuated: because it was not my part
in this Epistle to prove the truth but to disprove falsehood. Yet least this
letter of mine should fall into some hands of those who have not seen such
learned discourses as of this point heretofore have been set forth: I will
briefly set down some few reasons amongst so many, whereby I may show this
action of going to heretical service to be no indifferent action, or such as
may be exercised without sin: but wholly forbidden and unlawful of it self.
The reason of the difficulry which diverse make in this question.
which thing when I undertake I know in how uncertain and slippery a place I
find my self. For although in my judgment this matter may evidently be
deduced out of Scriptures: yet are the scriptures wrested from our case to
other senses. Although we may conclude it out of the examples of holy Fathers:
yet are they interpreted of Idolatry and not of heresy, or of being present at
Idolatrous sacrifices, not at heretical service. Although we may allege the
grane example and severe discipline of the wholle Church, even since Christ his
time, in all ages forbidding communication with heretics: yet are we answered
that those were perfect times; in which as all manner of virtues, so all manner
of severity did also flourish; I know not what prerogative being attributed to
our age. Wherefore although this were a matter fit to be discussed out of
Scriptures, Fathers, and practice of Gods Church: yet will we refer the large
allegations thereof unto other books, the learning and knowledge whereof we are
not able to reach unto: Only touching thereof so much as we shall think
necessary to fortify and confirm those reasons, which out of the law of
nature and of God we will bring to infer our purpose. But first we must agree
what we mean by going unto the Church.

. 14. What is meant by going to the Church.

First therefore by going to Church with heretics, we mean not that material
action of going to that material place where heretics have their service.
For in this respect such action is indifferent. Yea in any action in the world
that which is material may be found at some time or other, The material of
every action may be indiffe rent.
and with some respect unto reason which is the guide of all our actions;
morally lawful and good: though at other times and with other respects it be
unlawful. For if we take that which is material or natural in murder, which
is to beteaue a man of his life: as it is unlawful, when order of justice
wants: So is it lawful when the same order is observed. That also which is
material in adultery or in theft, may be found in true matrimony, or in a
man's own good altogether lawful and commendable: And yet is there none Wc will
deny but that murder, adultery, theft are of temselues unlawful. The reason
hereof is, for that actions are not morally good or badde but by that
conformity or deformitye which they have with reason. Wherefore diverse
accidents and many varieties of respects unto reason belonging unto one
material act: The necessary conditions, of moral obiectes, are not
circumstances but essential un to the action.
these are not now in respect of goodness or badnes accidents, but belong unto
the very nature and form of that act, making different quallities either of
goodness or badnes: or in the one or the other diverse degrees and kinds. For
example: it is not a thing belonging unto the natural substance of the act,
whether the man Wc is killed deserve death, or no: whether it be ones own
wife, or no: whether the horse be mine, or an others. But in the moral form
and nature thereof, that is in respect of that conueniency which our actions
ought to have with reason: these conditions import very much, and belong unto
the very substance and form of goodness or badnes. yea in the very same kind
of theste, as it is not a circumstance but intrinsecall unto the thing which is
taken, that it is an other man's, when the will choo seth and intends the
same: So the difference, of place is not a circumstance but the very substance
of the object; in as much as it is moral, and maleeth the action sacrilege
when the will determines to take from an holy place. And so may we discourse
of other conditions of every obiecte or action. In like manner must we resolve
of this action of going to the Church. For when we say that going to the Church
with heretics is unlawful in it self: we mean not that material action
common to Catholic and heretic countries: nor going to the Church with
heretics as it may be with other moral conditions which may guie it an other
manner of conueniency or disagreeing unto reason: What conditions are those
which make the going to he retickes service a moral action and of it self
unlawful.
but as it has annexed such conditions as we know are in our country, with
the which the goeing being quallified: is of it self altogether unlawful.
These conditions are, when one goes for to be prefent at service: and so, that
he may worthily seem to go as others do, with conformity in religion, or
prejudice, or contempt of Catholic faith and unity: which in one word we may
well term, an orderly going to heretical service.

. 15. Some manner of going not reprehended

Whereby we exclude those which go to the Church for a temporal end of some
particular duty required by the Prince, not in respect of heretical service,
but of that which is due at other time and places. Going with the Prince see.
7. and. 16.
or used by them to give the world to understand that they go to the Church:
or alleged by them to prove that they be not recusantes: Such I say, are
judged by diverse learned men not to go to service as unto service, neither to
obey the Prince in respect of service, which neither the Prince in commanding
does respect, nor they in going. all contrary unto them, which only for
obedience go to the Church, where the end of the precept and of the going is
service it self. Going for obedience see. 9.
But they are esteemed to use that action as a duty common to all places, and
no more intended in the Church than other where: And so all signification of
conformity to be taken away; and this to be only marerially to go to the
Church without that form and morallity which otherwise it has These I say I
exclude. not meaning to set down my opinion therein, whether it be evil of
it self so to go with the Prince: or if it be not, whether scandal may be
separated from it or no: whether they may stay there after their particular
service is finished: whether ordinary attendance upon the Princes person be
such a sufficient cause or no: and such other like: Wc I will leave unto more
learned persons to discuss, and to such courtiers if there be any to
assertaine their consciences in, before they adventure. This one thing am I
assured of, that such persons are in conscience bound to leave the court if
they may without manifest danger of incurring the Princes disgrace, not in
respect of their recusancy (for that they must willingly sustain) but in
respect of their want of that temporal duty which by reason of their calling
or the Princes favor is expected from them.

Going through ye Church.
but some other necessary end, go through the Church, without any show of
reverence at all: for there wants the aforesaid conditions.

Going to Mass with an heretic in a catholic Church.
Yet I say to a Catholic company: for if the company were of heretics
gathered together as such: than although there were Mass: yet were this to go
to heretics service, as we said above. The like I say if one went to hear
an heretic preach, whom he privately knew to be an heretic: if such an
heretic preached in a Catholic company, because he is Pastor of the place,
or thought by the Magistrates and people to be Catholic. Hearing a secrett
heretics sermon.
For although this hearing the sermon may in other respects be evil, as for
danger of infection: yet is not this formally to go to the Church with
heretics: the wholle company being Catholic, Disturbers.
and the name of service, or Church being always taken of the company to which
such service is judged to belong.

Curiouse beholders in an indifferent city.
and known only for such respect to come thither, not that they may show any
liking or conformity at all.

Also those, which in a Catholic or indifferent city do curiously enter to
behold the manner and behavior of heretical conuenticles, See. 36. n. 5.
so that they show no reverence or religious and ceremoniouse presence.

Presence at the heretics grace.
or it be not a formal service before sitting down. For these are not at
heretics service, and the end of their coming is known to be to refresh
their body: neither are they bound to withdraw their presence being altogether
temporal. and the putting off their hatte is understood either an act of
ciuility, others being bare: or an exterior sign of reverence of his own
thanks giving unto God, which becomes every Christian after meat.

. 16. Unlawful going

We do not yet exclude from the unlawfulness of this action such as although
they go not to the Church yet have service at home, either by a minister or
without. Service at home.
For it is not the Church but the service and profession of conformity which is
reproved: which always is understood when the form of heretics prayer is
observed. Yet would I not condemn (neither trewlye allow) those which without
any minister gather all their house together to their private devotions, or
have one of the famely, to rehearse in the name of all, some Catholic
prayers, not in an heretical form, although all the persons be not
Catholic: so that this be not done for contempt, or with a show of unity in
schism or heresy. For this is not heretical service: and without such
prejudice of Catholic unity, one may pray with heretics as with any other
person in mortal sin or excommunication. Going with the Prince and denying
themselves to be Recusants.
Nor we exclude those which going to the Church with the Prince (if such going
be lawful) allege that going for a show of conformity and of absolute going
to the Church, when they are called into question. For as their going cannot be
iuslified, if it do signify conformity in religion: So if they say that it
was used for the same conformity: it must needs be anvnlawfull dissimulation:
For in those actions which signify religion, it is all one to do the^ and to
say they were done. Making others to think that they go.
And there fore those Wc any way give others to understand that they go to the
Church, giving probable cause of such estimation themselves, are no way to be
excused: although they may, giving no sufficient cause permit that others say
or think what they list. The like of those which say that they have been at
the heretics service, Saying that they have gone or will go.
or that they will go. For such speeches imply conformity in religion, and are
so commonly understood. Hitherto appartaine those, which going to the Church,
say they go for obedience. For such obedience is but an extrinsecall motive or
end: Going for obedience. see. 9.
the very form of such action being to go to Church, and principally intended
in the commandment as we have said above. And therefore by the commandment the
signification of religion, or contempt of the Church is not taken away, but
rather increased. And the like is not in going to the Church for some
particular service of temporal duty unto the Prince. For here the going to
the Church is not formally respected, See. 7. and 15.
but only in as much as it happens that a mere temporal service is to be
used in the Church as well as in other places. Even as if it should happen
thathe Prince in some extremity of corporal disease, would for particular
devotion go to the Church: and necessity should require that the Physician,
Nurse, or Apothecary should their attend for their ordinary services.

Going with out intending to profess religion.
yet not intending any signification in religion. for this action of it self
signifying religion, on, when for some particular circumstance, the
signification it self is not taken away, as in the cases aforsaid: It is much
alike as if a man hanging up an Iuye garland at his door as though he had wine
to sell: should answer such as offer to buy wine, that although there be a
garland hanged up: yet he had no such meaning as to show that he had wine: or
if a man should with very angry and fierce countenance call some person of high
dignity even before his face, by all manner of opprobrious names: and being
conuented for the same, should say he meant not as he said. For although God
himself in this action of going to ye Church knows very well our meaning:
yet does it signisy unto men as it ordinarily does at other times, and by
others. And rather men may doubt of the true meaning of his protestation if he
make any, Of a Protestation. see. 31. and 35
then of his outward action: And whether his protestation be sincere or no:
certain it is yt there is in the action, all signification set apart, at
such time and place a very great contempt of religion, and of that person to
whose dishonor the signification would tend that is of God himself. For who
doubt eth but that if one should co^tumeliously name his Prince before his
face, although both the Prince and yt wholle court knew his meaning to be
otherwise, yet if such opprobrious words were enforced by a foreign enemy for
contempt of the Prince, A very fite example against Prote testation.
such action would be deemed treason? Wherefore that this wholle matter may be
perfectly conceived: Let us imagine that unto AUGUSTUS the Emperor came 4.
several persons: the first contumeliously, and also from his very heart,
says AUGUSTUS is an unjust Prince. the second contumeliously also, although
against his conscience, uses the like speeches: yet does he not seek to make
his conscience known unto the Emperor, or unto his courtiers being present.
The third makes in deed his mind open unto his majesty and court, that he
thinks not so undoubtedly of him: yet contemptuously, either to please an
adversary of his, or else moved with greater fear of that adversary than of
the Emperor, he utters the very same. The fourth not after any of these
manners, but sent by a very loiall subject of the Emperors, brings him this
relation: that a foreign Prince or Lord forgetting his allegiance or duty,
has publicly said of his Imperial majesty: AUGUSTUS is an unjust Prince.
Most evident it is, that the three first has formally used and most
traitorously the aforesaid words. but the last only materially and without any
crime at all. Now to apply this example unto our purpose: there are three kind
of men which wickedly and traitorously unto God and his Church go to heretical
service. The first is the heretic himself: who in this action both
signifies and inwardly means a false religion The second is the dissembling
scismatike, who signifies it, and yet in his heart thincketh it not. The third
is the same fearful schismaticke who protests that he means not to show
liking of a false religion, yet neither can his protestation be known to all
which see his fact: and perhapps also he is not believed in the same, whereas
he may as well lie in his words as in his action: and yet (although he obtained
so much that he might be believed) cannot be excuse himself from contempt and
derogation unto Catholic truth. The fourth only uses the action materially,
with out any signification of falsehood or contempt of truth at all, as are
those whom we have excused before. For as in words, which are principally
instituted for to represent the meaning of the heart, there may be the material
sound of them, without the signification, which is the form thereof as when one
repeateth the words of an other; although they were blasphemous: So, and much
more may there be in actions or outward signs, which are not ordinarily so
determined to signify, as words. So may a man carry an Iuy bush upon his back,
home for the fire, and never be thought to pretend selling of wine: Bannes. 2.2.
And a comedy plaier counterfeite Idolatry before an Idol, without any formal
or sinful meaning thereof.

All kind of dissimulation in this point.
For we speak of going to their service formally, that is when there is
annexed unto the material thereof a signification, contempt, or prejudice of
religion.

Finally, hereby it appears that we exclude not any from the sinfulnes of
the deed, who any way guie show, or use any kind of dissimulation in these
weighty matters. Such are those which go, but pray not there: or pray by them
selves: those which by their own procuring or consent, are put in the book of
co^municants or of married folks, or of such like. Such as get license from
the Arches to be married where they will: Such as send their children to be
christened by ministers, or say that the minister christened them: women which
cause the minister to come to their house with his book and surples, as though
he should Church them: those which receive comfort of ministers at their death,
or in sickness: for those c. Filij De Haereticis in sexto.
are adjudged by the Canons of the Church even heretics, and so their goods
confiscate after their death: those which go with coarses to Burialls, if they
withdraw not them selves when service of the Burial begins: nor such as to
save them selves from the danger of the law, cause a Catholic Priest to go
into the Church to preach, thereby to make their neighbors to say or think
that they go to the Church: yea and without such intent, if they go so that
they seem to go to heretical service: nor those which are married by a
Catholic Priest with the communion book, or otherwise, that it may seem
they be married conformably: those which having secrett Pewes or closettes
looking into the Church, cause some other to go thither, that them selves may
be deemed present: or those Wc cause themselves to be carried to the church: for all such have not lied to me^ but Act. 5.
unto god. And although we are not bound always to confess our religion, yet
are we bound never to deny it, or to give probable occasion to others so to
esteem of us. although without such occasion given we may permit them to
think what they list.

. 17. Whether this doctrine be scrupulous.

Neither let any man marvel at these manifold down falls intosinne, or
esteem us to scrupulous, or the way of salvation to strait. For this is that
strains of the gate Mat. 7.
which leads unto life: this is the combat between the world and Christ,
10.16.
never agreeing in one: this is that Psalm. 18.
vnsported law of God, which not With standing conuerteth souls, and makes them
despising the delights of the flesh, yea and the extreme vsages of the world,
only cleave unto Christ: and (that which is a most happy thing) to remain Luc.
22.
with him in his tribulations, in the least jot not swaruing from his holy
will. Marvel not though heretics dissemble amongst Catholics, though they
show no difficulty of making al demonstration of feined piety, contrary unto
their own consciences, whilst they receive our Sacraments, profess our
doctrine, and seem to detest all heresies: They want together with true
religion all constant prosessio^ of that which they esteem for truth.
Treacheries. dissimulations, false worshippings, dublenesse, deceit, and all
manner of fallacy, is far from those hearts which em. brace Christian verety.
One remedy there is which may deliver you from this precisenes. An easy way to
avoid all seruples herein
Be at utter defiance with Schism and Heresy: Let all the world understand,
that in the least dangerouse point you will take the secure part, and no way
shrink from your duty toward God: than shall you certainly avoid the
diverse snares of conscience, with which you may otherwise be entangled, and
perhaps be left in more settled quiet in the world, which ordinarily molesteth
them most, which most seek to flatter it. This assure your self of, that as
you cannot too soon fly from places suspected of pestilence: So cannot you be
too curiouse of shu^ning whatsoever has the least savor of schism and
heresy.

And least you may for want of a right persuasion of your duty, do amiss:
compare alwaie: the case of going to the Church, A rule to know how far we
may go in this point.
unto the receuing the communion, and doing facrifice, or being present at
sacrifice unto Idols. And what you may do, or say you have done, or will
do, or what you may dissemble in one, you may in the other. For I will show
hereafter, that although there be degrees amongst them, yet there is sin
committed in them all alike.

. 18.
Having than hitherto declared our full meaning in this question, and whom we
exclude or include therein: Let us begin to handle the matter, scholastically
as I said before: as for fruitful examples of ancient ages, and pithy
sentences of the doctors of the Church, and devout conceits and exhortations
unto that which is necessary in so weighty a point of Christian religion: I
leave the^ unto the three books, The book of Schism.
which learnedly, devoutly, and largly entreat thereof in our own tongue. My
purpose is only to press you with sound arguments, and so to enclose you
within the bands of most firm reason, The reasons of refufall.
that you shall neither escape my hands, nor being once in them be wrested
from me.

We must therefore out of the sure and steadfast grounds of sound Divinity, The
cololatory letter.
prove that the usual going unto the Church with heretics in England, is
altogithtr of it self unlawful: having annexed unto it as signification of
false religion, a denaill, contempt, dishonor, and prejudice of the truth
which do give the form and nature unto such going, and so make it that by to
accident or circumstance in the world it may be justified This will we deduce
out of the nature and quality of five principal virtues necessarily
appertaining unto Christian duty.

. 19. Every Christian is bound to profess his faith at some times.

The first of these virtues, is an exterior confession of faith: to which
every Chrstian is bound in two fortes. For first there is an affirmative
precept, which commands us to confess our faith, and show outwardly that
which we believe. and to this are we bound, sometimes in respect of other
virtues, sometimes in respect of faith it self. In respect of other virtues:
as of religion, which is a virtue to which it belongs to yield honor unto
God: not only with the mind esteeming him our chief Lord and final end,
Damasc. l. 4. c. 13.
and submitting our selves unto him as the sovereign ruler of our souls: but
also with our body* and exterior actions (whereas we consist as well of body
as of soul) exhibiting unto him outward reverence in prayer, thanksgeuing:
sacraments and ceremonies of religion. Which exterior actions always being a
profession of faith, it is a clear case, that sometimes in respect of religion
we are bound to this exterior act of faith, which we call confession of
faith. And this bond in respect of religion takes place, so often as the holy
Church binds us unto any act of religion, as of hearing Mass, confession,
receiving, baptism, extreme unction or other such like, or when there may
happen any necessity, either of our neighbor, or of our selves, or of the
honor of God, or singular common profit. To this confession we are also bound
sometimes in respect of charity to wards our neighbor. A man is bound to
profess his faith for ye charity toward his neighbor.
As when this is a necessary remedy to hinder the peruersion of others in faith
and religion, or any great scandal in this behalf. As we read of diverse
Saints, who seeing Christians in torments ready to relent, comforting them with
wholesome and necessary counsel: have them selves confessed their own faith,
and together with charity toward their neighbor showed their faith toward
God, for wihch they have been rewarded even with Martyrdom. Christening of
children a great bond.


And here can I not conceal a thing as necessary for the good of my country,
as any other thing without which we cannot be saved. It happens not seldom
that in childbirth the little Infant is in manifest danger of death. The midwife
and others assisting either for ignorance, malice or for fear of the
instruments Commonly against the 9. Injunctions such are now troubled by the
spiritualty.
of the Devil, which seeks to take away that only remedy of salvation which
our poor and most miserable country has retained: does not care to Christen
the same. Now whatsoever other man or woeman there present yea the 30. q. 1. c.
Ad limina.
father or mother in such necessity, is bound although manifest death would
ensew: under pain of mortal sin, that is of eternal damnation if they
repent not, to Christen or cause to be christened the aforesaid Infant. where
by it happens that in such fact they consesse this most certain point of
Catholic verety, that no Infant can be saved without Baptism. And in this
bond are included schismatikes and heretics themselves: who having this
belief, are also bound to show the same in like necessities.

Some other may be bound hereunto by reason of Iusticke, as those which are by
office appointed to teach others. For such are bound even with peril of their
own death to instruct their flock, so therwithall uttering their own
belief.

But in respect of the very virtue of Faith it self this outward confession is
necessary. first, When is a man ordinarily bound to show his faith.
when any man by concealing and not confessing his faith, should be thought to
deny the same. Secondly, in Baptism, where an open profession thereof is made.
Thirdly, when generally the faith were in great hazard or peril of
subversion. Saint THOMAS entreating of this matter gives this rule of the
obligation of this precept, saying: 2.2. q. 3. ar. a
That a man is bound unto the exterior confession of his faith, when by the
omission thereof there should be withdrawn dew honor from God, or profitt to
our neighbor: as says he, if any man being demanded of his says, should
hold his peace, and thereby it should be thought either that he had not faith,
or that the Catholic faith were not true, or others by his silence should be
auerted from the faith: for in such cases the consession of our faith is of
necessity to salvation. Thus Saint THOMAS. The ground of this doctrine hitherto
set down, is the infallible rule of S. PAVL, To. 10.
With heart it is belecued unto justice, but with mouth confession is made unto
salvation.

But of this kind of affirmative precept we needed not here to entreat, save
that partly for the necessity thereof in our country I thought it charitable
not to omit to say thus much: Partly also I think it profitable for the
better understanding of that which shall follow: But most of all for that I
desire to engraffe in every ones mind a great conconceit of the excellency of
faith, and what account we should make of the confession thereof.

. 20.
Now there is concerning this very same point of confession of faith, A man is
always bound not to deny his faith.
a kind of negative precept, forbidding us ever to deny either in word or deed
our faith. For so is there in all affirmative precepts included also a
negative. As in the precepts of loving God and honoring our Parents which are
affirmative, there is implied a negative precept of not hating God, or
dishonouring our Parents. And as the affirmative precepts do not bind us at
all instants to fulfill them: So do the negative at every moment bind us not
to break them. For at no season may a man steal, whereby he should
transgress a negative precept: And yet at all seasons is not a man bound to
pray, to fast, to give alms, to honor his father, which are affirmtiue
commandments, but in time and place convenient. This precept therefore of
never denying our faith, Mat. 10. Luc. 9 2. Tim. 2. Mat. 26. Aug. l. cont. mend
c 6. Theophil. in Luc. 12. Leo. ser. 9 de Pass. Do.
always binds unto mortal sin. For who denies Christ, shall be denied by
him: who is ashamed of Christ; of him also will Christ be ashamed: and this was
the sin of S. PETER for which he wept so bitterly: For he never lost his
inward faith as S. Augustine and others do affirm but only sinned against ye
exterior confession there of, as we may manifestly gather by the promise of
Christ that his faith should not fail. Against this precept may a man sin
not only in word, by saying that he knows not whether any one point of
faith be true or false: A man may deny his faith by deeds as well as by words
Admitting of consere^ce
by offering to confer with heretics as to be instructed by them, so going
from the school of his master Christ, and of his mistres the true Church: by
saying he is a Turk or Protestant, or no Christian or Catholic: or by using
such words as may make others to conceive, that he is no Christian or
Catholic, at such time as he is asked, although the words of them selves be
indifferent: But also in fact, or in any sign which shows that which in
words might be falsely or unlawfully uttered. This does S. Hierome teach.
neither must we think, says he, in ep. ad Tit c. 1
that in the day of judgment those only shall be denied by the son of God,
which in Martyrdom have denied Christ: but all those also by whose work, or
speech, or thought, Christ being denied, Ser. de Abra ham.
denies: or being confessed, confesses. And Saint Ambrose not only in false
words, but also in dissembled works a lie is found. And even as the inward
dissenting from true faith is either inward infidelity, Apostasy, or heresy:
so the outward show of a false faith, Exteriout. heresy.
or denying the true faith, is called exterior infidelity, or exterior heresy
and apostasy. And so were always those which had outwardly done any act of
infidelity in the primative Church thought by all Fathers to have denied their
faith. Cypr l. 2. ep. 7.


. 21.
Than out of this wholle most certain discourse will we thus frame our
argument. Going to heretics service is exterior heresy.


The being present with heretics at their service in such outward show, as
is nothing diverse from the heretics them selves: is an exterior act of
heresy, and consequently a profession of heresye, and denial of Catholic
religion.

Most manifest therefore is it, that such presence is of it self unlawful, and
a mortal sin.

But let us prove our Antecedent. Such presence is a ceremonious and religious
act, applied unto a false congregation and religion. But every ceremony is an
exterior act or profession of that faith and religion to which it is applied:
therefore is such presence a profession of Protestants religion.

That such presence is a ceremonious and religious act, Going to ye Church is
a ceremony. L. 10. ciu. c. 6.
S. Augustine shall witness. who expresslye teaches that whatsoever work is
done, that with holy society we may cleave unto God, is a kind of sacrifice:
which truly cannot be without a religious ceremony. It signifies a society of
Godliness.
And what I pray you is the end of coming together in Churches in all men's
opinion, but for to cleave unto God with holy society? than must the coming
thither of hecessity be a ceremony. And of what religion or society but of
DATHAN and ABYRON, of such as DAVID did detest, Psalm. 25.
when he said I hate the Church of the malignant, and with the wicked will I
not sit? therefore in this ceremony is implied a profession of heresy. Neither
is it sufficient to say that your meaning is not to make any such profession,
but only to go after a profane sort: or to use a lawful ceremony of your
own religion: for that is the meaning of words and signs and actions, which
either their own nature or the common use of men has imposed, not that we your
self would intend: neither can you by this word (Mountain) make others to
understand water; nor by (Fire) an house: nor by a (horse) a man: although you
would frame unto your self never so many CHIMERAS and false imaginations of
the same in your brain.

Presence at Catholic service is ceremonious.
Therefore the being present at heretics service is a ceremony of heresy.

A principal sign of religion. l. 19. cont. Faust. c. 11
therefore cannot we show our religion to God without the same. But wherein does
our religion show it self so much as in going to the Church on the holy days,
wherein consists the very fulfilling of the 3. commandment? therefore is this
a ceremony of our religion. Holy days are observed especially by going to the
Church.


Further also. the Church in the commandment of the keeping of holy days,
which no doubt is a ceremony of Christian religion, does prescribe unto us the
manner thereof, and binds us to no other observance than to be peesent at
Mass: at the wc Divine Sacrifice whosoever is present, although without any
attention or devotion which is dew: yet has he done an exterior act of
religion commanded: yet sinned for want of the inward devotion which he should
have joined thereunto. But the same is found in the presence at heretical
service. Therefore is such presence ceremonious and religious: Neither can you
excuse your self with saying that you are not attentively and deuoutely
present, because there wants your goodwill and affection: For there is an
inward act of religion as I touched before and an outward, Inward and outward
acts of religion.
and sometimes the one and the other joined together. Now this is an exterior
action of religion although it want the inward form: and that is the thing wc
we purposed to prove that it is an outward act of religion.

Comparison with other kind of ceremonies.
Some do consist in hallowed things as Water, Oil, Ashes, Palms,
Vestimentes. Other in time, as in Holy days, Vigils Fastings, Lent or such
like. And in like manner does there some ceremonies consist in places: as in
Churches, Churchyardes, Chappells. Others are found in diverse obseruances, as
we see were kept in the old law of MOSES. Now to use the other ceremonies
is always a sign of that religion unto which they belong as the keeping of
Saturday, of IVDAISME: the eating of swines flesh, of GENTILISME: the
absteining from certain meats, of MANICHISME: the keeping of the Catholic
Fastes and days, of some kind of affection to Catholic religion: And why I
pray you shall not the place being ceremonious, with the ceremonious action
used therein, and the ceremonious time withal, of the Sunday, or holy day, be a
sign of religion, of that religion I say which uses the same, Ceremonies of
places less indifferent than others 2.2. q. 85. ar. 3.
and commands the same, and which there as a distinct commonwealth from all
others is gathered together? And this reason in ceremoniouse places, has more
force than in any other sorts of ceremonies. For as the Divines do
excellently teach, Religion being a vertew which exhibiteth honor and
reverence unto god, sometimes it happens that this vertew commands unto
other virtues and ordains their acts to Gods honor: As is to fast, not
only for the punishment of the body, but also for the honor of God, to give
alms, to pay debtes, to visitt Pupills and widows for Gods honor and such
like, Iac. 1.
which properly belong to other virtues, but are by religion as it were
commanded and directed unto the end of religion. But there are other proper
acts wc only belong to religion, and not to other virtues: Such as have no
other praise (as S. THOMAS speaks) but that they are done for the reverence
of God. And these are most properly acts of religion. Of this sort are
sacrifices, kneeling, knocking of the breast and such like. Such also is this
ceremony of going to such a place more than to an other.

Hereof it proceeds that one may eat flesh upon a friday or otheer fasting
day in diverse cases: Why one may eat flesh on a friday, and not lawfully go
to the Church.
and yet in no case go to the Church with heretics. For to abstain upon
certain days: is not a proper or immediate act of religion, but commanded
by religion, being in deed an act of temperance, and so intended by the
Church: though it may be referred not only to chastise the body, but for to
do an honor unto God. And because this law is particulerly found amongst
Catholics: hence it is that it does oftentimes betoken a Catholic and
distinguish him from an heretic. Yet because the immediate end of the law is
temperance, and the act of eating flesh or other forbidden meats is such as
has other natural ends besides the profession of religion as of feeding the
body, or eating with dispensation; therefore is there not necessarily implied
therein any ceremony or signification of religion: And in case of necessity it
may be used, although others understand a profession of heresy therein. For why,
this act of eating or absteining, neither of the own nature nor by common
estimation of men does signify religion, but has an other principal use. Yet
the going to the Church howsoever, does always betoken, both of the own
nature and by common ac ception of all the world, devotion and religion, in
Catholic Churches to the true faith: in heretical to their detestable
sinagogues.

This does S. THOMAS (whom I oftener allege because my conflict is with those
which will be counted Catholics, 2.2. q. 84. ar. 3. ad 2.
although in this apostaticall action, they do deny their Catholic
religion.) This I say does S. THOMAS very plainly set down, when he yields
three causes why exterior worship of God should have a determinate place,
where principally it ought to be exhibited, not that God may be included in any
place, but for respect of those which do worshipp him. The first is, Three
causes of Churchches. 3. Reg. 8.
for the consecration of the place, whereby those which pray conceive
spiritual devotion, that they may the rather be heard, as it is manifest in
the worshipping of SOLOMON. Secondly, for the Sacred mysteries, and other
signs of holiness which are there contained. Thirdly, for the concourse of many
worshippers, whereby the prayer is made more acceptable: Mat. 18.
according to that: where there are two or three gathered together in my name
there am I in the midst of them. Consider I pray you then, whether this place
have not a signification of agreement in religion, and of a ceremony of that
religion, which is there gathered together, I may not say in the name of
Christ, but leave unto your self to judge in whose name. As for the
consecration, you know from whence it came, and how nevertheless they which
were the autours thereof account it now profaned. But of the sacred mysteries
and other signs of holiness, I hope you will not be very ready to brag or
boast: especially when I shall tell you hereafter what manner of mysteries there
be in Protestants service.

The ministers presence is ceremonious.
The minister himself is ceremoniously present, yea although whilst he
reads his service he would never so feign intend to be away or wish that as
it happens sometime to some of his brethren, he were reading Chaucer. But the
presence of the minister and of the auditors have a necessary relation
together: The minister is there as one that offers for the rest, the others
as those which are offered for. Heb. 3.
Every Bishopp says S. PAVL being assumpted out of men, is appointed for men,
in those things which appertain unto God. The minister is to enter into the
Tabernacle: the people to expect without. Luc. 1.
The minister is to make perfect: the people to receive perfection. And
therefore a sufficient sign of religion is it in the laity to be present. Than
may we manifestly infer that ye lay people is also ceremoniously present.
Whence I infer: that as the minister if in the saying of his communion he
were touched of god, so that he were resolved to renounce his heresy: were
bound under mortai sin presently to lay down his book. It is impossible to
receive Gods grace in the Church of heretics.
and not to continue his unlawful action, no not for one instant. So also the
lay man going thither for fear, and in offering up such prayers as he can
afford almighty God in that place, being touched with remorce of conscience of
his unlawful presence: is bound under pain of the same sin to follow
immediately the counsel of the Prophett, and of the Apostle: Esa. 52. 2. Cor.
6.
Get ye hence, get ye hence, go forth from hence, touch not that which is
polluted, go forth of the midst of your congregation. Neither were it
sufficient for such to determine that he would go no more: for so long as he
stayed there so long should he continue in the act of a mortal sin.

The heretics pretense is cere monious
Again the heretic him self every time that he goes does an act of
religion and of his false religion, professing his unity in the church of
Calvin: therefore so does the Catholic also, and both alike in every
particular time committ a new offense. For although the one with this exterior
act of religion, has joined the interior: yet sufficient it is that both do
the same exterior act. And the heretics sin is dubble: for he is an inward
an outward heretic. But the other is only an exterior heretic, but not an
interior.

Receiving the communion is cere monious.
although one be more greeuouse, than the other: therefore it is not lawful to
be present. For let us scanne a little the nature of receiving the communion.
For I pray you, why may you not receive? Because this is not an indisterent
thing, as my presence is. what thing more indifferent, than to eat a peace of
bread? because it is given me in steed of a far more excelent thing which
Christ instituted. So is the service roung in your ears in steed of a far
more sacred thing And as you set little by the service, so you may also set as
little by the bread: especially whereas some of your ministers will scant take it
up from the ground if it fall. Because I should receive it unworthily and to my
damnation. What? do you now know that Christ is not there, and that true
consecration is not made? Do you receive every but of meat wc you receive
unworthily, to your damnation? because it goes against my conscience. O
scrupulous conscience, and why goes it against your conscience; or why this,
more than that? Bring forth any cause why you may not receive, and I will bring
the same for to disallow your presence. The true cause therefore is, for that to
receive is an act of their religion, and so is also to be present at service.
Obedience may excuse as well the one as the other: An intention of I know not
what, may clear them both alike. And if to go to the Church be not evil in it
self, neither is receiving. Yea greater indifferency is in eating and
drincking which has other material reasons of commendable and discommendable:
than can be in the going to the Church, and to such a company which has no
other natural end at that time, and with those conditions, but religion. The
ministers sayng is not ceremoniouse. but in respect of the company


Again the ministers saying is an exterior act of religion and a
ceremoniouse behavior. But his saying is not ceremoniouse but in respect of
the company, which is there religiously present for to hear him. For if one wc
has license to read heretical books, did out of the Church, at a table for
curiosity, before great companies, read the verve same it were no religiouse or
ceremoniouse act. Therefore as well the hearer as the reader are religiously
present.

Presence at Idolatry is ceremoniouse. 1. Cor. 10 see Testament of Rhemes.
Besides. To be present at Idolatry after the like manner or to eat idolothites
otherwise the^ at a profane seast and not in the temple, is a profession of
the Idols service: therefore is the like in this your presence in respect of
heresy: the one signifying as well as the other. heither have we in Christian
times any other Idols but heresies, nor idolothites, but their false services
shifted into our Churches in steed of Gods true and only worship.

The vestiments of a Turk see. 35.
or the picture of the moon, specially dedicated unto him: is by all Divines
esteemed of it self a mortal sin: For no other reason than because such a
vestiment is ordained for no other end but to signify religion: Caiet. verbo
Habitus omissio Bannes. 2.2. q. 3. ar. 2 dub. 2.
Euch as the offering of incense unto an Idol done in such time and place is
determined unto a naughty end of Idolatry, -- although the intention be sarre
contrary: But the union in prayer with a false sect being a ceremony of
religion, is more near unto such a signification, than a coat which is
profanely used, and only a mark of religion: Much more than must it be
unlawful, although the intention be never so contrary. Dissembling of any
jews ceremony, is ceremonious. ep. 11. and 19 Aug.
they both agree in this that the Judicial obsernances are perniciouse and
deadly. As thou (says Saint AUGUSTINE) with a free voice, yea although all
the world were against thee, do pronounce, that the ceremonies of the Jews
are both perniciouse and deadly unto Christians, and whosoever shall observe
them, whether he be of the Jews or Gentiles, that he is tombled down into the
pit of the Devil: So do I also confirm this thy saying, S. Augustine and S.
Hieromes censure.
and add that whosoever shall observe, them whether of the Jews or of the
Gentills, not only nuely, but also dissemblingly, he is hurled down into the
pit of the Devil. This doctrine is according to those words of S. PAVL: Gal.
5
If you be circumcised, Chust will profit you nothing: what is the reason of
this? but because these ceremonies are signs of Judicial religion? There Jews
ceremonies more lawful
And is it not lawful to use the signs of a religion which was once the only
true religion in the world, and by Gods own prescript ordained, and may we use
the signs of a Diabolical schism and division, from the truth of Christ:
which never was good, neither can ever be good? or what difference is there
between the circumcision, and shauing, and conuersing with Jews, and the
signs of your goodly new religion? For even now may a man be circumcised for
his bodily health, and in like manner shaven. But the doing of these things
after the ceremoniouse manner of the Jews is that which is reprehended, as a
thing of it self evil. Even so do I say unto you, that although you may go
to the Church, when none is there, and pray also with heretics in a
Catholic Church or congregation, when a few heretics come thither: Yet if
you go to the Church of heretics to their service, I say, Wherein do
heretical ceremonies consist.
Christ will profitt you nothing. Heretical ceremonies consist in their
service and sacraments. the sacraments you cannot receive but by some
particular act, but of the service you are partaker by your only presence.
For that the very presence may be ceremoniouse, S. Peter's co^uersing with Jews
was to Iudaise.
it is manifest by S. PETER'S conversation with the Jews, to whom he adicined
himself that he might not be thought to converse withGentills, which to have
been a dissimulation in religion, both S. HIEROME and S. AUGUSTINE agree:
although the first excuse him from sin, the second condemns, although not
of a mortal sin. For than was it lawful to use the Jews ceremonies, that
the Sinagogue for the reverence of the Author and antiquity thereof: being now
dead after the promulgation of the new law of Christ, and of a Church wc was to
last for ener, might with honor be carried to the grave, The jews ceremonies
were lawful to the Christened Jews for a while, to knitt the Jews and
Gentiles together
yet so that they were not accounted as necessary unto salvation. And so S.
PETER'S dissimulation, although it were in a matter of religion: yet being in a
matter of a lawful Religion for a time, it had no other sin than it had by
dissimulation, which is not mortal but when it is in a mortal matter. Now if
S. PETER'S civil conversation with Jews was religieuse, because it was to
fulfill the Jews law: how much more shall the spiritual association with
heretics be ceremoniouse? And can it than any way be justified? No no Sir,
your reasons are sriuolous, and your dissimulation is perniciouse. In Amos. 5.
Heretical Synagogues do stincke
Your Sinagogue is long since dead, yea already buried and rotten, and if it
were not buried, yet deserved not to be buried with that honor which was
convenient unto the reverend Sinagogue of the Jews, who were Gods true and
natural people. And therefore in nothing must you obscrue her laws: but
persuade your self of them as S. HIEROME very truly faith. that so often as
heretics are gathered together in the name of our Lord, God detesteth their
stench, and stops his nose. In ose. 6.
Yea the same Doctor in an other place, has these words even of heretics
which have true administration of sacraments. See S. Cypr. l. 1. ep. 6.
They offer sacrilegiouse bread and give alms, and seem to follow humility,
which things if they be done truly I esteem as holocaustes, but when they
have lost the knowledge of God: Sacrilegious bread L. 3. dial. c. 31.
in vain do they brag having cut off the head of faith, to have the other
mebers. So did S Gregory call the Eucharist consecrated by an Arrian Bishop a
communion of sacrilegious consecration: Sacrilegious consecration
How than dare you have any part in such felloshipp? or how can you so wrest
your understanding, that you can persuade your self whilst you are joined
unto Beliall, to have felloshippe with Christ? The sabbath. Gal. 4. Col. 2.
Come. Laod c. 29. Greg. l. 11. ep 3. Can. Apost 69.


Finally to observe the Sabbath or other days of the Jews is to Iudaise.
Therefore to be present at the sacrifices and ceremonis of the Jews is to
Iudaise. For how can one understand that not to work, or to omit an action
is to Iudaise, and to use an ordinary action of their religion is not to
Iudaise? than is there any doubt but in like manet to be present at Caluins
ceremonies is to Caluinise? Surely except you can invent other reason, other
rules and Judgments of moral actions, yea and withal other wits, and
other men, than hitherto have been in the world, you can never convince the
contrary.

Than do I by so many reasons conclude, that to be present at heretical
scruice is an exterior religiouse and ceremoniouse act, even of that
congregation to whom such ceremony or religion does appertain. What is a
ceremony. See Bellarm l. 2. de Sacra in genesis c. 29
And therefore whereas the nature of a ceremony is to be an exterior act of
religion, which has no other end but only the profession of honor and
reverence toward God. in that way which every one does follow: this act for
to be an exterior act of heresy, a profession of Caluinisme, a denial of
Catholic religion and says, and a participation with those of a contrary
religion and says, and a plain incorporation with the members of the same,
utterly excluding a man from the participation of the mystical body of JESUS
CHRIST. which because it does in diverse manners I must here briefly as I am
went) de clare the same.

. 22. Those we go to heretics service are many ways excommunicate.

First therefore an exterior heriticke is excommunicate in FORO EXTERIORI, in
the exterior court. For the holy Church generally excommunicating all
heretics: they are perfectly excommunicate: But if they show that outwardly
which is proper unto an heretic yet keeping inviolable their inward says:
they are not properly called heretics, Exterior heretics excommunicate in
foro exteriori.
but only exterior or outward heretics. And the Church because she cannot
judge of the inward affection of the mind, esteems them nevertheless as
absolute heretics. Neither must you doubt but if you were in Spain the
Inouisition would so proceed against you for your going to the Church with
heretics, as it does with those which will not wash their dishes or sweep
their house on the Saturdaies: that is as if both you were an heretic and the
other. Jews. Whosoever therefore is an exterior heretic, must fully persuade
himself that the Church accounts him an absolute heretic, and therefore
that in places where he is known to have behaved him self as an heretic, he
ought to behave him self also as an excommunicate person, not communicating
with any other, either an civil or spiritual things, whereby he remains
although not so perfectly as others, Nauar. c. 11. number. 27 Silu. verbo
haeresis. 1 q. 9. and verbo A postasia. 4. Bannes. 2.2. q 11. ar. 4 Cap. Nuper
and ca. Sicon cubina. De sent. exc.
yet after some sort cut off from the Church of Christ which is a visible
congregation of those which profess the faith of Christ cannot include those
which in as much as is visible unto men have cut them seiues from the same.

This is (I confess) the common doclrine of divines concerning exterior
heresy: that is, that it does not leave the parties which fall into it
excommunicate before God and in conscience, but only in the out ward court.

Yet you must understand that there are two sorts of exterior heretics, the
one which does an act of heresy for fear or any other cause, yet not so that
he may seem any way to join himself unto an other sect, or to participate
with the minister of such sect, being by name excommunicate; or to favor the
same sect at all, the other sort is of those which do such acts with one of
those conditions, A favorer of heretics or partaker in their crime for wc
they are declared excommunicate are also excommunicate
or all of them, the first is not excommunicate, because he is nothing but an
exterior heretic: the second is excommunicate being not only an exterior
heretic, but a favorer or partaker in the crime denoneed. Yea moreover he is
properly a schismaticke, when he any way concurreth unto the approving,
increasing, crediting, or favoring or showing unity with a company divided
from the true Church of Christ, of wc we will prefently more at large entreat.
Let this now remain that although ordinarily he which is only an exterior
heretic, is not in conscience excommunicate, but only holden by presumption
as such, punished by the Church as such, and bound publicly, where he is
known, to behave him self as such: Yet as the case stands in England, an
exterior heretic is withal a favorer of heretics: for why he increases
their number and adds somewhat unto the creditt of their congregation, and
so makes heresy to spredde it self, and therefore so often as he goes to them
he is excommunicate He is also a partaker with the^ in their crime: for the
which he is also excommunicate, if the chief agent of the service be by name
excommunicate for the same fault, which your self may examine. But now let us
discuss, whether he be excommunicate also for Schism.

. 23.
My promise was (if you remember) to show that this action which I would so
feign discreditt and banish from the practice of all Christian life is of it
self evil, as directly repugning to five Christian virtues, from which we
cannot swerve without a mortal sin. Let us now, having already as I hope,
sufficiently proved that it is against faith the very foundation of all
Christian vertew; show also, yet with more breuity that it is against the
virtue of Christian charity, the Queen and as it were the form of all true
vertew.

Charity therefore, as the Divines all do teach, The effects of charity.
besides her principal effect which is love of God and of our neighbor for
God, has diverse other effects as well inward as outward. Inward: as first a
spiritual joy of the excellency of God and his goodness communicated to his
creatures. To 5 et 14. verse. 118. vet 16.
Secondly Peace, which makes an union of wills and consent of desires
between. God and our selves: also toward our neighbors and within our own
soul, when all our powers do tend to one end and purpose. L. 9 ciu. c. 3.
Thirdly Mercy, which is (as S. Augustine defines) a compassion within our
heart of others miseries, by the which we are moved to yield them succor if we
could. Outward effects of Charity, are beneficence, alms, and brotherly
correction, which is also a kind of alms. These being the effects of
Christian charity, Vices oposite unto charity,
there are in like manner certain vices opposite unto every one: To love,
hatred: to spiritual joy, that wc we call ACEDIA, and may English a certain
loathing of spiritual good, and also Envy: to Peace; discord in thought:
contention, in speech: schism, war, fighting, sedition, and scandal in
deeds.

All these other desormities being let alone, we must make some stay upon that
one of schism, The greeuousnes of schism. 2.2. q. 39 ar. 2. ad 3. see S. Aug
l. 2 de bapt. c. 6.
which that you may even from the beginning the more abhor: amongst all sins
which may be committed against our neighbor, in S. THOMAS his opinion and also
S. AUGUSTINE, is the greatest: because it is against the spiritual good of a
multitude.

This most horrible crimne so dredfully punished not only in Dathan and Abiron
the principal authors, Number. 16.
but in all the wholle multitudes of those which were partakers of the schism
against MOISES: 4. Reg. 17.
and in the ten Tribes rewarded with the subversion of their kingdom and
general captivity into a strange land, for their reuolting from the house of
DAVID: this crime so great and so enormious, I say, that by your reuolting
from Gods Church, that is, by uniting your self to the tabernacle of Rebels
to Gods unity: you do most shamefully and lamentably incurr. Which that I may
the more plainly expound, I must first show you (yet briefly and concisely as
unto a divine of the chamber though not of the schools) what this monstrouse
vice of schism does mean. The necessity of peace and unity. 1. Cor. 14.


That Peace therefore of which we spoke before how necessary an act it is, we
may well understand by that which Saint. PAVL does teach us, when he says that
God is not a God of dissension but of peace. And by our Savior him self, who
commanding his Disciples, Marc. 9.
to have salt amongst them, as without which nothing can be seasoned, added
thse words. Have Peace amongst your selves. who also gave a special
benediction to the peaceable, Mat. 5
and for his last farewell before his death, and his first salutation after his
resurrection, Io. 20.
thought nothing so necessary for his Church as Peace. Which Church although he
had left amidst the storms and streams of the world in which she could have
no worldly peace: yet had he so established in true peace, that she should
even in the extremity of all kind of miseries, enjoy not that peace which the
wicked have, Esaias 48. Io. 14. Io. 17.
but that wc should unite her unto him, and all her members amongst themselves:
that they might be one thing even as his Father and he were one. Now Sir do
you not tremble to think that you have no parcel of this peace? For there is
no peace with the wicked: Esaias. 48.
and the ancient holy Bishopps in the primative Church, called the admitting
of the Penitents into the Church again, the giving unto the^ peace. But whom
do you think these Penitents to have been? Adulterers, thieves, incestuouse
and sacrilegiouse persons? not those only: For those were never (as we will
show hereafter) in so far a degree separated as those which did in the
exterior show communicate with Idolaters, heretics, schismatickes: But those
especially and with greater difficulty, which in a far higher degree of
apostasy, heresy, or schism, although only in the exterior show, had divided
them selves from the Church of God. Why do you not then long for this peace,
and why do you not think it many thousand years, until you may hear that
sweet voice, which amongst Catholics is pronounced in the holy Mass:
PAXTECVM. Peace be unto thee? For how can there be peace unto you, which
disunite your self from that union which peace makes of one sheepfould and
one shepherd? or who is your shepherd I pray you? Sir Tinker, or Sir Cobbler?
for you must not deny but that he is the shephearde, of whosoever he shakes
his filthy fodering unto.

Or if sometimes before you be restored unto peace with the true Church of
Christ, you presume to entrude your self unto the holy mysteries: with what
hellish confusion do you hear that sacred word of Catholic Peace, which you
have forsaken? No, no. you have broken that Peace, neither must you look for
any peace, until you have renewed that perfect union which Christ has made in
his Church.

Neither yett must you think that Christ his Church has any need of your
person: alas it is but a small access of gain, The holy Church it self
cannot be divided: For it is most perfectly one: you may be divided from it,
and so are, and therefore as an unfruitful branch (save that you have a little
time, God knows how short, to return unto the Vine) in present danger of
being threwen into the fire. This Peace therefore being so important, and
consisting in the union of wills or desires: Let us examine a little how many
things there are in which the Church of Christ is to maintain unity, wherein
her perfect Peace does consist.

The unity therefore of the Church consists in two things: Wherein ye unity
of the Church does consist 10.21.
in the connection or communication of the members of the Church one with an
other, and in the order of all those members unto one head, that is Christ our
Savior, and he to whom he committed his sheep on earth. Io. 21. Col. 2.
Both these parts of the Catholic unity does S. PAVL describe, when he says
of some that had so divided them selves from Christ his Church: that they are
in vain puffed up by the sense of their flesh, not holding the head, whereof
the wholle body by jointes and bands being served and compacted, grows to
the increase of God. This unity have you and do continually cut a sunder:
therefore are you not a peacemaker such as God has blessed (and so blessed are
they which shall procure the unity of the Church, that they shall be called the
children of God:) Mat. 5.
but a peace breaker a deuider at the least of your self from such union, a
fugitive from the Tents of your Captain Christ: Finally in one word which
comprehends in it self many enormities a Schismaticke.

. 24.
That you cut a sunder this unity and so incurr the detestable crime of
schism I thus prove unto you.

The Connection and union of the members of the Church one with an other is
such, that it must make them as one kingdom, one common wealth, one city, one
house, one congregation under one governor yea one body under one head. For
otherwise the Church could not be one, as we are taught in our Creed: and all
other unions which may be found in the Church (this which we speak of being
once taken away) cannot make the Church one, but may only give it a certain
relation unto one thing, which relation diverse things never so contrary one
to an other may have. Diverse unities in the Church. Io. 6. Ephesians. 4. Ibid. 1.
Cor. 12.
There are diverse unities in the Church: it has one beginning, from one God
which called it: one end and hope of the same vocation, which is everlasting
felicity: the same means to attain to such an end, which is one says, one
baptism, and all Sacraments the same: one Holy Ghost which governs the
Church, and distributeth to every one his diverse graces. But none of these
unities make the Church one, but by them either she may be said to proceed
from one or to be directed to one, or to go one and the same way, or to be
subject unto one external governor, not united unto her as a necessary part
and intrinsecally joined unto her, which is the holy ghost. But that is the
essential unity of Christ his Church, Romans 12. The Essential unity of ye
Church
which makes it fully and most perfectly one: that it is one mystical body
whose head being united unto the members, and the members amongst them selves,
and with the same head, are now truly and perfectly, not from one, or to one,
or by one, or under one: but one very self same thing. This is that unseamed
coat of our Savior which cannot be divided: from which whatsoever part is
cut, ceasseth to be a part of a garment: (for Christ's garment has no part:)
Cyp. 1. (...) unit ecc.
but as a bough once broken from the tree, withers: As a river severed from
the fountain, dries up: As the beam divided from the Sun, in a moment
vanishes away.

Now Sir, can you any way persuade your self to be in this unity when you go
to your herticall congregations? L. de fid. and Simb. c. 10.
S. Augustine makes a flat opposition between the Catholic Church and
heretical congregations. Catholics Church and heretical congregations
opposite.
The heretics and scismatickes (says he) call their Congregations, Churches.
Where is Caluins Church, but in his congregation? Where is Luthers Church, but
in his congregation? Where is the true Church, but in the visible congregation
gathered in the union of the Sea of PETER? Who would doubt going into S. PETER'S
Church at Rome, and seeing the multitude there present at the Divine services,
to say, that this is the Catholic Church? And who doubts also when he
seeleth in London streets Caluins black sanctus to fill his ears, to say
this is the Church of the Caluinistes. The de finition of the true Church
Define me I pray you the true Church. It is the congregation of many men
professing the faith of Christ, and using the same ceremonies and Sacraments
under the true Pastors. The definition of Caluins church
Now define also the Church of Calvin. It is the congregation of many men
professing the same faith of Calvin, and using the same ceremonies, and
services, and sacraments, under a Caluinian Pastor. What exempteth you from
this definition? your inward faith? your inward devotion toward PETER'S See?
see how by going to Caluins Church you have gotten Caluins imagination of the
nature of the Church. Calvin dreameth out a Church invisible, L. 4. inst. c.
1.. 7.
and manifest only unto the eyes of God. Of this Church if you desire to be,
you may easily dream it: but then are you not of the true Church, but of a
dreamed Church. But as the true Church of God is visible it self: so is the
union there wc visible. And the division of other Churches which are in deed not
true Churches but conuenticles or as S. Hierome calls thee^ sinagogues of the
Devil, being in all the world manifest and visible, as it were the devils
visible congregations: Ep. 11. ad Gero^t de monog. As the Church is visible: so
is the union therewith visible.
who doubts but the union there wc is also visible? You know that in
Philosophy ENS and VNVM be certain Transcendents, wc agree to all things
equally: and look what every thing has of Entity, that it has also of unity.
Now if Caluins Church be a visible Church (and I would to God it were
altogether invisible, and sent down) so that the persons thereof were safe
(unto the Prince of darkness, from whom it first proceeded) if Caluins Church,
I say, be visible, than as the being of it is, so is the unity also: that is
it has a visible unity, and what unity is this, but that wc the wholle world
judges, a visible freque^ting of Caluins congregation? The Church you go unto
is Caluins congregation: Ephesians. 6. Col. 1.
what is a congregation, but a multitude gathered together? and who makes this
multitude but Ihon, Thomas, and Peter, and all that are there? If you will from
this word (All) challendge a certain extra ordinary privilege, to say, that
they are all except your self: you surely do more than ever was heard of: and
arrogate unto your self, To. 5.
the deserved Privilege of CHRIST and our B. LADY, who only are said to have
been exempted, yet with sufficient grounds of scriptures and Fathers, from
general sentences, such as is that of S. PAVL: in which all have sinned. But
Sir, you can no more exempt your self from this sentence: All these are
Caluinists, by saying except I: than you shall be able at the dreadful day of
Gods severe judgment, if you alter not your course, to exempt your self from
(go you cursed) by saying, except I. Mat. 23. What place our Schismatickes have
in Caluins congregation Aug. in Brouin collat. 3 The soul of Caluins church.


Than are you one of Caluins congregation. Yet, that I may do you no wrong, I
will here put you in mind of a certain distinction which Catholic Doctors
use: that is, that some be of the soul of the Church: and some of the body.
For the Church of Christ is not a dead body, but a body quickened with a
lively spirit. The soul of the Church, are the inward virtues thereof: the
body is the outward show. Even so do I say that in Caluins Church, there is a
body and a soul: the soul is Caluins belief, and whatsoever other dowry of
hell it has: for this soul has no other place than hell fire. The body of
Caluins church, The body thereof
most fit for such a soul, is the outward profession or show, or union, or
practice, and society of Caluins brood. Now I confess that one of these may
be without the other: And as there may be in the Catholic Church variety of
her members: So may there also be in Caluins Sinagogues. In the Catholic
Church some are both of the body and soul of the same: such as have both
Faith, and the outward profession of Catholic religion: Others, only of the
soul: such as have not the outward union and peace with the Church, but before
God are of such perfection that they be immediately united thereunto by his
heavenly grace. Such are those cathecumens, wc abound with love of God, and
true faith: or also excommunicate persons, not yet restored in humane
Judgment, but restored before God from whom they have received true contrition
and purpose of amendment For God is not tied unto his Sacraments, but can, and
does oftentimes immediately justify, those which are thoroughly converted unto
him. Finally others there are which having no inward disposition at all, yet
either for fear or some other affection of worldly interest, in outward show
do nothing differ from the rest. And these are worthily compared unto the
hears of a man's body, or nails, or evil humors, which although they be
within the body, yet are they not animated by the soul, as other parts of the
body are, being deprived of all sense, and lost without pain, and by nature
not fit to be quickened, but rather certain excrementes of the body, only
made to adorn and guard the body, and to be used by the same for the operations
of the wholle. So than have we found out your office in Caluins congregation.
You are not of the soul thereof, in deed: For I hope of the former faith, which
I know to have been perfect in you. But as S. Hierome says, although at the
beginning no schism has false doctrine, in Tit. 3. Schism is the way to
heresy.
yet at the length it forgeth to it self some erroneous proposition, that it
may seem to have gonne from the Church with pretense of some cause: much like
unto your self, who first going to the Church for fear: now that you may
purge your self of cowardice and baseness, maintain your error, contrary to
the general sense, not only of the Church, but even of moral reason.
Therefore look well unto your self, least at the length, as the loss of
charity 1 Timothy 1.
is the way to the loss of faith: so your entrance into schism, make you an
entrance unto heresy and so to a general shipwreck in faith according to the
saying of the Psalmist. Destroy it, Psalm. 136. See S. Greg. l. 25. mor. c. 5.
destroy it, even unto the very foundation. But yet (as I said) you are not of
the soul of Caluins religion. Neither are you of the body of Calvin, as a
principal member. But you shall hear what you are, and I pray you hear it
patiently: Prou. 27.
For better are the strokes of a friend then the kisses of an enemy. You are the
excrements of Caluins congregation, The excrements of Caluins religion.
receiving life neither from Catholic religion, nor from Caluins heresy
(although how could Caluins heresy, or any heresy at all give life unto the
soul?) and in that body you serve for no necessary use (in which you are the
happier, and so I hope you will keep your self, from any butcherly and
tyrannical exercise:) but you serve them yet, Caluins religion in England has
been compacted of excrements.
for an ornament and creditt, as though they had a show of a common wealth. And
how fitlye is Caluins religion adorned with excrements? For if you take way
these excrements, or at the least, if such excrements had been taken away from
the beginning: in Caluins wholle body, there would be now never a sound member.
But remember (I pray you) that whilst your body is with Calvin, your soul
cannot be with the Catholic Church. None can be of the soul of the
Catholic Church wc are of ye body of another. 1. Cor. 6.
For although the catholic Church have undoubtedly some wc are of the soul
thereof, and not of the body: yet those are such as being in soul in the
Church, desire also to be in body: and no ways make the members of Christ, the
members of an harlotte. You whilst you are with your body belonging to
heretics, cannot have your soul in Gods hands, or his Churches. Therefore
consider your self where it is with Calvin it is not (and God forbid it should:
keep at the least your soul from him if you cannot your body:) with God it is
not, nor with his Church: For they both of very good right require both soul
and body, neither can either have the soul without the body. It is in his
hands (yet not as of a lover and favorer) into whose hands, as a Judge, it is
most horrible to fall. Heb. 10.
Who for his great mercy whold a while his justice, and give you space of true
and perfect repentance.

Thus much be for this time said of schism: See 40.
for we shall afterward most evidently out of holy Fathers show that your
action is Schism.

. 25.
But your refuge will be here, The 12 objection, that he wc goes to the Church
is not a schismatike, but rather an exterior here ticke.
that by these reasons I make you a Caluinist, that is an heretic, and not
only a Schismaticke, which I intended to prove: and therefore assuring your
self that you are no Caluinist, whose faith and pernicious opinions I with
your self think you detest: you seem to infer, that as I conclude falsely,
that you are a Caluinist: So do I also falsely infer that you are a
Schismaticke.

From this starting hole can I easily expel you. I have proved that you do
show an exterior union with Calvin: thence do I infer, that you are in the
judgment of the Church a very Caluinist: for the Church judges not of inward
affections, but of the outward actions: and deemeth those actions to proceed
from your inward faith, as they are of them selves an outward profession of the
same. And of this I spoke before where I showed how your action was contrary
unto faith. But now I say you are a Caluinist also by reason of Schism: and as
Calvin is both an heretic and a Schismaticke: So you, Going to ye Church is
both exterior heresy and schism The difference between heresy and schism L.
20. con. Faust c. 3. and con Craesco Gram. saepe
out of his congregation come laden with both vices, of exterior heresy and
absolute schism. Which that you may the better conceive, you shall understand,
that the difference between heresy and Schism, is very well, set down by
S. Augustine, in that he says, that Schism is, when one having the same,
opinions, and using the same ceremony of worshipping God with others; yet only
is delighted with a several congregation: But Heresy has contrary opinions
unto the Catholic Church. Now therefore Calvin in that he teaches diversely
from Christ his true Church, is an heretic: in that he has divided the
Church of Christ, and erected a new altar, and appointed new ceremonies: he is
a Schismaticke. 2.2. q. 39. at 1. ad 3.
And therefore S. THOMAS with all the Divines do vere truly teach that even as
faith may be without charity, so may a man be a Schismaticke and yet not an
heretic: Every heretic is a Schismaticke
But as charity cannot be without faith: so can it not be that one be not a
Schismaticke, which is an heretic. Calvin than is an heretic, and also a
Schismaticke. Now in that he is an heretic, your communication with him (if
we may believe your self, saying you be no Caluinist in deed) is only
exterior heresy, as I have said before: but in that he is a schismaticke, your
communication with him does make you a Schismaticke: and not only an exterior
Schismaticke (For in Schism there is no such distinction of interior and
exterior schism:) but a very absolute Schismatike. So that you are a
Caluinist, both for the exterior profession of Caluinisme, and also for the
exterior union which you have with Calvin: And so should be called, although
Calvin were no more an heretic, than other Schismatickes have been heretofore
in the Church, whose followers have been called Nouatians, Luciferians,
Donatistes, and such like. And to show you plainly my mind: I cannot but
marvel greatly at their clemency, The name of a Schismaticke is too
favorable in our country.
who gave first unto such as you are, the name of Schismatickes: or rather I
marvel at your self and your companions, in that you dispute so seriously
whether you be to be called Schismatickes: whereas you are rather in the
judgment of the Church, plain heretics: being in the outward appearance (of
which only the visible Church, as of a visible token and badge can judge) most
absolutely worthy of that name. We in deed who know you so particulerly and are
fully persuaded of your inward resolution, which notwithstanding we only
suppose upon your own fidelity because yon say so: See more. 40 out of S.
August.
albeit your own fidelity toward God we see outwardly to be very small: yet
do we very fitely, and truly call you Schismatickes. of which name I would
you were so readely ashamed for to mend it, as you are deservedly ashamed for
to hear it. The 13. objection that this act is only exterior schism and not
absolute. and perfect Schime. There is no exterior schism but is also inward.


. 26
But this must we for your better satisfaction prove, that it is possible to
be an exterior heretic not being properly an heretic: and yet not an
exterior Schismaticke, without being a very Schismaticke.

This Argument I can first answer by an other like case. For if you will have
in all vices the like distinction unto infidelity and heresy, than may you
say of a murderer that although he wittingly and willingly kills: yet he may
be but an exterior murderer and not a perfect murderer: And in like manner of
theft, fornication, and all manner of sacrilege. The reason therefore of this
difference is, that the vertew of faith, is in the understanding: for it is a
kind of knowledge, which is always in that power of the soul, which we call
understanding: but other virtues of charity, justice, religion, and such like,
are harbored in the will. And hereof it proceeds, that as one may do an
exterior act, contrary unto his understanding, but not contrary unto his will:
So may a man exteriourly work against faith, and yet his understanding not
consent therewith as to veresie it, although his will do consent unto it as to
do it. for it is the will which has the rule and government over all outward
actions, and they all are ready pressed to work as the will commands. So than
in all moral actions (which must needs be voluntary) it is not possible that
any be exercised outwardly, which as being voluntary, do not join with the
outward the inward goodness or deformity. Even as in our case propounded of
exterior infidelity, such outward action because it is voluntary, has annexed
the inward deformity of the will, unto wc it is imputed, although not the
error of the understanding from which it did not immediately proceed, and with
which it did not agree, although it agreed with the will and proceeded from the
same. All this we may plainly express in a familiar example. One may tell a
lie, when he speaks contrary to that which is in his mind, and by outward
dissimulation show that, which in deed is not. But yet although by such
exterior demonstration he alters not his understanding: yet does his will
voluntarily incur the fault of lying and dissembling. as in all other outward
actions the will contracteth the deformity of them when they be evil. In like
manner may a man tell a lie or dissemble in matters of faith, either by words
or deeds, as has been said: and than although he has not lost his faith, by
loss whereof he should be an heretic in deed: yet does he by such lie or
dissimulation show him self an heretic, and therefore is called an exterior
heretic. which exterior heresy being also voluntary is a most grievous
sin. showing that he loves more the glory of men than of God. But in other
actions wc have no respect of conformity unto the understanding which
consists in truth, but only a respect of conformity unto reason and
prudence, which consists in goodness: there cannot be such disagreeing
between the inward and the outward, whereas the inward now consisting in the
will only, which respects as her proper object, goodness and not truth, as
the understanding does: must of necessity participate that goodness or badnes wc
is in the outward. And therefore in our case, if schism be outwardly, it must
also be inwardly. In few words we may utter this, for the more plain
understanding of the simpler sort, in this manner. Heresy supposes an error
in the understanding, and therefore he which is only an exterior heretic
without such error, is not an inward heretic. But Schism requires nothing
but a consent of the will to division from the Church: and therefore every
outward Schismaticke, is also an inward Schismaticke: as every outward murderer
is also an inward murderer.

. 27
Here also you take hold of that which we said above, The 14. objection. That
if it were schism, all exterior heretics should be excommunicate.
that exterior heretics are not holden by Divines as excommunicate: and yet
Schismatickes are excommunicate in the yearly Bulle of Maundy Thursday: how
than can it be that you being only an exterior heretic, should be a
Schismaticke, unless all exterior heretics be also Schismatickes. And than
false is that general proposition of the Deuines, that an exterior heretic
only is not excommunicate: for he is excommunicate for schism, which we will
have him also to incur.

This is in very truth the greatest color you may have to excuse you from
schism, yet, besides that I will show, that it is but a color: what have you
gained, when you have won that you are not a Schismaticke? or not
excommunicate for schism? is it not sufficient to go to hell with five or six
morsinnes, except you go also for schism? or to be cut from the Church by 3.
excommunications, except you be also excommunicate for schism?

But suppose that every exterior heretic be not a Schismaticke: are you
therefore assured to be of that kind of exterior heretics which are free from
schism? Although in all cases exterior heretics were not Schismatikes: yet in
this case they were.
Hear I pray you what I will say unto you, in this point: For so far are
you from the truth in this freeing your self from schism, because you are an
exterior heretic: that if it be possible for any one kind of exterior
heretic in the world to be also a schismaticke: you are belonging to that
kind.

For what want you, when you be among Caluinistes of the nature of schism?
because Calvin is an heretic? he is also a Schismaticke as I have showed.
Because his service is rather heretical the^ scismaticall, for if it were in
deed schismatic, it should not differ from Catholic service? this were
true if Calvin were but in one of these degrees and not in both. For I pray you
tell me: if Caluinistes were true Catholics in doctrine, An urgent reason to
prove this schism
and had the same rites with the Catholic Church, yet Calvin being divided
from the Church, and withdrawing him self from the unity thereof, were he not
than a Schismaticke and his followers schismatickes, and you amongst them also
a schismaticke? And has he by being also an heretic, gotten a privilege,
either for him self or for you, that the filth of schism is taken away from a
far filthier division? No surely his division is not taken away, but
increased: not excused, but dubbly accused: The 15. objection that it is not
schism because it is not accompained with an inward desire of division
not diminished, but exaggerated. Than does there remain but this only
defense, that although you should be most properly a schismaticke, if you went
of your own free will, or with an intention, or desire of disuniting your
self from the obedience and unity of the true Church, and of the head thereof:
yet now going for fear, and being in heart and desire united to the Catholic,
you cannot incur the disunion from the same. Here (Sir) I have catched you:
for this wc you think to be your defense, shall most easily convince you. If
you went with those conditions and intentions, than you confess you were most
properly a Schismaticke: as those are which go in such manner. The exterior act
makes Schism.
But that exterior act is that which makes schism, whatsoever your motive
or intention is: therefore are you most properly a Schismaticke. For when is
more properly Schism in the Church, than when two Popes are together? And yet
the intention of the Schismaticke Pope is not always to decide the Church: but
either to be a great Prince, or to revenge him self of his enemies, or such
like: and those which follow him do oftentimes follow him for fear, L. 2.
vitae. c. 7
as in S. Bernards time, against Innocentius the second, diverse clergy men
followed Peter Lion, for fear least the other, if they should have reconciled
them selves, would have used the severity of Ecclesiastical discipline upon
them. and yet were they by S. Bernard and all the learned of that age esteemed
schismatics. The like may we say of the other schisms which have been in the
Church heretofore: although of this we shall say more hereafter. Sufficient it
is that Schism be incurred, that such division be made, whether Schism it
self be directly intended ot indirectly. Much like it is if a loose licentious
young man, should defile his neighbors bed, knowing that he shall be
discried, and his lemman be killed by her husband: this man is also a man
slear, although he intended principally the satisfying of his filthy desire. Or
if a thief upon the Alps should take away a poor trauailers apparel, whereby
the other must needs dye for told. Or as it has sometimes happened, if a
thief by fear and threatening, should make one true man to hang an other or
that we may bring Caietanes example of this very matter. If a man for to
fulfill his own pleasure, Verbo Schisma.
should by shooting in a public place, against his intention chance to kill
a man. he he notwtstanding incurreth the crime of murder. But of this point of
your intention, or of the motive of fear I have sufficiently spoken above,.
10.11.
where I answered your principal reasons. This is most certain: that as in
all other sins the exterior action, which is the object of the interior,
gives the quality thereof to the interior, whether such exterior act or
effect be principally or directly intended or no, so long as it is voluntary
and foreseen: Even so is it in this exterior act of Schism, in which
notwithstanding I may say as I said above, that whatsoever other extrinsecall
or remote intention you may have: as of fear, creditt and reputation in the
world, (for this is it which drives your self, and many other unto the
Devil) yet the very intrinsecall end and nature of your action is Schism and
disunion from Christ's Catholic Church: So therefore although every exterior
heretic were not a Schismaticke: yet dee I say that you are a Schismaticke.

Now to answer your objection, and to save the general ground of Deuines,
that every exterior heretic is not excommunicate: I say first, that if
Caietanes opinion be true, who as you know is a Catholic author, 2.2 q. 12.
ar. 1. and q. 94 ar. 1.
and of no small account amongst the examiners of acts of man's conscience:
than every exterior heretic is properly excommunicate, and so every exterior
heretic may perhapps be no Schismaticke, and yet be excommunicate for heresy:
Every exterior heretic is not excommunicate, and yet he is a schismaticke
Bulla caenae c. licet de Elect.
or if he be also a Schismaticke: he may be as well excommunicate for his
exterior heresy, as for his schism, Secondly allowing ye contrary opinion,
which is of most Divines, that is, that an only exterior heretic is not
excommunicate: I say, that the Churches intent in exco^municating of
Schismatics, is only to comprehend those, which calling them selves
Christians, either make, receive, or acknowledge unto themselves a new head as
when there are two Popes together: or those, who making Aug l. 1. co^t. Parm.
in fine
a several congregation, or ioining them selves thereunto, under what manner of
government soever, make a public separation from the true Church or the head or
members of the same. For it is not necessary as Divines all agree, for to
incur schism, Caietan. Bannes. The Pope may be a schismatic.
that the Schismaticke make unto him self a new head: for the Pope him self
remaining head, may be a Schismaticke, if he should refuse to communicate with
the rest of the body in spiritual things: or defend secretly or openly
schism: or excommunicate the wholle Church: or alter generally the
Apostolical and ordinary ceremonies, rites, customs, and services of the
Church. And yet in the Pope, this were peculier that he cannot fall into
excommunication, because he is not subject to the humane laws which impose
excommunication. Schismatickes are excommunicate only in two cases.
In these two cases therefore Schismatickes ere excommunicate. when they openly
profess an other head, although they believe inwardly the unity of the holy
Church, and of the head thereof (for other wise they were heretics:) or when
they erect or make them selves part of a new congregation, divided from the
unity of the wholle. in other cases although they be Schismatickes: yet do
they not incur such censure. And if you ask me, what cases these are in
particular: I answer: that if one amongst Infidells, should say that Christ
were not God, or deny for fear, not from his heart any point of Catholic
faith: or if in a Catholic country one should upon any Passion, make show of
heresy: because here is no diverse head, nor several congregation whereunto he
may seem to unite himself: this man is not excommunicate, although he be a
Schismaticke. Contrary it is when he does the same, for to seem to unite him
self unto a seditious head, or congregation professing the name of Christ, or
publicly seuereth himself.

Neither is this any strange doctrine, that every Schismaticke is not
excommunicate. for who would doubt but that one who makes him self a Turk or
a Jew, Bannes. 2.2. q. 11. ar. 4. Sylu. Nauar
or an Infidel is a Schismaticke? for how can he separate him self more from
Christ and his Church? yet certain it is that so long as he in his mind
forsakes not Christ, or his faith, he is not excommunicate, although he sin
most grievously: or except he commit exterior Idolatry, which has a
particular excommunication, although not in respect of Schism, but in respect
of Idolatry. Direct. Inquis. p. 2. q. 43.
Which excommunication also was not before the time of IHON 21 the Pope. To
this also I add, that according to most Divines, no Schismatickes at all were
excommunicate before Bulla Caenae. Wherein the intention of the Church does
comprehend only such actions as have been usual in ye Church, and
scandalously are wont to break the public peace thereof. But such pernicious
schisms are only in the cases aforesaid. Again, an heretic never so
secrett, if he privately unto him self utter his heresy: is excommunicate for
heresy. and yet I see not in the practice of the Church, but that such as have
special authority to absolve from heresye, would not stick to absolve him, for
all his Schism: which is always annexed unto heresy.

The reason her of is this. why all Schismatics are not excommunicate Aug. l.
1. de lib. arb. c. 5. D. Tho. 1.2 q. 96. ar. 2.
for that ye holy Church being a certain common wealth, does not always
punish alike equal sins: but in ordaining of penal laws has a regard unto
that wc is perniciouse for the wholle body: Blasphemy is a greater sin than
theft: so also is adultery: and yet we know the punishments are not alike. So
is it also in ye Church. some are excommunicate for a fault in one degree,
others for the same fault, in an other degree, are not excommunicate. The
cause why the Church exco^municateth Schismatickes only in these two cases, is
for that wc these two only the Church has been or may be ordinarily molested,
and generally hindered from her necessary peace. Wherefore S. Augustine l. 20.
co^t Faust. in Tit. 3. vide Cypr. ep. ad Magnu^ 24. q. 1 c. Schisma.
defines schism by a separation of congregation: and S. Hierome, by
episcopal dissension. Whereunto Pelagius an ancient Pope does also agree: who
speaking of schismatickes; says, that they have made to the^ selves parts,
and seuering them selves from that wc is one, according to the holy Apostle S.
IVDE, have no spirit.

Thus therefore you see, how an exterior heretic does always an act of
schism, seuering him self from the unity of the Church: yet is he not
excommunicate so long as he follows not, or endeavors not to make a part
contrary unto ye Churches unity. Schismatics in England are excommunicate
Than may a man be an exterior heretic and yet not excommunicate although a
Schismaticke, yet not such a schismaticke as your self, who are a schismaticke
in the highest degree, save that you pretend to do it for fear wc is not a
sufficient excuse to allege unto Christ to purge the dividing of his most
indivisible holy garment. And so you see (if you will see any thing, wc
pleases you not) how contrary this action of going to ye Church is unto two
Theological virtues Faith, and Charity.

. 28
I have stayed longer tha^ I thought to have done in this matter of Schism.
Let us now go forward unto other virtues, whose sacred laws, I say this
practice of yours does infringe.

The next therefore is Religion, ye most noble of all moral virtues, Of the
vertew of religion.
whose duty it is for to yield unto God, honor and reverence. wc it does,
both inwardly by devotion, and prayer: and outwardly also, by external show of
worship, by sacrifices, offerings tithes, vows, lawful oaths, and Sacraments.
To these so many excelent virtues, are there many vices opposite. Idolatry,
divination of future humane events, whether it be by devils, stars, dreams,
fire water, birds, beasts, or any such like thing. Also palmestry, Caluins
service is superstitious. See. 6. L. 2. de. nar. Deo. L. 4. c. 28.
wichcraft, necromancy, superstitious obseruances, tentatio^ of God,
sacrilege, simony. All these kinds of irreligious behavior you detesting: I
would you had such conceit of Caluinists service as you ought, it being a most
certain verety, that it is most wicked and superstitious. There is between
Tully and Lactantius some controversy concerning superstition. The one calls
it the unlawful worship of the true God, the other will have it to be a
worship of false Gods. But according to the doctrine of S. Augustine and S.
Thomas, L. 2. doct. c. 18. and 20. 2.2. q. 92.
superstition comprehends them both. Therefore as you cannot without mortal
sin be present at the Gentills Idolatry, which is a superstition of the first
kind: nor at the Jews sacrifices although directed unto the true God, and
having been ordained by his own commandment: So, and much less than at
these second, may you not be relgiously present at the superstition or
voluntary Col. 2. See Testament of Rhemes.
worship of heretics, invented by their own head, without the warrant of
Christ in the Scriptures: or of the holy ghost in the Church: or of any lawful
authority of such, whom Christ commands us to obey: although such service have
never so great a show of wisdom, or piety, as S. PAVL expressly teaches us.
But of this I will say no more: because I have touched it also above, only I
would not have you to think so grossly as many do, ye superstition consists
in the length of service, and therefore because Caluins service is not so long
as ours, to free it from such name: it is not the length of ye prayer wc makes
superstition, for than should Christ's most holy prayers, have been
superstitious, who prayed longer than any of us all: but the form and manner of
prayer only makes it superstitious when it is either superfluous, or
pernicious as we said above.

. 29
You transgress also the vertew of obedience, This act is contrary to
Christian obedience
whilst you do an act commanded for contempt of the Churches authority. of
which also I have sufficiently entreated above, and showed, how such contempt
cannot be without a mortal sin. Neither can here your protestation take
place, See. 9
as I showed before: as it cannot also, to exempt you from an exterior act of
heresy. For in the Primitive Church Marcellinus the Pope and others of like
condition also, were accounted as Idolaters, although their inward meaning
were well known to all the world to be quite contrary to their outward action.

. 30
There is an other vertew necessary in man's life which is called verity: It is
a most detestable dissimulation. 4. Eth. c. 7.
by which a man shows him self in his life, and speech, such as in deed, he
is. Which may be transgressed either in speech by a lie, or in fact by
dissimulation, which is a kind of lie, as we showed above out of S. Ambrose.
Ser. de Abra.
See You make therefore a great lie by such dissimulation, and are by S.
Augustine See. 6
condemned in Iehu, and by the example of holy Eleazarus in the scripture
utterly confounded. 2. Match. 6
This kind of lying or dissimulation in matters of Religion is most
perniciouse, and by all Deuines condemned of a mortal sin: being not only a
lie, but a lie in the most necessary profession of faith, where all lies are
perniciouse as I said above: and therefore, here I will not more largely
entreat thereof. But that you may more perfectly know the greeuousnes thereof,
and learn not to dissemble in such weighty matters, for never so great danger:
I will only set you down a division which S. Augustine makes of lies: Lib.
de mend. c. 14 3. kind of lies.
and his censure thereof. The first and principal kind of lie (says he) and
far to be banished from all men is, that, which is made in doctrine of
religion, unto which lie, by no condition any man may be induced. The second is
made, that it may hurt some man iniustly, which is of such manner that it
neither profits any and yet hinders some body. The third, wc so profits
one, that it may hinder an other, although not in any corporal uncleanness.
The fourth, which is made for a mere delight of lying and deceiving, which is
a wonderful kind of lie. The fifth, which is made for the desire of pleasing
others with sweet speeches. The sixth, To save an other man's goods. To save
another man's life. To save another purity.
which neither hinders any and profits some, as if a man knowing that an
other man's money shall be taken unjustly from him, being demanded by any,
says he knows not where it is. The seventh, hinders none but profits
some, when one lies unwilling to betraye an other, who is sought for to death.
The eighte, hinders no man, and withal profits heereunto, that it may save
an other from corporal uncleanness. S. Augustine goes farther and shows his
judgment of these kind of lies: c. vlt.
and calls the first kind (which most makes for our purpose) a great
wickedness, and the first kind of a detestable lie. A lie can never be lawful.
And speaking of the last, that one may not lie for the custody of an others
chastity? he yields this reason, that in the nature of good things, the
chastity of the mind is preferred before the cleannes of the body: and in the
nature of evil things, that which we do our selves is more damnable unto us,
than that which we permit to be done. And he has there also a notable
sentence, that a man must not by the help of a lie, be lead even so much as
to everlasting salvation. Yea he has in the 7. chapter that a virgin may not
without sin tell a lie to preserve her self from dishonest violence. This
saying of S. Augustine, I would not have so understood, as though it were a
greater sin to tell a lie not hurtful unto any, than to be dishonest: but
that supposing that any one goes about to dishonest a virtuous matrone, and
she have no other way to deliver her self from such filthy violence, but by
telling a lie: as that some body is present, which is not: she should rather
permit the dishonor than tell a lie, saying with the glorious Virgin S.
Agnes, Amb. l. de virgin.
if violently thou defile me, my virginity shall have a dubble reward Hence I
pray you make the comparison your self. If a most pure Virgin or most grave
matrone, for to conserve the most pretiouse treasure of womankind, may not tell
a venial lie: may you by losing the greatest treasure wc you have or may be
had in this world, that is your fidelity toward God, and his Church, utter a
most detestable lie, which you do by this wicked dissimulation, only to
avoid some small penalty of body or goods? Uttering of Catholics secretts,
to their danger a mortal sin and binds to restitution
Neither yet for this division of S. Augustine, must every simple body when he
is examined before Commissioners, traitorously utter the secrettes of
Catholics: for to tell truth than, were a mortal sin, and to tell a lie
unsworn, were but a venial sin. Yet both may be avoided, either by silence,
or by lawful equivocation. and less harm it is, if either must be committed,
to commit the venial. And if an oath be taken in such case, it does not
bind. even as no the of any unlawful thing, can bind in conscience.

. 31
I will not omit here to touch the crime of scandal, That this action is
always scandalous
which is a vice opposite to charity: by which we give our neighbor occasion
of spiritual ruin which although in this matter it be one of the least
reasons to condemn your fault: yet is it in some manner always found in your
action: in other manner although not always present, yet very hardly avoided.
It can hardly be avoided, in that it causes others by your example to fall,
and to think the sin either none at all, or not so greeuouse: and withal it
gives occasion unto our adversaries to insult over us, and to blaspheme our
religion. And this is both the greater and the harder to be avoided; in men of
known resolution, and notable gifts or talents of wisdom and learning: which
they might better have wanted, being cause of their utter damnation, when by
the creditte of them they cause their Brothers fall. This deformity of
scandal, I say, in these respects, can hardly be avoided. For you must not
think that you can avoid scandal, by informing your neighbors that you come
not for any liking of their religion: A protestation increases sca^dall. See.
19.
for when you desire them not to take any example from your action, this does
more increase your scandal, whilst you show that you do such action merely
against your conscience, and teach them by your example, if not, to go to the
Church, when perhapps they go already and is but one fault: yet by giving them
a general example in effect to all vice not to stick at any offense of God,
either fornication, or theste, or any other enormity, when they see you, so
perfectly acquainted with Gods Sacraments, and the practice of the Church, to
committ with hope of repentance, a fault no less enormious than theirs.
Whereby, you, wc should be the light of the world, give occasion to fill the
world full of darkness, out of the which you were once delivered: teaching
servants to deceive their masters: children, to be lascivious: wives to be
dishonest: finally all manner of wickedness: so that there be no scandal, and
that they intend afterward to arise again. Which although I know, you think
to be faults worthy of great detestation, and they also for you are not
persuaded other wiser yet by seeing you so couragiouse, in aduenturing your
best iointe, by leaping over the walls into the enemies camp: How can you
blame them, if they also, within the walls, or without, being amongst their
friends, betake them selves to far less dangers? in which estimation of a
lesser danger, if I seem to err: give me leave a while and I hope hereafter
I shall satisfy you.

Yet do I confess that this fault of Scandal may in part be avoided: Going
to ye Church in a strange place is unlawful and scandalous.
but never altogether. If one should go to the Church with heretics in a
place where none knows him, not so much as the minister, or servant, or
neighbor: than, I say, scandal were avoided in part. But such going can
seldom happen unto a Catholic, unless a man had such pleasure in going to
the Church against his conscience, as some men may have (as we said out of S..
30.
Augustine) in telling of a lie. for either he goes to avoid suspicion in
some place, and than, they which are curiouse of him, do conceive of him as of
an heretic or schismaticke: Or he goes that he may when he is called into
question or before that also (if he be so forward as many are) be thought, or
said, to go to the Church. And this wants no more of Scandal, than the
going where he is known.

But howsoever it is, I say that scandal although it may in part: yet can it
never be fully avoided. For whosoever is at an heretics church, Scandal can
never be fully auoded.
although never so unknown so that he go not invisible, but be seen there, by
those which are there present:) besides the signification of the religion which
is there used, schism, dissimulation and such like as we have said before: he
incurreth the grievous crime of scandal, because he seems to consent unto
the wickedness of the minister, and his adherents in that service. Wherein you
must remember an ordinary distinction of Deuines. For there are 2. manner of
consents. the first is consent, Caiet verbo Restit.
which is cause of the action: as when I know that without my consent, such
action would not be done. An other is a simple consent, which only
consents, Two manner of consents to an other man's sin.
and yet is not the cause of the action. As if in Parliament there be a Bill
put up against Catholics: and I know that so many voices being passed
already before mine, my contrary voice can not hinder, but it will be made a
law: Now if I consent after so many voices, as are sufficient, (for if I should
before sufficient voices were granted, the case were altered, although I knew
what voices were to follow:) than is not my consent a cause of that law: yet is
my consent, a consent: To. 1.
and so according to S PAVI. worthy of death as well, as that of the others. In
like manner of you go to the Church, and the minister says service only for
you: than is your consent the cause of his sin and of the sin of as many,
as are there present: and than, who doubts but you committ a scandal? But if
you go at ordinary times, when the minister notwithstanding your presence,
would say service, and others be there without your inducement. or any evil
example if this be possible:) yet is your consent present, and so understood by
all men, and therefore is not your action void of sandall, but by consenting
unto an other man's sin, you are also guilty thereof: as a coucurrunt, though
not as the cause or mouer thereunto: as one which allows, not as one which
commands: as one which gives the voice; when the number already is
sufficient to make the law. Neither is there any doubt but you may as well give
consent unto an action unto which you concur for fear, See. 10.
as if you concurred for love, as we have said before. Than unto your self
must you apply the verses of the Psalm. Ps. 49.
When thou saw a thief, thou did run with him, and with adulterers
thou did putt thy portion. Thou did wickedly think that I were like unto
thee: I will reprove thee, and set thy self before thy own face that is,
that your own conscience shall judge and condemn you. But least you should
think I speak this of my own judgment, not leaning unto the general
doctrine of Gods Church: you shall hear the Martyr Irenaeus his grave doctrine
against the Valentinian heretics and other like. L. 4. c. 46. A plain
testimony of S. Ireneus
Be not you (says he) partakers with them. And as there (in the schism of
Dathan and Abyron the damnation of the principal sinners was common to the
rest, because they liked them, and conuersed with them: So here also a little
leaven corrupts the wholle heap.

. 32.
Hitherto you see I have proceeded from the very necessary grounds of the law
of God and of nature. THE THIRD PART
Neither can you by your protestation, or intention, or pretense of fear, or
any other motive whatsoever, excuse your self from the violating of any one of
these virtues before rehearsed.

There are some other reasons of no small force, used to be alleged, of wc
because I know you will make no great account, I will be content to say no
thing. One only thing will I putt you in mind of: that is, of the danger of
infection, Danger of infection.
wc by going un to heretics churches, you expose your self unto. of wc if
you make small reckoning esteeming your self a great doctor, and able to
answer all manner of heretical objections: yet do I earnestly desire you to
remember, that once you could say as much in this point of going to the Church,
as in any other matter of Catholic religion. And O senseless Galathian who
has bewitched you? Gal. 3. Sap. 4.
how are you so suddenly altered? verily malice has altered your
understanding, and fiction has deceived your soul and therefore most happy had
you been, if as ye wisdom of God does speak, Dissimulation is the way to
infection.
you had been the^ taken up unto god, wha^ living amongst sinners you were
pleasing and beloved unto God. O how true it is yt fiction and dissimulation
deceives the souls of many in our poor country? What old man is now a
Protestant, who has not gotten such pestilence by fiction? who is now a
Co^missioner of ripe wit, who being son of Catholic parents, has not been
altered by fiction? Yea who is now so earnest persecut our of Catholics, as
those wc at the beginning of this last reuolte, having been Catholics them
selves, are now most opposite, because they saw they could not have creditte at
the first, but by fiction? L. 4. mor. c. 27.
S. Gregory describes four degrees of sins, both in the mind and in the
deed, expounding a sentence of JOB, and to every member of that sentence
applying one degree. The words of JOB, are these: Job. 3.
Wherefore died I not in the womb? or being come forth from thence, did I not
forthwith perish? why was I taken upon the knees? why was I nourished with the
papes? Four ways (says he) is sin committed in the heart, Four degrees of
sin.
and so many also is it executed in the deeds. In heart it is committed, by
suggestion, delection, consent, and by the presumptuousnes of defense.
Suggestion is made by the adversary: delectation, by the flesh: consent by the
Spirit: the presumption of defense, by pride. For the sin wc should
terrify the mind, does extol it: and having thrown it down, does lift it
up; but being lifted up, does more grievously bruise it. In the same manner is a
sin executed in the deed. First, the sin is Going to the Church secretly.
secretly done: afterward, before the eyes of men, without any shame thereof,
it is manifested: than is it brought in to custom: at the last either with the
seducements of false hope, or the obstinacy of miserable despair it is
nourished. Thus S. Gregory. This is the miserable progression of lamentable
Schismatickes, who trusting too much to their own cleannes, adventure to touch
pitch: and much like unto the lewd persons of the world, seeking to enjoy their
unlawful contentments, before they be aware, conceive sorrow, Psalm. 7.
and bring forth iniquity: which so long they harbor in their unhappy lap,
that at the length they nourish it with their pappes, and drink it in unto
their very heart? Thus much for a wise man as you are will be sufficient, for
the danger of infection, Eccle. 3.
least perhapps loving danger you perish therein. I my self have been
acquainted with a learned religious Professor of Divinity, who according to
the necessity of his lectures having sometimes Caluins works in his chamber:
with great humility (a far contrary spirit, unto that which bears great sway
in our country) protested unto me, that he trembled, when he remembered he had
them in his chamber. Much more should you tremble at the lively voice of your
blasphemous ghospellers, as from whose mouth undoubtedly the Prince of heresy
him self, belcheth out the smoaky doctrine of his filthy kingdom. And it is a
thing to quake and tremble at, that the Prince of the Apostles who thought him
self (and that with great reason) more strong than your self, was
notwithstanding at a girls voice so infected with fear, that he repented it
all his life after.

. 33
Now for the greeuousnes of this sin, The comparison of this sin with other
grievous offenses
which as you see contains in it self so many sins, I know not how to
deal with you. For we have received even from the first Parents of mankind
such inclination to the defense of our own iniquities, that every one seeks
to make that fault which he him self is subject unto, the least of all other.
much like unto a tale (which is for all that no false tale) which I have heard
of a Robberye done between London and Portchmouth. when the thief taking
certain golden buttons, which the true man had upon his dublett, and by chance
letting some of them fall: the true man set his foot upon 3. or 4. of them,
and being asked by the thief, who had diligently sought to take them up,
whether there were all: he anuswered that there were all. But the thief
removing the others foot and spying the buttons took them up, and sharply
rebuked him for his lie; Saying: what a liar? a lie is the worst fault in the
world. So that I fear very much, least as the thief esteemed his own fault
less then a venial lie: So you will not be induced to judge aright of your
fault of going to the Church. But I told you before S. Thomas his opinion of
schism, who judges it the greatest sin which may be committed of all
others, which are not directly against God: See. 73. The hainousnes of Schism.
such as are heresy, Idolatry, and other like: but only against the neighbor.
Yea in the same place he says that sometime Schism is greater than heresy,
because it causes greater harm. S. Augustine says that it is a greater
fault, L. 2. de bapt c. 6.
and sacrilege: and proves it by the punishment of Dathan and Abyron. S.
Cyprian is very vehement in the reprehension of schism saying that the
Schismatickes of Christ's Church offend more hainously than Dathan and Abyron:
L. 1. ep. 6. ad Magnum.
because these did not make a new congregation, but only presumed to take upon
them the office of doing Sacrifice, which belonged only unto Aaron. But
Schismatickes make a new congregation opposite unto Christ his Church. But you
will surely bear reverence unto Christ his own testimony, who appearing unto
S. PETER of Alexandria a glorious Consessour and Martyr, Peda in martyrol.
with a torn coat: gave him this answer, demanding the cause: that Arius
had torn his vestiment, wc is the Church. Think therefore with your self of
the filthe of this sacrilege: and blushe to see your self a shamfull patch in
Caluins coat, whose coat surely, is not now a piece of Christ his coat, which
is altogether undivided, but a ragged cloute, raked out of the sincke of hell,
although presumptuously arrogating to it self the name and title of a Church
of Christ. But we will stay somewhat upon the general doctrine of S. Thomas,
whom willingly I follow, for that his authority in common doctrine of Deuines
is sufficient to stop any man's mouth who pretends to believe Catholickly.
1.2. q. 73. Whence is ye greeuousnes of sins examined
This doctor therefore, does define that sin to be more grievous, which has
an object of greater dignity. As because all outward goods, are of less
dignity than man him self; man being the end of all exterior things: and God
more excellent than man, as his final and principal end: Therefore is murder
a more grievous sin, than these: and infidelity, blasphemye, The order of
those good things which we must love and pursew
heresy, and such like, are more hainouse than murder. Than according to this
rule must you consider what good is taken away by every vice. And that wc
takes away that good which is dew unto God and his Church: you must prefer
before all other. Afterward, there follows the good of your own soul: than,
of your neighbors soul: next, of your own body or life: than, of your
neighbors: And finally your own temporal good has the last place of all. So
that you may see what account you must make of that action, which neither
observes faith toward God, nor unity, and obedience to his Church: nor
charity toward your self, or your neighbor. If a man sin against a man (as
the holy scripture says) god may be pacified unto him: 1. Reg. 2.
But if a man sin against our Lord: Sinners in ye Church easily rise again.
who shall pray for him? Besides if you sin within the Church of God, you
have a remedy at hand: the daily use of holy Sacraments do as it were inuit
you to repentance: the continual prayers and Sacrifices of the Church are
offered up for you, to mitigate the wrath of God, against you. But if you once
sever your self from the body: Ser. 11. de verbis Do. et ep. ad Bonif com. 50.
S. Augustine says that schism is a sin against the holy ghost.
you can receive no influence from the other members. S. Augustine where he
expounds the words of our Savior, concerning the difficulty of remission,
when a man sins against the holy ghost: very learnedly discourses of the
sin of schism, which he affirms to be the sin against the holy ghost.
For that the Schismaticke uniting him self to other congregations, or rather
as this Saint says) to other segregations, and so dividing the spirit of
God: cannot in any manner have the same spirit of God, by which only remission
of sins is given: so that Martyrdom it self cannot avail him. Martyrdom
profits not in Schism.
whereas those wc sin, being in the Church; do only sin against the son
of man, not dividing the unity of the spirit. And all this he confirms by
the authority of S. IVDE, who says, that Schismatickes not holding the head,
have no spirit or life within them.

Nevertheless that no man may take occasion hereby to give him self to
licentiousnes within the Church: let him understand, Against licentiousnes in
the Church of God.
that although heresy and schism in them selves be more filthy, abominable,
and offensive unto God, than any carnal sin whatsoever: yet may schisine
perhaps sometime be committed in so small a degree, and with such circumstances
of fear, or want of deliberation, or of perfect knowledge, or of the smalnes
of the matter in which schism is showed, that although it cannot be excused
from mortal sin: yet it may so be diminished that the greeuousnes of other
sins, less in their own kind, but being committed with great disorder and
continuance, may far exceed the greeuousnes of schism. Moreover carnal
sins are more dangerous, Carnal sins very dangerouse. l. 3. eth c. 12.
than such schism as may be of frailty and fear committed. For as the
Philosopher teaches, the appetite of delight is insatiable, whereupon it
ordinarily happens, that a man is very hardly withdrawn from fleshly
concupiscence, if he be once entangled therewith: which is also the cause that
the Devil most of all (as S. Augustine says) reioiceth of Idolatry and
lechery. in Leuit. Isid. l. 2. c. 3.
But he which once goes to the Church for fear, and with trembling of heart,
and humble acknowledging of his fault before God, may easily rise again.
Furthermore he which is drowned in carnallity, for the vehement applying of his
thoughts and powers to such senfuall abiectes, is hardly capeable of reason,
and of Gods holy motions and inspirations, whereby he may be moved to rise
again: which hindering of reason and Gods motions, is not ordinarily found in
one indeliberate or fearful act of schism. Finally (as S. L. 33 mor. c. 11.
Gregory says) carnal sins have a certain filth and infamy joined unto
them, which is not in other sins, although greater in their own nature.
Wherefore Aristotle him self affirms, 3. Eth. c. 10.
that the sins of intemperance, as well in touching as tasting, are of all
other most reproachful: because they be about those delights, which are common
unto us and beasts. Whereupon he concludes thus: With such things therefore to
be pleased and delighted, Against those which call carnallity a man's fault
is beastly. Those therefore are beastly men, which give them selves to such
delights as they are capeable of, not in that they are men, but as they are
(animalia) that is, living things, which is a name common to them and beasts.
Schism a proper sin of the Devil
Yet on the other side least I should flatter you to much: those are Diuelesh
men, wc give them selves unto sins, more proper to Devils, than unto men.
which sins although they be far severed from beastly concupiscence: yett
do they imply such deformity, as the Devils only loved at the beginning. as
Pride, against God and his Church, heresy, schism, and such like. For that you
may know perfectly your own estate: the first Scismaticke that ever was, was
Lucifer: making a division in that holy Church, as yet being but militant, from
whence he was by his detestable schism thrown out: that as of him it is most
worthily sald; Hier. 2.
From the beginning thou have broken the yoke, thou have pulled a sunder the
bands and have said, I will not serve: so he might, being here permitted to
govern the darkness of this miserable world, be King over all the sons of
Pride, who breaking the sweet yoke of Christ, Job. 41.
and renting the holy bands of his undivided garment, refuse to serve unto his
holy Spouse. Esaias. 60. Genesis 7. Hieron. ep. 57 ad Damas. Degrees of these kinds
of sin
For what nation or kingdom soever shall not serve this most glorious Queen,
shall perish. Whosoever is out of the Ark of Noah, shall be swallowed up in
the general deluge. I will show you therefore my opinion of the degrees of this
kind of fault. In the highest degree is he which going to the Church, is an
heretic in deed. Perswaders of schime or allowers.
which is not altogether so hainouse And if this scandali be notably joined
thereunto: I dare match this person, yea, and prefer him, also, to the
heretic him self: and that by S. Thomas his authority: 2.2. q. 39. ar 2.
Chrysostom. ho. 11 in ep. ad Ephesians.
who says in this manner: It may happen that some Schismaticke may sin more
hainously than some Infidel, or heretic: either for his greater contempt, or
for the greater danger which he causes, or for some such like thing. Than
let there follow in this rank, he who usually goes to the Church, yet all
the world knows he does it for fear only, Sess. 25. c. 3. de refor.
when it commands that against such as after they are by name excommunicate,
remain in their excommunication for the space of one wholle year, such
proceeding be taken as is ordinary against heretics or the suspected of
heresy. Priests allowing of this action.
yet may incurr in very high degree the crime of schism and these are
Priests, (if there be any which maintain this action) of whom I need to say
nothing in this place Whereas for that learning which God has bestowed upon
them, themselves may consider, what censures they have incurred, or may
incur, and how great a fault it is opposing themselves to their chief
rulers herein, in steed of shepheardes to become wolves. But if any one should
so forgett him self, and in corners secretly whisper against ye received
truth: such you are bound under pain of mortal sin, to detect, that by
their superior they may be corrected. For it is convenient that they know how
there is one unto whose decisio^ in all doubts in vertew of obedience they are
bound to stand. who has long since not failed to make his judgment known
herin.

Now Sir I remember that in heathen common welthes, it was accounted a great
indecency, Cicer. de offic.
for parents to bath themselves together with their children: Such great
reverence they thought to be dew to natural comelines, that they esteemed it
no small fault, to be unto them a pattern of the breach thereof. Impiety of
schismatike Parents.
But how can you here answer the great impiety which you use unto your
children, when not only you show them your evil example of doing wickedly,
thereby giving them a certain license to fall into whatsoever wickedness, they
can craftily conceal: But you enforce them, or command them, or at the least
permit them, to go to heretics Sinagogues. Where is your wisdom? where is
your piety? where is your fear of God? I will here say no more than this: that
according to the law of God and of nature, Ephesians. 5.
you are under pain of mortal sin bound to bring up your children in the
discipline and correction of our Lord, for who has not care of his
domesticalls, as S. PAVL says, 1. Tim. 5.
has denied his faith, and is worse then an Infidel. And what is this which
you do in your children, but to sacrifice them unto the Devil? Let the
example of Hely fear you: who though he severely reprehended his children for
their sacrilegious extortion: Psalm. 105. 1. Reg. 2.
yet because he did not remedy their disorder, was severely punished, both with
the loss of his life, and also with the desolation of his wholle country and
famely, and the taking of the Arc of Gad. And it is to be noted as S.
Chrysostom very well says, Cont. vituperat. vitae monast. Parents never so
holy condemned for their children. Carrying to the Church by Nurses
that this Hely was otherwise a virtuous and perfect man, as that Saint
gathers out of his resignation which he showed unto Samuel, when the young
Prophet after his new vocation, threatened unto him from Gad that which
afterward befell unto him. But this one fault did grievously incense Gods
wrath against him. Let this be sufficient for your paricidiall impiety toward
your children, that howsoever they be carried by their Nurses to the Church, so
long as they suck (which notwithstanding is a greater danger, then to let the^
go to bed without blessing, or to suffer the^ to remain in place^s haunted
with spirits, Going of children.
as experience has taught us) yet after they be once able to have a conceit of
devotion toward Almighty God, although they de neber so little, or so simple,
to suffer the^ to go, much more to send them to such conuenticles: is in you a
heinous mortal sin, as being directly against the charity, and piety, and
discipline toward your child. Marying them out of ye Church.
The like I say of marying them, or permitting them to marry out of the Church.
It is the childs office in deed not to marry without his Parents or Tutours
consent, and in so doing albeit his marriage be sufficient, though it be
secrette, and without Priest, or witness in our country where the Council of
Trents decree takes not place: yet as well in the secresy of the marriage and
in the secret use thereof, wc is always unlawful, although they be
sufficiently married, until it be published: No small fault for children to
marry without consent of Parents or Tutours Catechism: conc. Trid. de Sacr.
matri in fine 30. q. 5. c. Aliter etc. Nostrates etc. qualis and 23. q. 2. c.
Non omnis Nau. c. 14. n. 15. Sotus. d. 29. q. 1. ar. 4: Bellarm. l. 1. de matr.
c. 19
as in the want of his Superiors consent, he sins grievously. This being
in man's life reputed a great injury, and against the honor dew unto his
Parents, except the Parents or Tutours offered him herin some great wrong. For
although a child be not bound to marry whom his Father will, except there were
other particular circumstances of the necessity of his family, or some great
cause, which in charity might bind him, there being no cause to the contrary:
yet one thing it is, not to marry at his fathers apointment (which
notwithstanding sometimes may be mortal sin.) an other it is to marry one of
his own choice and appointmente, and to bring into his fathers family a new
daughter in law, without asking his fathers consent, or without presuming of
his liking: which thing is both contrary to the custom of the holy
Patriarchs, and the honor dew unto parents; and the doctrine of holy Fathers
and of most grave Deuines, and the custom also of the holy Church, wc uses to
have the spouse delivered by her Parents or Tutours at the solemnization of
marriage. Now you must not be like unto those which love to buy good cheap,
and to sell dear. Therefore as you must have your children obedient unto you,
so wc mutual bond, must you provide for them, and that much more in spiritual
things than in corporal, Conc. Carth. 4. c. 13. Tert. l. 2. ad vxo. in fine.
Ambr. ep. 45. ad Sisin and l. de Abraham. c. vlt. and habetur 32. q. 2. c.
Honora^ tur very plainly intreateh hereof.
and with more care and diligence preserve them from schism and heresy, than
from the temporal infamy of other wickedness. which if you do not, what do you
else; but as l. con. me^d. c. 7 Our dewty toward our neighbor in this point
Eccli. 17. This dewty is much greater in extreme necessity and at the point of
death. Ser. 16 de verbo Do. l. 1. ciu. c. 9. Ser de natiu Ioa. Bapt.
S. Augustine says, beget children, that you may nourish them, not to God, but
to ye Deuell? I will not say that you are bound with your own imminent peril,
to admit them ordinarily to Mass: but to keep them from Churches, to
instruct them Catholickly, and when it is thought necessary, to provide them
spiritual helps: this I affirm to be your necessary dewty.

If you have manifest hope and fit opportunity of reducing any most simple
person from his wicked ways, whom you see to have necessity of your brotherly
correction and admonition: when there is none other which can or will undertake
the same: so that you fully perceive that he will thankfully accept such office
of charity, and not traitorously detect you for a perswader, neither
maliciously or peruersly bring you or others into manifest danger of
spiritual detriment: than are you bound under the guilte of mortal sin, by
the very law of God him self, who has given unto every one charge of his
neighbor, to bestow this charitable alms, and to show this spiritual mercy
like a good Samatitane toward your neighbor. which office if you culpably
omit, you are as S. Augustine saieith, guilty of the same crimes which your
neighbor commits. the reason of such censure we may understand by S.
Bernard. Let none say, am I the keeper of my brother? Let none as much as lies
in him, bear patiently, that order do perish, and discipline be transgressed.
For to be silent when thou may reprove, is to consent: and we know that like
punishment is provided for those which do, and those which consent. Feed,
says S. Ambrose, him which dies for hungar. Did. 86. c. Pasce. vide. l. 3.
off. c. 6.
for whosoever thou art, which by feeding him, might have saved his life if
thou have not fedd him, thou have killed him. Infer hence the greater
necessity of saving a soul, than feeding the body: and the grrater bond of
fatherly piety, than of brotherly charity. God grant that in our afflicted
country many thousand souls, without any other crime but with this only want
of charity and piety toward their neighbors, and children, do not every day
eternally perish.

. 35
By this which hitherto has been said, THE FOVRTH PART Of the nature of a
sign distinctiue
it remains proved, that this action of going to heretics service, is of it
self repugnant unto the very law of God, and of nature, and a case
indispensable by any power upon earth: and, besides, many other deformities
therein contained, a distinctiue sign and manifest note, whereby heretics or
schismatickes are discerned from true Catholics.

Whereupon I do infer two very certain truths. The 16-objection that temporal
laws or Princes, can not appoint distinctiue signs of religion
first, that most frivolous is that reason of yours yt the going to the service
of heretics was lawful before the statute of going to the Church, and no
distinctiue sign at all: and thence you conclude, that neither it can now be a
distinctiue sign, where as temporal Princes cannot give the nature of a
necessary sign of Religion, unto any exterior actio^, which is not such of it
self. For howsoever your assertion of the power of Princes in this point be
true or false: This action is of it self a sign distinctiue
this action is (as I have said) not by any worldly Prince or law instituted,
but by nature it self, and by the very form of all manner of Religions,
ordained, as a ceremony. and from a ceremony if you take away the signification
of religion, of that religion I mean, unto which it does belong: you destroy
the nature of a ceremony, and make a ceremony, no ceremony.

But I perceive the cause of your error in this argument, to be the dissension
between Caietane and the rest of the Deuines. Caietane says that if a Prince
or a law amongst Infidells, in 2.2. q. 3. ar. 2. Whether a Prince may make a
sign distinctiue the omission whereof may be a mortal sinac
do command, that every Christian wear a certain kind of garment, different
from the rest of that country, as a redd or yellow cappe: such law or
commaundment may be in two respects: either for the protestation of religion,
that the Prince intends only to know their religion thereby: or else for a
politic distinction, that a Christian may be known from an Infidel, for the
peaceable order of the commonwealth, and by such mark be reputed as it were
infamous. Of these two cases he gives a different censure. For in the first,
that is, when the Prince intends to know every man's faith and religion,
although the same Prince intends thereby to take occasion of persecuting the
Christians: he says, that it is a mortal sin to omit such garment for
than (as he says) every one is virtually, and in effect interrogated of his
religion, which than he is bound to confess. In the second, he says that a
man may lawfully omit such a sign, especially for to save his life, whereas
such law does not bind in danger of life, being only a politic and civil
law, for the peaceable government of the state, not in respect of religion.
What Caie taken thinks of the omission of a sign of true religion appointed
by the Prince of a false religion.
Therefore he concludes that if a Christian amongst Infidells should be
commanded to wear a redd cappe, only for civil policy, least any tumulte
should arise or disorder in the common wealth, by diversities of religions,
than in danger of death, and with less danger also he may without mortal
sin omit that sign: As a Jew at Rome, or at Venice, for to avoid the
officer which comes to arrest him, may without deadly sin cast off his Jews
cappe, that he may not be known; yea although his religion were the only true
religion of the world. For such sign is not ordained for the protestation of
his religion, but only for civil policy. But if the end of such law were
only to protest religion, and that the Prince intended thereby to know
Christians, for to punish them for their religion, and not to make only a
civil distinction, for the peaceable government of Christians and Infidells:
than to omit such sign is a mortal sin, against the confession of faith,
which always is necessary when a man is interrogated: even as he is now (as it
were, in effect) interrogated by the law or commaundment of the Prince. Thus
does Caietane discourse of the omission of the sign of a Christian used
amongst Infidells. Caietanes opinion of the use of a sign of a false religion.


But now let us also see (for it makes much for the understanding of the
wholle matter, and there is great difference) what he says of the usurping of
the sign of an Infidel, either when Infidells live in a Christian common
wealth, as Jews at Rome; or when Christians live in an Infidel common wealth,
as among the Turks. Than, says Caietane, although there be a sign appointed
for an Infidel only for civil respects of temporal peace: yet is it a
mortal sin, for a Christian every time which he uses the same. So that a
Christian at Rome wearing a Jews cappe, or amongst the Turks a white Turbant,
does every time commit a mortal sin, although it were for to save his
life: for he than shows him self a Jew or Turk, by using the sign of
either of them.

Thus you see Caietanes opinion is, Mark ye difference of using a sign of
false religion, and omitting a sign of true religion.
that a man may never use a sign of a false religion, although appointed by
the Prince: but that he may omit the sign of his own religion, when it is
not instituted for a protestation of religion: but when it is ordained as a
sign of religion, than cannot he omit it without mortal sin.

This doctrine by all other Deuines for the most part is thought to rigorous.
And they teach very well, Bannes. 2.2. q. 3. ar. 2.
that a sign of an Infidel, ordained for civil respects only, may lawfully
be used by a Christian in time of necessity, and when there is no scandal.
neither is there is such use, any signification of religion justly given, Other
Divines are against Caietane.
but only permitted. Even as a lay man may wear a religious man's ordinary
apparel, or a man a woman's gown for a good end, or for necessity, and yet not
make any lie at all in the outward show: but using that wc has an other end
besides the signification; permit the behoulders to think him, to be either a
freer or a woman, which in deed he is not. As also Christian Captains in war
often times for policy use Turks banners: and Priests among heretics, lay
apparel: and never are reprehended by any devout conscience, for lying or
dissembling, either in religion, or in their particular estate.

In like manner the same Deuines do teach against Caietane, that a man may
lawfully omit a sign of a Christian where it is appointed, when by any
necessity he is urged thereunto. and they yield a reason, for that such Princes
cannot prescribe unto us by what signs we shall protest our faith.

Here Sir, was that with which you were deceived. For although Caietane be
worthily judged, to have been too seueere: yet against this action of going to
heretical scruice, together with Caietane, do all other Deuines give their
grave and most deserved verditte. Diverse kinds of signs or tokens of
religion.


For they distinguish in these matters, whether they be garments, or other
actions; diverse kinds. The first is, when some special garments or actions,
are proper only to a certain nation, which is heretical, Jewish, or Turkish;
Asigne distinctiue of religion in respect of the nation
but in that the common use of their country, has brought into practice, such
particular custom. Such are the diverse banners of several countries, and the
manifold fashions of apparel, which in every country we see to be most in
use. and in this kind there is no difficulty but any man may use such garments
or signs, Asigne distinctiue in respect of civil Policy
for any lawful advantage.

The second degree is when not only in respect of the country, but
particulerly, for to make a distinction of religion, such garment is prescribed
or used: And if such prescription or custom be only brought in for humane
policy of civil government, although withal there were a purpose of punishing
or afflicting Christians thereby: yett if there be some civil or honest humane
use of the same besides the signification of heresy, Iudaisme, Turkisme, or
other sort of Infidelity and Apostasy: In urgent case of necessity it may also
be used lawfully by a Christian, as we have said before. and it seems very
reasonable, for that a Turk newly converted to Christ, were not in any man's
judgment bound under mortal sin, presently to cast away his white Turbant
and so to betraye him self: for in those countries a sign of a Turk is a
white Turbant on his head.

A sign distinctiue in repect of religion, yet having a profane use for the
principal end
(which is the principal end) referred unto a ceremonious signification in
every religion. As amongst Catholics, a corner cappe, a Freers weed, eating
of white meats, and not flesh upon a friday. Amongst other sects a
ministers apparel, an Idolatrous Preistes ordinary and profane garment. And
in this degree also they say, that whereas these things have of them selves a
good and convenient use for the life of man, and the principal end of them is
an honest humane use, not a religious signification (neither trewly is a Freers
weed, although it signify a Freer, so religiouse as a Surplesse, Cope,
Tunicle, or such like, whose principal and only end is religion:) whereas also
the common practice of man's life has as it were by a long prescription
obtained, that such things in time of danger may be used, for their civil
end, not regarding their religious signification: it shall be lawful for to
save a man's life, or for other necessary and important good, to wear a corner
cappe, or Freers weed, although these holy signs were used in a false and
detestable religion: Also to eat flesh on a friday, to put on a ministers,
or Purseuants apparel, or such like. Neither were a minister under pain of
mortal sin, presently bound to put of his cloak or Ierkin after his
conversion, nor a Purseuant to throw away his dreadful badge; which he should
necessarily do, if it were a mortal sin to use the same.

You have now 3 degrees of signs or tokens of a false religion, and the common
doctrine of Deuines of their lawful use and practice. Certain necessary
circumstances in the use of the signs aforesaied.
yet are not these degrees altogether indifferent of them selves but with
certain circumstances only to be practiced, and not otherwise. that is,
first, with necessity. for otherwise the wholle action and the signification
also, should delighte, which cannot be without sin. Secondlye that it be
seldom: as such necessity happens seldom. but that it may be prevented.
Thirdly, that there concur not such circumstances therewith, that there be an
effectual profession of religion. as if one using a ministers apparel for to
hide his religion, should with all prepare him self as it were, to say
heretical service, or to preach, or such like, although he meant it not: or if
one should do any thing indifferent in it self, in manner aforesaid, but
commanded for contempt of true religion.

Fourthly that scandal and danger of infection be avoided, which in familiar
conversation with those of a contrary sect does ordinarily use to happen.

Asigne distinctrue which has no other use but to be a mark of religion
But besides these indifferent uses of such actions or garments, there is the
fourth degree: when garments or actions either of their own nature, or by
common judgment and estimation of men, have no other convenient or honest use,
but only to be certain marks or tokens of religion. for the use of such
manner of things, is of it self evil: and can never be admitted without
mortal sin. as for to wear a garment with an Idol painted therein, or the
sign of the moon which the Turks use for Mohometts honor: or to have an
Idol in a man's house with an altar before it, or other religiouse sign: this
is altogether unlawful, because it is by the conmmo^ estimation of men,
esteemed as a necessary sign of religion, and for no other end used, and
therefore no more indifferent, than to cast incense into the fire before an
Idol, and with the intention to refer it unto the true God.

Wherefore al Deuines conclude that such a sign in the very instant of such a
man's conversion is to be presently left: neither possible to be continued
without remaining in the estate of mortal sin. Such marks amongst
Protestants I think you have none. But amongst Catholics, such a sign were a
pair of beads: which only to wear at our girdle, if Catholic religion were
not the truth, were a damnable sin.

A sign distinctiue which is a
in which your going to Church shall be lodged and harbored. that is when a man
uses such signs or actions, as of their own nature and common consent, very
ceremony of religion.
or practice of all nations are only appointed to be ceremonious actions of
religion. Such for to use, and to apply unto a false sect, or to a
Schismatic congregation, is a manifest sign of the same sect, and of union
with the same conciliable or false congregation. See. 7.
This made devout Naaman for to fear, least his kneeling, when the King
kneeled, should have been thought as done to the Idol. which in deed if it
had been so judged, and not only materially done before the Idol, without any
ceremonious signification: could not any way have been justified. but his
kneeling to aid and assist his Prince, to whom he owed that dewtifull
te^porall service, convenient unto his Princely greatness: was not thought by
any man to be unto the Idol, whom all the people knew he detested. See. 6.
And for this cause is Iehu condemned by the general consent of Doctors, for
his dissembled use of an action of the own nature signifying a ceremony of
Baalls religion and honor. Unto this place and lodgeing must I of necessity
vssher your self, and all your companions. whose action of going to the
service of heretics (as I have proved before) has as intrinsecall a
signification of heresy and schism, as the devout going of a Catholickc to
Mass in a catholic congregation, has a profession of Catholic faith, and
of Catholic unity and religion. yet is it here to be noted that as in words,
which have the principal place amongst signs of the mind and affection of
man, there may sometimes be themateriall use or supposition thereof, without
the formal, as the Logicioners teach: So there may also be in any action,
which signifies religion. An example we brought above of one which did only
relate the disloiall words spoken of Augustus: who only used those words
materially, without any formal signification thereof on his part. So also did
we bring an example before of a material ve of signs and ceremonies of
religion, when we according to the common doctrine of Deuines affirmed, that
the material show of Idolatry in a play or Comedy, was not of it self
unlawful. Yet notwithstanding as we say that Sacrifice unto Idols, and
contumelious speeches unto his Prince are of them selves unlawful: So do we
say of signs of religion, namely of going to the Church. For we always take
such actions with the formal thereof: which is the signification. which when it
is to be thought present or absent, the common estimation of men must decide by
the consideration of time, person, place, and such like. And so we say that
going to the Church in an orderly manner as it is used in our cou^ trey, cannot
be void by all men's estimation of signification of heresy, and of contempt of
verety, as has been proved

Than do I conclude that the grave censure of Deuines condemning Caietanes
opinion as too severe, Why Caietaines opinion is thought too rigorouse
connot be understood of these express and positive signs of a contrary
religion, but of the omission only of a sign of a true religion. wherein the
reason is manifest. For a man is not bound always to profess his religion,
but in time and place: yet is he bound in no time or place to deny his
religion. So may a man omit a sign of his religion, when he is not expressly
interrogated: but he cannot, neither being asked, nor without asking, use a
ceremoniouse sign of a contrary religion, without a most grievous mortal
sin. See than how you are deceived whilst you argue in this manner. If the
Prince do command me to wear a yellow cappe for protestation of my true
religion, I shall not deny my faith by leaving it; because ye Prince cannot
make a yellow cappe a sign of religion: Therefore if the Prince command me to
go to the Church of heretics, for sign of conformity and adherency unto his
religion: I shall not deny my faith by doing it, because he cannot make going
to his Church a sign eof his religion. Surely, Sir, he needs not to make it a
sign of his religion. for nature it self and the consent of all nations, and
the judgments of all men, not affrighted from their reasonable understanding
by terror of heretical persecution: has made it so already. And if you
should remain in Bocardo until you had proved this consequence, and reduced
it to any lawful mood or figure, you should never come forth alive. A great
difference between a sign of true and of false religion.
That I may say nothing of the difference between a sign of true and of
false religion. For the true religion may be protested only by ceremonies
ordained by God and his Church: And therefore a temporal Prince cannot make a
protestatiue sign thereof. But as a false religion may be by a temporal Prince
instituted and followed: so may the ceremonies, and protestations, and
distinctiue signs thereof be framed also according to his peculier imagination.
A man may contemn God and his Church, by houlding up his finger, when by a
blasphemous co^uenticle it were so agreed: but I think he could not please God
so much by houlding up his finger for his honor, as he may displease him with
the contrary intention, in the self same action. Neither do I think any so
wise, as to make that a general sign of Catholic religion and unity.

Let this than be our final conclusion in this point, The conclusion of this
wholle last discourse.
that although an Infidel Prince cannot make us determinate signs of
protestation of our only true religion, yett may he make protestatiue signs
of his own Religion; which cannot be practiced without mortal sin: as we
see in every false religion to be in use. In Mahomets religion to kiss his
toumbe. IN Jewish, to be circumsed. In Caluins, to receive his communion, or to
be at his service. Sozom. l. 5. c. 16.
Which thing in Julian the Apostata his time, made diverse Christians to repent
their folly. who having put incense into the fire before the Emperor,
supposing it to have been done accordin gto some ancient law and custom of
the Romans, only to his honor: understood afterward, that the Emperor took
it as a sign of Idolatry: wherefore they with open protestation returned to let
the Emperor know their Christian intent, and were banished the court for the
same.

Moreover I say that this sign of going to the Church with hereticke^s, is
whether the Prince will or no, of the own nature a sign of heresy: and so
not made by any law a sign distinctiue, neither in any case to be justified
by the Princes commandment.

As fot your Protestation we have long since overthrown it; saying, See. 16.
and. 31.
that for all your contrary mind, it is an exterior sign of heresy: even as
in Marcellinus and others, there mind was known to be disagreeing to their
exterior Idolatry. And besides, that if it were possible that your
Protestation might take away signification of heresy: yet it cannot but leave
signification of schism and contempt. Going to Caluins Church not made first
unlaw full by any late Canon


The second thing which I infer of that which has been said in this wholle
discourse, is the manifest discovery of the malicious envy which our
adversaries: always, not only carry in their minds, but most cruelly and
odiously disclose both many other ways, and especially in all Arraignements of
Priests and other Catholics. For I perceive by your own confession, that
the greatest motive of your going to the Churches of Protestants, is the fear
of being esteemed a hollow and dissembling subject. And surely, I never saw so
far into the drift of our adversaries, as I have been put in mind of, by the
perusing of your letter. They seek to discreditt all Priests, and the lay
Catholic with the Bulle of Pius.5 wc although it is well known to have come
forth before some of the^ were borne, yea and before the most part of them
were of years of discretion: yet they must needs, forsooth, be accessory unto
the same: because they are not conformable in it is one action of coming to their
divine service. For this cause they read it openly at the bar, being
faithfully translated by some honorable learned Counselor (as they say) and
are not afraid to publish that thing unto the wholle multitude of true and
faithful subjects, which we would feign have drowned in perpetual
oblivion. They very odiously charge us, that we refuse to go to their Church,
for that Pius 5. having sent forth that Bull, and reckoned up the causes
thereof: amongst other things makes forsooth, one of the crimes condemned, the
using and commanding to be used by others, certain impious mysteries (for so
you say he calls them) and ceremonies according to Caluins prescript. for
which as well as for the other, he declares not only the principal, but
also the adherents in any such matters there recited, to have already incurred
the sentence of excommunication, and to be cut off from the unity of Christ
his body. This you say you hear to your exceeding reproach, at every bar and
judgment seat in London. wherefore you are enforced (for to make known your
faithful allegiance) to show in effect, that you have no part at all of the
blame of that Bull. whether this be true or not: that is, whether such be the
effect of the same Bull, or no: I protest unto you that I know not: and that,
for the natural love, and loiall affection I bear unto my sovereign: I never
did read the same. This your self is very privy unto, I doubt not, that so
long as you have been a Catholic, and so continually conuersed amongst Priests
and lay Catholics, you never heard any one word, or never so little
signification of so unpleasant a thing. And withal, you perfectly should
know, as well by the truth of the matter it self, as by many public
protestations and solemn assertions, that there is not one Catholic in
England, but bears as dewtifull and hearty affection unto his most dear
Sovereign, since such Bull or declaration: as either before the same, or if
any such thing had never come forth. In so much yt look what we might have
lawfully done before without prejudice of our Relgion, and disuniting our
selves from that body, of which every one of us must necessarily live and dye a
member: the same we will in most dewtifull manner, and with most sincere and
unfeigned love, whatsoever otherwise malicious tongues give out, even as we
look for heaven, and the favor of our redeemer: continually perform unto our
death.

. 36.
How needles a thing it is to bring forth the authority of the Cannon law, THE
FIFTH PART The 17 objection that we have no express Canon or ancient
practice of the Church
and example and practice of Gods Church, in this question which we handle: I
hope it does already remain manifest. For that which out of infallible
grounds of holy scripture is so necessarily concluded, what necessity is there
by humane laws or customs to confirm? That which is enacted by the most
sacred Canons of the word of God, and the immediate inditing of his holy
spirit, who will require to be by humane judgment approved? especially whereas
(as I said above) if this actio^ were only contrary unto humane laws although
such humane laws may undoubtedly bind even in peril of death:) yet is it to
be supposed that our tender mother ye Church, so careful of us in other
matters, and extending her sovereign power over our souls to the dispensation
in most extraordinary cases: would not in so great hazardes and dangers as on
every side enuiron us, hold the bridle so strait, 1. Cor. 3.
but in the person of Christ, according to S. PAVLES example, confirm her
charity toward us, least we be circu^uented by Satan. Besides, I know very
well, how many there have been heretofore, It were requisite yt the defenders
of schism should allege Canons.
who have showed herin their learned industry. So that I marvel not a little,
that you who seek to transgress the bonds which your spiritual Fathers and
Founders of this new of spring of religion, have with so great piety and
unwearied patience laid before you: do not rather bring forth some ancient
Canon, or practice of ancient times, to color at the least, if not to defend
your folly. For when was it ever heard of in all ages since Christ his time,
that a Catholic orderly and religiously went to heretics Sinagogues?
Infinite places of Fathers, innumerable examples of Saints with the sacred
Canons of ecclesiastical discipline condemn it: not one approves it.

Heretics sometimes have come to Catholic congregations Theod. l. 4. c. 17.
l. de gest. cum Emerito. initio. L. 5. ep. 33. Theod. l. 5. c. 32.
That Heretics or Schismatickes have come to Catholic congregations, therein
giving token of their submission, we read. As their holy mother desires
nothing more than their reunion: So came Valens the Emperor to S. Basils
Mass, and offered thereat: So was S. Augustine and all his Catholic fellow
Bishopps desirous of the Donatistes return. So also would S. Ambrose his
soldiers of the Emperors guard have willingly waited on their Lord to S.
Ambrose his Church: And S. Chrysostom professed unto Gainas an Arrian, that
his Church was open for all which would come thither to pray: In like manner
has the wisdom of the Church released unto us the ancient bond of avoiding
heretics, or any excommunicate person even in Divine services. The bond of
avoiding heretics in part enlarged
(I say) in Divine services not in Caluines devises) so long as they are not by
name declared: Whereas before, even since the Apostles, we were bound to avoid
them in diverse things, which the Canonistes and Deuines from ancient time,
do express by this verse.

OS, ORARE, VALE, CO^MVNIO, MENSA NEGATVR.

Whereby all manner not only of civil conversation, but also of communication in
spiritual ceremonies, yea even of the only lawful holy Divine service of ye
Church is understood to have been forbidden. Presence at Mass in a Catholic
Church lawful amongst never so many heretics
Hereupon I know very well that (as I said above) in a Catholic Church, so
long as the name and title thereof and manner of service is Catholic, a man may
be present at Mass, although the wholle company thereof, yea the Priest him
self were heretical: So that they were in such manner heretics, either
secret, or publicly known, that they made not that their several
congregation: but for fear, or some worldly respects, or that they allowing
the Mass, dissenting in other points from Catholic union, came to that
place, as to a Catholic place, not of any several right, or unity wc they
pretended therein. For so long as we do not participate with the^ in their
several Altar by them erected, nor in those things which do divide the^ from
Gods Church: we shall not divide our selves from Ecclesiastical unity.

How some Deuines, do say that it is lawful when there is no danger of
infection or scandal
Farther then this, I also am not ignorant (as has been said before) how yt
without any breach of Canonical precept now in use, a known Catholic, in a
city, either universally Catholic, or for the most part heretical, may upon
curiosity, or some other desire of mocking or disturbing the heretical
service, in some Church of theirs be present at their service and sermon, so
that he be manifestly known not to come as one of them, and altogether he
keep him self from any ceremoniouse show of cappe, or knee, or color of
conformity, or of unlawful obedience, exacted for the creditte of such
religion or service. Such a one, I know, by diverse to be allowed, or at the
least, not to be condemned of mortal sin, so that there be neither peril of
infection, nor scandal. For this man's going I know to be material, as when
Christians enter for such intent, into Jews Sinagogues at Rome, or else where.
And it is not formal, because he neither shows any reverence, or conformity,
nor is exacted of contempt, or for show of such conformity or union in their
service or sacraments to be present. Although I know such practice to be far
diverse from the custom of the most pure time of the Primitive Church, C. 59.
when as we read in the Eliberin Council, it was strictly forbidden that none
should go unto the public places of Sacrifices, even only fo to see such
Idolatry. And if we consider the case aright, we shall plainly perceive, that
the seeing, or hearing, yea the thinking of heretical Sinagogues and services,
is rather a thing fit with sorrow to burst the heart than to feed any curious
minds, with the pleasure of other men's miseries.

Of the practice of Scotland.
Moreover, I understand also that in Scotland (which many peruersely will have
a pattern for England, whereas it were greater equity, that contrariwise, that
country should learn of ours, wc has been with so many holy labors, and
bloody conflictes of most holy Martyrs, instructed and embrewed:) I understand
I say, that in Scotland a certain tolleration has been. but, of what? of
going to heretical Churches? No Sir, of no such thing: But whereas there
wants that perfect resolution which ought to be in Catholics, who must
bear every where Christ's Cross and ignominy: that such as being otherwise
Catholickly affected, will not refrain from the heretics Sinagogues, and
their Schismatic practices: may yet as other heinous sinners are, be
admitted unto Divine service: and notwithstanding their excommunication, where
with they are tied, be exempted from this particular effect of ye Churches
censure. which that ye Pope may grant: no man doubts, who knows that such
impediment proceeds only from his own law. And that he has granted it: I
have understood by those who have in this point conferred with such as very well
have known the matter. But that he worthily granted it unto that country: I
do nothing doubt: whereas it was so expedient to allure the ignorant people to
the services of the Church almost grown altogether out of their remembrance
and liking. But neither was it the Popes intention to absolve them in this
manner from their excommunication, neither are they continewing in this estate
capeable of any sacramental absolution, or sufficiently disposed to the sacred
communion of Christ's holy Body and Blood: And therefore never admitted (whilst
they so persist) to the participation of any Sacrament at all. Neither can the
Pope, nor ye wholl Church of God, (as I am also most assured they will not)
dispense any otherwise in communication, either with Heretics or
Schismatickes: but so far only as we shall not communicate in their crime:
which always is when we associate our selves vuto them in the highest degree
of their crime, which is in their spiritual congregations.

All this though I willingly and plainly yield unto you: yet it avails you
nothing. For it stands you upon, to prove, that it is lawful for to go to
heretics Churches, so that neither in respect of the manner of your going,
which is religiouse and devout: neither in respect of the motive of your
going, which is obedience to a law commanding a religiouse going: neither in
respect of the union between you and the rest which are there, which is
esteemed by your orderly presence: you may justly be thought to conform your
self to the wholle Sinagogue. This if you can prove, or bring any one express
Canon, or manifest sentence of approved Father, to maintain such opinion: you
shall have the victory: And I will not only cease to disprove your action, but
I will also commend the same. Neither am I so wedded unto my own opinion, nor
so doting upon my own conceits, but I would willingly yield to the ancient
truth. And when I could not understand the reason it self; I would think it a
chief reason, to submit my reason to my betters. Yea this I do sincerely
protest unto you, that for the desire of both spiritual and temporal good of
my dear country, which I know might ensew, if this action were found by Gods
law, and the sacred Canons, tolerable: I should so reioise at such a
profitable invention, that I should not esteem of a straw, if withal for
this doctrine here set down, and the like taught heretofore: I should remain
infamous and marked with perpetual ignominy in this world. But too clear is
the case, and so well confirmed and established by general consent, and
practice of all ages: that to call it into doubt, seems unto me no otherwise,
than if a man in the brightest noone time of the year, should having his
eyesight, yet grope for the way.

And you, Sir, and those also, who seek to make them selves Patrons and
maintainers of such schism and detestable practice, It is ridiculous now to
call this matter into question
in this examination or rather condemnation of the learned judgment of your
Superiors, and of diverse holy priesles, worthy of their function, and of the
great reward wc they have received, that is of walking with Christ him self.
IN ALEIS QVONIAM DIGNI SVNT, because they washed their garments, and as it
were, Ap. 3. Ap. 7.
bleached them with the blood of the Lamb: you I say, and your companions or
Fathers (if there be any Priest, which has newly been your ghostly Father, to
begette you to the Deuell) after so many gloriouse confessions, after so many
deaths, after so huge forfeitures of goods and lands, after so grievous
disgraces of the world, only for this point, which you impugn, incurred: in
examining now whether it be right or wrong: seem to do as ridiculously, as I
have heard to be used in some places not far from you, where they first hang
the malefactor, and afterward consulte of his deserte of death. From which
places, even as some very pleasantly have made a form of a certain Letany,
that they may escape: So do I desire our good Lord to deliver all his people
from such AFTER IVDGES as your self and your companions are.

But least I should seem to lean overmuch to my own discourses, or to the
sentence and opinion of our late Founders and Apostles of our recovery, unto me
always most grave and reverend: I entend, with as much breuity as I may, to
enter into the consideration of the Canons, and practice of the Church: that we
may see, how truth is ever constant, and never disagreeing to it self. Yet in
all Christian charity I think it first necessary by the way to give you this
fraternall admonition: The proud arrogance of the defe^ders of schism
that whilst you and others. scarce out of the A B C when this doctrine was
first universally published, by such as now living, for learning, authority, and
vertew, you or they have not yet overtaken; do set so light by their sacred
censure: you show your selves scarce as yet entered into the A B C of true
vertew and mortification, and perfect purgation of heretical dragges of Pride
and singularity. And to all godly Catholics worthy of the glory of that name,
and of the general renoume of constant confession of their faith, now made
public in the wholle world, and registered unto eternal memory: I say with S
PAVL, 2. Tim. 3.
reasoning of the dangerous times, into which it seems we are now fallen: of
you, and of your fathers, and followers: ET HOS DEVITA. and such do you avoid.

. 37.
In the manner also of requiring the testimonies of antiquity, what proceeding
is to be used in examining the Canons and Fathers
you deal as ridiculously, as if a man by the common sentence of all the
Judges and lawiers of the Realm, condemned for a Robbery done in Coome Park,
should plead that he could not justly be hanged, because in all the law there
is no mention made, that he which robs in Coome Park should be hanged. All
Scriptures, all Fathers all Canons are full of most severe thunderings against
your actio^, and yet is it not enough to condemn such breakers of Gods peace
and his Christian unity, but we must have forsooth, every particular accident
of your act, the time, place, manner, intention, and circumstances all set
down by Prophecy before hand, and so condemned. This may well serve you to
cavil for a while, yet cannot it hinder the most just Judge to pronounce upon
you dew sentence, and deserved punishment.

That we may not deny our faith, that we may not make any outward show of false
religion, what cannot be denied in this point wt-out heresy
that we may not disunite the Church of Christ, or divide his holy garment,
that we may not contemn his spouse, or any ways participate with her
traitorous rebels in their rebellion: it is so clear in Scriptures, Canons,
Fathers, and perpetual custom of ancient Ages; that to deny it, or to doubt
of it, were a most detestable heresy. But because they name not Caluins heresy,
nor make any mention of England, nor touch your Parliaments, nor English
obedience, nor high Commisioners, nor childishe awe: therefore those general
rules are not to be applied to your Churches, Countries, Parliaments,
Intentions; which whilst you maintain: see also if there were a law made in
England to defend murder, whether some also would not require an express Canon
to condemn so horrible a crime.

But as I have hitherto dealte with you out of Scriptures, and the steadfast
grounds of Divinity: So will I now deal out of Canons and customs of the
Church: so that you will promise me, to confess your self as well included in
ye general laws of Christians: as you hope to be included in the general
promises of Christ, and must whether you will or no, be included in his
general threatenings. The division of that which follows.


I will therefore divide this last piece of my discourse into three parts. And
first show what has been observed from ancient times of avoiding heretics
universally, even in all civil conversation. Secondly of avoiding them in
their service and ceremonies of their religion. Thirdly of the like care of
shunning also such as are only Schismatickes, even in their lawful rites and
ceremonies.

. 38.
Concerning the first point, Of the general bond of avoiding Heretics. Mat.
18. 1. Cor. 5.
I need not to be very long: considering the charge of Christ commanding us to
account those which disobey the Church as heathens and publicans: and the
doctrine of S. PAVL, that with such persons we must not eat and drink: And
the admonition of ep. 2.
S. IHON, who warns us, that to an heretic, or any erroneous Doctor (such
are those also, which teach that it is lawful to go to the Church) who says
God save you, communicates with his wicked works. This did the same S. IHON
teach us also by his example: Iren. l. 3. c. 3 S. Ihon Evangelist.
when he suddenly departed from the Bath, in which Cerinthus the enemy of
truth did bath him self: saying, that he feared the ruin of the house, S.
Policarpe
because of his presence. S. Polycarpe also, out of whom S. Ireneus reports
the former example, shows how diligent a follower he was of the holy Apostles
of Christ, with whom he had been familier. who would not so much as afford
vnto^ Marcion an Arch-heriticke, a good look: but when he meeting him,
desired him that he would know him: he said, I know thee for Satan's eldest
son. Such care had the Apostles and their disciples not so much as to speak
unto those, which went about with their deceitful leasinges to salsifye the
truth. Even as S. PAVL does warn. A man that is an heretic, after the first
and second admonition, avoid: knowing, Tit. 3.
that he that is such a one, is subverted, and sins: being condemned by his
own judgment. All this does Eusebius l. 4. c. 13.
report of these Saints, out of Ireneus: so that you have in one thing the
authority of many. of Eusebius: S. Ireneus: S. Policarpus: S. PAVL: and S. JOHN.
S. De nis.


The same rigor we read to have been observed by S. Dionisius an ancient
Bishop of Alexandria, whose own words Eusebius thus cites. l. 7. c. 6.
This Canon, and this example did I receive of our blessed Father Heraclas. S.
Heraclas.
For he cast out of the Church such as had departed from the Church, (not so
yet but that they in corporal presence were partakers of the congregation of
the faithful) wha^ they were accused, that they had much conuersed with one of
those, which defended a contrary doctrine unto the Church.

Finally you know very well, that if this were the ancient custom of the
Church toward all excommunicate persons, 11. q. 3. c. cum excommunicato and
sequenti and preced. Chrysostom. ho. 25. in c. 11. ad hebr. 1. Cor. 5. In vita. S.
Anthonies last will.
which were neither heretics, nor schismatickes according to S. PAVLES
doctrine, who speaking of all such divided members commands not to eat with
them: you may much more know the stricte kind of bond in avoiding heretics
and schismatickes. Which lesson the glorious S. Anthony a most perfect master
of all holiness and Christian dewty, not only taught by example, but lest unto
his scholars for his last will and testament. Hear (says he) my children,
the last will of your Father. And presently: To the Meletians and
Schisinatickes do you not come near: neither join your selves in
'communication with the Arrians. Thus much as in so clear a case for this
first point shall suffice.

But because I know very well, Two kinds of tollerations in communication with
heretics
that you will say that this custom is now worn out in the Church of Christ,
and you see not the most zealous Catholics of all to be so scrupulous in
avoiding heretics civil conversation, as these examples do seem to require:
I must necessarily say somewhat of two kind of Tollerations, which has justly
enlarged the ancient severity of the Church herein. c. quoniam multos 11. q.
3. and seq.
The first is necessity: whereby wives, children, servants, bondslaues, are
permitted to communicate in civil things with those, to whom they belong.
Also trauailers, and strangers, for their necessary helps might of old have
ordinary traficke in places of excommunicate persons: This tolleration has a
ground in S. PAVLES doctrine: 1. Cor. 5. See Saint Chrisost. cited before
who to the Corinthians writes in this manner. I wrote unto you in an epistle,
not to keep company with fornicatours: I mean not the fornicatours of this
world: otherwise you should have gonne out of this world: But if he ye is named
a brother etc. Where he shows a certain necessity of civil conversation,
with those which make the wholle community of the place where we abide, for
otherwise as he says we could not live in this world. For which cause he
gives leave c. 10.
in the same epistle to go to an Infidells feast. So that we may ground this
tolleration upon an evident necessity, that when we live amongst Infidells
only or for the most part; although they be heretics and fugitives from
Gods Church: yet we may use such civil conversation with them, as shall be
necessary unto us: avoiding always danger of infection, and scandal. Thus
far may we bouldly adventure by the ancient permission of the Church.

Mart. 5. Ext. ad euitanda See Nauar. c. 27. n. 35
and even in the countries where most be Catholics to grant by the special
permissio^ of our holy mother the Church, that we may freely, in all manner of
things, as well spiritual as temporal, communicate, with whosoever, having
incurred excommunication through some crime so punished by ye laws of the
Church, are not either specially declared, and denounced to be so
excommunicate, or manifestly and notoriously known to be strikers of a Clergy
man. And although some do except from this tolleration all manifest
excommunicate persons, and consequently all manifest heretics, according to ye
limitation of the Council of Constance: yet has the custom of the Church a
true interpreter of laws, received this decree, with this general
enlargement: as it was also in the Council of Basil propounded. So that this
tolleration must be generally understood, that even with heretics not by name
excommunicate nor notorious strikers of the Clergy, we may as well in civil as
in spiritual things communicate. When I say spiritual things, I mean such
things as belong unto the spirit of God: not the inventions, or society of
infernal spirits.

But what manner of spiritual things Caluins mysteries are, and of the
understanding of this kind of tolleratio^, See. 7.
enough has been said above. Now must I warn you and whosoever shall take the
pains to give the reading unto this my writing: that these Tollerations in two
cases cannot be any warrant unto us at all, No Tolleration in two cases.
they being in whatsoever case indispensable. First if we find such
communication to be noisome unto our souls, so that we perceive our selves to
wax cold in our fervor, and Catholic resolution of perseuering in
Christian dewty, good life, and frequenting of Sacraments for this bond of
avoiding spiritual danger does bind us in every sin, Secondly, if there be
joined withal, an express or virtuall denial of our faith, or contempt of
the Church, or superstitious behavior or scandal: which in going to
heretics Churches do always concur. For even as the aforesaid
tolleratio^ cannot make but if you in murder, theft, fornication, Idolatry,
communicate with heretics, you shall sin as much, as before the
Tolleration: So is it in this case of going to the Church. That therefore which
is good: you may by the tolleration aforesaid, do with heretics: that which
is evil, is as unlawful as ever before. And therefore in unlawful matters we
must have recourse unto the ancient Apostolical rule of avoiding most
constantly heretics; And especially in their service: as a thing which can
never be lawful. For if a man may in putting of his cappe to the^, as S. IHON
says in his second epistle communicate to their wicked works, because he may
give the^ countenance and encouragement to prosecute the same: how much more
shall he do the like in the very top of their iniquity, which is in their
service, and contrary Altar unto Gods holy Church?

39.
For that always, even since the beginning, what the Canons have decreed of
avoiding heretics Service. l. 6. hist. c. 3. Origin.
there has been amongst true Christians an especial account of communication
with heretics in their prayers: the great learned clearke Origin, and most
ancient Doctor, shall give plain testimony. Of whom thus writes Eusebius.
Origin (says he) although being driven by necessity, he conuersed in the same
house with Paul an heretic: yet even at that time was he not affraide to
show evident and open tokens of his true and Catholic opinion in matters of
faith. Going to heretical conuenticles a toke^ of faith.
For when a great multitude, not only of heretics, but also of our men, for
the great eloquence which was in Paul did flock unto him: Origin could
notwithstanding never be induced to be present at prayers with him: As who from
his tender age had both seriously observed the Canon of the Church, and had
always detested the doctrines of errors. Thus Eusebius. Where I desire you to
mark those words. Evident and open tokens of his religion. To be present at
prayers. The Canon of the Church. And ye condemnation of such as being in mind
Catholics, were present with Paul at his prayers. Diverse manners of praying
with he retickes.


rather as Catholic. So that here I do not so much show my self to
communicate with the heretic, as he to communicate with me. This was
accounted in the ancient Church always unlawful: until the Council of
Constance and decree of Martinus the fifth. For this degree of communication
being not of it self unlawful, neither implying any denial or contempt of
religion, nor union with the heretic in his division: as it was justly
forbidden at the first: so for the avoiding of many scandalls and dangers it
was permitted after, as we lately said. counterfaite Sacrament. And this is in
the highest degree of spiritual communion with them, always unlawful, and
most detestable, as also the second: although somewhat in a greater measure of
iniquity.

These three degrees, you shall now see plainly set down, in three Canons of
the Apostles: where by the diverse punishments contained, you may judge of the
greuousnes of every one.

The 44 Canon has thus. A Bishopp, Priest, The Canons of the Apostles
or Deacon, which shall join prarers with heretics: let him be only suspended
from Communion. But if also he permit them to do any thing as Clerks: let
him be deposed.

In the 63 Canon so we read. If any Clearke, or lay man enter into the
Sinagogue of the Jews, or conuenticle of heretics, that he may join prayers
with them: let him be deposed and excluded from the Communion.

Finally, this is the 45 Canon. The Bishop or Priest which has taken the
baptism or sacrifice of heretics, we command to be deposed. For what
agreement is there between Christ and Beliall? or what portion is there unto a
faithful, with an Infidel?

Where although it pleased the holy Apostles to impose sometimes punishments
upon the Clergy only, as which of dewty should be the form of the flock: yet
does both their reason, and the practice of the Church, show the thing to be
unlawful to every faithful Christian.

But here you very subtelly reply, that it is ye coming into heretics
Churches for that intent of prayer, which is condemned in the 63 Canoni: not
the only coming without any prayer at all. Nay Sir: that is no good gloss.
For the 44 Canon imposes a smaller penance for praying with them, and that
only to some degrees of the Clergy. Therefore, here is something more than
praying with them forbidden. and what is that, but going to their conuenticles?
which going, because they will distinguish from that going which may be
sometimes lawful, they call it going for to pray. And it is always understood
that one goes for to pray, when he is orderly present, at the time of prayer.
Neither can man's judgment, which searches not the heart, esteem otherwise.
Neither did ever the custom of the Church (according to the politic and new
devised intentions) interpret the presence of a man at service or Mass, but as
a communication in prayer. For which cause good Catholics were always bound
to avoid the Chapel or Church when any excommunicate person in none of the
tolerable degrees showed before, entered in. Which if he did not, he reputed
him self to have communicated with him in prayer: Nauar. c. 27 n. 20. The 4.
Cou^ cell of Carthage. c. 71. and 72.
howsoever lewdly or idly disposed the excommunicate person was. Thus much of
the Canons of the Apostles.

The 4 Council of Carthage where S. Augustine was present, thus honorably
speaks of your Churches. The Conuenticles of heretics are not Churches, but
Conciliables. with them we must neither pray, nor sing. Where if you make the
same reply as before: I give you also the same answer. And a new reason also
for both. For whereas prayer with them is unlawful, only for this respect,
that we do make our selves thereby of their communion or fellowship: what doubt
is there but in signification of this unity, it is all one to pray with them,
and to seem to pray with the^? Or who doubts, but that a shrewd wanton boy,
kneeling in his mothers presence, at his prayers; may satisfy her (who knows
not his mind, although she be his mother) as well in moving his lips only,
and knocking his beads, as if he had prayed with greatest devotion?

The Council of Antioch. The Council of Antioch c. 2.
With excommunicate persons, it is not lawful to communicate: neither with
those, which come together in houses, avoiding the prayers of the Church must
we pray. The like we read in the 5 Canon. The Council of Laodicea c.
9.32.33.37.


The Council of Laodicea forbids the same even when none is there present.
And in the 33 Canon it expressly forbids to pray with heretics or
Skhismatickes, and in the Canon before, it calls the blessings of heretics,
curses. In the 37 it forbids to keep holy days with heteticks or Jews.
how than may we go to their Churches with them on holy days? The great
Laterane Council c. 70. C. Quidane de Apostatis. Eccli. 2. Ex. 22.


Innocentius the third in the great Lateran Counsel says thus. Some, as we
understand, which voluntarily have come unto baptism, do not at all leave the
old man, that they may putt on a new: whereas retaining the relickes of their
former ceremonies or rites, they by such mixture, consou^d the comelines of
Christian religion. But, whereas cursed is the man which goes upon the earth by
two ways, and we must not wear a coat wouen of linen and woollen: we ordain
that by the Prelates of the Churches, such observance of their old ceremonies
be in any case repressed: that who^ their own free will did offer unto
Christian religion, those the necessity of wholesome coaction may retain in ye
observance thereof. whereas less harm it is, 1 pet. 2o
not to know the way of God, than after it is known to go back. Here have you
nothing to say, but that by going to the Church you use no ceremony of
Protestants religion, which I have confuted above: showing that your very going
and presence is a ceremony of Caluinisme.

But let us come unto the example of so many constant Catholics, as in the
time of the Arrian heresy were in greater misery than we: but bore it with
far greater fortitude Wherein first there comes unto my mind a law which
was made even of going to ye Church, not unlike unto ours, of our new kind of
obedience, of which because it serves for the perfecter description of those
times, I will set down what Sozomenus writes. L. 7. c. 13.


What Iustina the Emperesse, mother unto Valentinian the younger, A law against
Recusants in S. Ambrose his time.
maruailously molested holy Ambrose Bishop of Millan, and yet could not
prevail to make him yield the Churches unto the Arrian sect: she growing unto
more fury, sought to strenghthen her endeavors with a law. Therefore sending
(says Sozomene) for BENIVOLVS the chief amongst the enroulers of the laws,
A good lesion for true gentle men.
she commanded him, that with all speed, he should make a law for confirmation
of the faith established in the Council of Arininum (which was for ye
Artians.) This business when he modestly sought to avoid, because he favored
the catholic Church, she was very importunate to entreat him, and to allure
him with great promises of higher dignity, and yet prevailed not. For BENIVOLVS
taking off his girdle, cast it at the Empresses feet, saying; The girdle was a
sign of dignity as with us the garter.
that neither his present, nor any greater dignity he so esteemed, that he
would desire it for a reward of impiety. When therefore he persisted therein that
he would never do it: others were found which should undertake the service of
the making of such law This law commanded that freely should come together,
those we were of the Arrian says, A law for going to the Church
and that such which should resist unto these, or attempt things contrary unto
ye Emperial law, should be putt to death. Thus Sozomenus of this law, which
notwithstanding was not executed because of extraordinary calamities and
troubles, which as Sozomenus writes, made Iustina forget her fury. About that
time, notably S. Ambrose. who when the Emperor demanded a Church for the
Arrians; Again, says he, he sent this message: Amb. l. 5. ep. 33.
I must also my self have one Chrrch. But I (says S. Ambrose) answered: He
alludeth to the speech of S. Ihon Baptist unto Herod Mat. 14.
It is not lawful for thee to have her. what have thou to do with an
aduoutresse? For she is an aduoutresse, which is not joined in the lawful
marriage of Christ. Even so do I say unto you: you may not go to the heretics
Church: for what have you to do with their aduoutresse Sinagogue, which is not
joined in the undefiled matrimony with Christ? This argument is of the greater
force, for that it is manifest yt this Valentinian was always a catecumen, and
not baptited at all, by reason of his sudden death. So that we are hereby
assured that his onele presence was by S. Ambrose forbidden: whereas it is most
certain that being but a Catecumen, he could not receive any Sacrament nor so
much as be present at the Churches sacrifice: But only at the singing of
Psalms, and readings, and sermons. Those soldiers also which sought by force
to get a Church for the Emperor, Ibid.
being by him commanded to be excommunicate: suddenly, God altering their
minds, came unto the Catholic Church where S. Ambrose was: refusing to be
joined with the heretics, or for them to obtain a Church.

The same most gloriouse Prelate in the same quarrel of the delivery of the
Churches to the Emperor, Orat. de tra dend. ba sil.
for the Arrians; takes occasion of that part of scripture, which by mere
chance being read that very day, in which the tumulte was attempted for the
Churches; very fittely he applies unto his purpose. Luc. 19. Mat. 21.
The place was of the riding of our Savior upon an Ass unto Jerusalem and
casting forth amongst others, those which soulde pigeons in the Temple. Where,
after yt this Saint had showed his seruent desire to make his own body an
host and sacrifice unto Christ in so noble a quarrel, if it would please our
Savior so to use the same his body, as he once used the Ass, when he
satisfied with a few of his forceable words, all those which would have
hindered it, saying; that he had need of his service: he adds this most
notable sentence of the Doves. What are the Doves but simple minds or souls,
following the sincere and pure faith? should I than bring into ye Church one
whom Christ excludes? for he is commanded to go forth, Auxe^tius because of
his wicked behauior in other places, had changed his name
which will sell the simple minds of the faithful. Therefore Auxentius is cast
forth, Mercurius is excluded. One monster it is but two names.

What think you tha^ would S. Ambrose persuade, if he now saw Auxentius in
Churches? or what would that his devour people think themselves bound unto, if
Valentinian commanded them there to be present? neither was Auxentius so
excluded, but that if he could not have been excluded, every Catholic should
have avoided him in the Church, more than in civil conversation: which also
was forbidden them. Yea such was the fervent zeal of this Bishop in this
quarrel, and such was the readiness of the people to cleave unto their Pastor,
Ep. 33. l. 5.
in so just a cause: that the Emperor him self feared, least by the mutany of
ye soldiers (which notwithstanding S. Ambrose never allowed) he should have
been putt in prison. But this Emperor, for all this, being once deprived of
his evil Counselors, was always after united unto his Bishopp, reputing him
not only as his Father, but as his Protector and deliverer in all distresses.

But in this matter of heretical Churches, Amb. orat. de obitu Vale^tiniani
orat. de trad Bas. How we ought to esteem of laws in this point. Gal. 2.
hear I pray you a necessary lesson of this great and most holy Doctor. For
speaking of Auxentius the Arrian Bishop: he says, whom he could not by
speech deceive, those he thinks to strike with ye sword. with his mouth
enditing, and with his hand writing bloody laws: thinking that the law may
prescribe unto men, a belief: he has not heard, that, which even this day was
read: That a man is not justified by the works of the law. Or this: by the law
I am dead unto the law, ibid.
that I may live unto God. And we therefore by the law of our Lord JESUS CHRIST,
let us dye unto this law, wc enacteth decrees of perfidiousnesse Thus the most
constant Pastor, of those laws of which we spoke before: for the delivery of
Churches unto Arians. Judge you what he thought, of going to the same, if the
Arians had obtained their purpose, although in this point also, I have showed
you, even here his judgment.

A little before that time Sozom. l. 6. c. 18.
when Valens in the East did persecute the Catholics, he came to Edessa for
to see a noble Church of S. THOMAS. A notable example of Catholics constancy.
From this city had he either by death, or banishment, or imprisonment, taken
away most of the Catholic Pastors: yet when he saw the Cotholicke people to
gather themselves together in a field before the city, he is said very
sharply to have rebuked the Governor general, and to have given him a blow
on the ear, because against his commandment he suffered such meetings to be
made. A civil heretic.
Modestus therefore (for so was the Governors name although he were an Arian,
yet secretly gave them warning that they should take heed, least the next day
they came to the same place to pray. For the Emperor had commanded him,
grievously to punish those which he should find there. But the people
contemning his threats, with far greater desire than before, did fill the
place. Which thing Modestus understanding, knew not what to do, yet went be
into the field. In the way a woman drawing her child after her and contrary
unto woma^ly decency her gown evil fauoredly put about her, as it were
hasting unto a desired thing, rusheth through ye band of soldiers wc went
before the Governor: who seeing that, commands her to be apprehended: and
asks her the cause of such have. That I may quickly come (says she) unto the
field, in which the Catholics are gathered together. Art thou alone ignorant
(says Modestus) that the Governor will presently come thither, and kill all
that he finds? Yea, says the woman, I have heard thereof, and therefore I had
need run most speedely, least I come when all is done and so be deprived of
Martyrdom, which now God has offered me. But why, I pray thee, do thou
lead thy little boy with thee? That he also may be partaker of the public
afflicton, and receive a like reward. Therefore Modestus wondering at the manly
courage of the woman returns unto the court. And when he had informed the
Emperor of her, he persuaded him that he should cease from seeking to
accomplish what he had begone, whereas especially it was a thing neither of
small dishonor and of great discommodity. So far Sozomenus. O constant
people, O most kind and godly mother, O happy child wc live in such a time.
If our times and people were like unto these: than should we not only have
more refusers of Valens his Church, but more constant practisers of their own
religion, not able to be hindered with loss of goods, or of liberty, or of life
it self. But we will go somewhat farther, in the worthy acts of this renoumed
city, l. 4. c. 16.
And take that wc followed after out of Theodoret. For notwtstanding the
Emperor feared the multitude: yet were those wc were of the Clergy, that is,
some Priests and Deacons (for their Bishop Baxses was sent into banishment)
and one Lupus worthy of such a name, putt in his place, with whom that godly
devout people refused to communicate) these Cleregy men I say were brought
before the Governor, and commanded either to communicate with Lupus, or to be
banished. Where after a fair long tale said by the Governor to persuade the^
from their recusancy, A preaching Governor.
alledgeing that it was an extreme madness, for a few simple men, to resist one
which was so mighty a Prince, and over so many: at the length says ye Governor
to Eulogius a holy Priest, and the chief of those which was than left; Go to
that Church which your Prince goes unto.
Communicate with the Emperor. Unto whom Eulogius very stilly, but quippingly,
answered. What, was he, when he was made Emperor, made also a Bishop? The
Governor understanding the quipp, began to be angry, and to revile the
Priest, and to add these words. I said not so focile that thou art, but I
exhorted you all to communicate with those, which whom the Emperor
communicates. But ye good old man answered that they had a Pastor (meaning
his Bishop,) whose commandment they should in such things obey. Whereupon
fowerscore of them were sent into barbarous Countries, into banishment.

But mark I pray you both here and in what shall be said herafter, what is
communication with heretics or schismatics
that to communicate with heretics, was always understood by a religious and
ceremonious presence at those actions, wherein their Pastors and Bishops
exercised their woolfish profession toward their scattered flock.

And this must of necessity agree with manifest reason, that such communication
as is had with heretics in their prayers, is the highest and most unlawful
degree of communication with them. For if in ancient times, the holy Bishopps
of the Primitive Church, by giving or sending of certain letters unto
Schismatickes or heretics, Litrae Formarae vel co^mmicatoriae. Aug. ep. 16 2.
and 163 Opt. l. 2. copt. parm. Conc. Mileu. c. 20
which were called LITTERAE, FORMATAE, or COMMVNICATORIAE, should thereby have
signified their union with the same; and therefore have licensed others to keep
company, and to communicate with them also; which they reputed always
unlawful; ever refusing to grant any such letters, but to such as were in deed
Catholics: in so much that S. Augustine writing to certain Donatistes,
protests that he does not send them communicatory, but only private letters
for their conversion. What shall we than judge of this association in
spiritual things? neither must you now run unto your old excuse so often
by you alleged, and by us refuted; that you do not communicate with them in
prayers, when you do not pray your self: For your very presence at their
prayers, is a communication with their prayers: even as the presence at the
same table, although you eat nothing, is a communication with them in the
table: and dwelling in the same house, or lying in the same bed, is always
adjudged Nauar. c. 27. n. 20.
a communication, expressly forbidden by holy Canons, when there is not that
Tolleration of which we spoke before in civil cases: yet never was nor could
be granted in the crime of their rebellion.

It is very well known, how in ancient ages, neither Catholics with
heretics, nor heretics with Catholics would join Churches. Wherefore of
S. Ambrose, Amb. in or. detrad. Basil.
the Arians sought a Church as we have said. Of Athanasius, the Emperor
Constantius demanded a Church, for the Arians: and S, Athanasius in like
manner, for the Catholics in Antioch. Sozom. l. 3. c. 19
whereas before the Catholics in private houses did use to meet, refusing to
come to the Churches of heretics: as great Athanasius also him self, that
worthy and immovable Pillar of Christian religion did refuse. Theod. l. 5. c.
32
The like petition was made by the Arians, in Arcadius time at Constantinople.
which when S. Chrysostom resisted, and signified before Gainas, who made such
motion unto the Emperor, that the sacred Temple was open, and that he did
forbidd none, but he might pray there if he would: But I, says Gainas, am of
an other religion, and with the men of my own religion desire to have a Church.

These Arians at the day of Judgment shall condemn our politic
Schismatickes. The Donatistes.


When ye Donatistes had made certain hymns in Affrike to allure the people to
their service: S. Augustine, that Catholics might in all things be opposite
unto them, made a godly Psalm, for them to sing, Socr. l. 6. c. 8 Sozom. l. 8.
c. 8.
which he entitled a Psalm against the part of Donatus. The Arians also in
Constantinople, when they by Theodosius had been forbidden to use their service
in the city, and therefore in the night used to meet in public galleries, by
sides and quires singing certain heretical responses: after that the day drew
near, were wont to go from thence also singing blasphemous songs against ye
B. Trinity. S. Chrysostom therefore with greater solemnity than ever before;
performed the like manner of nightly singing and procession in his Church. and
in short space, Solemn procession was long be fore in use See S. Basil. ep.
63.
both in number and in solemnity, exceeded the Arians. For in this procession
there went first a silver Cross, with Torches kindled and charge was committed
to the Empresses Chamberlain, to provide both the expenses and also the
music.

So that in all antiquity we see, that heretics churches and services unto
Catholic Churches and services, have always been as opposite, as Babylon
unto Jerusalem, as heaven and hell, as the city of God and the city of the
Devil.

The people of Alexandria chose rather to dye. Theod. l. 2. ^. 14.
than to go to the Church where an Arian Bishop had possession. For which cause
S. Athanasius him self comforted by writing, certain Virgins to the constant
confession of their faith. For the Arians having found the^ once at Catholic
prayers, with all manner of brutish cruelty, sought to make them profess
Arianisme. Theod. l. 4. c. 14.
The people of Samosata having lost their godly Catholic Bishop Eusebius,
were such enemies of heretical wickedness; that ye Arian Bishop at service time
was ever alone. Yea when he had been in the bath, some Catholics coming
thither, and meeting him going forth (neither would they enter whilst he was
wtin) would not adventure to wash them selves, before the water in which he
had washed was cast forth: least by the very water they should have received
some filth of heretical contagion. He therefore soon gave over his office, and
Lucius an other Arian being intruded could not yet alter the mind or constancy
of Gods Catholcike flock, forsaken of their Pastor; yet as the same author
writes, executing them selves the cae of a Pastor, which they plainly
declared by a childish example, but a true pattern of fervent zeal to
ancient religion. For when this false Bishop Lucius by chance rode through the
market place; a company of children there playing at ball: it happened that the
ball slipping from one of the^, went between the Mules legs, on which Lucius
rode. But the children cried out, thinking the ball to be polluted with some
great filth. Wherefore having made a fire, passed the ball often through the
flame, reputing that so it might be purged. This example of childish piety,
whereas Theodoret a most grave Bishop and Doctor, has not thought unworthy of
his ecclesiastical history: I also think it may very well beseem my simple
writings. You may, if it please you, exhort whosoever will take the pains to
supply M. FOXES Martyrologe: to put this ball in ye number of those which have
suffered for the Gospel.

Very notable is also the Recusancy of the Roman citizens, Theod. l. 2. c. 10.
who when Constantius had sent into banishment their Pope Liberius, and placed
Faelix ye second in his room (who notwtstanding afterward was a Martyr) would
never enter into the Church, whilst Faelix was there: both because he was not
their true Pastor, and for that he had communicated with the Arians. By which
fortitude they obtained of the Emperor the restoring of Liberins to his See.

But most famous is the Martyrdom of S. Ermigildus, Greg. l. 3. mor. c. 31
that most noble young Prince who for refusing to communicate with Arians; was
by the barbarous King his Father, in steed of his Princely inheritance crowned
with a Martyrdom and honored by God after his death with most strange
miracles, and rewarded with the conversion of his wholle country.

I could here very much dilate this discourse, in the rehearfall of diverse
examples of most constant Catholics, Victor vticensis.
whom in the persecution of the Vandalles in Afric heretical sury, made most
gloriouse mirrours, for whosoever in our age has to contend with the like
barbarousnes. Athenageras in Apol Theoph. Antioch. l. 3 ad Autol. Text. l. de
spectac. Cypr. de spect.
A great argument might also be, brought forth of the ancient custom of the
purest age of the Church, when it was generally holden unlawful for Christians
to be present at the plays or spectacles of the Gentills: whereby we may judge
of the strange spectacles wc are in your Churches.

To conclude, what word more common in Fathers and Canons, than that it is
unlawful to communicate with heretics? and where shall we not find that one
of the chief communications was in Churches and Ceremonies? although the very
civil communication also were always condemned but not in so high a degree.
So that in all antiquity we may plainly perceive, what has been judged of
communicating with heretics in churches and service. Yea so many decrees we
have of this most certain truth, as there have ever since Christ, arisen
heresies, and dew sentences of comdemnation, have at any time been given by
Counsels or Pastors against the same.

. 40
Let us now see what we have in the like case of Schismatickes. The prescript
of holy Canons concerning schismatickes service.
Who although they be as much to be avoided as heretics: yet for that they
retain with the same faith, ordinarily the same ceremonies which are in the
Church: there may be in the^ a particular difficulty: And if we can in this
point also show our purpose, it will be unto the matter which we handle a
singular advantage.

I say therefore that it is not lawful, but rather a thing having annexed unto
it, many of those deformities we spoke of before, to be present at the service
of Schismatics. I mean when they have once divided them selves, and, made a
several congregation; or as the thirteth Canon of the Apostles and all
ancient Fathers are wont to speak, have erected an other Altar. For than do
I say, that it is an union with them: and therefore Schism, disobedience, and
contempt of the Church: Scandal and danger of heresy: See. 24.
Schism being always the high way to heresy, as we have before expounded. By
reason and discourse, this has been already proved. But by the authority of the
Church, we may aduouch it, This may be deduced out of the things before. 2.
ways.
in two ways. First, for that in the alleged Fathers and Counsels, there is
often times mention made not only of heretics, but of Schismatickes also: as
in the Antiochen and Laodicean Council and others. Secondly, because many
heretics have nothing differed from the true Catholic Church in service or
Sacraments, as ordinarily happened in the Primitive Church. Whereupon I infer,
that not the service, but the union and participating with the^ in their
wickedness, True Sacraments damnable out of the Church.
is by the Fathers reproved, when they generally teach to avoid heretics
service. So do the Fathers allow Christ's Sacraments, as sufficient, even
amongst heretics and schismatickes: when there concurreth the necessary
matter, form, and intention, and the convenient minister. l. 2. cont ep Parm.
c. 13 did. 32. c. praeter hoc. Conc. Illerd. c 13. Sending Infants to
Christening.
Yet does S. Augustine plainly teach, that such Sacraments cannot ordinarily be
either given or taken without sin. Wherefore it was reputed in all ages so
heinous a crime to cause a child to be christened by an heretic (although in
the dew form) that an ancient Council made this decree. Let not the
oblation of that Catholic in any wise be received in the Church, who shall
offer his children to be baptized in heresy.

So do the Fathers of the 7 general Council determine, Act 1. 1. q. 7. c.
co^ueniontibus
that such heretics as have received holy orders by the hands of heretics,
must be after abiuration of their heresy, received unto their functions: but
if any one of purpose go to an heretic, and receive of him holy orders: him
they command to be deposed. What is here I pray you worthy of condemnation,
but the exterior union with an heretic, the order it self being approved,
and acknowledged by the Church? In like manner we have an ancient Popes Canon
in this form. 24. q. 1. c. si. quis dedet it
If any one do receive the communion (he means the true communion of
Christ's most holy body) from the hand of an heretic, and knows not that
the Catholic Church does reprove it: afterward knowing it. let him do penance
one year. If he know and neglect it, and after repent: let him do penance
for ten years. Other do adiudge him seven years, and some more mildely,
five years of penance. If any man permit an heretic to celebrate his Mass
in the Catholic Church and knows not: let him do Penance 40 days. If for
reverence unto him, a wholle year. If for condemnation of the Catholic
Church, and custom of the Romans: let him be thrown out of the Church, as
an heretic except he have Penance; and than let him do it ten years. If
he depart from the Catholic Church, into the congregation of heretics,
and persuade others, Persuading to scisme
and after repent: let him do 12 years Penance. If than, in heretical rites,
and ceremonies, that which is reprehended, be the company, not always the
ceremony: Than when we condemned with ancient Fathers the association with all
heretics, in their services: the same Argument and censure must be made in
the communication with Schismatickes, with whom we cannot profess any union,
but by disuniting our selves from the one only Dove and Spouse of Christ. And
yet will I not so give you over, but we will have some more express thing
also, if it may be, for communication with schismatics: that you may the more
be confounded, at your gross defending of communication with heretics. For
there is a confusion, which brings sin: Eccli. 4
and there is a confusion, which brings grace, and glory and since you have
shamefully entered into the one: be not I pray you, ashamed in respect of so
great reward: to abide the other.

than because you are so curiouse an enquirer for ancient Canons, I bring you
here a Canon of an ancient Pope S. Pelagius, who next before S. Gregory
governed the Church.

This word Schism (which is a greek word) says he, does signify
division. 24. q. 1. c. schisma.
But in unity there can be no division: they therefore do not communicate with
unity, who communicate with Schismatics. They have made to the^ selves parts,
and seuering them selves from that which is one (that I may use the Apostle
IVDE his words) they have no spiritte. Whereby it is brought to pass, that
because in unity, they are not one; because they would be in part; because
they have not the spirit of the body of Christ; they can have no sacrifice.
Gloss. ibi.
(His meaning is because such sacrifice has no effect, whereas the effect of
the holy Eucharist, is the unity of Christ's mystical body, from which
Schismatickes are divided.) And discoursing of the great crime of those which
communicate with such, he says. Finally, either you think them to be the
Church, and whereas there cannot be two Churches, us to be Schismatickes: or if
it be manifest that the true Church is in the Apostolical Seas: than know you
that both they are divided from unity, and there is now no question lest of
communication, which cannot be true but only in unity. Presence at heretical
service expressly forbidden.
Be you not therefore (as if there were no difference between Schismatickes,
and the true Church) indifferently associated unto both their sacrifices. It is
not the body of Christ, which a Schismatike makes, if we follow truth as our
guide. Neither can any man feign, without reproving ye Apostle, that Christ is
divided. 1. Cor. 1.
One only is the Church which is Christ's body, which cannot be divided in two
or more parts. For so soon as any departs from her, he cease to be of any
Church at all. How could that ancient holy Bishop more plainly discourse of
communication with Schismatics, even when they have true service and
Sacraments? For that which he says, that a Schismaticke cannot make ye body
of Christ, See ye gloss upon this place.
is not understood of want of true consecration if he which takes it upon him
be a Priest: but according to the ordinary custom of Doctors, which call
the true body of Christ, that, which is the effect of the holy Eucharist, which
is the incorporation with Christ's mystical body, which a Schismaticke cannot
make in any: or because a Schismaticke him self is no part of that mystical
body: so that he speaks not of consecration of the Eucharist, but of the
union of him which is the consecratour.

S. Augustine disputing against the Donatistes, S. Augustines opinion. l. 1. de
Bap. cont. Donat. c. 2. 24. q. 1. cap. Si quem forte
has this notable saying, which I will set down the more largely, that you
may see how that great Saint, and most grave Doctor of Gods Church, esteemed
of this exterior show of union with the true Church of God, which we defend.
If perhapps (says he) extreme necessity drives any man where he cannot
find a Catholic: and keeping in his mind Catholic peace, he do receive by
some other, which is out of the Catholic unity, that which he would have
received in Catholic unity (he means baptism:) if forthwith he depart out
of this world: we do not repute him but as a Catholic. And if he be
delivered from corporal death: when he shall yield him self unto the
Catholic congregation, even with his corporal presence, from whence he never
departed in his heart: not only, we do not disallowe, that wc he has done;
but with all security and verity we commend him: because he believed that God
was present in hjis heart, where he observed unity, and would not depart out
of this life, without the Sacrament of Baptism, which whenever he found, he
knew to be Gods and not of men. But if any, when he might receive it in the
Catholic Church through any perverseness of mind does choose to be baptized in
Schism: although afterward he come unto the Catholic Church, where certain
it is ye the Sacrament profits, which may trewly be otherwhere received, but
not profitt: he is perverse and wicked, and so much the more perniciously, How
a man in necessity may receive a sacrament of an heretic or schismaticke.
by how much the more wittingly. S Augustine speaks here of Schismatickes.
Where he reprehendeth not the service or Sacrament, but the union which is by
the outward show professed. Neither yet was it his mind to approve such
communicatio^ with Schismatickes in necessity, that a man may dissemble his
recourse unto them, for to be in sign of union unto them: but he speaks of
those which were public Catecumens in the Church, Conc. Trid sess. 14. Caiet.
verbo. Absolutio cap. Pastoralis de off. iud. ord. Anglez de. Conr. Art. 8.
Diffic. 9.
and known to desire ye Churches Sacrament, and as he says, of the Church
already in heart: which in their extremity could find no Catholic who might
actually incorporate them to the same. After which manner, in extreme necessity
there wanting an other Priest: at the hour of death, any Catholic may
lawfully, and sufficiently, be absolved by any true Priest, although an
heretic, yea by Luther him self, if he were alive: So that neither the
Priest want dew intention, and the Penitent make known, both unto the Priest,
and others, who might otherwise be scandalized, that he would live and dye in
the Catholic unity.

This is a point very good for our countrymen to know, as a thing which may
happen unto them to be as profitable: as it is most certainly permitted by
holy Church: So that it be not according to the form of the communion book,
or with dissimulation. and dew diligence be used, for to find a Catholic
Priest.

But of S. Augustines opinion in this point, out of whom this Canon was taken,
we can say much more. And if we would say all, we should exceed any reasonable
volume. But our intent is not to bring here the sentences of holy Fathers, but
in as much as either they show ye custom of ye Church, or have their grave
sentences for the government of the wholle Church, placed in the body of the
Canon laws. This glorious Pillar of Christendom living in Africa, amongst
the swarms of Donatistes, which at that time molested the Church of Christ,
being first only Schismatickes, but afterward growing to express heresy, as
always Schismatickes, if they continue use to do, as we have new oftentimes
said out of S. Hierome: in all his works against Donatistes gives most
plain testimony of the custom of his days. Going to the Church is schism in
S. Agustines opinion.
For whosoever shall read any of those learned books which he writes of that
Schism: shall see, that neither the Donatistes with the Catholics, nor these
with them would any ways communicate. Yea by this great Father, it was reputed
Schism, for the one part to communicate with the other in spiritual things:
which when I say, I mean the religious presence at service.

Hear, I pray you, what this Saint rehearses of an Imperial law against this
action Civil law See cod de hereticis L. quicunque l. 1. cont ep. Parm. in
fine See ep. 166. Although the conuenticles, are several, and the segregation
wicked: yet the law cannot coueniently punish all. proper conuenticles wicked
separation congregated.
Of the other Emperors laws and justice, (except of Julian the Apostata, who
only favored the Donatistes, permitting them to have Churches) which laws are
most vehement against them: who is ignorant? Amongst the which, one general
law against all such as will be called Christians, and do not communicate with
the Catholic Church, but are gathered together severally in their proper
co^uenticles contains thus much: that as well be who ordeineth a clergy man,
as also he which is ordained, be amerced in ten Pounds of gold. But that
the very place where the wicked separation is congregated, be confiscated.
There be also other general commaundemements, by which they are disabled
either to make will or donations, or to receive any thing by any wills or
donations. Thus S. Augustine. Where you may observe the cause of such
punishment, only to be the gathering together into several co^uenticles,
which he calls wicked separations, and the not communicating with the
Catholic Church. So that in S. Augustines judgment, you may see, that it is
all one, to be gathered in Caluins wicked separation, and not to communicate
with the Catholic unity: which I pray you, what is it else but to be in
Schism? l. 1. de bapt. cont. Don. c. 4.


More plainly he calls those which receive Baptism in the Donatistes
congregation, with an intent after their Baptism presently to come to the
Catholic Church: Schismatickes.
Such I say he calls Schismatickes: not disallowing the Sacrament, but the
receiving of it in that Church, wc makes schism. What need is it (says he)
to committ this accursed evil, even but one day or one hour? For whosoever
desires this to be granted him, may either of the Church, or of God demand,
that it may be lawful for him, but for one day to be an Apostata. For there is
no cause why he should fear to be an Apostata for one day, and not fear to
be a Schismaticke or Heretic for one day. See how he accounts ye receiving
of the holy Sacrament of Baptism of an Heretic, although with intent of
coming to the Catholic Church afterward, to be Schism: and the persisting
after in such congregation, to continue the schism. Thus much he says of
such as know the Donatistes not to be the true Church. In the next chapter: But
they which through ignorance are there baptized, c. 5.
thinking, that to be the Church of Christ: in comparison of the former, do
indeed sin less: yet are they grievously wounded with the sacrilege of
Schism. Wounded with the sacrilege of schism.
He expounds him self afterward because their ignorance cannot be excused.
Than is it Schism to receive a most holy and true Sacrament of a Schismaticke.
Why I pray you? not because ibid. c. 2.
they receive baptism, but because they receive it in Schismatickes Churches.
therefore the being in Schismatickes Church, as one of their society, is
Schism. The like he has in the same book. c. 8
Those whom they Baptize, they cure of the wound of Idolatry and Infidellity,
but more grievously they do strike with the wound of schism. Schism by S.
Augustine, is more grievous than Idolatry.
For Idolaters amongst ye people of God the sword destroyed, but the
Schismatickes the earth opening swallowed. Behold, what account this holy
Doctor makes of ye company of schismatics in their Churches: not because the
thing done, wc is the administration of Gods most pure Sacrament, is evil;
for he always honourerh it: nor because of the sin of the minister, vr
worthily exercising his function; for such sin is most often committed even
in the Catholic Church, and cannot defile the worthy receiuour: nor because
of the evil, or false belief, or schismatic mind, of the receiver; for he
supposes the contrary: but only for that association which is had in a
Schismatic congregation with the same, and is not only committed in the
act of the Sacrament there received, but ever after by remaining amongst the^
is continewed.

The same Doctor where he entreats against Emeritus a Danation Bishop: Of
such as were of the part of Donatus in heart but yielded to the Catholics
their corporal presence, says: that they are CARNE INTVS, SPIRITV FORIS.
Tha^ is it also a clear case, that the very corporal presence in Caluins
part, makes one to be CARNE INTVS, SPIRITV FORIS, that is in flesh within
Caluins Church, in spirit without. and because, as we said above, none can be
of Gods Church divided, See. 24.
but he must be wholly of the same: what remains, but that such are to be
esteemed of Caluins, S. Gregory l. 1. ep. 36.
and not of Christ his Church?

Of S. Gregory's time, we have most evident testimony. Who not only strictly
forbids that any person permit his children, bondslaues, or any belonging
to his jurisdiction, to be baptized by the Donatistes: But when the Inhabitants
of a certain Island called Caprea, L. 7. ep. 99.
returned from schism, sending their Ambassadors to Rome for their
reconciliation; he gave order, that if their fitst Bishop would be also
reconciled to the unity of gods Church, he should remain their Bishopp:
otherwise that a new should be made, that our Lords flock (says he) may be
secure against the darts of the deceitful enemy. Which great care
(considering the tumultes and inconveniences which happen, where two several
Bishops do sit) had been in vain, if that people might have received their
spiritual things of their old Schismatic Bishop. Neither is there any
cause hereof, but the exterior show of union in his congregation, whereas the
difference in doctrine, service, and Sacraments, was none at all.

Whosoever reads over the histories of such Schisms as have been heretofore
in the Roman Church, when there has been division of Popes (although ye
Roman Church was never divided, but all deuiders have presently ceased to be
of this Church he shall find this doctrine of avoiding Schismatics most
constantly on both sides to have been observed. For as the Schismatickes did
arrogate unto the^ selves the name of the true Church: so did they also always
paint them selves with the show of whatsoever piety the true Church should
profess. L. 6. vitae. Sancti Bern c. 6.
In the time of that great Schism between Innocentius the second and Peter
Lion; S. Bernard a most carnest defendour of the true Pastor of the Church, at
POITIERS, before that Church had publickely showed it self to be
Schismatic, had offered unto God in the Cathedral Church the immaculate
Sacrifice. But after his de parture the Deane of the same Church broke very
impiously, but not scotfree, ye Altar in which the holy man had celleorated:
for after a very short time he died most desperately. And when ye Prince of
that country of A quitane, who had opposed him self to Innocentius came to
parley with S. Bernard: after much debating of the matter, S Bernard got him
self unto ye most effectual armor of the Divine mysteries. When ye Prince
him self was not permitted to enter into the Church: but by the Divine
authority of the Saint, adiuring hun in the presence of Christ's body, which
upon the sacred Patene he carried forth of the Church unto him; was at the
length mollified, and of a wolf, S. william D. of Aquitane.
became a lamb; and of a SAVLE, a PAVLE; and of a notorious sinner, a glorious
Saint, and pattern of true repentance, for nourishing the division of the
Church.

Than do we evidently see that on both sides this has always been an
inviolable custom, that as well the Schismaticke has avoided the Catholic,
as the Catholic has shunned the spiritual communication with the
Schismaticke.

But the example and authority of S Cyprians time shall both determine and
finish this controversy. S. Cyprian.
Against whom when Felicissimus had raised a Schism, and gathered together in
a certain bid so many as he could, using thereunto the terror of seculer
Magistrates, and diverse threatenings: S. Cyprian sent into those parts two
Bishops and as many Priests, to hinder the poorer sort, least for poverty
they should be drawn unto Felicissimus his part. ep. 40.
Let none (says he) draw you Christians from the Gospel of Christ: let none
take away out of ye Church, the children of the Church: Let such perish alone
by them selves, who will needs perish: Let them alone remain out of the
Church, who are gone out of the Church. And after. But if any shall go unto the
part of Felicissimus, or his Cha^pions, and join him self unto that
heretical faction: let him know that he cannot afterward return unto the
Church, and communicate with the Bishopp and flock of Christ. ep. 38.
And of the same. whosoever shall join him self unto his conspiracy and
faction, let him know that he cannot communicate with us in the Church, who
voluntarily chose to be separated from the Church. These my letters do you
read unto our Brethren, and send them also to the Clergy at Carthage, adding
also the names of whosoever have joined them selves to Felicissimus. The like
censure to have been made of such as joined them selves in Churches unto
Nouatianus a false Pope against S. Cornelius: S. Cornelius
out of S. Cvprians epistles; and that which S. Cornelius him self wrote unto
Fabius the Bishop of Antioch, ep. 52 l. 6. c. 35
wc Eusebius sets down at large; we may manifestly perceive, where it is
also plainly to be seen, that this external union in service and Sacraments,
is the very nature and essence of schism. For as S. Cornelius writes, when
the followers of Nouatianus came at his Mass to receive, he houlding their
hands between his own, exacted of them this oath: Swear unto me by the body
and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou will never either forsake me or
return unto Cornelius. See than that the schism is not only in receiving
sacraments, but in not forsaking the schismatic congregation. Which when
diverse afterward did, than did they return unto ye Church: So says
Cornelius. Know thou, that every day now the brethren forsake him, and return
unto the Church, and that now he is destitute and deprived almost of the
society of the^ all. Behold, I pray you, that to come into ye Catholic
Church is to forsake schismatic society. Thousands of the like examples and
autorities might be brought: l. de vnitat^^ Eccl. in fine. Three manners of
communicating with heretics or schismatiks.
but I will conclude with a distinction of S. Augustine, who makes three
degrees of communicating with Hreretickes or Schismatickes. The first, of such
as communicate with them when they have not plainly showed their rebellion
against the wholle Church: And these not with standing their communication, he
calls pure and uncorrupted wheat. Others, as this Doctor speaks although
having a goodwil, yet through fleshly darkness do wander with the^ a while, when
their schism is manifest: And these he accounts as wheat, whose blade is
trodden down and withered, the root remaining alive: and never to grow again
but by Gods merciful correction. Finally others, with an evil mind and
purpose do co^tradict the most open truth: these are altogether pulled up by
the roots, neither can be planted again, but by him, who only is able to
grafte again the broken boughs in their natural stock. Romans 11
So that according to S. Augustines doctrine, we may learn what is to be
judged of our fearful Schismatickes. THE CO^CLVSION.


But it is now time at the length to draw to an end of our wholle disputation.
Wherein if I have been somewhat bold with your self: I pray you impute it to
the sincerity of my good will, and the familiarity of our friendship. If I may
seem to be over vehement, and incensed against others: I name none: If any
ones conscience do accuse him, let him either amend him self, or not there
devise a quarrel where none is meant. If either by you, or other Catholics,
I may be judged to have given some occasion by plain and true speeches, to
exasperate heretics: 2. Cor. 12.
I answer with S. PAVL: I am become foolish, you have compelled me. So long
as the sheep of Christ his fould do obediently and simply harken unto the
voice of the Pastors, and choose to be guided by the^, refusing to hear
strangers: so long may the Shepherd be quiett and still. But if once the false
shepheardes be entered into the fould, or rather express wolves, who do take
away and scatter the sheep: than is it time for the Shepherd, not only him
self, to stir abroad; but to send out his dogs, and to use all possible
remedies, against so present dangers. I do not take upon me to have said more,
than has been said hertofore, only I have sought to press you with that wc
most learnedly has been brought by others, whose writings being almost worn
out of mind, the effect of them seems to be as little regarded.

Remember I pray you, Gal. ^.
that saving of S PAVL, and apply it unto your self If I build ye same things
again which I have destroyed: I make my self a Preuaricatour. How odiouse the
name of a Preuaricatour is, you know very well. A Preuaricatour, 2. q. 3. c. fi
quem. Vlpianus ibi citatus.
(says the Ciuilian) is said, as it were a varicatour (a stradler, of whose
legs you cannot know the right from the leafte) which helps the contrary
part, and betraieth his own. You will not be offended, I hope, if I tell you
that which truly I may: that whilst you go about to build up the rebellious
walls of Schism, which once in your self and others you destroyed: you make
your self a Preuaricatour. For do you not perceive, how you help the adverse
part? Do you not see how you betray your own cause? I mean that cause, which
once you made your own, although now you have forsaken it, you have betrayed
it, yea you have not only now by secrett collusion impugned it, but by open
hostility taken upon you the patronage of your adversaries cause against it. He
that gathers not with me scatters, says our Savior. Mat. 1^.
You gather unto Satan's congregation: than can you not gather with Christ, but
scatter against Christ. Or rather I may say of you, c. 17.
that wc Hieremy the Prophett long since foresaw of the Devil, and whosoever
is his instrument, in fauouriug of heresies. The Partrich has cherished (or
gathered together, as S. Augustine reads) those with she has not brought forth:
She has made riches, L. de paste c. 12.
and not in judgment: in the midst of her days she shall leave them, and at
her latter end she shall be unwise. The Devil whom S. Augustine understands
by the Partrich, or, as that Doctor also faieth, any Heretic, Brother
Coadiutor, or son of the Devil, (for these names does this gloriouse Saint
attribute unto these contentiouser Rebels, therefore well likened unto
Partriches, who with striving are the sooner taken:) These Partriches I say,
gather together those, who^ they have not brought forth: those, whom Almighty
God has created, and the holy Church brought forth unto grace, and unto her
blessed unity. These Partriches have increased their congregation with riches,
but not in judgment. For as the Devil cares not, of what heresy one be of,
so he be an heretic: So has he without any judgment or discretion, gathered
amongst heretics, such as he cares not whether they be heretics or no, so
that they be in his congregation: so that they be without: so that they be in a
part: whereas Christ's garment can have no part, nor any way be divided. The
Deuell says not (that I may use the speech of S. Augustine) these are
Donatistes, and not Arians: whether these, or those: they belong unto him,
which gathers together without judgment. Let him worshipp the Idols (says
he) he is mine. Let him remain in the superstition of the Jews: he is mine
having forsaken unity, let him go unto this heresy, or that heresy: he is mine.
Yea as we have showed be fore let him but be gathered together with Heretics
at their service: It is a sign of heresy, to require Catholics to come to ye
Church. Ezech. 34
he is mine. The Devil then, and whosoever gathers with him, and against
Christ; gathers his riches, but without judgment: far contrary unto the
Catholic Church which detesteth all others, and gathers none but such as
desire earnestlye to be her children, and to be the sheep of him, who said I
will feed the^ in judgment. But in the midst of her days She shall leave
them: (says the Prophet either, because God will mightily raise up the lapsed
again. or because according to that saying of S. PAVL, I would to God those
were curt off which do disturb you: the favorers of such schism shall at ye
length discover the^ selves; and by open Apostasy show what they secretly
harbored within their rebellious bosoms; and forsaking those whom they
pretending to feed did devour; verify in them selves, the saying of the
Apostle: They went out from us, but they were not of us. or else, because God
will suddenly punish, and take out of this life such divided members, and
wandering sheep to their eternal confusion. when at the last such Diabolical
endeavors shall show the folly of their authors, and all the fair promises,
and flourishing persuasions of Schismatic rebellion, shall disclose and
discover them selves, as foolish devises.

And I would to God the diverse punishments which are daily inflicted upon the
lapsed, were sufficiently known unto the world. Three kinds of punishments
of Schism. Ser de laps.
whereas we see now in our age, no less miraculous scourges for this shameful
lapse, than we read in S. Cyprian of those, which in his age fell into
Idolatry. So many schismatic marriages, suddenly turned into mourning: so
many conformable men, either possessed or distracted, or punished with the
death of their nearest allies: So dreadful torments of conscience, and
cominuall terrors, as they worthily are afflicted withal; whom God with Caine
has cast out of his holy sight, and lest as vacabonds and forlorn of the
earth: Such sudden deaths of Infants, baptized by heretics: no otherwise
than happened to the son of Valens the Emperor, Theod. l. 4. c. 17.
for admitting the cursed blessing and baptism of the Arians, after S. Basils
sacred presence, and infinite other like wonders. To which effect I remember
what Tertullian writes of a far inferior kind of iniquity, L. de spect. c.
26.
than presence at heretical service, that is of presence at the Gentills
spectacles: of which we spoke before. There happened, says he, an example in
a woman testifying Gods indignation. This woman going unto the Theater,
returned with a Devil: wherefore when in the exorcisme the unclean spirit was
rebuked because he durst molest a Christian: the Devil answered very bouldly:
I did it most worthily: for I found her in my own. Take you heed therefore
that the Devil find you no more in his own.

Eus. l. 1. vit con. c. 11. Sozom. l. 1. c. 4.
For most worthy was that judgment of Constantius the Emperor Father unto the
great Constantine, who desirous to make trial of Christian fortitude, gave out
an edicte ye whosoever refused to sacrifice to his Gods, should be banished the
court Whereupon some, which impiously yielded, were banished: and the other,
which remained constant, with singular favor were retained. For that wise
Emperor, well considered that who would be treacherous to God, could not be
true to him,

Iudic. 16. Dalila
lost his former strength: and falling into his enemies hands, was deprived of
his sight: and bound in chains, was made ever after to grind in the mill. So
after the entry into the heretical conuenticle, a most false and deceitful
Dalila, who sees not, ye the mind being blinded, betaketh it self to the
bondage of all manner of iniquitye, where, even as it were in a wheel, it
runs an unlimited race, never ceasing to go from one wickedness to an other.
L. 25. mor. c. 12.
For by the deserte of so great a sin, the pit of other sins is covered
(as S. Gregory notably teaches) that he which wittingly commits one evil,
even in other things may justly unwitting perish. One sin is punishment of
an other. Romans 1. 1 Thessalonians. 2. Ap. 22.
For this is therefore done, that sins may be punished with sins, to the end,
that the very increase of vices, may be the punishment of the offenders.
Hence, does the Apostle say, that God has delivered certain unto the desires
of their heart. And again: that they may fill up their sins always. Hence,
by an Angels voice is it said unto JOHN, who hurts, let him hurt yet; and
who is in filthiness, let him be filthy yet. Hence DAVID says: Lay iniquity
upon their iniquity, psalm. 68.
that they may not enter into thy justice. Hence again, by the said Psalmist
it is said of our Lord him self: Psalm. 77.
He has made the suggestions of malignant spirits, to be the way unto the path
of his wrath. For to make that which was but a path of his wrath, to become a
broad way, is by his district judgment, to enlarge the causes of wrath, that
those which being illuminated would not do well, being iustlye blinded, should
farther do, whereby they may deserve the more to be punished. God grant that
you may open your eyes at the length, and find the way of the city of Cods
habitation, least in the day of his revenge, from this wilful darkness which
you have incurred, Psalm. 106
you be against your will thrown into the utter darkness. From which God of
his mercy, and by the intercession of his blessed mother deliver you.

He which desires nothing more, than that our friendship may through Catholic
unity be perpetual.

S. Cypr. lib. de unit. Eccl.

S. Ambrose upon the 9. chapter of the Apocalipse, comparing the hears of the
caterpillars unto the heretical Churches: says. The Locusts had hears of
women. for as ye Saints of the Church of God had their flocks which at
certain times did come together to celebrate ye divine services: So also
heretics had their mad and furiouse people, which in diverse places came
together, to the celebration not of divine mysteries, but of deuelish services.

The same Father, upon those words of the Gospel of S. Luke the 9. chapter:
when ye unclean spirit shall depart out of a man. This, it cannot be doubted,
but that it is spoken of the people of the Jews: which our Lord before did
sever from his kingdom. Wherefore understand thou also, that all heretics and
schismatics are separated from the kingdom of God, and from ye Church. And
therefore it is most manifest, that the meetings of heretics and
Schismatickes, belong not to God, but to the unclean spirit.

S. Cyprian in his 40. epistle, even of Schismatic Churches, speaks thus.
There is but one God, and one Christ, and one Church, and one chair by our
Lords voice sounded upon Peter. There cannot be erected an other altar, nor
made another Priesthood, besides one altar, and one Priesthood. whosoever
otherwhere gathers, scatters. it is aduouterouse, it is impiouse, it is
sacrilegiouse, whatsoever by humane fury is decreed, that Gods disposition may
be violated. Depart you far from the contagion of such men, and even as if
you would avoid a canker or pestilence, shun their speeches.

In the same epistle he gives warning to avoid deceitful teachers. such as
are now a days those wc teach to go to heretics churches. Flee the wolves,
which separate the sheep from the Pastor: flee the venomous tongue of the
Deuell who from ye beginning of the world always deceitful and false, lies,
that he may deceive: ^^^attereth, that he may hurt: promises good, that he may
cause evil: offers life, ye he may kill. Now also do his words clearly
show them selves; and his poisons are manifest: he promises peace, that none
may come to peace: he promises salvation, that he which has offended may nor
come to salvation: he promises the Church, whereas he endeavors, that who
believes him, may utterly perish from the Church.

The same in his 77. epistle. Our Lord insinuating unto us unity defines and
says: I and my Father am one. unto which unity he bringing his Church, says
again: And there shall be one flock, and one shepherd. if than the flock be
one, how can he be of the flock, which is not amongst the number of the flock?

Again libro de lapsis in fine. Such manner of men (he speaks of
Schismatics) do you avoid as much as you may. their speech spreads as a
canker, their take passes abroad as a contagion, their hurtful and venomous
persuasio^, kills worse than the persecution it self. Gen 4. Apoc. 2.


S. Hierome ep. 11. de Monogamia. Let one Eve be the mother of a^ll the living:
and one Church the mother of all Christians. as cursed Lamech divided ye first
into two cities: so heretics tear this into many Churches Wc according to
ye Apocalipse of S. IHON, are rather to be called Sinagogues of ye Deuell, than
congregations of Christ.

Laus Deo, ac Beatissimae semper Virgini Matri Deiparae MARLAE atquod omnibus
Sanctis.
FINIS.

