THE WAY TO HEAVEN.

IN A Sermon delivered at Saint Mary's Spittle on Wednesday in Easter week the
27. of March. 1611.

By SAMVEL GARDENER, Doctor of Divinity.

Imprinted at London by W. W. for THOMAS MAN. 1611.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE VERTVous Lady, JANE Lady BARKLEY, wife to HENRY,
Lord BARKLEY.
SAMVEL GARDENER Consecrateth this his Sermon in testification of his dutiful
affections.

ROMANS 8.16. The same Spirit bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the
children of God.


Having lately handled among you, the doctrine of the certainty of our
Election; I hold it fit now, to open the vein of these two Questions,
naturally incident unto the former Argument. 1. Whether a man may know his
particular Election. 2. How it may be known. This Scripture that teaches how
it may be known, plainly insinuates that it may be known. How it may be
known, it is here told us: the mouth of two witnesses the best that is in
Heaven; The Spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2.10.
which searches all things, yea the deep things of God. 2. The best that is
in Earth, The Spirit of man, 1. Cor. 2.^1.
that only knows the things of man within him, revealing it unto us.

By these degrees, as by the Staves of Jacobs Ladder, we ascend up to this
sacred counsel of his Sanctuary. Our own Spirit, is our Heart and
Conscience, sanctified in the sprinkling of the Blood of Christ. The Spirit of
God, is joined by God unto it, to help our infirmities. Our Spirit testifies
morally of our Adoption, by sanctification, and the fruits thereof. The Spirit
of God witnesses an other way; that is, by the absolute certainty of Faith,
declaring and applying the Promises of God.

Four manner of ways, may one be said to be the Child of God. 1. By natural
or essential Generation: in this sense, Christ Jesus is the only Son of
God, begotten of the substance of his Father before all worlds. 2. By the
grace of Hypostaticall union with the natural Son of God: thus Christ as
man, is the Son of God, and the borne Son of God. 3. By grace of Election,
as they that are elected and put apart to this, to be Sons, and so joint
heirs with Christ in his Kingdom; in this meaning, Christ is said to have
died, John. 11.52.
To gather together in one, the children of God, that were scattered: that is,
the Elect, not as yet regenerated. 4. By grace of Regeneration; according to
the saying of Christ to Nicodemus, John. 3.5.
Except a man be borne again of the Spirit, he can not enter into the
kingdom of God. Here to be the Child of God, is to be Predestined into the
Adoption of his Children, Ephesians 1.5.
Who has Predestined us to be adopted through Jesus Christ in himself.
Next, to be made actually, and indeed the Child of God through Faith; As many
as received him, Ioh. 1.1^.
to them he gave prerogative to be the Sons of God; even to them that believe
in his name. Finally, by the same Spirit, to be regenerated into the child of
God, and to put on the nature of the Son of God Christ Jesus, or to put on
Christ Jesus himself, according to the Apostles phrase of speech; Put on the
new man, Ephesians. 4.24.
which after God is created unto righteousness and true holiness^. Now the
Privileges are royal annexed by God to those whom he has thus Adopted his
Children. They are the Lords Heirs apparent, it is the consequent the Apostle
makes; 1. If we be Children, Romans 8.17.
we be also Heirs, even the Heirs of God. 2. Fellow-heyres with Christ, so
are they surnamed in the same place: Heirs annexed with Christ. Romans 8.17.
3. Yea Kings at all degrees; so the spirit speaks evidently: Revel. 1.6.
And made us Kings and Priests, even to God his Father. 4. All their
Afflictions, Wantes, Offenses, are but probations, and fatherly Corrections
laid upon them for their good; as it is written, We know that all things
work together for the best, Romans 8.28.
unto them that love God. 5. They have a commanding and imperial power over
all creatures; yet so, as in this life they have but, Jus adrem, Right to the
thing. In the fifth that is to come, they shall have, Jus in re, Right and full
state in the very thing it self; world, life, death, things present, things
to come, even all are yours: ^^b. 27.
Thou made him little inferior to the Angels, thou crownest him with Glory
and Honor, and have set him above the works of thine hands. ^is. 8.
Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet. 6. Lastly, the very
Angels are Officers at hand to give attendaunce unto them, and to watch over
their good: Ieb. 1.4.
Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for their sakes
which shall be heirs of salvation? Whereto answers this part of Psalmodie;
Psalm. 34.7.
The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them. Hereupon let me speak in the language of David; Seems it a
small thing that I be Son in law to a King, sithence I am poor and of no
reputation? So seems it a small thing to us, to be adopted into the Children
of God, being Worms, 1. Ioh. 3.1.
and no Men: Behold what love the Father has given us, that we should be
called the Sons of God. It was a part of high honor done to our forefathers,
Hebr. 11.16.
Abraham, Izaac, Jacob, that God was not ashamed to be called their God: No
less honor is performed to us, that he is our God, and we his people: he
our Father, and we his Children. Now the Spirit of God, while it inwardly
witnesses to our Spirit, that is, to our Minds, by illuminating them by the
Sunbeams of his Grace that we are the Children of God; he does plainly and
openly reveal to us, that we were from all eternity, Adopted into his
Sonship. For they are not by Faith the Children of God, neither are they
regenerated into the Children of God, or have put on Christ, who have not first
been Predestined unto this Adoption.

And here now come our first Question in place, to be ventilated and decided;
whether a man may know his particular Election. The Papists say no, without
suggestion of special revelation. A very erroneous and absurd assertion,
easily checked by Scriptures and Reasons.

By Scriptures, as by the words of Christ to his Disciples, Luke 10.20.
Rejoice that your Names are written in Heaven: But, Ignot^ nulla cupido, no
man rejoices in a thing either unknown, or uncertain unto him. By this
Precept of Peter, Give diligence, 2 Pet. 1.10.
to make your election sure. Now herein what would all our diligence do good,
if it could not be made sure? Lastly, in this persuasion of S. Paul to the
Corinthians: Prove your selves, 2. Cor. 13.5.
whether ye be in the faith or not? Know ye not your own selus, how that
Josues Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? Where it is assumed as a
matter confessed, that a man may know his Faith, and so his Election; Faith
being the infallible mark of our Election.

By Reasons we confront them in the cause, thus.

1. That which a man is bound certainly to believe, he may certainly know,
and that without notice of special Revelation: But every faithful man
stands bound to believe that he is elected, it being the positive precept of
God, that we believe in Christ: 1. Ioh. 3.23.
This is his commandment, that we believe in the Name of his son Jesus
Christ. To believe in Christ, being not only to believe that we are Adopted,
Justified, Redeemed by him; but also eternally to be Elected in him.

2. Again we dispute thus. That which is consigned and sealed unto us by the
spirit of God, of that we may be sure; for then are we sure of our Leases and
Grauntes, when they are sealed unto us. But our Adoption, and so by sequel our
Election, is sealed unto us by the Spirit of God. This Scriptures conceal not,
but reveal unto us, ^. Cor. 2.12.
where they say: We have received not the Spirit of the world, but the Spirit
which is of God, that we might know the things that are given to us of God. As
in an other place thus: Ephesians. 1.13.
Jn whom also ye have trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, even
the Gospel of your salvation, where^^ also after that ye believed, ye were
sealed with the holy Spirit of Promise.

If our Adversaries hereto shall object, that this obsignation of our Adoption
is morally by our works, to bear us in hand, that this our knowledge of our
Adoption, is but coniecturall and probable; we further answer, that the holy
Spirit seals our Adoption, by begetting in us, a special confidence. For
when as we hear the Promises of God, and withal ruminate and meditate upon
them, in comes the holy Ghost in the nicke, inclining the Understanding and
the Will, to embrace them; and then draws them on to give consent unto them,
and to rest contented in them: Whence arises that special assurance, that we
are Gods adopted Children, and that we stand in his favor.

If further it shall be objected, that the Catholike-fayth charge none, to
give Faith to that, which God neither by written or unwritten Word, or
otherwise by Tradition, has intimated unto us: and how that by none of these
ways, it has been suggested that this man Peter, or that man Cornelias, is
Predestined by God: and therefore that no man is constrained particularly to
believe, this or that man to be saved: let them be thus answered, that albeit
this particular proposition, J am Elected, be not so broadly set down in the
Bible, yet inclusiuely as Species in sico genere, as Logicians speak, is it
there contained. So as by natural collectiue inference, it is set down in the
word by disputing in this manner: Ioh. 6.35.
Whosoever truly believe, are elected: But ^aruely do believe, therefore J am
elected. The Proposition or first part of this Reason, is the very Scripture:
the Assumption or second part, comes from the Conscience of the believing
person. The Conclusion naturally issues from them both.

3. Our next Argument, shall be thus formed. The Faith of the Elect, or
otherwise, that which we call, A saving Faith, is a certain, and particular
persuasion of forgiveness of sins, and of eternal life. That Faith is this
resolute persuasion; and that this Resolution is of the nature of Faith.
Scriptures do conclude: as where Christ says to Peter; Math. 14.31.
O thou of little Faith, wherefore did ^est thou doubt? As where he says to his
Disciples; Math. 21.21.
If ye have Faith, and doubt not. As where Saint James monisheth thus: Let him
ask in Faith, Iam. 1.6.
and waver not. The Faith that was so much commended in Abraham; He doubted not
of the Promise of God through unbelief, Romans 4.20.
but was strengthened in the Faith.

In the second place, that Faith is a particular persuasion, applying things
believed, it is thus proved. The property of Faith is to receive the Promise;
so S. Paul, That ye might receive the Promise of the Spirit through Faith:
Gal. 3.14.
and the thing promised, which is Christ with his spirit: of which says our
Savior, As many as received him, Ioh. 1.12.
to them he gave prerogative to be the Sons of God, even to them that believe
in his Name. It is this that gives us courage and confidence; these two being
the worthy effects of our Faith, as Paul teaches, saying: Ephesians. 3.12.
By Christ we have boldness and entrance with confidence by Faith in him.
Boldness is, when a sinner dare press into the presence of God, and not be
dismaide with the menaces of the Law, or the understanding of his own
unworthiness, nor with the manifold tryalles of the Devil: and it is more
then certainty of Gods favor; which a general Faith can not breed, as
Papists would have it. This general Faith, without doubt, being in Cain,
Saul, Achitophel, Judas, and such like; yea, in Satan himself, who
not-withstanding despaired, and some of them desperately did fordoe themselves;
and the Devil for all his faith, quiuereth as a Leaf tossed with the wind, in
the presence of God.

4. Lastly, I oppose against them the multiplicitie of instances as very
pregnan^ proofs of the cause congested by S. John i^ his first Epistle, whose
intention through (...) the whole Letter is to show, how a man may ordinarily
and plenarily know, the he is in Gods love, and so in the state o^ eternal
life. The places are very strong on our side, and they are these: Hereby we are
sure that we know him, 1. Ioh. 23.
if we keep his Commandments. verse. 5.
If we keep his word, hereby we know that we are in him. In this are the
children of God known, 1. Ioh. 3.10.
and the children of the Devil. Thereby we know that we are of the truth,
verse. 19.
and shall before him assure our hearts. Hereby we know that we dwell in him,
Chap. 4.13.
and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit. These things have I
written unto you, Chap. 5.13.
that believe in the name of the son of God, that ye may know that y^^ have
eternal life.

Now our Adversaries thus slubber up an answer to these Testimonies. 1. That
none of them do necessarily imply any such certainty of Divine knowledge, in
as much as those things which we learn by conjectures, we may be said to know.
This is but an hungry Answer, by their leave, and a very miserable shift;
which with what facility we list, we dissolve and do away. For thus S. John
directly delivers us the drift of his Epistle: Ioh. 1.4.
These things write we unto you, that your joy may be full. But it must needs
be an uncertain joy, which a doubtful and coniecturall knowledge does beget.
Again, this knowledge naturally brings forth security and confidence; as
where the same Apostle says, Cap. 3.19.^^.
We know that we are in the truth, and shall before him assure our hearts:
and we have boldness toward God: And therefore it can not otherwise, but
include an absolute assurance. Finally, that he might apparently conclude,
that this knowledge is a knowledge of divine Faith, are altogether as
infallible as it may be; he comes in with this inference in the next
Chapter; Cap. 4.16.
We have known and believed the love that God has in us. Now where as our
Adversaries come in with this surioynder, that these terms are general,
nothing concerning any one in particular: it is untrue that they say: For where
as John speaks in the plural number, We have known, he speaks of
himself, and in himself of the residue of the Church, wrapped and infolded in
the same condition. Now he himself knew certainly that he should be saved:
For Christ, not long before he left the World, filled their hearts with joy
and gladness, partly by repeating and renewing the Promise of Etern^^ life,
and of the perpetual presence of t^^ Spirit; and partly by praying to his
Father for them, for their final preservation: so (...) they might
irrefragably conclude their assured salvation, both for the present, an^ for
the life to come.

Thus having concluded the affirmati^^ of this Question, let us now consider
wha^ our Adversaries can say for the Negative and Destructive part thereof.

1. First, they tell us of Job, who for a his integrity, was without this
certaint^ and security of Grace, as where he thus be wrayeth it; Job. 9.21.
Though I were perfect, yet my so^^ sh uld not know it; ver^. 28.
I am afraid of all my works I answer by Hierome, that here he spe^keth by
way of comparison with God an^ himself, especially when he enters into
judgment with the creature, in which case he disclaymeth his own
righteousness, a^ not being able to abide the trial; so that that this
speech, My soul should not know^ is as much as if he should have said, I will
not acknowledge or stand upon my righteousness: which is no less then the
very Angels can say which are already in Heaven, and are herein aforehand
with him Again, the words according to the original, are commonly
translated, and to be read thus; Am I perfect? I know not my souls, I abhor
my life: That is, if I take my self to be perfect, I have no regard of mine
own Soul: Again thus, I am perfect in respect of you, and I know not my
soul, and I abhor thy life, namely in respect of mine own righteousness:
The words of the 28. verse are thus to be delivered: I fe^e all my sorrows,
and not all my works, as flat against the Hebrew text, and an exposition
which the Popish Translators do forsake.

2. Next they pleading against us, Eccles. 9.1.2.
from the words of the Preacher, thus: Man knovves not whether he be vvorthie
of Love, or Hatred: For all things are kept uncertain, till the time to come.
But it will not serve their turn, for the translation is not right; for the
words in the Hebrews and Septuagint, stand thus: No man knows love or
hatred; all things are before them. The latter words, All things are kept
uncertain, till the time to come, come in by intrusion: Hierome takes no
notice of them.

Again, the holy Ghost does not simply deny the knowledge of Gods love, or
hatred, as though no man could be assured thereof in this life. For to consture
the words so, the reason of the holy Ghost must be fashioned in this manner:
If Love or Hatred were to be known, then it must be known by the eternal
blessings of God: but it cannot be so known, in as much as all things come
alike to all; therefore Love and Hatred can not be known Now so the
Proposition is not true: For there be other means beside the outward benefits
of God; wherefore the true meaning of the words is that Love or Hatred are not
to be considered of, or determined by Gods outward favors. Bernard Bernard.
sermon. de octau. pascha.
speaks of this Text thus, that no man knows Love or Hatred, namely of
himself; yet that God gives most certain and assured testimonies thereof to
men upon earth: Sermon. 5. de dedic.
These be his own words; Wh^ knows whether he be worthy love or hatred. Who
knows the mind of the Lord? Here, both Faith and truth must needs help
us; that, that which is hidden in the heart of the Father, may be revealed unto
us by the Spirit: and his Spirit giving testimony, persuades our Spirit, that
we are the Sons of God; and this persuasion is caused by his Calling and
Justifying us freely by Faith. Hieromes Hieron. in hunc locum.
words on this place, (though commonly abused to a contrary sense,) are
these, That men can not know Love or Hatred by the present afflictions which
they suffer, because they know not whether they suffer them for probation, or
punishment.

3. Thirdly, 1. Cor. 4.3.4.
they press us with these words of the Apostle, I judge not my self, I know
nothing by my self: Where Paul not privy to his own estate, refuses to
pronounce doom of his own righteousness. But it is manifest by the words of
that Epistle, that Paul speaks nothing of his own person, or of estate
before God; but only of the function of his Ministry, and the eminency
thereof against certain deprauers of that calling amongst the Corinthians, as
Theodoret, Aquina, and Lyra, do auerre in their Scholies upon this text. So
that where he says J Judge not my self, it is as if he should have said, I
assume not to my self to stand in comparison of the excellency of my
Ministry, and dignity of Apostleship in the sight of God, above this man or
that, that is in the Ministry; the Judgment is the Lords, and I leave it to
him to whom it belongs. So that here he only refuses to value and prize
the worthiness of his Office, though in other cases, he makes no bones to
give Judgment of himself, as when he said, 2. Tim 4 ^.8
I have fought a good fight, J have kept the faith; henceforth is laid up for
me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give
me. And Chrysostom on this place says, that Paul did not deny to judge
himself simply, but only to this purpose, to bridle others, and to teach them
modesty. And where Paul says, I know nothing by my self; his saying is not
general, but it is to have restraint to his defectes, and offenses, in the
course of his Ministry: for he was privy to himself, That in simplicity
and godly pureness^, 2. Cor. 1.12.
he had his conversation in the worl^: And he knew this by himself, Romans 8.38.
That nothing could seauer him from the ^oue of God in Christ.

4. The fourth Objection is thus laid in against us. There can be no
Justification, where there is not Faith and Repentance: But no man can be
certain by the certainty of Faith of his unfeigned Repentance of his sins
past, and of such a Faith as God requires of us, in as much as the word
performs no testimony of our particular Faith and Repentance: therefore no
man can be certain by the certainty of Faith, that his sins are forgiven
him.

Our Answer is this; that a man by his Faith, should be certain of his Faith
and Repentance; there is no such necessity, because the object of Faith is not
of things present, but of things to come; whereas Faith and Repentance are
truly present in all that truly believe and repent; it will suffice if any
man any way be undoubtedly certain that he has them.

And albeit some men fondly feed upon their own Fancy, as upon a Restoratiue,
that they have Faith, and have it not; as they that dream that they are great
persons, and when they are out of their dream, find the contrary: yet the
true believer, knows as well that he believes, as he that understands,
knows he understands; and as he that believes a man on his word, knows
he believes him; and as he that holds Money in his hand, knows that he
holds it. Wherefore Paul calls on the Corintians, 2. Cor. 13.5.
to prove whether they have Faith or no, to insinuate that it is a point to be
proved, and discerned of us: And he professes this discerning skill in
himself, where he says, J know whom J have believed. 2. Tim. 1.12.
And S. John makes it as clear as the Sun, 1. Ioh. 3.24.
By th^s we know that he dwelles in us, by the spirit which he has given us.

And whereas they urge us further herein, that albeit we may know that we have
this Faith, yet we can not know whether it be of sufficiency or no, for our
security in this cause.

We answer, that true Faith not blinded with hypocrisy, in the mediocritie
and imperfection thereof, suffices to assure us of our particular Election, as
the least measure of Manna fed them in the Desert, Exodus 6.
as well as they that came in with Cornu copta, and had made greater provision:
As a Palsy shaking Hand could receive the benefit of an Alms, as well as the
strongest Arm and soundest Hand of all: As the Flesh, that is the weakest part
of man, has as much vinacitie in it, as the very stones that are of such
solid and firm composition: The sincerity of our Faith being of more worth
with God, then the perfection of it. The Will with God, is the measure of the
action; and the Desire of any Grace in God; is the very Grace it self. He that
has but a Will to serve God, has the Spirit of God; and he that has the
Spirit of God, is in Christ: and he that is in Christ, shall never see
damnation. God will approve his own works which he has wrought in thee, and
will not reject thee for thy work.

5. A fifth Objection thrown upon us, has deduction from such Scripture
authorities, as commend Fear unto us; the contrary quality (as it should
seem to this godly security of Conscience) that this Doctrine of the
Knowledge of our particular Election seems to implie: as where Solomon says,
P^^^. 28.14.
Blessed is the man that Fears always. ^^ul. 2.12.
As where Paul says, Work your salvation with Fear and trembling. As where
the same Apostle says, Romans 11.20.
Thou stand by Faith, be not high minded, but Fear. As where the royal
Prophet in the Ode, (...). 2.11.
says, Serve the Lord in Fear, and rejoice in trembling. Upon which places,
Stapleton croweth as a Cock on the dunghill, out of the advantage that he
presumes he has against our Doctrine, which he says, give the foil to our
counterfeite Faith, of our persuasion of Gods Love not possibly to be lost; and
to the opinion we hold of the indeleble Faith of the Elect: and to all our
Divinity of the certainty of Grace and Salvation. His Sophistication and
fallacy, is thus framed: Where there yet remains to the believer, and to him
that stands in the Faith, matter of fear, there this conceived Belief of
ours, this Faith inexpungible, this presumptuous assurance; can not have a
place His reason is; because nothing is more adverse to Security, then Fear;
nothing more destroys this our certainty of Salvation, then this our
facility of possibility of falling from Grace: neither may that be deemed
indeleble, that is in such danger and hazard to be lost. But the Apostle (says
he) strikes with fear, yea such as believe, and stand in the says; therefore
in this security of ours, there is an absolute nullitie.

I cannot greatly blame him for his dowtie dispute, to keep us still in
suspense of our salvation; for the Doctor knows well, that all their
questuous occupation whereby they live, is in the life of this their luxate
doctrine, and how that if this our divinity should stand, they might burn
their Books, as the Books of curious arts were served, spoken of by Luke in
the Acts of the Apostles: for the whole mass and weight of all their
building, their Purgatory, Mass, Indulgences, Satisfactions, Merits, and the
whole Papacy, leans upon this base, of base minded Doctrine, doubtfulnesse
of salvation; without which doubt, out of doubt all would come tumbling down
with a witness, at the sound of this our Preaching, as the Walls of Hiericho
sometimes did at the noise of the Trumpets of Rams horns.

But I answer Stap e^on in his Argument, that the Assumption of his
Sillogisme, is faulty two ways. 1. First, for that the Apostle does not put
fear into the hearts of the faithful standing in the Faith; but only such as
make detraction from the Faith; such as our Hipocrites, and seruers of the
times: such as never indeed being in the Faith, can not tarry or stand in the
Faith. Secondly, he does not affright the faithful standers in the Faith, with
the terror of their fall, but only monisheth them to that fear which
consists in modesty and humility. Bellarmine in his Books of
Justification, Bellar. lib. 3. cap. 12. de Iustificat.
to establish this (...) of the Sophisters, and to overthrow our position of
the certain knowledge of our Predestination, uses the selfsame argument,
more briefly framed, thus: Where fear is, there is no assurance: but we are
all willed to fear, therefo e there is no assurance.

The Proposition is true understood of the servile fear, unable to stand with
this assurance: for this fear is in the Devils, who believe and tremble: But
as it has reference to the filial fear, which is a fear of God, of
modesty, of humility, it is erroneous and false: for it is in the nature of
this fear, not to quench, but to kindle Faith, to conserve, and to increase
it. Again, there is, Fallacia non cau^ae, in the Minor: For we are commanded
to fear not by doubting of Grace, but by avoiding of sin, pride, and
displeasure of God. Thirdly, those threats and terrors, are indefinite,
peculiarly respecting Hipocrites lurking in the Church, who believe, and stand
by that Faith only, Quae creatur, which is believed in the profession of the
doctrine: but they do not believe, and stand in the Faith, Qua crea^tur, in
the which it is believed, that is, in the assurance of the heart: Now of such
only is the Minor to be taken, and so we give them the whole argum nt of such
as are truly faithful, it is false

The Consequent raised out of this sentence to the P^^iap^^ta (...), Work
your situation with fear and trembling: Therefore the faithful may fear
their fall. Being applied to the fear that is cautelous and careful, is not
to be denied: For the faithful must fear; that is, take heed they fall not,
and foresee that they plunge not themselves through security, into utter
perdition. This fear, Faith it self naturally does beget; and this Care, is
the Tribute that is due unto it. But as it considers the fear of doubt, and
distrust of Gods grace, the Antecedent is untrue; for the Apostle by exhorting
men to such fear, should derogate from the Promises of God, and to give the
lie unto him. Therefore both Bellarmine and St^pleton do but wrangle with the
Apostles argument. This fear of working of our salvation, is not in respect of
Gods mercy forgiving our sins, but in respect of us and our nature; which is
ever apt to turn aside from God.

There is a threefold fear. 1. Of Nature. 2. Grace. 3. Distrust. 1. That of
Nature is that, whereby the nature of man is troubled with that, which any way
strives against it; and therefore auoydeth it 2. Fear of Grace, is that
mother Grace of all others, which Solomon calls, The beginning of Wisdom;
and it is a kind of awe or reverence unto God, as considering how we are in
the presence of God, in all things we do. 3. Fear of Distrust, is that
melancholy and cruel fear that stabbeth the heart with the sword of Gods
Judgments, in the sense and sight men have of their sins, without hope of
recovery. The first of these three, was good by Creation; Marc. 14.
and therefore our Savior was not free of this, for it is written of him; He
began to fear. The third is naught; called a Servile fear. The second is that
which is so often commended and commanded unto us in these, and such like
authorities of Scripture; whose nature is only to make us more wary and
heedfull of our selves, that we run not into sin, while we consider our
own Infirmities, and Gods eternal Judgments: And this kind of fear, as
well as the first, agree well enough with the certainty of Faith, and can
stand together. In one and the same respect, they will not combine; but in
some diversity of Nature and Reason, they go hand in hand together. The
Saints of God on the one side, are smitten with fear, while they recount
their so many and so fearful falls: and withal, consider how the mouth of
the Law condemns sin, the hand of God strikes it; how he spared not
Angels, Kingdoms, Cities; nay not his own Son, being in the similitude of
sinful flesh: On the other side, while they regard the Promises of God, and
called to mind the tender mercies of God which have been ever of old, they
receive comfort, and expel all fear; and they set sure foot in the
Sanctuary of the Lord. Diverse causes, breed diverse effects in the minds of
men. A man that is in the top of an exceeding high Tower, while his mind is
intent unto nothing else, but how he may be in danger to fall and so wholly
looks downward, he cannot but fear: but while he considers that the
place where he stands has such Battlementes about, and that he is so mured
in with a Wall that he can not fall, he easily does rid himself of this
fear.

6. The sixth Objection is thus moved. To believe that our sins are forgiven
us, is no Article of our Belief; and therefore we have nothing to do to
believe it.

I answer them, it is; under these words, I believe the forgiueness of sins.
I conclude it thus. The Devil believes generally, and ingrosse that God
pardons the Church their sins: but we are to wade further into the Faith
then the Devil, and apply this remission of sins, every one of us
particulerly to our own souls. If the Papists will not have their Catholic
says to be better then the Devils, let them for all us, keep their Faith to
them selves.

7. The seventh Objection stands thus: In respect of Gods Mercy, we must
hope for Salvation; but in respect of our unworthiness, we must doubt the
Promise of the Remission of our sins, not being independent, but conditional
thereafter according as our works be.

We answer first; We may not at all lawfully doubt of Gods Mercy, because
doubtfulnesse is not of the nature of Faith, but rather a natural corruption.
2. If we consider our own unworthiness, it is out of all doubt we must be
out of all hope, and despair of our salvation. S. Paul teaches, Gal. 5.10.
They which are of the works of the Law, are under the curse: And so he
speaks in his own case, of his own works of grace, 1. Cor. 4.4.
Jn this I am not justified. So David being out of all doubt of his own
deserved damnation, says ingeniously thus: Enter not into Judgment with thy
servant O Lord, for no flesh shall be justified in thy sight. Also, the regard
of our own unworthiness, is no prejudice to the resolution of Gods mercy in
Christ. For true Faith makes an entrance unto God with boldness, even for
those persons that are unworthy in themselves. The Centurion that confessed
himself unworthy under whose roose Christ might enter; Math. 8.8.
Luc. 15.1
yet is a suppliant to Christ for his Servant. The Prodigal Son that
acknowledged himself a capital sinner against Heaven, Luc. 18.10.13.
and his father, yet took up good heart, and went to his father. The Publicane
smote his heart, and pronounced him self a sinner at al hands; yet doubted he
not to go into the Temple to pray that his sins might be forgiven him Our
Faith should be as the Faith of Abraham, Who believed under hope, against hope,
whatsoever our unworthiness be, never to cast down the Shield of the Faith,
which we have toward God, which defends the place where the heart does lie;
and the Helm of Salvation, which covers our head in the day of Battle.
Faith consists not so much in the sense of Gods mercy, as in the
apprehension of it; which apprehesion may be when there is no sense of it. Job.
13.13.
This appears by Jobes example, where he says, Though he slay me, yet I
will trust in him: Where he shows the force of his Faith; yet what little
sense he had of Gods mercy when he so spoke, may appear by that he says
immediately after, verse. 24.
Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and take me for thine enemy?

The Christian sometimes feels Faith, and sometimes feels none; that is, at
that time when God first calls him: and in the time of temptation. Here a
man may marueyle how one may be a Christian, who has no grace or goodness in
himself. But it is no marvel, for it is with him, as it is with an Infant
and young Child, who albeit yet he has not use of reason, yet is a creature
reasonable. A man that is in a swonde, has no sense of life; yet is he not
dead. Faith believes the Promises of God, yea when we feel the contrary; and
in one contrary, believes an other. When we feel our sins, we believe our
Justification. When we feel our wretchedness, we believe our Blessedness.
When we see nothing but eternal death before our eyes, it makes us believe
our everlasting life. When we apprehend Gods anger, and feel him our enemy,
it makes us to take hold of his loving kindness, and to put our trust in his
fatherly goodness. When Christ was forsaken of God, yet then he called him
his own God; My God, my God.

8. An other of their Objections stands thus. There be many sins unknown
to us and so also uncertain whether they be pardoned unto us.

I answer, that they ground upon a foundation that will fail them: For that a
man can not be assured of the Pardon of his sins, though some of them be
unknown, is a false ground I make it plain thus: It is in the case of Faith,
as it is in that of Repentance. But there may be true Repentance of sins that
are unknown. God will have a particular repentance for particular known
sins: but where they are hidden and unknown to us, he takes in good part
at our hands a more broad and general Repentance. Of this we have example in
David, where he says: Who can tell how often he offends: Psalm. 19.12.
O cleanse thou me from my secret faults: Were it not thus, we were in woeful
case: for neither David, nor any one else, might be saved. For though David's
repentance of his known sins of Murder, and Adultery appears unto us,
yet we find it not in his History, or else where in holy Writ, that he
particulerly repented his poligamie, his multiplicitie of Wives and Concubines,
which in all probability with the custom of the times, he drunk up as men
do Wine out of Bowls with all facility, and so in the common reputation that
it had, that it was no sin at all; it is likely enough of that, he repented
not at all, especially while he considered the superemmencie of his person that
he was a King, and by that had as good privilege and a liberty for this, as
any common person; yet because Scripture determines him a man chosen of God, a
party saved, it is peremptorily concluded, that this sin is pardoned.
Therefore when God pardons the known sins of man, whereof they do in
particular repent, he does withal pardon the rest that are unknown. It is
undeniable Divinity, that he that certainly and truly knows that but one
sin is pardoned him, he has before God, all his sins pardoned him whether
known or unknown: wherefore the ignorance of certain sins, cannot
prejudice an infallible assurance of the pardon of them all, and of his own
salvation.

9. Moreover, whereas it is thus objected unto us, that this proposition of
ours is not of the nature of an Article of our Faith, to be so carried away
hand-smooth as that, and therefore that it can not persuade us as that.

I answer, that the party that will be saved, must as steadfastly believe his
Salvation, as the Articles of the Cree^e: Because the Promise of life, and the
Commandment to believe it, and apply it to our selves; are indiuidually
conjoined, and can not be divided. Faith speaks in the phrase of David: J am
thine, O save me. Psalm. 119.
And it pronounces as Paul does: Romans 8.38.
J am persuaded that neither Life or Death; neither Angels, Principalities or
Powers; or things present, or things to come, are ever able to separate me
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesu our Lord. It talks as the
Spouse in the Canticles in effect, Cantic. 8.6.
in this zealous affect: Love is strong as death, Jealousy is cruel as the
Grave: The Coals thereof are fiery Coals, and a vehement flame. Much Water
can not quench Love, neither can the Floods drown it. If a man should give all
the substance of his house for Love, they would greatly contemn it.

Two things are required of us to believe truly. First, to understand a thing:
Secondly, to give our consent unto it, as unto that which is true. Therefore
Faith is called, Tota copulatiua; and therefore he that denies but one point
of Faith, makes hanocke of them altogether.

Again, to believe is one thing; to believe in this or that, is an other
thing, and it contains three actions of the person believing. 1. To know the
thing. 2. To acknowledge it. 3. To have trust in it. So that this knowledge is
not naked, and general. For the Devils have such knowledge; but it is more
special, by which we know God not only to be God; but to be my God, whereby
I put my confidence in him.

2. Secondly I answer, that this Faith whereby we are to believe our own
salvation, to consider of it in the proper and true nature of it; is as
certain as that whereby we believe the Articles of Faith. For whatsoever we
pray for, according to Gods will, that we are as well to believe that we shall
obtain, as we do believe the Articles of the Faith. This is flat by that
which Christ says: Marc. 11.24.
Whatsoever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall have it, and it
shall be done unto you. But we put up our Prayers for the remission of our
sins, and for life everlasting: And therefore lay hold upon the certainty
thereof, as upon the Article of our Christian Faith. If God should particulerly
say to thee or me John, or Peter, believe in me and thou shall be saved:
should not this commandment be as forcible a binder, as any Article of our
Faith? But the Minister lawfully called in the name of God, when he preaches
Gods word, it is all one as if God should speak from Heaven particularly unto
him, and make promise unto him of eternal life: for we are in legatiue
commission from God, to run upon this his arrant unto you, according to that
Saint Paul says: Now then are we Ambassadors for Christ: 2. Cor. 5.20.
as though God did beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ's stead, that
ye be reconciled to God. Heb. 4.16.
We come to the ^h one of Grace, in the certainty of faith boldly, Heb. 10 35.
that we may receive Mercy, and find Grace, to help in time of need. Ioh. 3.
And we Cast not away that confidence which has great recompense of reward.
Our Faith is not only in Cognitio a, but in Agnition, likewise, in
acknowledgement, as well as in knowledge. Inquisitiue fellows, like
Nichodemus, ^oh. 3.
puts up questions; How can this thing be? or as the Jews, that came in
properly with their spoake, ^oh. 6.
How can he give us his flesh to eat? by being thus busy, evidently do
bewray themselves, that they do not believe. We may lawfully ask of the
virgin Marie, how this may be, that we may be instructed? But we may not come
with Interrogatories in the case, to nourish doubtinges.

3. Thirdly, albeit Faith it self be the same, and common to all; yet is it
not so in the measure of it: But in some, it is of greater, in some of lesser
quantity; As God has dealt to every man the measure of Faith. Romans 12.3.
The Seed that was thrown upon the good Ground, came not up alike, but in
several plottes very disproportionably, in some thirty, in some sixty, in
some an hundred fold.

It is with Faith as it is with the body of man. First we are Infantes, then we
increase in years and strength: We are first Infants in Christ Jesus, and by
degrees grow from Grace to Grace, until we come at last to that height and
strength, as we grow strong in the Faith with Abraham.

There is a Positive, and a Superlatiue Faith. The Positive is that, which
otherwise is termed (...) A little Faith, Q^^^d^^, rather then Quantum, sampled
by our Savior to the grain of Mustard seed, the least of all Seeds; Math.
17.20.
which being put into the ground, grows into, First, an Herb. 2. the
greatest of all Herbs, 3. yea into a Tree 4. into such a broad Tree as the
Birds of the Heaven make their nestes in the branches thereof; compared by the
Prophet Isay, to smoakie Flax. Isa. 42.3.
The Superlatiue Faith is that, which is otherwise styled (...), An absolute
Assurance, as not being only a certain and true persuasion, but plenarie and
complete. But this least degree of Faith of this Positive kind, this beginning
or rudiment of Faith, this smoakie Flax which has no Fire in it, of that
weakness as it gives neither heat nor light; Christ will not quench, but
will make it gather strength, and wax into a Fire; so that we will do our
part, and use the means that serve to increase it, by diligent meditation upon
the word of God, earnest and ardent Prayer, and such other holy exercises,
appertaining to the furtheraunce of our Faith.

This little Faith may be thus described; when one in the humility of his heart
has not yet a sense of the certainty of the remission of his sins, and yet
notwithstanding persuades him self that they are such as may be forgiven him,
his soul desyring forgiveness of them, and therefore prays unto God that he
would forgive them, and give him strength ever after to forsake the^.

The Superlatiue Faith is the full strength and maturitie of Faith, which
dissolueth all doubts, and is not only in nature certain, but also a large
and plentiful persuasion of Gods mercy in Christ; of which we gave you
examples before in Abraham and Paul. By the first Faith intricated with doubts,
men do as certainly believe their Adoption, as the Articles of their Faith;
but not so firmly and fully. By this larger Faith, remission of sins is not
only as certainly, but also as fully believed, as any Article of Faith.

To end Objections, and so our first Question, we will justify our Doctrine by
suffrages of Fathers, because it is objected to us by our Adversaries, that
this point of the infallible and special certainty of ^^^ction is generally
disauowed and con^^mned by the Fathers; though otherwise (...) ^^^ters of
Faith, we hang not on their s^^enes the word of God, being the only rule and
square of our belief. Secur^ estote (...) et sanguis, says Tertullian;
Tertull de (...) ^^ctione.
Let flesh and blood be secure and take out their Qui^^^s est. Would ye know
why we should be secure? Ambrose tells you that you have good cause so to
be, Ambros. i^ cap. 4. et. 5. ad Romans
Securj quia credunt securj ^xemplo Abrahamae: They are secure, because they
do believe, they are secure after the example of Abraham. So does S.
Aug^stine: Aug. de v^rb^ domini serm^^.
S^^^es (...) re^^o^e se^u^^ de pro^^ssi^^e; Secure in our Pardon, secure in
the Promise that is made to us. To whom subscribeth (...), De quadrip. in. tit.
page 2. 3
as he is cited by Cassalius, In pa^^^^^^ (...) de ^^^^^mtione veniae s^ (...):
In the penitent person, a certain security is begotten out of the presumption
of a Pardon. And Augustine August. in Psalm. 39.
likes well this Presumption, Thou praesump^^, ^ed mo erata; It is a good
Presumption, but moderate. Hear further what Augustine Aug. de verbi^ Domin^
sermo. 7.
says; Jnter^^go te (peccator) credis ne Christo velno^? D^c^^ credo, quia
creus? Quod libere ^otest tibere ^tti^re omnia tua pe^cat^. ^a^os quod (...): I
demand of thee (O sinner,) Beleeuest thou in Christ or not? Thou tellest me
thou beleeuest. I ask next, what do thou believe? Thou answerest, that he
can pardon thee all thy sins. Thou have that which thou beleeuest. Bernard
speaks effectually to our cause in hand, Bernard. sermon. ^e An^a. nuat. Ma^^e.
thus; Si cre^as peccata tua non p^sse ob^u^^ rasi percunt contre q^^^ peccasi,
(...) ages, sed vl^^rius progrede^^, et cre^^ cum remisiss tibi p^^cata tit^.
Hoc est test^^omiu^ q^od spiritus st^ctus dat in cordibus nost^is, dicens
peccat^ tua remittuntur tibi. Nam sic Apostolus putat hominem Justifica^j
gratis per si em^: If thou beleeuest that thy sins can not be blotted out,
but only by him against whom thou have sinned, thou do well: But proceed
further, and believe that he has forgiven thee thy sins: For this is this
witness, that the Spirit of God makes in our hearts, saying, Thy sins are
forgiven thee; for so the Apostle takes a man to be justified freely by Faith.
The Papists being choked with this place, fu^^ble up this answer; that
Bernard does not say, that we ought to believe the remission of our sins
absolutely without respect of works; but that he requires our repentance as a
sign by which this Persuasion is wrought. But we answer them that he does
perspicuously auerre, that the general Faith, by which the fundamental
matters of Religion are believed, is only the Beginning, and Rudiment of
Faith; and therefore suffices not, unless we go further, and apply by Faith
this Grace of God unto our selves, simply without reference to any tradition of
our side.

M^^ut us Felix sings the same song with the former; S^^u^, spe futurae
resurrectio^is: We are secure under hope of the Resurrection to come.
Cornelius Cornelius Bitontius, in cap. 8. an Romans
Bishop of Bitonto, one of their own side, speaks loudly and liberally for
us, in this wise: Qui in Christo Jesus sunt, nihil habent, vnde timere debent:
They that are in Christ Jesus, have nothing whereof they should be afraid, Si
quidem securi sunt de salute, Inasmuch as they are secure of their salvation.

Antonius Ma^^^^^us Anton. Mari^
in the Chapter holden at Trent, durst stand forth and preach not only of the
doctrine of the certainty of Salvation, but also of our security therein,
speaking in this wise: Ab operum nostroru^ gloria auersi, in illius patris
elementia et voluntate, et in perpetuum conqu^escamus. Item, indubitationis
labirintho non errant, qui per Christum adepti sunt Iustitia^: sed in
s^curitate mentis, in pace cons^ientiae, in laetitia cordis audent dicere, Abha
pater: We wholly draw our minds from any confidence in our own works, and
repose our trust in the loving kindness and goodwill of our heavenly Father
for ever. Also, they err not in the maze of mistrust, who have obtained
righteousness through Christ, but they date boldly say in the security of
Mind, peace of Conscience, joy of Heart, Ab^a Father.

The same Doctor in the same Council, Council. Trident. Act 1. Anno. 1546.
was thus peremptory in this point, protesting of his own Faith herein on
this wise. Si Caelum ruat, si Terra euanes^at, si Orbis dissoluatur, praeceps
ego in eum erectus ero: si Angelus de caelo aliud mihi persuad^re contendat,
dicam illi, mathema: O faelicem Christiam p^ct^^is fiducia^: Though Heaven
should pass away, the Earth consume to nothing, and the whole World should be
dissolved, I shall erect my self toward him. And though an Angelical Doctor
from heaven should go about to persuade me otherwise, I should tell to his
head, that he is accursed. O the happy assurance of a Christian soul.

^e Oratione.
The very T^^^^entine Catechism thus speaks in our cause: Fides est quae
preces fundit, preces facit, vt omni dubitatione sublata, stabilis a^ s^rma s^t
fides: It is Faith that powers out Prayers, conceiueth Prayers, that all
distrust removed, our Faith might be firm and stable.

Some of the best of the bunch of Papi^tes do preach, and publish this true
certainty, and holy security that we speak of. At Tre^^ this cause has
been thoroughly can^ased, not by vollie of words, but by volumes of Books.
Cathar^^us is our Champion against D^minicus Soto; in which Book of his, he
tells us, how the Schoolmen are divided in this Doctrine; how they prefer
their own Reasons, and their vain Philosophy, before the holy Scriptures,
and so turn aside out of the right way. They distaste these words of
Security, and Certainty: but they should rellise them the better, if they
would bear in mind this text out of Jsaiah; Isai. 32.17.
The work of righteousnes^e shall be peace, even the work of Justice, and
quietness, and assurance for ever. They are terms the Fathers commonly take
up, as in the precedent instances you have heard. Cyprian Cyp. de mortalit.
sermon. 4.
admireth we should otherwise speak or think, where he says: ^t tu dubitas,
e^ flactuas? Ho^ est Deum omnino non noscere. Hoc est Christum, credentium
magistrum, peccato incredulitatis ^ffendere. H^c est in E^clesia construtum,
fidem in domo fi^ey non ^a^er^: Do thou doubt and waver? This is altogether
not to know God. This is to displease Christ the Master of the Faithful, with
the sin of Incredulity. This is to be in the Church, and to deny the Faith
in the very House of Faith.

In respect of the individual society that is between the Flesh and the
Spirit, doubts and quaimes must often arise and come upon our hearts, and
trouble our Faith. Incredulity between times, will assault every man; when
his Faith is at the best, the sensual part of man ever coveting against the
Spirit; but Faith will quiet all these brawles and broils at the last, be our
Faith never so eclipsed with Clouds, tossed with Tempests, winnowed by
Satan, driven at by the Darts, and all the fiery Darts of the Devil;
though brought into an agony, bloody sweat, and ecstasy, as Christ was in
the Garden, and on the Cross; yea, though almost brought to utter desperation,
the very brimme and introduction into the Hell of the damned: then God seems
to stand a far off, and to hide him self in the needful time of trouble: to
stop his ears with Wax, and not to hear us, though we make many Prayers: to
hold his hand still in his boosome, and not to pluck it out in our
extremities, Faith being the victory that overcomes the whole World: and so
we conclude this first Question; Whether one may be certain or his particular
Election, affirmatively as ye have heard, and put it out of question, with this
joyful acclamation of the Prophet; Blessed be God that has showed (...) so
great kindness in a strong city: That has se^ us in this invincible
fortress of Faith, so that we may cast out our Gantlet, and provoke all our
enemies to the field, and to the foil; so that neither Life nor Death, neither
Principalities nor Powers, things present nor things to come, nor any things
else in the nature of things can make a separation between God and us.

The second Question now under our decision, is; How our particular Election
may be known?

There be two ways of knowing it. 1 First, by going up as it were to Heaven,
there to pry into the very priuities of God: and then to come down, and to
come into our selves. But we disclaim this course, as pernicious and perilous,
God having drawn Curtains of black Clouds and Darkness over his Tabernacle
round about him: Bernar. sermon. 31. in Cantica.
Ad Deum accedendum non ^^^uendu^; We may come to God, but not, Concitate
c^^^u praeter viam, We must not rush violently into his presence Chamber. 2.
Secondly, by the contrary, by descending into our hearts, by going up from
our selves to Gods eternal Counsel. This is the way chalked out unto us,
which we may safely walk; which teaches us by tokens in our selves, to gather
what was the eternal Counsel of God touching our salvation. These tokens are
two; not taken from the Primitive causes of our Election: but rather from the
latter effects thereof. 1. The testimony of Gods Spirit. 2. The works of our
Sanctification This is proof enough in Law: For the Law has spoken it: In the
mouths of two or three Witnesses shall every thing be confirmed. The Spirit of
God is a Witness for the nonce, the best that is in Heaven, sealing the
certainty of adoption in our hearts, with the singer of his grace, it being
further confirmed unto us, under the Signet of the blood of the Lamb. An
inferior Witness by far, might have served sufficiently, for the persuasion
of this matter. As an Angel from Heaven, addressed to Man, and dispatched to
our Forefathers in the times of old^: Nay, If a King out of his Throne should
commend a Man, what Subject durst oppose himself to that opinion? Now if we
receive the testimony of Angel, or Man, that is great: The testimony of God,
is greater, as the supremest essence, our best Schoolemaister that teaches us
to pray, that holds up such as pray by the head, by the hand of his promises:
That is as good as his word, and keeps his promise for ever, that witnesses
the same by his inward motions, and operation in our hearts. An Angel, for
all his Spiritual intelligence, 1. Cor. 2.10.
must not compare in any sort with the holy ghost in knowledge of the
v^^earchable secrets of God: The Holy Ghost can less deceive us, Ioh. 16.13.
then an Angel, as being the uncreated truth it self, which leads into
all truth: Moreover, the testimony he perfourmeth, is beyond all comparison,
because it rests not in the care, so to run into the air, but keeps
residence in our Reins, and Veins, has a Chayer in our hearts, witnessing
to our Spirits, that we are the Children of God, by speaking, showing forth
his power, and by praying in us. Add heereto, that this Spirit has
individual commerce with our Spirit, never departs from us: He takes not
up the Temples of our bodies as an Inn for a short time, and be gone; but as
an House, wherein he is minded to continue, assuming to himself the whole
regiment of them; as a Lord that comes to dwell in an House, disposes of
that House after his own pleasure. Now as touching his Substance he dwells
not in us; the infinite Spirit of God being not to be cooped up in the narrow
and straight Rooms of the Body, and Soul of man, but only in his operative
power with us, he keeps his residence.

The Papists vildly derogate from the sufficiency of this Testimony, while
they mince and minish it alter their own manner; while they frame, in the
forge of their Fancies this devise, that this Witness of our Adoption is only
in some comfortable sense and feeling of Gods favor, being such as is weak,
and often times deceivable. But by their leave, it is much more then a bare and
naked feeling of Gods savor: For it is called in holy Scripture, The Pledge
and Earnest of Gods Spirit in our hearts; 2. Cor. 1.22.
and therefore it is sufficient to prevent and take away all arguments of
doubting: as in a Bargain and stipulation the Earnest that is given is the
binder of the Bargain on both sides, and makes it out of que^tion. Bernard
says, That the Testimony of the Spirit, is a most sure Testimony.

As concerning this Testimony of the Spirit of God, two Q^estions would be
scanned. 1. How it may be distinguished from the Spirit of Illusion, that is,
from presumption. 2. By what means the Spirit of God gives a particular
testimony in a Man's conscience, of his certain election.

1. For the first, we are to know, that as there is a certain persuasion of
Gods favor from the Spirit of God: So Satan has his sleightes, whereby he
sows Pillowes of Presumption to men's Elbowes, suggesting pleasinges and
leasings unto us. This Presumption comes to us by kind, as w^ are men, as a
natural and inevitable evil, which has a show of Faith, but denies the
power of it. And this counterfeite-mocke quality of pretended Faith, is more
common then the true and lively Faith indeed. This we see daily in the common
careless people: For if any of them shall be asked, what they think of
themselves, whether they shall be saved or no? they will wipe their mouths with
their Handkerchiefe, and say, yea, without all doubt; so that if there were but
few in the Country to be saved they persuade themselves, that themselves are
those persons: For why, he has always orderly kept his Church, evermore
believed, and have done no man wrong: These, and such like misfashioned
Fancies, easily with such unskillfulness, go for good and lawful Faith. But
such m^n would be unmasked, and this M^ster that covers their eyes and lead
them blindfold, is to be taken from them. Wherefore I answer to the Question,
That the Spirit of God is many ways to be decerned from the Spirit of
Presumption. 1. First, by a full persuasion the spirit of God gives: for the
holy Ghost does not barely word it, but thoroughly works it, by force of
persuasion; which is not in the power of Nature so to do. 2. Secondly, by the
manner of Persuasion: for the holy Ghost disputes not from the works or
worthiness of man; he draws not the waters of life unto us, from such
shallow Wells, but he draws deeper then ever Jacobs Well was, even from the
profound and bottomless Fountain of Gods love and favor toward us; and no
other kind of Logic does he use with us. This is a course that Satan can not
skill on; he has no will unto it: it is quite cross, and contrary unto him.
3. Thirdly, by the effects of that Testimony: For the Persuasion that arises
from Presumption, is cold and dead; but that which has descense from the
Spirit of God, is lively in operation: for such as are possessed with this
Persuasion, that they are the Elected and Adopted Children of God, they will
love God, repose their trust in him, call upon his name and that with the^r
whole hearts: and in regard of their love to him, they will loath sin, and
every thing else that agrees not with his will The Effects whereby we know
the true Spirit from the counterfeit, are two; noted down by Paul, where he
says; The Spirit makes us cry, Abba (that is) Father. The first, is to pray
with such intention of Mind, and contention of Sinnewes and Sides, with
groans and sighs, as though a man would fill Heaven and Earth: A principal
known mark of the Spirit of Adoption, never to be found in the Presumptuous
rechlesse sort, who pray but at Good times; and when they pray, they hear not
their Prayers, their Spirit dies in the Air, before it can pierce the
Clouds, and ascend up to Heaven where God is. The Church has their Bodies,
but their Hearts are at home. They bleat out the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and
ten Commandments, with their lips: but their God is their Gold, their minds
are on their Mony-bagges, or else they wander in their extrauagant thoughts, as
the Prodigal Son In longinqu^m regionem, in a far Country. They pray as
though their hearts and tongues were strangers; drawing near him with their
lips, but standing along aloof off with their hearts; praying, and in the
mean while leaving their Spirit asleep: or if they awake it, they leave it,
as Christ did his Disciples for the time. Their Altar is without Fire, their
Prayers without fervor, their Words without intention, the outward action of
their bodies without the consent of their inner affections.

The second effect is the Affect of Heart, answerable in nature to that which
is in Children toward their Parents; which is an affection of love,
reverence, obedience, thankfulness: For they call not upon him as upon a
skarlot and grimme Judge, but they come to him in his familiar name, Abba, that
is, a gracious and merciful Father. Now such as are not of the right Spirit,
they can not in truth come to him in this name. Finally, where the testimony
of the Spirit is, many other graces of the Spirit are with it: for it will not
be solitary, as when one branch of a Tree sprouteth, the rest sprout out with
it. Further, learn thus to know them asunder, and to put difference between
the Spirit, and Presumption. 1. Presumption is an inborne quality, which we
suck from our Mothers: but the witness of the Spirit is supernatural 2.
Presumption is in them, that recke not of the ordinary means that make to
their salvation. But they that are of the Spirit, chearefully embrace them, and
take care to follow the^; they reverently and religiously hear the word of
God. 3 Presumptio is in such that use not to call on the name of God: but the
Spirit of God is the Spirit of Prayer, teaching us to pray with tears not able
to be expressed. Presumption is lincked with Looseness of life: the Spirit
works us in a new mould, Mat 2, 22.
Mutatus ab illo Hectore, clean contrary to that we were before, and warns
us, with the Wisemen of the East, not again to return to Herod's Court, to
our old Byas; but by casting off our old conversation, as the Eagle does her
bill, to turn into our country an other way. Presumption is peremptory, and
makes a man to stand upon his Slippers to be confident up to the throat, and
never once to cast any doubt of our well doing, whereas the consciences of the
godly are often times perplexed, and troubled with doubts, yea, now and then
surcharged, and overwhelmed with them. Presumption will fail us at a dead
lift, and give us the slip in the needful time of trouble, in the hour of
temptation, and death. But the Spirit of God stands close to us, and
continues with us for ever and ever.

2. We come to the handling of the Second point, how the Spirit witnesses our
Adoption. For that it witnesses the same unto us, this Scripture concludes
it, as diverse other Authorities of Scripture beside, flatly confirm it. Our
Hearts are wholly in the hands of the Spirit, to rule and govern them as
seems best to him. This Rule of his, consists chiefly in the certain
revealed knowledge of our atonement with the Father in Christ. Hereof speaks
the Prophet Jsaiah, thus: By his knowledge, Isai. 53 11.
shall my righteous Servant justify in my. Of this speaks our Savior where
he says; Ioh. 17.3.
This is life eternal, that they know thee to be the only very GOD, and whom
thou have sent, Jesus Christ. This knowledge is not that which is general: for
so the Devils might be saved; but it is that which is particular, by which a
man comes to know, that God is his Father, Christ his Redeemer, the Holy
Ghost his Sanctifier and Comforter. This knowledge is the peculiar work of the
Spirit, as this Text teaches, as this other the same mouth delivers of the
same nature: We have received not the Spirit of the world, ^ Cor. 2.12.
but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are given
to us of God. Now three manner of ways, does the Spirit make us privy to this
counsel of God. 1. By his inward Inspiration 2 By his outward Word. 3.
Inwardly, and outwardly; by inward, and outward effects. By his Spirit he did
inspire the Prophets, and open many things to come. And Christ said to his
Apostles, as concerning the Holy ghost; He shall lea^ you into all truth. Ioh.
16.13.
By his Word he spoke unto the Prophets; and by his Word in like manner he
teaches us his Will. Also by diverse effects he declares either his Mercy,
or his Justice; as it is well known. The same is to be thought of the
revealing of his Election; to wit, that God reuealeth the same to the Elect,
by the Spirit, by the Word, and by the most assured effects of his
Predestination: We are now to speak of them severally in their order.

1. By inward inspiration we have intimation of our certain Election; by which
our minds are illuminated, and it is revealed unto us, that we are from all
eternity Predestined into this Adoption of his Sonship. All the Elect are
owners of this Grace, as now actually made the Sons of God by Faith,
regenerated and newborn by the Holy ghost, and ingrafted into Christ. So the
Apostle says; Romans 8.9.
If any man has not the spirit of Christ, he is not his. Whosoever therefore
is of Christ, and is ingrafted into Christ, must needs, ipso f^^^^, have the
Spirit of Christ Now, whosoever have received and have this spirit of Christ,
the spirit of God testifies to their minds, that they are the sons of God
and he makes them to speak in the language of Children, A^ba, that is,
Father. And it is a certain case, that none is renewed by the spirit of God,
who is not peremptorily persuaded, that God is become his most loving and
gracious Father, and so call upon him, by that sweet and special name.
Therefore though all men in that they are assured by the certainty of Faith,
that God is their Father, and they are his Sons, do not thereby argue and
conclude that they are elected to eternal life: yet all men indeed have
thereby a most sure certificate of their Election to the state of Glory;
because if they be the Sons of God, it follows by due consequent, that they
also be the heirs of eternal life. Let this Testimony appear evident by way
of demonstration, in this manner. Whosoever call upon God, and in their hearts
cry, Abba Father; it is certain, that such be the Children of God, and that
this cry of theirs is from the gift and motion of the spirit of God. But
whosoever are the Sons of God, are also inheritours of life everlasting, and
they are predestined into the adoption of his children. Therefore it cannot
otherwise be, but that all such as are persuaded by the spirit of God, that
they are the Sons of God, should be predestined to eternal life and be
thoroughly persuaded in the same.

2. The second means whereby we attain the knowledge of our Election, is his
outward Word, not any particular Word by which he does outwardly in private
and proper manner suggest to any man expressly his Election, but the general
word of the Gospel; in the which Christ calls all them which believe in him,
Elect. For albeit he gives us no such plain and particular proposition as
this is, Thou art Elected unto everlasting life; yet no less is concluded in
the hearts of the Elect in such Aphotismes as are general, even as each
particular man is determined capable of reason, by the universality of this
Axiom, Every man living is a creature reasonable, though the Assumption be
suppressed. This therefore is the course that God takes with us: He has
chosen all, and every one, whom he decreed to be faithful heirs of salvation.
And this maine Maxim in terms general, is proclaimed by the Apostles at the
Standard, to all that are Elect. The Proposition in generality stands thus;
All the Faithful are elected to everlasting life. Here the word stays and
medleth not with the Miner. Now here God effects by Faith, that he
bestows on us, that we make the Minor in our minds in this manner; But I am
of the fellowship of the faithful, as feeling that I truly believe in Christ.
How comes therefore now thy cause to be concluded, that thou art
Predestined to eternity of glory? Truly by God, that gives the proposition
from the Gospel, and by working thine heart with the work of faith, which he
works in thee, to go on with the assumption.

It is therefore manifest, that God, by the word of the Gospel, where he
pronounces all the faithful to be elected, that he does reveal his
particular election, to every one that is of the faith: Only it stands every
Believer in hand, that as often as he hears the general Proposition, he
make the Assumption, and infer it in the nicke, and upon the neck of it: And
so does the Lord reveal to every man, his special malediction, by this
general Scriptures enuntiation: Cursed be every one that abides not in all
things, which are written in this Bo ke. Though he does not come to tell
every man in his ear, that he, and he, is accursed: For this may every one
gather of himself, his conscience telling him, that he has started from the
Statutes of God, like a broken Bow.

3. The third kind of means, by which God vnfouldeth and lays open to us our
state of Salvation, is the effects in us as well inward at outward effectually
assuring the same unto us in a double respect 1. First, because these effects
are such as God gives them to none, but only to the Elect. 2 Next, for that
they are not simply the effects of Election, but also such, and such as they
be, the engraven Seals and the perfect Stamp thereof. For God is like to the
Sun to us. The Sun while it strikes us with his radiant Beams, and in a
manner looks us on the face, leaves such an impression of his light in our
eyes, as we reciprocally by the participation of the same light, see the Sun
it self, and the very light thereof: For the light of the Sun and the beams
thereof sent down upon us, reflect again upon the Sun it self. So the
Foreknowledge of God in which from all eternity, he did, and would acknowledge
us for his own, is so in God, as in it self, is not to be seen of us: but
yet as God acknowledges us to be his, and engraueth the Form and Image of
this knowledge in us that are elected he brings it to pass, as we
acknowledge this God for our only true God, and bid all other farewell. So
that God f^st looks down from Heaven on us, and acknowledges us; and so by
communicatio^ of this knowledge and light unto us, we are thereby made to know
him again. Hereto serves that which Christ says: J know my Sheep; Ioh.
10.14.
and immediately infers thereupon, I am known of mine: As if he should have
said, While I know them for my Sheep, and mark them out as Shepheardes do
their Sheep with a red stroke even of my red blood, I make them on the
other side by the participation of my knowledge, that they acknowledge me for
their Shepherd. The same learning the Apostle gives the Galathians, where he
faith, S^eing ye k ow God, Gal. 4.9.
ye rather are known of God. etc. Where he would have the Galathians know,
that all their knowledge holds in ^ayne, from the foreknowledge that God had
of them.

The like may be said of the Love of God, in which he loved us in Christ,
before the groundwork of the World was laid; which love of us, is more then
Adamantine, and has been the only Loadstone to draw our love by retaliation
unto him. For Gods love to us being eternal, and to eternal life, must beget
in time in us, a love somewhat like serving to the eternity of his glory;
whereto pertains these words of S. John, Not that we loved God, 1. Ioh.
4.10.
but that he first loved us; making our love, the consequent of his love. So
that by the sinceere love we bear toward him, we consider of the latitude,
and quality of that love, wherewith God in Christ from all eternity has
prosecuted us. Now what is all this his Love, but our Election?

Now that none is elected unto life everlasting, who bear not in due time
these effects and cognizances of their Election about them, it is manifest by
such Scripture places, which deal in the point of Predestination. The holy
Apostle tells us, that we were elected; that we should be holy and without
blame. Ephesians. 1.4.
And he further informs us; that such whom God Predestinateth, are likewise
Called, and Justified, and so consequently qualified with Faith, and the
knowledge of God, wherewith they acknowledge God for their Father; and with
love, whereby they embrace him as their Father: And finally, with good will and
settled resolution, Romans 8.30.
constantly and continually to seek his glory.

But we come to the effects, by which we come to the knowledge of the causes.
They are of two sorts. 1. Such as necessarily appertain to all, without which
they are not capable of eternal life. 2. Such as are annexed, as dependances,
and appurtenances thereunto. Of the first sort, are, 1. Christ, as Mediator and
Priest, and his obedience and righteousness, (for without Christ, there is no
salvation.) 2. Our effectual Vocation to Christ by the holy Spirit, and the
coniunctaunces thereof, our Justification, and so our Regeneration thereupon.
These four; Predestination, Vocation, Justification, Glorification, are so
coadunited and coanimated together, as they cannot be divided. And so no man
can be Glorified, who is not Justified: and no man can be Justified, that is
not first effectually Called; as no man can be so called, who is not
Predestined. Without these means, no not the very Infants, can attain to
this end of their endless Glory. Wherefore inwardly all the Elect children by
the Holy ghost in their kind, are Called, and Justified; that they may be
likewise Glorified.

Of the Second sort, which Infantes by reason of their age, can not have, which
notwithstanding follow the rest of the Elect, though in some they are more
forcible, in some more infirm; in some more, in othersome less, are such as
follow actual and habitual Faith. 1 Hearing of the Word. 2 Hatred of Sin,
Love of Righteousness. 3 Patience in adversity. 4 Endeavor to do good
Works: Wherefore we say, that such as are Elected to this end, are
therewithal Predestined unto the means that tend to this end: For
Predestination is not only of the end, but also of the means that serve
thereunto. All, as well the end as the means, are the effects of
Predestination. Wherefore rightly says Saint Augustine, August.
Praedistinatio est praeparatio beneficiorii D j, quibus cert^ssine liberantur
quicunque the^antur: Predestination is a preparation of the benefits of God,
by which they are most certainly delivered, whosoever are delivered.

1. The first Gift of God (the effect of Predestination) is Christ Jesus, with
his Obedience, Merits, Death, Resurrection, Glory; as he is ordained
Mediator between the Father and us, and the head of all the Elect, and so the
Head and Fountain of all the manifold Graces of God, from the flowing stream
of his free Predestination powered upon us: For the effects of Predestination,
are so ordinate, and subordinate one to the other, as those that have
precedencie, give their efficiencie and sufficiency to their fellows.
Wherefore Christ being the foremost effect of Election, he is the cause of all
the rest, from whom, and by whom they are all the company of them conuayed,
and communicated unto us. Wherefore worthily the Apostle in his Letter to the
Ephesians, the first Chapter, Ephesians. 1.4.
lays us down these Lessons.

1. That we are Chosen in Christ, verse. 5.
as it were in the head, that we should be his members.

2. That he has Predestined us to Adoption, and filiation; but we are
adopted into this Sonship in Christ, Gal. 4 6.
the first borne of many Brethren; and by the communication of the said
filiation, we are really and indeed the Sons of God, endowed with his Spirit,
by which we are regenerated.

3. verse. 6.
That we are made freely accepted to God in Christ his beloved.

4. That in the same Christ, verse. 7.
we have our Redemption, through his Blood of the everlasting Covenant, even
the forgiveness of our sins; as all Wisdom and Understanding beside.

5. Finally, that all things in him, verse. 8.
are reconciled together, as well the things in Heaven, Gal. 4, 10.
as the things that are in Earth. Summarily, the Apostle there, as in other
sundry places teaches, that whatsoever good things we have received, or are
to receive from the first to the last, from our eternal Election, to our
future Glorification; we have, and shall have them only in Christ, and by
Christ; in whom we hold them all in Capite from him: Whosoever therefore are
chosen of God to life everlasting, beside that they are chosen in Christ, they
are Predestined unto Christ; that is, to the union and communion of Christ:
so that by him it is of necessity, we attain all other things.

2. The second Benefit of God, and effect of our Election, is our effectual
Vocation to Christ and his Gospel; by which the Elect only are called,
because it is performed, 2. Tim. 1.9.
According to his own purpose and grace, which is given to us in Christ.

The outward calling is common with the rest, with the very Rebrobates,
according to this Aphorism of our Savior, Many are called, Ioh. 8.47.
But few are chosen. But the inward true calling, by which the understanding is
enlightened, with the saving knowledge of God, and the will is inclined to the
will of God, is the peculiar of the part predestinate. This vocation effectual
is discerned, by the very effects thereof: Whereof two are immediate. 1. The
hearty hearing of Gods word, together with the understanding thereof, coupled,
and consorted, with constancy, and cheerfulness. 2. A serious and sure
faith, and affiance that we have in the same. Hence is it, Ioh. 8.47.
that is said by our Savior: He that is of God, (that is to mean by
election, and effectual vacation) hears Gods word: (that is, willingly,
cheerfully, and continually.) Ye therefore hear it not, because ye are not
of God.

This vocation of ours, is done not only by the preaching of the word,
(albeit that is the ordinary means wherewith God effects it,) but sometimes
he uses other helps, as Prayer, the consideration of his Miracles, the
admonition of Friends, the interposition of afflictions, the inward
inspiration of his Spirit. Justinus Martyr, (as witnesses Eusebius Eusebius. Lib.
4. and. 8.
) was won to the says by the regard he had to the rage of Tyrants, Aug.
Confess. Lib. 3. Cap. 4.
and to the patient sufferings of the Saints. Augustine in his Confessions
tells us, that he was converted to Christianisme, by reading an heathnish
Book of Cicero, indorced and superscribed Hertensius, the form of his
confession is thus, Jlle Liber mutauit affectum meum, et ad teipsum Domine
mutanit preces meas: That Book turned my mind, and turned my Prayers unto
thee O Lord my God. God in mollifying our Hearts, Or any other thing of that
nature.
and converting us, does as he that would soften the Wax that is hard, to
make it apt to take an impression: First he chafeth it up and down between
his hands, he oyleth it, he dippeth it in warm Water, he sets it against
the Fire, and then brings it to the Stamp or Press: and if none of these
will do it good, then he medleth no more with it, but as a thing unprofitable,
he does utterly reject it. This is the course that God takes in the
mollifying and softning of our hearts. First he takes us as it were into his
hands, rubbing and stroaking us with the memorial of his Benefits, then he
suppleth us with his holy Inspirations, the unction and comfortable oil of his
Grace. 3. He washes and rinseth us with the Waters of his Pleasures as out of
a River. 4. And sometimes works our compunction by the fiery trial of
Persecution. 5. And lastly, strikes us out of life with the hammer of Death.
If none of these callinges will make us come to him, he then casts all such
sinners into Hell; as all the people that forget God, and will not obey his
heavenly Calling: Where Fire and Brimstone, Storm and Tempest, shall be their
portion to drink. He calls by his Word, such as are of age: wherefore it is
said to the Church of Laodicea^ Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any
man shall hear my voice, Apoc. 3.
and open the door, I will come in to him, and suppe with him, and he with
me: wherefore Christ says, If any man loves me, and keeps my words, Ioh.
14.
my Father shall love him, and we will come and abide with him. But withal, he
chiefly works our Vocation by his inward inspiration, by the which the Father
draws by the Spirit, them that come to Christ, the Dignation and Grace which
he gives to Infantes. Which Vocation, is the introduction into our state of
salvation in this present life. Wherefore usually the Apostles in the
frontispire and forehead of their letters to the Churches speak of this
Vocation, Romans 1.7.8. 1. Cor. 1.2.
inscribing and entitling them, Saints by calling. Therefore it must needs
be, that whosoever be Elected in Christ, be (at their appointed time)
effectually called, and drawn unto him.

3. The third benefit of God, and effect and proof of our Predestination,
proper only to the Elect, is Faith; without which, Heb. 11.6.
in the testimony of the Apostle, it is impossible to please God: For by this,
we are incorporated into Christ, we are made members of his body: without which
Faith, no flesh can be saved. In Infantos the action of Faith, (which is a
knowledge of Christ and confidence in him) is not, as not capable thereof, in
respect of their age; but they have notwithstanding, the Spirit and life of
Faith, which in process of time will break forth, as those Scripture p^aces
prove, which teach, That Salvation comes to all by Faith; and how that
without Faith, it is altogether impossible for any to please God. That this is
the effect and fruit of Election, the Apostle perspiciously and openly
delivers, 1. Cor. 7.25.
where he witnesses of himself, that he obtained mercy of the Lord (that
is, in his sacred and secret decree of Predestination) to be faithful.
Wherefore, whosoever are Predestined to eternal life in Christ, they are
elected to this Faith, the effect thereof; and therefore perforce they must at
last believe in Christ.

4. The fourth benefit, and effect is Justification, that is, the free
remission of our sins, and the imputation of the righteousness of Christ. So
that the form of Justification, is as it were a kind of translation of our
sins to Christ, and of Christ's righteousness to us, by reason of this divine
imputation. It is styled, The Righteousness of Christ, because it is out of
us, and it is in the humanity of Christ, as in the subject. This naturally
follows Faith at the heels, inasmuch as those that are endowed with this
Faith, are therewithal also Justified. That this Justification is an effect of
Election, Romans 8.30.
the Apostle insinuates by setting it upon the head of our Vocation, adjoined
to Predestination immediately before. Now this is not effected in us while we
are in this world, but in the Pardon of our sins, and in the imputation of
his perfect obedience to us.

5. The fifth benefit and effect, is Regeneration and Sanct^fication by the
Spirit, while we become New creatures by him, and so the Sons of God not
only by Adoption, but by regeneration also. For Christ when he Justifies us,
he not only remitteth our unrighteousness, and imputes his obedience unto
us: but also takes away our heart of Stone, and gives us his own heart of
Flesh unto us; puts off our Old man, and cloatheth us with his New one, and
strippeth us of our inward corruption, and makes us pertakers of his own
Nature: and so indeed, of the Sons of Men, makes us the Sons of God, and
Brethren unto him. Wherefore we are said to be Predestined by Jesus Christ,
Ephesians. 1.4.5. Ioh. 8.6.
That we should be holy, and without blame befo e him. And hence is this
saying of our Savior, That which is borne of the Spirit, is Spirit.

6. From this root springs the sixth Branch of our Election, which is, The
love of Righteousness, and hatred of Sin: For in Regeneration, there is,
To^m^^rs a quo, et termanus a^ q^m, An auersion from sin, and a conversion to
God: the mortification of the old ^^^am, and the vivification of the New: the
alteration of affections of Nature corrupted, into the affections of Divine
nature, by the Holy ghost sanctified: which is noted in their Walk, of which
the Apostle speaks, Romans 8 1.
which is, N^^ after the flesh, but after the spirit: And in the distaste,
their Stomachs take of carnalities, ^.
They sa^^ur not the th^^^ of the Flesh, but of the spirit. Now the first
affectes of the Flesh, are Love of sin, which is the C^ncupiscence of the fl
sh: and so on the contrary side, The hatred of Righteousness, and of the Law
of ^o^, which are not of the Father, but of the World: For that which properly
is spoken of Christ, (...) 5 8.
Thou have loved Righteousness, and hated ^^quitie, is not improperly
understood of all that are the members of Christ; wherefore David, who bears
the person of all the Elect, and expresses their disposition, (...) 3.
says of himself; J have ^oued thy Law. Thy L^^ (...) within my heart. ^
J hate all these that are workers of iniquity. J will not sit among the
Wicked. Such affections S. Paul delivers us. J delight in the Law of God
concerning the Inner man, that is, Romans 7.23.
as I have an inward and a better birth.

7. Now these two Affections, the first fruits of Regeneration, beget the
seventh Effect, A^ endea^our to do Good works; that is, to forsake Sin, and
to fulfill the Law. For he that hates any thing from his heart, he shunneth
and auoydeth it all that he may. And so of the other side, he that inwardly
loves a thing, he pursues it with the hottest contention that can be. This
distinction of theirs in these two opposite conditions, the Apostle thus
speaks of: He that does righteousness, is righteous, 1. Ioh 3.7.
as he is righteous. He that commits sin, is of the Devil: For the
Devil sins from the beginning. Now Christ came into the World, to dissolve
the works of the Devil in the Elect; But in the Reprobate, he suffers them
to remain still as they are; because he was never stated in them, they were
not given him of his Father, to be purged, regenerated, saved. Wherefore Christ
being preordinated to perform all these works, and no good thing is done in
us, which was not in Christ prepared for us from all eternity: it is more then
manifest that our solicitude of good works, is the effect of our Election.
This the Apostle shows plainly, where he says; E^li^ 2.1^.
We are cre^ted in Christ Jesus unto go^^ (...), which God has ordained that
we should walk in them. This duty as more then necessary, is commended and
commanded us by Saint P^ter, 2. Pet. 1.10.
in this precept he prescribes us, Give diligence to make your Calling and
Election sure; that is, by Good works: as many coppies have it. For to whom
should we make it sure? Not to God: for it was sure to him before all worlds;
but to our selves, and neighbors.

8. Now because while we seek the glory of God, and are careful of Good
works, and we refuse to fashion our selves according to this world in the
lusts and sins thereof, the Flesh, the World and the Devil, combine and
hang together like the Skales of Leuiathan, and display their Banners of
Hostility against us: whereby through the malice that is in their hearts, and
the might that is in their hands, they often get the upper hand of us; or if
they win us not, at the least they weary us: and therefore are enforced to
flee unto God as to our City of refuge. Here comes in the eight effect of
Predestination; Jnuocation on the name of God, that by his right hand, and holy
arm, we may have the victory. For this is the property of the Spirit which
the Elect have, to provoke them to pray: (...). ^.16.
We know not how to pray: but the spirit it self makes request for us with
sighs which cannot be expressed. Gal 4.6.
And because we are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into
your hearts, which cries Abba, Psalm. 50.15.
Father. It is the will of God we should Call upon him in the time of trouble,
and he promises to hear us.

9. From these premises, proceeds the ninth property of Predestination,
which is, Pe^^ence, and perpetual compunction for our daily and deadly sins;
an vnwearisome wish of proceeding in Piety: so as in this respect only, we
desire our dissolution, to be with Christ; that the end of our life, might make
an end of the life of sin. That this is incident to all the Elect, the
Apostle thus speaking in the name of all the Elect, unto us, thus witnesses: O
wretched man that J am, Romans 7.24. Phil. 1.23.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? As in this wish that else
where he makes: I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

10. This nynth, is the breeder of this tenth effect, which is a seruent
affection to Christ's second coming, to set an end to our sorrows and sins,
and to perfect and consummate his Kingdom: That this is the Godly mind of the
Elect, Saint ^ a l teaches us, where he tells us of them: 2. Tim. 4.8.
That they love his glorious coming. This is the Res^r^^bilis Echo, that
Saint John gives, Apo. 22.17 20.
answer the voice of the Bridegroom, and Spouse, Mat. 6.10.
Even so come Lord Jesus. It is the point of Prayer Christ teaches us, in his
prescribed coppie of Prayer: Psalm. 50.15.
Thy Kingdom come.

11. Now because such as pray thus unto God, are also heard according to his
word of promise unto them: Romans 5.3.
Thou shall call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee. Hence
is it manifest, that the eleventh effect of predestination, is our Comfort, and
Joy that we have in tribulations; thus described by Saint Paul, Romans 8.28.
We rejoice in tribulations: Knowing that tribulation brings forth patience.
And so a recovery of our selves, and a new life: So that it falls out to the
best, come what can come to those that are Elect: For the Elect, albeit they
yield sometimes in the plain field, in their Spiritual skirmish, yet because
by and by they have help from Heaven of Christ, they arise with great Spirits,
and they run the Battle against Sin, and Satan, and all the united troops
of Temptations, of Hostile affections; continuing the Wars, till they have
won the Field, as certain in themselves of the Conquest, and the Crown.

12. This certainty is the twelfe testimony of our predestination to all
felicity, common to all the company of the Elect: this is the consequent and
conclusion of the Apostle What shall we say to these things? Math. 24.24.
Jf God be on our side, who can be against us? And hence is it, that the Lord
Jesus gives us this comfort; that not by the coming of Antichrist himself,
and all his illusions, the Elect can be illuded.

13. Now from hence breaks out the last benefit of God, and effect of our
Election, that is, Perseverance in the Faith, and confession of Christ,
consorted with a mind to an holy life, and a desire to set out Gods glory.
This gift goes in common among all the Elect, according to promise in
Prophecy by Jeremie, I will give my fear into their hearts, that they depart
not from me.

But now if the testimony of Gods spirit has not such strength and virtue in
the Elect, as to secure them in this case; then may they judge of their
Election, by that other effect of the Holy ghost in our Spirits, namely,
Sanctification; as we use to judge by Heat, that there is Fire, when we can
not see the Flame it self.

Our Spirit performs testimony two ways to our certain Election. 1. By
inward Tokens in it self. 2. By outward Fruits. The inward Tokens are of two
sorts. 1. Such as respect our Sins. 2. Such as respect the Mercy of God in
Christ. The first are in respect of sins past, present, or to come. The sign
in the Spirit which concerns sins past, is godly sorrow; which is a
pricking in the heart, caused by an inward feeling of Gods wrath, and of
damnation that ensues, discerned and distinguished from a secular sorrow, by
these symptoms and signs. 1. A care to leave our sins. 2. An accusation
that we take out with our selves against them. 3. A grief and vexation that we
are in for them. 4. A fear of our future relapse into them. 5. A desire of
Gods strength and assistance against the^ 6 Zeal to all services of piety,
contrary to all our former iniquities. 7. A godly revenge we take of our
bodies, in subduing them to the spirit: This sorrow is in some more, in some
less; God out of his wisdom laying out to every one his portion, best
fitting with his condition, and sufficient to salvation, in the least
proportion; as a Pin or Needle serves sometimes to let out the corruption of
a running soar, as well as a Knife and Launcer.

2. The Token which is in regard of sins present is the combat between the
Flesh and the Spirit, proper to them that are regenerate, who are partly Flesh
and partly Spirit. Between these two enemies, there is no equality, but the
Flesh sometimes in mea^ure exceeds the Spirit. The Flesh resembling vast
Goliath, and the Spirit little David. I compare the Spirit to little David,
because the measure is but little that we have in this life: Romans 8.23.
For here we receive but the First fruits of the Spirit. We may not look
for the fullness thereof before the life to come yet the efficacy and power of
the Spirit is so great, as it may ordinarily prevail against the Flesh* For
the Flesh receives her deadly wound suddenly, in the very nicke and moment of
our conversion, and ever after languisheth and pineth away; and therefore it
fights but as a maimed Soldier: and the Spirit is continually strengthened
and confirmed by the Spirit of God. And it is a^il and Iouial, and the virtue
thereof is like Musk, one grain whereof is more fragrant and redolent, then
many ounces of other Spices and Confections.

3. The Token that respect sin to come* is a care to prevent it: Saint John
makes this mark of Gods Children, where he says, He that is borne of God,
sins not; 1. Ioh. 5.18.
b^t keeps himself, that the wicked one touch him not. And this care
extends it self, not only to the well disposing of the outward actions, but
also to the good rule of the very thoughts of the heart: For where the word
of God works, there, 2. Cor. 10.5.
Every thought is brought into captivity, to the obedience of Christ: And
there, the Apostles direction is followed: Phil. 4.8.
Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, etc. think on the e
things.

2. The Tokens which concern Gods mercy, are chiefly two. 1. When a Man
feels himself distressed with the Burden of his Sins, or when he
apprehendes the heavy displeasure of God in his Soul, for them: And further,
feels the need he has of Christ and therewith, gaspeth for the recovery of
Gods favor, in the merrits of Christ, and that above all other things in the
world: To all such, are most cordial promises made, which can have reference
to none but to the Elect, as where Christ says: If any man th^^st, let him
come to me and d^inke: Ioh. 7.37.
He that bell eueth in me, (as says the Scriptures) out of his ^elly shall
flow Rivers of Water of life. As where the Spirit says: I will give to him
wh^^ is a thirst, of the Well of the Water of ^^e freely. Revel. 21.6.
Now if he that thirsts drink of these Waters, mark what follows:
Wh^soeuer drinks of the VVate^ that I shall give him, Ioh. 4.14.
shall never b^ more a thirst: But the Water that I shall g^ue him, shall be,
in time, a Well of Water springing up unto everlasting life.

2. The second is a strange affection wrought in the heart by the Spirit of
God, whereby a Man does so rate the righteousness of Christ, as all other
things under the Roof of Heaven, are deemed but as Doung in comparison
thereof: This mind was Paul in, where he says: I account all things but
Doung, to gain Christ Jesus. Phil 3.8.
And this affection, the Parable in the Gospel poynteth at, Math. 13.44.
under the similitude of the concealed Treasure, and the peereles Pearl for
which the Evangelical Merchant sold away his temporalles.

Now every one saigneth himself to be of this affection, and that he more
esteems a drop of Christ's blood, then all the Kingdoms of the world: when
as the event shows the contrary, that this is but the smooth voice of Jacob,
they are spawned of the rough and hairie generation of Esau; more greedy of
his brother Jacobs red Broth, then of his Father Isackes Blessing: Of the brood
of the old Jsraelites, that more regarded their rancker and grosser diets,
their Onions, Garlic, Leekes, and such pelf, and the Fleshpots of Aegipt;
then the riches of C^naan, the Land of Promise. Gergesi^s all the sort of them,
more setting by their Swine, then by their Savior. Now to unmask such a
disguised Hipocrite, there be two proper marks to discern this affection from
the false. 1. The first is his love to a Christian, in that regard only that
he is a Christian: for he can not esteem of Christ as he ought, that does
not in like sort esteem of Christ's members. This is the Observation given us
by our Savior, where he says: He that receives a Prophet in the name of a
Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward: Math. 10.41.
and he that receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, shall
receive the reward of a righteous man. And it is the sign S. John tells us
of, where he says; Hereby we know that we are translated from death to life,
1. Ioh. 3.14.
because we love the Brethren: that is, such as are members, because they are
so.

2. The second mark is, their love to the second coming of Christ either
particularly by death, or universally by the latter Judgment, to no other end,
but to have a full fruition of Christ, S. Paul makes this a mark of our
adoption, where he says; The Crown of righteousness is laid up for all them
that love the appearing of Christ.

1. Tim. 4.8.
The outward Token of our Adoption, is our New Obedience, and conformity to
Gods Law in an holy conversation, expressed by Saint John, where he says:
Hereby we are sure that we know him, if we keep his commandementes. Now we
mean not such exact and absolute obedience, 1. Ioh. 23.
as the moral Law in the rigor thereof, looks for at our hands; for then
it should not betoken grace, but be the means of our damnation: But such
obedience as in the favorable acceptance of God, measuring a deed rather by
the disposition of the doer, then by the perfection of it; goes for current
pay: Yet that we may not pay him Copper for good Coin, this obedience must be
thus qualified. First, it must not come with paring Knives to the Law of God,
and cut off and keep such commandments as they please, and keep a part
behind with A^amas, and S^phi^a, and divide his worship, as the wrong Mother
that pleaded before Salomo^, would have the Child divided: He will have our
obedience to them all, or else to none of them all.

Herod could hear John Baptist willingly, and did reform many things by his
means: And ^udas had many good parts in him, as hereby appears, that he
was content to leave all, and to follow Christ, and preached the Gospel of
the Kingdom in Jurie, as well as the rest: Yet all this was to no purpose, for
that the one would not obey the seventh Commandment, in leaving his Brother
Phi^ips Wife; and the other would not leave his covetousness to dye for it.
Entire and true obedience, does stretch out it self to all the Commandementes,
as David says, I shall not be confounded, Psalm. 119.6.
when I have respect to all thy Commandementes. Iam. 2.10.
Saint James condemns him as guilty of all, that is guilty of one: That is,
our obedience to many Commandementes, is before God no obedience, but a flat
sin, if wittingly and willingly we leave any one undone. He that does repent
himself of one sin truly, does repent of all: and he tha^ liue^ but in one
known sin, without repentance, whatsoever he pretend, indeed repentes of no
sin.

2. Secondly, this Obedience must dilate it self to the whole course of our
life, after our conversion and repentance: for we are not to judge of a man by
one or two good deeds; but by the carriage of himself in the whole course of
his life. A man is, as his life is: They are not the slippes and salles that he
has by weakness of nature, that can prejudice his Election, so he renueth his
repentance for his new trespasses, and dwells not in sin in a senseless
security.

3. Thirdly and lastly, this Obedience, must be from the whole man, as
Regeneration the cause thereof, 1 Thessalonians. 3.13.
is through the whole man in Body, Soul, and Spirit. Also, Obedience is the
fruit of Love; and Love is from a pure Heart, a good Conscience, and Faith
unfeigned.

Thus we teach not that men must believe the forgiveness of their sins,
while they lie, and live in them, for that were altogether to teach falsehood
for truth. He that believes the Pardon of his sins by true Faith, has the
spirit of God in him, and a constant purpose not to sin against God, If he
do, it is against his mind; it is not he that does it, but the sin that
dwells in him, and his case stands thus. He has by his sin given a blow
to his Conscience, weakened his Faith, bereaved himself of the Favor of God as
much as in him is, made himself guilty of sin, and worthy of damnation. And
God for his part, accordingly turns the wonted signs of his Favor, into
signs of Anger and Displeasure; and though it be pardoned in the purpose of
God, yet is it not actually pardoned, till the party repent.

Wherefore here is Answer to this Demand, How a man may be assured of his
Adoption, if he want the Testimony from Heaven, which is the Spirit of God.
For as Fire is known by two properties, of the heat, of the Flame: We may
know it to be Fire still, by the very heat, though it affords no Flame, So
if a man has not the Witness of Gods Spirit, by the Testimonial of our
Spirit, our sanctification; we have certificate not obscure of our Election.

If it shall further grow into question, How it is that after all our curious
Inquisition, we find but few signs of Sanctification in our selves? In this
case they must have recourse to the least measure of Grace, which being but of
the size of a Grain of Mustardseed, and but of the strength of a weak Infant,
it is sufficient to engraffe them into Christ; and therefore they must not
doubt of their Election because they find their Faith feeble, and the effects
of the Holy ghost faint within them: which I speak not to the end to lead men
into security, and that they should content themselves with these small
beginninges of Grace, but only to show how any may assure themselves that they
are at the least, Ba^es in Christ; adding this withal, that they which have no
more but these small beginninges, must be careful to increase them, Q^ta non
progre^i est regredi, Not to go forward, is to go backward.

Lastly, and what if the Christian soul as yet has not found this little
measure of Grace and has no means in the world of assurance? He must not
despair, but persuade himself in this, that though he wantes assurance now,
yet he may have the same hereafter.

No man may peremptorily conclude, and set down, that himself, or any other
is a Reprobate: For Gods ways are not as man's ways, but h^e preferres such,
often times as seem greatest strangers and aliantes unto him unto his
Kingdom, when he casts out those whom the world esteemed Children of the
Kingdom. So says our Savior: M^th. 21.31.
The ^^b^cans and Harlots go before you. And the Parable tells us, how, Ma^y
an one is called at the eleventh hour, Math. 20.6.
as it appears by the example of the remorsed Thief upon the Cross. But in
the mean while be we persuaded, to hear the Word of God, and to receive the
Sacraments: For by our care in coming to the Lords Vineyard, and conuersing
about the Wine Press, we shall find that comfortable Wine of Gods Grace, as
shall serve to make glad the heart of man. When sickness and death assaulteth
us, the very chosen of God must prepare themselves to temptations, the Devil
then bestirring himself all he may, and sitting our souls to the coursest
branne, as curiously as ever L^^an did ransacke Jacobs stuff: And few there be
that can judge of these terrors of temptations, but such an one as can say,
Quarum pars magnafi^^. Now when men lay thus in darkness and in the region and
shadow of death, unless God should from Heaven with a gracious aspect, look
upon them in the face of his Anointed, and stream down unto them in this
life, some lightsome beams of his love in Christ, by the operation of his holy
Spirit, it would be very hard with the best of them all.

Finally, as every one of the Elect, in this life, is made certain of his
Election, ascertained thereof by the means above mentioned: so a due time by
God is determined for the same, termed in holy Scriptures, ^. Cor 6.2. Luke
19.42.
The Acceptable time: the day of Salvation: The time of our Visitation: Before
which time of our blessed Vocation, we never are persuaded, or once think of
our Salvation: as we see in the examples of Matthew, wholly betaking himself
to his Toll-house: as in Paul, before his conversion, when he was a Saul, and
vexed the Congregation: and in many such.

Again, many after the time of their Calling, are not by and by made certain
of their Election: but to some sooner, to some later, is this Grace afforded.

A Christian soul often seeks after this comfort in his Bed by Prayers,
and finds it not; as the Spouse the Church did her Bridegroom in the 3. of
the Canticles, In my Be^de by night, Cantic. ^.^.
J sought him that my soul I^nea; J sought him, but I found him not. He
entreats the counsel and comfort of his friends, and the help of their
holy prayers; verse. ^.
and yet found him not: The complaint the Spouse makes in the same place. He
resorteth to the Godly Preachers of the word, and yet speedeth not: verse. 3.
which was still the said Churches case.

Lastly, when all help and hepes failed her, the Bridegroom came, verse. 4.
Adiutor in opportunita^bus, An helper in the needful time of trouble: he came
on his own accord, as he has so done to diverse in the like case. 1. Then
Faith takes up as it were a new life, grows into heart, and takes hold on
Christ. 2. Then has the Soul very nigh society, and conjunction with GOD.
verse. 5.
3. Then comes joy in the Holy ghost, and peace of Conscience, as a sweet
sleep comes on a wearisome body, verse. 6.
and waters all the parts of the body with his refreshing deawe. 4. Then is
the Heart lifted up to Heaven with holy thoughts, verse. 8.9.10.
and Prayers, which mount upward as Pillars of Smoke, pleasant as perfumed
with Myrrh and Incense. 5. Then is it ravished, and out of it self, in the
muze and meditation of his glorious condition in the Heavenly kingdom. 6. Then
it endeauoreth to persuade others to consider of the Glory of Christ, and of
his Kingdom. verse. 11.
7. After all these, Chap. 4. verse. 1. to the cha. 15.
Christ reuealeth to his Servant, the happiness of his estate in this life,
and the other more plainly and openly then ever he did before; verse. 16.
and gives him a sight of such Graces and Benefits, as he has bestowed on
him. 8. The Christian presents his Prayers to Christ, that he would breath
and blow upon him with his Spirit, that so he might bring forth such fruits
as he has, of thankfulness to the Lord. Lastly, Christ yields to all we
pray for, and gives us our hearts desire; and does not deny us the request
of our lips.

Now for th^se, and all other his Graces and Blessings bestowed upon us; to
him, with his blessed Son, and Holy spirit, three persons, one eternal and
everliving GOD, be ascribed all Praise, Power, and Glory, now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

