THE COMMVNICAtion between my Lord Chauncelor and judge Hales, being among
other judges to take his oath in Westminster hall. Anno. M.D.Liii. Vi. of
October.

Chauncelor Hales. MAster Hales, ye shall understand that like as the queen's
highness has hertofore receiuid good opinion of you, especially, for that ye
stood both faithfully and laufulli in her cause of just succession, refusing
to set your hand to the book among others that were against her grace in
that behalf: so now through your own late deserts: against certain her
highness dooinges: ye stand not well in her graces favor. And therefore, before
ye take any oath, it shall be necessary for you to make your purgation,

Hales. I pray you my Lord, what is the cause?


Chauncelor, Informatio^ is given* that ye have indicted certain pristes in
Kent, for saiing of Mass.


Hales. Mi Lord it is not so, I indicted none, but in deed certain
indictamentes of like matter were brought before me at the last assizes there
holde^, and I gave order therein as the law required. For I have professed the
law, against which, in cases of justice will I never (god willinge) proceed, nor
in any wise dissemble, but with the same show forth mi conscience, and if it
were to do again, I would do no less then I did.


Chauncelor. Yea master Hales, your co^sience is known well enough. I know ye
lack no conscience.


Hales. Mi Lord, ye may do well to search your own conscience, for mine is
better known to mie self then to you, and to be plain, I did as well use
justice in your said Mass case by mi conscience as by the law, wherein I am
fulli bent to stand in trial to the uttermost that can be objected And if I
have therein done any iniuri or wrong: let me be judged by the law, for I will
seek no better defense, considering chiefli that it is mi profession.


Chauncelor. whi master Hales, although ye had the rigor of the law on your
side, yet ye might have had regard to the queen's highness present doings in
that case. And further although ye seem to be more then precise in the law:
yet I think ye would be very loath to yield to the extremity of such
advantage as might be gathered against your procedinges in the law, as ye
have some time taken upon you in place of justice. And if it were well tried,
I believe ye should not be well able to stand honestli thereto.


Hales. Mi Lord i am not so perfect but i may err for lack of knowledge. But
both inconsience and such knoledge of the law as god has given me, i will do
nothing but i will maintain and abide in it. And if mi goods and all that I
have be not able to counterpaise the case: mi body shall be redi to serve the
turn, for they be all at the queen's highness pleasure.


Chauncelor. Ah sir, ye be very quick and stout in your answers. But as it
should seem, that which ye did was more of a will, favoring the opinion of
your Religion against the Service now used, then for any occasion or zeal of
justice, saying the queen's highness does set it furthe, as yet wishinge all her
faithful subjects to embrace it accordingli: and where ye offer both body and
goods in your trial, there is no such matter required at your hands, and
yet ye shall not have your own will neither.


Hales. My Lord, I seek not wilful will, but to show my self as i am bound in
love to God, and obedience to the queen's majesty, in whose cause willi^gly for
justice sake (al other respects set apart (i did of late (as your Lordship
knoeth) adventure as much as i had. And as for my religion, i trust it to be
such as pleases God, wherein i am ready to adventure as well my life as my
substance, if i be called thereunto. And so in lack of mine own power and
will, the Lords will be fulfilled.


Chauncelor. Seeing ye be at this point Master Hales, i will presently make an
end with you. The queen's highness shall be enfoutmed of your opinion, and
declaration. And as her grace shall thereupon determine, ye shall have knoledge,
until which time ye may depart, as ye came without your oath, for as it
appears, ye ar scarce worthi the place appointed


Hales. I thancke your Lordship, and as for my vocation, being both a burden
and a charge, more then ever i desired to take upon me, whenever it shall
please the queen's highness to ease me thereof: i shall most humbli with due
contentation obei the same.


And so departed from the bar.
