SOLENNE DECRETVM, A nationali Ecclesiarum Gallicarum Synodo (celebrata GAPINCI
apud Delphinates) proclamatum, and publicae Confessioni earumdem adscriptum.
CVM Vero Episcopus Romanus, erecta sibi in orb Christiano Monarchia, sibi
arroget Principatum in omnes Ecclesias and Pastores: vsque adeo inflatus, Did.
96. Can. 7. Satis euidenter. Lib. 1. Sacrar. Cerem. Sect. 7. 6. De Ense
benedicendo.
Vt Deum ipse se appellet. Council. Lateran. vlt. Sess. 1. 3. 9, and 10.
Velit adorari: Ipse sibi tribuat omnem potestatem in coelo and in terra: Res
Ecclesiasticas ad libitum componat: Co^dat articulos fidei: Authoritatem
Scripturae velit pendere a sua, eamque ad libitum interpretetur: Animarum
mercaturam exerceat: Liberet adstrictos votis and iuramentis: Nouos Dei cultus
instituat: Et (quod ad Ciuilia attinet) legitimam Magistratuum auctoritatem
conculcet; dans, adimens, and transferens Regna: Credimus and asserimus, eum
esse verum illum and germanum ANTICHRISTVM, Filium perditionis, praedictum in
Verbo Dei: Meretricem purpuratam, insidentem septem montibus in magna Ciuitate;
Obtinentem Regnum in Reges terrae: Et expectamus donec Deus (prout promisit,
and iam coepit) eum fractum and victum Spiritu oris sui, tandem deleat fulgore
aduentus sui.

Visum and approbatum.
SERVET REGEM IACOBVM, FIDEI DEFENSOREM DEVS.
A SOLEMN DECREE OF the National Synod of GAP, in the province of Delphine in
France, publicly proclaimed, and ascribed to the public Confession of the
Church.
WHereas the Bishop of Rome, having erected a Monarchy in the Christian world,
does challenge and arrogate unto himself, the Principallitie over al Churches
and Pastors, being so extremely proud and puffed up, Did. 96. Can. 7. Satis
euidenter. Lib. 1. Sacrar. Cerem. Sect. 7. 6. De Ense benedicendo.
That he calls himself God. Council. Lateran. vlt. Sess. 1. 3. 9, and 10.
That he will be worshipped: And also attributes unto himself all power in
Heaven and in Earth: orders Ecclesiastical matters at his own pleasure:
frames new Articles of Faith: will have the Anthoritie of the Scriptures to
depend of his own Authority, and interprets them as he lists: exercises
the marchandizing of souls, absolues men from their vows and oaths;
Instituteth new worship of God. And in like manner (as concerning Civil
affairs) treads under foot the lawful authority of Magistrates, giving,
taking away, and translating Kingdoms: We do steadfastly believe, and
constantly affirm, that He (the Pope of Rome) is that GREAT AND PROPER
ANTICHRIST, that Son of Perdition, foretold in the word of God, that purple
Harlot sitting upon seven Hills in the great City, having obtained the
kingdom over Kings of the earth. And we wait and expect, whilst that God
according to his promise, and as he has begun already, to weaken and
overcome him by the Spirit of his mouth, does at last utterly confound and
destroy him, by the brightness of his coming.

SEEN AND ALLOWED.
Londini per Edwardum Allde and A. J. 1604.


