AN ABRIDGMENT OF CHRISTIAN PERFECTION. CONTAINING Many excellent Precepts, and
Aduertisments, touching the holy, and sacred mystical Divinity.

Written in Italian, by Fa. Achilles Galliardi of the Society of (...) and
translated into English:

By A. H. of the same Society.

THE SECOND EDITION.

Imprinted Anno M.DC.XXV.

TO THE RELIGIOUS MEN AND WOMEN OF OUR NATION. AND To all others who desire to
attain to the eminent state of Christian Perfection: health in our Lord.
THIS Little Book (Devout Religious in Christ Jesus) being first written in
Italian by the R. Father Achilles Galliardi, of the Society of JESUS, and
delivered over, in written papers only, unto an Honorable and very devout Lady
of Millan, for her private instruction, and better advancement in spiritual
matters, was some years past gotten out of her Closet, and communicated to
more, then it was at first intended. For a little after it was carried into
France and there translated, and printed in the French tongue; but with so many
omissions, obscurities, and other faults, contrary to the Authors meaning, that
in many places it could hardly be drawn to any perfect sense: the which some
persons of great zeal, and well experienced Masters of Spirit perceauing, and
lamenting that so excellent a Treasure should be obscured and clowded in such
darkness; did carefully labor to correct what was amiss, by making clear the
obscure places and by restoring of many passages to their proper sense, which
were before corrupt and intricate: that so being published anew, it might
appear worthy to be presented to the view of posterity.

In this little Work then, is contained, and set before our eyes, Doctrine of
so great Perfection, endeavoring so to purify the intention, and reduce the
mind of man to conformity and union with the Will of God, that the view of so
great a light, may perhaps dazzle the eyes of such, as yet do look through the
clowd of self-love, and are not fully resolved to repel their inward enemies;
and in that respect it is not intended, or directed to any such. And much less
is it offered to sensual minds, who cannot judge, or discern the worth of
such a pearl, but would rather tra^ple it under their feet, then tread the
pathe which leads to such a treasure.

But I doubt not to de^me it fitly presented to the reading of all such, as
have entered, or resolved to enter the paths of Perfection, by imitation of
Christ our Lord, in practice and performance of the Counsels Eua^gelicall. For
of such minds we may with reason hope, that first God for his part, as he has
called them from the pursuit of worldly vanities to the verity of his divine
love: so he will be no less bountiful unto them in assisting their endeauours
with plenty of grace, until he have perfected the work which himself has
begun in their souls.

And of their part, as they have received from God so much light, as to find
this Treasure, and so much wisdom as to know the value thereof, and so much
fortitude of mind as to contemn their former worldly estate, for the purchase
of this field or state of Religious life: so we may justly expect at their
hands, that according to the light, wisdom, and fortitude which they have
received, they should be desirous, and glad to labor in digging out the said
treasure, and getting it entierly into their own possession: and therefore
also that they ought neither to be loath to undertake the labor of digging,
nor yet to think much, if having gotten the gold, to sever it from the earth
and dross which adhereth unto it. And this true intention of benefitting
themselves (which is never wanting in any wise man that has found but an
earthly Treasure) is as much as this Book requires, in the practice of
whatsoever is here prescribed.

For first we be here advised to dig and descend into our own nothing by
Anihilation: then to cast up and throw from us all the earthly substance which
lies between us and the treasure, and this by Disappropriation, or as it is
called in the Gospel, by Renunciation of all things which we possess. Then
we be led by the virtue of Indifferency to cleanse it also being found, from
the dust of our private affections, and self-interest. And thus the gold being
gotten into our possession it the^ teaches us first how to purify the same
from the dross of all self-loue, by the Conformity of our will to the Will of
God. Secondly, to refine it yet more from the baser kind of metal, which is
often much mixed with this divine gold, and yet hardly by the eye to be
discerned, but the touchstone of Christ his example does try it, and the fire
of Charity does refine it, so that it then comes to be Aurum ignitum, spoken of
in the Apocalypse, and one thing, as it were, with the fire it self; and this
is therefore called Uniformity.

Then remains only, that this gold thus fervent and pliable to the will of
him that works it, receive the stamp of the heavenly King, that so it may be
current coin in his divine Court: in which it is only a Patient, and nothing
is expected of it, but that it take, without resistance, what impression the
workman is best pleased to impose. This is the work of Grace in the soul; the
workman is God himself, and the stamp he imprinteth in it, is his own
Image: and so this sixth and highest degree of perfection is called Deiformity.

In this state the Soul having first rejected al impediments to her
well-doing, rooted out all evil habits, planted in her self the habits of
solid virtues, and severed from her intention all self-love; yea having by the
help of Gods Grace, purified even her most inward desires, and all sensible
inclinations, from the infection of selfe-interest, then is her will not
conformed only, but united unto the will of God, and so transformed into the
same, that now it seems not to be her will that works, but the will of God
which works in her: as though she had given her own heart unto Christ, and (as
we read of Catherine of Stena) had received his in exchange, to be in her, from
that time forward, the beginning and first motive of all her operations.

Of which estate also we may understand the words of the Apostle Gal 2. when
he said, V^u^ autem, iam nonego, viu^t vero in me Christus: And I live now not
I, but Christ lives in me. Much like as we see the graffe which is inserted
into another stock, which lives indeed in it self, and brings forth fruit,
but not by the life it had before, from it own natural root; but by the sap
and life it now receaueth from the new stock into which it is graffed, in which
it grows, and by which it lives.

(...) many aduises in the book, (especially in the Chapters of the second and
third Estate) w^ere i^ is t^ught that the soul must be content to f^rgo first
all active operat^on, and practice even of virtues themselves, and lastly to be
deprived even of the pas^tue also so far as it may seem sensible unto the
soul that it is her own work. And this to the end that Gods will may be the
pure, and only motive of her will and works whatsoever; thou must beware in
these, and the like sentences, of two several doctrines or errors, wholly
contrary to that which is beer intended. The one, least thou think that a
soul being come to that estate, does not indeed work with her own will, but
that God then works all in her, so that those works be not really the
act^ons of the soul, but of God himself; which thing is both false and absurd
The other error is, that a soul in this state of Perfection should not do any
thing, but as seeing her self to be clearly moved thereunto by the will of God,
and in a manner compelled by the same to do all her actions, so that she in
the mean time should be idle, until the feel this impulsion from God. This
doctrine would nourish sloth in the soul, yea and breed, if not bring forth,
heresy also against the freedom of our will, and against the necessity of our
concurrence with the grace of God: all which are not different only, but
contrary to the intention of the Author, as (besides the authority of the
Parisian Doctors who approved this book, when it was translated out of
Italian, and set forth in their own language) the diligent and impartial
Reader may also by himself easily discern, if he mark well the whole discourse.
For he shall find it here required, that one omit no practice, or proof of
likely means, either in rooting out of evil, or in planting of good habits.
Also that all the rules, and aduises of this book, are to be applied to every
man's estate and that he omitting no part of his duty, do practice the same,
together with the actions which his estate and institute require. Lastly that
this Subtractio^ of active and pass^ue Will, touching the acts of virtue, is
the work only of God in the soul, with which (when the soul does perceive it
to be so) it must concur as with the will of God, to will the same thing, as
our duty does bind us. And this is no other thing then we find in daily
practice, though all do not feel it a like, nor all follow this rule, as they
should, when they feel it. Ye happens unto us more or less whenever any
desolation by Gods appointment does fall upon us, for in that case we find our
selves less apt then before to will, or work any good, yea, or to suffer the
proceeding of that good (which before we desired) with any contentment: and
this desolation may so increase, that it shall seem to us, our desire carries
us wholly to the contrary of that we had resolved. But all this is only in the
inferior part of ou^ soul to wit in our natural inclination, which for the
time is left to it self, by Subtraction of that effect, and fruit of grace by
which it was before comforted, strengthened, and enabled to perform good
actions, and concur to supernatural virtues, with desire and delight: which
to be the effects and fruits of grace, the Apostle teaches, Galat. 5.22. when
he says: Fructus autem spiritus est charitas, gaudium, pax, patientia etc. So
that all this while grace is not diminished in the superior part of the soul,
nor the virtues less perfect which are placed therein, but only
there-doundance, fruit, and effect of that grace is stopped, and subtracted for
the time, from the inferior part, to increase the batta^le which the soul is
to bane, and the victory which it is to obtain, by constantly conforming, and
uniting her will to Gods, notwithstanding that increased difficulty; yea by
renouncing her own natural will and inclination, transforming the same into
the will of God, and so saying with our Savior Christ in the like case: Non
mea, sed tua voluntas ^ia^, Pater: not my will, o Father, but thine be done. In
whose example we may see, that the practice of this point may stand with all
Perfection, which could not be wanting in his actions. So that the scope of
this doctrine is not to make us idle or remiss in working, nor to expect that
God should do all in us, and that our will should have no part in the action:
but it requires, that we do coopera^e with Gods grace, and labor with all
diligence, whilst we can. And when by Gods ordinance we feel that our
sensible forces do fail us, and that we are not now able to creep, who before
were able to run in the ways of God (as the Prophet says, Psalm. 118.32.)
cum dilatater cor nostrum, whilst he dilated our heart with joy and comfort; we
must then conform our will to God, yea, and be glad to transform our weak
will into his strength of goodness, to unite our drop of water to his sea of
graces, and to say with our active will (though our inclinations strive against
it) that his will shall be ours, and therefore that we desire his will may be
done with us in all things, howsoever our in^er^our part do, according to
nature, desire the contrary.

This is the Perfection unto which this Book leads: the practice whereof we
may see both used, and declared by God to his beloved Apostle, as may be
gathered out of the first Chapter of the 2. Epist. ad Cor. and it is the
highest which the soul can arrive unto in this life. For as the will of God is
infinitely good, and even goodness it self, so the nearer we come unto it, the
more we approach to a good and perfect estate. Neither can there be, even by
imagination conceived, a higher Perfection, or greater happiness, either in this
world or the next, then to be united unto God, the fountain of all goodness. In
this life it is to be done by grace, and in the next by glory. This ^le Book,
gen^le Reader, will lead thee to the one, and thy diligent practice of what it
teaches, will bring thee to the other.

Christ JESUS gra^nt us grace to seek this treasure with true desire, and
finding it, to use it to our best commodity. We shall do it the better, if we
pray heartily for one another, which I purpose to do for all, that will
endeavor to practice this Book, and do crave the like of them for my greater
needs. Farewell.

A. H.

AN ABRIDGMENT OF CHRISTIAN PERFECTION.
WHAT PERFECTION ought to be presupposed in the Soul that enters into the
practice of that, which is treated off in this discourse. CHAP. I.
THIS Perfection requires a firm and resolute desire in the soul that
undertakes it, and a determinate and set^ed purpose to attain unto it, and
above all, it must be as the mark at which she aymeth, and the end which she
pretends in all her actions. It requires also, that she give her self to
mortification of her senses and passions, endeavoring to subdue the repugnance
and contradiction which rises of them, and to obtain full dominion and
victory over them. Moreover that she apply her self wholly to the
mortification, and abnegation of her will, and proper judgment; under an
entire obedience and a full direction of her Superiors, even with all the forces
of her soul. That likewise she so apply her self to virtue according to the
occasions occurring, or in any other sort; and principally to charity, to the
love of God and her neighbor, that she be not in this way always rude, and as
a beginner, but well advanced and profited by progress of time; at the least
she must have attained a firm resolution, to be willing rather to dye, then to
offend God, yea although but venially, or to commit one of the least defects
against perfection, in such sort, that the sin she does commit, be by mere
occurring frailty. The cause, wherefore all this that has been said ought to be
presupposed, is, for that a firm purpose of al these things in general, is
most necessary for the obtaining of Perfection. And it is certain that
whosoever without a very earnest desire of these things does with coldness, and
negligence seek after virtue, giving himself to his proper commodities, and
self interests, living like a libertine, and with a will to remain in his old
habits, without amendment; can never attain, nor come near to Perfection, and
much less to this that is the highest of all.

TWO PRINCIPSES in which consists Perfection. CHAP. II.
ALL the building of so high Perfection is founded in these two Principles,
which consist in practice: and therefore by the use of them, being attentive to
the daily actions of his vocation, and institution, assuredly he shall come to
the top, and full height of all his building. The first principle is, to have
a mean, and base esteem of things created, and above all of himself: from
which esteem ought to be derived at least in affection, an entire forsaking of
al creatures, and arenouncing of himself. And concerning his affection, to
have always this firm in his will and resolution, but to put it in practice
principally when it is needful. And from this ought to be derived also a true
knowledge of the withdrawing that God works in us, admitting, and accepting it
with a ready will, to wit, to content our selves, and with great joy of heart to
accept it, when our Lord retyreth himself a little from us, or depriueth us of
anything whatsoever.

The second Principle is, to have a most high esteem of God, not by the way of
penetration with Theological conceits, or the like high points of Divinity,
for this few can reach unto, and it is not necessary; but rather by the mean
of a great promptitude, and entire submission of the will, and of the whole
man, to the majesty of God, to adore him, and to do whatsoever he exacteth of
us, for his greater glory, without any interest of ours, how holy soever it be.
For which esteem it suffices, that the soul with the light of faith
apprehend God (as we are taught in our Creed) as Almighty, the sovereign good,
our end: and that for the great love he bare unto us, he was moved to make
himself man, to suffer pains and death for our sakes. Moreover that he is
always present with us, and in all things governs us, as well in those of
nature, as of grace: and in particular calls us with a singular vocation, to
labor for so high Perfection, and the like; which special favors our Lord
gives to every one conformable to his capacity, and according to the measure
of grace.

Of this so excellent, and high esteem^ ought to spring a full and entire
conformity with the divine Will, which always must be the rule of all our
designemens, affections and daily operations. This manner of working by the
foresaid mean, with the use of these two Principles, brings the Soul to the
union, and transformation in God, which is called Deification, not by the
mystical way of rauishing out of our senses, and elevation of the
understanding, nor by most vehement affections, that are derived, and proceed
from thence; for this is subject to a thousand illusions, and to great labor,
with danger of infirmity of body, and ruin of spirit, and such pain for the
most part avails little, and few do attain unto it: But it is by the beaten
and common way, to wit, by the will wholly conformed, and with great stability
transformed into the divine Will, by perfect love, the which makes it to work
all in God, and for God even without light and of this all are capable, and any
that will, may come unto it with joy, and comfort, but yet not without pain and
labor. And after this there follows ordinarily many other gifts of light,
and divine affections, but they are to be taken as graces that are given gratis
as truly they are, and we ought not to be too careful for them, or to rely
much upon them. They are diverse according to the variety of souls, to some
more, to others less; and there is no rule on our part, but all depends of
God, and ought to be wholly submitted to his divine pleasure.

OF THE FIRST Estate: and first of Anihilation. CHAP. III.
THE foresaid principles applied to the diversities of our occasions, actions,
and motions, do make the soul to walk with continual progress, from the
beginning, even unto the end of Perfection, and all is reduced into three
estates, every one of which, and principally the first, contains diverse
degrees, that makes the soul mount, as it were, by certain degrees, going
from one estate unto another, even to the last. In the first estate, the soul
walks by the way of the knowledge, and base esteem of her self, which is
done in diverse manners, and principally in four.

1. The first is in acknowledging, and esteeming herself purely nothing, seeing
that of nothing she was created, and should be converted into nothing of her
self, if God did not conserve her. Unto which it helps much, to compare
herself to the whole world, to all men, to heaven, to Saints, and to God
himself, in respect of which things, she knows herself to be not so much as
a little drop of water, compared with the sea

2. Secondly in houlding herself for the most vile, and unprofitable creature
of all, how vile soever they be, as is dust, a sink, an Aposteme etc. all
these things being good for some use, but she for nothing, but to offend God.

3. Thirdly in thinking herself the greatest sinner in the world, yea greater
then all the devils put together, and worthy of more chastisement, attributing
to herself all the sins that are committed, and that all their torments duly
might be inflicted upon her. For there is no sin but she might have committed
it, if God had not preserved her. Examples of this may be seen in the lives of
S. Francis, and S. Catherine of Siena.

4. The fourth consists in this, that she ought to descend to the knowledge
of the things of the world, the better to contemn them: and for the rejecting
of them, she must make choice of the vilest and basest of them, as concerning
her place, garments, and any thing else; yet so notwithstanding, that she affect
not singularity: and she must esteem the most abject corner in the house the
fi^test habitation for her, and that the office, or charge she has, exce^deth
much her merits; and that she is not worthy of them, much less of greater. The
foresaid practice brings a man to a true anihilatio^ of himself. And
although he does not apprehend such conceits in his understanding, as may
clearly represent such baseness unto him, as he would; yet does not he leave to
have that esteem of himself, seeing that he, who willingly abaseth himself,
and prefers all creatures, how vile soever they be, before him, esteems
and reputeth himself always the least: and he that knows not the practice
of this anihilation, knows not the profit, and commodity thereof.

Thirdly in the soul that is founded thus in her own nothing, there follows
also the disappropriation or true abnegation, the subtraction or withdrawing
that God accustometh to work in the soul, and the conformity with the divine
will, which makes a man to be transformed into God: and these things as they
have diverse objects, so they have diverse degrees, according to the order that
follows.

OF THE FIRT degree of Abnegation, Subtraction, Conformity: and of the
Abiection, and Anihilation of our selves. CHAP. IIII.
FIRST, and principally there is wrought in the soul a full, and entire
renunciation of al things created, that are indifferent, as life, death,
health, all commodities, taste and interest of them, offices, dignities,
possessions, and other the like things; and this is to be done, first with the
affections, renouncing them entie^ly, and all desire or will she may have of
the: and for her own part, she ought to cast all desire, and affection, and
^nte^tion that she may have therein, and the hopes of any commodity, taste and
pleasure that may be had thereby, even as if she were dead.

Secondly by work, leaving actually that which is superfluou^, and retayning
only that which is needful to her, according to her state, with the counsel,
and consent of her Superiors. To this does correspond the subtraction, or
withdrawing, that God does in us of the like things, to wit, of life, by
sending us death, of health, by visiting us with sickness, of commodities and
means when they are taken from us, of pleasures and solaces, sending us
pains: and finally of any other worldly change, whereof we have experience
almost every hou^e. All being done by the d^ume providence in such sort, that
there passes not any day, in which our Lord does not take from us, and deprive
us (according to the variety of his providence) of many objects, and
commodities, concerning these transitory, and fading things. And he that is
free from all affection to the like things, admits with great alacrity all
privation of them, and easily contemns them all, how great soever they be.

Likewise to this subtraction, and privation correspondeth a meruaylous
conformity with the divine Will, not desiring any created thing whatsoever, but
that which our Lord wills, and that which he gives us, rejoicing to be, by
the means of these changes and varieties. (...) resaid conformity, a very
great, and true love of God, seeing there is taken away all the hindrances of
any created thing, that was between God and the Soul. And by this means the
soul comes to unite herself perfectly with her Creator, and to tranforme
her self perfectly into him: from which ordinarily follows great gifts, as
lights, affections, and divine motions: but for these we are not to be much
careful, but to seek above all, to separate our selves with all our power
from created things, and wholly to resign our selves unto God. And this is the
ecstasy, and rauishing of the will, and not of the Understanding, which is much
greater, and higher, and which Deifieth the soul more.

THE SECOND Degree. Chap. V.
WE ought to pass further in subtraction, or withdrawing our selves from
things created. For not only this subtraction ought to be of indifferent
things, as is said, but also of holy and spiritual, that are means to unite
the spirit with God; yet not, as of such, must we deprive our selves of them,
but for so much as under the color of holiness, there may be hid proper love,
and particular interest; and of these there is to be noted many degres. The
first, and that which is commonly understood of spiritual men to be the
lowest, or basest, is touching spiritual consolations, redounding even to the
affections of the heart, that are sensitive, to wit, tenderness, fervor, tears,
sweetness in our operations, and great facility surmounting difficulties, by
abundance of spiritual delight: of which things we ought to deprive our
selves, and not to cease until such time, as we have no more feeling of any
desire to them.

The depriving our selves of these, consists in not making any esteem, or
any account of them, considering that these facilities, that induce us to
work, proceed not of any habit, or particular gifts or graces, nor principally
of charity; but only of this sweetness and pleasure taken therein, which is an
object very proportionate to selfeloue, and particular interest, which
nourishes it self with self contentment, and pleasure, and comes in time
unto a spiritual gluttony: and to receive satisfaction in this, or to make any
great esteem thereof, is no other thing, then to convert holy objects into our
delights and pleasures, and abuse holy things, accommodating them to our gust,
and feeling. A very great vice, although it be secret and hid, from which
easily may spring diverse vain delights, proud illusions, and diabolical
deceipts, and a thousand other evils. Also we must not think that virtue
depends of them or consists therein, but we must know, that this is a
childish thing, and that with this sweetness and facility, a little strength and
virtue is sufficient to make us embrace the hardest, and most difficult
matters: therefore we must deprive our selves of al desire of them as of a mean
thing, and of little esteem: and by the foresaid anihilation, acknowledge our
selves most unworthy of them, with a total indifferency to have them or not,
being incited by virtue and perfection, to use them when we have them, only for
the end that God sends them, to wit; acknowledging them with great
submission, and referring them unto God, from whom they proceed, directing in
them our intention to establish us, and to increase so much the more in true
and solid virtues: taking always heed least being transported, and made drunk
with this swetnes and spiritual taste, we do not make purposes, or dangerous
promises of virtues, or works that surpass our forces, and which, when that
sensible delight and pleasure cease, will seem most difficult, yea impossible
unto us.

And to avoid such danger, the submission already spoken of, helps greatly;
that is, when we admit with great promptitude of heart, the taking away of such
consolations as God is accustomed at times to take from us, and then to make
greater estimation of God, and of virtue, then of any such consolations, yet
laboring still according to those former motions, with a greater, and more
ardent desire then ever, without having regard to the contentment of selfloue,
but only to the love of virtue it self, and for the divine glory.

The Conformity with God here is clear, and is of great importance; for that
to unite himself with the divine will, he depri^eth himself, on his part, of
such consolation, contenting himself with his spiritual cross whatsoever it
be; and so much the more, for that such tastes, and motions surpass all things
created, and all the pleasures that they can affoard: and how much the more a
man depriueth himself in this sort; so much the more he transformeth himself
into God, and perfect love, and Deification increases in him.

THE THIRD Degree. CHAP. VI.
AFTER the foresaid degree, there is accustomed to succeed and descend into the
soul celestial lights, desires, and affections of stable and solid virtues,
that are without comparison much more high, then the sweetness already spoken
of; for that they are most effectual means for getting of the said solid and
stable virtues, and have their being in the superior part of man. And then the
soul ought to mount to the highest degree of forsaking and renouncing his own
will, and of subtraction, and co^formity to the divine will, with the help of
the anihilation, and humble esteem aforesaid.

Therefore it is necessary to be advertised, that although such lights, and
affections be from God in the beginning, and that presently upon the receiving,
and embracing of them, they produce in the soul excellent effects, moving and
inciting it to unite her self with God, by the means of firm and solid
virtues: nevertheless soon after if a man be not well advised, but suffer
himself to proceed according to his natural inclination, he ordinarily will
embrace willingly such lights, and affections, with a certain satisfaction,
and a very great contentement in himself: which is a hidden delight of himself
in them: and to cooperate with such lights he sets himself to discourse at
large, and to fortify the natural forces of his understanding, will, and
affections, with the which it seems unto him, that his first lights much
increase, and are interiou^ly dilated: which yet is not so, neither is it any
effect of God, but only a pure reflection of the soul, and a great
contenteme^t and pleasure, which she tak^th of their first beginning.

And thus by little and little, the infusion of such lights coming to cease,
the natural, and reasonable strength of the soul remains alone, which
ordinarily is self-loue, which by this delight goes dilating this little that
he has of divine light, esteeming that to be very great which is not: and in
this sort he falls into blindness of pride, and vain persuasion of great
virtue, from whence do spring a thousand falsehoods, deceipts and illusions; our
Lord withdrawing his hand, because of the bar of self-loue which man has put
in his way: and yet such do think that they have great grace infused, and
great light, and it is nothing (the beginning only excepted) but only
discourse, and natural strength. And in the end, abandoned of the divine
influence, they fall into great faults, and errors; and from hence oftentimes
proceed very great illusions which notwithstanding had (...) good beginning.

Presently therefore when the soul receaueth such motions, she ought to humble,
and anihilate her self with great submission, even as nothing. And this act
rooteth out, and cutteth off all the force of this delight already spoken of.
Afterward she must protest, that she will not seek any selfe-contentment,
reputing her self most unworthy, as a most vile and abject person; and this to
f^e her soul of al self-love, which by reason of such lights may enter into
it. And here she depriueth herself of a much more noble thing then before,
and by this greater virtue is obtained: and although it seem unto her that she
diminishes, or decreaseth, yet notwithstanding it is not so, but the
hinderance is taken away that kept the soul back, and did hurt her greatly.
And our Lord finding the soul by such abnegation disposed, increases with his
particular concourse, the like lights and motions, by true and solid means,
although it be not with so great taste, and pleasure, and guides her with great
safety in the way of Perfection.

The soul thus deprived by the means of such pure and divine lights, comes
to refer and attribute them unto God, feeling her self in them affected only to
the divine glory, and not unto any other thing, with great acknowledgement of
the divine bounty, who vouchsafes by divine infusions, to abase himself to so
vile a thing. And this rule of spiritual motions is a matter of great
importance: for that, if they be not of God, presently they will be discovered
by this abnegation; and if such lights come from God, we shall be secured, that
neither self love, nor the devil can have any part in them. And moreover
referring them unto God, who has given them unto us, we come to make more
esteem of the giver, then of the gifts, and by this means get true and solid
virtue.

There follows afterward another conformity of most pure lights, and
motions, with the act of the will, and affections, purged from all self
respect, and vested with the divine will, pretending in such divine influences
only to obey Almighty God, and his divine pleasure, and nothing our selves,
where with the soul passes into God, and transformeth her self more highly,
and profoundly then ever; and here she offers, and gives, and dedicateth
her self wholly unto God.

THE FOVRTH Degree. CHAP. VII.
AFTER that the soul is exercised thus in purging and disappropriating her
self in these spiritual motions, and in desire of solid virtue, as has bin
said: there will follow a higher degree which is this. It happens often, that
having such desires, the soul cannot attain unto that she pretends, and
that for some worldly, or humane cause which does hinder it: as for example,
when we must leave prayer, by the which the soul finds her self prompt,
apt, ready, and as it were invited to unite her self with God. And obedience
on the other side, or charity requires to leave it for another work of great
distractio^, but profitable to our neighbors. And this will be necessary not
only in one work, or at one time only, but it shall be needful also concerning
our manner of living, to leave the quiet, and contemplative life, in which the
soul felt her self greatly inflamed with ardent desire of solid virtues, to
busy herself in the negotiations of the active life, in which she shall have
great repugnance, and by which she shall receive many occasions of distraction;
nevertheless she sees clearly, that she is called by God to leave that for
this, and sometimes also shall find hindrances which proceed from God, to wit,
when God gives us not so quick^y as we would, this virtue and per^ction, which
he inciteth us to ^esire.

In the like occasions the soul is accustomed to feel pain, anxiety, and
sorrow, for such hindrances, and is therewith very much afflicted. It is
needful here that she consider, that there may be selfe-interest in this
business, although it be very secret, and hidden, which she ought to cast away
wholly, with a noble and courageous abnegation.

The sorrow then, and anxiety that afflicts the soul in such desires, and
makes it unquiet, pro^deth ordinarily of self-love: and although it be
without sin, nevertheless it is a hinderance between God, and the soul;
seeing that as a thing created, it hinders perfectiton, and keeps the soul
back from arriving to the top of the same. Also the propriety is discovered
plainly, although it be of a holy thing, and it seems thereby (although
indirectly) that a man will give a law unto God. And finally the unquietness
that afflicts the soul inwardly, is not of God, whose spirit is sweet and
gracious, and full of peace and tranquillity: and to take away such unquietness,
he must forsake such desires, and the virtue it self, in the manner that
follows.

First a man ought to accept, and receive this desire as a gift of God, without
resting or staying himself in his proper delight and satisfaction, as has
been said in the degree before: and he ought to procure with all diligence to
put it in execution, never letting pass any means, that he does not try by
experience, and put in practice, that thereby he may come to such virtue and
perfection: for so much as doing this, he chaseth far away all tepidity, and
negligence.

When these hindrances before declared happen, he ought presently to think
that the divine bounty is not pleased at that time in the execution of his
desire, and therefore he ought to renounce it quite, with protestation that he
will have neither virtue, nor perfection (I mean, the execution, or act of
desire only, for the ground or essence of the desire ought to remain) but even
such, and in that manner, and when God will give it; renouncing utterly all the
rest. He ought then to take away all anxiety, and grief, discovering plainly
his self love, and his own interest, that was hid under such desires,
although they be holy: and also learn this most high doctrine, which is, that
such a desire even of martyrdom; with this anxiety, although it seem to be a
great thing comes to be very base, and little, for so much as it is
selfe-interest, and a hindrance between God and the soul: which being taken
away, the desire remains as great as ever, and instead of the anxiety, it is
accompanied with a meruaylous tranquillity in God, and in his divine Will.

And note well, that the soul that has such a desire with repose, and
tranquillity, without the virtue and perfection desired, is more agreeeble to
God then any other who has such a virtue; which if she had not received, or
had not attained unto, would have been much grieved and troubled, seeing that
he obtains most perfection, who is most conformed to Gods will and pleasure,
and exchangeth the virtue created, for the divine will increated, which does
far surpass, and infinitely exceed the other: notwithstanding the desire
will remain, not with humayne fear, that afflicts and disquieteth the
soul, but with a divine fear, which is annexed necessarily unto the desire.
For to desire a thing that we cannot have, brings fear, which is acco^panyed
with pain, until such time as it is obtained: but this is a pain from the
which does proceed a meruaylous contentment, and a resignation unto God,
knowing well that our Lord is pleased greatly with such a pain, to wit, to see a
soul quiet, and full of peace in her pain, to resign her self and
accomplish his will, who for to please her Lord, willingly and of her own
accord, will remain deprived of a good, that she so instantly does desire,
because her love unto her Lord, is more then unto any perfection, or virtue.

In such a soul remains ordinarily a divine light, that does instruct and
teach her, what great diligence she ought to use, without ^uer relenting, or
waxing cold and negligent; but a soul must not rely upon the same, seeing she
does not come to this that she desires by her diligence, and industry, how
great soever it be, but by the will and pleasure of God, who sometimes gives
it, and sometimes not, even as he best pleases. Therefore by rejecting, and
loosing all esteem of our own diligence, and industry, is gotten a certain
confidence and filial security, that God, who has given the desire, will also
give the perfection, when he shall please, and according to his will. And thus
for his own part, the soul puts, and casts herself as a little infant
into his arms, and is most contented withal, thinking no more of it, but with
a pure and sincere resignation unto God, works as out of her self, and, as
we may say, at adventure leaves all care of her self to our Lord, as a little
infant, with a kind of divine tranquillity.

To this so high renunciation, and disappropriation does correspond the
subtractio^, or withdrawing of our Lord already spoken of, when he does not
give the virtue we demand, which we ought to admit with joy, and cooperate in
the manner aforesaid. Also there is discovered clearly a conformity with the
divine will, very secret, and known but unto few, seeing that man leaves God
for God, that is to say, leaves and renounceth God, in as much as he brings
any self interest with ve^e, and perfection, to hau^ him more excelle^tly, to
wit, without any interest. From whence follows a most high tra^sformation,
and an admirable Deification, from which is accustomed to proceed excellent
gifts, and very rare lights, worthy of such a love, and so great union with God.

In particular the aforesaid doctrine ought to be applied to three sorts of
desires, besides the place it has in all others. The first is of eternal
glory, in which she ought to be resigned in the manner before specifyed, when
our Lord deferreth it, esteeming much more of the divine will, to the end she
might entierly forsake al self love, although it be of the most excellent good
that is.

The second is, the desire of this anihilation, renou^cing of her self the
conformity with God, which she must also moderate with the self same rule
aforesaid, when our Lord does not give it so much as she would: where it is
well to be noted, that to forsake willingly the love of the same virtue, which
is with anxiety, and superfluous propriety, for the desire to have the same
virtue with satisfaction, and be content to bear the burden of her
imperfection against her will, and to conform her self wholly unto Gods will,
is a most great renunciation, and surpasses all other virtues. And here must
be taken away the anxiety, and grief that we have to obtain it: and note
well, that the more diligence we shall use with anxiety, and propriety, for to
obtain it of God, the less shall we have it.

The third is the desire of suffering, although our nature repugn^, as a thing
contrary to sense: it may happen nevertheless, that the desire to have it, is
too great by excess of anxiety, and self love in (...) and endure, takes
away such contentment, and hinders the perfection of operatio^s; the soul
ought to take away, and cut off the thoghts of crosses, and pains, when it is
not time to suffer, converting and changing all into this cherefulnes of
conformity with God, to the which, the thinking of pleasant and delightful
things (so they be holy) helps much, for that such things are conformable to
perfection.

Of this cherefulnes springs a promptnes to all operations, strength to
surmount difficulties, and joy of heart and understanding, as the Apostle says:
Gaudete in Domino semper, iterum dico gaudete: Rejoice in our Lord always,
again I say rejoice. Agility also to take in hand any good work, facility to
execute and end it, and sweetness in all things, even in the cross it self,
when it is taken only for the love of God, and to please him. And if we have
not such cheerfulnes, at the least we ought to desire it, and enforce our
selves to have it in resisting al hindrances that the devil shall oppose.

Our Lord was singularly endued with this alacrity, and showed it in his
countenance, rendering himself very amiable, whereby is manifest that he
thought not always on his passion, but that he diuerted and retired his mind
and thoughts, except when he knew that it was the will of his Father he should;
and thought on joyful things with a pleasant aspect, and with a sweet and
gracious countenance, accompanied with gra^ity and words of weight, to draw the
hearts of the people with mild^ and authority; and with this al^crity he
endured, and suffered afterward the subtraction, o^ taking of it away, in the
time of his passion.

THE FIFTH Degree. CHAP. VIII.
THE soul being in this conformity, tranquillity, and cheerfulnes which has
been said, with progress in perfect virtues, and with great power of the
super^our part over the inf^riour, by reason of the long habit, and great
facility she has gotten in repressing, and subduing the motions of her
passions; God is wont after this, or when he thinks good, to permit her to
begim to feel^ great tentations, the li^e, or greater then those which she
suffered in the beginning of her conversion, to wit, of the flesh, of
impatience, of fear, of difficultyes, and other the like, in such sort, that
she begins again to feel a great rebellion in her inferior part against
the superior, and the devil sharply tempts her, in so much that she is
forced to return to fight, and that with great difficulty: but
notwithstanding, the superior part generously fights, gayneth, and bears
away the victory.

This mutation and unexpected change resembles the imperfect state of a
nouice, or beginner only. The rebellions of the inferior part against the
superior, the representations of devils, the motions of sensuality, and the
newnes unaccustomed, are as it were against the common style of grace, that
happens to us ordinarily after the first assaults of temptations, and the
victory over them, having gotten the habits of perfect virtues, and in such
sort subdued sensuality, that scarcely it dare once kick or repugne. All these
things are accustomed to put the soul in great peril, of thinking she goes
backward, and that she has given occasion of her being in so evil an estate,
whereby is wont to rise in her mind unquietness, despair, and great decay of
wonted force: and therefore it behooves that she stand well upon her guard, and
before all things consider and observe, that the will, by the grace of God is
resolute, rather to dye a thousand times, then to offend God in the least thing
that is. And for that sin consists in the will, she ought also firmly to
persuade her self, that she is far from committing of it, seeing that all
her grief comes of those contrary motions, her will being so earnestly bent,
not to offend God. And which is more, she ought to be secure, that she has not
on her part given occasions to such tentations, seeing that she abhors, and
detesteth them greatly: and principally for that she desires to conform
herself altogether to the divine will, and to disappropriate herself of al
things created. She must likewise be advertised, that she does perform this
while diverse acts of virtue with the superior part, for so much as hereby
through divine grace the spirit is made more vigorous, although the flesh be
moved and encumbered with no small perturbations, and this so much the more, for
that she shall find manifestly and assuredly, that there is no offense therein:
and if she find that she cannot sufficiently resolve her self, for her
continual fears, and remorse of conscience, let her remit her self, and
repose wholly on the judgment of him, that has the guiding of her soul.

Moreover she must be advertised, that such temptations, although they seem
unto her to be the same that she was wont to endure in the beginning, are
notwithstanding very much different, if she consider the cause from whence they
proceed: for that then the superior part being destitute of good habits,
virtues and graces that give great strength, and the inferior part full of
evil habits, very strong and stubborn, together with the fraudulent sleights
of the devil concurring therein, no marvel that the flesh did fight and
rebel against the spirit, until such time as the superior part were made
strong and vigorous, and our Lord giving strength to resist, and vanquish the
inferior part; which being thus tamed, the battle cease soon after, with
a submission and tranquillility between the one and the other; our Lord
permitting all this, to the end, that by the way of co^bat, to his imitation, we
may obtain the victory, and also by this means be made partakers of his
celestial gifts and virtues.

But when after all this the temptations return, the soul being already
fortified, and not having given any occasion thereunto, the^ she must assuredly
know, that this is an express providence of God, who will have it so, and that
such temptations do not take their beginning of the interior, to wit, of
default that is in her, but come of other causes: and this great and secret
instruction helps much to what end our Lord works and permits all this.
For first it is to the end, that the repose and peace that she had before, be
not occasion to her of so great satisfaction, and contentment that she come to
delight much in herself for it, and so be in danger to fall into pride.
Secondly, that self-love which subtly uses oftentimes to enter therein, be
quite extinguished. Thirdly, that there may increase, and continue in the soul
the knowledge of her baseness and little worth. Fourthly, that she may attain to
a new light, and know that perfection does not consist in being free from
temptations and in having peace between sensuality and reason: for it may so
fall out, that these temptations will be more vehement, then those that she had
before, and that she shall suffer much by them, and therefore she ought to hold
her self assured, that our Lord by such means will bring her to greater virtue.

Wherefore when she begins to enter into such afflictions or troubles she
ought before al things to humble her self and descend into her own nothing,
and acknowledge herself worthy of all temptations: and in the same manner, as
she was already before accustomed, to receyne with contentme^t the contempt and
afflictions outwardly: so ought she to enforce herself to rejoice in that our
Lord is pleased to humble her, and to permit her thus to be buffeted of the
devil. Secondly she ought to be willing to want the peace and repose that she
felt when she had no great temptations, and likewise all the contentment which
she had therein. And how much the more such repose is a high and excellent
good, so much the greater sacrifice it is, and more pleasing unto God, to be
willingly deprived thereof for the l^ue of him.

Thirdly, she ought to admit with the same affection, and promptnes, as is
spoken of before, the subtraction or withdrawing that our Lord does use, which
consists in this, that he does not permit the virtue or power of the
superior part, to redound and work in the inferior, by giving it such force
as that it should not feel these temptations: (which would be, if God did
concur therein as before:) but our Lord withdraws such concourse, and from
hence proceeds anxiety and affliction. Fourthly she ought not to enforce
herself to d^ue away these temptations with great penance and mortification
of nature, as she did at the b^ginning when she was a No^ce, for by that way
(as is read of some Saints) the temptations increase rather then otherwise, but
she ought to submit herself unto God with humility, for to suffer them
willingly, as long as it is in his will and pleasure, and then not to care for
them, but to contemn them.

Afterward, of this follows the conformity to the divine will greater then
ever, seeing that to conform her self unto him, the soul is content to be
left comfortless, and to suffer such pain and confusion, which is most
pleasing to his divine majesty: besides that, it is very comfortable to that
which our Redeemer did, when being in the garden he would that the inferior
part should find difficulty to suffer, and nevertheless he said, non mea, sed
tu^ voluntas fi^t, not my will (o Father) but thine be done. And of this
conformity rises in the soul not only a love of union that tra^s forms it
into God more highly, but also a love and desire of the cross, in conformity
with our Savior, when as to accomplish the divine will, she is content to
suffer temptation. And here she does not only offer, and dedicate herself
unto God, but does also sacrifice herself unto him.

THE SIXTH Degree. CHAP. IX.
BESIDES all this that has been said, the affliction and pain is accustomed
to pass further, and come even to the superior part where virtue and spirit
make their residence. And so she shall perceive her self to fail and want
light in her understanding, and good purposes, and desires in her affections,
promptnes to do well, strength and patience and the like, in such sort, as
where before she did fight with great force and vigor, now it will seem unto
her, that she is without strength and virtue, and that she cannot resist, and
every little straw will seem unto her a block, and so shall feel and
perceive nothing but obscurity, and blindness, great darkness, aridity or
dryness, grief, tepidity, rebellion, pusillanimity, confusion and great
oppression, seeming unto her impossible to return to her first designementes
and good purposes. And here in very truth is great danger, if she do not
enforce herself to remedy it as she should, to the end she fall not into
sundry great inconveniences, when she is thus abandoned, which happens in
diverse manners.

First in apprehe^ding too firmly all this that has been spoken of, to be a
great misery, and for this cause afflicting her self, and growing sad.
Secondly, too earnest setting her self to think of what cause they proceed,
attributing all to her own defaults, and enforcing herself to look curiously
into them. Thirdly, of set purpose, procuring with great diligence to free
herself of them, to take order to remedy all, and return to her first estate,
esteeming the present to be miserable, and yet nevertheless leesing all this
labor: for this being not the true way, nor the remedy of her evil, she
finds the trouble to be thereby increased. Fourthly, for this cause, the
soul is accustomed to fall into impatience, fear, and pusillanimity and in
danger to despair, it seeming unto her that nothing does help her, and that
she goes from evil to worse. Supposing the^ the soul to be exercised in
these foresaid degrees, it is needful she consider with her self, and
principally with the help of him that guides her, the secret and me^uaylous
mysteries that are hidden herein. For the first the^, let her know that the
true cause of all that is said, is the divine providence, who willing to make
proof, and to purify a soul, after he has enriched her with virtues, and
great strength in the supe^iour part, is wont to retire his accustomed
succors, without the which these virtues cannot work: whe^of it comes, that
although she have them, yet do they seem to her that she has them not: and
from hence follows darkness, aridity, and other miseries already spoken off;
notwithstanding the graces and foresaid virtues remaining in the soul as
before.

For the second, this subtraction or divine withdrawing does not proceed of the
absence of virtues, gifts, and graces, seeing that they remain entierly in
the soul, and it does less proceed from the action of the^, for so much as
indeed the soul is deprived thereof. But we must consider that in internal and
spiritual actions, there is a direct act, that tends directly to God, to
wit, the same internal act or operation touching his object: as for example,
the practical knowledge and election, or lawful desire, to have a will to
suffer, to have a will to love God, to have a will to be temperate, chaste,
obedient, not to consent unto sin etc. There is also the act reflectiue, that
turns to wards it self, to wit, to discern and judge whether he does such
an act, whereby he may receive contentment, and rejoice therein for the glory
of God, for that he discerns himself by the same to be strong, and
victorious over temptations, with great repose of the soul.

Of these two, the first is the pure act of virtue: the second is the fruit
that redoundeth in us, and the fruition of the same virtue: and this is most
clear that the act of temperance does not consist to perceive that he ^ath it,
or to rejoice in it, or content himself therein, but to desire it, and
effectuate it. Now God concurreth in the first, and by that means the acts of
virtue are performed, but he withdraws the second, to wit, our knowledge,
reflection, judgment, and satisfaction to have done the^, and therefore it
seems to us, that we do them not, and in the place of the knowledge
withdrawn, happens darkness and blindness, in place of the joyful affection
succeeds aridity and dryness: even as it happens to him that is almost
starued, who receiving food into his stomach neither feels nor tastes it:
it is clear that he eats, and notwithstanding it seems unto him he eats
not, and has in a manner no more satisfaction of such an act, then if he had
not done it. Seeing then that it is not properly virtue to perceive our
interior actions, and that therein does not consist virtuous effects and
operations, being only satisfaction unto our selves, our Lord pretending to
bereave us of all our proper taste and interest, as a hinderance betwixt him and
us. leaves us the purity of virtue, which is no other thing but to desire it,
and put it in effect, and takes away the second, which is a certain selfeloue
more subtle then those that have yet been specifyed, and an interest with the
which the soul nourishes it self, and such as diuerteth us from greater
union with God: and this being so, it is plainly to be seen, that there is
not only no evil heerin, nor any danger to be feared, but that the soul by
such a divine work is purifed the more in virtue, and is purged from all
proprieties, and self interest, although it be very hidden, and is raised to a
degree, and disposition of greater grace, and much more union with God then
before. For to make all this manifest, the soul that is come to this estate,
must be advertised of two points. The first, that if she will examine the
purity of virtue, she shall see the same in her actions more then ever she did.
For if one should demand of her in these griefs, obscurities and rebellions,
if she would offend God, she would presently answer, that (...) Savior Jesus
Christ, of whom it is written in the beginning of his dolorous passion: Coepit
pauere, ^adere, and moestus esse; that is to say, he began to be troubled, to
fear, and became sad: and after he said, Tristis est anima mea vsque ad
mortem, my soul is sorrowful even unto death. Now we must consider three
points. First the greatness of the pain and torments that he was presently to
endure. Secondly that then was with drawn from him the concurrence of
strength, patience, magnanimity, and the like virtues, concerning the feeling
of them in the manner aforesaid, and for that cause he presently fell into so
great anguish, fear, and heaviness, that the least of his sorrows seemed unto
him insupportable, whereof before he reioiced so much in thinking of them,
saying: Baptis^ hab^ baptizari, and qu^m^do c^arctor vsque dum perfici^tur: I
have to be baptized with a Baptism, and how am I straitened until it be
dispatched. Thirdly, that with all this, the stedfastnes of virtue was most
firm and more stable the^ ever, seeing that in these words to his Apostles,
Surgite, ^amu^, arise, let us go (that is, to meet them that came to apprehend
him) he discovered a meru^ilous promptnes to suffer, patience, strength, and a
generosity of heart, not to be overcome or quailed by such a withdrawing or
subtraction before mentioned^ by which the holy Doctors say, that our Lord
merited then for the holy Martyrs and other Saints, who in their torments and
pains were so richly armed with patience, strength, magnanimity and other
virtues in the superior part, that by the same virtues they did so triumph,
and rejoice even in the midst of their pains and torments, as we read of
many holy Martyrs. When the^, it shall please our Lord to take away, and
bereave a soul, for the love he bears it, of this garment, with the foresaid
subtraction, or withdrawing, as he does in this estate; then it is clear, that
he brings her to a higher imitation of himself, then was the other, seeing
that the same subtraction was used to him by his eternal Father.

And besides this reason of the most lively imitation of our Lord there
follows others also, to wit, that how much the superior part is more noble
then the inferior, or then the body: so much more the suffering of it, or both
together, is more noble then any martyrdom whatsoever of body only, if it be
without the other. And moreover to suffer with this fredom and liberty, or
sensible force of virtue, with which the Martyrs were endued was as easy unto
them, as if they had been in the midst of roses. But with this subtractio^ or
withdrawing it seems not only difficult, but also impossible. So that with
all this difficulty to be thus magnanimous, and courageous with all efficacy,
makes us more apt, and prepared for higher virtue, and greater merit. And
finally to find our selves so freely and highly raised unto virtue, naturally
it is an occasion of peril and danger of pride: wherefore unto S Paul ( Ne
magnitudo reuelationum extelleret eum, least the greatness of his reuelatio^s
should extol him) there was given to preserve him the temptation of the flesh,
so to counterpoise the danger which might follow: by this height of virtue the
soul is plunged into this extreme low estate, by the feeling which she has of
troubles and fears etc. And therefore she is secure, that is, she is preserved
from danger, which is a sign of higher estate, for that she has a great
foundation of humility, and knowledge of her own baseness. This as it seems,
may be gathered of the temptation of S. Paul, which was given him for avoiding
the peril wherein he was: whereof it follows, that the having of that
temptation of the flesh, was a higher estate, then the first, seeing that by
this means the hindrances and imperfections of the first are taken away. and
he is made more secure thereby, in such sort, as this estate is a certain
probation, that God makes of his elect, a lively imitation of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, a more excellent Martyrdom, then the exterior, and
founded upon profound humility, which is more sure then any other whatsoever,
and is of greater merit, and a disposition to receive greater gifts and graces,
and which is more, an enemy to proper love; for that it takes away the
satisfaction and contentment that is received of virtues, and so by consequence
increases, and comes to be of greater conformity with the divine will, and
is enkindled more in love toward God, then the others before mentioned:
seeing, that for to satisfy Almighty God, a man depriueth himself of so great
a good, and remains with the pu^e acts of virtues, naked of all sensible
ornaments, and self contentment.

That which ought after wards to be practiced, is: First for so much as the
devil is wo^t to trouble the soul with many thoughts, as if all this
happened for some great defaults, that were in her (which afflicts her much:)
to deliver her self from this, she ought to repent herself of all her defects,
sins, and occasions that she may have given in this case, but in general,
without any more thinking thereof; and the rest, to remit herself wholly unto
her Superior, believing in all things his advise, and renouncing her own
judgment, keeping her self in peace, and repose of conscience, supposing this
maxim, which is greatly necessary in this sixth degree, to wit, that a man
ought not to judge of himself, nor of what he feels in himself, seeing that
that the subtraction makes that he can have no light, reflection, nor perfect
judgment of his actions; but he ought to content himself, and rejoice in this
darkness, and a^idity, and ought to humble and submit himself to the judgment of
another, anihilating and acknowledging himself worthy of this, and so much
worse, unworthy of all light, and in such baseness he ought to glorify God.

Although that the motions of impatience, and other the like natural motions
be great, and make the soul to become sad and melancholy, without feeling any
comfort, or solace; yet must she know, and labor for, and to try by
experience, the for said submission, which does also consist in resigning, and
remitting her self wholly unto God, even as one that is sick, who although he cry
through the vehemence of his pains, nevertheless in will, is submitted
entirely unto God, and is content to suffer any thing.

As for fear and pusillanimity (besides that which naturally she feels,
which is not evil of it self) she ought not to admit any more, not to consent
unto it, but ought to endeavor herself to perform acts of submission,
confidence in God, familiarity, and the like.

And doing all this that is above said, and with the same, denying herself in
all things, and conforming herself unto God, not willing any thing, but what
he wills, if she feel these troubles, and darkness to increase, she must not
for all that, be afflicted for any thing whatsoever it be; but without any kind
of murmuring, she must seek to forget her evil, and ought to know that God is
accustomed to do this: that is to say, to withdraw all consolation and help in
our temptations. Therefore she must then redouble her conformity and
thanksgiving unto God, and quiet herself, and repose with assurance that in
the end God will not leave her, not permit that she be tempted about her
strength, which here does consist wholly in resistance against them, or putting
them away, seeing that is not so much in our power by reason of the
subtraction: but in this, to suffer and support them; and this is more sure and
perfect, then ecstasy.

OF THE SECOND Estate. CHAP. X.
Who would think, that there should be any thing yet left in the Soul which
she might renounce, forsake and withdraw her self from, besides this that has
been said, and especially the soul being brought to the only pure and direct
act of virtue, in the which it seems there is nothing but true virtue, and
also bereaved of all proper interest. But if we consider that such an act
although it be thus purged, is a pure act of election, and of our will, the
which, with his active virtue imperative, in respect of the other powers,
works and produces the acts of virtue; it cannot be denied, but that there
is proper will, and interest therein, although much purged, and by consequence
there is somewhat yet to forsake, and to be purged.

The soul then that is left without any other action but to do in the manner
above explicated, being arrived to the foresaid sixth degree, our Lord is
accustomed to withdraw by little, and little, the power to do such acts,
taking now one, now another until such time, that indeed he takes away all,
except the power to conform her self unto the divine will. And by experience
it is proved, that somtymes the soul finds her self so oppressed with
griefs and afflictions, and assailed with so many distractions, and miseries,
that willing to enforce herself, yet she cannot perform any act, neither of
thanks giving toward God, nor of fortitude, nor of patience, nor of any other
virtue, no not so much as to will that which is aggreable unto God. And she
must remain in this sufferance, pierced through inwardly with a thousand
temptations: so that as the Martyrs could not defend themselves, from their
torments and wounds, but receiving them, conformed themselves to the divine
will; even so must the soul do in this case, in whom it may be, there
remains not any active force, but only the passive, enduring all for the love
of God, and remaining content with the same.

But which is more, he is accustomed also to take away such an act of
conforming herself to the divine will, in such manner, that she has not any
sensible feeling to do it, and also less can she execute it^ and there
remains no other thing; but a passive tranquillity, by which, as a lamb
before the shearer, she remains quiet, and suffers God to accomplish
whatsoever he pleases.

This is an entire and absolute subtraction of the active power of the soul,
to wit, that God withdraws in such sort his divine concurrence that the soul
cam^ot in the superior part, how holy or raised soever she be, make any active
operations, but only can remain peaceable, and quiet, enduring willingly that
which God permits to happen unto her.

To such a withdrawing the soul ought to be correspondent with anihilating and
acknowledging herself to be pure nothing, and full of infinite sins, and
therefore unworthy to perform any action of virtue: and she ought to rejoice in
such contempt, that God works in her, taking from her the power to lift her
heart up unto him, with a free renunciation; she ought to be contented to want
wholly the active, and all the acts of virtue; the which how much more they were
pure, so much greater is the gift that God imparteth therein. After this it
often happens, that the troubles and afflictions will be not only as before,
but much greater, for having lost the rampire and fortress of the acts of
virtue: and moreover in the concupiscible and inferior part, there will be
raised motions so vehement and disordered, that she never felt the like in her
life, in such sort, as it will seem unto her, that she is even in hell it
self: and here she must not arm herself with any other armor, then with
submission and passive tranquillity in supporting all to satisfy almighty God,
who will have it so. And she ought to know, that such submission and
tranquillity gives to the soul a very great strength, not active but passive,
by the which he gives and leaves herself to be as a prey unto God; and so
like a most patient lamb suffers all, in great debility and feeblenes. Of
this peace and tra^quillity follows a comformity with the active will,
although passive, but without comparison greater then the foresaid, and an
inexplicable deification in an act yet passive, not of oblation, nor of gift,
dedication, or holocaust, but much more excellent and more perfect, as to give
themselu^ wholly, as it were a prey unto almighty God.

In this estate she must be advertised of some things of much importance: one
is, that the interior, and imperative actions of virtue are not lost, but are
made more active then ever, in such fort that a person has strength to work
and exercise the parts and powers of her body and soul in speaking, thinking,
and doing, all that is convenient to be done, according to her vocation, yea
even in performing acts of temperance, patience etc. Also when she ought to aid
and help her neighbor, it is with the accustomed affability: for the act of
commaundment, and practice rests in the soul, to command, and to direct all
her actions of command or execution. For the subtraction, or withdrawing ought
to be understood in the understanding and will, concerning the proper
interior acts of the will, intention, fruitio^, election, rejoicing,
satisfaction, and the like, which indeed are taken away.

Another is, that it must not be understood, that our Lord takes away the
gifts, or habits, but the acts, not giving his help and concurrence,
notwithstanding he does not so always: for that often in this estate, he
lets the soul be free, and at liberty to work, but sometimes he suspendeth
it, and this is done without any certain rule, and when he pleases. Therefore
the soul ought to be wholly resigned, to be deprived of all acts, or not, as
much, and when it shall please God, and to be always ready to renounce the^
with this admirable indifferency. When the active is taken away in she manner
aforesaid, then the soul remains in the passive state in two ^orts. First,
for that with promp^nes, and great tranquillity she submits herself to all
the afflictions, and foresaid troubles, and miseries, enduring them most
willingly, although she be transpierced, and wounded by them, for the great
resolution she has made rather to suffer a thousand deaths, then to offend
God, and for that she suffers so many evil motions: and also for that she
cannot perform any act of virtue, but only suffers such affliction for the
love of God.

Secondly, the soul in such estate being retired to the deepest part of her
heart, (which the Mystical Deuines call Pax anima, the peace of the soul)
operation being withdrawn, she gives and submits herself with great
pro^ptnes unto God, who works within with the passive consent of her
freewill, much more higher acts, then of thanksgiving, love, union with him,
election, or any other virtue, without taste; only admitting them, and
cooperating with all her heart, and affection, in such sort, that as the
understanding retired from the sense in ecstasy cannot be attentive with her
natural forces to active virtues, as she was before, but receives divine
light, that works most high understanding and knowledge in her (which the
mystical Deuines call pati diuina:) now if in the understanding raised above
her natural forces, our Lord works this, the same may be done, much more in
the will, when renouncing wholly the active, she forsakes the same, and then
our Lord raising it into an ecstasy, and a most virtuous practice, works in
her entirely what he pleases: and this pati diuina, which is an estate much
higher then the foresaid, for that ecstasy of the understanding is dangerous,
and few attain unto it, full of infinite occasions and subjects of curiosity,
and propriety: but here the will renounceth and humbles herself, and with a
most assured confidence submits herself unto God: and of such an ecstasy all
are capable, and it is much higher then the other, rendering the soul most
aggreable and pleasing unto God.

OF THE THIRD and last Estate. CHAP. XI.
FINALLY our Lord is accustomed to take away not only the active, but also the
foresaid passive, the will remaining in all, and by all, naked and impotent for
any thing. It is true, she does not resist, or oppose her self to this, but
she suffers herself to be bereaved of all. And for the understanding of this
last Estate, which is the highest of all the others, it must be noted, that the
virtue and force of the liberty which the will has, is so great, that she can
renounce wholly her will, and wholly her liberty, and indeed bereaueth herself
of them, as if she never had them; and she does this freely with her good will:
and by such a renunciation the will is made as it were no will, in the like
manner, as S. Pauli^ made himself a slave to deliver another slave: even so
the soul has power to do with her interior, and with her free will and
liberty.

Then our Lord takes away the active, and the passive by subtraction, and all
acts whatsoever, as if she were not at all: and she does not resist this, but
with an entire exhibition of such a renunciation, concurring therewith, comes
to be no practical will, to wit, that all the operations that she does, or can
do concerning herself, she does not will them, nor does them as of herself:
yet willing them nevertheless with a will conformable to the divine will, in
which sort she wills and works them; and therefore she does them as
commanded immediately by the divine will, without bringing therein any
concurrence of her own, putting the will of God in the place of hers.

For in as a large and spacious Palace, of the which one only is master, when
he is absent, he leaves some friend of his, absolute master, and there is
done all, that was done before, but only by the commandment of the friend,
and not of the other: even so the will renouncing it self wholly, as well in the
active as in the passive, although pure, and holy, not willing but what God
wills; and now not willing indeed neither more nor less, to have this
satisfaction, as is before said, she renounceth in all things, and wholly the
said active and passive, being resolved not to work at all, as with her will,
notwithstanding she does al even as before, but as things willed and ordained
by God, not of herself, leaving entirely and imediatly to the good pleasure of
God, the commaundment of her body, soul, actions, motions, and feelings, as if
truly she had no manner of will: and to this God correspondeth as is said,
with the withdrawing of all acts: and if peradventure she leaves, or does the
like acts of virtue as before, then she leaves and does them, not according to
her proper will, but for so much as she sees the will of God to be, that she
leave, or do them. Our Lord and master himself made this subtraction and
renunciation in the garden, when he said, non mea, sed tua volunta^ fiat: O
Father, not my will be done, but thine: to wit, my will would, as conformable
to thine, Eternal Father, suffer cross, and torments (...) his power: in the
same manner he inforceth himself, and seeks as much as he can to deceive us,
as often as he represents and puts before us, any proper interest or
commodity of ours: and as our Lord cast him off, and vanquished him, in
refusing all things, and not admitting any thing, so ought we to overcome him,
and drive him away by the means of a perfect anihilation of will, and to pray
unto our Lord, by this his holy and entiere renunciation he will give us his
grace to obtain full and entire victory over the devil and sin.

The first point.
MAN, and whatsoever is created concerning their first origin, proceeds of
nothing; and of himself, by a thousand ways, to wit, by infinite myseries of
soul and body (to the which he is subject) is ready, and tending to return to
the same nothing, if God by his bou^ty did not co^serue him; and a man sinning
is made worse then nothing. By the means of this consideration of this our
first origin, and of all things created, we must endeavor or esteem our
selves, and all things created as nothing, and not to love, desire, seek, or
will any thing for our selves: and thus we shall get a perfect anihilation of
our will.

The second point.
WE must consider, that this true anihilatio^ makes the soul to become a
true portraict and resemblance of the soueraygne greatness of God, for that it
takes away the hindrances that are between God and the ^oule; which is done
by not willing, or desiring any thing: and thus she becomes a most fair, and
clear mirror or looking glass. For even as when we would, that a glass
should receive in it self perfectly and entierely the image and figure of some
object, it is needful, that so much the further the one be set from the other,
as the object is greater in it self; so the greatness of God being infinite, by
the means of this anihilation, the soul only takes from it self all
obstacles that do hinder it from uniting it self with God; but which is more,
by a great submissio^ in her baseness, and a true knowledge of the infinite
greatness of God, she draws herself infinitely far from the same, and by this
means comes to be disposed, and able to receive in her this infinite object
of God; and the same. Lord by the pleasure he takes, and infinite love that he
bears to this soul, imprinteth and engraueth presently in her, a true
resembla^ce image, and portraict of all his greatness, even to the last Center
of the same.

This anihilation is of great force to purge the soul of passions, taking away
entierely all the objects of them, seeing that he that has no will to any thing
for himself, has not what to desire, love, fear, or hate: whereof comes
also that it purifyeth the soul, concerning the intention, taking away all
pretense of any created end whatsoever in all our actions, and makes it truly
capable to have no will to any other thing then to the pure glory of God in
himself, seeing she cares for nothing else; from whence also proceeds an
entire and total victory over all temptations; seeing that unto him that
desires nothing, the devil has not any object to present: and if he does, he
is presently rejected, and driven away with this resolution of not desiring any
thing, and by this means he is in all things vanquished and put to flight.
The affects and principal signs of this anihilation are these that follow.

The first is, that the gifts and graces that our Lord communicates to the
soul that is endued therewith, she receives them not, nor retayneth them in
herself, for so much as that which is nothing cannot receive in it self any
thing, but receaueth them in God, and refers the^ unto him from whom they
proceed.

Secondly, that she does not appropriate the^ to herself, nor rejoice in such
graces in herself, neither is she troubled if they be taken from her, or that
she happen to loose them; but equally, whether she having them or no, she
remains content in her nothing.

Thirdly, she makes no account of this grace, but for so much as our Lord
will be served by the means of the same.

Fourthly, she does not esteem the grace in it self, but for that by the
means of it, she comes to a greater knowledge of the giver, and esteems
him the more.

Fifthly, she does not exalt herself for any gift or grace that she can
receive, but always keeping herself in her nothing, remains in the same
conceit, and opinion of her baseness.

Sixthly, in the works that she does, she knows truly that of herself she
does nothing, but discovers in a high manner the divine assistance in them,
and that it is he which works all, and whatsoever happens unto her,
although never so grievous and hard to support, yet with an entire peace she
reposeth in him.

Seauenthly, in the time of subtraction, and dryness of spirit, she is not
moved with it, neither seeks any remedy, or consolation, but with all
submission imbraceth it, and gives herself in prey unto it, as unto a proper
object of nothing.

THE EXERCISE of Disappropriation.
The Prayer preparatory accustomed.
FIRST we must consider how truly was verified in our Lord JESUS Christ, that
which he said of himself: Vulpes foueas habent, and volucres cali nidos,
filius autem hominis no^ habet vbi caput suum reclinet; that is to say: the
foxes have holes, and the birds of the air their nests, but the son of the
virgin has not where to repose his head; and how much are we obliged to seek
with all our power, to imitate him in disappropriating our selves of all things,
for to answer the infinite love he bears unto us, Secondly, we must pray
unto our Lord with great fervor that he would impart unto us this grace: and
we must make a firm and constant resolution to be willing to accept it, with
all our heart and affection, and to dispose our selves perfectly, and wholly to
the exercise, and execution of all that it requires of us.

The first point.
WE must consider, that this disappropriation is a resolute will, that comes
from God, to be willing to be entierly deprived, concerning our affection, and,
as much as possibly is convenient, in effect also of all that we have, and this
because there redou^deth thereby greater glory unto God. And by this is
understood that we must deprive and disappropriate our selves, not only of al
created things, in as much as they nourish, and intertayne in us self-love,
and all other faults, and impertections that may be found in us: but which is
more, we must also deprive our selves of that which touches us nearer, even of
virtues, and graces that we receive of God, of all satisfaction, co^tentment,
consolation, and of any other good, that by the means of them we may attribute
to our selves, resigning all this truly unto God, not desiring in them, nor in
any living thing, other taste and contentme^t, then that his holy will be
entierly and fully accomplished in us and all persons. And in the end being
deprived of all proper interest and the virtues, and celestial graces
remaining in us, even in their purity and perfection, we then ought to
acknowledge out selves most unworthy of them: and the more perfect they be, so
much the more do they belong unto out Lord. And therefore with an entire, and
perfect resignation we ought most freely to offer them unto him in this their
natural purity, simplicity and perfection, remitting them unto their first
origin. And moreover we must (...) always prepared to deprive our selves of
all gifts, graces, and virtues, as if it were to give, and make a present of
them, unto any creature whosoever, as it shall please our Lord to ordain, and
this for his love, and for his greater glory and honor.

The second point.
THIS perfect disappropriatio^ or renunciation, is a dependence, and
participation of the divine, which is infinitely proper to God, if we may so
say: and nevertheless concerning the affection, our Lord depriueth himself,
with a meruaylous great and excellent perfection, of all that he has, with
peace, tranquillity, repose of spirit, and infinite magnanimity. This we see in
God the Father, who really communicates himself to the Son, and Holy Ghost:
and which is more in effect, he communicates his gifts unto us in creation,
conservation of his graces, as he does impart them to all his Creatures, and in
permitting sins. And in the work of the Incarnation, and in all other
mysteries of our redemption, we see how he debaseth himself in things most
base, disappropriating, and depriving himself of the contrary perfections. And
then when so many Angels departed from him, and so many souls yet do the
same, incur^ing eternal damnation, he depriueth himself of them, and of so
many graces which he has imparted to them: we see in him the same
disappropriation also in infinite other manners which cannot be explicated. Of
this may be gathered, that this is a most high perfection to imitate God
himself in foresaid manner, by the means of such a disappropriation.

The principal effects that this disapropriation works, and produces in the
soul, are these that follow.

First, that the gifts that she receives of God, she receaueth and uses them,
as if she had not received them, not putting any affection in the^, but
offering the love which she might have to them, and the gifts of God themselves
to him from whom they proceed.

Secondly, that she rejoices in the gifts that she sees in another, although
she has them not herself, as if they were her own.

Thirdly, it makes her ready and prompt to deprive herself of the graces and
gifts which she has reccaued, to enrich her neighbor therewith, and she
rejoices much in this.

Fourthly, when she finds herself deprived of all gifts, as well spiritual
as corporal, and of all graces in what manner foeuer, she remains also
content, as if she had not received them, and is not troubled, nor disquietted
any thing at all. She knows well all her necessities, and miseryes, but
nevertheless she contenteth herself in them, knowing truly that she has
nothing of herself, and that nothing appertains unto her, being unworthy of
any thing.

THE EXERCISE of Indifferency.
The Prayer preparatory, as accustomed.
FIRST, we must profoundly think of the sense of these words, Sedere ad
dexteram meam and sinistram, non est meum dare vobis, sed quibus paratum est a
Patre meo: that is to say: To sit at my right hand, and left, is not mine to
give you, but to whom it is prepared of my Father. And how much more in reason
are we obliged to be in all things subject, and to remit our selves wholly to
the good pleasure of God by the means of a perfect and total indifferency?

We must demand humbly this grace of our Lord, with firm resolution,
willingly to accept of it, and to put in execution the divine inspirations by
which we may be conducted and guided to the same.

The first Point.
FIRST, Consider that this indifferency is a most excellent, divine, and high
perfection, for that, although our Lord be of nature, and of will most resolute
to all that he will do, and to all that which he does, nevertheless
concerning his affection, he is wholly prepared to do, or not to do any work
whatsoever, if it were so convenient for him, and if he had, or might have any
superior of whom he depended; and moreover concerning the effect, we see that
he does put in execution this divine indifferency, in communicating (...)

Secondly, this indifferency causes one to have a great and magnanimous
courage, and by it we are disposed, and made prompt, and prepared to all
things: and of this springs a sincerity of heart, that makes the love of God
to increase in the soul.

Thirdly, the soul that is indifferent, accepts, and with all her forces
consents to, all that God will work in her, and with great promptnes puts
it in execution, although it seem unto her troublesome, sharp, grievous, and
uneasy to support, repugnant to her inclination, and her proper judgment, or
of what sort soever it be: in which oftentimes many souls do fail even of
spiritual persons, who for want of this indifferency, and deceived by self
love, do hinder oftentimes that which God would work in (...)

Fourthly, it makes the soul prepared to live or dye, to receau^ consolation
or affliction, and to take all things in good part, that can happen either to
herself, or others, and all the universal miseryes which our Lord permits
to happen in his Church. Briefly she receaueth all things equally, and in one
manner, from the hand of God.

Fifthly, what thing soever she has she sets not her affection thereon, how
good, or spiritual soever it be, in which many souls willingly stumble,
proposing unto themselves in their actions, a good intention truly in it self,
but according to their fashion, and make great account of certain exercises
that they do, and which they much esteem. But the soul indifferent, setting
all things aside^ (...), considers, and st^dieth with great diligence, how to
follow, and put in execution the pure, and true interior motions of grace, and
divine inspirations, and to do whatsoever she knows may redound to the
greatest honor and glory of God.

Sixthly, in time of consolation, she does not purpose to do difficult matters,
and of great perfection, neither does she suffer herself to be transported by
the excessive gust, and sweetness that she feels therein; but all that she
purposes to do, is done with repose, and maturity, always conditionally,
according to the will of God, to the end, that afterward in the time of
desolation, she remain firm. stable, and constant in the same good purposes.

Seauenthly, in great Solemnities, and like occasions she does not consider,
nor rely upon her own industry, neither does she make too long preparations:
but using therein convenient diligence, depends wholly, and with great
simplicity on God, suffering herself to be governed by him, as he best
pleases.

THE FOVRTH EXERCISE Of Conformity.
The Prayer preparatory in the manner accustomed.
FIRST we must consider in these worde^ ( (...) volum^tem Patri^ (...), that is
to say, ^y meat is to do the will of my father which is in heaven:) (...) in
other like speeches, the gr^ conformity that our Sa^io^ (...) had with the will
of his eternal father, so that in all his works he protested, that he
pretended no other thing, but entirely to put the feign in execution. And of
this we may gather how much more we are obliged to do the same in his
imitation, enforcing our selves as much, as shall be possible, and with the
greatest affection, to bend and submit our will to be conformable unto Gods, and
to conceive an earnest and vehement desire thereof, which ought to move us
humbly to beseech his divine majesty, that by the virtue of the merits of his
dear Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the same conformity aforesaid that
was in him, he would vouchsafe to impart us abundantly his grace.

The first point.
WE must consider, that this Conformity is no other thing then a total and
resolute dependence, and subjection of our will, to the divine, in all our
works, occurre^ces, chances, whatsoever they be: and moreover that all things
whatsoever they be, are neither good nor holy, but in as much as they are
beautified and sanctified with the will of God; and although they be
indifferent, yea and seem sometimes impertinent and not to the purpose, in so
much notwithstanding as they proceed and depend of the will of God, they are
very good, and tend to a very good end, and to the glory of God; and therefore
we ought to weigh well, and attentively to consider, how high and perfect a
thing it is to be thus co^formed to whatsoever we find to be Gods will, in all
things and at all times; and how much the endeavoring, and practicing of it
imports, and how necessary it is, if we desire to attain to great perfection.

The second point.
CONSIDER, that this is a most high perfection of God himself, and which we
see to shine in the divine attributes; which in their works, and in themselves
are infinitely conformable to the will of God: and from hence springs this
unspeakable harmony in them, as is seen ^uailously also in the divine divine
persons, in all exterior and interior actions, as well in that concerning
created things, as in all increated acts of knowledge, love, enjoying, joy and
infinite others. This conformity is seen also amongst the blessed spirits and
souls in heaven, who at the least sign they perceive of the will of God, are
always prepared to obey, and do obey it with great pro^ptnes: it is also seen
in all created things, and even in insensible creatures, as is read in the
Gospel, qui^ (...) and venti ebediunt (...), for that the sea, and the winds
obey him; but above al things it is most apparent in the sacred Humanity of our
Lord Jesus Christ with the second Person of the Trinity (to whom it it united)
and with his eternal Father, and in the inferior part with the super^our in
all his powers, affections, and operations: and likewise it is seen truly and
perfectly in the natural repug^ance that he felt, in consideration of the
torments, pains, and excess^e ^olours that he was to suffer: and how much the
more he did really and sharply feel them, so much the more he conformed
himself with an unspeakable repose to the will of his Father, in desiring
them; so much the more increased in him the repugnance, and sensibility of the
griefs, in such sort, that the contentment in this conformity, did not bring
him any asswagement of his sorrows, but only made that his will sweetly
reposed in them, and with so prompt and ready mind, he willed and desired the^,
that if the Jews had not crucified him, he himself (if such had been the will
of his Father) was prepared to have done it. We see also the like conformity in
his most holy mother; which, next unto this of our Lord Jesus Christ, was above
all things created most singular and most perfect. And we must consider that
all the foresaid conformities are represented in the divine Essence, which
conteyneth in it self all things, and shines infinitely in them, and in a
manner that cannot be explicated, from which proceeds great honor and glory
unto God.

THE EFFECTS OF this Conformity in a soul endued therewith, are these that
follow.
FIRST it causes that the said soul studieth, and labors with great
affection, and diligence to understand and know in all things what is the will
of God, and to put it promptly and readily in execution, and not to care for
any other thing.

2. She finds in all things repose, and tranquillity for the assurance she
has, that in all things the will of God is accomplished.

3. She enjoys great liberty of spirit, free from all scruples, unquietness,
and inward bitterness, saying often unto our Lord, Thou know Lord, that I
desire no other thing but the accomplishing of thy holy will, make me to know
it, I beseech thee.

4. She accepts, and receaueth afflictions, and tribulations as presents sent
immediately from the hand of God, attributing them to no other cause.

5. She is not troubled for the^, neither does she lament, nor complain unto
God, but to the imitatio^ of our Lord Jesus Christ, says, Non mea, sed tua
roluntas fiat; not mine but thy will be done.

6. She takes pleasure, and reioiceth in them: and the greater they are, and
more contrary unto her, she makes her commodity the more by the^, by a greater
knowledge of God, and a perfect submission unto his divine will.

7. When she is calumniated, and persecuted without any fault of her own part,
or any occasion given, she does not seek to justify and excuse herself, but
leaves all entierly in the hands of God, for to ordain the whole as he shall
please.

8. If by wearyne^, and labor she feel some unquietness, yet she finds repose,
considering that this is the will of God, conforming herself unto the same,
without seeking in this any particular interest, or good unto herself.

THE FIFTH EXERCISE of Uniformity.
The Prayer preparatory is to be made as accustomed.
FIRST, to consider in these words, Pater mi, non mea sed tua voluntas fiat:
Father, not my will, but thy will be done, the great union that the Son of God
had with the will of God his Father in a matter so difficult, contrary, and
grievous to nature, and so unbeseeming (as may be thought) his greatness, as his
passion was; and of this we must gather, by how much greater reason we are
obliged to do the like, in the imitation of so rare an example of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Secondly we must with an extreme desire seek to obtain this grace, and
instantly to pray unto the eternal Father, that he will make us worthy of it,
by the m^rits of his dear Son.

The first point.
WE must consider that this uniformity, besides that which is contained in the
Conformity, does more unite the will, with that of Gods. This takes from us
all repugnance, and difficulty, for that in all things we not only will, what
our Land wills, but moreover we are inci^ed, and moved to will it, only f^
the reason that God will (...) and all our contentment i^ (...) ^tisfy the
divine will, for the (...) union that we have with it: and this for the love of
it self, and not for any other respect. And the same love inciteth us to the
same union with our even Christian: according to that which is written in the
Acts of the Apostles: Erat credentium in Domino cor vnum, and animavna, all the
faithful of our Lord had one heart and one soul in the primitive Church. This
uniformity shines, and is plainly seen, first in things wanting life, the
which by an instinct of nature in so great diversities of operations agree
altogether to execute meruailously whatsoever they are ordained for by God;
and altogether accomplish uniformly this most beautyfull, most excellent and
meruaylous order, and harmony of this world; as we see for example in a house
well ordered, that many servants performing duly diverse offices that are
commanded them by their master, come finally to accomplish, and finish all,
as one only affayre. But this uniformity shines much more perfectly in heaven
amongst the happy spirits, and souls, in whom by the efficacy of love, the
divine will causes one heart, spirit, and will, as if truly all together were
but one, by a most singular vnio^ with the supreme will: but above all it
shines most highly and meruaylously in the divine attributes, that agree, and
accord in the essence, and divine will, in the divine persons, and in the acts
that they produce.

THE EFFECTS of this Uniformity in a soul^, are these that f^ll^
THE First is, that the soul that is endued with this uniformity, not only
contente^h herself in all that which is Gods will, but moreover unites herself
with the same of God, and by this being made one self thing with it, she
reioiceth equally in all things, only for no other cause, but for that the
divine will is pleased therewith, and will have it so.

2. In all places, and in all things she finds God, and unites herself
with him, and all creatures serve her as a ladder to raise her unto God.

3. For the that sins she falls into, she is grieved for the offense that
is against Almighty God: but even of them also she takes occasion to abase
herself, and that with so much greater submission, penetrating into the
consideration of the love, with which God has permitted them, she unites
herself unto him.

4. How much the more it seems to her sometimes that she is deprived of all
grace, aba^doned of God, and left as overwhelmed in her miseries; so much the
more, by the means of them, she unites herself with God, knowing well, that
the graces that she first felt in abundance, are retired into God, and that
they are kept, and preserved more securely in him, then when she felt them in
her self; and is contented, and more rejoices to see them in God, then in
herself: and therefore raising and uniting herself with God, goes to find
them in him, as in their proper origin, and convenient place.

5. Being afflicted with any temptation either of the devil, or other creature
whatsoever, she rejects, and resists all the evil that might happen unto
her by it, and withal acknowledging such creatures to be ministers of God, who
permits them for his greater glory, even by the means of these temptations
she comes to unite herself with God.

6. How much the more she feels herself favored of God by imparting his
celestial graces, and how much the more excellent, and of greater consequence
they are, she coming afterward to leave them for to unite herself more
fully and perfectly unto God, from whom these foresaid graces proceed: so much
the more she shows, that she made much less esteem of the gifts then of
the giver.

7. In all her interior and exterior operations in a moment and twinkling of
an eye, she unites herself with God, to know in them his will, and to put it
presently in execution: and by this all her actions are done without any
disordinate affection, propriety, or particular respect.

THE SIXTH EXERCISE Of Deiformity.
The preparatory Prayer accustomed, before the Exercise.
IN the beginning, and in consideration of these words of our Lord, Ego dixi
Di^ estis: I have said, you are Gods etc. and in this that he said unto his
Father, vt vnumsint, s^t^ Pater in me, and ego in te, vt and ips^ in nobis
vnumsint, that all may be one, as thou my Father art in me, and I in thee, so
also that they may be one in us. Here we must end^uour to penetrate into the
excellency, and greatness of the perfection we are called unto by our Lord
Jesus, to wit, to unite our selves in such sort by efficacy of will, and by the
vehemence of a loving affection, to the divine will, that being transformed into
the same, we be no more, as we may say, our selves, nor that which we were
before, but like unto God, and in God himself, Deified to the imitation of the
union of the Son of God, with his eternal Father.

2. Being prostrate, with a most profound submission in the depth of our
nothing, in the presence of the height of his greatness, as altogether
astonished, and relying on the love which incited him so much to abase
himself, even unto us, thereby to raise us up to himself, we must crave of
this love a correspondence of affection, which may live in us with a vehement
desire of this true and perfect Deiformity in him.

The first point.
WE must consider, that this Deiformity consists to have our will united by
such efficacy of love, with the divine, that she feel no more from
henceforward herself, as if verily she were not at all, but that only she
feel in her the divine will, and that all her actions, desires, and works tend
to the only accomplishing of the same. In such sort, that even in virtues, and
holy things, she wills them no more, with a created will, nor by it, but
only by the increated, made hers by an e^ti^r^ transformation into it;
considering that our Lord Jesus intended to show this in these words, (...) s^d
v^luntas fia^.

The fourth point.
THAT the humanity of our Savior Jesus Christ, and of his most holy mother,
and of all the blessed, by the working of God in them, and by the knowledge,
and enjoying that they have of the di^inity, are as it were swallowed up, and
raised into this foresaid being, and unity, and in the same most perfectly
deified: and finally that all the Saints, and the just yet upon the earth, are
tra^sformed into God, and from thence afterward return to their being, as a
drop of water being cast into a great vessel full of wine, is changed into the
same, and after being out of the said vessel, returns to his first being.

The fifth point.
WE must consider, that after the soul is arrived unto such an estate, that
she has taken away, by the virtue of this Deifying love, and of the other
aforesaid lights, all that might hinder the working of God in her, then has
she attained unto this Deiformity; and this Deiformity produces these effects
that follow.

1. She is Deiformed in all her actions, doing them, as if God did them, and
not herself; and the in them, and by them enters wh^ly unto God, and
acknowledges him, and enjoys him.

2. Even a^ a sinner does (...) action but out of God, being (...) ^ed of his
grace, even soon the (...) such afoule does not find or do any thing in which
God is not, and by means whereof, she does not enter, and unite herself unto
God.

3. She esteems not of any thing, but in as much as it comes from God, or
that it be done for God, and in God.

4. Although that somtymes our Lord hide, and withdraw himself from such a
soul, yet in this subtraction, and hiding, she retireth wholly into God, hiding
herself in him, without any sweetness or feeling: yea how much the more, that
by means of this rigor, leaving, sharpnes, and bitterness, it seems that she
is far from God: so much the more she returns, is Deiformed, and reposeth in
him.

5. Being most certains and assured, that she herself, as of herself, cannot
perform any thing that is good, by reason of her total inability, knowing
truly that she is nothing, has nothing, and can do nothing of herself; she
is not confounded, nor any whir troubled, yea even in the midst of
confusions, she finds herself much assured, and contented, knowing certainly
that she seeks not any thing proper, and that nothing of hers is therein, but
God does all imediatly.

6. Although she should raise the dead, and do such marvelous works, and
great things, yet she would neither care, nor esteem of such works, or be
moved with them; but in as much as God would, she should: and although she
should possess all the treasures of heaven and earth, she would not esteem of
them in themsel^, nor for herself, but refer, and offer up all things unto
their first origin, from whence they p^ded.

7. Although she knew sensibly that she had God in her, yea and though it were
in the same manner as our blessed Lady his holy Mother had, she would not be
moved any more, then if she did not perceive any such thing at all or that she
had him not in herself, but in God, only imitating heerin the glorious virgin
Mary, who having in her arms our blessed Lord, held him, as if she had not had
him, but as if her arms had been Gods, and as though he held himself, and this
was the most excellent Deiformity of this most pure soul.

8. When the soul that is come to this Deiformity, sees herself to be
praised, she takes no manner of pleasure therein, neither is she troubled,
afflicted, altered, or moved any whit at all, for so much as she is wholly in
God, and receiving the praises that belongs to God, refers and offers
them all unto him.

9. Two souls Deiformed, having between them great conformity of affection,
inter^ayning one another with mutual love of very great efficacy, and with
great disappropriation; and therefore being to be separated one from the other
never so far, for the greater glory of God, do care nothing at all, nor are
they any thing disquieted, for whatsoever accident, how great or grievous, that
may befall them.

10. If God would publish to the world the Deiformity that he has given her,
she would not be disquieted or troubled, but would say, Lord thou have done it,
do whatsoever it pleases thee, for the whole work is thine.

OF SELF-LOVE.
THERE are three fortes of selfeloue; the first is in a worldly person, who
lives amidst the honors, greatness, and dignities of this world.

The second is in a spiritual, person, who desires to serve God, and this
makes him to seek swetnes, consolation and light, having a desire to serve
God.

The third is in persons that have made some progress and are advanced in the
service of our Lord, which is such that with the same, they mingle a desire to
profit greatly, and to strive for perfection.

Therefore great watchfulnes and heed is necessary, to be able to know it: and
for this end, it is needful to examine very exactly thy interior, and to
weigh well, whether such a desire be with pain and anxiety, or not: and when
it is found to be with affliction and trouble, the person may be assured it is
self-love, and it is the more subtle, in that there increases with this
pain, a greater desire of perfection. Now he that will profit indeed, must be
wary to tak away the hindrance, which is self love, and to hope always in
God, and to have a firm confidence, that unto who^ almighty God gives such a
desire, he will also give strength and means to bring the^ to perfection, when
it shall be expedient for his honor and glory.

And we must not think that for any diligence the soul can perform, she can
ariue thereunto, but rather with a sincere submission unto God, and with an
operation as it were insensible, she shall come to have the accomplishing of
her desire. And so in this estate, she must be as a little infant that sucketh,
whose operations are of that quality, that they give joy and consolation to the
creature, and this for the innocence and purity which is in them, which makes
such creatures not only agreeable to the Creator, but also to those that behold
them; even so a soul that would be deprived of proper love, ought in this
manner to imitate such acts, that is to say, that even as a little infant
desires neither this, nor that, but only that which maintains his life to
wit, milk, and this without any self respect: even so a soul ought to do the
like, that is to say, to desire only that which gives her life, which is God
himself: and with how much the greater sincerity, fidelity, and constancy she
seeks God, in the in^e^iour of her soul; so much the more she makes
herself agreeable, and pleasing to his divine Majesty.

THE CONDITIONS that a soul ought to have to perform that which has been
specified, are these that follow.
1. THE first, is to desire to be even as perfect as God would have her, and
when, and in the manner he pleases.

2. To take away all hindrances that may any way impeach the execution of such
a desire in her and endea^our that there should not be any thing between God
and her, no not God himself, in regard of the pleasure, and contentment that
is accustomed to spring of the knowledge and feeling that she has of God
himself: for although that the said pleasure, and contentment be not evil,
nor any sin, yet notwithstanding it hinders, so that the disappropriatio^
does not ariue to his perfection. Therefore if sometimes the soul take
contentment or pleasure in her self, and remain busied in creatures, under
the shadow and pretense of the Creator; she puts God himself as a
hindera^ce, between him and her soul, and disuniteth him from the same, for
the respect she has of that which proceeds from his divinity, or is
appertaining unto him.

3. Not to take care, or be to much grieved if she attain not to that height of
perfection, unto which she finds herself called: for God is infinitely
pleased to (...) a soul in pain for his divine (...), the Kingly prophet
David having said so much in his Psalm 90. Cum ipso sum in tribulation^: that
is to say, I am with him in tribulation. For the interior tribulations make a
soul more capable then the exterior, to receive particular graces from God;
yea sometimes so great, as cannot be thought or imagined: Therefore a soul
ought to tak great heed, that she do not grieve or torment herself, if she
attain not to the top of the perfection so much desired; for that sometimes
God gives great perfection, and yet with the same a soul shall not be so
agreeable to his divine majesty, as another that has it not, but do on their
part all that possibly they can to have it. For having the said perfection she
will have a sati^on, and contentment in herself, the which although it be
good, it will not be so pleasing to our Lord, as the pain and affliction that
a soul suffers for his love: but with this pain and trouble she ought to be
wholly conformed to his divine will, without disquiet, and not to separate
herself any thing at all from the love of God, for otherwise it will be
self-love.

THE EFFECTS of Self-love.
THIS Self-love, although it be called in this manner, ought rather
nevertheless to be called want of love to our selves, hatred, death, a
selfe-venome, or poison: for that it has no regard, nor respect, either to
life or health, to body or soul, nor to any other thing: it esteems of
nothing but what it affects, it regards not God himself. This self-love
was first in Lucifer when he made greater esteem of his own excellency, then
to be with God in Paradise, whereby he incurred presently death unto himself,
to wit, to be separated from God: the like also happens to a soul, for it
separateth her from God, makes her become insensible, taking from her the
light of reason, to be opiniatiue, churlish, and void of ciuility. Self-love
is like unto the heath called Dogs-tooth, which being not rooted out, comes
by little and little to have such force, tha^ marreth all other heathes, that
are near unto it: even so, if this Self-love be not taken away and ^ted out
of our heart, it will take suck increase in our soul, that it will spoil and
corrupt all virtues and graces that are in the same; for (...) only it
corrupts the virtues that we have gotten by our industry; but also those that
we have received in Baptism, and in the other Sacraments. It does also the
same in our souls, as the opilations or obstructions do in our bodies, which
are the causes of infinite diseases. It makes a man proud and high minded, and
afterward casts him into the depth of despair. It gives him a
presumptuous strength, and hope to do what he will, and afterward makes him
unable, and cold in the service of God. It cloatheth the soul, and colors
it with diverse colors under the pretense of sanctity, afterward despoyleth it
and makes it naked of the means that might bring her to her Creator. It is a
venom by which the soul becomes senseless, and is ruyned and destroyed. It
is like unto the most hurtful venom of the Aspe: it gnaweth and consumes
without being perceived, and inchaunteth and betwitcheth in such sort, that she
knows not what she does, nor what she would; but passing from one thing to
another, she tormenteth herself, and not being able to come to what she
desires, she grieueth, fretteth, and pyneth away; and if any counsel her for
her help, comfort, and profit, she remains as a senseles body, not
apprehending any thing, like to one that had no life: finally the ornaments
that the foresaid self-love gives unto a soul, are these that follow.

First it makes it unlike unto God and like to Lucifer: it causes it to be
hurtful unto other and displeasing to herself. It makes it a vessel of
contumely, or sea of iniquity. A soul infected therewith may be likned to a
ship that is exposed to the waves, and tempests of the sea, that is shaken with
all sorts of winds; like unto a stinking water, a barraine ground that
produces no kind of fruit that is pleasant, an infected carren, and in a word
it is like an unbridled and untamed horse; but which is most of all, such a
soul deceyueth those that she conuerseth withal, for she shows herself as
though she were full of virtue and holiness, and hides inwardly the qualities
of a venomous serpent.

A DESCRIPTION of Self-love.
Self-love may be figured, and represented, as a man without eyes, and
notwithstanding has four, but none for God, but for himself: with two he
sees, and with other two forseeth only that which is for his commodity.

He has no ears to understand the voice of God that sounds mediatly, or
immediately, to wit, he is not attentive, when he is excited inwardly to know
his defaultes, and imperfections, but he has six earers to appropriate any
thing to himself: with two he hears his own praises, with two others he
hatkeneth unto that which may augme^t this self love, and with the other two
he is watchful and attentive, that nothing be said against him. He has three
hearts, notwithstanding he has not one that may bring him any profit for the
good of his soul, or whereby to come to perfection, for he has not any
affection, taste, or feeling of good. The first heart is for that which
concerns hi^ exterior, or interior commodity in regard of his body.

The second is for such things at he does negotiate with others, to the end the
world may have him in good reputation.

The third makes him to show a mild, and gracious countenance to be beloved of
all, having his looks very humble, his words sayre, and well placed;
outwardly an Angel, but inwardly a ravening wolf; in sum, seeking no other
thing then to please himself.

HOW SELF-LOVE enters, and intrudeth it self into all things.
THIS Self-love is most subtle, and hides it self, entering and intruding
into all things, even into the Sacraments. First causing persons to frequent
them for the proper gust they find therein.

Secondly to be well esteemed off by others, and also to cover some defectes:
it thrusts it self, and enters in the same manner, in hearing the word of
God for the pleasure they take therein. It enters into holy Orders, when the
are received or used for vanity, for some commodity, ambition, or other evil
designement. It thrusts it self into marriages, when they mary for to
satisfy their concupiscence, and appetites. It intrudeth it self also into the
practice of virtues, procuring that great pain and travel be employed in it,
without having any good, right, or sincere intention for the glory of God, but
rather for some other respect. It thrusts it self, and enters into the
exercise of Prayer, pretending to receive therein taste, light, and feeling,
under pretense to be united unto God; and in doing this, the person so
infected, seeks himself, (...) unto God. It enters also by a certain
superfluous, over great, and excessive desire of the cross, but it is for the
pleasure that one takes oftentimes in the same cross, in which self-loue much
delights.

PROPERTIES of a soul infected with self-love.
Self-love robs from God, what appertains unto him, for it steals and
takes from him his honor, by seeking to attribute the same unto himself, as
the Pharisy robbed our Lord of his honor, when he said, nou sum sicut coeteri
b^minum, I am not like unto other men.

First this love makes the soul unlike unto God, being a most simple object,
an infinite purity; Self-loue makes the soul double, crafty, and dissembling,
and causes it to seem other then it is.

Secondly, it makes her like unto the devil, for even as the devil is never
content, nor reposeth; so the like miseries does self-love cause in the soul,
for it causes much unquietness, and many troubles in her, not being able to
find any repose or contentment. It makes her a liar, and an enemy to truth,
and by this means she becomes hateful unto others; for that such qualities
are insupportable: moreover it causes continually fretting and unquiet, for
never finding any repose, and not daring to desire death by reason of this
self love, she tormenteth and afflicts herself without ceasing. It brings
her also to beavessell of contumely, for that to satisfy herself she does even
her best actions, desiring prayers, the Sacraments, and such like things,
having for a foundation of all this her self-love. And thus the works become
defiled, soul and infected with this self-love, and the soul by this means
is a sea of iniquity: for the bottom of her imperfections not being able to be
found, she is a sea without bottom, that is mooned and troubled with contrary
winds, and swollen with meruaylous great, fearful, and horrible waves, being
angry, and ever opposing herself against those that would affoard her any help
or remedy. She is also like unto a ship, exposed to the tempests and raging of
the sea, for this soul sailing in the sea of self-love, even as a ship in the
sea, so is she combated on every side, making ship wrack for a small matter.
She may also be compared to a stinking water, for she runs on every side (as
water that has no stay) to seek if she ca^ find contentment; but by reason of
her imperfections she is very noisome, and yeldeth an evil favor unto those
that are pure, and clean. She resembles also a barrayne ground, that
produces nothing but thorns, thistles, and other such unsavory weeds,
spoiling all the fruit of good works. She is like unto a stinking carren, for
this self-loue infecteth the soul and makes her serve him as food to a raven,
and afterward to become a prey and repast to that infernal fiend whom she
resembles. Briefly this love thus qualifyed, is as an untamed horse without
bit, or bridle; it will not be ruled by any person, nor co^taine it self,
neither by counsel, not by skillful advise, but it makes the soul to main
as rooted in her proper sense, and self judgment, whereby she becomes
incorrigible: and this happens sometimes to some spiritual person, under
color of sanctity, which is very hardly cured.

This foresaid Self-love springs of the delight that the creature hops to
enjoy in those things she seeks, and which do appertay ne unto her, and it
grows to that pass, that she esteems not of her life, nor of any other
thing else: in respect of arrayning to what she so likes. It proceeds also of
the nature wounded and corrupted in her irascible and concupiscible powers, and
evil habits, and customs which have gotten root in the soul. And this is
understood, not only of the first kind of self-loue which is common and
familiar to worldly persons, but also of the second, wherewith oftentimes
spiritual persons are entangled, the which may be called self-loue, for the
taste, and pleasure that they seek in spiritual things. It is understood also
of the third kind of self-loue in spiritual persons, who are already
advanced, and profited in the way of virtue, which may be compared to the
poison of the diamond, that gnaweth a creature, interiourly by little, and
little, but it leaves no exterior sign, as other poisons do: so this proper
love gnaweth oftentimes in wardly the conscice, but it leaves no mark or sign
in the soul, but kills it, and brings it in the end to death, and
damnation. It is a very evident sign of the forsaid self-loue when our Lord
has given any particular grace to a soul, and when it pleases him to deprive
her of it, she falls into great grief and sadness.

The root of this forsaid Self-love lies hid under the color of faygned
holiness, and guides the soul by a very strait, and narrow way, and makes it
appear, to those that converse which such a person, that the way to serve God
is very strait, and more difficult, then in truth it is. It engenders a great
wearines of sanctity, as well in the parties that have it, as in the persons
that converse with them; which is no true holiness. It exciteth a great
marvel, and an astonishment with unquietness, which procures to the parties a
disgust and confusion, in seeing that they cannot arrive to that perfection and
holiness, which they see in others, whereby they remain without repose, which is
a great sign that this holiness proceeds of self love. And he that wrote
this discourse witnesses to have proved and found this many times in ^isel^e,
to wit, that in thinking on the sanctity of some such per^o^, he much
meruailed, but notwithstanding he did not fall into unquietness and confusion.

REMEDIES against Self-love.
1. FIRST the soul infected herewith must seek to have a person very much
enlightened by God, that has the discretion of spirits, with whom she must
confer of her troubles and desires, and according to his judgment esteem
herself to be sick, and to have need of help, as in truth she has, and is not
able to help her self.

2. Secondly she must (...) mortify all her desires and affectio^^, as well, of
those things that are good and holy, as of those that are indifferent, and not
to run after them, especially, when she is most provoked unto them, and for
this effect it will serve her much to lay open her heart to her spiritual
father, and suffer herself to be guided, and conducted by him.

3. Thirdly the remedy is to think that all things, how good and holy soever
they be, are not always pleasing to God, but only those that come from him,
and are required by him. And by this we may know, that they come from him when
the said things do not move us, nor lift us up unto pride in having them, nor
torment and afflict us in having them not, but bring with them a peace and
tranquillity to the soul: in such sort, that she remains in as great repose
in the execution of them, as if she did not execute them at all.

4. The fourth remedy is to consider, that to accomplish such desires of this
self-loue, is to contemn God, and to contradict, and be opposite to the divine
will, for so much as Divine love, is altogether contrary to Self love; and
all our actions that we are induced unto by it, are contrary to the blessed
will of God, and by that means we become opposite, and contrary unto him.

5. The fifth remedy belongs to the spiritual father, who to take away, and
clear the soul from all self-love, in all that she pretends in her
actions, and desires, must first seek all the means to penetrate into her
heart, that is, to gain her good opinion and estimation, and to be grateful
unto her; and afterward he must begin with great sweetness to apply his
remedies, and so to cure and heal her: which must not be done in such open
manner that she may perceive it, but with some kind of dissimulation, and as it
were in jest, making her to do all things contrary to that she herself
disposes off, or desires to do: As for example, if the said person be
desirous to go unto one place of recreation, to make her go to another:
somtymes also not taking them away altogether, but correcting them, as if she
would mortify herself with long disciplines, to make her to use short, for
seldom it does profit to withstand proper Love altogether at one blow, as to
forbid her wholly disciplines, except it be to a person already advanced in the
way of perfection, and in the exercise thereof. And as this his dexterity ought
to proceed of charity, and love: so also ought she to be ruled with the same
love, for so much as in such cures and sickness, severity profits nothing, by
reason that this self-love is sweet and gracious, and makes the soul very
tender and delicate: so that if she be used with sharpnes and roughnes, she
enters presently into disdain, flies and abhors the cure. And by this may
be seen, that Self-love is healed with love, and by love.

This sweetness is most necessary in superiors, and principally when they treat
with those under their charge, of things appertayning to the superior part,
and spirit: for ordinarily in this affair all the evil proceeds of this
root, and severity procures anger, and disdain, and hinders much: and
moreover the Physician of Self-love must note, that he ought to be continually
diligent, and not to abandon the cure, but to do as a Physician does, who has
one grievously sick in his charge, for he visits often his patient, and many
times feels his pulse, and never abandoneth nor leaves him, until he
perceive that he is in better estate, and that he begins to amend.

He must also note, that there be two sorts of persons that are sick of this
self-love: some of the^ are as it were in a consuming fever, the evil whereof
has already very much penetrated into the inward part; and although oftentimes
they are incurable, or at the least very hard to be cured, yet notwithstanding,
he must not always despair of them, but must perform in their behalf what
the said corporal Physician does to those that has the forsaid disease, to
wit, to perform on his part, whatsoever he can, and to leave the rest unto
God; but he must take great heed, that he do not bear himself to harsh and
to austere, for that would be very domageable, and pernicious.

The others that are sick, are such, and of such an humor, as they may be
healed: and although it be needful to use great swetnes, and dexterity in
their behalf, as has been said before, and that there is great difficulty in
the cure, yet notwithstanding he must not despair, by reason of the difficulty
that he perceaueth in the beginning; for the cause of this difficulty is, that
this proper love, does so much blind the soul, that it does not permit her to
see clearly her faults, and imperfections: and therefore she not acknowledging
herself to be sick, the evil can hardly be cured, so that one ought to
employ all his care, and industry to make her to enter into this knowledge,
which in the end will serve very much for her remedy and cure.

First the said spiritual father must take great heed that he speak not any
thing of self-loue, and that must be shunned from the beginning, least the
infirm should be too much dismayed, and fall into too much fear: but he must
a far off put before her, and cause her to practice the exercise of
disappropriatio^, depriving her first of some things not very difficult unto
her, afterward make her return to herself, and cause her to know how she
was hindered in this love, although in chiding her, he ought to say nothing that
may co^tristate her, or to seem to blame her, but rather by little and little
make her know her evil; notwithstanding when she knows it, or when she is
cured, then he must make her understand, how great, and dangerous it was, for he
must comport himself in this behalf, as a guide does in a journey, who being
to pass some dangerous strait, says nothing to the passengers of the peril
and danger, but only encourages them to follow him, and afterward having
passed the strait, has no more care, nor looks back unto it; even so, those
that treat with such kind of persons, ought to be have themselves dexterously
without making them to think of the difficulty that they shall have to mortify
the said selse-loue, sometimes speaking to them in parables and similitudes in
a third person, sometimes by good counsel, making them to understand and to
come to the knowledge of their defects; then with sweetness, and taking ever
some good occasion to make them to return, and enter into themselves.

Whilst I was writing a copy of this book, our Lord inspired this virtuous
Dame for whom it was first composed, that she should advertise me of this that
follows, that I might set it down in the end of this work: to wit, that as
there is an Angel appointed over proper love to rep^esse it, and fight against
it; so there is another over the love of God, to conserve, increase, and
augment it, who from the beginning of their creation were deputed to this
function, the one, and the other not passing further then their charge. S.
Gabrid was deputed over divine love, by the means whe^of he was chosen to be
the messenger of the sacred m^stery of the Inca^nation of the God, a work of
most singular love of Almighty God toward mankind, unto whom it was
especially revealed in heaven by the most Bl^ss^d ^mity, when the divine
persons made their acts of reciprocal love. S. Michael was also appointed
over proper love; and therefore when Lucifer rebelled in heaven against God,
seeking to be like to the most high, and equalling himself with him, he was
ordained by our Lord to resist him, as one that had a great zeal of divine
love, contray to this self-love. Our Lord then revealed this secret to this
holy Lady, and said unto her. Advertise thy spiritual Father, that he may
learn, that when any one would heal a soul, infected with Self-love, he
demand my aydand succor, by the prayers and intercession of S. Michael the
Archa^gel: and when any soul shall be touched, and surprised with divine love,
it is needful that she implore the favor of S. Gabriel, to the end, that by
this means she may more easily attain unto the sovereign perfection of the
said love of God.

AN APPENDIX TO THIS ABRIDGMENT, whereby to ascend to a most high Perfection.
THe perfection, presupposed of all the estates before declared, even unto this
present, cosisteth in an utter forsaking of al prete^ces whatsoever, and not to
pretend any other thing, but God only, in a most excellent, and a most perfect
manner, in all our actions, whereby we may attain unto a most high perfection,
which consists in the examen following, distinguished into seven points.

1. The first is, when the soul apprehends any trouble or affliction, that
of new is presented unto her. For that then by the suggestio^ of the inferior,
or infirm part, the apprehension of such a cross is accustomed to be very
vehement: and with this, a thousand exaggerations will be presented, that will
cause it to appear more violent, whereby the soul is accustomed to take this
affliction with much difficulty, and many repugnances.

To remedy this, and to provide for it thoroughly, it is necessary that the
superior part of the soul, propose all this before her, as a judge does, who
before he give his sentence, harkeneth to the reasons of both parties, provided
always that she be not moved any thing with their reasons, but that she
remain without passion or any kind of alteration, suspending her judgment,
until she find out what may be according to reason: and that she may the
better understand it, these two means will aid her. The one is, that she enter
into herself, and consider how Almighty God knows, and sees all her
troubles, and whatsoever she endures, and therefore she ought to remit it wholly
into his hands, to dispose thereof as he sees most expedient. The second is to
consider, and believe assuredly, that even as the divine bou^ty desires
nothing but our good; even so his divine providence (which is hid from us, not
being permitted unto us to seek too curiously into it) knows very well how
to provide and remedy all in time, and manner, as it shall seem best unto him,
and not as best likes us, nor as it may best please us. Of this suspension,
and repose of spirit follow two things; the first, that she puts away, and
rejects all the hindrances, and trouble, and the deceytes that might happen
by this apprehension: and secondly it will follow, that she shall come to
conceive a true, pure, sincere, and mature apprehension of all her affairs.

The second point is, that when the soul is come to receive, and accept this
affliction, as coming from God.

REMEDIES.
SHE must not rest herself here, or permit herself to accept of it, as often
many souls are accustomed to do, to wit, basely with an infinite number of
difficultyes, of excuses, and seeking of themselves, but she must accept
thereof (...) ^o offer it, and return it unto God, accepting it only in him,
and for him.

4. The fourth point, is to know, in what manner the superior part must suffer
with the inferior, and with the exterior senses, in the repugnances, and
contrarieties which they feel, as has been said before.

REMEDIES.
THE superior part ought to do all, that has been said before, in the
behalf of the inferior, and weakest parts, in such sort, that it be not with
a certain excessive violence, which may cause the^ wholly to loose their
strength, and vigor, or so as may trouble, or make the soul pusillanimous and
fearful, or else utterly unable to support so great a blow; but she ought for
this cause something to suffer with them, and encourage them with all the
reasons the can imagine, and she must do all this with the greatest discretion
that she can possibly, in giving now and then some relaxation unto their
travails, and afflictions, and in seeking the most convenient remedies that
she can advise herself of. Even as one that would have a horse, or any other
beast to serve his turn, will give him more meat, to the end he may be strong,
and able to travail better when there is need. And when by reason of divine
subtraction she cannot use the force of any act of co^sola^io^, or ra^sing up
of her mind, she ought to repose in this, and procure the parts that are
inferior, to repose in the will of God, and this by means of the divine
conformity, which will bring much more true and strengthening consolation,
although it does not seem so.

5. The fifth point is, how she ought to comport herself with self-love in
this case, or the like.

REMEDIES.
Self-love is accustomed to pretend and seek in all things her own
interest, and particular commodity directly, or indirectly; and it does so
also in this, under pretense of many good reasons, yea even of virtues, and
purposes many things that are not to the purpose; and for this cause the
soul with the purity of a right intention ought to discover by the light of
the love of God, all his deceipts, and oppose herself against this self love
very freely, and effectually; and by the force of a pure and clean love, she
ought to reject all particular and self respect, and follow purely that which
God shall inspire, and teach her.

6. The sixth point is, how that the superior part ought to answer to the
propositions or offers, that our Lord will make unto her concerning these
pains, and afflictions, or other greater.

REMEDIES.
AFTER this that has been above said, our Lord is accustomed to make many
propositio^n to the soul: as for example, that he will send her many other
afflictions, or else make her endure this present affliction along time, yea
that we will cause her to suffer even the pains of hell; and then ought she
with great promptnes to be wholly resigned unto God. He also is accustomed to
give the choice of two kinds of afflictions for her to accept of one. And in
this case raising and ^ixing the eyes of her soul wholly in the perfect love of
God, with a marvelous purity, she ought to make her election in God, and this
choice must be always of that which will redound most to his honor and glory.

7. The seventh is, in what manner she ought to behave herself, that she may
use all her powers in the execution of this affair, or of this affliction, and
of all that which shall be necessary, to come to the height of this perfection.

REMEDIES.
FOR as much as ordinarily in the exercising of all these things, it is
necessary that all the powers, and faculties of the soul concur thereunto, to
put it duly in execution; she ought fully to resolve with herself to observe
all that she has deliberated upon, in such sort, that as well in general, as
in particular, she may perfectly accomplish, and put in execu^io^ all this that
she has already chosen, and resolved to do in the present affliction, or in
any other thing: and she ought to take heed diligently to correct the faults
that may happen in the execution, ^yther by reason of her imagination, and
representation of afflictions, or of the understanding, or of the will, or of
all the other powers. And thus the soul that is perfect, shall become much
more perfect: and all this is a disposition unto the state, that re^dereth the
soul wholly divine.

THE DAILY EXAMEN of our Conscience, especially at Night.. 1.
TO give God thanks for all benefits formerly received, and especially of that
present day.

2. To demand grace and true light, to know and hate our sins.

3. To call our souls to account, wherein we may have that day offended God:
having special considera^io^ of such defects whereunto we are most inclined.

4. To crave pardon humbly of God for all sins and defects, whereof we find our
selves guilty.

5. To make a firm purpose, through Gods grace to avoid sin hereafter, with
intention to confess those wherein we have transgressed. Lastly, say Pater
noster. Aue Maria. Credo.

THE PARTICVLAR EXAMEN to be made at three times, very necessary for the better
disposing, and searching into our selves.. 2.
THE first is in the morning when, as soon as we awake, we must purpose to keep
a dilige^r watch that day over our selves, for the avoiding of some sin or
imperfection, which we are desirou^ to amend.

The 2. is at Noone, when we must demand Gods grace, that we may remember how
often we have fallen into that particular sin or defect, and be more heedful
hereafter. Then, let us make our first Examen, calling our soul to account,
and running over every hour of the day to that present, how often we have
fallen therinto: and let us make so many marke^ in the former syne of the
ensuing table. This done let us purpose to keep our selves more warily the rest
of the day.

The 3. Time, shall be at Night after supper, when we must make the second
Examen, running over every hour from the former examination until that,
calling to mind, and nu^bring the times wherein we have offended, making so many
marks in the second line of the table mentioned before.

FOUR ADDITIONS very profitable, for the more easy and speedy rooting out of
any Vice, or sin.. 3.
THE 1. is, that as often as we commit that particular sin, we be sorry for it
from our heart, in witness whereof let us lay our hand upon our breast: which may
be done at all times, without being perceived by others.

The 2. is, that at Night we number and compare the mathes of both lines
together, the former line being appointed for the first examen, and the later
for the seco^d^ and let us see, if from the former has followed any amendment.

The 3. is, that we compare the examinations of the first and second day
together, and mark whether any amendment has been made.

The 4. is, that by comparing two weeks together, it may appear what
amendment has been made, or omitted.

It is also to be noted, that the first of the lines following, which is longer
then the rest, is appointed for the first day, the second somewhat shorter for
the second day, and so likewise for every day, shorter and shorter. It being
meet that the number of our faults be daily diminished.

Sunday -- Mundy -- Twesday -- Wednesday -- Thursday -- Friday -- Saturday --
CERTAIN ADVERTISMENTS necessary for the better making of our Prayer.. 4.
BEFORE Prayer, the Soul must exercise it self in some acts of Humility, by
considering its own baseness, and the greatness of God, with whom it is to
treat, and falling down upon our knees we must begin with the sign of the
Cross, blessing our selves, and craving of the divine Majesty grace, to spend
that short time well, which we are to employ in that holy Exercise; so as all
out thoughts, words, and works may be sincerely addressed to the greater glory
of God. Moreover we must imagine a certain Composition of place, and therein
accommodate our selves in such manner as is taught us, by our spiritual Father
and Directour in that case. Finally we must persuade out selves, that we stand
in the presence of God, who is both within and round about us, to the end that
the imagination thereof may incite us to greater attention, confidence, and
reverence. Next we must ask of the divine goodness that, which we desire,
answerable to the matter whereof the meditation is to be made. For example, if I
meditate of sin, I will crave pardon for my own etc.

We must also make one, or more Colloquies at the end, according to the
motions, and affection which the soul shall feel in it self, in speaking
sometimes to the Blessed Trinity, sometimes to every one of the three Divine
Persons, or to the B. Virgin, or the Saints, giving thanks other whiles for
benefits received, other whiles craving Gods help, for getting of some one
virtue in particular.

The repetitions, that our B. Father S. ^gnatius teaches in the first Week of
his Spiritual Exercises must be made after two, or three meditations, in such
manner, as is specified in the same place, making three Colloquies, to wit, to
the Father, to the Son, and to the B. Virgin.

THE TABLE.
1. WHAT Perfection ought to be presupposed in the Soul, that enters into
the practice of that which is treated of, in this Discourse. 2. Two Principles
wherein consists Perfection. 3. Of the (...). Estate: and first of
Anihilatio^. 4. Of the first Degree of Abnegation, Subtraction Conformity: and
of the Abject on, and Anihilation of himself. 5. The second Degree. 6. The
third Degree. 7. The fourth Degree. 8. The fifth Degree. 9. The six Degree. 10.
Of the second Estate. 11. Of the third, and last Estate.
THE LADDER of Perfection.
THE first Exercise of Anihilation. The 2. Exercise of Disappropriation 3. The
Exercise of Indifferency. 4. The Exercise of Conformity. 5. The Exercise of
Uniformity. 6. The Exercise of Deiformity. 7. Of Self love. 8. Of the Effects
of self love. 9. A Description of self-love. 10. Properties of a soul
insected with self-love. 11. Remedies against self-love. 12. A supply of this
Abridgment, to ascend unto a most high Perfection. 13. The Examen of our
Conscience.
FINIS.

