THE SECRETARIES STVDIE: CONTAINING NEW familiar Epistles: OR DIRECTIONS, for
the formal, orderly, and judicious inditing of Letters.

Whether Amorous. OR Loving. Whether Moral. OR Civil. Whether Oeconomicall. OR
Household business. Whether Political. OR Witty. Whether Obiurgatory. OR
Chiding. Whether Excusatory. OR Excusing. Whether Petitionary. OR Requesting.
Whether Gratulatory. OR Giving thanks. Whether Nuncupatory. OR Relating News.
By Thomas Gainsford, Esquire.

Sic iuuat indulgere fugacibus horis.
LONDON Printed by T. C. for Roger Iackeson, and are to be sold at his shop in
Fleetstreet, over against the Conduit* 1616.

TO THE RIGHT HOPEFVL YOUNG GENTLEMAN Master John Mounson at Charter House, and
as likely to advance his Virtues to Honorable eminency, as any expectation can
warrant.
GEnerous Youth,
without other ceremony or complement, I am now to adventure a journey (and a
fearful one) as the first voyage that ever I made into the streights of
opinion, or severe Censure: so that pollitick and temporising-men would
contract a sure bargain with some rich merchant, honorable patron, or
sufficient Statist to protect and countenance the enterprise: But in despite
of adverse Fortune, or calumniation, I have made choice of your love, favor,
virtue, and good condition, of which I take the advantage in your virgin
chastity, and souls purity, and wherein I will as much rejoice, as if larger
embraces had opened themselves to make me credulous of sincere welcome: Be
therefore your self, (expectable Gentl:) and do but love me for old loves
sake; and I shall be so proud, yea, presumptuous in your acceptance, that
neither winds nor seas shall affright me, until I have made a satisfactory
voyage; or (being ouer-freighted with heavy Fortune) sincke the whole Stock
or Remain of mine abilities in this kind, in other like adventures: which if
it should so fall out, I could but conclude,

Hic finis Priami. Yours assured, though there be no assurance amongst men:
Tho: Gainsford.

Non opus est digitis, per quos arcana loquaris? Errata: page: 5. lin: 4. read
tracted.
Page: 10. m. read loose. p: 13. l: 24. read sturd. p, 17. l. 6. r. even. fol.
19. l. 15. r. sorer. f. 26. l, 5. r. adornation. f. 27. l. 7. r. country life.
f. 30. l. 7. r. go p. 31. l. 26. r. five. p. 34. l. 2* besides, for so. p. 34.
l. 33. r. stake p. 35. l. 16. r. work. p. 36. l. 26 leave out to. p. 43. l. 27.
r. sedation l. 29. r. inuitations, p. 45. l. 13. re* a bettering. f, 46. l. 26.
r. grow. l. 32. r. Lords favor, p. 47. l, 30. r. hold up p. 50, l. 11, r, you
might gather, l, 14, r, having p, 53, l, 12. r. for the, p, 57, in the mar.
following and described, l, 21, r, O God! that p, 107, l, 30, r, obsolete.

THE TABLE.
Amourous, or loving Letters.
THe Lover afraid to loose his friend contracted. The Lover troubled with
suspicion of hazarding his desire. The Lover justifies his love from inward
virtues, and outward comeliness. The Lover finds fault with neglect of
titles. The lover complains of sequestration. The lover cannot endure a
rival. The Lover cannot soon forget his love, after firm rooting. The lover
desires secrecy, not over liberal discoueries. The lover does not tie his
affection to outward beauty. The lover is afraid to loose his contentment.
The lover maintains that a little jealousy will season affection.
Moral or Civil Letters.
True Friendship. Friendly precepts. An other of the propertyes of friendship.
Friends would have no unkindness taken for any thing. Necessity causes
importunity. Friendship is broken through denial of trifles, and presuming of
another weakness. Friendship is lost through unkindness and discontinuance.
Ingratitude is not befitting a Gentl: A man out of good manners must answer
Letters. Jealousy should not be shown without just cause. The difference
between a willing and compulsed absence. Friendship is afraid to be forgotten.
A good Wife compared to a Ship at Sea. A friend desires a Gentlewoman to
unite the inward virtues to outward comeliness.
Oeconomicall Letters, or of household business.
A Gentleman must take heed how he settles himself in the Country as a
Farmer. If a Gentleman will be a Farmer, it is best to obtain the principal
House, or credit of the highest place in the town. Concerning the building
and ordring a house, with retaining of servants Whether a Gentlewoman may with
her credit let out Lodgings for money. The danger of disagreeme^t between man
and wife, with their duties. How Children ought to be brought up. How Servants
are to be instructed.
Political, or witty Letters.
Women in years should rather look for rich advancement, then wanton
satisfaction. A Gentl: should not be servant to any, that has a sufficient
estate of his own: and if he be, with what policy he must contriue it. No
Oaths must be believed before marriage. He that will enrich himself by
service, must follow some thryuing Officer. The Lady must be observed, by such
as mean to thrive under the lord. Some Lord or other must be made an Agent, to
obtain a suit of the Prince. Suites in Court are not dispatched without great
attendance. A military policy to restrain insolent mutiners. What policy
soever ambition builds upon, it is cast down with death and destruction. Men
must submit to their Fortune.
Obiurgatory or chiding letters.
Against a son, for his disordered life. Against inconstancy, and following
a strumpet. Against swearing. Against covetousness. Against denial of trifles
amongst friends, Against idle excuses. Against pride, and tyrannous behavior
in great persons. Against foolishnes and dishonesty in a servant. Against
Drunkenness. Against the breach of Wedlock in the man. Against Whoredom in the
woman.
Excusatory or defensive letters.
Excuse for not lending money. Excuse for being importunate in the behalf of a
friend. Excuse for keeping company, and going to Court. Excuse for sheltring
with a stranger in a storm. Excuse for not dispatching a suite of importance.
Excuse for tarrying too long from a Wife. Excuse for not dispatching of
business. Excuse for not writing and attending unwilling persons to be spoken
with. Excuse for not forbearing a friend, presuming to disgrace another. Excuse
for not being surety for a friend. Excuse for not entertaining a friend as he
ought to be. Excuse for not soothing up of humors.
Petitionary, or Letters of Request.
A Request to requite discurtesie. A request for Money. A request to entertain
a daughter. A request for assurance of a Farm A request to forbear a debt. A
request to forbear a dangerous Ladies company. A request to be charitable. A
request to entertain a Scholar for a Soldier. A request for the Knighting of
a friend, and worthy Gentleman. A request to defend a Widow in her right,
against all wrong and calumniation. A request for an office for another A
request for advise in matters of difficulty.
Gratulatory, or Letters of giving thanks.
Thankefulnes for a daughters good bringing up, and well-bestowing.
Thankefulnes for recompencing the giving of a Book. Thankefulnes for an
office. Thankefulnes for defending one against a great adversary.
Thankfulness for not believing a false report. Thankefulnes for lending of
Money. Thankfulness for a timely good turn.
Nuncupatorie, or Letters of News.
News from Xante and Candie. News from Constantinople. News from Scio. News
from Metelline. News from Malta. News from Venice. News from Turine. News
from Zidon and Jerusalem. News from Ciprus.
FINIS.
AMOROVS LETTERS
To the only Life of his desires.
Sweet Soul? What mean you to do with me? The lover is affraide to lose his
beloved.
or what think you I shall do with my self; considering your virtues, which
I term excellencies have been Adamants of my feruentnesse, and I erected my
building upon so good a foundation, that you have compared the Sympathy of our
loves, to well tuned Music. From whence comes then this retraction? or how
can you be so cruel to terrify me with suspicion? Oh do not think that I
have praised those eyes, which my supposes, in absence, imagine to reflect a
very Sunlike luster? that I have doted on that favor and comeliness, which in
the contemplation did ever transport me beyond my self? that I have been
enamored on your beauty, which in the gazing has overcome me with admiration?
that I have been ravished with those kisses, which seemed an infused life to
my distracted heart? that I have been amazed on that face, which me thought was
a very map of loveliness, and all in vain? as though I could pass over the
remembrance of my contentment with slightness, and frame my self to believe
contraries. No no, (Sweet soul) I shall not, may not, nor cannot. For it is
not the fathers frowns, nor the brothers storming, that I respect, but your
sadness and tears, your sorrows and complaints, which me thinks resemble
spots disgratiously chancing to pure linen: be therefore the pattern of your
self: Let virtue remain vnmaimed: continue constant and well satisfied: and
for my part, what ever goodness may arise from our allowable proceedings, I will
justify. To be plain, let the assurance of your desires warrant my hopes,
remove my jealousy, and I will lose this life, rather then thus hazard the life
of my life. But I hope I have encountered with an understanding woman, and there
shall need no such expostulation. Nay I am assured I have cast my self into
the lap of virtue, which like the square Die being every way thrown stands
upright, so that if there should be any blocks in the course of our
justifiable desires; either a strong arm of policy shall tumble them aside, or
a noble resolution spurn them away in scorn: in which assurance I will rather
breathe with joy, then pant for fear; and at last proclaim to the world,
there be women will remember their vows, and can be loyal in spite of
contradiction or calumniation.

Your afflicted friend.

To his fullness of Contentment.
The Lover distracted with fear of hazzarding his desire.
MY only Beloved, I had not thought love, especially in such youth, had bin
capable of moderation, that already you can be contented to dispute the matter
with reason, and to consent to the peevish restraint of ill concluding
arguments; which some envious tongue has whispered unto you. Oh that our first
meeting had received this restraint: then with small grief I might have over
passed my fear: or had the fire been kindled with artificial degrees, I might
have prevented the flaming outright. But now when I am in the violence of my
speed, when the heart burns with passion, when my very life depends on the
hope of your assent, and that, in a manner, you resolved my cure and redress,
to stand at a stay, to dispute the matter, to find cause of distasting, works
in me impatience, so that I know not how to demean my self. Oh, do not
slightly pass over these things, or with an unkindly gravity censure my
proceedings. Remember I have, will, and must love; and what cannot or dare not
love effect? Is there a suspicion of prodigality? love will be a shepherd, nay
a slave. Is there a mistrust of incontinency? love will settle desire, and
quite extinguish all flames of unjust concupisence. Is there a breaking out of
folly? love works discretion, and reformeth abuses. Is there a fear of want?
love has no want, and contriueth impossibilities. Is there a doubt of any
thing else? love attaineth any thing else, and facilitateth any difficulty.
Alas, what could I not say to plead for my self? what would I not say, nay
what would I not do to please my self, especially when such loveliness
enamoreth? Do not therefore believe: faith and honesty bids you not believe?
myself bids you not believe these slanderous enemies of affection, these
brokers of misreports: for I protest you shall find it otherwise, and they in
the disceptation prove ashamed of wronging the innocent. Let me therefore come
to appease them, let me come to satisfy you, let me come to justify my
self: nay let me come to die quickly or live happily: for this is
intolerable, and I cannot credit my fears, nor believe these tormenting
apparitions.

Your living dying friend.

To the only hope of his Fortunes. Love occasioned through a unity of inward
virtues and outward comeliness.
Mrs. B.
MY Souls life, When I beheld you first, me thought nature determined to open
a storehouse and show us some excellent workmanship, and so as a man longing
for novelties, I looked and gazed on the same, yea with admiration commended
her handiworke: but after I had considered what inward virtues caused the
motion of this outward worth, and loveliness, I could not but compare it to a
rich casket, containing within it more richer jewels: so that you must not
wonder at my likeing the same; but rather maintain the cause of my judgment,
for bestowing it self on so well deserving a subject: nor is this flattery or
idle discourse, but justice in yours, and necessity in my case: for as you
have inflamed mine affection, so there must be used some means of satisfaction.
Thus requesting you to consider me, as a man, whose thoughts, words, actions,
life, soul, and all attend you, not darinng to behold the Sun of the world,
till they receive comfort from the Sun of your savors, I remain

The honourer of your matchless perfection.

To her chiefeest Contentment.
The Lover finds fault with neglect of titles.
MY Love and Joy, I have read, that the Emperors of Rome did commonly look on
the date and superscription of their Letters; whereat, if they were distasted
they rejected the same, and would not ouer-view them further: but yet I will
not serve you so by taking such state and imitation upon me; but impute your
neglect of our covenant concerning reciprocal titles, to a gentle trial of my
simplicity and love; withal, entreating henceforward, not to let
forgetfulness, or contempt put in a finger, lest by intrusion or sufferance it
bring in a hand, and so the whole body. For why should you give me any cause of
suspicion, when a warrant is sealed of our happiness; or assume to your self
a counterfeit liberty of trying my patience, when you know I will pull out mine
own heart, before it shall entertain a thought of alteration? Therefore I pray
you remember your self, and those vows you have conttacted; remember me, and
that affection you have inflamed; remember virtue, and that goodness which you
have commended; and remember love with that honesty you have professed: and so
I expect, that as you are my chiefest content, your next Letter shall confirm
me your choicest delight.

None but yours.

To the Honorable Lady, T.G.
HONORABLE, Love complains of sequestration.
and worthily honored Lady: Although fame has set open the enclosure of your
praises, whereby Honor and Virtue remain exposed to the world, as you see a
rich Diamond augmented in his luster by the cunning of the workman: yet is
misfortune so tyrannous unto me, that I am necessited to an untimely
banishment, even when there appeared life in your patronage, and delight in
your loveliness: so that now to sequester my self is an absolute walking in
darkness, and a miserable staggering without supportation. Yet again, when I
consider, with whom I have encountered, and that I am fallen into the hands of a
generous spirit, and heroicke worthiness; I conceive great pleasure in my
confidence, and I begin to grow proud, that I may publish your virtue, I dare
say loyal Constancy. Be therefore then your self great Lady: and let the
opinion I conceive of my fortunes, encourage my endeavor, that all the actions my
industry shall undertake may receive life from the beams of your name. Then
though I might raise my glory equal with the Sun I would not fail to lay it
prostrate to your high acceptatio^: and so I request you give me leave to
diuulge to the world, that the sphere, in which I move, is governed by your
influence* that I cannot live without your favor; that I will not love, except
you vouchsafe it; that I have no other Lady, but your self; no other world
then the place of your residence. And thus I bid you fare as well as vvishes
can enlarge, leaving my soul in your tuition: which if you preserve for her
own, yours, or my sake; Oh how happy shall I be, and with glad tidings
will it return unto me, and (I hope) command me to return unto you: and so I
rest in the best expectation, and bascia la honorata manu.

Your Honors devoted.

To the Honorable and his highly respected Lady, B. S.
RIght honorable Lady, I cannot deny but a Diamond is a precious stone, Love
cannot endure a rival or competitor.
though imbased in lead: but excellently polished, and set out to the best
becoming, it must needs constrain a farther praise and admiration: so fares
it with Virtue, which no question is allowable in the meanest persons: but
when there is a uniting of many graces, as beauty, generous mind, noble
birth, settled wisdom, affable demeanor, and such like; it not only
approaches absolute perfection, but binds us to high and strict observation:
of all which I must and dare publish you a insta^ce, so that it is the pride
of my life to justify my souls desire to serve you; and the glory of my
bondage, that I am made servile to such worthiness: command therefore ( great
Lady) but with all command me to love; for I cannot live except I love; nor
care to die so I may love you only, who are worthy of all love. Yet my
dearest happiness, I beseech you mistake me not; for howsoever I have
subjected my self, I (like a Sovereign) can endure no co^petitor: and
although it cannot be chosen, but the very stars ouervvatch you, and
therefore many eyes on earth look tovvard you, and many hearts vvish you well;
yet shall I never endure another claim, much less a daring hand to take you
in possession: be therefore thus circumspect for humanities sake; not betray
your virtue to corruption, nor my poor valor to inevitable danger. For if you
frustrate my hopes either by willingness or wantonness, I renounce the
world, all women, and my self. But if the high strongest arm stretch it
self tovvard you with inhumanity, or compulsion; my rest is up to make it
shrink back again, or cut it off in the extension.

Yours in death it self.

To the Noble and truly virtuous Lady, F.M.
MOst worthy Lady had not my love received life from the breathing heat
issuing from your gracious acceptance; Love will hardly be suppressed, after it
has taken firm rooting.
it might well have recoyled with the first violent reiection, and taken out
a new lesson of restraint, with a civil acknovvledging your greatness, and
confessing that the stars are only to be looked upon with an abasing
reverence; but you know, (and none but you shall know) that when I made my
self a stop, as afraid to go further then either my strength or policy could
direct me, a lovely hand took me by the arm, and drevv me along to the height
of my happiness, wherein I vvil sit as glorious, as the Sun in his
strength, and in despite of malign circumstances, or maleuolent aspects,
embrace my fortune with gladness. Therefore I pray you desist from
questioning my presumptuous attempt, or affrighting me with your greatness, or
tormenting me with discovery, or murdering me with suspicion, or sending me
to hell with terror of your loss. For I dare, and will thus answer every
particular. Concerning my presumption, It is easier to reach at a high bough
then to stoop to a low straw; it is glorious to be busied in honorable
designs: and he is made famous in the attempt, though he fail in the
conquest. It is a worthy resolution to aim at a well deserving object: and how
ever the hazard be, there is a show of a generous spirit; since fortune and
love are painted blind in their portraitures. Concerning your greatness, we
have many instances of Queens and Princes pulling up inferior persons to
honor: nor is love tied to such laws of priuacy; but being naked, himself
shows plainly, that flesh and blood lies as naked to the incursions of his
passions in high and low: the low not ouer-awed with titular dignities, or
outward shows; nor the pre-eminence of the hie privileged from amorous
affecting the low. For my self, I am in blood generous, and in affection
fully contracted to loyalty: concerning discovery, who shall betray us but our
selves? nay, who dare whisper against us but jealousy? and in that lies the
secret of our prosperity. For what is difficult to get, is carefully
preserved; and where there is danger in the adventure, there is sweetness, and
joy exceeding other joys, when the peril is ouerpassed: therefore be you
reposed, and let me bustle with mischance; for I am resolved to love you
against all ouerwatchings. Concerning suspicion, Oh give not wings to my
fears, that some other will intrude and participate my immunities; or do you
it only to make a trial of my spirit? Believe it; before I will consent to
such baseness, I will pray for Sampsons strength to pull down the house on
all our heads together. And concerning your loss, Oh there is death in the
very sound, and it cannot be raised out of any other circle, then envy at my
prosperity, or your own desire of a more worthy servant, whereat I am now
struck silent: and unless you confidently resolve me what to trust unto, I
will not live to write you another Letter.

Yours, not to live without you.

To her best choice, C.D.
MY loves Pride, Love desires secrecy, not over liberal discoueries.
Although I am informed, that by your liberal praises of me, some quick
apprehension discovered your liking, yet cannot I take it so ill, as to draw
you within the compass of reprehension, because I would not slack the first
vehemence, wherein love has nobly displayed his colors on all sides. Let us
therefore continue resolute; and if by some small absence we sometimes slack
the burning of these fires, shall it not resemble a Smiths forge, who casts
water on his coals to strengthen the heat, and make the flame more glorious?
Yet by way of caution, it is not always befitting to speak what we think,
nor report what we know, lest a captious ear mistake our discourse, and a
passionate heart set the tongue at random. As for our selves, there has been
made a reciprocal trial: and for my own part, as you expect constancy in me,
I request secrecy in you, and so am resolved to love you, and none but you,
while I am warm in my hearts blood.

Yours in the midst of fear.

To his virtuous and dearly beloved, M.A.
SWeet Heart, True love is not tied to outward beauty.
What a strange counterma^d did you send me, not to visit you, because your
late sickness had cast a defiance in beauties face, as if my liking depended
on outward shows! Why, good Soul? when reason had won the field of passion, I
loved a virtuous Cassandra, not a fair Hellen; a noble spirit, not an outward
feature; a constant resolution, not a fading comeliness: and yet I am
persuaded no disaster whatsoever can have power to controwle thy beauty or
bounty; only time excepted, which must wear us out with death, and then shall
our souls welcome a perpetuity: therefore I pray thee let me come, if it be
but to show my self a man a lover of virtue, and maintainer of all constant
and honest resolutions.

Yours ever resolved.

To the Mistress of his thoughts, F.D.
Love is afraid to look his contentment.
MY Love and life, I hope it is not come to that pass, that you can be
contented to dispute the matter with discretion, as though it lay in your
choice, which way to travel to the palace of Felicity; as though wisdom had
taught you to wipe away the forces of Fancy, with a commanding hand; as though
some divine inspiration had forewarned you of ensuing mishaps. For sure no
objection can now be made, which long since received not a foil in the
encounter; therefore I pray you (if my fortunes be so bad, that I must revive
your memory) go to that grove where we called the trees to witness, and swear
by the pleasant shade, that nothing but the fruit of enjoying one another,
should cool the fires of love, and there recount the words we counterchanged,
the vows we contracted, the tears we drunk up from each others faces. But I
can say no more, unless I shall be enforced to exclaim. I am unworthy to
live; because my dearest life supposes me unworthy to love, or be beloved:
which if it be but in show; as you break the seals of these Letters, you
break the strings of my heart.

Yours dying in constancy.

Civil Letters.
To his best beloved and more then much respected Mrs. G.Z.
WOrthily beloved, These pretty crosses and contradictions make Love the
sweeter, A little jealousy seasoneth true love
and strengthen Fancy the more, when the veil of jealousy is taken away, and
an honest heart has taught a strong arm the cunning to turn aside all
obstacles of our delight: yet believe me, it was a miserable temptation, for
you to swear my falsehood, and lay the weight of disloyalty on the breast of an
honest man. especially to raise your suspicion, from so unworthy a person, and
degenerating a cause, when there was no motive to startle my resolutions, nor
thought to disparage your worth. Say the course of the Danse brought me with
her to a turning change, and that afterward I commended her graces and
comeliness, I could do no less out of courtship and good manner: but to say
that either procceeded from amorous passion, is to be over passionat, and
unwarrantable by reason, or laws of love. Besides, some tongues have traduced
her for a wanton: and then is beauty as ill bestowed, as valor in a profane
swaggerer: so that me thinks you should rather have challenged any other for
deprauing me in this kind, then been challenger your self to raise a greater
disease. But I hope you are now satisfied, as no such misprision shall ever
endanger the unity of our loves again.

Yours fearfully loving.

To the worthiest of all my friends.
MY other self, You have commanded me to write, and I durst not but obey: A
letter describing true friendship.
nay, you have prescribed the method, and therefore I will not alter the manner:
but make you believe I have apprehended your will, and would thus satisfy your
desire. True friendship is an vndissimuled consent of our affection toward one
another, and a very transportation of two hearts into one body: so that two
friends in a manner love with one mind, speak with one tongue, execute with
one hand, live with one life, and sometimes die with one death. Amongst friends
must be no contradiction, no disproportion of conditions, no dissimilitude in
manners, nor talk of mine and thine. Does he sorrow? thou must mourn: does
he rejoice? thou must not repine: does he complain? thou must not accuse:
does he demand? thou must not deny: does he want? thou must not murmr:
does he contriue? thou must practice: does he desire? thou must not reprove.
For though private thoughts are proper to our selves, yet the fortunes, goods,
persons, and estate of friends, are to remain in a pleasant community: upon
this, some Philosophers have maintained, that one man can have but one friend;
framing thus an argument, A contrariis. If there be danger in many enemies, by
reason of the many and uncertain courses to revenge: there is trouble in many
friends, by occasion of divisions in consent. According to the opinion of
Aeschines, there was no such grief as to be divided from him we did love. For
look what properties love ever contained, were in friendship maintained: and
because love could not receive her estimation from untoward liberty to change;
friendship has been denied her desires to alter. Tully, the light of
eloquence, had friendship in such account, that he preferred it before kindred,
because in the dissolution of love, the name of a kinsman remained, but in the
privation of friendship all titles and goodness ended. If then with these
properties you can bear with my imperfections, I with these conditions will
tolerate your defects, and so shall this name of friendship pass and repasse
reciprocally between us.

Yours inseperable.

To his highly esteemed.
WOrthy Sir, A letter of friendly precepts.
Whereas you complain of my slownesse in visiting you, and slacknes in writing
concerning your self, I am determined to remain with the same faith and order
I ever accustomed; and touching those latter motives, I will come as near your
satisfaction as I can in this slender discovery. Understand me then, that my
poor experience would open the mystery of this knowledge unto you: that
fortune, which we so often profanely remember, is no way to be overcome but
with Virtue: that Virtue is never so well to be entertained, as in youth: that
youth is but some special flower in a curious garden, kept by extraordinary
diligence, till an untimely blast perish the stalk, and impouerish the beauty:
that beauty is like a white wall curiously trimmed, which if an envious hand
do besprinkle with a few unclean drops, a present alteration daunteth the
company: that company is like a strange net catching all fish, unless they
slip into some unknown nookes, or avoid the danger by other cunning: that
cunning is like holding the Woolfe by the ear, which if you wrest hard, you
are bitten; if you let go, you are in peril of life: that life is like a
strong timbred tree, which at the masters appointment is cut down in a small
time: that time is resembled to sweet smelling flowers, which must be staid to
please the sense, and stilled to heal the body, or else they will be fair to
the eye, and as unprofitable as ill disposed friends: that friends are like
childrens sports, who for a new Counter refuse an old Angel, and to go to a
strange nurse, forsake the nearest kindred: and that kindred are like Tantalus
apples, which keep their show till they be touched; but once pressed, crumble
to powder.

These be principles to my grief experienced, and may without offense be to
others good embraced; not that I go about to draw you into suspicion: but
because I would preserve your remembrance toward me, whereby I must needs be
satisfied, if you be not displeased.

Yours as I have professed.

To his esteemed friend, C.N.
The properties of true friendship.
SIR, Had not our friendship received reciprocal strength from true virtue,
and worthy conversation; I could slightly have passed over your last denial of
trifles, and quietly gathered the raines of discretion to restrain the
forwardness of impudency or combersomnesse: but when I remembered our
combination, and with what conditions we contracted a league, especially the
nature and property of friendship, me thought there was a pleasure to name you
so, and a comfort to find you so: therefore from henceforth let us understand
one another better; either firmly to maintain the cause of kindness, or
lightly to leave it under the colors of courtesy. For the best Philosophers
have chained love and friendship with equal goodness, so that as love can
endure no competition, friendship must abide no community: as love can have but
one favorite; friendship should admit but of one companion: as love
pardons, friendship forbeareth; as love commands all, friendship is denied
nothing: as love enters when he list, friendship does so vncontrowled: as love
triumphs over the heart and affection, friendship reigns over body and
goods: no excuses, no drawings back, no contracted brow, no delays, no hiding
the head, no daintiness, or absurd ceremonies; but a happy Sympathy to
strengthen goodwill, and an absolute power to command, and readiness to obey one
other. If then with these conditions, you can be contented to march arm in
arm to the house of contentment, I am yours as you mine; and both to show the
world an example of happy imitation.

Yours indissoluble.

To his assured friend, F. L.
SIR, The properties of true friendship.
To crave pardon were to submit, and more then you look for: obstinately to
offend were injurious to you, and not befitting a Gentleman. To avoid therefore
the one, and to eschew the other: For not writing, imagine want of skill: for
not coming, suppose my business to hinder me: for not sending, think I could
not conveniently: thus you see I am willing to be excused, where I am loath to
be accused; and considering I love you better then other men, I would not
distaste you if it were possible: especially because I have tied my self to
true observation, as you have professed a happy contract of kindness. In hope
or rather assurance hereof, I pray you present my service to that lovely party,
whom I compared at our last meeting to a rich Diamond orderly inameled, and
extraordinarily set out to the best grace; and all to show the cunning of the
workman: so that if my fortune could but conduce me to the way of
entertainment, it would sure exceed the worlds happiness, and I durst search the
whole earth for AEsculapius bones to restore her eyes: but if you play the
truant with me to show her this letter, give me leave to be my own
interpeter, and let not your excellent wits triumph over my simplicity.

Ever your own.

To her tried and trusty friend.
Necessity causes importunity.
WOrthy Sir, Having relied on your noble promises, and knowing my self on a
sure and honest ground, concerning the secrets of my discontents, I rested some
way satisfied in the expectation of the performance; and thought my self happy
in this unhappiness, that I had fallen into the hands of so noble a Gentleman:
so that if there were no more in it, then love and assurance of your self, I
would have been silent, till your own leisure had served you rightly to
consider me. But necessities knocking so hard and so fast, and conspiring with
the suddenness of time against my patience and quiet, I am enforced to
ouerpasse all limits, and step to an earnest importunity, to request both your
confidence of my honesty in this business, and suppliment to keep me out of
the hand of misery and despair. This humanity challenges at your hand, this
occasion compels me to request: so that if I find you no less then I hope,
nor no worse then I deserve, we shall both be pleased; and I have cause to
proclaim your worth even to my best friends: and thus I have cast my self
down into the scale of equal consideration; take up then an upright hand, and
peize me accordingly: but withal, I pray you let no indirect strength turn
the beam aside. For I have ever loved you truly, and therefore rely on your
friendship at this time absolutely.

Not living without you.

To his assured Friend, G.M.
Denial of trifles, and presumption of another weakness, makes a breach in
friendship.
SIR, I would not willingly have our friendship receive any maime, lest my
wounds grow festred for want of a skillful Surgeon; considering I have loved
you above all men, and found you many ways true and free-hearted: yet I am
afraid we do both fail in judgment and true use of conversation. For you
see, that that hand which has, or should cover my nakedness, has not only left
me bare, and subject to cold: but ever turned the worst side to the view and
derision of passengers; insomuch that your last denial of trifles, and
glorious liberty of deceivable speeches to please your self, has made me
contemptible to servile creatures, and debarred my desires, when I determined
but a small satisfaction, which with a little suppliment had had a free
passage. But now I see my self more miserable for the want of Virtue, then
want of money; therefore I am resolved to be reposed: and if you think me
worth the keeping, I pray you hereafter forbear those disloyal and palpable
discoueries, indecent contradictions, unkind denials, and triuiall excuses.
For a small help will stay a fainting man, when a strong arm cannot lift him
up, that is fallen flat on the ground. I urge not this, to draw you to any
inconveniences concerning your purse, but to keep us both upright touching our
credits, and so with a mere disturbed hand, and troubled mind, I bid you
farewell; but I am resolved to endure no further unsavory jests against me, for
any hopes of worldly helps.

Yours, as I have cause.

To his Honorable friend, Sir G.S.
WOrthy Sir, Discontinuance and unkindness loses friends in the end.
Had not my life received heat from the Sun of your favors, and as I may
say, from the first influence, wherewith that Noble Lord so graciously beheld
me, I might quietly go forward without once looking back to see, wherefore I
am despised, and why, without offending, debarred from the same. But because I
must and will acknowledge it, and in a manner confess my self all darkness
without it, yea ready to be plunged into every durty bogge and irrecouerable
danger: I humbly beseech you therefore, either to extend a gracious hand to stay
a fainting soul from sinking, or give me leave to blame my misfortune, that
has thus subjected me to the violence of so dangerous displeasure; whereby if
you be not the more noble, discontinuance shall make me worse, then water spilt
out of a vessel never to be taken up again. For what a terror is this? nay,
how inexcusable, for my self to have you in town, and I not to visit you, or
so much as once to be thought upon? yet it may be, this eternal horror of
gentle minds (shame and wants) have only stirred up jealousy to afflict me
without cause; considering you will be still your self, and love me for being
honest, and endeavoring to make virtue proud, that poverty cannot abase her:
In which hope I send you my true and faithful heart, howeuer I remain most
miserable in the fear of your loss.

Yours in true friendship.

To his Honorable friend, Sir. T.B.
WOrthy Sir, In those times, when Dracon the tyrant of the East, advanced
himself to the height of sovereignty, Ingratitude is not befitting a gentleman.
ingratitude and injustice were punished with death: so that if he underwent
the imputation of cruelty, it was not for satiating a blood-thirsty-minde, but
revenging the neglect of his statutes: now if examples endure longer then
precepts, had not we need in these corrupt times to stand on a guard of
circumspection, not to vilipend virtue less then the heathen, nor practice
impiety worse then idolaters; and if they thought ingratitude worthy of death;
I hope we shall (at least) suppose it unbefitting a Gentleman. Wherefore
without further complement, or larger circumstances for those many favors,
wherewith your plentiful hand has even laden me; I open the exchecquour of
the poor, and thank you with a public acknowledgement of the same. Yet give
me leave (considering mischances are multiplied upon me) to resemble my self
to a man tumbling down a stairs, who never leaves falling, till he come to
the bottom. And concerning your last promise unperformed, how can I be
compared better then to a man lying faint and wounded on the ground, whom some
courteous hand seems to advance, but lifting him up half way, lets go
his hold, and so he falls back again to his sore hurt? therefore, good Sir,
either give my hope fuller wings, that it may take a higher flight of security,
or let me die at once, to avoid an everliving misery: and this I urge the
rather, because in cases of untoward distress, there is courtesy in quick
dispatch; as in the benefits of friendship there is a double pleasure in the
timelinesse, and orderly disposing of favor. Now my request is, if any
ungentle hand has cast dirt into the pure stream of your love; Oh, let it not
so remain, but either cleanse it your self, or give me leave to pull it out,
what danger soever I incur: and if my fortune be so malignant, that a slavish
report has ecchoed against my peace, Oh, let me know the particulars, and
answer for my self accordingly. And thus assuring my self, that I shall fall
into the hands of judgment, with quick apprehension, I leave all to
favorable construction, and commit you to his hands, who can advance you to
the height of your desire, and merit of your worth.

Post scriptum, Gratia ab officio, quod mor a tardat, abest. Your thankful
friend.

To his much esteemed Friend, C.G.
A man out of good manners must answer letters howeuer they prove unsavory in
the acceptance.
SIR, I am sorry that my letters were either unsavory for the matter, or
tedious for the length, considering that out of the rules of civility I was to
answer yours, and the necessity of my business to importune further, then you
thought good manners. But such is the misery of wants; and poor men are
resembled to ruinous walls, which every man shunneth for fear of falling upon
them; otherwise I could excuse my self many ways. First, to avoid idleness,
wherein the Persians were so obseruant, that they would rather whittle sticks,
or rip the seames of their coat, and sewe them up again. Secondly, to eschew
ingratitude, which is a vice unbefitting a generous mind of all other. Next,
to exercise my understanding; for to write to so delicate a judgment, and
apprehensiue a wit, craves study and a careful foresight: then, to better my
knowledge: For if I do well, your commendation can confirm me; if I fall into
errors, your wisdom can reform and restrain me. Fifthly, to make you
believe, there is some good thing in me allowable and justifiable, and
therefore worthy of a small regard, as noble Sir Phillip Sydney was wont to
say, Let us love him for one good quality; for a great many have none at all,
and no man has all. Lastly, to know what to trust unto; for to hope for a
thing which comes not, and to love them that care not for us, be two of the
living deaths in this world. Therefore, Good Sir, let me not plead in vain,
that plead so truly, and urge these reasons, rather to know how your love
shall be enlarged, then my vaineglory published: and if you please to second
my enterprise, I shall with a further cheerfulness proceed in my business;
if not, as good fall at first, and all at once, as live in expectation of more
mischief, and greater troubles. Thus I bid you farewell, and to fare better
then I can fare, unless you wish me well.

Yours, as a lover of Virtue.

To her newly displeased Friend, M.I.
GOod Sir, Jealousy should not be shown without cause.
How comes it to pass, that you draw my love and modesty in question, for my
civil entertaining of a Gentleman last night, as though I could do less, then
afford him a salutation, and performed too much in continuing our moral
discourse? Believe me, I am not ignorant, that love is seasoned with a little
jealousy, but being out of Italy, grow proud of Englands liberty, where the
practices of humanity teach us the true use of conversation. So that an
uncorrupted heart is Canon-proof against a slanderous tongue, but a wanton
mind will turn virtuous sentences to lasciviousness: if then you were well
persuaded of my virtue; to put all out of doubt, there passed not one word,
which a divine might not have been partaker of; otherwise be resolved, that if
I had not been limited with the bands of respecting you, I would have been tied
to the conditions concerning my self, and neither have given ear to immodest
parlee, nor way to any vndecencies: and so if you are satisfied, I am pleased.
But from henceforth be more confident of my worth, and less suspicious of my
loyalty.

Yours, if you wrong her not.

To her best resolved friend, F.G.
MY true and worthy friend, Your late discourse concerning absence and
jealousy, The difference between a willing and compulsed absence.
as if they were rather inflamers, then extinguishers of love, has almost
startled my resolutions concerning the negative: that is, whereas I held an
opinion that jealousy and absence were rather deficiencies in themselves, and
merely obstacles to continuing kindness, I am now persuaded, they may so
march in the army of passions, as to have the Vauntgard in the encounter of
affection: but withal I have learnd so much cunning in morality, as thus to
distinguish between their abuses. Concerning absence, there is a difference in
that which is constrained, and that which is voluntary. For there may be
honorable causes of the one, when the other at (the best) is but an untoward
trial of one another, as employment in martial affairs, legation to foreign
Princes, travel to enrich experience, necessity of traffic and such like:
to all which no worthy party beloved, but will afford a helping hand, and
admit of hope of return; patience to endure, and wisdom to harken after his
endeavors: but voluntary absence, if it could be veiled under the adulterate
show of trials, has so many ill companions, that it can neither do well it
self, nor bring them to any good order. For commonly, it is accompanied with
carelessness, slacknesse in observation, suspicion, fear of idle humors,
unkindness; and, at last, meets with utter oblivion, with diverse of that sort:
and what shall the party beloved conceit, if she first demand reasons of his
departure, and after find a breach of vows for his return? so that allege
what philosophical inference you may, and guild it over with the imposturing
Art of Oratory: I absolutely conclude, that howeuer pleasure is the stronger in
his rarity; love, true, honest, and perfect love is no way beholding to a
wilful absence. Touching jealousy, I confess I have read of a holy day in
hell, when love and jealousy were married together: but howeuer they feasted
for that day, I am sure, all the time after they were turmoyled with despite:
For except a great discretion ouermaster suspicion; fear, rage, madness,
watchings, disquiet, absteining from meat and rest, torment of mind, and
untoward distractions accompany us, especially if there be the least cause
given of the breach of vows. Oh then, love proves like a beautiful glass,
which once broken, can never be cemented again: yet I confess, there may be
a civil emulation concerning a Riuals worthiness, and honest fear to hazard
the thing vnobtained: but once, wiued and contracted inseperable, there can be
no man jealous, but upon his wives disloyalty; and she that gives the occasion,
must adventure her honor. I will not therefore have the married man jealous;
and would tie the amorous suitor within certain bounds, lest by transcending,
he transshape his own discretion into fury, and quarrelsome humors, of which,
a well disposed Gentlewoman would, nor should be any way guilty: and so, till I
hear further, I leave what you have heard, to a favorable construction.

Yours wheresoever.

To the worthy and Noble. L.B.
MY best Lady, I would not now prove recreant to my former co^stancy, Friendship
is afraid to be forgotten and so pleads in her own behalf.
considering I have not only played the wanton with affliction; but have had you
a looker on to my great encouragement: yet some unkind fear begins now to
stagger my resolution, because I find a falling away amongst your selves, like
loose earth from a maine bank; and am resolved that this banishment will
utterly disioynt the frame of our long acquaintance, and at last pull in pieces
the bands of true friendship: else how can it be, that I am unworthy the
remembrance? and who would have thought I should so long have passed
unregarded? But this is the corruption of greatness, either you think to make
us slaves by observation, or dare not be your selves virtuous, for fear of
co^bersomnes: as for friendship, kindness, love, faith, loyalty, respect, and
generous dispositions: they are but voices and smoke, and as you all use the
same, like Tantalus Apples, which once touched, turn into cinders, and yet
hang with glorious shows to the eye. But will you serve me so indeed? and as
the devil seduced the woman, the woman enticed the man, the man offended his
Maker; run arm in arm in the race of contempt, and at last triumph in my
deiection? Why, do a Gods name; and then shall you see me smile in distress,
and reach at the help of all helps out of heaven it self: yet for all this, I
pray you do not mistake me, but rather impute all to the distraction of my own
fears, then your defects: for I have ever loved your worth, and while I live,
will think you worthy to be beloved: so that if amongst your other virtues,
you can pardon this vnsauorinesse, I shall receive a new life, and with a
further cheerfulness present my duty once again unto you.

Yours, if you prove worthy.

To his much esteemed Mrs. P.
A good wife commended and compared to a ship at sea.
Mistress, Me thinks I behold you like a goodly ship at sea; so that, I which
am a stander on the shore, must needs be afraid, when I consider the danger of
boisterous winds and raging billows; the peril of the shelfes and sands; the
terror of rocks and shores; the inconveniences of harbors and long voyages,
and the hazard of incounters with pirates and men of war. Yet again, when I
remember the excellent workmanship in your contriuing, the strength of your
building, the comelines of your raising up, the delicacie of your trimming, and
above all, the cunning and experience of your Pilot and steersman, I am
somewhat pacified, and had rather expose you to the glory of famous voyages,
then see you lie still in safe harbor, where time and many inconueniencies
shall wear out your keele, and obscure your beauty: therefore go forth a
Gods name, and let me see you under sail. For the wisest of men, has compared
a good wife to a ship at sea, which brings her food from a far; and so I
make no doubt you will esteem your self, and not aduenter abroad without
care, order, and good provision. In which hope, I leave you to the fortune of
the world, and send my good wishes after you, to fill your sails with the best
wind, and bring you home again with the fullness of prosperity.

Yours, and Virtues.

To his well advised Friend, Mrs. H.
GOod Mistress, A friend desires a Gentlewoman to unite the inward virtues of
the mind to outwardlouelinesse.
Obedience is better then sacrifice; and therefore do I send you these
triuiall letters according to your command imposed, requesting you not to be
too quick in apprehending any thing amiss, nor stupide in not conceiving what
belongs to your portion: For I protest, I mean to say nothing, to draw your
worthiness in question: nor will leave out any thing, which may manifest my
good opinion of you. I then must begin with a certain custom of the
Schoolemaisters in Lacedemon, who at the first admittance of their scholars,
brought them a glass to look in: If they were fair and comely, they then
advised them to take heed, that the inward virtues answered the outward
loveliness; otherwise they might resemble painted sheaths covering only
wodden swords, so that true beauty and handsomnesse consisted in noble parts,
not outward feature. If they were misshapen, or outwardly deformed, to endeavor
for the adoration of the mind, the light of understanding, and the load-starre
of wisdom, whereby they should see no man except against the first shape: and
here may man ouerpasse the imperfections of nature, by extolling the conditions
of nurture. Now I hope I shall not need to apply this to your self, because I
am assured you look in a glass every day; and although you do not with
Narcessus doat on your own form: yet you cannot choose, but be thankful to
nature for so extraordinary benefits conferred; and withal, remember, what a
happiness will make you perfect in this world, if you unite such inward
graces, as begin already to take you by the hand, to pase out the measures of
worth and modesty. Go on therefore, go on, that I may live to say, Yonder goes
the wonder of time, and the true example of nobleness and beauty But I dare
not enlarge my wishes, lest I fall into an ecstasy, and from giving good
counsel to others, cross mine own judgment for not doing as I should my
self: yet I swear, if my fortune were worthy the name of a fortune, I durst
triumph amongst other masters of earthly contentments, that you think me of
deserving to be commanded by you, and put me in the Catalogue of your chiefest
friends. The business you inserted, shall be dispatched, and the next letters
discover, what I think of the choice of a husband, and to what conditions I
would tie man and wife, living in a generous liberty.

Yours well advised.

Household Letters.
To his dearly beloved friend, M.T.
GOod Sir, A gentleman must take heed how he settles himself in the counitry
as a farmer.
I well perceive by your worthy disposition, that oblivion cannot get the
mastery of virtue in judicious and honest friends. For howeuer we are remote in
body, you have justified your remembrance toward me, yea continued a good
opinion, and strengthened it with a conceit of my understanding somewhat;
concerning your retired country, it is so, that some thing must now be said,
drawing near to satisfaction, but especially to discharge the duty of a
friend, and faithful well-willer. Believe it then, that in diverse persons a
country life neighboureth contemplation and quietness, according as we adapt
our selves to the same. For a Gentleman, of any reasonable estate, desiring to
free himself of city vanities, continual resort, extraordinary expenses,
superfluous diet, curiosity of apparel, and alluring temptation, may so seat
himself and persecute his passion, as to meet with profit and reposednes, in
the country: but then his resolution must be, not for any occasion to
ouerpasse the limits of his intended expenses; because, if he once step into
the vaineglorious reputation of a housekeeper, a giver of alms, and desire of
salutations from russet coats: his very Hall will eat up his Parlour, and
he shall be drawn in to spend more at a Christmasse, then his upper chamber
in the city did in a tweluemonth. But for a free spirit, and a liver only
upon a stock, to be emboldened with the hope of commodity, and bettering his
estate by a husbandly paines-taking, is as far from expectation, as to feed
a hunting horse on the commons, and yet presume to run with him for the best
game. For he that must say to his servants, Go, and to his men, Do this, must
be a Centurion, who lives upon an annual entrade: but (...) a vine-dresser,
must labor and take pains himself, yea have both art and discretion to
manage his affairs, that when he sees a barren fig tree, he may not in a
rage go and cut it down, or stock it up: but prune it, dung it, dig the
earth about it, and make trial of another year. Besides, for a Gentleman of
worth, to live in any town in suspicion of a decayed estate, or necessity to
increase himself by industry: especially where they do but seem better men
of eminence, is, as if a man should go from his understanding friends, who out
of civility would neither disteeme him, nor reveal his secrets: and proclaim
the same in public, exposing himself so to derision. For believe it, howeuer
the country man may bid you good morrow, and stubbornely bend his knee, his
heart is full within, and at home he cares not what he murmures against you;
except you are in office to controwle him, as a Justice of peace: or in
ability to pleasure him, as Lord of the Manor: or incredite to terrify him,
as some officer at Court: or in estimation to master him, as some noble man's
man or other; especially, a privy counselors. Besides, the servants will
loyter, the Bailiffe will sooth you up with flattery to deceive you; the
cattle will famish or diminish, the plough will go untoward, the whole family
live in confusion, and the best byword shall be for you: a poor Gentleman
Farmer. All which considered, I could be contented to see you here again, where
you may eat meat with the best, and sort out your pleasures at as easy a
rate, as you list.

Your plain and true Friend.

To his loving and long expected Friend.
GOod Sir, If a Gentleman will be a Farmer, it is the best to obtain the
principal house: or the credit of the highest place in the town.
I would not have you play with me, as the Jews did with Jeremy about their
going into Egypt, asking his opinion, and swearing a conformity, till his
resolution was contrary to their own minds, and so they retracted, scorning
the Prophets advice: thus it may be you expect at my hands to iump with your
desires, and please you by way of soothing, and applaud your pretenses: surely
I only cast but a doubt, and therefore will thus plainly tell you my opinion.
The house and Farm you have taken, as I understand, is the Manor house, and
having many Tenants, you have as many privileges by their serviceable tenures.
Here questionless you did very well: for by this occasion you shall keep the
stubborn man in awe, and confirm the well disposed with security: besides,
whereas peradventure you cannot take pains your self, or attend the plough in
person; the principal point of husbandry and trick to win the game for a
mean estate: you shall be sure that the very best husbands will ouer-looke
your grounds for you, as glad to spy a fault in them, or come with a tale to
pleasure you, even with offering his service to amend it himself for you. But
withal, is not the house of too great receipt, costly to furnish, chargeable
to repair, dangerous to keep, and drawing on extraordinary expenses even for
fuel and maintenance? besides, is there not a certain expectation of
extraordinary housekeeping, and entertaining of passengers? Wherein to
proceed, it will drink up the profit of the Farm like a Sponge; wherein
to draw back, will drown your reputation in vilipending. This is that I
would say unto you, so that if you meet with discretion, and judgment in so
intricate a business; surely I must applaude your choice for taking the manor
house; but if you chance upon iollitie, or vainglory, determining to thrive,
you will take as wrong a course in being a farmer, as I have done in aduising
you against your mind, and desires.

Yours, with good wishes.

To his well advised friend, S. G.
Concerning the building and ordring a house with retaining of servants.
SIR, When I opened your last letter, and ouerviewed the sentences divided into
interrogatories, I was almost affrighted, as if there had been a citation sent
for me: but after I considered the particulars, and saw they were only
household aduertisements, or (if you will) husbandly questions, for the better
settling a man in the possession of contentment: I cheered my self, and thought
it good manners thus to answer them; wherein, if I pay you in your own coin,
and not once to look into the treasure house of Oratorie for any rhetorical
amplification, remember the justice of my cause, and the low flight of my
subject. But to the purpose: Whereas you demand, how you should build your
house? I answer thus; That though former times esteemed it better to have a
house too little for a day, then too big for a whole year, and cared for no
conueniencie of lodgings, so the hall and kitchen were big enough to dress
meat, and entertain company; yet do not you so, but discover a good spirit
by the outward fashion of your building, choose a handsome prospect and
wholesome situation; let your lodgings be warm and light, for you may darken
them at pleasure; your stairs easy, and your rooms of entertainment large
and delightsome; the outhouses convenient, the gardens and orchyards to the
South and your own chambers near your husbandry, yet as far from annoyance
as you may. In a word, let the whole frame discover your willingness to do
well, rather then brand you to hereafter memory for covetous and basely
disposed; and if you can leave an estate of a thousand marks behind you, let
the passers by, viewing the house imagine it a 1000. pound a year. For so a
second good husband and a good family to match in, may raise it in another age,
and then follows a kind of repining, that my father or grandfather was not
well advised, and esteemed more of money, then the reputation of his family.
But, above all, take heed you exceed not this proportion, lest either you
incur derision, for beginning a work you were not able to finish; or leave
the house to emptiness and decay, if your next heir be not sufficient to
adorn and furnish it. Whereas you demand what retinue to keep? I answer, Have
rather one too few, then two too many, and of al other things, take heed to an
idle servant for corrupting the rest: for I cannot but resemble him to a
stinking broad spreading burre, who is not only bad in it self, but hinders
the rest of the grass growing round about it. And concerning outward show, by
that time your Clearke, Coachman, Butler, keeper of your Wardrobe, chief
Bailiffe, and better sort of husbandmen be instructed the hour of attendance,
and have also an honest care and cunning, cleanely to shift themselves, there
may be a sufficient ostentation for a hundred pound a year. Whereas you demand
what fare you should keep: I answer thus; let not the Sunday so exceed, as
there be scarcity in the week following: give the laborer sufficient, for
dainties fill not the belly: allow not every one a breakefast, nor every day
three meals: have your meat warm and good, but do not reserve the best dish,
till it be stark naught: if a neighbor come in about business, let him tarry
a Gods name; if he be invited, set before him, what he has not at home; rather
have a little and fresh, the^ return a great deal to smell of the dry larder;
and above all, let not the end of the table be so forgotten, either to be
served with blown drink, stale bread, or refuse meat: (For goers and comers
by the door will look for that, and better) because such a heart and tongue
may sit at your board, as will repine at his nasty entertainment; and be bold
to publish your reproach. Whereas you demand what cattle to keep, I answer
thus. For a Gentleman, Oxen are better then Horse, because after any mischance
they may be fed for the butcher, and few men of sort would cart for money, or
attend the court with a Teeme: let such do that, as love toil and money, and
taste any pains taking with the sauerines of profit: those geldings you keep,
let them be well and orderly kept: so that if your country must be served, you
have one in readiness: the servants which ride with you, let them be honest,
careful, and well provided, and take heed of baseness, as plowing cattle,
broken saddles, patcht boots, unmatched spurs, a sword without a chape: nay
I would not have the sword and hangers of one fashion, and girdle or dagger of
another, with infinite such disparities, and merely ridiculous nastinesse.
Whereas you demand what government to observe? I answer generally thus: and for
particulars, you shall hear more hereafter: Above all, remember the Sabbath,
and rather feast of any day, then of that: not but that the Sabboath is a
continual feast, but how? for spiritual purposes, not filthy gurmundice: more
then necessity of life, and good use of conversation: let no swearer nor
profane person, once or twice admonished, tarry with you: give good examples
by your own prayers: and rather by gentle exprobration, then filthy vndecncies
reprehend your servants, but suffer them not to be masters amongst themselves.
To conclude, be charitable toward offenders, gentle to inferiors, willing to
give, careful of good neighbors, and remember the sick labourer, and
fainting soul.

Yours, with a true heart.

To his respected Friend, Mrs. G.
MY old acquaintance, Whether a gentlewoman may with her credit let out
lodgings for money.
I understand by your first servant, that you have enlarged your mind with
your house, determining to lodge civil Gentlemen, and to raise a benefit from
their entertainment: besides, you add for excuse, want of company, and that
your house is ouer-great for your own family: here is now a subject of
plentiful matter, and in dilating the same, I must needs incur displeasure
on all sides. But there is now no remedy; you have in a manner enjoined me to
deliver my opinion, and I will be brief and plain, according to my skill. I
then would with one blow cut off the Hydraes head of confusion, and overthrow
all distinction by the negative, thus; That a Gentlewoman, whether widow or
wife, living in the freedom of reputation, is not to be servile in any thing,
nor to bedurtie herself with the dregs of any covetousness, or sinister
practices against her credit. For as it is unbefitting to a Gentleman to be
guilty of any servile crime; so it is indecent to a Centlewoman to incur the
hazard of her honesty by any base inclination. Now what can the best lodging
and lodgers maintain, but the inconveniences depending will quickly ouer-sway
the the profit following? For if they be only men, they must have servants,
and comers, and goers; the servants shall bedurty your carpets and couerlets
(if the masters themselves are tied within the circle of respect and civility)
wipe their boots and scabberds on your best furnitures, toss your kitchen,
command your vtensels, turmoyle your house, and upon the least contradiction
burst out into violent and offensive terms: and for your self at the best,
you shall pass with the character of Hostess, Land-ladie, Sweet heart, or
some such invention. The comers and goers shall be of all sorts, yea many
times Seamsters, Launderers, kinsewomen, and such like, not without some
venomous inclination to incontinencie and riot, under the handsome green
grass and color of business, and entertainment. If they be only women, I
can say no more, but women will be women, who cannot live without the company
of men; and then if the fire and tow be put together, there must needs be
combustion, what glorious show soever the flame appear with; or what admirable
cunning is used in the kindling or extinguishing: so that, hold the balance of
an upright conscience how you will, you shall not escape the imputatio^ of
dishonest practices from base calumniation, howeuer the better sort hold their
peace to make you an instrument for their pleasures. If they be men and women,
so a doubling of many inconueniencies; there is but only this excuse
affoorded, that Opportunity is a baude to Corruption, and unclean persons are
now safe, being so conveniently lodged. This is briefly my opinion touching a
Gentlewoman that lodges for money. But for others that are tradesmen, and must
advance their estates from the gains of their profession, I dispute not at
all, but leave it as a thing indifferent to my approbation, howeuer I would not
have them lose the benefits of their endeauours, when they may make double use
of them. First, in the rent of their chambers, next, in the increase of
customers for the venting such wares as they expose to sale, wherein their
credit lies, only at the state in those customary vsances of swearing,
lip-labor, and the secrets of their business, so that letting their lodgings,
may seem less offensive through a cunning ignorance, then many indirect
speeches through a customary dissembling.

Yours, well affected.

To his assured friend Mr. S.S.
GOod Sir, The danger of disagreement between man and wife with their duties.
It was an unsavory news to me, when I heard that some ominous action had
divided the mutual agreement between you and your wife, wherein I cannot
resemble you better, then to a churlish husbandman, who puts some
headstrong horse into his Teeme, and when they go forward, he strives
backward, the servants beating him to greater rage, and the Master wanting
discretion to take him away, till a more convenient season, so that howeuer
they disquiet themselves, I am sure the war in hand, is rather hindered then
forwarded. Thus is it, when man and wife are not fast tied in the bands of love
and discretion, but subject the whole house to confusion, and send disgraceful
rumor abroad to busy idle tongues, with many untruths amongst some
certainties. For alas, what man will be so foolish that loves cleanliness, as
to besmeere himself with dirt and filth? what husband will be so senseless as
to revile his wife, and bring his own name in question? what shall the
children think to hear their mother called whore? what shall the servants
imagine to see their mistress distracted with jealousy and suspicion of one
side, and shame and calumniation on the other side? what shall the neighbors
imagine, to be acquainted with such disgraces, and whisper that a Gentleman so
abused himself, or durst discredit his wife. Come, this must not be; For as
women must admit of an honorable obedience, rather then imperious controwle, of
sweet and gentle persuasion, rather then contentious exprobation: of a modest
disposing themselves to all household affairs, then a busy entermedling with
their husbands affairs; of a fashionable entertainment at all seasons,
especially a wise observation according to time and occasion: rather then a
sudden apprehension of their husbands distemprature, either in passion or
affection: so must men abandon themselves from home inconveniences, bear with
their wives imperfections, not taunt before servants, not burst out into filthy
and scurrilous chiding, or reproaches at all; be charitable even concerning
offense, not churlish for trifles, not deny necessaries, and in no sort give
ill example by leaud life, or bad husbandry: lest wants knock at the door,
and then will bitterness and displeasure enter. So that concerning falling out
between man and wife, I thus conclude; If it be possible to avoid all
eruptions against civil life, lovely behauour, or necessary business: but if
disagreements begin to show a face, let the man leave the wife for that time,
and not endure the contention: let the wife retire her self, if the man begin,
and not dare to reason the matter.

Yours, in religious care.

To his approved Friend, R.S.
How children ought to be brought up.
GOod Sir, Your last letters were so passionate, that sure in the writing you
vented sighs, if you did not shed tears, and I cannot blame you: For, a
father that has an irrigular son, and a dangerous daughter, not only wears
out his time to provide them maintenance, and leave a competency behind him,
that they may rank in the foreward of civil people: but watches his hours,
and grows gray with care, lest one will not be reclaimed, and the other step
aside into wantonness. Therefore says the wise man, that he that setleth his
son, has laid a strong foundation, and he that marries his daughter, has
dispatched his chiefest business. Whereupon I would advise you, concerning
your sons, not to cocker them too much, or be ouer-nice, either at their
vprising or diet: not to let slip their years, but commit them as soon as you
can into the hands of instruction: be not of that mind, that the rod must be
a tyrant to them, but rather endeavor that they fear to offend for the love of
virtue, then fear of punishment: suffer neither oath nor uncleanly speech to
profane or defile their mouth, nor let them presume proudly to insult, or
unmannerly to revile the meanest servant. Coming forward, and growing to
understanding, make not nature a slave to cunning or profit; that is, enforce
them not against their own inclination to follow that which is irksome unto
them. For, if you tie a great spirit to a servile trade, he will never prove
good chapman; or contend with dull capacity about mistical secrets, he will
never grow good scholar, and so in the rest: let them ever be, where either
the best company shall give good example; or if inconveniences follow, they may
have the shadow of honorable purposes: but above all, let them neither
practice deceit nor dishonestie: for, when a mind is once corrupted with
baseness, it resembles a stinking vessel, which will never be througly sweetened.
Concerning your daughter, presume not too much of our country liberty; for
wantonness stands at the corner of every Street, to inuit the commers-by:
yet do not so restrain her, that she may either murmr at the same, or
complain to her neighbors of her Parents hard hand, as though she were
viciously inclined by nature. If it be possible, rather school her within
doors, the^ adventure her with a pedant abroad; and for dancing, courtship, and
such like: let the^ be used rather like a feather to a little dust, which may be
brushed from the garment, the guard or seame, which shall wear out with the
cloth: give them warning of familiarity with the servants: For a courteous
ciuility becomes the children of Gentlemen, but wanton embraces, sitting on
the knee, bearing in arms, and such like, be fearful signs of following
confusion, and too forward desires: sitting up late, allow not; nor give way
unto night banquets: For they resemble the stolen bread in the Proverbs: and a
strumpets Title is the nethermost hell, wherein the name of Virgin is
perpetually damned: make them not proud, either of natures portion, or the
fathers dowry. For women will look in a glass, and shall not want any
flattering to seduce them to vanity: and concerning the vpshot of all
reckonings, which is marriage, let her neither assume so dangerous a liberty, as
to run at random without your consent: nor be you so transported with a
variety of self-love, as to draw her perforce to vnpreuentable inconveniences,
yea many times mischifes, and confusion. For, these matches in infancy, as
(contracts for money without liking; enforceme^ts, to unequal years, or nasty
disparily, with diverse of that kind) are merely, pullies to wind up care,
sorrow, and discontentments, and at one letting flippe the hold, to hurry them
on the head of a poor afflicted virgin.

Yours, in true libery.

To his ill advised friend, I. M.
SIR, I am not ignorant, that the two mastring corbes, that govern the reins
of the whole world, how servants ought to be instructed.
are praemium and Poena, reward, and punishment. I do also know, that in a
statute against stabbing and wilful murder, there is a clause of exception
inserted, for fathers and masters in correcting their children and servants:
yet will I give no such way to the violence of passion, as that a Gentleman, or
otherwise civil disposed liver, should strike or wound his servant with any
dangerous weapon: nor can I any way color your temeritie, for contending so
long with that boisterous knave, as to be compelled to free your self: (for
such be the words of your excuse out of his robustious closing with you) by the
stabbe of a dagger, which ran 9. inches upward over his pappe. Believe me, it
was a fearful falling off, and I wish in my heart there had been no such
occasion given to draw your discretion in question, nay to endanger your person
and estate. For if he had miscaryed, the king having lost a subject, you must
needs have been brought to judicial trial, and then laws are according to
the Judges construction, or Jurors interpretation. Well, I hope from henceforh
you will be better advised, and rather bring up your servants so, that either
they shall not offend, or after the offense be apprehensiue of instruction with
more gentle correction. Therefore choose the sons of such men, as rather will
second their fathers honesty and credit, then follow their own wantonness
and riot: let every one have instruction for their feuerall places, yet teach
them al to obey when you command, and not one to command another: have an eye
unto the honest diligence of the meanest, and grace him with a cheereful
reward. If you chide for good occasion, ler the ptowdest be the subject of your
first admonition; wherein be so temperate, that indecent reuilings heat not
your mouth, but words sauouring of wisdom and justice. Thus shall the rest
stand in awe, when they see you are not partial or fearful: if advice serve
not, spare not a smarting blow; which if it prove a sturrer up of rage or
contempt in him, bring him to public justice, but be not you on him, your own
executioner: suffer neither oaths nor profanation: no gaming on the Sabbath,
nor for much money at any time: nay, let it be rather a recreation, with a
modest acknowledging your wincking at small faults, then any comaunding voice
to pass away the time, or please themselves: let them not slack the hours of
attendance, nor the entertainment of friends: give ear to no busy bodies,
tale-tellers, nor flatterers of your imperfections, least government, turn to
confusion; and recreation to dissipation: as pride is a drawer on of filthy
enormities, so nastines and uncomely adorning themselves brings surquedry, and
loathsomenes. To conclude, in one word, let your servants be such of all
sorts, as shall do what you prescribe, rather then make use of the time to
maintain their own pleasures, and licentiousnes: as for such as must perform
inferior seruill duties, pay them truly, and send them to their work orderly:
neglect no service of God for any cause: and if you have (as you ought) private
prayers, let all come, and know what reverence means: hearken to the time of
sickness, and let them not complain for want, nor cry out to God for susteyning
more then they can away with: upon good deserving, add a recompense, and let
none presume to strike or revile another. Infinite other particulars would draw
on many lines, but these shall sufice, till better conueniency to show my love
and duty, and serve for caution and advertisement.

Yours, in charitable advise.

Politic Letters.
To his noble Lady and Virtuously respected, T.G.
WOrthy Lady, I think it not befitting the time, nor the tenderness of your
sex, to give such life to your memory, as Catalogue the praises of that worthy
knight deceased, Women in years should rather look for rich advancement, then
wanton satisfaction.
or draw in question his want of judgment in this one point, or peradventure
ability, in leaving you thus wrapped untowardly in accounts, and bringing you
(as having five daughters to marry) to the house of care and sadness, further
then the sorrow of his loss, and the ceremonies of his exequies pretended. But
I would rather open the storehouse of instruction and comfort, and show you
the Emblem of Fortune, or Time shadowed with a hairy foretop, as if we might
take hold thereon for any purpose; and a bald head behind, as if opportunity
let slip, were not to be recovered. Therefore without ceremony, if there were
not necessity, yet out of a necessary policy, let not the noble Judge be
dallyed with in his honorable purposes: and considering the heat of youth is
spent; and as the Poets sing, that Hiperions fires burn not with a wonted
blase, be rather cautelous for a well disposed life, then indirect satisfaction
of fancy: this I would say if you were rich and childlesse, good helps in all
times both good and bad: but as time has brought you to wrestle with some
inconveniences, you must learn if it be possible to give a fall, rather then a
take foil: and both for your own and childrens sake, dispense with
wantonness, and be rather prouidently ambitious, the^ ambitiously improuident.
For by this match, your quietus est shall be obtained, your peace shall be made
without disquiet; your accounts shut out of the kings Exchequer; your household
affairs reducted to an uniformity; your lap filled with money; your ears with
submissiue petitions; and your chamber with the better sort of visiters; your
daughters shall still walk in the school of courtlinesse and befitting
suitors, and rather be taught to step up to honor, then fall down to fear of
preferment: even their youthful desires for ornament and cost shall be so
supplied, that you shall grant without grudging, and they demand without
timorousness or combersome importunity: their portions shall be sure of
augmentation. For though he do not open the strings of his own purse, yet from
custom, the under officers will bring in presents: and such Gentlemen as
before would make question of some incombances, shall now attend your house for
resort and noble conversation: so that without controversy there is no
refusing his love, nor disputing with any malign circumstances of his years
and humors.

Yours, in honest advise.

To his much disquieted Friend, A.S.
A Gentleman should not be servant to any man that has a sufficient estate of
his own: but if he be with what policy he must contract it.
SIR, I am ashamed to show my self a traitor to gentry, and bind a free
spirit to the servitude of controwle: for the wisest and greatest must fail
through imperfections, and he which submits to the command of another, cannot
tell how he may be driven to impatience: so that I could swear, that it were
unbefitting to a man of your estate, a Gentleman of blood, a housekeeper of
account, a Justice of peace, and a commander of many servants, to fall back
into the contemned estate of servitude, and wear another blew coat. Yet
because policy has some secret walks into which Virtue will not enter, and
that I see errors hale us along to dangerous inconveniences, without
satisfaction of humors, I am contented at this time to deceive your
apprehension with the mist of policy, with guilefull feeding of ambitious and
contentious humors. If then your fear be so great of the knight your
adjoining neighbor, and Lord of the manor, that either you must come to
trial of the law, and profuse expenses, or meet with contracted brows, and
perilous encounters: there is no such way to wipe away the fear of these
encombrances, as the supportation of the great Lord you speak of, whose
service must be orderly implored, but cunningly obtained: wherein I would have
you resemble the Lapwing, which cries farthest from her nest; and so fasten
your self upon him, rather with admiration of his virtues, which have
altogether attracted your submission, then fear of your own defects, or
desire to be, by his help, revenged on your adversary: and this you must
strengthen a while with attendants and presence, marking whom he admits to his
secret familiarity, and consorting with them, not so much for fellowship, as to
be a mediation between your Lord and your self when occasion shall burst out;
and show some particulars of your wrongs, where by way of discourse you may
intimate, that you wonder at your adversaries audaciousnesse, not to forbear
you now for his honors sake, considering one virtue inclined to another, and he
would not maintain any injustice for a world. As for those controversies
impending, his Lordship should command him as his servant, and overrule all,
as should seem good to his honorable pleasure. This is the surest channel,
as I take it, to lanch forth your ship in the troublesome Sea of contentions,
with your betters, or at least such, whom the worlds estimation reputeth in a
higher eminence: So that if you can dispense with some disgraces, which may
chance by distemperature of your Lord, and calumniation standing on the tip of
idle tongues abroad, you may meet with sedition of country troubles, and
peradventure carry the sway of applause and observation, even at public
imitations, as your credit with your master is subject to report or opinion.

Yours, in honorable love.

To her loving Niece, G. B.
No oaths to be believed before marriage.
MY dearest Love, There has passed and ouer-passed a rumor of the young
Counts affecting you, wherein love has dealt like himself, and chained him to
certain streights of passion: so that by voluntary oath he has protested
conditional marriage, if you please to afford him a primordiall satisfaction:
wherein love may Simpathise between you I know not, but merely out of honest
and honorable policy, go into the open channel, rather then come near the
banks of Nylus, where Crocodiles may deceive you with tears; and of all other
things, let no man boast of dividing you, til you yield him possession of al
together: and this is a caution even amongst wantons, not to marry with him to
whom dotage or misfortune has prostituted them. For what hope is there but a
following eternal jealousy? and when a breach is so made, a continual
roaring and thundering of whole vollies of checkes, taunts, and opprobrious
terms, of whore, strumpet, filth? What had I, but another might have gotten?
and what know I, but thou art still a broken glass never to be cemented
again? Therefore sweet Niece, stand upon a strong guard of circumspection,
and do not expose the certainty of your honorable merit and high attracting
worthiness, to the uncertainty of deceivable promises: I care not, though I
term them fully resolved oaths. For one way they are yet in the pleasure of
the first maker: another way, in the danger of better resolved conceit, when
the heat of wantonness is reclaimed, and some new displeasure shall open a
gappe of both your ouer-sights. But I hope I need not ambiguously handle the
cause of your virtue, and modest inclination; considering you have many times
cast a defiance in the face of temptation: and will now surely, when you are to
be tried pure gold indeed, not make it adulterate by ambitious desires, or
foolish credulity.

Yours, in prevailing truth.

To his loving Cousin at Court, H.A.
GOod Cousin, Seeing you are resolved to follow the sway of time, He that will
enrich himself by service must follow some thriuing officer.
and become a Courtier, with an intent to depend upon the favorite of the
kingdom, that noble and generous Count: you may take your own race to leap,
as high, and far as you can: But as my advise and experience whispers to
pleasure you, there is no policy in it at all, considering your project to
your self of bettering your estate, and husbandly desires to fill your purse,
and not vainglorious ostentation, or public glistering with feathers and
colors, which many times bear better men then your self, to dangerous
inconveniences; and at the best, draw on expenses without other satisfaction,
then courtly smiles, and deceitful smoke-promises. Besides, there shall be so
many before you hanging on expectation of suit preferments, that when you shall
think to step forward, there will scarce be room for you to lay on a finger
on the prevailing end of the beam of prosperity. Therefore be ruled by me,
considering some good parts may add to your youth reputation, and to good
carriage more respect; place your self as near some quiet officer as you can,
and by serviceable attendance, not obscuring your quality; give him notice of
your willingness to be commanded, and aptness to be employed, as he shall
think convenient.

Thus shall you contriue and wind your self into some profit at home, and be
known well enough abroad: yea so well, that performing your duty for the
private affairs of your Master, when alteration shall happen, you may by some
voices be called to the public managing affairs for the state.

Yours, as you can desire.

To his dearest brother, G. D.
The Lady of the house must be observed of such as mean to thrive under the
Lord.
GOod Brother, as I am glad, that you have extracted the love of your
honorable Lord: so would I be the gladder, if you did contriue the continuance
of the same. For there is no less cunning in keeping a thing well gotten, then
in attaining it before it be in possession; but if it be as I hear, you are so
far from true policy in this kind, that I am afraid presumption will trip your
expectation on the ground, and give your forwardnes a foil. For they say, that
you disagree with my Lady, and under color of my Lords profit, oppose her in
triuiall demands: take heed (I pray you) in time, and if you mean to stand
firm, as you sometime, for reverence of her estate, take her by the arm to
lead her along, let her likewise take you by the hand, to settle you in
security. For if women wrought Solomon the wisest and greatest of all Princes,
out of his full course of virtue and piety, such a woman as she will quickly
conceive, if she be disesteemed of you, and as quickly gone to mislike of your
pere^ptorines, or audatiousnes, and as quickly desire to be revenged, wherein
if she be resolute, you shall not know who hurt you, nor she care, how you are
overthrown: therefore good brother, be not deceived in this contumacy, but
reduce your self to understand, there is no aduauncing the colors of
establishment on the citadel of your Ladies favor, if the Lady Barricado the
entrance, or seem envious after your proceeding.

Yours, in all occasions.

To the honorable L. and his high esteemed Patron.
RIght Honorable, Although all the rivulets of favor and grace, Some Lord or
other must be made an Agent to obtain a suite of the king.
have their sowrce and flowings from the fountain and spring of Majesty: (for
neither is honor bestowed, petition granted, commission sealed, nor any things
disposed without the kings liking and firm:) Yet is there a kind of policy
to be used in contriuing and compassing the same. For to step bluntly to a
king, and urge him to a grant, or peradventure expostulate the matter with him,
may seem unsavory, and without the sure ground of a high exalted favorite,
receive a protraction, if not a denial: therefore your honor must be contented
to do as the Lords of France amongst themselves, one to prefer the suite and
request of another: so that if this Baron would have an addition of honor,
that Counselseller is engaged, and intimates to the Prince his worth, his
valor, his virtue, his former employment, and such like. If that Earl would
have such a grant, then does the other take a time to illustrate the latters
praises, and infer the necessity of acknowledging and rewarding the same,
with all the gracious properties of liberality incident to a Prince. Thus must
your Lordship make some second means, and how ever Honor could be contented
to repine to depend upon the liking of inferiors: yet must policy restrain
passion, and discretion give you notice when the king is disposed to grace: and
so though a present must be exacted, you need only hold your head, and be
contented till your business be determined, in which you must apply your
self to the time, so far as in honesty you may: But you must speak them
fair whom you like not; and smile where the heart swelles, and go along even
with the observation of Court, though you should take a journey another way to
better purpose. These be the passages to which time and fortune drives all
attendants in Princes courts, and so it is fit so far as policy may not
hinder the peace of a good conscience. For God has said, they are Gods, and
there is no such proximity to a godhead, as with a breath to advance whom they
will, to have mercy on whom they please, and to cast down the presumption of
such who abuse their favor for dishonest pretenses. And thus I leave your honor
to the order prescribed, and success of affairs.

Your Honors obseruant.

To the Right Honorable and worthy L. G.
RIght Honorable, seeing you have vouchsafed to descend so low a degree of
humiliation, as to make me partaker of your secrets: Suites in court are never
dispatched without great attendance.
I will surely raise up my self (as far as I dare) to yield you some reason
for our last conference; and warrant your honor, that there is no unkindness
thrust upon you, though your business seem detracted, and (as you supposed)
procrastinated: For believe it, there is a policy of state, not to dispatch
suitors too fast, for diminishing the glory of the present court, and weakening
the majesty of the Prince: if every one should be admitted at their own
pleasure: and as in the height of martial dissipline, some things must be
absolutely commanded, not disputed upon, all secrets are not to be revealed,
and every man that dare ask a question, must not be resolved: so in the
Counsel of kings, and their best ordered courts, no man ought to contest with
the judgment, that the Chancellor shall pronounce: or traduce the last verdict
after he has appealed to the Prince. For if you seldom bring a Physician in
question, that knowing his patient out of danger of death, and of such a
constitution, that some excellent potion will quickly advance him to the
pristinate state of health, and yet dallieth with him awhile, peradventure to
show some secrets of arts: peradventure to make him believe a difficulty in the
recovery, and perauenture to enrich his purse by an often resort to him that is
able to give. There is no reason to presume so far, as to call in question the
affairs of great Counselors, especially determining for the common good,
without partial interposing either their own purposes or passions: nor can any
man come unto them at any time, but diverse shall be found before him, who
challenge a dispatch of their business, according to the priority of their
suites: therefore your honor must lay no such burden of the state, to think,
if there were such an interposition, that any man's private malice could
prevail with the authority, gravity and wisdom of the rest. Besides, it
may be there is a further policy to draw out the thread of this cloth of
business at the greatest length, to keep you from a further suite, or
troubling the king with other matters of importance, till this be dispatched,
and hung on the file of assurance in your behalf. This I presumed to write
unto you, because you commanded: but in regard there be some things you will
not command, nor I can iustisie in the answer; I mean to reserve them till I
have opportunity to present my duty unto you, as you have showed a generous
mind, to manifest your good opinion toward me.

Your Honors devoted.

To his well experienced friend, and noble minded Gentleman, G. P.
A military policy to restrain insolent mutinies.
NOble Sir, Whereas at your last conference you told me coming from Germany to
Antwerpe, you saw no watch set, and a kind of fearful stillness amongst the
soldiers, wherein I could not resolve you so suddenly, because you spread no
larger cloth of novelties, and peradventure durst not in that place raise any
suspicion by demanding many questions: I have now thought good to add to your
experience some intelligences of my own, whereby as you well said, then I do
gather the occasion of that defection, and desisting from their martial
ceremonies: You must then understand, that the Garrisons have newly mutined,
and from insolent attempts drawn a fearful execution on some principal
offenders: the Governor of the town and citadell, did put in practice an
ancient vsance and policy of martial discipline, to command a cessation from
orderly watch, and souldier-like services: And this was an absolute custom
even amongst the Romans, that when insolent and tumultuous soldiers had looked
with grimme and traitorous visages on the face of good order, and made a
repugnant disobedience against all law and restraint, the Captains presently
prohibited any calling to the watch, any preparation to the Parado, beating the
drums, attending the colors, or to use any ceremonious bravery: whereby the
mutiners, that were so lusty before, seeing what a confusion they had wrought,
and how they presented a sort of Padlarie reapers in a scattered field, began
to bewail the want of their honorable customs, and to confess their former
rudeness and oversight. And this was the cause of the stillness in Antwerpe,
at your lodging in the town. And amongst other policies of war, according to
the several business in hand, of which you shall hear more hereafter, when
we have further leisure to dispute of other occurrents.

Yours, in terror of death.

To his well disposed Friend, Mr. M.D.
GOod Sir, Wat policy soever ambition build upon, it is at last cast down with
death and destruction.
Conceive of me what you please, there is not a man in this kingdom shall have
more interest in me, then your self; and that you shall well perceive by my
plain and true satisfaction of your demands, although it be somewhat too
intricate to deal in such confused questions, and dangerous relation of
business; Whereas then you demand the reason, why so many great and noble
persons have (as it were) met with death and destruction, in the violent race
of their turbulent innovation, and insolent wilfulness: not taking warning by
precedent examples, nor terrified with the euer-impending reward of treason,
which is the overthrow both of themselves and families. I answer, that truly I
can yield you no reason, because all they pretend, is not only against reason,
but many times against policy, and at all times against honesty and religion:
yet can I give you some false fires, and (as it were) contriue adulterate
excuses out of favor and partiality. You have read then that the devil in
compassing the earth, did consider men's frailties in his progress, and as the
principal mark of the world, he most gloriously attempts, principallities
and powers: so that sometimes he pleads the axioms of Philosohers, and
recites a pestilent position out of Euripides: that if faith and loyalty be
to be rent asunder, it is excusable, in compassing a Diadem, and reaching at a
Crown. Thus Stephen, Earl of Blois, usurped the kingdom of England, and made
wars on the faction of the Empress. And thus Henry the fourth in fringed
his first vow, to step no further then the Duchy of Lancaster: but when
he found no hindrances, he quickly ranged over all other territories and
jurisdictions. Sometimes he dilates Matchiuilian policies, and tells men
that are cruel and ambitious, that they which mean to have a smooth walk to
contentment, yea to pass the time in any Orchard or Garden of pleasure, must
not only remove the greater blocks, sticks, and stones: but as occasion
serves, pick out the sharp pibbles, and roll the same smoother. Thus
Athaliah destroyed the kings stock to gain the Diadem. And thus Richard the
third, first removed the Queens kindred, after usurped the persons of the two
Princes. Sometimes he whispereth in the ears of moderate kings, that they may
be jealous in points of sovereignty; and who shall controwle them, if they
settle their fears and peace, though they see the bleeding necks of such as
they fear? Thus Adoniah fell under his younger brother. Thus Nero put Corbulo
and Germanicus to death, because they were reputed worthy of the kingdom.
Thus was Mortimer in Henry the fourths time, as it were, banished from the
Court. Thus was long before that, Robert Duke of Normandy deprived of his
eyes. Thus was Edward Plantagenet Earl of Warwick imprisoned and destroyed:
with many such like. Sometimes he makes the justifying of a faction, and the
loving of one another, and honest cause of rebellion: As you saw in the Barons
(...), in the beginning of Henry the fourth, when the king should have been
destroyed at Oxenford, and afterward when the Percies maintained the
coadiutements of Worcester and Mortimer. Sometimes he rayseth innovation and
treason out of the circle of ambition and vainglory, upon any pretense of a
title, as you saw in the first claim of Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York:
and in the last tumults of the Earl of Warrewicke, in Edward the fourths time.
Sometimes he deceives honor with covetousness, and bogges the minds of
generous spirits with hope of increase of living, and augmentations of titles.
Thus was the Duke of Buckingham caught in a snare of the Earldom of Hertford,
and not only streched his arm out to help Richard the third to mount on the
throne of Majesty, against all religion and piety: but to spread the colors
of his own revenge against the tyrant himself: whereby he lost his head.
Sometimes he impostures men with the fanaticall hopes of devilish promises
from forcerie, and witchcraft: As you may read of Elinor Cobham, who well
expected the preferment of the Protector her husband, and of H^^^ford Duke of
Buckingham, whom the Cardinal overthrew in Henry the eights time. Sometimes he
blows the bellows of popularitie, and swells men over big with the windy
breath of opinion: as in diverse worthy presidents, and instances of our own,
wherein even the best subjects have yet taken a wrong course to curb their
Princes, and making good causes (as reformation of disorders, remoouing of
evil Councillors, protecting of Justice, and maintaining the honor of
martial discipline, etc. Baudes to wicked and troublesome spirits, have in the
end pulled on death and insupportable affliction on themselves and families:
and sometimes he inciteth even common persons to presumptuous darings and
dangerous troubles, falsifying their wicked pretenses, on the glorious shows
of the kingdoms good, as in the Irish expeditions, the rebellions of Straw,
and Cade: the wicked purpose of Perkin Marbeck: the clamours of Ket, the
insurrections of the North, and such like: In all which, from the beginning to
the ending, there is no one sound and substantial reason, but must needs be
overthrown with the shoulderinsg of truth and vprightnes. And thus could I
fill you volumes with precepts and instances, and both divide and subdiuide to
infinite particulars, wherein greatness and policy resemble poison in the hearts
of corrupt persons, which runs from vein to vein, and never desisteth till
all be infected: and at last the very life blood contaminated: Nay, I could
have spread your letter to a greater breadth, even with modern examples, and
daily positions: but I cannot name them without offense, and traducing of many
of their imperfections and follies: and therefore I will leave what I may not
write, to a private relation, when we may meet with security.

Yours, to trust only.

To her dearest husband.
MY only life, I may not write at large, nor one word but what another
ouersees: therefore I pray you consider of me and your children, Men must
submit to their fortune.
and how ever your virtue fill your heart with constancy; yet remember, that in
all ages, and with all persons, virtue does not thrive alike; nor must a man
proclaim all he knows, or divulge what he thinks: so that there is no remedy
for your enlargement, but a patient enduring, a politic silence, an humble
submission, and plausible casting your self and cause into the lap of the
Queens favor, and under the shadow of that great Lords mantle. No more:
neither I dare, nor must: but that I am and will be,

Your ever loving wife in distress.

Chyding Letters.
To his ill advised Son, T.G.
MOst foolish and idle headed, A son reprehended for his disordered life.
I have heard thee sometimes discourse of historical relations, because I
should strengthen my opinion, that thou have not been a truant at school, nor
a traitor to nature, in overthrowing some good parts allotted as thy portion.
But I wonder, that amongst the rest, thou do not remember a certain law of
the Lacedaemonians against disobedient children, who were publicly whipped, and
when they continued refractary, they were despightfully hanged, as enemies to
the commonwealth: so that if thy profuse expenses, riotous courses, disobedient
wilfulness, irregular conditions, dangerous company, and intemperate abusing
the time, were in those days to follow thee to that bar of censuring, I
should surely take no further care for thy punishment, nor fear for thy
hereafter overthrow. But because thou live in a corrupt age and commonwealth,
belike thou think thy self disgraced, and out of the fashion, if thou be
not corrupt too; nay monstrously wicked, and degenerating. For, what hope can I
have of the preservation of my estate and family after death, when thou dare
presume in my life to carry an absolute sway against my prescriptions, and
run three hundred pounds in debt, to all our troubles; And if thou come to
particulars, how bare and poorly will thy excuse seem? how ugly and deformed
will thy vanity appear? I brought thee with a gentle hand to the study of the
law, whereon both profit and honors depends: and thou have not only
neglected the same; but with a kind of contempt and despite, abandoned thy
study, and because we should be sure of thy hate and vilipending such a jewel,
thou art bold to boast of pawning thy books, and that thou will not curb a
brave spirit, (thou may say a devilish ruffinlinesse) with stupid and dull
enclosing thy self in a Cabinette, and poaring on harsh and unpleasant lines.
I taught thee a way to handsomnesse and civility, showing thee (like a Father)
the difference between pride and comeliness: and thou art so far from the
modest use of Gods creatures, in this kind, that thou have transshaped thy
self with filthy disguises, of long-haire, diffused Apparel, colored Bands,
gaudie Ornaments, ridiculous fashions: yea, thy very heel and spurre-leathers
show the lightness of thy mind, vanity of thine affections, and deformities of
both: So that from top to toe, the best excuse is the fashion: the best of
these fashions so out of frame, that wisdom hates them, and piety pittieth
them. I instructed thee with the modest oratory of good demeanor, and how
weakly they were armed, that stood at defiance, with patience and virtue,
building a poor frame on the high exalted Title of valor: as though vice must
either be carried up with the strong arm of robustiousnes, or colored over
with the sophisticate paintings of good-fellowship; courage, not disparaging of
Gentry: and that a man living in eminence and expectation of glory, must not
give way to any discredit. But thou like a resty-iade, have run backwards,
and affrighted thy own good spirit, with fearful blood-sheddings, quarrels,
and contentions: exposing thy self to barren and beastly destructions, in
despite of order, and good government: So that I cannot compare that valor,
which thou would have graced with such an Epithet, better then to the
beauty of a strumpet, who is either mercenarie to all comers, or so kind,
that she cannot gainsay any, asking the question: and at last, makes her self
abhorred or vilipended. There be other matters of offense wherewith I could
load you, but these for this time, shall startle you a little, and prepare you
to some better consideration, against I examine you further, or absolutely
determine to show you a stronger hand of reformation: therefore be advised you
were best, and if you dare forget I am your father, and must maintain you:
remembet you are a Christian; and live under a religion and law, which will
clip the wings of such licentiousnes, and deplume the feathers of all such
consuming birds of prey.

Your displeased Father.

To her wilful and seduced friend, M. G.
Unkind, and ill advised. To what purpose have you made me believe, Love
finds fault with inconstancy and follow a strumphet, who is desired.
that you never spoke sentence, but love joined the words: never breathed vow,
but virtue instructed the heart: never performed action, but my worth was the
magnes to draw you into industry: and yet you can be contented to wipe away
all with the slight hand of carelesnes, and to forsake me without a cause; yea,
to despite me the more, to abandon a faithful and true friend, for the
beastly show and love of a strumpet, whose eyes sparkle with deceit, and very
smiles are more dangerous then Crocadiles tears, which commonly weep over
such, they mean to destroy. O that thou either had discovered this falsehood
before, whereby I might have taken the way of better assurance, and conformable
honesty; or will thou yet defend the poor troops of chastity, against the
mighty armies of incontinency and wantonness? then should this wanton know, what
it were to betray modesty into the hands of filthy inconstancy, and to bring
simplicity into the bondage of passion and affection. But I preethee let me
dispute with thee a little: Have I not seen thee laugh a fellow to scorn, as
a buffone, or iester, for wearing great guilt rings full of coulerd glasses,
guarded clothes, capons feathers, and a ridiculous aspect? and what is a
strumpet, but suitable in every thing? Have I not read of a fool, that was led
like an Ox to the slaughter, and went in the shutting of the evening into the
house of a strumpet? Have I not heard thee tell the tale of a passenger, who
coming over a dangerous water upon a narrow bridge, being drunk, and
returning the next day to to see what adventure he had escaped, died with the
apprehension? And what is a whores conversation, but a sudden peril ouerpassed
with fear and trembling? And so in infinite particulars; whereby it cannot
choose, but either you are insensible of good, or desperate of all bad;
otherwise you would not come within the reach of heavens vengeance, and virtues
curses: I mean my own poor cries, and tears, which if they once should be
vented with bitterness of my soul, believe it, they would prevail with the
God of mercy, to draw thee and thy perfidiousnesse into the house of vengeance,
for thy cruelty and mischievous abusing so constant, and innocent a friend.

Your poor abused Friend.

To his much disordered Friend, F.M.
Against (...)
GOod Sir, If I were not tied by the band of friendship, to all those duties,
wherein honest men are, or should be actors; yet am I bound by the laws of
Christianity to plead Gods cause, and not to suffer (as far as in me lies)
so great a justice to be overthrown with the violent thrust of desperate and
irreligious shouldrings. To what end then dare you so profane the name of God?
or to what purpose do you breath out the smoke of oaths, yea common periuries?
as if the sulphur of that infernal furnace, were raised up to darken the
light of the firmament. Do you know what danger you incur? the vengeance
prepared, the threatenings denounced, and the punishments appropriate to such
idle and defiling wantonness? Do you not read, that you shall be guilty
before Gods seat, for taking his name in vain? Does not the Prophet tell you,
that plagues shall invade that house, where the swearer remains? Has not our
Savior instructed us, with yea, and nay? showing plainly, that whosoever
digresseth out of that path, walks to perdition. And are not the Apostles the
voices of many waters, and the sounds of Gods trumpets against further
irreligion, and indecent oaths? And how dare you then continue in horrible
profanation, and either not believe, or not apprehend this truth? Besides, if
Satan had taught us cunning enough to excuse other vices: The glutton may say,
he is a hungered: the unclean person, he is ready to burn: the covetous man,
he is afraid to want: the murderer, revenge is sweet: the drunkard, that his
drought is great: the thief, that he is in distress, and such like. But the
swearer has neither reason, nor excuse for his idleness: no man enforces
him, the flesh inticeth not, the world provoke not, only custom and the
devil raise a commotion against piety and sincerity. So that it is almost
come to pass, that a swearer and a lier move in the same orb of incredultty,
and as the shepherds ran so often in vain to the boy, that told them the
Wolf was come into the fold, that when he came indeed, they did not believe
him. So does every man abandon a swearer in his most urgent occasions, because
vnurged he made no conscience of an oath. Therefore, if not for Gods love,
Christian duty, sweetness of conversation, and assurance of our contracts and
friendship; yet for fear of hell, and in regard of salvation, let me divert
you from this horrible, and hateful vice.

Yours, in reformation.

To her miserable rich Friend, P.D.
Against coueteousnesse.
SIR, Although it appertains not to our sex to take the rod of restraint
into our hands, and seem free Denizons in the kingdom of wisdom, and good
counsel, more then men: yet because I am engaged for you to that honorable
Lady: and ser open the enclosure of your praises from my own judgment, and
experience of your worth: I must needs presume (beyond your expectation) and
crave pardon, if I seem to have a more daring confidence in this reprehension.
To what end then have you cast dirt and filth into the stream of your spirit,
where a confluence of many virtues make a flood of perfection, and even now,
when a very mizer should set at large his hardbound heart for expenses, have
damned up the same, with the mudde of avarice: you that have carried away good
opinion with you in times past for courteous, affable, courtly, well-descended,
free, noble, and (above the rest) a liberal Gentleman: now to make a stop,
and darken all that luster with a miserable sparing, and niggardly
conversation. And when in a time of professing love, which seems to shed
tears at your degenerating condition, and to whom? to a Lady of honor and
judgment: whose very presence may command presents and extraordinary expenses;
and where? in both your countries, where reproach stands watching for any
occasion, and envious eyes behold you with repining, and would feign look
justly awry upon the least deformity. Be therefore (good Sir) better advised,
and remember, that in religion covetousness is resembled to Idolatry: in
Philosophy, to all wickedness, and overthrow of the best resolutions: in
morality, to the dropsy, an insatiate disease, which the more corruption it
has, the more it desires? in civil conversation, to a nastie combersomnesse,
which terrifieth one another, and breaks the band of true friendship. Alas,
what do you gain by unmeasurable hoording up of wealth? but a base report,
and a ridiculous pointing at, even as you ride along. Nay, you shall be
compared to a barking Dog at cattle, feeding on hay, which will neither let
them take a repast, nor can help himself to satisfy nature. O, good Sir,
though I am no Scholar, yet can I read what other men do write: and of all
the vices which are enemies to a quiet soul, and free borne Gentleman,
covetousness is the worst, basest, and most ridiculous. For, besides that, it
detaineth us from the civil use of Gods blessings in the world, so that
neither in diet, nor ornament, a man is master of himself: it makes us unapt
to the entertainment of such virtues, as commonly help us out of the filthy
puddles of disreputation, and keep us secure from calumniation, and bewitching
corruption of profit: therefore, for honors sake, for virtues sake, for
friendships sake, for my sake, for your own sake, for posterities sake,
remember where about you go, and how a good and free demeanor will prevail,
when these hard enclosed hands seem rather to threathen strokes, then promise
hopeful entertainment.

Yours, if you can be mine.

To her unkind Friend, R.S.
SIR, Against denial of trifles amongst friends and fear of combersomnesse.
I perceive by my self, that poor and unfortunate persons may well be
resembled to threatening tempests, from whose violence every man seeks a
present shelter: else would one never have been so discourtuous, as to have
denied me a small request, or continued your despite, in ababandoning my
company, for fear of combersomenesse, or importuning you to more, then your
own free will should condescend unto. Is this the law of friendship? Or what
do you imagine can be the end of such unkindness? Who taught you such
rules? Or can humanity think well of such perverseness? Well, I am a woman, and
therefore will be so far from immodesty, that I will impute it to my ill
deserving, not your bad disposition: but if I were a man, howeuer I disclaim
quarrels, I would make this a matter of complaint, wherein if your wit did not
wind you out, by the scrue of sufficient excuse, it should surely turn to
displeasure, and cause other malign circumstances to threaten you further.
Therefore from henceforth I will be so far from loving you, that I will hate
my self, for deceiving my kind heart in affecting so unkind a friend. And
thus I bid you farewell; yea, to fare as well as I did, in the want of that I
write for, and the discomfort I endured, to think how ill I had bestowed my
first liking.

Yours, if you will have it so.

To his ill respected friend.
Against idle excuses.
SVspitious sir, what cause have I given you to deny your self? or how could I
deserve so ill at your hands, as to drive you from your own house, when you
were locked in your study? belike you thought I came to borrow money, or beg a
dinner, in neither of which, a friend, and such a friend as I presumed you to
be, by reason of your own protestatio^s, ought to be denied: which makes me
remember, a tale in the Italian courtier, of a ge^tl: who coming to ask for
his friend, was only answered by a servant, he was not within: whereupon (for
his better intelligence) he departed satisfied in show, till some occasion
directed the other to demand for him: whereupon he answered aloud in his own
behalf, he was gone from home: Not so said the other; for I hear your voice,
and know it too well to be mistaken. But (said he again) you are a strange
man, I believed your maid when she told me you were not within: And are you so
incredulous, that you will not believe my self? But, as I remember, there has
been no such passages between us; therefore I wonder at this sudden dispatch,
and cannot be persuaded, but you wish a dissolution of our combined loves. For
(my own part) I will not come to the house of my friend to receive any affront
of denial; and he that will take occasion of sequestration, to make such a man
of my condition stand without doors, is not worthy to rejoice in true
neighborhood, though there had been a wanton in your arms, or any Bag a
telling.

Yours, if you be worthy.

To the worthy Lady, R.C.
GOod Lady, If your honor and virtue resemble not the primum mobile, Against
pride and tyra^nous behavior in great persons
of the Spheres; to carry about the lesser circles of our duty and observation:
I see no reason why a generous and free borne Gentleman, should betray the
cause of GOODNESS into the hands of GREATNESS, with degenerating conditions. For,
to what end has a voice from heaven proclaimed the Godhead of Princes, and
higher advanced persons; but to resemble the^ in perfection, and highly exalted
virtues? as for shows and outward ceremonies, they be meere'y tumors of
vanity, pride, and ambitious desires, and the best of your lives may be
compared to a gaudy mask at Christmas, which if it carry more state, and last a
little longer in the kings court, then another place; yet must it have a
melancholy farewell, and is forgotten, like water spilt out of a Bucket: whereas
affabillity, pious inclination, liberal compensation, regard of the afflicted,
raising the weak, mercy, compassion, and such like, be indeed fair
resplendant stars, worth praise and observation; from whose influence can
proceed nothing, but auspitious presages; and are sure to make you famous to
posterity, even from the mouths of widows and orphans, when your painted
sepulchers shall lie trodden to dust, and your proudest edifices be turned to
other uses. Be not therefore good Lady, so transported with passion, or open
eard to every flattering insinuating groom, that I shall never be heard in my
iustifications, though worthy to cliame my own, nor enjoy such privileges and
immunities, as my ancestors have filed on record to their own credit, and
posterities immitation. For believe it, there is no such corasiue to a gentle
mind, as to be deceived in the expectation of another worth, and where he
hoped of support and countenance, to be menaced with threatenings, and
contracted brows, which if you saw, how ill they became your louelines and
beauty, you would quickly admit of a sweeter cheerfulnes, and make me happy
with a plausible alteration.

Yours, as a lover of honor.

To his servant, F. M.
Foolishnes and dishonesty in a servant condemned.
ALthough I have plentiful matter of reprehending you affoorded me, yet will I
only at this instant redeem your foolishnes, and dishonesty: foolishnes, in
winding your self further into such intricate business, then either your
cunning or strength can help you out of dishonesty: in converting the money
appointed to general employment to your own advantage, whereby the Tenants
are disabled, my self discredited, and you stand under the burden of my as
just (and peradventure) heavy displeasure. Therefore, I charge you take some
other course, and that suddenly, to prevent a further account and aggrauatio^
thereof; or you shall find, that as I can be a kind Master, so I know how to
punish a less gross crime, and make you an obedient servant.

To his miserable and most wretched son, R.B.
THou cupshot, stain to my name, and torture to my thoughts, All the while I
looked on the filthy and menstrous cloth of thy vices, Against drunkenesse.
I remembered the story of the old man of Lions, who enquiting after his sons
misdemeanors, with a fond partiality, began to cloud them with one excuse or
another; as that government and discretion would moderate his riot, time would
cool his blood, and danger of the law terrify him from swaggering: marriage
and the attractiue condition of a good wife would divert him from
lasciviousness, with such like: till understanding he was a drunkard, he
wrong his hands, and washed them wirh tears, as desperate of his recovery. For
in this vice, custom and age are so forcible, that men are so far from
reformation, as they grow from bad to worse, and from worse, to be loathsome to
themselves and al civil company. So played I with thee, and dried up thy mother
cheeks with my kisses, kept her rage from desperate fury with excuses; held
her hands from wringing with sweet persuasions; showed her instances of many
licentious young men redused to government, till we heard of this eruption of
beastiality, past all limitation, or hope of amendment: A drunkard! that I have
lived to see this day, and my own shame and disgraces ripened in thy
rottenness. Let me tell thee, how the Lacedaemonians were wont to do, after
they had found a drunkard wallowing in the dirt, and (like a Swine) besmeered
in his filthiness, to bring forth their children, to beget in them a deadly
detestation of the spectacle they beheld. But how? that if any forewarned, and
by such exe^plary cautions terrrified, fell into the bogges of such by-ways,
out of the tract of Temperance, and pathway of discretion, they were publicly
whipped: but I am afraid thou will serve me like the beastly younker of
Strasborough, who when his father led him to such a spectacle, where besides
the loathsomnes of the party wallowing in his vomit, the ridiculousnes of the
action, set the spectators on work, to the clapping their hands, and
extraordinary iollitie: was so far from misliking of the same, that he only
demanded, where the good wine was, which had made the good man in such a
taking. And will thou serve me so indeed? Are the pleasant voices of my
fatherly instruction discords unto thee? Is there no remedy, but I must see
thee irrecouerably plunged in a quagmire of so loathsome a vice? Oh that I
might rather see thy death, then this disorder; and cease to be a Father, then
to have so untoward a son. My prayer is, Either mend, or end: And so I leave
thee.

Your Father, if you be sober.

To her unkind Husband.
WRetched and miserable man: How dare thou lift up thy Adulterate eyes to
heaven, and behold the pure and christalline Firmament, Against the breach of
wedlock in a man.
wherein that everlasting Lawgiver sits in Triumph, against the day of
vengeance, to judge such perseuera^t delinque^ts, as thy self? or do thou
imagine, that those strict duties (commanded from the beginning) were but
matters of policy? or that position of man and wife, being one flesh, was
merely breath and exhalation? Surely it must needs be so with Atheists and
profane livers; And I am afraid to the hereafter horror of thy soul, that
thou will tumble into the pit of burning lasciuiousnes: from whence it is
easier to be kept from falling, then once fallen, to recover out. But O fool,
look again with brighter eyes, and read with more iudiciuos understanding:
the lips of a whore are as sweet as honey, to the taste of fools; but in her
heart is the sting of scorpions, yea, the poison of aspes, lies under her lips:
and will thou then adventure the stinging, when there is no Cataplasme for the
soar? Will thou forget the honest wife of thy youth, for a disloyal and
impudent stranger? Will thou despise thy children, resembling olive branches
about thy Table, being buds of the Blessings promised a good man, for Bastards
plants, which the hand of Divine Justice will soon root out? will thou run
into the sincke of lustful confusion, that may trace the fair walks of
contentment, with chaste embracings? Oh do not so I charge thee: nay, by the
contracts to our first vows, I conjure thee, return to the pleasant springs
of our amity: and I will wash thee clean again, and make thee sweet, with
tears and kisses of a loving wife.

Your true wife, in your untruth.

To his periurde and lascivious wife.
THou for sworn wretch: To what end have thou prostituted thy self to
filthiness, Against whordom in the woman.
and abandoned the strong and certain supportation of grace, for the
momentarie ticklings of pleasure: so that by this filthy dashings of lusts
loathsome chariots, we are all bemyred, deformed, and made odious to the world:
thy self art branded for a strumpet, and in the best excuse but a broken
glass, never to be set together again. I am made a byword, and a
pointing-stocke; not that the disloialty of a whore can overthrow the
reputation of a virtuous and honest man: but because corrupted times have
taught men a mischievous lesson, of taunts and conte^ptuous scornings: thy
children appear not but with suspicious faces; and I dare not look upon them
for fear some harsh news should whisper in mine ear their bastardy: our
friends and acquaintance dare not meet without murmuring; and me thinks I
hear them say, what shall we do in the house of shame, and eat at the table
of incontinency? Oh that thou had remembered Judah against Thamar, that she
should be burnt for playing the whore; and yet a widow, and before the law: But
when the Jews were reduced to obedience, adultery was punished with death. But
me thinks I hear the devil to prompt thee, that they which dare adventure
their souls, dare hazard their lives: and now it is not so strict as it was
in the time of the law: For Christ himself forgave the woman taken in
adultery, and we live in a commonwealth far from such extremity Is this your
sophistry? take heed of cousening your own soul, and deceiving the trust
which Christ has reposed in thee, making thee thereby partaker of his precious
blood, and thy own redemption. But how? neither to spill the one by casting it
abroad with unclean and polluted hands; nor betray the other by conspiring
with presumptuous sinners, to rebel against grace, repentance, and newnes of
life; wherein if thou do not examine thy self, and prepare to better
conformity, I need not breath out vengeance against thee, or seek a greater
justice, then thy mischeeuous will, and unpenitent life shall pull upon thy
disguised shameless face, and defiled misshapen soul.

Your husband if you do not divide him.

Excusing Letters.
To his best Friend, G.L.
GOod Sir, I would not have you stagger in your opinion of me, considering I
have always with an upright hand held up the beam of our friendship: Excuse
for not lending money.
and would never give my heart leave to entertain a thought of politic
misdoubt, either of your ability or honesty. For the very name of a friend
shall command my person, much more my goods: but such a man as your self has
interest in my life and spirit. Therefore believe it, I was so destitute of
money at that time, that casting up an irksome account of my brothers
departure, necessity enforced the pawning of my vtensels to furnish him;
wherein if any experience, or example have taught my tung the cunning of
excuses, let it hereafter grow too big for my mouth, and when my wants knock at
the door for supply, let hands of Adamant admit them no entrance to my
insupportable afflictions. But whereas you lay a further imputation upon me,
that my credit carried an ouerswaying command of my rich neighbor: true it is,
that in former times, as Doves resort to glistring painted houses; as Farmers
bring their seed into fat ground; as Beasts and cattle resort to feeding
places; and as all the world is transported with private respect, I carried up a
head of thriuing wantonness, and he looked upon me with a correspondent
alacrity, but no sooner came the pulling hook to throw down the fruit of my
fertile trees, whereby he perceived the boughs bare, and saw the knots and
branches battered in pieces: but he suspected my prosperity, and added withal
a fearful prophecy of hereafter canker-eating, and decay both of root and
rind. Thus are my hopes abortiue concernining my interest in him: and to
speak the truth, I am so fearful of a denial, that I had rather sit still
with some ease, then rise and fall with utter despair. Thus if I have won
the field against your incredulity, and brought up prevailing forces to
strengthen your love, and good will still on my side: I am then my self
again, and protest I rejoice more truly in your sweet conversation, then a
wanton could do, if his mistress were to hang about his neck with
deceivable kisses, and counterfeit embraces. For they commonly resemble the
Yuy, running up a tower with dangerous loosening the stones, when true
friendship is like Atlas and Hercules, supporting of the heaven of prosperity,
and life from falling, yea from failing.

Your justifiable Friend.

To his Honorable, L.G.
Honorable Lord, Whereas I understand, that you excepted against my last
importunity, as if I transcended the bounds of good manners; Excuse for being
importunate in the behalf of a friend.
and abased your greatness with carrying too slight a respect toward you; I
hope I shall find you so favorable, both to admit of my justifiable excuses,
and to distinguish between presumption and necessity. Wherefore I pray you,
remember the story of Aurelianus the Emperor, who once proclaimed a stately
sequestration of his person from common intruders, inhibiting all soldiers and
subjects, to advance themselves in his presence for any suit whatsoever: Yet
notwithstanding, when a Captain had infringed the edict, and was attached by
the guard to receive a condign punishment; the Emperor stepped forth, and
said, if he come for himself let him die; if he determine for his friend, let
him be released. In like manner do I overthrow this objection at the first
charge, and besides your Lordships apprehension, say plainly, that if I had not
been tied by the laws of friendship, to expose unto you the desires of another,
I would not have diuerted you from more serious affairs, by my tedious
discourse, and unmannerly importunity. And thus making no doubt of your worthy
and noble disposition toward a man, that does study nothing, but to love and
honor you, I commit my self to that part of your virtue, which can make
extention of pardon and favor, as I have done of submission and duty.

Yours, as you will be mine.

To her over suspicious Friend.
GOod Sir, I am not ignorant, how the Poets have invented a marriage between
Cupid and Jealousy: Excuse for keeping company, and going to court*
and true love is many times seasoned, and made sweeter by pretty
contradictions, and softly raised suspicion: but to be ouervehement in
accusation, and absolutely to conclude a negative by fond supposes and cruel
constructions, are beyond my reason, and your fair demeanor. For, be it, I
went to the play with my sister, I endured the mask, I danced the measures: I
will not much stand upon the commendations of such customary practice: Yet was
there any thing here worthy the traducing? or could a Gentlewoman do less,
considering the circumstances and commanding majesty of the place? But you
will object, that fancy now settled, and the mind contented with another
controwle: it was idly done to go at al. I could say so too; if a mothers
well-wishes, a sisters importunity, a solemn festival, a time of revels: and
above all, a presumption of your noble disposition and free hearted discretion,
had not mustred themselves far stronger then my weak denials: wherewith at
first I came so forward, that they wondered at my mortification, and swear it
was a counterfeit retiring to more dangerous business. Besides, I was not (as
I take it) under any penalty of infringing your will, you not imposing such a
task on me: nor would I be so absolute a slave, though the name of husband and
wife had linked us together with the Churches ceremonies. Be therefore I pray
you satisfied with my justifiable excuses, and believe it; I will rather
forswear the hopes of marriage, and the glory of costly ornaments, before I
will leave you again in such an hell of affrighting jealousy.

Yours, so you be resolved.

To her jealous Friend.
SVspitious Sir: I perceive that ignorance is many times a mistrisse of
quietness, Excuse for taking shelter in a shower of rain, with a strange
gentleman.
and too much learning lays the heart open to leaud example, and idle
instances. Thus because you have read of the Hunting which Dido prepared for
Aeneas, and that opportunity, and a strange accident brought them to an
Amorous encounter, in that solitary cave (whither they retired) to avoid the
peril of the storm: therefore must I be suspected, for that at the last
Hunting I met with S. G. in the thicket, and not able then to endure the
shower, mounted up into the stand: If there were no other excuse then
necessity, and the accidental proffer of civil courtesy, me thinks it might
carry credit with understanding: but least I cannot handsomely gather together
my forces to satisfy you, I will tell you true: There came both my brother,
and his man, to prevent any ouerflowings of a wanton tongue, or idle
conference: so that we were so far from any occasion of Loves encountering,
that we were glad to shake our hattes, and wring our clothes, for fear of
catching cold: yet say, that the accident had prevented other company: has
the opinion of his worth, so ill a ground in your thoughts, that you can so
quickly cast it out from any sound rooting? Or am I such a truand in the
school of modesty, that you stand in doubt of my loytering, or at least of my
insufficiency, to prove an honest proficient? But I will answer for you, it is
loves fault and not yours: and there can be no good will, where many questions
arise not to contrarieties: yea, sometimes to distastings, and fallings out:
which if it be so, I am contented to offer my Taper, at the altar of his
deity, and hope to find you the faster hereafter, by letting me lose a
little, and giving some small liberty to the fears of my loss, and proving
counterfeit.

Yours in her very thoughts.

To his worthy Friend, Sir I. D.
SIR, Excuse for not dispatching a suite of importance, according to
expectation and promise.
it pleased me much, that you supposed me over shadowed with the high exalted
favor of such a Queen, who as she is the mirror of all ages, for her
magnificent government: so is she the president of all actions for her virtues
and maiesticall properties. But withal, you must consider the condition of her
greatness, and the custom of Princes, who do not allow of too much easiness
in access, or facility in subscribing to petitions, for fear of diminishing
the glory of their palaces, and making us careless in our service and
observation. Therefore I pray you be resolved, that I neglect no opportunity
to infer your former merit, and present aptness to the place, nor found her
any way obdurate, more then in her plain resolution you might tarry a while:
As for that imputation, that I was tempted with a thousand angels to speak for
D.C. and so bare you in hand to feel Esaus roughness, when yet Jacobs voice
was deceitful: do not believe it. And let one protestation serve for all, that
no man but your self shall alter my journey to her Majesty: nor any business
but this set the loome of my industry a work, till the web of your prevailing
be dispatched: or at least, what I can warpe out, made up accordingly: as for
the report, or, if you will, suggestion of your murmuring, that you attended
ouer-long, and yet went away not speaking with me: I can assure you, the fault
depended not on my greatness, or willingness to distaste any man, much less
your self, who are as welcome to me as any man: and (if I might speak it
without flattery) in a farther degree of acceptance with me then any man: but
merely the misprision of your person from the groom, that turned the key: who
mistaking you for another, which had reviled him, put this poor trick of
revenge upon you to make you believe, I was busy, when I neither knew of your
being without, nor would have had any business, to have ouerborne my respect
toward you if I had known it. If this may draw toward a satisfaction, and keep
you from contracting a brow of displeasure against me, I am proud we shall
agree, and glad there was occasion of this pretty contradiction.

Yours in despite of suspicion.

To his loving wife, B.G.
MY only beloved, I am now to deal with a woman, that can spread the mantle
both of love and discretion. Excuse for tarrying too long from a wife.
Of love, not to give way to any sinister and indirect conceit for my tarrying
so long from you. Of discretion to apdrehend the difficult passages, wherein
Court-suters trauerse their grounds, and are sometimes like a ship under sail,
ready to enter the haven of their desires, driven far back by contrary
gusts, into the troublesome and turbulent Ocean of crosses and unexpected
changes. Thus as you have often told me your self, are men sometime
protracted, examined, promised, denied, and many times afronted with
competitors, whose particeans would gladly prefer their friends before a
strangers. But for the giving raines to any extrauagant and licentious
corruption, either for incontinency, gaming, or pleasure, more then what the
better sort of men may draw me along unto by the cords of conversation, do not
believe it, though it should be reported; nor report it, though some untoward
suspicion may hasten you to belief in this kind. And thus relying on your
wisdom, more then my own fortunes or good merit, I commend these civil
excuses to your favorable construction, and commit that little, which the
poor remainder of my discretion has compassed to your care and government.

Your husband resolved.

To his loved loving wife, C.G.
MY dearest and best beloved, Excuse for not dispatching of business
Although your unsavory letters are framed on the foundation of unkindness,
so that you seem to justify the advancing the pile of your grudges and
repinings upon good occasions enforced: yet I hope by that time I have filled
your ears, and impressed your heart with honest excuses, you will quietly
gather together the disperced forces of your care and duty to affright
misreport and sinister understanding. First the^ concerning the money to be
paid to your cosen; I was so far from receiving it then, that there is no
hope ever to have it hereafter. Concerning the not accompanying your brothers
in his suites, and attending with him in the court, you know how unsavory such
a servitude is unto the freedom of my spirit; and how untoward he is in his
spleenefull wilfulness, otherwise I will ride, run, or go, yea lacky by him to
do him good: but to make my self servile upon every occasion, and wait on
those days, wherein no business is determined, cannot stand with policy or
discretion. Concerning the not having the things from the Mercer, whereby you
think your self more then forgotten, yea forsaken and vilipended; I answer
truly, there is but one you know, to the warmth of whose bosom I can repair,
and he being out of town, I cannot presume on any other: so that forbearance
being no quittance, you must be contented to attend a more thriuing hour.
Concerning the sending your son over, there is no hope of him in any
befitting courses of a man. For all that he practices is merely repugnant to
virtue, and my willingness to see him do well; As for savoring martial
affairs, some uncivil and erroneous report has affrighted him with painful
marches and watchings, hard lying, unpleasant fare, careless regard, (what
hunger ot sickness ever chance:) and above all, slight entertainment, with
sudden steppings before him, through the favor of Letters, or Officers, of men
inferior to his supposes, and presumption of his own worth. Therefore I can
do no more, then speak to the Capt: and engage my self for his attendance,
draw out extraordinary promises of respecting him, and encourage him what I
may: but he being a back retirer, and pleading insufficiency of body, I have
left it, without further vexation: howeuer I could for your sake enforce my
unwillingness; and considering his unsupportable humors, to set him on foot, to
prevailing according to his own desires.

Your careful Husband.

To his best, and Noble Lady.
Excuse for not writing and attending, unwilling persons to be spoken with.
MY best Lady, whereas you wonder at my slacknesse in writing: and attendance
of your Father, without complement or ceremony; I answer both thus: The best
letters resemble but the passage of a Ship, who leaves behind no impression
of her course; and if they savor of cumbersomnes, they seem as poison
represented in a golden cup: so that howeuer we entertain the thing
containing, we quickly reject what may be noisome to the taste, and dangerous
to the stomach: As for my personal performing my duty; Shall I now walk in
a Hall, that was wont to come up stayres, without controwle? Shall I now be
afraid to speak to a groom, who will smile in my face, and bring counterfeit
excuses to my sight? Shall I betray my virtue to baseness, when he is willing
to make his greatness to look big upon me? Shall I come to a man ennobled
with report, who yet disableth his worth, by a woman's malice? Oh, I may not do
so! For though he can strike away the secrets of friendship with a commanding
hand, I may not forget the properties of a man, the liberty of my life, the
royalty of my profession: So that till I can recover my pristine glory, and
iollity of familiarity, I will submit to these disasters, and make this
unworthy banishment, the author of Contemplation, and trial of affliction: In
which, if my prayers ascend like a smoke of a sweete-smelling Sacrifice, I
will thank the God of comfort, for his Fatherly correction; and remember in
the same, that you may flourish in the world, like a fair fruitful Tree, and
prosper in your desires: as if Jacobs seed did sow in the Land of Abimelech:
where he received an hundred for one. As for your Mother, I wish her the
blessings of Rahel and Lea: to be honored of her Husband, reverenced by her
Children, esteemed of her Neighbors, famosed by strangers, respected of
Friends, and above all, loved of GOD; who will never leave to love such as
understand, what true love imports.

Yours, though I thrive not.

To his Honorable Friend, Sir G.L.
WOrthy Sir, Excuse for not forbearing a friend, presuming to disgrace another.
I am loath to use a further preamble with you, then may stand in equal poyse
with your judgment, and my duty: yet because I would not seem too
peremptory, in justifying my self, I will confess, that virtue looks with a
more confident aspect, in the maintaining a well gotten possession, then in the
first Fortune of kind embraces: so that I infer according to your own
proposition, that there is more cunning in keeping, then getting a Friend. But
withal, if a Friend will so presume on the weakness of another, to tie him
ouer-strictly to observation, or burden him with intolerable impositions,
because there has passed upon him some descendings of gratuities: I see no
reason to curb his manhood, or liberty in such a fashion: especially, if the
standers by be ignorant of their combination, or jealous that he is subject to
some malign circumstances of Fortune or Time: and thus much in general. Now
to the particulars: As you wonder at my repugnancie, and absolute contradicting
your arguments in the last conference: I marvel that you would so apparently
maintain such a Paradox: and amongst all the rest, draw me into the circle of
wrestling with our wits, whereby either I must cowardly leave poor truth in
the hands of venomous, and corrupted Sophystrie: or fearfully bring my
prevailing forces forward, to foil your understanding and judgment; whereby,
in the contention, friends must needs fall out: whereas you wonder that I would
hazard your love, by so sudden a denial, of such an easy command, wherein
better and greater Friends never disputed.

I marvel why you should at that time, above all others, and before such
persons, burst out to show your greatness and power over me, or discover my
weakness, only to be insulted on, when you had attendants of your own for
servile business; or might have made some groom an actor in the same, to
prevent all exceptions? Otherwise I swear for honorable purposes, when the
whole body should be exposed to your service, I would not have denied the
Legs from going of an errand into the Kitchen for you. Whereas you wonder
that I departed discontented, without ceremony, or making you once acquainted,
when all the company wished me well, and expected a conclusion of the
discourse. I marvel both at your putting me to it, before such curious ears,
and solid judgments, and at the strange entertainme^t of a man, whom you know
could not look upon me, but with Basiliskes eyes: nor I endure him, without
dislike and discontent. Therefore to prevent, untoward disturbance, and to
scatter my jealousy abroad, least it should gather a head of assurance, that
you did it of purpose; I left you to murmr at my vnmannerlines, but pleased
my self in a supposed prevention of further mischief. Thus, if these sad
lines have better fortune then their master, it may be you will admit of them
as excusatory, and of me in them, as willing to please you in noble and
justifiable actions.

Your servant and assured.

To his suddenly displeased Friend.
GOod Sir; Excuse for not being Surety for a Friend.
you saw at the beginning, that the devil was so envious of man's felicity,
that he never desisted, till the bands of his first contract were dissolved,
and the hope of salvation abandoned: and so has he continued ever since, as
an adversary to all goodness, and virtuous dispositions; whereof (even at this
instant) I am a poor witness, and in this foil, which our friendship is likely
to receive an unhappy instance: else could not you have demanded the only
thing I have forsworn: nay, am legally bound to take heed of: nor I have
denied you any thing which might seem dissona^t to our contract: so that I
request you, with tears (if a man can shed them without ridiculousnes) make
trial of me, if it stood with the secrets of our love, in any thing
(Surety-ship excepted,) command my person, rifle my goods, pawn my Leases,
open my purse, and take whatsoever I call mine: but to draw me and my
posterity into the terror of bondage: Nay, to fasten, and (as it were) to
sigillate, and affixe us to the unmercifulness of men, and cruelty of
Cutthroats, is so terrible to a poor estate, that I start at the naming of a
Statute, and am afraid of mine own shadow, least my hand should be
counterfeit. For, I have known the debt discharged, and for want of honesty in
some, and cunning in others, to cancel the Recognysance, a new enformation
has made a hurliburly in the family: and the Law has claimed for the Prince,
against all prescription of time, and releases of men: because the record was a
living voice: and ecchoed out, you must discharge the debt again: Therefore I
request you, let not this denial make any breach against the fortification of
our love: nor let the banks of out friendship be so slightly cast up, that so
small an Inundation shall either ouerflowe the same, or burst down with
violence, that which we once presumed was strong enough against most impetuous
shouldrings, either of Rivers, or Seas.

Yours, when you command.

To his well resolved Friend.
Excuse for not entertaining a friend, as he ought to be.
GOod Sir; let it not seem strange unto you, that I neither durst bid you
welcome: nor open my mouth with so pleasing a voice as the harmony of our
hearts was wont to tune together. For you know I am subject to an others
controwll, and this name of a servant, has in me ouermastred the condition of
a Friend: so that I can but curse the occasion, when first my Lord let in an
ill opinion of your worth, into the closet of his former affection, and blame
that ominous night of feasting, which ended so mischieuousty, to distaste you
both: but I hope time will either weaken these inflictings, or your fair
demeanor work upon a better Anuile of constancy, and regard of virtuous
noblenes in you both; so that I shall perform the part of a Friend, in working
your reconciliation: and you the part of a wise man, in giving way unto some
humors, that otherwise might confound all our quietness. Be therefore (I pray
you) your self, and pardon me a while: if my duty to him restrain me a
little, from running too violently in the race of our friendship: otherwise be
assured, that no other restraint could keep me from flying into your arms,
and prostrating my self to your second command in any thing.

Yours when mine own.

To his well deserving Friend.
MOst dear Friend: If I could prevent my disgraces, as well as I can excuse my
bad disposition, you should neither complain, Excuse for not soothing up of
humors.
nor I be terrified with fear of my utter ruin: therefore I pray you be
satisfied with this assured confidence of my love, that I neither opposed to
your brothers peremptorinesse, out of any pride of my own, or willingness to
ouer-thwart him: nor crossed your mother in her peevish insultings over my
decayed estate, from any preiudicated malice, or desire of contradiction: but
merely to countenance the cause of virtue, and establish the right of truth:
Therefore I pray you consider of me, and as you were wont, maintain that old
goodness which has made you famous to all well-willers, and me happy in your
worthiness and kindness. For to come to particulars, who could have sworn,
that virtue was seeldom or never innated in a poor person, or of mean
condition: if he had said, it was little esteemed, as the wise man maintains,
that wisdom in a poor man, makes a slender oratory, it had carried some
reasonable color of argument: but to discharge it quite from the service of
inferior persons, is merely swellings of pride, contempt, and filthy desires.
Again, whereas your mother resolved that no estimation could arise to any man,
but from an aggeration of wealth, and raising his Fortunes from land and
greatestates, I had reason to swear they were both base and corrupt positions,
from ignoble and degenerating burstings out of frailty: So that howeuer the
duties of a child may restrain you from public condemning your mothers
wilful esteeming of the world, before religion, or a brothers pitiful opinion
of true virtue indeed: I hope you know better how to raise up the frame of
goodness, and when it is raised, to keep the possession against all
disseasures, or intrusions of sin and wickedness.

Yours assured.

Requesting Letters
To his honorable Lord: The L. C.
A request to requite a discurtesie.
RIght Honorable, In those poetical fictions, such were the prerogatives of
deity, that whatsoever one god confirmed, no other would disallow: nor by any
contradictory courses, weaken the reverence due to their sufficiency. So that
if Teresias were stricken blind, there was no restoring of his eyes, howeuer
he might be helped with the gift of divination. If Jupiter give again the
sight to January, (as in Chaucers Tale) to discover his wives incontine^cie,
Juno could quicken her spirits to such a witty answer, as might pacify all
indignation: and so in diverse other particulars, from whence I recollect thus
much in this civil administration of Commonwealths: that when the Law has
had a passage from authority, there is no stopping it by a subjects hand,
howeuer the prerogative of a Prince may cou^termand the same, in another kind:
Therefore my Honorable Lord, I dare not attempt so far, that you should
overthrow the verdict against me, or by sinister course of greatness, wrest
aside the penalty inflicted, but humbly request you to raise as great a
punishment on my adversary, by reason of his wilful abusing your Honor: and
me your poor servant, and tenant, as may answer in proportion my forfeiture,
and oppose against his malicious inclination to overthrow my poor estate. And
whereas these trialls in Law are mere distractions both of our peace and
purses: you will give him this notice, that except he condescend to fair
conditions of agreement, you will open a larger flood of dipleasure against
him, considering the circumstances. For truly my good Lord, he began with
me, as that wicked man in the Gospel, who, when infinite sums were remitted
him, notwithstanding ran and took his fellow by the throat, and most
cruelly demanded 500. pence: These things I leave to your particular
consideration, and am resolute to rely more on your wisdom, in the managing
the same, then my Fortunes, in ouercomming the affliction.

Your Honors in respective duty.

To his honorable Friend, Sir D. L.
NOble Sir: Howeuer there has lurked some dangerous poison of incombrance, A
friendly request for money.
under the tufted green-grasse of civil complement, and other protestations:
yet I was never an absoute and apparent beggar till now, nor had thought to
have stepped so rudely, as to press your courtesy. Therefore I request you,
lay the blame on necessity, and pardon this eruption of ill manners: but
withal, so far to consider my business, that these lines remain
uncancelled, and my suite be not tripped down, in the first setting forward.
For (good Sir) if you vouchsafe not to send me x.ll, as well to defray the
charges of the suit, as to help toward the paime^t of the other debt, I shall
not only lose the benefit of our first proceedings, but endanger my poor
estate, which being a morgage, has a time of forfeiture annexed, and day of
terror couenanted in the Articles. So that I cannot compare my self better
then to a man holding the Wolf by the ear, which if he pull hard, he is
bitten: if he let go, he is in danger of further mischief. Therefore I
request you, hold up so far an advancing hand of supportation, that I may wade
through the current of these troubles, and land on the bank of security and
contentment: which, for that it is not to be effected without your assistance,
I am the bolder to make you believe (as it is indeed) it is a work both
glorious and charitable.

Your expectable friend.

To her much esteemed good Lady.
A request for the entertaining of a daughter.
GOod Lady, I desire not willingly to deal with you, as jealous husbands with
their wives, who commonly look for that they would not find: So that if I
should suspitiously make trial of your many worthy promises, and find them
Court vapors, or formal protestations, it would prove an unsavory search,
and dull my desires in their forwardness toward you. Therefore I will proceed
more confidently, and frame my request on the iustifiablenesse of the motion,
and the worthiness of your merit. I beseech you therefore good Lady, take
this poor gentlewoman by the hand, my only daughter, and settle her in the
school of observation, that she may look toward you, as the eyes of David's
handmaid; and toward her self as that good servant, that doubled his talents;
to which purpose I have instructed her with a mothers love, and a woman's
experience; wherein I hope she will proceed rather for the love of virtue, then
fear of displeasure. But good Lady, withal, I humbly request you, that she
may be orderly led to the sight of her errors, and know with what face
displeasure can look when she does amiss, especially in the desire of
liberty, or acquaintance with wantonness, two such dangerous gulphs, that I have
seen very tall and well built ships swallowed in their whirlings: and therefore
I have reason to fear so slender a bark, and ill provided, as she is.
Besides, there are some things, wherein ignorance has a privilege: For man
was never unhappy, but in the knowledge of good and evil: not that there is
any harm in understanding to do well, and avoid the mischief of practicing
ill: But because we are rather prone to vice then goodness, and (quickly
seduced) run violently into the breake-necke race of precipitant iniquity.
My last request is, that you will pardon my presumption, and impute it rather
to the confidence of your worth then my own bad disposition: and so emboldned
accordingly, I leave her and my self to those virtues, that can bear
imperfections, and regard our dutiful service toward you.

Your Ladyships in all impositions.

To his Honorable Lord.
Honorable Lord, Among all the blessings afforded man in this world, none may
equal mutual society, nor come near the beautiful motions of worthy
neighborhood, A request for assurance of a farm.
and friendship: and of this I am an instance, and may well resemble diverse
trees and plants which prosper the better, when the cunning gardner has rooted
by them, such kind of fruits and herbs, as in nature they desire, and in
growing advance their heads in iollity. For as Philosophers affirm, all things
are distinguished and governed by Sympathy and Antipathy. This made me affect
the place, wherein (as a poor tenant, Gentleman, and neighbor) I would
willingly do you such service, as befitteth my condition and quality to yield
unto: and your honor and gravity to command. I humbly therefore request you,
that I may have some certain assurance of the farm in possession, as you have
from me of my best love, and then (no doubt) I shall with cheerfulness and
sufficiency make my approches in such manner, that you shall neither be afraid
of combersomnesse, nor I ashamed of any desparagement. But withal, I (again
and again) desire, that you subject me not to inferior grooms, and tie me to
so strict a behavior, as that the falling of a tree, the plashing of a hedge,
the killing of a Partridge, and such like accidental occasions, draw my actions
within your servants censuring, or indirect information of busy bodies. And
thus with a submissiue resolution to love and honor you, I commit you to his
hands that can add to your merits, honor upon honor, and make me happy in the
fullness of your opinion, and your noble respect, according to that I shall
endeavor to deserve.

Your Honors humbled.

To his loving Friend, Mr. G. M.
A request to forbear a debt.
SIR, I dare not ouer-guild with quaint terms, and rhetorical Phrases
(though I had such a prerogative by nature) my suit unto you at this instant,
lest you grow suspicious of some bad inclination, and secret cunning in crying
with the Lapwing furthest from her nest; that is, making a show of one thing,
and determining another. Therefore I will plainly desire you to forbear the
debt another year, that I may with a more cheereful look consider the spots
and stains of my durty face, and so at leisure make it clean, or with a
stronger arm cast it lightly from my shoulders, when I shall have time to rest
my self; and prepare to stand firmly under the load: otherwise, I may fall in
making too much haste, and besmeere me the more in attempting with a foul and
filthy clout, rashly to purify me. Herein likewise you shall show your self
free from hard and griping exaction, wherein diverse usurers are compared to
Harpies, who never seize on any thing, which they let go without carrying
something away; nor ouermaster at all, where they do not utterly destroy.
Besides, I shall proclaim you a charitable Gentleman, and enlarge my wishes
for your prosperity, as you tie me to love and respect you for so undeserving a
courtesy.

Yours, if you be not offended.

To her unkind Friend.
GOod Sir, A request to forbear a dangerous Ladies company
Howeuer these dangerous practices of yours may be at the best veiled over with
excuse of trials, and as it were touchstones of my constancy: yet I pray you
deal not with me, as some strange Physicians do with their patients, who,
because they find the body strong and well composed to some endurances, will
therefore add violent potions, and raging poisons to their receipts: and so
peradventure to see you visited of friends, accustomed to civil conversation,
courting of Ladies, and affording pleasant changes, as time and place
requires: I can pass over as things of course, and make my heart believe,
there is no peril in such adventure, nor hazard of true love in
circumstances: but to hear, that you daily converse with that fantastical
Lady, whose eyes are nets to entrap wiser men, and whose hands have with the
Spiders web wouen twisted threads to tie the rouing fancy to straiter
admirations: concerning her beauty: of stronger and more wary men the^ your
self: I cannot endure, nor will afford my opinion of you, so strong a
presumption, that you can come away vnsnared or uncorrupted with allurement.
Therefore I humbly request you, if not for love, yet for pitties sake, leave me
not in this suspicion, nor throw me so violently into the turbulent sea of
jealousy. For I am a poor slender bark, and built for shallow waters: no man
of War, nor high decked ship to endure all wind and weather. I am a slender
reed placed in lower grounds to avoid the boisterous puffes that assail the
highest mountains: no Cedar of Lebanon, to advance my head against all
menacing storms and tempests: I am a true hearted lover, who can be contented
with only one honest man, and have taught my soul a lesson of belief, that
you are master of your self, and a conqueror of affection; nay a follower of
truth, and good remembrance concerning our contracts and marriage. To what end
then do you affright me with these indirect straglings abroad, and set my
patience on the tainter-hooks of cruel expecting your return, and how you
will reason the matter to pacify this displeasure? Well, I pray you be a
little more reposed, and take some sudden course to come and satisfy me
better: otherwise I will not believe, but you wish an alteration, and I must
prepare for some pitiful, either change or distress.

Yours and yet displeased.

To his Honorable good Lord, and Patron.
A request to be charitable.
RIght Honorable, I am very unwilling to make a perilous mixture of divine
precepts, and civil introducements; for fear I should not with sufficient
reverence settle my self, and prepare you to hear the same: otherwise, I
could with Saint Paul to Agrippa, demand, whether you believe the Scriptures:
and answer for you, that I know you do believe them: and out of them can
collect thus much; that by mercy we approach to God, and from compassion are led
to the bar of acceptance with the divine Majesty. This made Saint Paul
write to Philemon, to pardon the misled servant, and sounds out the tune of
charity, as the sweetest note in all the Scriptures: and this has incited me
to request your Honor to come as freely forward to the remission of my friend,
as you can; and once again admit him under the covert of your favor, and good
opinion: For I know his heart is not only impressed, with an acknowledgement of
his fault, but (as it were) cast in a new mould to amend his life, and
entertain a true conversion into the new built house of his conscience.
Therefore, good my Lord, I beseech you again for him, that he be not oppressed
with despair, and so cast down on the bed of affliction irrecouerably: and
again and again, for my self, that I bring him not worser tidings of your
displeasure toward me, for urging you beyond either my duty, or your own will
and worth. But I am persuaded, that so great a blood and generous mind will not
look with a tyrannous brow upon such submission: nor greatness prove
implacable, where humility is suppliant. In which confidence, I leave your
honor to a noble consideration of us both, and worthy acknowledgement of many
apparent benefits.

Your honors in all duty.

To the Honorable Colonel, Sir F.P.
WOrthy Sir, Although martial men naturally affect not either complement or
rhetorical ampliation, as knowing that wisdom it self is sometimes
unseasonable: A request to admit a scholar for a soldier.
yet having good experience of your own sufficiency many ways: and remembering
a noble speech concerning the commendation of ( M.R.) whose only oratory, and
eloquent persuasion, kept the troops whose together, and reunited the dispersed
forces flying away, whereby those unexpected fallies of our strong enemy were
defeated, and a new life infused into our soldiers fainting courages; I am now
the bolder to present this worthy Gentleman and scholar unto you, in whom a
great spirit, and true desire of honor has prevailed against industry, and
peaceable addiction to civil employment: so that if he prove as good a
proficient in this martial school, as he has done in the exercises of
several Arts, I make no doubt, that as a double Band binds stronger then a
single, so shall he give that harshnes of a soldier, a further luster: and
besides, a general good to his country, by such endeavors, gain a particular
grace from your self, for well applying such gifts as nature has admitted him
to receive out of her chiefest store house. Thus much emboldened from the
secrets of our former friendship, and the merit of this my kinseman; whom I am
so well persuaded of. I commit you to his hands that has helped your hands to
reach at honor: and and commend our selves to your good consideration, of so
reasonable a request.

Yours, sworn to worthiness.

To his right Honorable Lord.
For the knighting a friendly and worthy Gent:
RIght Honorable Lord, I would be loath to open any enclosure of ridiculous
folly, or dangerous ambition, in the prosecution of of my suit, and
justifiable request, for the Knighting of M.G.S. considering many captious
tongues, and envious eyes, are busied on the Theater of the world, to prye into
the demeanors of men, and burst out with calumniation, against the least
imperfection: so that if a man stand not upright indeed, upon the sure frame of
prosperity, and good opinion: a poor virtue shall be easily shouldred aside,
and quiet spirit made the Tenis-ball of boisterous contempt, which commonly
laugheth men to scorn with vilipending, not for any insufficiency in the
other: but because idleness and presumptuous conceits run at random without
controwle in themselves. Thus might I be terrified, because I have heard some
make a Tush at the motion, and know others ouer-daring to traduce him in
private, and yet touched to the trial, disclaiming the least conceit of
mislike.

But if it please your Honor to be your self, and recollect your own
memory, I hope you will answer for us both: For my self, that being my
friend, and such a friend into whose bosom (when I shiuered for cold,) I have
shrouded my self for warmthe: I could do little, if I would not prefer so
easy a petition, to so noble a Lord, and such, as had brought me long since,
out of the narrow entry of suspicion, to a manifest confidence of love, and
tied his honor to the performance of a greater matter for my sake. Concerning
him, he is in blood, so generous, that his grandfather was the thirteenth
Knight of his Family: in revenues so enriched, that he may improve his
living, when he will, to an 1200. pou^ds a year, in stock so plentiful, that
a 1000. pounds cannot counter-poise the same: in judgment so reposed, that
howeuer his great enemy has kept him from being Commissioner: yet has he
ended diverse contentions amongst his Neighbors, and regained the best opinion:
in demeanor so delicate, that his house seems a well ordered and furnished
Palace, and his Stable, a storehouse of excellent and well appointed horses:
in conversation, so pleasing, that the best Ladies have taken pains to
revisite him, and went away with admiration rather then satisfaction: and in
eloquence so facet, that though he have not bin a traveler, or soldier: yet
can he dispute of both, and ouer-beare a good resolution, to confirm it in
either.

All which being considered, I make no doubt but I have reason to infer the
same: he is worthy to be remembered with the immunities of his ancestors: and
your Honor so respective, that neither flattery nor detractio^ shall pull us
within the danger of your displeasure: And for the maine point, which is
disbursement of money, he has sworn the contrary, and is not determined to
spend your friendship so mercinarily; because he can so dispatch it by meaner
men, meaner trouble, and a meaner account, or giving reckoning of his fortunes.

Your Honors, as you can devise.

To her highly respected Friend, Sir T.B.
For to defend a widow gentlewoman in her right against all wrong and
calumniation.
Honorable Sir, I have read, or at least, given ear unto other folks
reading, that in ancient times, when honor and arms were mounted on a throne
of estimation, there was a military oath prescribed to soldiers and knights
with diverse limitations: amongst which, repulsing of injuries, and defending of
Ladies were principal; and truly if a woman might be admitted unto a court
of war, mo thinks it was necessary and honorable. For what is virtue, but
a natural inclination to charitable actions, and noble resolutions? and how
dare a Gentleman take upon him the title of Chiualry, that will defile his
heart with malicious and dangerous reuenges, open his mouth to indecent
speeches and filthy opprobry, stretch his hands to entertain fury and revenge;
yea frame the whole course of his life, either to a bestiall liberty, or
barbarous doing of injury? Therefore Noble Sir, remember your self, and from
whence you are extracted, near in alliance to me, and one, on whom I have
leaned for supportation, and relied in all these eruptions of misfortune.
Remember me a poor Gentlewoman, a widow in distress, and groaning under the
heavy and cruel hand of a great and merciless adversary. Remember the cause,
that it is virtues, the defense of chastity, and keeping us al from penury and
wants; and remember my adversary, that he is merely malicious; and because he
could not obtain, what he unlawfully desired, he now sounds out no note but
revenge: and swears he will make me repent, that I either denied, or contested
with him. Therefore dear Sir, let me fly to you for refuge, and as far as
true manhood may avoid the imputation of quarrels, and dangerous bloodshedding,
cling to your side under the shield of your noble protection: wherein I will
desire you to proceed no further, then by petition to my H. G. and orderly
attendance on the high Commissioners: And this I take both ways to be
justifiable, and assure my self, this you would do for a stranger, that had
not estranged her self from good demeanor, and fair courses of a virtuous
inclination.

Yours, and sworn to be so.

To his Honor able good Friend; L.
Honorable Sir, I would not now resemble the fish Caepia, which cast into any
water troubles the same; A friend entreats for an office, for another.
nor be compared in my importunity to your Court tapers, which burn out
themselves to pleasure others: so that in pleading thus in my friends behalf,
I may peradventure do him no good, and yet spend the splendour of your worthy
love to as little purpose concerning my self. But presuming still to find you
more and more generous, as you more and more approach unto honor and dignity,
I am the bolder to expose unto you the honest request of Master H. and make it
the mark of my aim, wherein if I ca^ come but so near as your kind
acceptance upon those conditions, which in a manner you gave life unto: I
shall then think my self much bound unto you, because of many blessings cast
into my lap at once by that means: as the confirmation of your love and
regard, the gratuitie of two hundred pound besides the sum appointed for you:
the discharge of the duty of a friend; the answering certain frivolous
objections against my credit: the corroboration of his good opinion and
neighborhood: the assured establishment of his alliance, and the preferring of
true virtue and desert to noble and orderly entertainment. For I can assure
you, he is not only worthy of the place, but extraordinarily quallified to
move (like a fair Planet) in his own Orb for sufficiency. Besides, when he
knows it is your pleasure to admit him to more private familiarity; you shall
find him reposed in judgment, quick in conceit, witty in discourse, pleasant
in conversation, and, above all, a lover of virtue, and civil in all his
actions. Therefore I have reason to plead in so good a cause, and for your sake
in some sort am proud, that I have such interest in the business: whereby if
you nobly consent to dispatch, then shall you double the favor, and make us
both obliged unto you for ever. For, as in harsh and unpleasant news, a quick
delivery eases much the heart, which otherwise would weary with expectation.
So in all good turns, a timely sending forth, makes the benefits gracious, and
the benefactor to resemble a sweet swelling spring to a thirsty soul.

Yours, if you think me worthy.

To her assured friend.
GOod Sir, Common experience has brought women into the field of this
knowledge, For advice in matters of difficulty.
that it is an easy task to give good counsel, and private trials of your
great understanding has assured me, that you know when to advise your friend;
with all the other circumstances of place and persons: whereupon I am now
enforced to ouer-burden you with petitions, and make one request for all, that
you deny not the best directions, though I seem to examine you on particulars.
I pray you then consider on the assurance of my dowry, and whether it be not
prejudicial to my estate, if in surrendering I make a change for the manor of
F. which may be for any thing I know subject to some encombrances. Secondly,
remember the conueiance of those lands for my daughters portions, and younger
sons annuities: and I pray you be careful that the pleasing of our selves in
present times, endamage not the Orphants in future changes. Thirdly, send me
word, what enquiry you have made of Sir G. P. who would make me believe, a
second marriage cannot be prejudicial to my fortunes, and may add to my
comfort and augmentation of estate mutual society of a worthy husband, and
settled prosperity, when the mind is contented, and a woman satisfied in her
last desires. Fourthly, let your former care I pray you extend thus far, that
this secret enemy to the thriuing of all Gentlemen (10. in the 100.) do not
steal upon us like a privy thief, and carry such a mastring hand over our
prosperity, that we be not able to eat meat in good order, nor hold up a
cheerful face of entertainment, as we were accustomed: and last of all, that
my rents may be duly sent up, and without further trouble or danger, then the
stewards fee, and the tena^ts dinner, not that I would enter into any league
with covetousness, or sparing, but because I would leave no president of
encombring my Children, nor their presumption to claim an unbefitting
privilege. Thus as far as I am beholding to remembrance, I have patched
together (as you see) my requests, and make no doubt but you will accordingly,
endeavor to continue my assured Friend, as I resolve to be your well-willer in
any thing to my power.

Yours, relying on your advise.

Gratulatory Letters.
To her careful Friend, M. S. H.
A thankefulnes for a daughters good bringing up, and good bestowing.
WOrthy Sir: I perceive by you, that custom is as great a preservative of
virtue, as furtherer of vice: For as in abuses, it oftentimes falls out, that
those sins, which at first we were afraid to touch, we afterward make a
pastime to handle: so in worthy proceedings, a continual progression makes
the race so pleasant, that a generous man walks in no other tract, nor
practices other actions then noble and heroical.

Thus have you begun with friendship to the Father, settled regard toward the
mother, continued with care to the daughter, and put charity on her best wings,
to fly for us all: Thus have you remembered a dying friend, supported a
distressed Widow, relieved a succourlesse Virgin, and taught far more nearer
kindred a lesson of true charity: Nay, thus have you help the fatherless,
defended the innocent, raised up the fainting soul, and loved virtue, for
virtues sake: so that my poor child may think her self happy to be borne in
such an hour, when you were a witness of the same; and I bless the time in
which I obtained your favor to christen her. But is this sufficient? or shall I
thank you recompense such an inestimable benefit? I confess it cannot:
considering you have not only provided for her infancy, ouer-watched her
childehood, instructed her youth, taught her good manners, and brought her out
of the darkness of ignorance, to the light of understanding: but have also
made it the work of your own hands, to marry her to a worthy Husband; as if
therein lay the secret of all business, and that it were the perclost of each
action: Therefore, as a small advantage, I add the public acknowledging of
the same, and the continual presenting our selves and endeavors to your
acceptance; wherein I am the rather emboldned, because I hope I have
encountered with such a man, that did not so much glory in the pleasuring of
us, as rejoice in bringing his own good purposes to perfection.

Your true obseruant.

To his Honorable Friend.
WOrthy Sir, A thankfulness for recompencing the giving of a Book.
Amongst many others, Martial has a pretty Epigram against an hypocritical
Moecenas of learning: who, when a reasonable Poem was presented unto him,
accepted the same, but returned the author without recompense: which when
Martial perceived was a trick of covetousness and bad disposition: he called
him cousener, and urged the reason; he said, he had cheated him of his Time,
labor, wit, spirits, and passion: For how could a poor Scholar but repine at
the misery, and curse the occasion, that had prevented him from a further
benefit elsewhere? But on my soul: you were not affrighted with this: For I
have known you requite the writing of a Letter, and when you rendered great
recompense for a small kindness, I have heard you say: Sic paruis componere
magna solebam.


As for my poor business: I wondered at your profusenes, and thought it a
donatiue from heaven: and when I was telling of three pound, for three sheets
of paper, I suspected my self for dreaming, till a creditor came in, and not
only awaked my fears, with assurance it was gold: but was contented to take
the most part of it away, in part of payment of a greater sum.

Thus from your Noble bounty was I relieved, a debt paid, your Honor
divulgued, a good example discovered, and all of us assisted: And thus must I
swear you worthy of all worth, and be my self proud, that ever I knew your
name, and participated of your good condions: wherein (I hope) as a Magnes, you
will draw others to imitation, and teach me to take out a new lesson of love,
duty, and obedience, toward you.

Yours, as you have restored him.

To the right Honorable Lord. L.
A thankefulnes for an office.
MOst Honorable Lord, As often as I was comforted with the glorious sight of
gold, so often must I needs remember your Honor, but when I make use of the
same, to worthy purpose, I bless the cause, and pray the giver of all
blessings, to establish you as firmly, as wishes and worldly means can
contriue. Oh what a difference is there between wants, and abundance,
between preferment, and standing at a stay, between employment, and
idleness? whereas before I walked vnre-garded, now I fit at ease admyred;
and how ever the heart, is corrupted, I am sure of an obsequious ceremony, and
cheerful countenance; where as before I was scarce welcomed to any, I am now
entertained of all; and in steed of fretting my self for lack of presents to
give my friends, am now made cheerful with many gratuities, even from my
enemies: whereas before I could not prevent necessities with great pains
taking, and trouble, I now supply even wantonness with cheerefulnes and
pleasures. So that the fear is as great to be corrupted with felicity, as the
vexation was grievous to be tormented with adversity: whereas before my sons
were affraide to be called the children of a beggarly Gentleman, and the
daughters sequestered themselves for want of outward ornaments, the boys dare
now floorish with the best fashion; and the girls take upon them to demand,
what livings shall equal their dowry: and all this heat comes from the
Sunshine of your favors; all this glory from the rays of our regard; all
these riuulets of spreaching graces, from the sweetning spring of your
effectual love toward me: so that as I live I am beholding to nature, but as I
live well, I am beholding to you, and (the highest only excepted) none but
you, nor will acknowledge any vpholder of my state but your self, while I live.

Yours, howeuer established.

To the worthy of Honorable titles, Sir F. H.
NOble Sir, A thankefulnes for defending one against a great adversary.
I perceive that virtue and discretion is so predominant with you, that you
keep equal correspondencie in all things. For as I walked in your orchard, I
saw a young tree scarcely rooted, and doubly defenced for fear of a shaking
wind, and boisterous shouldring of careless comers and goers; whereby*
remembered my self and business, and when I recounted, that in my last
presumption by plunging my self into a turbulent sea, (that is, in aduenturing
to contend with my great and malicious adversary) I was ready to sink under
water, had not your streched out arm held my head upright: I blessed heaven
for sending such succor; I blessed you for taking such compassion; I blessed
the cause that thriued so well; and I blessed my self, that had obtained such
favor; so that I must not only be thankful for the same: but request the
perseverance to your continual glory. Oh how happy is he that runs well:
but ten times more happy, that obtains the reward. The good desires of men have
some allowance, their charitable actions great estimation, their noble
beginnings warrantable hopes; but a constant resolution and perseverance
assurance of felicity. Therefore (worthy Sir) as much for your own honor, as
my good, I humbly request you to consider still of me, and as you help me out
of a dangerous tempest, so now vouchsafe to pull me out of a raging fire: not
that I would have any contumacy in me abetted by your greatness; but see true
nobleness in you spring up to the eminentest height. For, Sir G. threatens
further, and when he was not to be answered, told me in public, that neither
I, nor my Champion should carry it away, as we presumed. But, good Sir, you
plead for virtue and innocence, and therefore I know will not be out-dared;
with power made wilful by peevishness, in which confidence I will neither
accumulate your praises, nor flatter my well deserving; but settle my
resolution, to desire nothing at your hands, which is unjustifiable; nor
despair of any thing, which your love to me, and regard of the justness of
the cause, may contriue.

Yours resolved.

To the Honorable Lady, M.
MOst worthily honored, when David gave only care unto Zibas complaint, A
thankefulnes for not believing a falls report.
lame Mephibosheth was wronged, and half his land was given to a Parasite:
which made Solomon more cautelous, and from his fathers unjust proceeding in
this kind, prevented the calumniation in himself: and so admitting the harlots
face to face, decided the controversy for the living child. So that it cannot
choose but that you have thriued in searching the Scriptures, and made use of
the same to your eternal comfort. For which I thank you; and believe it, it
was nobly done, both to send my accuser away without entertainment, and not
condemn me for any triuiall enforcement before you heard my iustifications.
Why (my best Lady) you know, and many better men, then he, have told you, that
I am so far from wronging you with a falsehood, that I have maintained your
honor against any, as far as truth would give me leave: when (as the time
was) that you gave me cause to distaste your unkindness; I would not permit
another to whisper against your injustice: Nay more, when I was threatened for
being a supporter of your disobedience, I plunged my self into a gulf of
troubles, to keep you from falling into the danger. Therefore I pray you
continue your own worthiness, and good opinion toward me. For howeuer out of
passion I may suspect my thriuing in your estimatimon; believe it, out of
judgment, and the true duty of love and friendship, I will not suffer any
other to traduce you.

Yours, only to be commanded.

To her well esteemed Friend.
A thankfulness for lending of money.
MY dearest Friend, Although I am a woman, and should rather busy my self with
household affairs, wherein a good wife is resembled to a well manured ground,
yielding increase to a rich advantage. Yet can I not choose but hear of many
discourses, especially touching thriuing business, whereby friendship has
been maintained in the lending of money, for which great recompense has been
made by interest and other gratuities: so that now we do not dispute of the
unlawfulness of usury, but suppose him well satisfied, that can have money
lent him at any reasonable rate: which seeing necessity and corruption of time
has brought so to pass, Oh how blesssed was that occasion! how happy were
those steps? how fortunat was that hour? how careful was that Genius? and how
compassionate was that ouerwatching eye, that brought you to my house? whereby
you did not only hear my complaints, commiserate my grief, relieve my wants,
and cheared me in discomfort: but lent me money; and how much? 500. mark, and
how long? without limitation: and upon what security? my honest word, and my
servants bond: and wherefore? gratis, without a penny usury or augmentation of
profit. O rare and worthy example! more fitter for Fames golden Clarion to
echo in the world for admiration, then a silly woman's thankfulness to
acknowledge to her friends of necessity. So that believe it, if prayers could
prevail by ceremony, I would not only kneel, but kneel so long as I could,
till God had heard my request to grant you your desires. Nay I would hold up my
hands and mine eyes, and lift up my heart and all, and never leave looking,
till I saw comfort from heaven, spreading over your head the mantle of
prosperity. In which assurance I bid you farewell; because I fare so well from
the assurance, whereby you have warranted your love and friendship unto all of
us for ever.

Yours, most dutiful if you would accept of the humiliation.

To his true helping Friend.
GOod Sir, This last was a timely favor, and represented the first and second
rain to a thirsty ground: A thankefulnes for a timely good turn.
whereby as you haae afrighted all imputation of formallitie and smoke
promises: I have, and must acknowledge the same as a worthy kindness, and duty
of a true Gentleman. For howeuer men may run away with the titles of honor
and greatness; yet (believe it) in the professing of friendship, there is a
manifest duty to be observed toward the meanest. This caused Poets and
Philosophers to describe a friend from the effects of his actions, and
suppliment of others in adversities: this raised the difference between a good
neighbor and a bad in holy Scripture: this taught the Italians to cry out,
that Dono multo aspettato e venduto e non donato: a gift long expected, is sold
and not bestowed as a kindness: and this has taught you the way to true
worthiness, whereby I stand supported by a strong arm, and you remain
exposed to the world, as a fair moving planet in a serene firmament.

Your recovered Friend.

Letters of News.
To his worthy Friend, Aduenturer into the Straights.
Worshipful Sir: The fame of Ward (our English Pyrate) has the same passage
here, as all rumors commonly enter into: News from Xante and Candy.
so that if there be the least certainty of some occurrencies, many lies shall
be augmented, and a mint of foolish triuiall absurdities set on work: but
because there is but one Truth, and that you expect something at my hands may
come somewhat near the same, I will deliver what I know of my self, and am
informed from others: Out of the closet then of mine own knowledge, I gather
thus much, that being in Xante, and attending my passage for Constantinople,
certain Italian ships bound for Cyprus and Scanderon, durst not stir out
of harbor for fear of Ward, who was supposed to lie on the other side of an
Island called Sapientia, and watched but the opportunity of their setting
forwards: which they so procrastinated for fear of surprising, that two
English ships went to Candy, vnladed their goods, made up their accounts, and
came back again for Currens at Xante, before the other could ouermaster their
fear, or durst make trial of their fortune: but when these ships had made
relation of a new merchant man of London, cast away on the coast of Candy for
want of a good Pilote, or orderly direction to prevent a northeast wind, which
is most dangerous at the spring of the year, we were somewhat perplexed, and
the Posts were sent immediately ouer-land, to advertise the merchants not to
come into the straights, so slenderly provided as they did. For questionles
since our peace with Spain, diverse of your company presuming on the same, have
improuidently set out weak shipping, and slenderly provided; so that what with
piracy, shipwreck, and the Florentines, and Maltesses, we lost more within
these five years, then we did in forty before, when we stood on our guard,
and prepared to encounter with experted foes. From the aduertisemenrs, of
others we gather together abundell of these occurrences, that Ward had the
fortune to take a Venitian Galeas, which he brought into Tunis, cthad raised
an estate by it, but that it miscarryed in harbor; that he lived there in
great fear and jealousy, both of the Bashaw, whom he was feign to bribe
extraordinarily; of the Turks, whom he only corrupts with reward; and of his
own followers whom he suspected upon the least coffeehouse would betray
him to the Venetian, or send him to his Majesty's Ambassadors: as for that
smoaky report he carried, it is nothing so; only he lives in a house when he
comes on shore, and is reasonable politic, if he had any wealth, not to make
show of it for fear the Ianisaries themselves should rob him altogether. But
in truth the spoil has been far greater of his piracies, then the goods
orderly brought to land, and out of them so maextractions, as there can little
remain to his own share. For by that time the Bashaw is compounded with: the
charges defrayed, the Turks paid, and his own company contented, there will
be such an abatement, that out of ten thousand pound, his share and part
grows to an height of pride, if it raise it self to five hundred pound: and
how dearly he must live in the rate of housekeeping, every passenger can tell.
Concerning your particular business, your factor both in Xante and Candy has
sent you many letters and bills, which I leave with this of mine to receive
speedy dispatch and orderly pardon, if any errors are committed.

Yours undivided, though far off.

To his noble Friend, S. I. S.
WOrthy Sir; There need no filling a letter of news, with preamble,
complement, or circumstance, and therefore I will only tell you, News from
Constantinople.
I am proud of any remembrance, when I expose your worth, to my conceyt, and
glad of any good fortune, when I can avoid the imputation of ingratitude, by
acknowledging your many favors, and writing the same under my hand and seal:
This I will do still, even in this letter from Constantinople, entreat you to
admit of my coustome, and pardon me, if I take the plain highway of reciting
particulars: without stepping into any ambiguous nookes of phrases, and
eloquent advantages: I came then to Constable. in Aug: and found Sir Tho: Glouer,
and his Lady so well settled, in an honorable correspondencie to their
estates, that I was proud in my countries behalf, that a man had raised his
Fortunes merely by worthiness and desert; and a woman had showed such an
heroic spirit, that she was never distempered with the tediousnes of her
journey, nor affrighted, though she met with Cap: Ward, at the passage to
Nigroponte: For when M. Clarke the master of the Ship and she went in, they
disputed the matter, as if it were Ward indeed, and seeming to make a stop at
the same, she told him, there was no remedy but to fight, and he might be
made for ever, if he had the good fortune to bring his fame on the ground, and
deliver our Confederates from so great a fear: -- Touching the City it
self, it is in a manner a Triangle, double walled, with beautifall Towers, and
may resemble a painted Curtezan, deceiving you, with sophysticate comeliness,
and adulterate shows, but within corrupted, and full of confusion and
beastialitie: yet are many excellent things remarkable in the same: namely,
within the Town it self, called of the Turks Stanbole, or comely: the
Turks, Seraelio, or Palace, containing two miles about: the seven Towers, a
goodly Prison toward the South-East: the Wall it self, without any Suburbs:
the Mosquees, or Churches, to the number of 800. amongst whom, the Sophia,
Almorata, and Sultanina, are the principal beautiful Fabrickes? the
Besisteine, a place like our Exchange, or Rialto at Venice, for delicate
commodities: but for advantage, there are men and women sold, like horses in
Smithfield.

The Jews Sellers are all underground, with iron gates, where the whole
treasures of the Commonwealth are secured, both from Fire and Earthquakes:
the Conduits of water at many corners of streets, where a kind of Officer
attends, to give to all comers. Diverse monuments of Porphyrie, Brass, Marble,
Obeliscos, Pyramides, and such like, showing some face of Antiquity, and
placed where the ancient Greeks were wont to celebrate their Turniaments.
The Balneas, which through corruption of time, and manners, are mere Brothells
and stews: The Bashawes houses, Palaces of state, and of great capacity: as
containing diverse places of sequestration, according to their number of Wives
and Concubines, which they maintain. A place called Iobs-Toombi, celebrated
for the burial of the Emperors children.

Diverse Seralias for men and women, as Hospitalls, to keep them till they come
to age. Constantines Palace, and the Patriarchs houses, as solet edifices, and
showing the ruins of time, and memorable Antiquities: the guard of
Ianissaries, to the number of 50000, when the Army is at home, and the burying
places, both of Jews and Turks, remote, at least a mile from the Wall, and
superstitiously, Dedicated to the memory of the dead. Without the City, the
admirable haven, called Sacra porta, 20. fadome deep, close to the wall of
both the Cities.

Galata, a City walled over against Constantinople, only divided by sea, as
broad as our Thames: the vines of Pera, a great Suburbs to the same, where the
English, French, and Venetian Ambassadors were resident. Toward the North, the
Arsinall of galleys, toward the South, the office of artillery, called
Tapinau: the passage to Pompeyes pillar, and the black tower, 20. mile
orderly, beautified with Bashawes houses, and other edifices, proud of comely
exornation, till you enter the blacke-Sea it self, which extends a great
breadth northwardes, and a 1000. mile to the East, as far as Trebizond.

But if you would hear of a work of wonder and magnificence, you must ride
into the Country, some 15. miles off, and ouer-looke the Aquae-ductus, which
are raised in the Valleys, to the tops of certain hills, about 500. foot
high, and so carry the water level, from one to another, till they fall into
a Cesterne: from whence it has a passage through diverse Pipes, to many
Conduicts in the City.

I dare not enlarge my Letter greater, with these triuiall things, because I
know you have read many discourses more peculiar and pertinent, and expect at
my hand a farther discovery, when we shall meet at more convenient leisure.

Yours, amongst Infidells.

Te his respected worthy Friend, Sir L.
Worthy Sir, I was almost ashamed to write any thing from these parts, News
from Scio.
as news, or matter worth the inquiring after, but that I received a letter
from you while I was in Scio, which seemed to command me, and taught me the way
of good manners to satisfy your pleasure. I would hasten to an end, lest some
curious eye make a tush at these papers, when they examine, that I would fill a
letter with such poor and common intelligences. I then came to Scio, of
purpose to tarry for master Bradshaw, whom we expected from Scandaron, but
such was the misery and trouble of these times and places, that the
Florentines and Maltessis had sent out diverse ships to intercept the
transportation of Turks in any Christian vessel whatsoever, and lighting upon
him, put him to a dangerous fight, in which he was sorely wounded, and had
much ado to come off with utter destruction: so we lost our passage, and
spent our money in this Island, where the Greekish women are extraordinarily
beautiful, rich, and handsome: and the English Merchant lives at great
expenses not daring to trust any of us without good bills of Exchange, or good
sufficient assurance of a better estate, then most commonly a traveler can
enlarge. We did also hear that Master Pindar our Consul at Aleppo, behaved
himself very worthy of the best report indeed, and had much ado in those
Turkish tumults for to save his life, and keep the town and Merchants from
spoiling. Besides, at Scanderon a most intricate business about Master E, a
Merchant, and a Frenchman, who had contracted a bargain for Gawls to the value
of 10000. dollers, raised his fame for the well contriuing, in saving all their
lives. For the Turks maintaining justice in the strictest manner, and
punishing the least corruption that way with death, found an occasion to bring
these parties to judicial trial, because it was supposed, that the Moore
which sold them was deceived in the weight by a corrupted Turk, who was the
officer of the customs, and broken upon the wheel upon the first complaint:
so that there was a present demand of the like justice both on the English and
French merchants; and was not determined without a great sum of money, and
bribing the Bashaw: wherein there was no other face of prevention to be seen,
then disbursment of a fine, and acknowledging a fault, and so with great
difficulty the matter was concluded. About the same time Master M. having been
some two year before surprised by the Maltesses, and then protesting never to
be so ouermastred, or ouershot, undertook a dangerous encounter between
Sicilia and Candy with a Venetian Galeas, in a ship called the Corslet. For
coming toward the gulf, and having some uncustomed, or peradventure
prohibited goods aboard: as also neglecting those nauall and marine ceremonies
appropriate to the State, he held it stubbornly out, rather then he would be
searched, or abased in vailing his bonet, and so the fight continued a whole
day, till he was hurt, and many of his men slain, but being taken and over
mastered he was carried to Venice, where with much ado his liberty was
obtained, to the great honor of Sir Henry Wotton our Ambassador, and
contentment of the merchants, both here and at home.

Your memorable friend.

To the Worthy Doctor, T.
Reverend Sir, News from Meteline.
While I lay ill at ease in Meteline, I received a letter from you, by the hand
of Sir H. B. as he came a shore to see the Island, and belike taking easy
iourneys in a Turkish Carmisan, heard at Gallipolis and the castles, that I was
sick there. Notwithstanding, I raised up a pale face with a cheerful heart,
and understood by the same, that you desired a kind of account concerning the
Greek Church, and Turkish government. Truly your letter was most acceptable
unto me, as understanding thereby the health of him I love so well: but the
contents affrighted me, as knowing nothing could come from me worthy your
view, or bearing any show of delight, especially satisfaction, considering the
judicious apprehension and great reading of the receiver: yet again, when I
knew (if the worst fell out) I was to encounter with love, and civil
acceptance, I took advantage of a day wherein my Fever did not rage, and
thus hudled up this unfashionable piece, which if it resemble the confused
lump, wherein nature helps the Bear in the deliverance of her burden, you
must with her industry, either reduce it to fashion, or your own goodness
wink at the deformities. I will therefore begin with the Greeks, who are so
envious and malignant toward the Latins, that they had rather live in
servitude under the Turks, then require either aid or assistance of the
Romish Bishop, contesting with him even from prioritie of place, and ancient
possession of the Christian religion: so that in their account he is but a
mere usurper of their glory and promotion, which he has ouermantled with
diuises and men's traditions, that neither they can acknowledge him a father in
the true Church, nor he them, as obedient children to his holy Consistory.
Concerning their civil government, it is a mere mangled body. For no man
possesses either lands, goods, or scarcely their lives in security; but
either the Turks command makes them slaves, or the Timatriots or quartering of
soldiers by the name of Capoges, or Spahies subiecteth all to licentiousness
and incontinencie: they have no munited cities, but upon the frontires of
Transiluania and Hungary, nor permitted the possession of armor or munition:
only Gratianopolis, Andrinopolis, Philopolis, Salenica, Galipolis, and some
towns in the Islands are populous and full of Edificies, but far from their
ancient beauty, or other cities of Europe. To conclude in a word, they are the
mere pictures of miserable confusion, and ruins of time. Concerning their
religion, it is so corrupted with age and pride of precedence, that it will
entertain no reformation; saying plainly, that Antioch was the first Christian
Church, and the Greeks made the sheep of Christ's fold before ever Paul was
carried prisoner to Rome: as for Peter's persecution, or being there at all,
they absolutely deride it: and assure us, that he was twenty year elders of
Antioch, and appointed the Apostle over the Jews. In poverty they almost come
near the Primitive Church. For their Monasteries are much diminished, and
their Churches and Congregations very small, and of little entrade: they deny
purgatory, and the Popes supremacy, saying plainly, that if such a title were
extant or necessary, it belonged to John Patriarch of Constantinople, with whom
Gregory the Great of Rome, had many encounters to suppress that tumor: they
baptize with oil and water, have four Lents, fast precisely, wear long hair
like the Nazarites, allow of no Saints but in the Bible, nor have pictures in
the Church but from thence: yet do they celebrate certain feasts to Saint
George. Nicholai and Demetrius, they are much given to mirth, and exceed in
contraries. For at their marriages they have great pleasure and pastime: in
their buryall great sorrow and lamenting, even to the groueling on the ground,
and watching night and day over the graves. Many Countries acknowledge their
religion, as Russia, Georgia, Mengrelia, Armenia, and the people of Aethyopia,
under Prester-Iean: Of whose particulars, you have whole volumes; Amongst whom
an understanding wit may select the best, though many absurdities are
entermingled with some truths.

Concerning this Turkish government, never came Monarchy to the height of such
a prevailing. For there is no subject of hereditary eminence but himself, and
this Emperor Sultan Achmat, is the 14. of the house of Othoman: the doctors of
their Law called Alcharon, and the Mufty the principal Priest, rule the
Empire, although it seem managed under the government of the 5. Vizeeres, and
other Bashawes: the strength of his kingdom is merely supported by the
Ianissaries and soldiers, who are the sons of Christians, and depend upon
the pleasure of their Emperor, as without either Friend or Parent, but the
Turks pension: They love Justice: punish Adultry with death: hate Drunkenness,
and Blasphemy: do nothing but to purpose: eat no swynes-flesh: nor should
drink any wine: They wear long garments: never uncover the head, which is all
shaven, except one lock on the top, by which they suppose to be pulled up to
heaven by Mahomet their great prophet: They have many wives and co^cubins to
prevent adultry: they write bias, and read backward, as the Hebrews; and
neglect all languages but their own, Persian, and Arabian: None but of
Mahomets race wears green, and all are obedient to their Bashaws: and they
absolute slaves to the Emperor; For their religion, it is full of great
reverence: They call to their churches or mosquees 4. times a day, by the
voices of men, on the top of a tower: and on friday (their sabbath) 5. times:
No living thing is pictured or engraven in their churches or mosqueis, to
avoid idolatry. The principal Priest is the Musti, of great account with the
Emperor: For he and the doctors of their law, overrule in many civil things.
The order of Deruices is suitable to the Capuchine friars, and are called
Turners: They allow God the Father, but deny the Trinity: They reverence the
three professors of the three religions: Moses for the Jews: Christ for the
Christians: and Mahomet for themselves: They hate in others profanation or
blasphemy, and observe naturalls, madmen, and fools: They bury their dead
with a singing noise, and watch over the graves, with mourning and howling.
Infinite other particulars may be observed, but these shall suffice, till a
larger discourse can bring me within the reach of your acceptance* and show,
how I have not employed my time amiss: and am willing to give you notice of
the same; whom of all other men I would content in this kind.

Yours, with a true heart.

To his honorable Friend, Captain S.
News from Malta.
MY noble Companion, without further compleme^t; when we parted from Messina,
you for Venice, and I for Constantinople: News came to our English Consul,
that the Vineyard (a ship of London) was surprised by the Malteses, the goods
confiscate, and one Harris the Master, terribly threatened, for transporting
Munition, or other prohibited merchandise to the Turks: wherein the Gran-Prior
is so resolute, that he has presumed to write into England, to justify the
action: and added withal, that the next offender shall loose ship and all. For
you must consider, that there is a kind of Confederacy between the Pope, the
Duke of Florence, and these Malteses, against the Turk: and whereas all other
Princes are now as it were under a protection of a peace: these only dare to
proclaim a war: And what they cannot perform with the bravery of open
hostility at land, they will execute with the cunning of private surprises at
Sea: and by reason the Knights of the Rhodes abated their florishes in the
loss of that Island, they are retired to Malta, to recover their credit: and
ever since that happy repulsing the Turks, by that miraculous defending their
city and Castle, have stood at defiance, both with this enemy of Christians,
and all such as shall support him, to make him a stronger enemy, then they
suppose he can be of him self: And herein the Pope is so charitable, that he
blesses their enterprises, and encourages many Gentlemen, (of diverse Nations)
to enrowle themselves under the Holy Banner: and account it a glory to be a
true Soldier for religion: So that a Knight of Malta holds up a countenance
of such reputation, that he supposes his Honor to precede any temporal
dignity under a Baron: and the Gran-Prior himself will not abate a jot of a
Princes estimation.

Yours for ever, though we never meet again.

To his approved Friend, G. A. Esquire.
GOod Sir: News from Venice.
There is no one thing in the world, in which I desire to have an honorable
contention with you, as in courtesy and good conditions: So that whether it be
emulation, or a natural motion to do well, I care not: but am assured you
have exposed such a pattern of true friendship, that I must answer the
proportion, and frame my self to an orderly satisfaction: you have loved me,
therefore I must affect you: you have visited me, therefore I must not seem
strange: you have been bountiful, therefore I must be thankful: you have
written, and therefore I must answer: yea, and that from Venice, the wonder of
Europe, and the glory of Italy: where I have encountered with News, which I
am proud to make you partaker of: because within the memory of man, never was
so remarkable an accident. Know then, that after the Pope had swelled, with the
repining against the Venetian contumacy, Friar Paul of the order of Serui, was
condemned for an heretic, burnt in his image at Rome, and attempted many times
to be murdered: his offense raised from certain books against the Popes
secular jurisdiction, over Princes and free states: his discourses grounded on
the love of his Countey, at such time as the Venetians determined a stopping of
certain Mortmaines, with pretenses of money satisfaction: least time and
seduction should weaken their glory by diminishing their lands, and giving
away their territories to monasteries: his reward, an annual pention of 500.
ducates, and glorious Title by sound of Trumpet of Theologo designato: At which
the Clergy so stormed, that they made it a matter of treason, against God and
his Angels, thus to extenuate the authority of the Mother Church, by such
presumptuous restraints, against the will and pleasure of the Pope and his
Cardinals. Whereupon, without further disputing, a severe fulmination passed
forth against them: which also so vilipended them, that fire and sword was
proclaimed, and nothing but submissio^ and absolution could deliver them from
the savage strokes of revenge.

This so startled the Venetians, and rowsed up the drowsy eyes of other
Princes, that they al looked up to see with what face these controversies and
accidental displeasures, would terrify the world: and not contented with
verbal protestations, they mustred their Armies, and at my coming into
Italy, I heard nothing else but the clamours of war, and war against the
Pope himself. In which hurliburly, a noble man of Venice, of the house of
Donatus now Duke, having been long since Bandited by the State, for murdering
a Gentl: to whose wife love had formerly enthralled him, determined to work
out his reconciliation, by prostrating his service to the State: and attending
the same (if need and occasion required) with 50. Horsm: at his own charge;
and because they should not lay imputation upon him of formalitie, and
ceremonious bravery, from wind and smoke, he brought them by Sea into the
City it self, and had license to make a Martial show before the Ladies and
better sort of the people: And thus in a sequestered place, at their fundamento
nuouo, he mustred 50.Horsm: with reasonable equippage, and proportionable
discipline, which was never seen in Venice before. For there is neither horse
nor cart, neither fresh water, nor wholsome-ayre, neither sword nor cloak for
the Gentl: of Venice himself: nor any pleasant walk to pass the time with
recreation, more then the delicate entertainment in their Gondolas, and some
comicall shows on their Grand-Canal: Amongst which, the rarest that ever I
saw, was a costly and ostentous triumph, called a Regatto, presented on the
Grand-Canal, to entertain the Princes of Piedmont and Mantua, who came hither
of purpose to see the City, and the pleasures of the same: which I must needs
say for liberty of life and conscience, Curtesans, Mountebanks, Music, and
Monastical presumption, surpasses any City in the world. The show it self
was briefly thus: diverse young Gentlem: according to their ability and
willingness, were selected by the order of their Balls, as Capt: of several
Barges, which were decked up in orderly representations, of whales, unicorns,
dolphins, elephants, woods, fountains, and such like: wherein all the
Mariners and attendants, with several warlike instruments, and music of
lower sound, were placed, both for ornament, glory, magnificence, and adapted
congruity, to the thing they attended: and thus they passed all in order, 2.
English mile in length, under the Rialto-bridge: attended with infinite
Gondaloes, and Boats, who rowed for wagers, and striued for the mastrie of the
best and speediest passage.

Yours, in all places and times.

To his honorable Friend, S. I.
WOrthy Sir: I perceive by you, that wise men will smile sometimes, and the
best gravity can give care to triuialll discourses: News from Turine.
yea, and I am afraid, it is man's natural imperfection, to hunt after
Novelties, and the mind is much delighted with variety: elfe could you never
have given way unto such triuiall letters as I sent you, and with a kind of
cheerfulnes welcomed them, discoursing only of the passages of Sauoy, the
height of the Alps, the snow in Iulie, the falling of the water with such
impetuosity, and dangerous rupture, the pines on the mountains, the plowing on
the hills, the strength of the Fortes and Ramparts: especially Agabella,
Mount-Melian, Moriana, and Saint Katherines: and the bravery of the Spanish
Garrisons in those parts.

Because therefore I perceive you of such fair demeanor, and willingness to
support your Friend in his weakness: I will go forward in my passage of
thankfulness* and make you believe I write to you still more for to express my
love, then come near your satisfaction. Believe it then how-euer, I have seen
the admirable Castles of the Hellespont, which be the keys, to open and shut
in the glory and strength of the Turkish Empire, the natural situation of
Corfu, the Forte of Xante, the Cittadell of Naples, the many Fortifications of
Italy, and other strengths of Sicilia, Rhodes, Cyprus, and such like: yet may
none of these compare with the Castle of Millaine, for Garrisons glory,
greatness, Munition, Bulwarks, Counter-scarphs, Casamattes, and all things
pertaining to the managing of Martial ostentation, and Military necessity: So
that this one place is the Anchor-holde of the Spaniards usurpation in Italy:
and the affrighting countenance, which keeps many worthy Princes and
Provinces in awe, from attempting an invasion in the Government, howeuer their
hearts are affected, if any mischief should burst out against him: and this is
most apparent in Sauoy it self: For the Spanyard understanding of a contract
between Piedmont and Mantua, with an other combination of Modena, sent diverse
age^ts to Turine: yea, employed many Knights of Malta, and the better sort of
Genoa, to work a means, that the Sauoyen Princes might be sent into Spain,
under the tuition of the Grandes and Clergy: To which when the Secretary
seemed to incline, he was imprisoned for his Spanish affection: and till the
Cardinals Aldabrandino and Caesario, with the Popes Nuntio, had streightened
these crooked measures, and confirmed the Italian marriages, vnreleased: But the
truth is, that, concerning the displeasure which these great personages bear
one another, it arises both from covetousness and ambition.

For the Sauoyen having married a Daughter of Spain, and seeing long since the
Enfanta quietly settled in the pride of the seventeen Provinces: much repined,
that either Naples or Millaine, especially Millaine for the proximitie, was not
proportioned unto him. And so, as (far as he durst, or could,) both repined
against the same: and has labored with his Holiness to be led, and invested
in a greater field of dominion and sovereignty. But for all this, I am
resolved, no one thing troubles him more, then the escape of Geneua, from his
proud attempts, and reaches.

So that if either policy, or strength could prevail, with time and
success, to make him master of the same, he would quietly cast himself into
the arms of contentment, and seem proud in the glory of such an atchieuement.

Your everlasting Friend.

News from Ziion, and Jerusalem.
To his especial Friend, Capt: Abr: Yo.
NOble and worthy Friend: you and I may well vent out the breath of common
proverbs, that men may meet, but not Mountains. For as I remember, we embraced
in France: raunged over Ireland: yea, stamped in the dirt, at Kinsale:
encountered in Germany: saluted one another in Italy: played the wantons at
Venice: and divided our selves again; as if the arms of the north and south,
should open a larger embracing: For you prepared for Sweden and Ruscia: and I
for Zidon, and the bottom of the streights; where I received a letter from you
so compendious and well compacted, that I protest I made use, concerning the
occurrences of those times and places: and received delight from your invention
and phrase: not desisting, till I read and read it again and again; but when
I came to your demand of another of mine, for particulars, concerning the
passage to Jerusalem, I started back, as if I had seen an adder in a path, and
was afraid, as if some mischief indeed were threatened or intended; Not that
there was any difficulty in writing to my Friend, a Soldier and apprehensiue
man, who could both pardon out of love, and bearewith imperfections out of
favor: but because the papist will repine at my truth; the traveler complain
of my simpicitie; and the curious desirer of Novelties make a tush at my
information: For good Sir, howeuer the Templars out of their policy, and
imposturing cunning, erected a kind of structure, to make Jerusalem look with
some face of nouelty, and framed a Vault, in which they deceived the world,
with the Tomb of our Savior: So that the adulterate daughter of religion,
superstition, filled their Monastery and palaces with infinite wealth and
Ornaments, wherewith they made liberty and licentiousnes wanton with custom,
and filthy abuses: and for which they were condemned by a general council, and
the Papal decree: and howeuer some corrupted Pope has since given way to
diverse Pilgrimages, and permitted certain friars to revive former memories, and
gather together the scattred stones of the first Monastery, whereby there is a
way open to simple credulity, to believe some thing, and pay much for the same:
yet without controversy, since the last deuastation, and that the Turk has
piece-meale rent asunder the goodly edifices of those places, as we were wont
to exclaim Nunc seges vbi Troiafuit: now corn grows where Troy stood: we may
well cry out, now are there heaps of dust, and some barren vines where
Jerusalem flourished: and according to his prophecy, that cannot err, there is
not one stone left upon another: only the crafty Turks, and the covetous Bashaw
of Aleppo, the governor of those parts, are contented to bear with things even
contrary to the laws of their Alcheron, impugning altogether the Godhead and
incarnation of Christ: as the Jews against his poverty and humiliation: and for
great sums of money, and annual entrado, suffer still diverse friars and
religious persons to entertain pilgrims, travelers, ignorant deuotists,
superstitious papists, and simple credulists, with impudent, lying, and
deceitful relics. For otherwise if rivers might be turned, there is neither
show of City, temple, edifice, nor the brook ^^dron it self: no, an
understanding man dare not say (by any seeming probability) that it is the same
ground where Jerusalem was builded, and the glory of the Jews established; nor
is there one Jew remaining, nor honest man to maintain a verity: yet is Zidon
a harbor town, some 28. English mile from the same: and after the traveler or
Marcha^t has performed his devotion, for great hyre, certain guides and
Ianissaries will conuoy him to Gran Cayro, Arabia, Persia, Damasco, or whither
you please: so that sometimes you shall have 400. camells laden with provision,
merchandise, and men, to take a journey into Persia, and Ormus in the mouth of
those Seas, against the fishing for Pearl: sometime the Christian for
novelties sake, will apparel himself like a Turk, with a Turban, to view the
city of Mecha in Arabia, where Maehomet was entombed: Sometimes the passage is
made easy into Aegipt, and we come this way to Nylus, from whence by Boat
we visit Cayro, Alexandria, and Athyopia it self. Sometimes we take another
course, and go by sea to Scanderon and Aleppo, and so travel by Damasco to
Babylon and Armenia: and sometimes have the fortune to go to Tauris, and those
places near the Caspian-Sea: but this is very seldom, and never but when 4.
or 500. Merchants make themselves strong, both in arms and provision. For
otherwise the Thieues of those places, especially Arabia, would make a prey and
spoil of all passengers. This is all I can say, this is all I dare write, for
fear of interruption: but if ever the sun will make our shadows meet in
England, I will justify further particulars, and make you wonder, that so many
wise and understanding men as have been in these parts, will be transported
against the verity of Scripure, and the infallible congruitie of judgment and
reason.

My own, in your memory.

To his worthy Friend, M. T.
GOod Sir, News from Cyprus.
I never had such cause to remember the Philosophers Banquet, as when I lay in
Nicosia in Cyprus. For as I take it, Epictetes having invited certain Stoyck
philosophers to dinner: for a latter ba^quetting-dish brought out the globe of
the world: and after they had called a council, Epictetes ouercouerd it with a
fooles-cappe, whereat Heraclites wept bitterly, and Democrites laughed heartily.

The first bewalling the misery, the latter, deriding the vanity of the same:
but if they had lived in Cyprus, and seen such confusion of government; all
yet ouershadowed with the Canopy of order and obedience to the State, it would
questionless have put them clean out of patience, and turned their mirth into
sorrow, and their sorrows into raging and phrenzie. For the Bashaw expecting
nothing but Tribute and legal jurisdiction, is careless how other Nations
either live with upright conscience, or thrive with lawful profit: So that
the better sort practice what they list, because no man dare controwle, and
inferiors follow all liberty and licentiousnes, because the others make way
with ill example: The churchmen confirm religion, but for policy, and are
only proud: they can terrify the simple with fear of damnation, and dazell
the eyes of the ignorant with the gaudy colors of superstition. The Jew is
grown so cruel in his usury and extortion, that whereas before it was much to
forfeit goods and lands, now he exacts upon their very flesh and blood:
glorying at nothing more, then to see penury and wants eat up a Christian:
and coldness of charity trouble his very soul. The Lawyer insults with the
peace of the time, and to wring the gold out of men's purses, wrests the Law to
their own Fancies: so that they justify their actions only with legal
authority. The Citizen is bountiful in fair words, and so he may make his
merchandise vendable, has learnd the trick of aequiuocating, and deceyuing
his best customers. The crafts-man studieth for nothing, but to be crafty in
his cunning. The Courtezan resembles the horsleach, who never falls off till he
be full: and when he has sucked the blood from the veins, leaves a man to
look pitifully, on his sores and deformity. The Soldier sweates with rage,
at that he cannot remedy, and curses peace, because it wars with his
profit, nor will apprehend any goodness, but in the ill of licentiousnes.

The Noble-women study for nothing but to seem not to be honest, yet have
they a clawse to affright inferiors for calling their actions in question: so
giving the more scope to their greatness, to run the more at random in
pleasure. The Turkish wives understanding these particulars, repine at their
Prophet, and so murmur at their sequestration, that to have some use of the
world, they visit the Balneas, come to buy jewels, make maskes in English
atttyre; use perfumes, and rather then they will not please themselves, allure
their very slaves to carnal pleasure.

To conclude, if ever the Devil compassed the earth, and considered men, to
make them subjects of hell, Cyprus is now a pattern; and the Turks there
despise their Alcaron: the Jew smileth at their Religion: the Christian
derideth the scripture, and all men and people make a mock of purity and
sanctifying graces, or the true-way to salvation: So that I am weary of this
profane country, and desire nothing more then the blessedness of our own
England, where the very soil is the reuiuer of our spirits, and good
government the load-starre to eternal felicity.

Yours, in the midst of temptation.

A Dumpe or Passion.
I Cannot sing; For neither have I voice,
Nor is my mind nor matter Musical:
My barre^ pen has neither form nor choice
Nor is my tale, or tales-man comicall,
Fashions and I were never friends at all:
I write, and credit that I see, and know,
And mean plain troth; would every one did so.
I cannot feign me unto subtle faction,
No prompt affection to an idle ghost,
Nor do I favor any in detraction,
Nor do I praise them, that themselves dos boast
Small fire suffices unto little roast:
A poor man's tale's soon told, as soon reproou'd
Never assisted, though never so much soothd.
For credit is not of a common stamp,
The fairest gamesters are not always winners:
The stro^gest joints are troubled with the cramp
And many good men are reputed sinners,
Yet shallow foords seem best for young beginners.
The water's surest, where we feel the ground
But all are not as safe as they be sound.
Conceyt's a current forcible and deep,
Simplicity a shiftlesse ship of fears:
A man may dream amiss, and sin asleep,
And foxes may accuse the asses ears:
Patience and plainness ever burdens bears:
And best they may, For custom does invre it,
And he is fit to bear that will endure it.
Not every stomach brooketh every meat,
A dainty mouth can ill affect plain fare:
All appetites at all times cannot eat,
Nor complete merchant that has every ware
Nor thriues he ever that does ever care:
"Wishers and woulders practice and conspire,
"all have their hopes, not every hope their hire
For some are blessed, other some corrected,
Some for their work, and some for their intent:
Nor are all, who^ our GOD has made, elected
Nor can all that offend, as well repent:
Nor has he pardond all, whom he has shent,
Nor mad them happy, whom he does forbear
And so much wiser in so much mistrust,
They have most hope that have most doubt of tim
"the best assured heart must bear, or brust,
Bare honesty is poor as Ballet-rime:
And somewhile counted for an heinous crime;
"Yet store's no soar, because the honest-wise,
Are feasted, when they have what will suffice.
"Content's a royal portion for a Prince,
"A mind at peace excels government:
"He has abundance, that has competence,
"Pleased is a treasure never to be spent,
"The patient man did never yet repent:
"Nor hope in vain, nor yet in vain repine,
"For sufferance is sufferantly divine.
And yet it is a hinderance to my Creed,
That neither sex nor sorts in means or mind:
Neither for cause, matter, desert, or deed,
Should have a care of love, or love of kind,
Lost-labour so to seek, and such to find:
Then seek no more to find such labors losses
"It Is better not to live, then live with crosses.
For touching life, that we do love so much,
And court with such variety of favor:
If that our wisdom and our grace were such
To weigh our loss of time, with loss of labor,
And judge the mischief of our misbehauiour:
In both the courts of conscience and repentance
Our selves might give both evidence and sentence
And escape the scrupule of a froward mind,
And cleanse the filth of our corrupted sense:
And in the molde of vanity soon sinde
The foul occasions of our vilde offense,
Purging diseased sins with some pretense:
Whereby we live so wretchedly so wrought on
as neither GOD, nor any good is thought on.
O wicked world! growth of inconstant passions,
Wherein no virtue is at all abiding:
If now at ease, straight sick at least of fashions,
With whose impatience there is no desiding,
From whose devises there is no dividing:
Now this, then that* eue^ as the humor bread.
Now honored much above our small desert,
Anon more low then is the servile slave:
In whom there is no hope, no work, nor Art,
To purchase, or prolong, to wish, or crave;
Oppression's humble, and opinion's brave:
All things uncertain: yet most certain too
That what so ere Time made, it shall undo.
Times past and present, teach us what is to come
That frail mortality is as fruitless air:
Though much desirde, and honored much by some
By some less happy, in as much despair,
In some most foul, in other some most fair:
Most fowl, most fair, most desprat, most desird
And all but with infection most inspirde.
So all alike the Noble and the Clown,
Dye, and with them their deeds, as well as they:
For after-ages put the former down,
Their murthred momuments have naught to say
Their beauties with their bodies, air, and clay:
Caesar and Alexander, dead and rotten,
The actors and their actions quite forgotten.
David, the Darling of the Almighties-heart
Predominant in pleasure and in power:
Most worthily, till wickedness did thwart
That heavenly Sunshine, with a worldly shower
"The greatest winner has a loosing hour.
For GOD did never yet make that man live
That has not in his life some cause to grieve.
How trust we then to vain ability?
The breath of howrs, and giddy Fortuns favors:
Whose alterations work debilitie,
And our loose-hopes, with loosing happes mislabours,
time hu^teth fools, as fools hu^t hares with tabers
Beating upon the top of styles and stocks,
Tlll in the fire of pride they burn like blocks.
Senseless of all sense, but senseless pleasure
And that it self even as it is affected:
Subscribing only to the humors leisure,
By which alone they wholly are directed,
Till ill by worse be worthily detected:
Then cared as little for, as they have car'de
They feel the difference to be spoyld, or sparde.
Beauty and strength are but a vulgar blast,
And shape a subject unto every beast:
Even sense it self, will leave our selves at last
When this shall be the subject of the feast,
That virtues store will never be decreast:
Where good men may recou^t without control
The golden reckoning of an humble soul.
And to dilate the matter somewhat more,
Let Us look a little ore the world again:
And see, if that we have not causes store
to fret our selves, and on our selves complain,
that any worldly Soil our souls should stain,
When nothing in the world is good or sure:
there is nothing good that can the world endure.
Princes of state, the game of Fortunes wheel,
Are treasons subjects, thralls to base despite:
tormented in their souls, when as they feel
A guilty conscience open inward sight
to see, how wrongs have ouergrowne the right:
And how so ere their titles make them proud
Yet must they (dye like me^) GOD says aloud.
Nobles (the breath of Kings) are vain in pride
And vainer in opinion of vain men:
Swelling with factious hearts against wind and tide
If they be crossed, or countermanded, when
The Lion among the beasts coms from his den
And peradventure takes the Ape to play,
When Beasts of nobler kind are chasde away.
Great Officers (the wantons of the time)
Sifting their senses through slight vanity:
Teaching poor virtue, that this dirt and slime
Must work our worldly base felicity,
And further pleasures in iniquity:
As for the soul, let simple men regard it,
For being simple, simple worths reward it.
Friends yet vntryde, like golden hanging fruit
With words of favor, and as smooth as oil,
Smoke promises to help thee in thy suit,
But all to countnance pride, and to beguile
Simplicity with many a fained smile:
For touch them once, they crumble unto dust
like burnt cole-fruit, which Ta^talus did trust
Acquaintance only bubbles in the air,
Made out of soap and water by young boys:
Swelling a while with pleasant shape and fair,
As long as our own breath augments the joys,
but blown on burst proving themselves slight toys
For if that our misfortunes are espide,
They quickly shrink, and hang their heads aside.
Children the care of cares, and hearts disease
In such a time of bravery and sin,
Where disobedient sons must needs displease,
And daughters fair, themselves to know begin
Seeking a dangerous liberty to win:
For what a Fever makes the Father quake,
when daughters hands with fool or whore do take.
Women the torments of unsettled hearts,
The very Fuel unto burning lust,
Yet in themselves do act contrary parts,
Against such men as do them truly trust,
For if they swell with wantonness vnburst:
They practice slye deceyts: if they be good,
Yet often with chafings they do vex thy blood.
Stru^pets most dangerous baytes, a burning fire
Black coals consuming, or for to bismeer:
Trothles to trust, wrought up with greater hire
A foul consumption of the soul most dear,
Yet making boyles and botches to appear:
O that fond man would live with sweetened breath
For their dark stinking houses lead to death*
Beauty, a pleasing ornament to sight,
Ordainde to show the Makers noble glory:
But see how Pride and Nature does delight,
To overthrow the goodness of a story,
Although decayed with time, when head is hory
Yet is it made adulterate hy art,
When a false hand has playde a cunning part.
Opinion is a Monster amongst us all,
Yet does not terrify with outward shape:
Only our selves do as we rise and fall,
After the censures of the people gape,
And thereupon by force of vicious rape
Bereave sweet virtue of her chastity,
With anxious hearts swelling in vanity.
Life and the best life but a topping tree
Set in the midst of a confused grange:
Which when the Lord thinks good he does agree
to fell, or root it up for some new change,
Or try some stranger form, by such exchange.
Yea peradventure burned in the fire,
subjects must yield to what their kings require
Apparel monstrous by our monstrous wills,
Disguising our defests* seeking to hyde
Natures deformity, when purse fulfills
An humorous wantonness on every side:
Yet from substantial truth most largely wide.
For when that we must naked go to grave,
What will become of that we seem to have?
Virtues and vices, neither good nor bad,
But as the owners states give them their test:
For, who in estimation can be had,
For greatest virtues if they do not rest
In wealth, or good opinion of the best:
And vicious who, but he that cannot hide
And keep his faults from being soon espide?
Buildings of sumptuous cost, the prey of Fire,
are sometimes cursed, with sobbing poor mes cries:
When to erect what greatness does desire
A hundred cottages in rubbish lies,
And many an Orphan vnrelieued, dies:
But where the mortar of an house is mixed
With blameless blood, it cannot long be fixed.
Pearls, precious stones, the glass of ple^ties pride
Riches and Friends, unstaid in mood and mind,
Kindred, but Natures chafe, When they are tried
For they will fly away with Stormy wind,
In whom nor love, nor truth at all we find:
These shapefull monsters daily alter so,
as we can hardly credit, what we know.
The fraudfull Fox deals frie^dly with her whelps.
There is no beast that to her own is cruel:
All things were by creation made for helps
And kind to kind is still a friendly jewel:
The Fire does give him fire, that gives Fuel;
Even there where contraries enforce despite
Nature in nature teaches (...)
Then, if thou will be man, and not be kind,
Disdain thy needless interest in creation:
Be to instruction, deaf, to nature blind:
With neioher man nor beast have conversation,
Abandon hope of grace, abjure salvation:
Be both alive and dead harmfull and hateful
Be any thing, if thou will be ungrateful.
And lay aside absurd Affinity,
Unless to hell thou will allye thy self:
And so the Devil grant immunitie:
As is thy trust in him, and in thy wealth.
Abortiue potion of foul poisoned pelf:
Sorrrow of soul, and surfeit of vile sin,
Man had been happy if thou had not hin.
An honest mind informer time did show
More piety then now the best of kin:
That was because the time was honest to,
Much better then this age, that we are in,
Such are the putrefactions of sin:
Our alms, our neighbor-hood, our humanity,
Turned devil, discord, and immanitie.
Neighbor indeed is now by stranger nam'de,
Cosen by cousnage, kindness is unknown:
And friends of friendship are so much ashamde
As custom has concluded there is none,
None that does good, the Psalmist says, not one.
It is the Prophet, it is GOD, does say it,
And man were much to blame to disobey it.
As he is as much to blame that does believe
Any that lives in joy, vnusde to moorne:
Does love, can love, commiserate, or grieve,
Father or brother hapless and forlorn,
For pity only is to plenty sworn:
And he is a bastard unto worldly blood,
That does a poor man either grace, or good.
Yet GOD forbid, that GOD should causer be,
That we for lack of knowing him do err:
He gracious suffers, whilst that graceless we
His tollerance into negligence trans-ferre,
Whereby it makes the Atheist to auerre:
The soul of man immortal in the least,
(...) as it does in beast.
Men cannot do, what cannot be undone,
Nor suffer more then flesh and blood can bear:
Who plays with fortune, sildom times has won
It Is labor lost to work aganst the hair,
Then not prevail, its better to forbeane:
"A thing undone, is easily prevented*
Do to undo is never unrepented.
Glorious designs are ammelled in blood,
The way to greatness is uneven and hard:
He never was that for preferment stood,
That was not often with mischaunces barrd,
The body of attempts have crosses scarrd:
Who liu'de and sought for honest labors hyre
And was not forced to work it out of Fire.
Courts and occurrences of Kings and Palaces,
Where some soon rise, to fall again as fast:
Show the conditions of the fallaees,
Whose fruits do scantly blow before they blast,
Planted with care, and with repentance past:
So that compare the gains with loss surmou^ting
And save a labor, and avoid accounting.
It Is pity War were not at war with this
But let the worthless Soldier be advanced:
The better times made better services,
Where best endeavors best rewards enhanced,
But now the best of Beggars is best chanced:
A heavy Fortune that such hazard yields,
Either to starve at home* or die in Fields.
But hear my counsel in a Grand-sires phrase,
All do amiss, let all amiss amend:
Self saving works are best deserving praise,
And praise on works in prudence done, attend
All actions are approved as they end:
Who made the feast will fast to mind the pay,
when unthrifts care* not who the charge defray.
Then since the end is good of these my Rimes;
Their plainness shows no vainness, but the Times.
FINIS.

