THE HISTORY of Life and Death.

With Observations Natural and Experimental for the Prolonging of LIFE.

Written by the Right Honorable Francis Lord Verulam, Viscount S. Alban.

LONDON:

Printed by I. Oaks, for Humphrey Mosley, at the Princes Arms in Paul's
ChurchYard. 1638.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber.


TO THE Right Worshipful Sr. EDWARD MOSLEY Knight, his Majesty's Atturny
General of the Dutchey of Lancaster, etc.
SIR,
THe Honorable Author of this History was such a miracle of Learning, that
Fancy striving to comprehend his Worth, would be lost in Wonder and Amazement:
this Work of his retaining an affection to GrayesInne, where the Author is, and
shall be remembered by the Living and Posterity, has an original ambition,
before it walk abroad into the World, to visit Your Worship, being a worthy
Ornament of that Society; that so Your respective entertainment may instruct
the Envious and Ignorant Tribe, to reverence, rather than udge Honorable
Personages and their Labors. It will become me only to wait on the
Imaginations of so great a Genius, and while they converse with You in a nearer
distance, to acknowledge that Your Worships Name dignified with deserved
Titles, the Seals of virtue, agreeing with mine only in Denomination, made me
presume of Your Favor in accepting them, and my Intention full of Service
viceable respects, hoping that verbum sat, etc. a word will be sufficient to
present this Oblation, and the humble service

Of Your Worships Honourer, HUMPHREY MOSLEY.

TO THE Living and Posterity.
THE History of Life and Death, being the last of six Monthly designations,
seemed worthy to be preferred to be the second in Publication, because the
least loss of time, in a matter of so great utility, should be, precious, for
we hope, and desire that it may redound to the good of many; and that noble
Physicians raising their minds, may not be wholly imployd in unclean cures,
nor honored only for necessity, but become also the Stewards of Divine
Omnipotency and Clemency, in prolonging and renewing the life of Man,
especially since it may be done by safe, convenient, civil, but untryed new
ways and means: For while (...) Christians aspire and labor to come to the
Land of Promise; it will be a sign of Divine favor, if our shoos and the
garments of our frail bodies, be here little worn in our journey in the worlds
wilderness.

THE History of Life and Death.
The Access.
ANcient is the saying and complaint, that Life is short, and Art long.
Therefore our labors intending to perfect Arts, should by the assistance of
the Author of Truth and Life, consider by what means the Life of man may be
prolonged. For long Life being an increasing heap of sins and sorrows
lightly esteemed of Christians aspiring to Heaven, should not be despised,
because it affoords longer opportunity of doing good Works. Moreover Amatus
survived the other Disciples, and many Fathers, especially many holy Monks and
Hermites, lived very long, whereby it seems that this blessing of long Life
(so often repeated in the Law) was after our Saviors time less diminished
then other earthly benedictions. But the happiness of long life is naturally
desired, although the means to attain it, through false opinions and vain
reports be hard to find, the general opinion of Physicians concerning Radical
mosture, and Natural heat being deceiveable, and the immoderate praise of
Chymicall Medicines possessing others with failing hopes.

That which admits reparation, remaining whole and sound in Essence, may be
eternally preserved, as the Vestall Fire, whereupon Physicians and Philosophers
perceiving that the bodies of living creatures being nourished, repaired, and
refreshed, grew old afterward, and speedily perished, they sought Death in an
irreparable subject, supposing Radical moisture incapable of solid reparation,
from Infancy there being no just reparation, but an unlike Addition, sensibly
by Age decayed, and at last corrupted, and dissolved. This conceit of theirs
was ignorant and vain, for young living creatures being all over and wholly
repaired, do by their increasing in quantity, and growing better in quality,
show that if the measure and manner of repairing decayed not, the matter of
repairing might be eternal. But the (...) in repairing proceeds from the
unequal repairing of some parts sufficiently, others hardly and badly in Age,
the bodies of men beginning thereby to undergo Mezentius torment, living in
the embraces of the dead until they dye, and being easily repairable, yet
through some particular difficulty in restoring, do decay. For spirits, blood,
flesh, and fatness, are in the declining estate of Age easily repaired; but
there is much difficulty and danger in repairing the dry parts, and fuller of
pores, as membranes, tunicles, nerves, arteries, veins, gristles, most of the
bowels, and all the organicall and isntrumental parts. For when those parts
that should perform their office to other actually reparable parts, cannot,
being decayed in strength, execute their office, a general ruin follows, and
parts naturally restoreable, through defective Organs of Reparation, do
decrease and decay. For the spirit, like a light flame, continually feeds on
bodies, and the Air without conspiring therewith, does suck and dry the
fabric and instruments of the body, which are thereby decayed, and made unfit
to perform the office of repairing. And these are the true ways whereby nature
all Death approaches, deserving due consideration: For how can Natures course,
if unknown, be helped or prevented? Therefore the means whereby the
consumption, or decay of man's body may be prevented, and the repairing and
restoring thereof furthered, are most precious, and worth knowing. The spirits
and air without are the chief causes of consumption, and the general
progress of Nourishment is the cause of restoration. For the spirit within and
the air without do work on dead bodies, striving also to produce in living
bodies the same effects, though weakened and restrained by the vital spirits,
and partly by them increased. For bodies without life do a long while subsist
and endure without Reparation: but the life of creatures without due
nourishment and reparation suddenly decays, and is extinguished like fire.
Therefore a twofold search is required, considering man's body as livelesse and
unnourished; and as living, and nourished. So much for the Preface, proceeding
now to the Topics, or common-places of the search.

Particular Places: OR, Points of Inquiry concerning Life and Death.
1. OF Nature durable, and less durable, in liveles bodies, and in Vegetables,
no copious or Legal, but a summary brief inquiry is made.

2. Of the Dryness, Withering, and Consumption of livelesse bodiesand
Vegetables, of their manner and progress in working, and also of hindering and
staying of Drying, Withering, and Consumption, and the preservation of the
state of Bodies; and also of Mollifying, Softning, and Reviving, beginning to
be affected with Dryness, make diligent inquiry.

3. Yet no perfect exact inquiry is needful concerning these points, included
under their proper Title of Duration and Continuance, being not principal
matters in this Inquiry: but such as do only afford light to prolonging and
restoring of Life, in living Creatures, subject (as is aforesaid) to the same
accidents butin a peculiar manner. Afterward the inquiry proceeds from
livelesse Creatures, and Vegetables, unto living Creatures, and Man.

4. Of long lived, and shortliv'd living Creatures, with the due circumstances,
causing their long lives, enquire. But the dureablenesse of Bodies being
twofold, one in Identity or being, the other in repayring of Vegetables and
living Creatures, perfected by nourishment, therefore concerning nourishment
and the ways and progress thereof, enquire in the Title of Digestion and
nourishment, where they are particularly handled.

The inquiry proceeds from living Creatures to Man, the principal subject,
whereof a more exact and perfect inquiry is needful.

5. Of the long Life of men, in respect of the Ages of the World, Countries,
Climates, places of birth, and Dwelling,

6. Of the length and shortness of Life in men, in regard of their stock and
Kindred, and in respect of several Complexions, Constitutions, shapes and
statures of the Body, measure, and space of Growth, and the making and
proportion of the Limbs, inquire.

7. The long and short Life of Men is showed by no Astrologicall inquiry, but
by common and evident Observations drawn from Births in the seventh, eight,
ninth, and tenth Month, by night or day, and in what Month of the year.

8. How Man's Life is lengthned and shortened, by sustenance, Diet, government of
Life, exercise, and the like, and by Air, showed in the aforesaid point of
dwelling places.

9. How Studdies, kind of Life, affections of the Soul, and diverse accidents
do shorten and lengthen the life of Man.

10. Of Medicines prolonging life.

11. The signs of a long and short life, not denoting ensuing Death, (which
belong to Physical History) but being in health apparent, are observable by
the Physiognomy, and such others.

To the inartificiall inquiry of length and shortness of Life, is added an
Artificial inquiry, by ten practical intentions, being of three sorts, and
intending to stay Consumption, to Repair and Renew Age.

12. Preservatiues against dryness and Consumption, and to keep the body from
drying and consuming.

13. Of Nourishment and Digestion, being Repairers of the body, and how to
improove and make them good.

14. How to repair and renew age, and to soften and moisten hardness and
dryness.

15. And because the way of death without knowing the seat, house, and den of
death is hard to be known, therefore these kinds of Death are declared, which
want and necessity, whence consumption of Age proceeds, not violence do
procure.

16. Of the drawing near of Death, and the necessary not violent causes
thereof.

17. Lastly, the lively character of Age describing the different state of the
Body in youth and Age, by their necessary Effects and Defects.

18. Of the different state of the Body, and abillities in Youth, and in Age
remaining undecayed.

NATVRE Durable.
The History.
Metals are very durable, and continue beyond al observation, Age and Artic. 1
Rust, not perspiration making them decay, but not Gold.

2. Quick silver being a moist and soft substance, is easily rarefied by the
fire, but without fire does neither decay by Age nor gather Rust.

3. The harder sort of Stones, and many Minerals, though exposed in the open
air, are very durable, much more lying in the earth.

Stones gather a kind of solder instead of Rust, but pearls and Crystal,
though their clearenesse decay through age are more durable then Metals.

Stones on the Northside of Pyramids, Churches, and other buildings, do sooner
than on the South Side decay and consume; but Iron, as appears by iron bars of
windows, does on the South Side sooner than the North-side begin to rust. For
in all putrefaction (as rust) moisture haftens dissolution, and Dryness
withering.

5. The stocks and bodies of hard Trees being feld, and hewed into timber, or
framed into wooden works, do last diverse ages, yet their bodies differ; some
being hollow, as the Elder-tree; outwardly hard, but having a soft pith in the
middle. But of solid trees, such as the Oak, the inward part (called the heart
of the Oak) is hardest.

6. The leaves and stalks of Plants and Flowers continue not long, but do
either dissolve into dust, or rot: Roots are more durable.

7. Bones of living creatures last long, as appears by dead bones lying in
Charnell-houses. Horns also are very durable, and Teeth, as Ivory, and
Seahorse teeth.

8. Hides also and skins endure long, as it is evident by ancient
Parchment-bookes: Paper also will last many ages, though not as long as
Parchment.

9. Glass and burned Bricks, also roasted Flesh and Fruits last longer than
raw, because the roasting prevents putrefaction; and by evacuating and venting
the watery humor, does longer preserve the oily humor.

10. Water is soonest devoured and dried by the Air, oil on the contrary,
does slowly evaporate, which in liquors and mixtures may be discerned. For
Paper wetted with water is at first transparent, but afterward waxes white and
clear again, loosing that former transparentnesse, the vapor of the water
being exhaled: but Paper; dipped in Oil, is a long while transparent, the oil
being not exhaled: so that writings, by laying on them an oyled Paper, and
carefully drawing the Letters discerned through the Paper, may be counterfeited.

11. All Gummes are very durable, and also Wax and Honey.

12. Other accidents also, as well as their own Nature, do make bodies
endure, or decay. For Wood and Stones lying continually in the Water, or Air,
endure longer than if they were sometimes wet and over-flowed; and stones
placed in buildings North or South, as they lie in the Mines are more durable;
and Plantslive longer being removed and transplanted.

Greater Observations.
1. IT is a certain Position, that all Bodies which may be touched, have a
spirit with tangible parts, covered and (...) being the original cause of
dissolution and consumption, prevented by detaining of the spirit.

2. The spirit is detained, either violently when it is thrust together, and
confined; or voluntarily, the spirits being slack, and unactive in motion, and
the Air does not urge it to vent and issue forth: for hardness and oylinesse
being durable qualities, do bind, supple, and feed the Spirit, and keep it
from the corruption of the Air, which is in substance like unto Water, as
Flame to Oil. And so much of the durablenesse and dissolution of inanimate
bodies.

The History.
COld Herbs with their roots and stalks do every year spring, and dye; as
Lettice, Purslane, Wheat, and all kind of Corn: yet the colder sort of herbs
endure three or four years, as the Violet, Strawberry, Burnet, Primrose, and
Sorrel: but Borage and Buglosse are short lived; Borage living a year,
Buglosse above a year.

14. Hot herbs bear their age and years better, as hysop, thyme, savory,
marioram, balm, mint, worme-wood, germander, sage, etc. Fennel, after the
(...) is dead, buddeth forth again from the root: but pulse and sweet
marjoram can better endure age than winter, and will live and flourish being
set (...) a warm place, and defenced from cold. For a knot of hyssop (...)
usual ornament of gardens, being twice clipped yearly, (...) continued forty
years.

15. Bushes and shrubs live three score years, and some double (...) much. A
Vine of sixty years old is fruitful in Age: Rosemary well set and planed,
lives sixty years: but Beares-foote and Ivy endure ^bove an hundred years.
The age of the Respasse is not discerned, because the head thereof bending to
the earth, gets new roots hard to be perceived from the old.

16. The oldest great trees are, the Oak, the Holme, wild ash, Elm, Beech,
Chesnue, Planetree, Fig Tree, Lote-tree, wild Olive, Olive, Palm, and
Mulberry, some whereof live 800 years, and the rest 100.

17. The wood of sweet Rozen trees is more durable than themselves are in age;
also the Cypress, Maple, Pine, Box, and Juniper, live not so long as the
former trees, but the tall Cedar is as long-lived.

18. The Ash forward in bearing fruit, reaches to 100 years of age, or more;
and also the Cane, Maple, and Servis-tree. But the Poplar, Linden, Willow,
Sycomore, and Walnuttree live not so long.

19. The Apple Tree, Peare-tree, Plumme-tree, Pomegranate, Orange, and Cytron,
Medler, Dog-tree, and Cherry-tree, being cleared from moss, may live fifty or
threescore years.

20. Great trees are generally long-lived, and of a hard substance; Mast-trees
and Nuttrees live longer than Fruitetrees, and Berry-trees: And trees whose
leaves do slowly come forth, and fall off, continue longer than trees more
forward in producing Fruit and Leaves: also wild Forresttrees live longer than
Orchard trees, and sharp Fruit Trees than sweet Fruite-trees.

The greater Observation.
3. A Ristotle well observed the difference between Plants and living
creatures, in respect of Nourishment and Repairing; namely, that the body of
living creatures is confined within certain bounds, and coming to a due
proportion, is continued and preserved by nourishment: nothing that is new
growing forth, except Hair and Nails, accounted excrements, whereby the
vigor and strength of living creatures must necessarily sooner decay and wax
old: but Trees putting forth new boughs, branches, and leaves, those renewed
parts being young, green, and flourishing, do more strongly and cheerfully
attract nourishment than sear dry branches, whereby the body, through which
such nourishment passes to the boughs, is with more plentiful nourishment
moistened. This (though not observed by Aristotle, nor clearly discussed) is
evident, because woods and Trees, by lopping their boughs and branches,
flourish more, and live longer.

Of Dryness; the preventing of Dryness, and softning of Dryness.
The History.
1. BY Fire and vehement heat Artic. 20.
some substances are dried, others melted.

Limus ut hic durescit, and haec ut cera liquescit
Vno eodemg igne --
As the same fire hardens clay,
And makes Wax to melt away.
It dries the earth, stones, wood, cloth, and skins, and melts Mettalls,
Wax, Gum, Butter, Sewet, and the like.

But Fire being vehement, at last dries up that which it has melted: for a
hot Fire makes metalls (except gold) by evaporation lighter in weight, and
more brittle. And oily fat substances are by a hot fire fried and roasted,
becoming more dry and hard.

3. The open Air does dry, but never melt; as Highwayes, and the face of the
earth wet with showers, are hereby dried; and also Linnen-cloaths hanged out in
the Air, and Herbs, Leaves, and Flowers growing in the shade: And the Air
warmed with the Sunne-beames, (not disposing it to putrefaction) or moved with
Winds, does dry much more on an open plain.

4. Age is a great but slow dryer; for all natural bodies not rotting or
putrefying, are dried by Age, being the measure of time, and the effect of the
inbred spirit of bodies, sucking out the bodies moisture thereby decaying, and
of the outward air, multiplying above the inward spirits, and moisture of the
body, and so destroying them.

Cold most properly dries; for Dryness proceeds from shrinking and gathering
together, being the proper effect of cold: but by the powerful warmth of Fire,
abating the weaker cold of Winter, Frost, and Snow, the dryness of cold is not
on men so powerful, but sooner dissipated: yet Frost, and March winds being
dry and cold, do lick up moisture, and dry the earth more than the Sun.

6. Chimney-smoake is a dryer; for Bacon and Neats tongues are hung and dried
in Chimnies, and perfumes of Sweetewood and Olybanum drying the brain, do
stop Distillations and Catarrhs.

7. Salt dries slowly both without and within, making salt fish, through long
salting, hard within.

8. By the application of some hot gummes and binding waters the skin is
dried, and filled with wrinkles.

9. The spirit of strong Wine drying like Fire, will make the yoalke of an Egg
put thereinto become white, and bake Bread.

10. Powders dry, and suck up moystures like Spunges, or as Sand-dust thrown
on a Writing, dryes the Ink: Also the smoothness and uniformity of a body
(not admitting moisture to enter by the Pores) accidentally causes Dryness,
by exposing the Body to the Air, as Jewels, Looking-glasses, and Sword-blades,
being breathed on, seem at first to be covered with a Vapor, which vanishes
afterward like a cloud, and so much for drynes.

11. In the East parts of Germany Garners are usually made in Cellars under
ground, wherein Wheat and other Grains are kept in Straw, which being laid a
good thickness, expels and drinks up the moisture of the Vault. Corn is thus
kept twenty or thirty years from putrefaction, and both green and serviceable
to make Bread. The like Garners have been used in diverse Countries, as in
Cappadocea, Thrace, and also in Spain.

12. On the topps of houses, Garners also with Windows to the East and North,
may be conveniently placed, having a higher and lower Room, and a Scuttle hole
in the midst, through which the Corn, (like Sand in an hour glass)
continually falling, and afterward with shovels thrown back again, is kept
in continual motion, and preserved from putrefaction; for by this motion and
Wind, the watrey humor being speedily vented, the oily humor is kept from
venting with the watery humor. Also on Mountains of a pure Air, dead carcasses
do not in many days corrupt.

13. Fruits, as Pomegranates, Cytrons, Melons, Pears, and the like, and also
Flowers, as Roses and Lyllies, will keep long in earthen Vessels well stopped,
although the Air, their outward enemy, lets in through the Vessel unequal
heat and cold. Therefore lay the Vessels closely stopped in the earth, or in
shaded waters, as in the Wells or Cisternes of Houses; but let Fruits laid thus
in water, be put in Glasse-vessells rather than earthen.

14. Generally, whatsoever is laid under the earth, and in Cellars under
ground, or deep in waters, does retain natural vigor longer, than if kept
above the earth.

15. Apples, Chestnuts, or Nuts, falling into a Snow-cave on the Mountains, or
into an artificial Snow-house, and afterward found when the Snow is melted,
will be as fresh and fair as if newly gathered.

16. Bunches of Grapes in the Country, kept in meal, will taste some what
unpleasant, but are thereby preserved moist and green, also all hard fruits
will keep long in Meal, or Saw-dust, or in a heap of sound Corn.

17. Fruits in liquors of their kind, resembling their flowers, will keep
fresh, as Grapes in Wine, Olives in Oil, etc.

18. Pomegranates and Quinces keep long, being lightly dipped into Seawater,
or salt water; and then in the open Air and shade dried.

19. Fruits laid in Wine, Oil, and Pickle, are thereby long kept. Honey, and
the Spirits of wine, preserve them longer, but especially Quicksilver.

20. Fruits covered with Wax, Pitch, Mortar, Past, or the like, keep Green
very long.

21. Flies, Spiders', and Ants, being accidentally drowned, and buried in
Amber, and the Gums of Trees, their soft and tender bodies do never rot or
corrupt.

22. Grapes and other Fruits are by hanging up, both kept from bruises, often
received by lying on the ground, and are also by the Air equally encompassed.

23. Observe that Vegetables and Fruits begin to putrify and wither on that
part, by which growing they attracted nourishment, therefore Apples or Fruits,
their stalks being covered with Wax or Pitch, will keep best.

24. Great Weeks of Candels do sooner consume the Suet, then lesser weeks,
and the flame of Cotton, sooner then that of a Rush, or Straw, or Wooddentwigs;
and Juniper Torches burn out sooner then Fur or Beech Torches. A candle
blazing in the Wind, wastes sooner, then burning quietly in a Lantern; for
generally all flames stirred with Wind are most wastfull and devouring. Also
Lamps in Sepulchers burn very long.

25. The nature also and quality of the Nourishment, as of the flame, makes
candels burn long; Wax being more durable than Sewet, and wet Sewet than dry
Sewet, and hard Waxthan soft Wax.

26. Trees, the earth about their roots being not every year, but evere five
or ten years opened, and the superfluous boughs and branches cut away, and
pruned, will last the longer. Also dunging and spreading of Marle about Trees,
or much watering makes them fruitful, but not durable. And so much of
preventing Dryness and Consumption.

The experiments of softning Dryness drawn from living creatures, and from
Man, are these which follow.

27. Willow-twigs, serving usually to bind Trees, laid to steep in water,
become more flexible: Rods are set in Pitchers of water to keep them from
drying, and Bowls cleft with dryness, being laid in the water do close
again.

28. Boots grown old, hard, and stubborn, being greased with Sewet before the
fire, do wax soft; or being only held before the fire, become somewhat
softer. Bladders and skins grown hard, are softened with warm water, and
Sewet, or any kind of grease, especially by rubbing together.

29. Old Trees having stood long without removing, if the earth be opened
about their Roots, will begin to put forth, and flourish.

30. Old spent Oxen taken from the Plough, being put into fresh pastures,
recover new tender flesh, and as sweet as if it were of a Steer.

31. A strict spare diet of Guiacum, and bread twice baked, used for curing the
French Disease, or old Catarrhs, and the Dropsy, makes Patients very lean, by
consuming the moisture of their body; which being restored again, they become
strong and lusty. Moreover weakening sicknesses well cured, do make many-live
the longer afterward.

Greater Observations.
1. MEn like Owls wondrous sharp-sighted in the darkness of their own
opinions, are blinded with the daylight of Experience. The elementall quality
of dryness, and how dryness by a natural working does corrupt and consume
bodies, is observed, but not the beginning, proceeding, and ending of dryness
and consumption.

2. Dryness and Consumption proceed from three Actions, originally caused by
the natural spirit of bodies.

3. The 1. Action is the refining of moisture into spirit, the 2. the spirits
venting; the 3. the drawing or closing together of the bodies thicker parts the
spirit being gotten out. The former are Causes only of Consumption, the last
is that dryness and hardness, here chiefly handled.

The refining of Spirits is clear and manifest; for the spirit enclosed in
every tangible body that may be touched, forgets not to alter and change
whatsoever is digestable and convertible in the body, and does multiply it
self by begetting a new spirit. This is most evident in substances, which by
dryness being abated in weight, are hollow, and full of pores, and do yield
an inward kind of sound; for the spirit making things lighter rather than
heavier, by converting into it self the heavy moisture of a body, makes it
lighter in weight. And this is the first Action, namely of refining and
co^verting moisture into spirit.

5. The second Action of the spirits venting is also evident. For this venting
forth of the spirit may be seen in vapors, and smelt in decaying odours and
sents, or if breaking out by degrees, as in age, is the same, but insensibly
performed. Moreover, the spirit in a compact close body, finding no pores
whereby to vent, striving to get out, drives and thrusts out the thicker parts
of the bodies superficies, thereby making mettalls rust, and fat substances
grow moldy. And this is the second Action of the Spirits venting.

6. The third Action obscurer, but certain, is the contraction of thicker
parts, after the spirits getting forth, for bodies do then contract and take up
lesser room, as dried Nutkernels fill not their shells, and beams and wooden
rafters joined close at first, afterward through dryness do chinke, and
cleave asunder, and Bowls chap and gape with dryness. Secondly, it is evident
by the wrinkles of withered bodies, some parts by contraction being loosened,
others drawn together, and wrinkled. For wrinkled outsides of bundels of Paper
and old Parchments, the skin of living creatures, and soft cheese having an
outward coat wrinkled with age, are smooth within: and so Parchment, Paper,
and leaves held before the fire, do wrinkle, turn, and wind together. For
Age by slow contracting and drawing together, does cause wrinkles; but fire
does hastily contract, and fold together: and substances incapable of wrinkles
do contract, and grow hard. But when bodies, after the spirits are violently
vented, and moisture consumed, cannot unite and contract, they putrefie into a
mass of dust, which being lightly touched falls asunder, and vanishes into
air, as burnt Paper and Linen, and embalmed carcasses will do. And this is
the third action of Contraction of thick parts after the Spirits venting.

7. Observe, that when fire and heat drying only accidentally, have performed
their proper work of refining and diffusing the spirit and moisture, then the
parts accidentally contract, only to avoid vacuity and emptiness, or for
other reasons.

8. Putrefaction and dryness proceeding from the inward spirit, differ in
their ingresse and entrance: for in putrefaction all the spirit is not vented,
but a part detayn'd, which like a silent fancy works diverse changes on the
thicker parts not locally contracted, and brings them to an uniforme likeness.

The length and shortness of Life in living creatures.
COncerning the length and Artic. 3. Co^nexion.
shortness of Life in living creatures, observations are light and fabulous:
the unkindly life of tame creatures being corrupted, and the life of wild
beasts by enduring hard and hot weather, shortened. Neither do the greatness
of their bodies, time of bearing, number of young ones, or time of growth,
sometimes concurring together, sometimes disjoined, afford any certain
observations.

1. Of all living creatures, (except some few, (it is reported) that Man lives
longest, in whom all concomitant accidents meet in due proportion: Stature
great and large, bearing in the womb nine months, one Offspring commonly;
private hair at fourteen, growth till Twenty.

2. The Elephant lives longer than any Man does ordinarily: His bearing in the
womb ten years is afabulous report, being but two years, or above a year.
His bulk or body is exceeding great, growing twenty years; and his Teeth are
very strong. The Elephant is observed to have the coldest blood of all other
living creatures, and an hundred years, whereunto sometimes he attaineth, is
his age.

3. Lions are accounted longliv'd, many having been found toothlesse, caused
happily by their violent breathing, and therefore no certain sign of age.

4. The Bear is a great sleeper, a slow and sluggish beast, born by the Damme
not above forty days, being a sign of short life.

5. The Fox is well skinned, feeds on flesh, and lives in caves, but not long
lived, being a kind of Dog, which is a short lived beast.

6. The Cammell being a slender strong beast, lives ordinarily fifty years,
sometimes an hundred.

7. The Horse seldom attaines to forty years of age, his ordinary age being
Twenty years, there being now no Horses of the Sun living freely in fair
pastures, but all are serviceable to man, by whose usage the life of the Horse
is shortened: but the Horse grows until he be six years old; and a Mare goes
longer than a woman, and has seldom two foales.

8. The Ass lives as long as the Horse, but the Mule is longer lived than both.

8. The Heart is famous for his long life; for about the neck of a Heart a
Chain hid, and covered over with fat was found, which had been put about his
neck many years before. But because at five years old the Heart comes to
perfection, and his horns having at first but a few branches, do then sprout
forth, and afterward fall off, and grow again every year; therefore his age
is not so currantly believed.

9. The short-lived Dog lives but twenty years, being his utmost age; his
ordinary age fourteen years. His disposition is hot and fickle, always
violently stirring about, or sleeping. The Bitch brings forth many whelps at
one litter, and goes nine weeks.

10. The Ox being a slow beast, full of flesh, soon fatted, and fed with
Grass, is shortliv'd in respect of his bigness and strength, sixteen years
being his age; which is longer than the Cow does live, bringing forth but one
Calfe, and going with her burden six months.

11. The Sheep, a beast of a midling bigness, having a little gall, and well
clothed with a warm fleece, more curled than other Beasts hair, seldom
comes to the age of ten years.

Rams at three years old begin to engender, and until Eighteen years of
Age do beget Lambs. A Sheep being subject to many diseases, does seldom
live out his utmost age.

12. The Goat somewhat resembling the Sheep in shape, lives no longer, but is
nimbler, and firmer fleshed, and should be therefore longer-liv'd, but
lasciviousness shortens his life.

13. The Sow lives fifteen years, sometimes twenty, being moister fleshed
than other beasts, but not long-lived. The age of the wild Boar and Sow not
certainly known.

14. The Cats age is six or ten years, being a nimble, fierce ravenous beast,
not chewing his food, but devouring and swallowing his food whole, and his
seed (as AElianus says) burns the Female, conceaving with much pain, but
kitning easily.

15. Hares and Conies do hardly live seven years, being breeding creatures,
knitting and coneeaving again immediately after their bringing forth young.
The Coney lives under ground, the Hare sits in the open air, and has
blacker flesh.

16. Birds are lesser bodied than Beasts, an Ox or Horse being far bigger
than an Eagle or Swan, and an Elephant than an Estridge.

17. Birds are well clothed with feathers, lying close down to their bodies,
and being warmer than Beasts wool or hair.

18. Birds, though great breeders, carry not all their young in their Belly,
but do lay their Eggs severally, being apt to produce young Birds by hatching.

19. Birds chew not their food, being often found whole in their Crops; but
they will pick out Nut-kernels, and the seeds of Herbs and Flowers, and they
are of a strong hot digestion.

20. Birds fly with a mixed motion, being borne up by the Air, and their
Wings, whose motion exercises their bodies.

21. Aristotle observes, that when Birds engender by treading, the Cock begets
not the Eggs substance, but makes it fit to hatch; so that fruitful Eggs are
hardly known from unhatchable eggs.

22. Birds bodies are in one years growth at their full bigness, but their
Feathers and Bills grow seven years afterward.

23. The Eagle casting her Bill, and so becoming young, is the Emblem of long
life, her age being a Proverb, Aquilae fenectus, the Age of an Eagle; yet the
Eagles growing young changes not her Beak, but her Beakes changing makes the
Eagle young: For the Eagle feeds very painefully and difficultly when her Bill
is grown extreme crooked.

24. The Vulter lives an hundred years, Crows also, and all ravenous Birds
feeding on flesh, are long-lived: But the Hawk living not according to his own
kind, but being kept in bondage for private delight and recreation, his term
of life is therefore not certainly known; though some reclaimed, manned Hawks
have lived thirty years, and wild Haggasses forty years.

25. The long-lived Raven lives an hundred years: he feeds on Carrion, and
flies not often, but fits much, and has very black flesh. The Crow resembling
the Raven, though not so big, nor like in voice, lives almost as long, being
accounted a long-lived Bird.

26. The fair feathered Swanne feeds on Fish, swimmes continually on running
streams and Rivers, and an hundred years is his age.

27. The Goose, though his food be grass, is long-lived, especially the
wild-goose; so that in Germany this Proverb is common, Magis senex quam anser
nivalis, Older than a white Goose.

28. Storkes are long-lived, for because they never came to Thebes, a City
often sacked, therefore it was observed, that they did either circumspectly
instruct their young ones in the Theban History, or remembered the passages of
former ages wherein they lived, and so this sable pointed at their long life.

29. Concerning the Phoenix, Truth is lost in Fables. It is chiefly observable,
that other Birds, when this Bird did fly abroad, wondered not at her, as they
do by instinct of Nature at an Owl flying by day light, or a Parret gotten
out of a Cage.

30. The Parret brought into England, has lived threescore years, being a
Bird that eats any kind of meat, chews his food, changes his Bill, and is of
a churlish angry disposition, and has black flesh.

31. The Peacocke has a slow pace, and white flesh, living twenty years, and
being three years old his tail is with Argus eyes speckled and adorned.

32. The Cock is leacherous, a courageous fighter, and shortliv'd, having
white flesh.

33. The Turky-cocke, or Indian Cock, somewhat longer lived than the Cock, is
a testy angry bird, and has very white flesh.

34. The Ring-Dove being an ayery Bird, loving to build and sit high, is
long-lived, fifty years being her age. But Pigeons and Turtles are
shortliv'd, their Age being eight years.

35. Pheasants and Partridges live sixteen years, being great breeders, but
blacker fleshed than chickens or Pullets

36. The lascivious loud whistling Blackbird is of all small birds longest
lived.

37. The Sparrow is short-lived, the Cocke-sparrow shortning his life by wanton
lasciviousness. The Linnet and Finch, though no bigger than the sparrow; do
live twenty years.

38. The Estredges age is uncertain, and life not long, as by tame Estreges it
is observed. The age of the Bird (...) being longliv'd, is unknown.

39. The age of Fishes less observed, because living under the water, is more
uncertain than the age of Beasts. Some of them breath not, their vital
spirits being kept close, and cooled by their gills, but not so constantly as
by breathing.

40. The air dries not, nor decays their bodies, because the water wherein
they live, encompassing them, pierces into their pores, having a greater power
than encompassing air to shorten their lives.

41. They are ravenous devourers of their own kind, having cold blood, and
soft flesh, not so firm as Beasts flesh, but fatter, an infinite quantity of
oil being made of the fat of

42. Dolphins live thirty years; for some whose tails were cut off, thirty
years afterward being taken, were known; they grow ten years.

43. It is observable, and very strange, that Fishes bodies do grow slender
with age, their tail and head retaining their former bigness.

44. In Fish Ponds belonging to the Roman Emperor, Lampreys living threescore
years, by long keeping were made tame; one of their deaths being therefore by
the Orator Crassus lamented.

45. The Pike of all fresh water fish is longest lived, forty years being his
age: he is a ravenous devourer, and his flesh in eating is dry and firm.

46. The Carpe, Breame, Tench, and Eele, live not above ten years.

47. Salmons are of a sudden growth, but short lived, and also Trouts, but
the Perch groeth slowly, and lives longer.

48. The age of the Whale, SeaCalfe, Sea-hog, and other Fishes is unknown.

49. The long-lived Crocodile always growing, is a devouring cruel creature,
that lays Eggs, and the Water pierces not his skin being scaly and hard.
The age of other shelfishes is unknown.

Greater Observations.
COncerning the length and shortness of the life of living Creaturer, hitherto
negligently observed, and proceeding from diverse causes, instead of certain
Rules hard to find, these notes following may be added.

1. Birds are longer-liv'd then Beasts, as the Eagle, Vulter, Pelican, Kite,
Raven, Crow, Swan, Goose, Storke, Crane, Ib is, Parret, Ringdove, etc. though
they are lesser, and in one year at their full growth. For Birds are longliv'd,
because they are well clothed with warm Feathers to keep out cold, and do
live in the free open Air, as Mountayners do, or because when they fly, they
are carried by the Air and their Wings, this mixed motion makes the^ helthful
or because Birds are not pined for want of nourishment, or thrust in the belly
of their old Bird, by turns laying her eggs; but especially because Birds
partaking more of the Hens substance than of the Cocks, have not such sharp
and hot spirits.

2. It is a Position, that living creatures begotten by a greater quantity of
the Dammes seed (as Birds are) than of the Sires, and lying longer in their
Dammes belly, partaking more of the Dammes seed than the Sires, are therefore
longer lived. And it is observeable, that men being in visage and countenance
liker their mother than their father, do live longest; as those children do,
which sound and healthful men beget on young Wives.

3. Living creatures may receive much hurt or good in their first breeding; for
such as lie not too close together in the belly of the Damme, but have
sufficient nourishment, are longliv'd; as the eggs of Birds laid by turns,
and the young of Beasts, bringing but one at a yeaning, have room enough and
nourishment.

4. Long bearing in the mothers womb, and the Dammes belly, is forthree
respects a cause of long life. First, the offspring has more of the mothers or
Dammes substance: Secondly, it becomes a stronger birth. Thirdly, it better
endures the Airs power. Lastly, it denotes, that Nature intended such a Birth
for the Center of a large circumference of many years. The short life of Oxen
and Sheep, Calves, and Lambs lying six months in their Dams belly before
they are calved and yeaned, proceeds from other causes.

5. Grazing Cattle are shortliv'd, but Beasts feeding on flesh live longer, and
Birds which do eat seeds and fruits. For half the long-lived Hearts food
grows (as they say) above his head; and the Goose feeding not only on Grass,
find some food in the Water.

6. Another cause of long life, is warm clothing, and keeping out immoderate
heat and cold, whereby the Body is much weakened and decayed, as Birds clothed
with warm Feathers, are therefore longer lived. But Sheep having thick
Fleeces, are not longliv'd, being subject to many Diseases, and feeding only
on grass.

7. The Head is the principal seat of all the Spirits, being great wasters
and consumers of the Body, so that the great abundance, or sharp inflamatio^ of
the Spirits shortens Life.

Therefore Birds having little heads inrespect of their bodies are long lived,
and men having very great heads live not long.

8. The best kind of motion for prolonging of Life, is to be born and carried,
as the Swan and other swiming water Foul are, and all Birds flying more
painfully with their wings, and fish whose Age and long life is unknown.

9. Slow coming to perfection, both for Growth and ripenes, signifies long
life in all creatures, for teeth, private hair, and a Beard, are degrees of
maturity or ripeness preceding Manhood.

10. Mild meek ereatures, as Sheep and Doves, are not long-lived, the gall
being like a whetstone, whereon natures faculties are sharpened, and fitted to
perform their offices.

11. Creatures having white flesh, live not so long as those, whose blacker
flesh shows that their Bodies moisture is finner, and more compact.

12. As a great fire is lasting, and not soon extinguished, and a little water
soon evaporates: so quantity and bigness preserve corruptible bodies; a
twigge withering sooner than the body of a Tree, and all great Beasts living
longer than lesser Beasts.

Nourishment, and the ways of Nourishing.
The History.
1. NOurishment should be of an inferior nature, and Artic. 4.
simpler in substance than the body nourished. Plants are nourished by the
Earth and Water, living creatures by Plants; and men by living creatures,
feeding partly on flesh as man does on Plants; but neither can subsist by
Plants or Sallets only; but Fruits and parched Corn will sustain life.

2. Nourishment too like the nourished substance, is not good. For Grazing
Cattle touch not any flesh, and Beasts feeding on flesh prey not upon their
own kind. Anthro Pophagi or Cannibals, feed not one men's flesh ordinarily,
but by eating their enemies flesh as a great dainty, doeat once satisfy their
hunger and revenge. Also seed Corn in the same field where it Grew, should
not be sown, nor a Graft be set into the stock, whence it was taken.

3. Nourishment well prepared, and somewhat like the nourished substance, makes
Plants fruitful and living Creatures Fat. For the stocks nourishment is better
and more agreeable unto the Grafts nature, then the earths nourishment to a
young Tree or Plant. And an Onionseed or a Plants seed sown or set in the
earth, produces not such a great Onion, or fair Plant, as when the seed is
put into an Onion, or into a Plants root, and so set in the ground.

The Boughs of Elm, Oak, and Ash, and such Forresttrees, grafted on stocks,
and coming to be trees, have broader leaves tha^ other planted trees. Also
men feed not so well on raw flesh as on roast.

4. Living creatures receive nourishment at their mouth, Plants at the root,
young creatures in the womb at the navell. Birds are nourished awhile by the
white of the egg, part thereof being found in their throats after hatching.

5. Observe, that although all nourishment proceeds and rises from the Center
to the Circumference, issuing forth from the inward parts to the outward, yet
Trees receive not from their inward parts and pith so much nourishment as from
their outward parts and Bark, which being stripped off, they presently wither,
and dye. Also of living creatures, the flesh beneath and above the veins is
nourished by the blood.

6. By the inward function of extruding or driving out, and the outward
operation of attracting nourishment, the nourishing faculty does work.

7. Vegetables or Plants simply digest their nourishment, without avoiding
superfluous excrements, Gummes of Trees being rather superfluities of
nourishment than excrements, and knobs and knots, sores: but living creatures
discerning what nourishment is like their substance, do digest the best, and
reject the rest in excrement.

8. The greatest and fairest fruits hanging on the Tree, receive all their
nourishment through their stalks.

9. Living creatures seed being sown and spent, is only at first capable of
nourishment, but seeds of Plants after long keeping will grow: but young grafts
and shoots must be planted while they are fresh and green, or else they will
not grow, but their roots being not covered with earth, will dye.

10. Living creatures have different kinds of nourishment agreeable to their
age, for in their mothers or Dammes belly moisture is their food, after Birth
milk, then meat and drink; and being old, they love sollid savory food.

11. But whether nourishment may not only by the mouth, but also outwardly be
received, is chiefly considerable. For if Baths of Milk in hot Fevers and
Consumptions were used, and some Physicians hold that nutritive Glisters might
be purposely made, then such nourishment received not by the stomach, but
outwardly, may supply digestions weakness in Age.

The Length and Shortness of Man's Life.
The History.
1. BEfore the Flood, as the sacred Artic. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 11.
Scriptures declare, men lived an hundred years: yet of all the Fathers none
attained to a complete thousand years of age, neither did the Generations of
the holy Line of Grace live only thus long; for by the Patriarchs Eleaven
generations from Adam to the Flood, and Caines Eight, Cains generation seems
longer-liv'd But Man's Life immediately after the flood, was reduced to a
moiety, though Noah borne before the Flood lived to his Ancestors Age, and Sem
attained to six hundred years of age. But three Generations after the flood,
man's Life was contracted and shortened to an hundred years, being the fourth
part of their former Age.

2. Abraham lived 175. years in great Prosperity and Happiness. Isaac
attained to an hundred and eighty years of Age, a chaste and quiet man. Jacob
having many troubles, and many Children, lived an hundred forty and seven
years, he was a patient, mild, wise man. Ismael was a Martialist, and an
hundred thirty seven years was his Age.

3. But Sarah (no other Woman's age being Recorded in the Holy Scripture) dyed
at an hundred seaventy years of Age, being a (...) Woman, an excellent Mother
and Wife, and famous for discreet carriage, and obedience to her Husband. Also
Joseph, a Wise and Politic man, though in his younger years much afflicted,
lived afterward in great Felicity and Happiness, and attained to an hundred
and ten years of Age. But his elder Brother Levi, impatient of disgrace, and
seeking Revenge, lived an hundred thirty seven years complete. And the son
of Levi, and his Nephew, the Father of Aaron and Moses lived as long.

4. Moses lived an hundred years, being stout-hearted, but of a mild carriage,
and slow speech: yet Moses said in the Psalm, that threescore and ten years
was the ordinary age of Man, and of the strongest but fourscore years, being
still the term of Man's Life.

But Aaron, three years elder than Moses, dyed the same year that his brother
did: A man of ready speech, and gentle carriage, but somewhatinconstant.
Phineas, Aarons Nephew, (by Gods divine Grace and Favor) lived three hundred
years: For all the Israelites going out to war against the Tribe of
Benjamen, Phineas, being a very zealous man, was then (as the History relates)
a chief Captain and Counselor.

Joshua, an excellent and fortunate Captain, lived to an hundred and ten
years of Age. Caleb lived in his time, and to his Age: but Ehud the Judge
lived also an hundred years. The Holy Land, after his Conquest of the
Moabites, being eighty years under his government: He was a valiant stout man,
and devoted his actions to the Commonwealths good.

5. Job restored to his former happiness, lived one hundred and forty years,
having had before his troubles, sons that were grown men. He was a Politic,
Eloquent, good man, and the example of patience.

Ely the Priest lived 98. years a fat man, and of a pleasant loving
Disposition. But Elizeus the Prophet, being at the time of the Assumption of
Elias, in regard of his Age, mocked by Children, and called old bald Pate, lived
sixty years afterward, and was above an hundred years of Age when he dyed:
he was a severe man, living austerely, and contemning Riches. Isaias the
Prophet was an hundred years of Age, and spent seaventy of those years in
Prophesying; but when he began to prophecy, and at what Age he dyed is
unknown. He was a very Eloquent and Evangelicall Prophet, inspired with the
promises of the coming of Christ, fulfilled in the new Testament.

5. Tobias the Elder lived 158. years, and the younger Tobias 127. years,
being merciful and charitable men. Many Jews that returned from the Captivity
of Babylon lived long, and could remember the building of both the Temples, the
latter being builded seaventy years after the other. Many Ages afterward when
our Savior was borne, Simeon was an old Religious, Faithful man. And Anna the
Prophetess lived then to an hundred years of Age, she having bin first a
Maid, then a married wife seven years, a Widow eighty four years, and
afterward a Prophetess of our Saviors Incarnation: She was a holy Woman,
that spent her Life in prayer and Fasting.

6. The long lives of men mentioned in Heathen Authors are fabulous
narrations, and deceitful calculations of ages. Those Egyptian Kings, that
reigned longest, lived not above fifty or five and fifty years, a common
modern age. But it is fabulously supposed that the Kings of Arcadia lived to a
great age, because their Country was Mountaynous, and both they and their
people being for the most part Shepherds, kept a temperate Diet. But as Pan
was their god, so all these Relations are but Pannicke vain Fables.

7. Numa King of the Romans lived to eighty years of age, being a peaceable,
studious, and Religious man. Marcus Valerius Corvinus, was Consul six and
forty years after his first Consulshippe, and lived an hundred years, being
both in Wars and private affairs very powerful, of a popular Disposition,
and always fortunate.

8. Solon the Athenian Lawmaker, and one of the wise Sages, lived above
fourscore years, being a Valiant man, but popular, a lover of his Country,
learned, and somewhat voluptuous. (...) of Creete reached unto 157. years of
age, and lived fifty seven of those years in a Cave. Half an age afterward
(...) Calophonius, having at twenty years of age left his Country, after 77
years travail returned again, and lived in all 102. years, or longer. This
man being a traveller, had also a wandering mind; and for holding many
opinions, was called (...) orthe wanderer, instead of Zenophon; yet certainly
his conceit and fancy was large, and infinite.

9. Anacreon, the wanton, voluptuous Poet, reached to fourscore years of Age,
and upwards; and Pindar of Thebes, a Poet of an high fancy, witty in a new way
of writing, and a religious adorer of the gods, lived fourscore years
complete. Sophocles the Athenian, attained to the same Age, an eloquent
Tragical Poet, and a great Writer, but careless of his family.

10. Artaxerxes, King of (...) lived ninety four years, being a man of a dull
Wit, not laborious, nor painful, but affecting ease more than glory.

Agesilaus was a moderate King, and a Philosopher; a great Soldier, and
Politician, but ambitious of honor; and aspired to fourscore and four years
of Age.

11. Gorgias Leontinus lived an hundred and eighty years. This man was a
Rhetorician, a public Schoolmasters, and a Traveller, and before his death
he said, that Protagoras the Abderite, being a Rhetorician, a Politician, and
as great a traveller as Gorgias, lived ninety years. Socrates the Athenian
multiplying his life, reached to ninety nine years of age: he was a modest
Rhetorician, that would never plead in open Court, but kept a private School.

Democritus of Abdera, drew out his time of life to an hundred years, being a
great natural Philosopher, and a learned Physician, and Practitioner in
Experiments; so that Aristotle objected against him, that his Observations were
grounded more on Comparison than Reason, being not prooved by Logic, but by
Similitude, the weakest kind of Argument. Diogenes Synopeus, allowing others
liberty, but strict in private government, delighting in poor diet, and
patience, lived ninety years. Zeno Citteus, lacking but two of an hundred
years old, was high-minded, and a contemner of opinions, and had an excellent
wit, not offensive, but rather alluring than co^pelling affection. Seneca
afterward had the like wit. Plato of Athens lived 81 years, a man affecting
quietness, and high contemplation; of a civil handsome behavior, not light
but pleasing, and majesticall. Theophrastus Etesius using a sweet kind of
cloquence, mingled with plentiful variety gathering only the sweet Roses of
Philosophy, not the bitter worme-wood, attained to fourscore and five years of
age complete. Carneades of Cyrene many years afterward, lived until he was
fourscore and five years old; a fluent eloquent man, delighting in variety of
knowledge, which made his conversation pleasing and acceptable. But in Cicero's
time Orbilius, no Philosopher, or Rhetorician, but a Grammarian, lived almost
an hundred years; being first a Soldier, then a Schoolmaster; of a proud
disposition, and a whipping, railing writer even against his own scholars.

12. Q. Fabius Maximus having been sixty three years Augur, and more
respected for his Nobility than Age, was above fourscore years old when he
dyed. He was a wise man, that ripened actions by delaying their execution,
being all his lifetime moderate, courteous, and grave. Masinissa, King of
Numidia, lived above 90. years, and being above fourscore and five years
old, had a son. This man was valiant, and confident in Fortune, whose changes
his younger years having experienced, he afterward lived in constant
happiness. Marcus Porcius Cato lived above 90 years, being a man of an iron
body and mind, of a sharp speech, and contentious; addicted also to
husbandry, and to himself and his family a Physician.

13. Terentia, Cicero's wife, living an hundred and three years, suffered many
troubles and afflictions by her husbands banishment, and putting to death, and
by the gout. Luceia playing the part of a young maid, afterward of an old wife
upon the stage, lived an hundred years. Also Galeria Copiola being at first an
Actresse, was 99 years afterward at the dedication of Pompeyes Theater,
brought forth as a miracle of Age, and afterward was a spectacle in Plays made
in Honor of Augustus Caesar.

14. Livia Iulia Augusta, wife to Augustus Caesar, and Mother to Tiberius,
living but ninety years, was a more famous Actresse than the former: For Livia
being a courteous, stately, and pragmaticall matron, complying with her Husband
by dissembling obedience, and with her Son by majesticall courage, was
certainly an excellent Actresse in the Comedy of Augustus life, whereunto
himself spoke a commanding Epilogue, charging his friends to applaud it after
his Death. Iunia, wife to C. Cassius, and sister to M. Brutus, being ninety
years old, and living sixty four of those years before the Philippicke
Battle, was rich, and though unfortunate in her Husband, and Kindred, yet a
noble Widow.

15. In Vespasians Reign, Anno 76. in the part of Italy lying between the
Appenine and the River Po, men of an hundred years old, and upward, were
ceased, and put into the Subsedy-booke, namely, 124. of one hundred years of
age, 54 an hundred and twenty years old, 57 aged one hundred twenty five
years, 2 aged one hundred twenty five years, 4 one hundred and thirty, 4
others one hundred and thirty five, or seven; and 3 that were one hundred and
and forty years old. There were also at Parma 3 men of an hundred and twenty
years of age, and 2 one hundred and thirty years old. At Bruxels there was an
old man aged one hundred twenty five years, and another at Placentia an
hundred twenty one years old, and an old woman aged an hundred thirty two
years, was living at Fluentia; and in the ancient town Velleiacium, seated on
the hills near Placentia, were six men aged an hundred and ten, and four an
hundred and twenty. Lastly, at Rimino, one M. Aponius was an hundred and fifty
years old.

The fortune, disposition, and An admonition.
qualities of the former persons being signs of long life, to such as be
endued with the like, are in a true and brief character described, and no
examples of long life under fourscore years of age, have been, or shall be
mentioned.

16. Of the Roman, Grecian, French, and German Emperors, being almost two
hundred, some only attained to fourscore years of Age. The Emperors
Augustus and Tiberius living seventy eight, and seventy six years, might have
reached fourscore years, had they not been poisoned by Livia and Caius.

Augustus lived seventy six years, being a moderate Prince, somewhat hasty in
action, but of a fair and pleasing carriage; temperate in diet, lascivious,
and very fortunate, and about 30. years of age falling into a dangerous
sickness, was restored to health by Antonius Musa, and cured by cold medicines,
instead of hot applications used by other Physicians, as agreeable to his
disease. Tiberius was by two years longer-liv'd than Augustus. His Words (as
Augustus said) stuck in his jaws; being a Prince of a flow speech, but
stern, and bloody; a drinker, and (...) in diet, yet very careful of his
health, being wont to say, that every one after 30. years of age was a fool,
or a Physician. Gordian the elder lived sixty years, then being made Emperor,
he fell into a violent sickness, and dyed. He was a brave famous man, learned,
and a Poet, constant in the whole course of his life, and a little before his
Death fortunate.

The Emperor Valerian lived seaventy six years before he was taken prisoner
by Sapor King of the Persians, seven years afterward suddenly fell sick,
and dyed: He was or an ordinary temper, and not very valiant, and though weak
in desert, was by general opinion conceived worthy to be (...) Emperor.
Anastasius surnamed Dicorus, was fourscore years of age, being a quiet, mild,
superstitious, (...) man. Amicius iustinianus lived fourscore and four
years, affecting glory, famous by his Captains success, not his own valor;
uxcrious, and by others governed. Helena of Britain, the mother of Constantine
the great, lived fourscore years, being no States-woman, but wholly devoted
to Religion; yet of an high spirit, and always happy. Theodora the Empress,
(sister to Zoes, the wife of Monomachus, who after her decease reigned) lived
above fourscore years, a (...) woman, stately, fortunate, (...) credulous.

17. After these Examples of long-lived Heathen men, the Ages of principal
Ecclesiastical persons shall be related. St. John, our Saviors beloved
Apostle and Disciple, lived ninety three years, whose divine (...) and burning
charity were shadowed forth by the Emblem of an Eagle drawn near his Picture.

Luke the Evangelist was fourscore and four years of age, an eloquent man,
and a traveller, St. Paul's constant companion, and a Physician. Simoon
Cleophas, called Christ's brother, was Bishop of Jerusalem, and lived an hundred
and twenty years before he was martyred, being a courageous, constant,
charitable man. Polycarp the Apostles Disciple, and Bishop of Smyrna, attained
to an hundred years of Age, and was then martyred: A high minded man, of
heroical patience, and laborious. Dionysius Areopagita, in the Apostle Paul's
time, living ninety years, was called the Bird of Heaven, being an excellent
Divine, and famous for Life and Doctrine. Aquila and Priscilla, the Apostle
Paul's Hosts, and afterward fellowhelpers, lived to an hundred years of age,
being in Pope Xistus time an ancient married couple, wholly given to good
works, the Churches first Founders being commonly to their great comfort,
fortunate in Marriage. St. Paul the Hermit lived in a Cave an hundred and
thirty years, with intolerable poor hard diet, spending his life in
meditation, being not illiterate, but learned. St. Anthony, the first founder
or restorer of the Order of Monks, attained to an hundred and five years of
age, and being a devout contemplative man, of an austere and severe life,
governed his Monks in such a glorious solitude, that he was visited by
Christians and Philosophers, and adored as a living Image of Sanctity and
Holiness. Athanasius, a man of invincible constancy, commanding Fame, and
yielding not to fortune; bold with great personages, popular, and a stout
Champion in controversies, dyed above 80. years old, St. Jerome above 90.
years old; being an eloquent writer, learned in Languages and Sciences: a
Traveller, and toward his old age of an austere life, his high mind shining in
a private life like a Star in obscurity.

18. But of two hundred and one and forty Popes, five only attained to
fourscore years of age, and upwards: The age of many of the first Popes being
shortened by Martyrdom Pope John the 23th, lived ninety years complete: A
man of an unquiet disposition, and an Innovator; bringing in many alterations
and changes, some for the better, but a great hoarder of Wealth and Treasure.
Gregory the twelfth, by a factious Election created Pope, dyed at ninety years
of age, his short Papacy affording nothing worthy of observation. Paul the
third lived eighty one years, being of a quiet disposition, and profound
judgment; a learned Astrologer, careful of his health, and like the old
Priest Ely, a father of his family.

Paul the fourth being fourscore and three years of age, was of a severe
disposition, high-minded, and imperious; of a working fancy, and an eloquent
ready speech. Gregory the 13th, living also fourscore and three years, was a
good man, politic, temperate, and charitable.

19. The Examples following are promiscuously set down together. Arganthonius,
King of Cadez in Spain, lived 130. or 40 years, reigning 80. years; his
manners, kind of life, and the time wherein he lived are unknown. Cyniras,
King of Cyprus, accounted then a happy pleasant Island, lived one hundred and
fifty, or sixty years. Two Kings of the Latins 800. and 600. years. Some
Kings of Arcadia 300. years, but the inhabitants long life in this healthful
Country is but an invented fable. It is reported that in Illyricum one
Dardanus lived five hundred years without any infirmity of age. The Epians, a
people of AEtolia, were generally all long-lived, 200 years being a common
age; and amongst the rest the Giant Litorius was 300. years old. On the top of
the mountain Tmolus, anciently called Tempsus, many men attained to 100 and
50. years of age. The Sect of the Esseans in Judea lived above 100. years,
keeping a very poor Pythagorean diet. Apollonius Tyaneus being above an
hundred years old, had a fresh fair complexion, and was accounted by the
Heathens a very divine man, but by the Christians esteemed a Magitian; being a
Pythagorian in diet, a great Traveller, famous, and renowned, but in his age
he was disgraced, and suffered many contumelies and reproaches, which
redounded afterward to his honor. But his Pythagoricall diet caused not his
long life, being rather hereditary from his Grandfather, who lived an hundred
years, the age also of Q. Metellus, who being twenty years after his
Consulship, High Priest, his hand did not shake, nor his voice failed not in
offering sacrifice. Appius Caecus being very old, and blind, governed a great
family, and the Commonwealth; and in his extreme old age being brought on a
bed into the Senate house, dissuaded from making peace with Pyrrhus: in the
beginning of his Oration showing a memorable and invincible courage and
strength of mind, saying, My blindness (Reverend Fathers) I have very
patiently endured, but now hearing your dishonest counsel and purpose to
conclude a peace with Pyrrhus, I could wish my self deaf. M. Perpenna lived
ninety eight years, surviving all the Senators of his Consulship, and all
elected in his Censorship, except seven. Hiero, King of Sicily, reigning at the
time of the second Punick War, lived almost an hundred years, being a
moderate Prince both in government and manners, religious, faithful in
friendship, bountiful, and continually fortunate. Statilia, of a noble Family,
lived ninety nine years in Claudius Reign. Claudia, the daughter of Otilius,
one hundred and fifteen years. Xanophilus, an ancient Philosopher of the
Pythagorean Sect, one hundred and six years, being very healthful and lusty
in his old age, and very popular for his learning.

Islanders were formerly accounted very long-lived now equal to others in age.
Hippocrates of Cous a famous Physician, lived one hundred and four years,
approving his Art by lengthning his life. He was a wise learned man, of great
experience and observation, who affecting not methodicall words, found out the
nerves and sinews of Science.

Demonax a Philosopher by profession and manners, livingan hundred years in
Adrians Reign, was an highminded man, a Conqueror of his mind, and without
affectation a contemner of the World, yet civil and courteous: when he dyed,
being asked touching his Burial, he answered, Never take care for burying me,
for stinch will bury me. He that asked him, said again, Would you have your
Body left for Dogs and Ravens to feed upon? Demonax answered, What great
hurt is it, if having sought while I lived, to do good unto Men, my Body do
some good to Beasts when I am dead.

The Indians called Pandorae, are very long-lived, reaching two Hundred years
of Age, and their Childrens hair, (which is strange) being White, when they
grow elder, turns black, and afterward gray; whereas white hair does
ordinarily grow blacker. The Seres, another sort of Indians, with their
plantine drink, live to an hundred years of age. Euphranor the Grammarian,
being above an hundred years old, kept a School, and taught Scholars. Ovid
Senior, Ovid the Poets Father, lived 90. years; who differing from his Sons
disposition, and contemning the Muses, dissuaded

9. his son from studying Poetry Asinius Pollio, Favorite to Augustus, and
favored also by the gods, granting him a long life of an hundred years, was
luxurious, eloquent, learned, hasty, proud, cruel, and made private benefit,
his actions only Center. Seneca managing States matters, and being banished
for Adultery in Claudius Reign, was not an hundred years old when he was
Neroes Schoolmasters. John of Times being a French man, and Charles the greats
Soldier, was accounted in those latter times the longest liver, being three
hundred years old.

Gartius Aretine, Grandfather to Aretine, living to 104. years of age, was
healthful even to the last, feeling no sickness; but when strength of Nature
decayed, dyed with Age. Many Venetians lived exceeding long, as Captain
Francis Donatus, Thomas Contarenus, Proctor of Saint Marks, Francis Molin,
Proctor also of St. Marks and others. But Comerus Venetus having a sickly crazy
body, for the recovery of Health, took all his meat and Drink by weight,
keeping afterward according unto that proportion a constant Diet, and thereby
lived above an hundred years in perfect health. William Postell a Frenchman,
being an hundred and twenty years old, had on his upper lip black hair not
turned white, being a man of a stirring brain and light fancy, a great
Travailer, and a well experienced Mathematician, and somewhat inclined unto
Heresy.

20. In England there is in every populous village a man or woman of threescore
years of age. And at a Wake in Herefordshire, a Dance was performed by eight
men, whose age added together, amounted to eight hundred years, some being as
much above 100 years old, as others were under that age.

21. Many mad folks in Bethleem Hospital, in the Suburbs of London, live very
long.

22. The Ages of Nymphs, Fawnes, and Satyrs, formerly superstitiously adored,
are but dreams and fables, contrary to Philosophy and Religion. So much forth
History of the long life of particular persons, general observations follow.

23. In succeeding ages and generations, Length of Life is not shortened,
fourscore years having been from Moses time the constant age of man, which
declines not (as it is supposed) nor decreases. But in particular Countries
men's lives were longer, when plain homely Diet, and bodily labor were much
used, and shorter when more civilized times delighted in idleness, and wanton
Luxury. But Succeession of Ages shortning not the length of Life, must be from
the corruptions thereof distinguished. The Ages also of Beasts, as Oxen,
Horses, Sheep, Goats, and such like Creatures, being not shortened in this
Age. Therefore the Deluge, or general Flood, and perhaps particular
accidental Floods, long Drouths, Earthquakes, and the like, do shorten age,
not succession of ages and generations. Neither does the bigness and stature
of bodies now Decrease and Grow less, though Virgil following common opinion,
prophesied of a lesser stature of men in succeeding ages, of the ploughing the
Emathian and Emonensian fields, saying thus: Grandiaque effossis mirabitur Ossa
sepulohris.
He shall admire those great and mighty bones,
Which are dug up from under their Grave stones.


Though is Sicily and other places three thousand years since Giants lived in
Caves, yet the general stature of men since then, is not Declined, or
Decreased, which is observable, confutes the common opinion, that men are not
so long lived, big, nor strong, as formerly.

24. In cold Northern Countries men commonly live longer than in hotter,
their skin being more compact and close, whereby their moisture is not so
easily diffufed, scattered abroad, and consumed by the Sharpness of their
repaireable Spirits, nor by the air moderately warmed with the Sun beams
exhausted and Devoured. But under the Equinoctial line. over which the Sun
passing, makes two Winters and Summers, and equal Days and Nights, the
inhabitants live very long as in Peru and Taprobana.

25. The Mediterranian Islanders are commonly long lived, for the Russians live
not so long as the Orcades, nor the Affricans as the inhabitants of the
Carnaries and Terceras, though under the same parallel, and the (...) though
earnestly desiring and affecting Long Life, are not so long lived as the
Chinois, the Sea Air yielding a cheerishing warmth in cold Countries, and a
refreshing cool Breez in hot Countries.

26. High Grounds, except the tops of Mountains, doeproduce longer lived
people, than low flat Levells, and in high Countries, as in Arcadia and Greece,
and part of AEtolia; the inhabitants live to a great age, as the inhabitants of
Mountains would do, if their pure clear air were not accidentally corrupted
with Vapors, which rising from the Valleys, do settle and rest on the Hills.
Therefore on snowy Mountains, on the (...) the Pyrenean Mountains, and the
Appenine, the inhabitants live not so long, as those Dwelling on midling Hills
or Valleys: but on the ridges of Mountains toward Ethiop. and the Abyssines,
covered with Snow, but with no hovering Vapors, the people live and arrive to
an hundred and fifty year of age.

27. The air of Marches and Fens lying flat and low, agrees well enough with
the Natives, but to strangers is unhealthful, shortning their lives. And
Marshes or other Fenneyplaces that are over-flowed with Salt tides, are
unwholsomer than those overflowed with fresh land water.

28. The particular Countries wherein the people live unto agreat Age, are
these; Arcadia, AEtolia, Indye on this side Ganges, Brasil, Taprobana,
Britain, Ireland, and the Islands of Orcades and Hebrides, but not Ethiopia,
as some of the Ancients supposed.

29. The airs perfect wholesomnesse is a secret quality, rather found out by
experience, than reason. For if a piece of Wool laid some certain days in
the open air, do not Grow heavier in Weight, it is an experiment that the
Air is Good, also if a piece of flesh laid in the same manner remain
unputrified, or if a Perspective Glass do present the object in near
distance, the air is thereby approoved wholesome.

30. A wholesome and healthful air must be Good, Pure and Equal. Hills and
Valleys, with a kind of changeable variety, make a pleasant prospect, but are
not so healthful, as the moderately dry plain, notbarren or sandy, but
woodded with shady Trees.

31. It is bad Dwelling in a different changeable air, but change of air in
Travayle, by use and custom becomes healthful, making Travailers long-lived.
And Cottagers dwelling continually in one place, live to a great Age, the
Spirits being consumed less by an accustomed air, but nourished and repaired
more by change of air.

32. The Life of man (as was said) is not lengthned or shortened by succession
of ages, but the immediate condition of the Parents, both the Father and Mother
is to be Regarded. As whether the Father were an old man, young, or middle
aged, healthful and sound, or sickly and diseased, a Glutton, or a Drunkard,
or whether Children were begotten after sleep in the morning, after long
forbearance of Venery, in the heat of Love, (as Bastards) or in colder blood,
as in continuance of Marriage. The same circumstances are also on the Mothers
side considerable; and also the conditions of the mother being with child, as
whether she were healthful, and what diet she kept. Certain rules for
judging of Childrens long life by their begetting, and Birth, are hard to be
given, matters falling out contrary to likelihood: for Children begotten with a
lively courage, prove strong, but through their spirits sharp inflammation are
not long-lived. Also children conceaved of a greater or equal quantity of the
Mothers seed, and begotten in lawful Wedlock, not in Fornication, and in the
morning, their Parents being not too lusty and wanton, do live long. For it is
observable, that stout strong Parents, especially Mothers, have not strong
children. Therefore Plato ignorantly imagined, that because Women used not
exercise as men did, therefore children were not strong; whereas unequal
strength is most powerful in the act of generation, a strong man and a weak
woman having strongest children; so young Women are the best breeders, and
young Nurses are best. For the Spartan women marrying not until two or five
and twenty years of age, called therefore man-like Women, had no luster
long-lived children, than the Roman, Athenian, or Theban Women, counting
themselves at twelve or fourteen years old marriageable. Therefore spare
Diet made the Spartan Women excellent Breeders, not late marriage. But
experience shows that some Families are long-lived; long life, and diseases
being hereditary to all of the same stock and Parentage.

34. A black or red hair and Complexion with freckles, are signs of longer
life, than a white hair and Complexion. And a fresh red color in young Folks,
is better than a pale; a hard skin, being not a thick spongy Goose skin, but
close grained, is a better sign of long life than a smooth skin. And great
wrinkles in the forehead are better signs than a smooth forehead.

34. Hair hard like bristles, is a better sign of long life than dainty soft
locks, and hard thick curled Hair is better than soft and shining.

35. Baldness coming sooner or later, is an indifferent sign, many being
soon bald, yet long-lived; and gray hairs accounted signs of old Age,
coming betimes without baldness, are signs of long life; with baldness
betokening the contrary.

36. The hairinesse of the lower parts, as the thighs and legs, is a sign
of long life, but not of the breast, or upper parts.

37. Men of a tall stature, proper, big, strong, and active, are long-lived;
but a low stature, and slow disposition, are contrary signs.

38. In regard of proportion, short wastes and long legs betoken longer life
than long wastes and short legs. And a big proportion downwards and slender
upwards, is a sign of longer life, than broad shoulders, and slender making
downwards.

39. Lean folks, of a quiet, peaceable disposition, and fat folks of a
choleric stirring nature, are commonly longliv'd. Fatness in youth is a
sign of short life, but not in age.

40. Long growth, either to a great or lesser stature, is a sign of long life;
but sudden growth either to a low or high stature, is a bad sign.

41. Firm flesh, full of muscles and sinews, buttocks not too big, and high
swelling veins, do signify long life; the contrary are signs of short life.

42. A small Head proportionable to the body, a middlesiz'd neck, not long,
slender, thick or short, shrinking within the shoulders, large nostrils, a
wide mouth, ears grisly, not fleshy; and strong, close, even teeth do
signify long life, and especially breeding of new Teeth.

43. A broad breast bending inwards, crooked shoulders, a flat belly, a broad
hand with few lines in the palm, a short round foot, thighs not very fleshy,
and high calves of the Legs, are signs of long life.

44. Great Eyes with a green circle between the white and the white of the
Eye, senses not too sharp, slow pulses in youth, in Age quicker, holding the
breath easily; costivenesse in Youth, looseness in Age, do signify long life.

45. Astrologicall Observations drawn from the Horoseope or Nativity, are not
allowable. Children coming at eight Months are commonly still-borne; but
Children borne in Winter, are longliv'd.

46. A strict Pythagoricall Diet, or Cornarus Diet of equal proportion, are
good to make Scholars and Friars live long. But by free eating and drinking,
and a plentiful Diet, common people live longest. A moderate, temperate diet,
though healthful, is no cause of long life; for the strict Diet does breed few
spirits, consuming less moisture, and the full Diet yields more repairing
nourishment; but the moderate Diet affords neither fewer spirits, nor more
nourishment, the mean of good extremes being not so good as of bad extremes.
With a strict diet watching must be used, to keep sleep from oppressing the
spirits being few, and also moderate exercise, and abstinence from Venery: But
a plentiful Diet requires much sleep, frequent exercise, and seasonable
venery. Baths and Ointments formerly used for delight, not to prolong life,
shall be hereafter in the following Propositions exactly handled. But the
learned and wise Physician Celsus, held that variety and change of good
plentiful diet was best, also watching, but longer and oftener sleep; fasting
also, but more frequent Feasting; and business sometimes, but more often
pleasure and recreation were good and healthful. In keeping a good diet, being
the greatest lengthner of Life, there are different observations. I remember
(...) an old man of above an hundred years of Age, produced for a witness in
a Plea of Prescription, having given in evidence, and being asked by the Judges
by what means he had lived so long, answered, By eating before I was hungry,
and drinking before I was thirsty: but this matter shall be hereafter handled.

47. A religious holy Life may cause a long life; for retyrednesse, rest,
divine Contemplation, spiritual joy, noble hope, wholesome fear, sweet
sorrow, newness of life, strict Observations, Repentance and Satisfaction, do
lengthen the natural life of a mortified Christian; and the austere diet of
such a life hardens the Body, and humbles the Spirit; so that Paul the Hermit,
and Simeon the Anchorite, and many other Monks, lived thus in the Wilderness
until they were old.

48. Next unto this is the learned life of Philosophers, Rhetoricians, and
Grammarians, living in ease, and thoughts not appertaining to business,
without grief, delighting in variety and impertinences, and in a free
voluntary expense of time, in the pleasant conversation of young men. But
Philosophies in respect of long life are different; for superstitious high
contemplative Philosophies, as the Pythagoricall, and Platonicke, and natural
Philosophy, Metaphysics, and Moral Philosophy of Heroical virtues were good
studies to prolong life: such were the Philosophies of Democritus, Philolaus,
Xenophon, Astrologians and Stoics: also sensible Philosophies, not profound
and speculative, but agreeable to common opinion, were good studies, professed by
Carneades, and the Accademicks, Rhetoricians, and Grammarians: But difficult
subtle Philosophies, weighing matters in the Scale of Principles, and full of
thorney questions, were bad studies, whereunto the Peripateticks and
Scholasticks were devoted.

49. The Country life busied in employments abroad, being active, and keeping
a fresh homely diet, without care and envy, does therefore prolong life.

50. The Military life is good in youth, many excellent Warriers having been
longliv'd, as Corvinus, Camillus, xenophon, Agefilaus, and other both ancient
and modern. Also the improvement of Virtue by increasing daily in goodness,
and laboring in youth, does prolong life, the remembrance thereof being sweet
in age. Besides, military affections, raised with the desire and hope of
Victory, infuse into the Spirits heat agreeable to long life.

Medicines for long life.
MEdicines there are many Artic. 10
for preserving Health, and and curing Diseases, but few to prolong life:
Therefore those notables Medicines called Cordials, shall be here propounded.
For Cordials taken to fortify and strengthen the Heart and Spirits against
poison and diseases, being with Judgment used, may by all likely hood be as
powerful to prolong life. These here selected, and orderly set down, are
best.

1. Gold is exhibited, and used three ways; in potable Gold, Gold quenched in
Wine, or substantial Gold, as LeafeGold, and powder Gold. Potable Gold was
given first in dangerous desperate Diseases, for an excellent powerful
Cordial, receiving the virtuall effect from the spirit of Salt wherein it is
dissolved; for Gold would be more sovereign, could it be without corrosive
waters, or by Corrosives cleared of their venomous quality, dissolved.

2. Pearls are taken in loose powder, or dissolved in the sharp juice of
green Lemmons, or in spiced Comfits, and drinks. The Pearl and the shell
whereunto it cleaves, are of one nature, and in quality like the shells of
RiverCrabs.

3. Two Christalline precious Stones are chief Cordials, the Emerald, and
Iacinth, given in the same manner as Pearls, but not usually dissolved; yet
these glass green stones are of a sharp operation.

The benefit and help received from these medicinal Species, shall be
hereafter declared.

4. Bezars Stone is of approoved virtue, recreating the spirits, and provoking
gentle sweat. Unicornes Horn is of like esteem with the Hearts Horn, and the
Bone of the Hearts heart, Ivory, and the like.

5. Amber-Grise is very good to comfort and refresh the spirits. These Drugges
following are of approved virtue.

Hot.
Saffron. The Indian Leaf Wood of Aloes. Citron Bark. Baulme-Mint. Grains.
Avens, or Sanamund. Orange Flowers. Rosemary. Mint. Betony. Blessed Thistle.
Cold.
Nitre. Roses. Violets. Strawberry bush. Strawberries. Syrrop of Lemmons Syrrop
of Oranges. Juice of Apples. Borrage. Buglosse. Burnet. Sanders. Camphire.
Prescriptions for Diet being An admo nition.
here only delivered, hot waters and Chymicall Oils, (by Chemists said to be
under the Planet of Mars) having a destructive furious operation, and also hot
biting Spices are to be rejected, and waters must be made more temperate,
lively, and fragrant than Phlegmatic Distillations, or hot Extractions of the
spirit of Wine.

6. Often letting blood having been formerly much used, and all Observations
falling out fit and convenient, is good to prolong life, the old moisture of
the body being thereby evacuated and emptied, and new introduced and bred.

7. Consumptious also and sicknesses procuring leanenesse, being well cured,
do lengthen life, the Body being thereby supplied with new moisture after the
consumption of the old. Therefore it is said, that to grow healthful after
such a Sickness, is to grow youthful; therefore the procuring of sickness by
Artificial Dayets shall be hereafter declared.

Intentions.
INquiry having been made concerning livelesse bodies, Vegetables, living
creatures, and Man; a new search by true and proper Intentions, resembling the
paths of mortal life, shall be made, and more effectual than all former
contemplations of comforting natural heat, and Radical moisture, or of
meats breeding good Blood; neither hot, nor Phlegmatic, and of refreshing
and recreating the spirits; or of Medicines of Gold, being of all metals least
subject to corruption; and of precious Stones recreating the spirits by their
hidden qualities and cleerenesse, and of the Balsomes and Quintessences of
living Creatures, which being contayn'd and received in Vessels, would give a
proud hope of immortality. And of the flesh of Serpents and Hearts being
powerful to renew Life, the one changing his skin, the other his Horns; and
the flesh of Eagles, because the Eagle changes his Bill; and of one that by
anointing himselle all over, (except the souls of his feet) lived 300
years, and never felt any other sickness, but only a swelling of his feet:
and of Artesius, who perceiving that his spirits grew old, attracted the spirit
of a lusty young man, killing him for that purpose, and receiving it into his
mouth with the young man's last Breath, living many years by his Spirit; and of
fortunate Hours according to Astronomy, wherein medicines to prolong Life
should be gathered and compounded, and of the Planets influence powerful to
prolong life, and the like superstitious fables, and strange delusions, by
which Reason being besieged, has miserably yielded up the Fort of belief. But
to these material Intentions, touching the quick of the matter, though not
largely handled, much cannot be added, some few Admonitions only concerning
them are to be delivered.

First, the Offces and Duties of Life being better than Life, the Prescriptions
of our Intententions hinder not the Offices and Duties of Life, such being
rejected, or lightly mentioned, and not insisted on. For no serious Discourse
of living in a Den, or hole of a Rock like Epimenides Cave, never befriended
with any cheerful Sun-beame, or Daylight, or of continual Baths of prepared
Liquors, nor of Searecloaths, keeping the body in a bag, nor of thick
pargetting and painting used by Salvages, or of accurate dyets to prolong life,
formerly kept by (...) and in our Age more moderately by Cornarus Venetus, nor
the like unprofitable idle projects are here mentioned. But our Remedies and
Precepts may be used without interrupting and hindering common duties and
businesses.

Secondly, it is a vain conceit, to imagine that any Potion or Medicine can
stay or renew the course of Nature; which great Work must be brought about
and effected by Application of diverse Remedies, and being a new project, must
be wrought by unusual means. Thirdly, some following Propositions are not
grounded on approoved experiments, but on Reason, and our former Principles and
suppositions are all cut and dug out of the Rock and Mine of Nature. And
because man's body is in Scripture said to be the Souls upper garment, therefore
no dangerous, but wholesome and profitable Remedies are here propounded.
Besides, it is observable, that the same drugs are not good to preserve Health,
and to lengthen life; for some being good to cheer the spirits, and make them
vigorously and strongly perform their duties, do shorten life; others being
powerful to prolong life, unless prevention be used, do endanger health;
therefore some Cautions and Advertisements shall be inserted, leaving the
choice of Remedies belonging to the several Intentions, to the Readers
discretion. For their agreeableness to different constitutions of bodies, to
diverse kinds of Life, and several ages, and the Order observable in their
Application, would be too tedious to declare, and unfit to be published.

The 3. Intentions propounded in the Topics, of staying consumption,
perfecting reparation, and renewing Age, are enlarged into these ten Operations.

1. The first Operation is of reviving and renewing the Spirits.

2. The second Operation is of excluding or keeping out the Air.

3. The third of Blood, and heat breeding Blood.

4. The fourth of the juice and moisture of the Body.

5. The fifth of the Bowels, and digestion of nourishment.

6. The sixth is of the outward parts attracting nourishment.

7. The seventh is of making Diet more nourishing.

8. The eight is of the last act of Assimilation, or converting into the
substance of the body.

9. The ninth is of making the parts of the body tender, after they begin to
wither, and wax dry.

10. The tenth is of purging out old-moysture, and filling the body with fresh
new moisture.

Of these Operations, the first four belong to the first Intention, the second
four to the second Intention, and the two last to the third Intention.

And because these Intentions may be daily practiced, therefore under the name
of an History, Experiments, Observations, Counsels, Remedies, Explications of
Causes and Reasons are together blended and mingled.

The Operation on the Spirits, to make them continue youthful, and to revive
and renew them being decayed.
The History.
1. THat the Spirits work all effects in the Body, is most clear and evident
by diverse Experiments.

2. And youthful Spirits conveyed into an old Body, would like a great wheel
turning about the lesser, make Nature move backward, and old folks become young.

3. In all Consumption by Fire, or age, the more moisture that the spirit or
heat does devour, the less durable is the substance.

4. The spirits working temperately, should not drink or devour, but sip the
moisture of the body.

5. Flames are of two kinds, one sudden and weak, working and vanquishing
thin substances, as the blazing flame of straw, and shavings of wood: the
other strong, and constant, invading hard stubborn substances, as the flame of
great wood.

6. Flames suddenly blazing, and weak, do dry, consume, and parch the Body:
but strong flames dissolve and melt the body, making it moist and solt.

7. Also some plasters and medicines for swellings, drawing out thin humors,
do harden the flesh; others by drawing strongly, do soften.

8. And some Purgations do sweep and fetch away waterish thin humors,
others draw down watery, stubborn, flymy matter.

9. Such spirits as are more powerful to abate, and subject hard stubborn
humors, than to avoid thin and prepared humors, will keep the body lusty
and strong.

10. The Spirits should be composed, thick in substance, hot and lively; not
sharp and burning; of sufficient quantity, not abounding, or swelling; and
quiet in motion, not hoyting or leaping in an unequal unruly manner.

11. Vapors work powerfully on the Spirits, as those do arising from sleep,
drunkenness, melancholy, and merry passions, and from odours and sweet smells
recreating the fainting spirits.

12. The Spirits are by four sorts of means thickened: by flight, cooling,
delight, and restraint; and first of the thickning by flight.

13. Bodies by general driving and putting to flight, are forced into their
Center, and so thickened.

14. The juice of black Poppy, and all medicines procuring sleep, do thicken
the spirits by flight.

15. Three Grains of Poppyjuyce will make the spirits curdle together, and
quite extinguish their working.

16. The spirits are not put to flight by the coldness of Poppy-juyce, and the
like Drugs being hot; but the flight of the spirits does make them hot and
cooling.

17. The flight of the spirits from Poppy-juyce, is best discerned by the
outward application, making the spirits withdraw and retire, and keep within,
until the mortified part turn to a Gangrine.

18. In painful incisions, or cutting for the Stone, or cutting off Limbs,
juice of Hemlocke is used to mitigate the pain, by putting the spirits to
flight, and casting the Patient into a swoone.

19. The thickning of the spirits by Flight, and driving inwards, is a good
effect of Poppy-juyce, proceeding from a bad Cause, being the flight of the
spirits.

20. Poppey was esteemed by the Graecians to be a great preserver of Health,
and prolonger of Life: the principal ingredient used by the Arabians called
Gods hands, was Poppey-juyce, the bad qualities thereof being allayed with
other mixtures, as Treacle, Mithridate, and the like.

21. All Medicines thickning the Spirits, as Poppey does especially, and
staying and restrayning the Spirits unruly working and raging in pestilentiall
Diseases, are good to prolong life.

22. A good quantity of Poppyjuyce being found by experience to be comfortable,
is taken by the Turks to make them valiant; but to us, unless taken in a
small quantity, and well allayed, it is deadly poison.

23. Poppy-juyce does also strengthen the spirits, and excite to Venery.

24. The distilled waters of wild Poppy is good for Surfeits, Fevers, and
diverse Diseases, the spirits being thereby thickened, and strengthened to resist
any diseases.

25. The Turks drink the powder of an herb in warm water, to increase
their valor, and sharpness of wit; but a greater quantity thereof is of a
stupe fying power like Poppey.

26. The East Indians refresh themselves before and after labor, by holding in
their mouths, or eating a famous Root called Betell, enabling also their acts
of Generation; being also of a stupefying power, because it blacketh the teeth.

27. Tobacco, in this age grown so common, and yielding such a secret delight
and content, that being once taken, it can hardly be forsaken, does lighten the
body, and take off weariness; opening the pores, and voyding humors, but
thickning the spirits; being a kind of Henbane, and does like Poppy, buzzell
and trouble the brain.

28. Some humors of the body, as those proceeding from melancholy, are like
Poppeyjuyce, and do cause long life.

29. Opium, Or Poppy-juyce, the Leaves and seeds of both kinds of Poppey, also
Henbane, Mandrake, Hemlocke, Tobacco, Nightshade, or Banewort, have all a
drowsy stupefying power.

30. Treacle, Mithridate, Trifer, Paracelsus Gum, Syrrop of Poppey, Pills of
Hounds tongue, are compouded drugs of the sale nature.

31. These Presecriptions Prolong life by thickning the spirits by coolers.

32. In Youth keep every year a cool diet about May, the spirits in Summer
being loose and thin, and no cold humors bred: and take a Julip of Poppey,
and other hot ingredients, but not too strong, every morning between sleep,
then keep a spare diet for fourteen days afterward, forbearing Wine, and hot
Spices.

33. Smoakes and steames being not too purgative to draw forth humors, but
having a light operation on the spirits of the brain, do cool the spirits as
well as coolers: therefore a Suffumigation made of Tobacco, wood of Aloes, dry
Rosemary-leaves, and a little Myrrh, being in the morning received into the
Nostrills, is very wholesome.

34. But the Water of compound Opiate Drugs, the vapor rising in distilling,
and the hear settling downwards, is better to be taken in youth, than the
drugs: for the virtue of distilled water is in their vapor, being in other
respects weak.

35. Some Drugs being like Poppy, but not so strong, do yield a drowsy
cooling vapor, and wholesomer than Poppy, not shunned by the spirits, being
thereby gathered together, and thickened.

36. The drugges like unto Poppy, and therewith used, are Saffron, and Saffron
flowers, the Indian Leaf, AmberGri^se, Coriander-seed prepa red; Amomum,
Pseudamomum, Rhodianwood, water of Orange Blossoms, and an infusion of the
flowers steeped in Oil Olive, and a Nutmeg dissolved in Rose Water.

37. Use Poppy sparingly at set times, but these other Drugs being commonly
taken, and in daily diet, are very sovereign to prolong life.

Pharmacopaeus in Calecut, by using Amber lived to one hundred and sixty years
of Age, and the Nobility of Barbary, by using the same drugge, are longer lived
than the common people. And our long-lived Ancestors used Saffron verymuch in
their Cakes and Broths. So much of thickning the spirits by Poppy, and Other
drugges.

38. The second way and means to thicken the spirits is by cold; for cold does
properly thicken, and by a safer operation and working than the malignant
qualities of Poppey, though not so powerfully; yet because coolers may be
familiarly used in daily diet, they are better to prolong Life than drowsy
Potions, or Drugs.

39. The spirits are cooled by breathing, by vapors, or by diet; the first way
being best, but difficult; the second good, and easy; the third weakeand
tedious.

40. The clear pure Air which may be taken on the dry tops of mountains, and
in open shady fields, is good to thicken the spirits.

41. Also vapors do cool and thicken, and Nitre has in this kind a special
operation, grounded on these Reasons.

42. Nitre is a kind of cold Spice, being so cold that it biteth the tongue as
hot Spices do.

43. The spirits of all Drugges Naturally, not Accidentally cold, are few and
weak; spiritual Drugges being on the contrary hot; Nitre only having
abundance of spirits, is of a vegetable nature, and cold. For Camphire is
spiritual, and cold in operation by accident, and the thin quality thereof
being without sharpness, does lengthen the breath in inflammations.

44. Also Nitre mingled with Snow and Ice, and put about vessels, does congeale
and freeze the liquor within, and common Bay Salt does make Snow colder, and
more apt to freeze. But in hot Countries where no Snow falls, Niter is only
used.

45. (...) and Soldiers, to make them valiant, do drink Gunne-powder before
they fight, or join Battle, as the Turks do Poppy,

46. Nitre does allay the destroying he are of burning (...) and Pestentiall
(...)

47. The Nitre in Gunpowder shunning the flame when a Piece is fired, does
make the crake and report.

48. Nitre is the spirit of the earth; for any pure earth covered or shaded
from the Sunbeames, so that nothing do spring or grow thence, will gather
store of Nitre, the spirit of Nitre being inferior to the spirit of living
creatures, and of Vegetables, and Plants.

49. Cattle drinking of water wherein there is Nitre, do grow fat, being a
sign that the Nitre is cold.

50. Land and Grounds are made rank and mellow by the fatning quality of the
spirit of Nitre, which is in dung.

51. Therefore the spirit of Nitre will cool, thicken, and refresh the
spirits, and abate their heat. For as strong Wine and Spices do inflame the
spirits, and shorten life, so Nitre composing and restrayning the spirits; does
lengthen life.

52. Nitre may be used with meat, and eaten with Salt to the proportion of a
tenth part, and put in morning Broaths, from three Grains to ten, or in
drink, and being used in any manner moderately, it Prolongs Life.

53. As other Drugges besides Poppy, being weaker, and safer, to be taken in
greater quantity, and oftener, do condensate and thicken the spirits by flight:
so Drugs of an inferior nature and operation to Nitre, do also cool and
thicken the spirits.

54. All Drugges inferior to Niter smell earthly, like good pure earth newly
turned up, and dug: the chief whereof are Burrage, Buglosse, Burnet,
Strawberry-leaves, and strawberries, Cowcumbers, and fragrant Apples,
Vine-leaves, and Buds, and Violets.

55. Next to these are Drugges of a hot smell, but cooling; as Balm, Citrons,
and Lemmons, green Oranges, Rosewater, roasted Pears, Damask and Red Roses,
and MuskeRoses.

56. These Fruits, inferior to Nitre for thickning the spirits, should be
used raw, not roasted, their cooling spirits being by fire dispersed; therefore
to infuse or squeeze them into Drink, or to eat, or smell to them raw is best.

57. The spirits are thickened also by the odor and smell of other Drugges
inferior to Poppey and Nitre. For the smell of pure fresh earth, coming from
following a Plough, or digging, or weeding, and the smell of leaves fallen from
trees in Woods, or Hedge-rowes at the beginning of Autumn, is good to cool
the spirits: and especially withered Strawberry leaves; also the smell of
Violets, of the flowers of Pellitory of the Wall, of Blackberries, and
Madre-selve, is cooling.

58. A Noble man of my acquaintance, who lived to be very old, did usually
after sleep, smell to a clod of fresh earth.

59. Also Endive, Succory, Liverwort, Purflaine, etc. do by cooling the blood,
cool also the spirits, though not so soon as vapors and smells. So much of
thickning the spirits by Flight. The third kind of thickning is by Delight: the
fourth by the restraint of their cheorefulnesse, joyfulnesse, and too violent
motions.

60. The spirits are mitigated and thickened by such acceptable pleasing
Objects, as do not draw them forth, but afford them inward delight, whereby
being collected into their Center, they enjoy themselves, and therein find a
sweet content.

61. The former Positions of drugges inferior to Opium and Nitre, being here
remembered, further inquiry of thickning the spirits by cooling will be
needelesse.

62. The restraint of the violent affections and motions of the spirits, shall
be hereafter declared: now the thickning of the spirits having been showed,
the qualification and temper of their heat follows.

63. The spirits should not be hot, and sharp, but strong, and lusty, to
conquer and subdue resisting matter, not to attenuate and expel thin humors.

Spices, Wine, and strong drink must be temperately used, and after Abstinence
has refreshed the appetite: and also Savory, Margerum, Pennyroyall, and all
heaters that bite on the tongue, must be seldom used: The heat by them
infused into the Spirits being not operative, but a devouring heat.

65. These Herbs strengthen the heat of the Spirits; Endive, Garlic,
BlessedThistle, young Cresses, Germander, Angelico, Wormseed, Vervin, Set-well,
Myrthe, Pepperwort, Elder-budds, and Parsley, and being used in Sawces and
Medicines, are hot in operation.

66. Also of cooling Drugges, compounded with Euphorbium, Bastard Pellitory,
Stavesacres, Dragon-wort, Anacardium, Oil of Beaversstone, Hart-wort,
Opoponax, Gum of Agasillis, and Galbanum, and the like, to allay the drowsy
stupefying power of Poppey, a very good Medicine to strengthen the spirits, and
make them hot and lusty may be made, like Treacle and Mithridate being not
sharp, nor biting on the tongue, but bitter, and of a strong sent, yet hot in
the stomach, and in working, or in their Operations.

67. The desire of Venery often stirred up and excited, but seldom satisfied
in Act, does strengthen the heat of the spirits, and so do some of the
affections. So much of the hear of the spirits, being a cause of long life.

68. The spirits should not abound, but be few, and moderate; for a small flame
devoures not so much as a greater.

69. A sparing Pythagoricall diet, such as Monks and Hermits under the Order of
St. Necessity, and St. Poverty used, is good to prolong life.

70. Also drinking of water, hard lodging, cold spare Diet of Sallets, Fruits,
and powderd flesh, and sale Fish, without any fresh warm meat, a haireshirt,
fasting, watching, abstinence from sensual pleasures, do abate and diminish
the spirits, which being reduced to a quantity sufficient to maintain life,
do make lesser wast on the body.

71. But a higher Diet, somewhat above those rigorous moderate Dyets, being
kept man equal constant manner, has the same operation. For a great constant,
quiet flame consumes not so much as a lesser which blazeth, and is sometimes
bigger, sometimes lesser: and Cornarus Venetus keeping such a constant Diet,
and drinking and eating so many years, by just proportion and weight, lived in
perfect health until he was an hundred years of age.

72. Also to avoid inflammation of the spirits, a full-sed body not mortified
by strict dyets, must use seasonable Venery, lest the spirits swelling too much
do soften and destroy the body: so much of the moderate plenty of spirits.

73. The restraynt of the spirits motion is next considerable, for motion does
make the spirits hot. There be three Restrayners of the spirits, Sleep,
avoiding of violent labor, exercise, and weariness, and the governing and
moderating of troublesome affections. And first of Sleep.

74. Epimenides slept many years in a Cave without any food, because the
spirits in sleep devour not much radical moisture.

75. Also Dormice and Bats do sleep in holes all the Winter, sleep
restrayning the consrming power of their vital spirits: so Bees wanting Honey,
and Butter-flies and Flesh-flyes do live by sleep.

76. Sleep after Dinner, the first Vapors of meat like a Dew ascending then
into the head, is good for the Spirits, but unwholesome for the body. And
sleep is as nourishing as meat for old folks, who should often take light
Refections, and short naps, and being grown extreme old should live in
continual ease and Rest, especially in Winter.

77. Thus moderate sleep being sound and quiet, does prolong Life.

78. To make one sleep soundly and quietly, Violets are good, sod Lettuce,
Syrrup of Roses, Saffron, Balm, Apples eaten before going to Bed, a sop dipped
in Malmsey, wherein a Muske-Rose has been steeped, or a Pill or Potion made
of these Ingredients. Also all binding Drugges, as Coriander-seed prepared, and
roasted Quinces, and Pears, do cause sound and quiet sleep: But a good
draught of clear cold Water is best to make young folks having strong
stomachs, sleep soundly.

Voluntary Ecstasies, and fixed profound Meditations, joined with a quiet mind,
do thicken the spirits more than sleep, making them rest from outward
operations, as sleep does. So much of sleep.

79. Violent wearisome exercises and motions, as Running, Tennis, Fencing, are
not good, nor strayning of strength to the uttermost, as Leaping, and
wrestling: for the spirits by such violent nimble motions, and straining of the
strength being droven into a narrow room, do become more sharp, and
praedatory, or devouring: but Dancing, Shooting, Riding, Bowling, and such
moderate Exercises are very healthful.

Some of the affections and passions of the mind do shorten the life of man,
and some do cause long life.

80. By exceeding great joy the spirits are made thin, loose, and weak, but
by familiar common Recreations they are not loosened, but strengthened.

81. Joy arising from sensual pleasure is bad, but the remembrance of former
joy, or the apprehension of joy to come conceived only in the imagination is
good.

82. An inward conceived joy, sparingly vented, does comfort the heart more
than a vulgar immoderate expression of joy.

83. Sorrow and Grief, being without Fear, and not too heavy, and Grievous,
do prolong Life by Contracting the Spirits, which is a kind of Condensation
or Thickning.

84. Great Fears do shorten Life; for though Sorrow and Fear do both
contract the Spirits, yet Sorrow does only contract, but Fear mingled with
Care and Hope, does heat and Vex the Spirits.

85. Anger being close and suppressed is a kind of vexation, making the
spirits devour the moisture of the body, but being vented and getting forth,
does strengthen the heat of the spirits.

86. By Envy the worst passion, the Spirits, and by them the Body are hurt and
weakened, being always in Action and Working, for Envy is said to keep no
Holidays.

87. Pity and Compassion of another misery, whereinto we cannot possibly
fall, is good, but Pity reflecting back, and exciting Fear of being in as
bad a case, is bad.

88. Shame lightly at the first drawing in the spirits, and afterward sending
them forth again, does make blushing bashful Folks commonly long-lived. But
shame arising from Reproach, and continuing long, does contract and choke the
spirits.

89. Love not unfortunate, nor wounding too deep, being a kind of joy, is
governed by the rules prescribed for joy.

90. Hope being the best of all the Affections, and Passions, is very powerful
to prolong Life, if like a nodding Nurse it do not often fall asleep, and
languish, but do continually feed the fancy with beholding good Objects. And
therefore such as propound certain ends and purposes to be compassed, thriving
and prospering therein according to their desire, are commonly long-lived: but
having attained to their highest hopes, all their Expectitions and desires
being satisfied, do not live long afterward.

91. Admiration and light contemplation are very good to prolong Life, keeping
the spirits busied in (...) matters, and in a peaceable quiet gentle temper: So
that all Philosophers, and observers of the Wonders of Nature, (as Democritus,
Plato, Parmenide, Apollonius) were long lived. Also Rhetoricians, tasting only
matters, and following the light of speech, not obscure dark Philosophy, were
also long-lived, as Gorgias, Protagoras, I socrates, Seneca. Andas old men are
Talkative, so Talkative men, do often live to be old men. For Talkativenesse
is a sign of a light Apprehension, not binding or vexing the spirits: but
subtle acute studies wearying and weakening the spirits, do shorten life. So
much of the motion of the spirits by the pafsions of the mind, some general
Observations not included in the former Division, do follow.

92. The spirits must not be often loosed, nor made thin, being thereby
loosed; for the spirits being once extenuated, loosened, and made thin, are
not easily collected and thickened. The spirits are loosed by excessive Labor,
exceeding violent passions of the mind, much sweating, much Evacuation, warm
Baths, and intemperate or unseasonable Venery; also Care, Grief, doubtful
expectation, sickness, sorrow, and pain, do dissolve and loosen the spirits,
and should therefore be avoided and shunned.

93. The spirits delight in Customs and Novelties; for customs not used
until they grow wearisome, and Nove'ties much desired, and then enjoyed, do
wonderfully preserve the vigor of the spirits. Therefore Judgment and Care
should be showed in leaving off Customs before they become loathsome and
contemptible, and in making the desire of Novelties stronger by restraint, and
in altering and changing the course of our life, lest the spirits employed in
one setsed kind of Life should grow heavy and dull: For though Seneca said
well, A fool does always begin to live; yet this Folly and many other do
lengthen life.

94. It is observable (contrary to common custom) that the spirits being in a
good, quiet, sound temper, (discerned by the quietness and inward joy of the
mind) should be cherrished, not changed.

95. Ficinus says, that Old men should comfort their spirits with the actions
of their childhood, and youth, being a Recreation proper to Age. Therefore the
remembrance of former Education together is pleasant in conversation, and the
place of Education is beheld with delight. So that the Emperor Vespasian would
not alter his Fathers house, being but a mean building, because the old House
did put him in remembrance of his Childhood: and besides, on festival Days
he would drink in a Silver-tip'd wooden Cup, which was his Grand-mothers.

96. Also an alteration of life for the better, is acceptable and delightful
to the Spirits. Therefore Youth and Manhood having been spent in pleasures
proper and peculiar to those Ages, Old age should enjoy new delights,
especially moderate ease. Therefore Noblemen in their Age should live a
retired kind of life, as Cassiodorus, having been in great favor with the
Gothish Kings of Italy, and accounted the soul and life of their Affairs, at
fourscore years of age retired to a Monastery, living there to 110. years of
Age, and there dyed. But such Retyrement should be before the body be decayed,
and diseased, for then all changes, though for the better, do hasten death:
and a retired life being undertaken, their minds and thoughts should not be
addicted to idleness, but employed in pleasant delightful studies, or in
building and planting,

97. Lastly, the spirits are recreated by labor willingly undertaken, but
consumed by action or labor performed with unwillingnesse. Therefore a free
kind of life by Art contrived, to be at our own disposing, and an obedient
mind, not resisting, but yielding to the power of fortune, do prolong life.

98. And for the better governing of the Affections, the body must not be
soluble, or loose; for on all the affections, except those arising from
melancholy, as Drunkenness and Melancholy, such laxativenesse and looseness
has more power than on the heart or brain.

99. This operation of making the spirits continue youthful and lusty, not
mentioned by Physicians, has been more diligently handled, because the
readiest and most compendious way to prolong Life, is by renewing the Spirits,
working suddenly on the body, as vapors and passions do work on the spirits
in a direct not indirect manner.

The Operation on the exclusion; or keeping out of the Air. 2.
The History.
1. THe Exclusion or keeping out of the Air, does in two respects lengthen
life: First, because the outward Air animating the spirits, and being
healthful, does next unto the inward spirits, devour the moisture of the
body, growing thereby dry, and withered.

2. Secondly, by the Exclusion and keeping out of Air, the body being shut and
closed, and not breathing forth at the pores, the detayned spirits by their
working do soften the hardness of the body.

3. The reason hereof is grounded on the infallible Axiom of the dryness, the
body being dried by the emission and issuing forth of the spirits, but by their
detayning melted and softened. Besides, it is a Position that all kind of heat
does properly make thin and moysten, and does only accidentally contract and
dry.

4. Dwelling in Caves and Dens, the Air receiving there no Sunbeams, does
lengthen life; for the air being not excited by heat, cannot wast and consume
the body. And by diverse ancient Tombs and Monuments in Sicily, and other
places, it is clearly evident, that the stature of man was greater in former
Ages than now, being of a great stature, and long-lived. Epimenides Cave is an
ancient Fable. And as living in Caves was then usual, so the Anchorites lived
in Pillars, impenetrable by the Sunbeams, and the Air being unchangeable.
The Anchorites, Simeon, Stilita, Daniel, and Saba living in Pillars, were very
long-lived. Also modern Anchorites have lived in walls and Pillars unto agreat
Age.

5. Dwelling on Mountains is next to living in Caves; for the Sunbeams
pierce not, nor penetrate into Caves, and on the tops of Mountains have no
reflection, and little strength. But on Mountains having a clear pure air,
and dry Valleys below, whence no Clouds or Vapors do ascend, being like
those mountains encompassing Barbary, whereon people live to an hundred years
of Age, it is good dwelling.

6. Such an Air, either in Caves, or on Mountains, is not naturally
praedatory, or devouring; but our common Air being of a wasting quality
through the warm heat of the Sun, must be excluded, and kept out of the
body.

7. The Air is excluded, or kept out by shutting or filling the pores.

8. Coldness of the Air, nakedness of the skin, washing in cold water,
binders applied to the skin, as Masticke, Myrthe, and Myrtle, do shut and
close the pores of the body.

9. Baths also made of astringent binding mineral waters, extracted from
steel and glass, do strongly contract and close the skin, but must be
seldom used, especially in Summer.

10. Concerning filling; painting, ointments, oils, and Pomanders do preserve
the substance of the body, as oylecolours and Varnish do preserve wood.

11. The ancient Britains painted their bodies with Woad, and were very
long-lived, and so were the Picts, from the like painting of their bodies
called Picts, or living Pictures.

12. The Virginians and Brasiltans do paint themselves, and are very
long-lived; for the French Friars lately found there some Indians who could
remember an hundred and twenty years since the building of Farnamburg.

13. John of Times living to 300. years of Age, being asked what Preservatives
had made him live so long? answered, Oil without, Honey within.

14. The wild Irish also live very long, being used to annoint themselves naked
before the fire with old salt-peeter: And the Countess of Desmond bred teeth
thrice, and lived to 140. years of Age.

15. The Irish do wear saffroned Linen, and shirts, continuing long clean,
and lengthening life. For Saffron being a great binder, oily, and hot without
sharpness, is very comfortable to the skin and flesh. I remember that an
English man, being to go to Sea, and having put a bag of Saffron within his
Doublet, next his Breast, to avoid paying of Custom, was in that Voyage very
healthful, having been formerly always sea-sicke.

16. Pure fine Linen (according to Hypocrates advice) should be worn in
Winter next unto the skin: in Summer courser Linen, and oyled; for the
spirits being then very much exhaled and drawn forth, the pores of the skin
should be closed and filled.

17. Anointing of the skin at the first rising out of Bed with Oyle-olive, or
Oil of Almonds mingled with Bay Salt, and Saffron, is good to lengthen life.
But this annoynting must be with Wool, or a soft sponge lightly done; not
dropping on the body, but only wetting the skin.

18. For the body being drawn by a great quantity, and drinking in a lesser
quantity, should be therefore lightly anointed, or instead thereof oyled
shirts may be worn.

19. But the Grecians and Romans formerly using this anointing with Oil, left
off now in Italy, lived not longer in those Ages, being used by all, except
Fencers, only after Bathing, hot Baths being of a contrary operation opening
the pores by unctions and ointments shut together and closed. Therefore Bathing
without Annoynting is unhealthfull, but Annoynting without Bathing is very
good. Besides, precious Ointments were then used for delicacy and delight, not
for health, or to lengthen life, as Virgil said: Nec Cassia liquidi corrumpitur
usus Olivi:
Nor does the use of Oil decay,
By using precious Cassia.


20. Annoynting is healthful to keep out cold in Winter, and good to keep in
the spirits in the Summer from loosening, and defend them from the praedatory
devouring power of the air.

21. In annoynting with good Oil, being good to prolong Life, four Cautions
arising from four discommodities are observable.

22. The first discommodity is, that suppressing of sweat may breed diseases
out of those excrementitious Humors, being not prevented by Purgations and
Glisters. For swearing, though healthful, does weaken nature, and shorten
life; but moderate Purgatives work on the humors, not the spirits, as sweat
does.

23. The second discommodity is, that by heating and enflaming the body, the
enclosed spirits venting not forth by breathing, may become hot. This
inconvenience is prevented by a cool diet, and by often taking such coolers,
as in the operation of blood shall be mentioned.

24. Thirdly, annoynting may make the Head heavy; for all outward filling,
striking back the vapors, does drive them back toward the Head: but
Purgatives and Glisters, and closing the mouth of the Ventricle with
restrictive binders, and combing and rubbing the head with Lie, to cause the
exhalations, and using exercises to vent humors by the pores of the skin, do
all prevent this inconvenience.

25. The fourth discommodity being of a subtiler nature, is the increasing of
the detayned spirits by shutting the pores; for new spirits being without any
venting of the old continually generated and multiplied, would feed on, and
waste the body; but this assertion is erroneous, for the spirits being
confined, are dull, (and venting by motion as Flame) are not so active and
generative to increase in heat like a hot flame, but slow in motion: besides,
this inconvenience may be remedied by coolers, steeped in oil of Roses and
Myrtle, but Cassia, and heaters must be shunned.

26. The linings of apparel for exhausting and drawing the Body, should not be
of a watery but oily substance; and therefore Bays and woollen linings are
better than Linen. And sweet powders sooner loose their sent among Linen,
than among Woollen; Linen being soft and clean, but not so healthful as
Woollen.

27. The wild Irish beginning to grow sick, do presently take the sheets of
their Beds, and afterward wrappe themselves in the woollen Blankets.

28. Carded Wool worn next the skin in Britches and Doublets is very good.

29. Accustomed Air wastes not the Body so much as change of Air: Therefore
poor men living in Cottages, and never changing their Dwellings, are commonly
long-lived. But in other Respects, the Spirits being fresh and lively change
of Air is good, four yearly remoovings being sufficient, that so neither
Travayle, nor continual residence in one place may prove wearisome. So much
of excluding or keeping out, and avoiding the praedatory devouring power of the
Air.

The Operation on the Blood, and cooling the heat of the Blood. 3.
The History.
THe two Operations following have (as Actives to Passives) Relation to the
former, which endeavored to keep the spirits and air from wasting the body,
as these show how to make the blood, moisture, and body less subject to
depraedation and wasting: but Blood watering the moisture and limbs, three
powerful rules concerning the operation on the Blood shall be first
propounded.

2. First, Blood being cold is less dissipable, and subject to scattering
abroad. There are two coolers more agreeable to the following Intentions than
Julips or Potions.

3. In Youth Glisters not purgative or cleansing, but only refrigerative,
cooling, and opening, made of the juice of Lettuce, Purslane, Liverwort,
Sevegreene, or House-leeke, Fleawort-seed, with a temperate opening decoction,
mingled with a little Camphire: but in Age, instead of Houseleeke and Purslane,
the juice of Borage and Endive may be used, and these Glisters must be an Hour
or more retained.

4. Secondly, in Summer a Bath may be made of sweet lukewarm water, and new
whey, and Roses, insteade of Mallows, Mercury, Milk, and such like mollifiers
and softners.

5. Annoint the Body with Oil and thickning substances before Bathing, for
receiving the refrigerating quality of the coolers, and repelling the water,
the pores of the body being not shut too close, lest outward cold strongly
closing and shutting the Body, do hinder cooling, and rather stir up heat.

6. Bladders also applied with Decoctions and cooling juyces to the inferior
Region of the Body, beneath the Ribs downward, are a kind of Bathing, whereby
the liquour being excluded, the Refrigerating quality, or Coolness is only
received.

7. The third Rule does only qualify the substance of the Blood, making it
firmer and less subject to Dissipation, and scattering abroad, or to the
working heat of the spirits.

8. To effect this Operation, powder of Gold, or LeafeGold, or powder of
Pearl, precious Stones and Corrals, are good; being therefore much esteemed by
the Arabians, Grecians, and also Modernes. Therefore to omit fantastical
Opinions, insinuation being made into the substance of the Blood, the spirits
and heat having no power to work thereon, putrefaction and drying would be
thereby prevented, and Life Prolonged; yet diverse Cautions are observable:
First let them be exactly pulverized, and made into powder; secondly, let
their malignant quality, hurtful to the veins, be taken away: thirdly, beware
lest their long abode in the body, being taken with meat, or otherwise
received, do breed dangerous obstructions in the Bowels: fourthly, to avoid
Repletion, or filling of the veins, let them be seldom used.

9. Therefore take them fasting, in White Wind mingled with a little oil of
Almonds, and afterward use some exercise.

10. In this operation use Pearls, Corrall, and Gold; for all Other Metals,
having some malignant quality, are not so exactly pulverized, or made into
powder, and the powder of clear grass green stones is bad, being a Corrosive.

11. But drugges of wood may be more safely and effectually used in Infusions
and Decoctions, being good to make the Blood firm, and not dangerous for
breeding of Obstructions; and their Infusions being taken in Diet, or Drink,
having no dregs, do easily pierce into the veins.

12. Drugges of Wood are Sanders, the Oak, and Vine; but hot woods having in
them any Rozzen, or Gum, are not good: but dry Rosemarystalkes, being a shrub
as longlivd as many Trees, and such a quantity of Ivy-stalkes as will not make
the Potion unsavory may be used.

13. Drugs of wood may be also boiled in Broths, infused into Ale, or Wine
before they be settled or refined: But Guiacum, and such Drugges must be put in
before the Broaths are boiled, that the substance of the firmer parts of the
Wood being dissolved, may remain in the Broth: but whether Ash be good in
Potions is uncertain. So much of the Operation on the Blood.

The Operation on the moisture of the Body. 4.
The History.
1. TWo kinds of Bodies (formerly mentioned concerning living creatures) are
hardly consumed: hard bodies, as Metals and Stones; fat, as Oil and Wax.

2. Therefore the moisture of the Body must be hardened, and made fatty or
dewy.

3. Moisture is hardened by firm food, by cold thickening the skin and
flesh, and by exercise compacting the juice, that it may not be soft and
frothy.

4. Beef, Porke, Venison, Goat, Kid, Swanne, Goose, and Woode-pigeons,
especially being powdered, also dried Salt-fish, old Cheese, and the like, are
firm sollid meats.

5. Oaten bread, or Miscelline bread made of Pease, Rye, and Barley, is more
sollid than wheaten bread, and the course Wheaten bread, or brown bread that
is full of Brane, is sollider than White bread made of purer flower.

6. The Orcades feeding on fish, and being generally fish-eaters, are long
lived.

7. Monks and Hermites living sparingly on dry food, commonly attained to a
great age.

8. Pure water being mingled with Wine or Drink, hardens the bodies moisture,
and because the Spirit of the water is dull and piercing, Nitre may be there
with mingled. And so much for the firmness of nourishment.

9. People living abroad in the open air, the cold thickning their skin and
flesh, no longer lived than Dwellers in houses; and in cold Countries, the
Inhabitants attain unto a greater Age, than in hot Countries.

10. Many thick clothes on the bed, or back, do loosen and soften the body.

11. Washing the body in cold Baths, does lengthen life, but hot Baths are
very bad. Baths of binding Mineral waters were formerly mentioned.

12. By an easy jdle Life without exercise, the flesh is made dissipable and
soft, being by stout exercises used without excessive sweating and weariness,
compacted and hardened. Swimming is also a good exercise, and generally all
exercises abroad, are better than within the house.

13. Frications by a kind of exercise fetching out, not hardening nourishment
shall be hereafter handled in its proper and due place.

14. To make hard moisture, oily, and dewy, is a perfecter work than hardening,
being attended with no inconvenience, whereas hardners of moisture, staying the
Consumption, and hindering the Reparation, and Renewing of Nourishment, do
thereby further and hinder long Life. But oilie and juycy Nourishment by
bedewing the Body, is less dissipable, and more reparable.

15. This Dewy fat moisture of the Body is no tallowy fatness, but a Radical
Dew diffused and spread through the body.

16. Oily fat meats are not converted again into fat, perfect Substances
returning not again into one and the same Substance, but Nourishment does
after maturation and Digestion breed an oy lines in the bodies moisture.

17. For oil and fat alone, and also in mixture and composition, are hardly
dissipated and wasted. For water is sooner consumed and Dried than oil alone,
sticking longer in paper or a Napkin before it be Dried.

18. To breed this oylinesse in the body, roasted or baked meat, is better
than boiled or stewed, or dressed in any kind with Water, more oil being
Distilled and extracted out of dry substances, than moist.

19. And generally all sweet things do moysten the body with this oylinesse,
as Sugar, Honey, sweet Almonds, Pine-Apples, Pistacke-nuts, Dates, Raysons,
and figs; but all sower, salt, sharp meats do breed no dewy oylinesse.

20. Also Seeds, Nuts, and roots, the Maniches using no other diet, are good
with meat and in Sawces, for all kind of bread being the confirmer of meats
is made of Seeds or roots.

21. But Drink, being the Wagon, carrying down meat, does especially
moisten and soften the body. Therefore Drinks not sharp or sower, but ripe
and clear are best, as Wine (being as the old wise said in Plautus) toothles
with age; also stale Beer and Ale being not sharp but ripe and pleasant.

22. Metheglin strong and old is a good Drink, but being incorporated with
Sugar insteede of Honey which is sharp, as the Water is by Chemists thence
extracted would be better, espeoially after a year or six months age, the
rawnesse of the water being then gone, and the Sugar grown subtle and
spiritual.

23. But old Wine and stale Drink being subtle and full of oylinesse, are
also Spiritual and sharp, and not so Good; therefore Porke or Venison well
boiled being laid into Vessels of Wine, Ale, or Beer, the spirits of the wine
and of other lyquors feeding thereon will lose their sharpnes.

24. Also Beer or Ale, bread of Wheat, Barley, and Pease, with Potato roots,
Bur roots, and other sweet roots, to the quantity of a third part, is better
to prolong Life, than drink made only of Grain.

25. Flowers also being not sharp or biting, are good sawces and sallets for
meat, as Ivy-flowers with Vinegar taste pleasantly, and Marigold leaves, and
Betony flowers in broaths. So much of the operation in the bodies moisture.

The Operation on the inward parts to make them digest and drive out
nourishment. 5.
The History.
1. How the Stomach, Liver, Heart, and brain, the principalls parts and
Fountains of Concoction, may be comforted, and made to perform their offices,
by imparting Nourishment and spirits to the several parts, and renewing the
Body, Physical Rules and Prescriptions do declare.

2. The spleen, gall, reins, midriffe, small guts, and lights being members
serving the principal parts, are here confiderable, because their Diseases
cured by Physic, may be derived to the principal parts: But by good
digestion, and the soundness and strength of the principal parts, life is
prolonged, and the Body nourished, and kept from decaying in old age.

3. But Medicines and Dyets agreeable to the state of bodies, and comfortable
to the four principal parts, are in Physic prescribed. For (...) and
Physic are necessary to recover and preserve health, but Life is chiefly
lengthned by a good physical diet, prescribed in these choice Receipts
following.

4. The stomach resembling the good man of the house, and being the cause of
all Concoction and Digestion, must be fortified and strengthened, by being kept
temperately warm, retentive, and clean without oppressing humors; not empty,
or fasting, being nourished by it self more than by the veins, and lastly in
appetite, whereby Digestion, is sharpened.

5. Warm drinks are also very good. For a famous Physician would usually at
Dinner and supper (...) mess of hot broth very greedily, and afterward wish
that he could cast it up again, saying that he needed not broth, but the broths
warmth.

6. At supper the first cup of wine, Beer, Ale, or any other kind of Drink,
must be always warmed.

7. A draught of wine wherein Gold was quenched is good at meals, the Gold
having no virtue, but as other metals, yet Gold quenched in liquor, leaves
therein a binding power, without other qualities belonging to metals.

8. Sopps of bread dipped in wine wherein Rosemary and Citerne bark have been
infused with sugar, are better in the middle of meals than wine.

9. (...) are good to (...) the stomach; but syrrup (...) Quinces taken alone
after meals, and with vinegar before meals, is better than Quinces being
somewhat too (...) for the stomach.

10. (...) Elecampane, Masticke, Wormwood, Sage and Mint, are excecding good
for (...) stomach.

11. (...) of Aloes, Masticke, and Saffron, taken in winter before dinner, are
also very good, the Aloes being first washed in Rosewater, and the infusion of
Dragant in vinegar, and then dissolved in sweet fresh oil of Almonds.

12. An infusion of wormwood, with a little Elecampane and Sanders, may be
sometimes used in Winter.

13. In Summer a (...) of white (...) of the infusion of powder of Pearl, and
powder of River Crevises shells, and a little chalk, does very much refresh
and strengthen the stomach.

14. But all cold morningdraughts commonly used, as Syrrups, Decoctions, Whey,
Beer, or Ale, are unwholesome; coolers being not good for an empty fasting
stomach, but five hours after Dinner, and an Hour after a light Breakefast
they may be used.

15. Fasting often is bad for long life, and so is also all kind of thirst; for
the stomach must be kept clean, but always moist.

16. The annoynting of the backe-bone over against the (...) of the stomach,
with (...) fresh Oyle-olive, of the (...) of Mithridate, is (...) for the
stomach.

17. A bag of locks of Wool, (...) in sharp Wine, after the in fufion of
Myrtle, (...) Bark, and a little (...) is good to be worn always next the
stomach. And so much of comforting the (...) handled more largely in other
operations.

18. The Liver must be kept from Inflammation, dryness, and obstruction
happening in Age, the waterish looseness thereof being a disease.

19. To the Rules hereunto belonging, delivered in the Operation of blood,
these choice Prescriptions may be added.

20. Promegranate-Wine, or Pomegranate-juyce newly squeezed into a glass, may
be taken in the Morning with some sugar, and a little Citronbark, and three or
four whole Cloves, and used from February to the end of April.

21. Young Cresses taken either raw, or in broth, or drink, are exceeding
good, and also Spoonewort.

22. Aloes washed, and allayed, is hurtful to the Liver, therefore not
commonly to be taken. Rheubarb dissolved in sweet oil of Almonds, and
Rose Water is good for the Liver, being taken before meat, because a dryer;
and at several times, either alone, or with Tartar, or a little Bay Salt, lest
by purging away the thin matter the humors should become tougher and harder.

23. Take the Decoction of Steel twice or thrice a year to loosen
Obstructions, and stoppings in the liver, two or three spoonefuls of Oil being
first taken, and the Body, especially the Arms, and fore part of the stomach
afterward stirred by exercise.

24. Sweet Drinks keep the Liver from growing dry, Salt, hot and cold,
especially being incorporated, and made of sweet Fruits and Roots, as Raysons,
Iujuba, dry Figs, Dates, Parsnips, Potatoes, and Lickorish. Also Drink made
of Indian Maze, and other sweet Compounds, is very good. It is an observation,
that the keeping of the Liver fat and soft does lengthen Life, and the opening
of the Liver procures health, in obstructions joined with inflammations curing
also drynes.

25. Succory, Spinach, and Beet, after their pith is taken out, being boiled in
water with a third part of white wine, until they be soft, are with oil and
Vinegar good ordinary Sallets. Also Sperage-buds and stalks, and Burre-rootes
well sod and seasoned, and Broth made with young Vinebuds, and blades of green
Wheat are good. So much of strengthening the Liver.

26. Because the heart receives most benefit or harm by the vapors of the
air drawn in by breathing, or by affections and passions, therefore the
former Rules concerning the spirits may be thereunto applied, but no Physical
Cordials but Antidotes, strengthening the heart and spirits to resist the
allayed poison. These Cordials are formerly mentioned.

27. A good air is better known by Experience than Signs. The best air is on
a level open plain, the soil being dry, not barren and sandy; but naturally
bearing wild Bettony, Fetherfew, and wild Mints, shaded with some trees, and
Black-berry-bushes, and watered with no great river, but with clear gravelly
brooks.

28. The Morning Air is healthfuller than the Evening Air, which is accounted
more pleasant.

29. An Air somewhat rugged, and stirred with a gentle wind, is better than a
calm clear Air; and in the Morning the west wind is best, but the Northwinde
in the Afternoon.

30. Sweet odours and smells are very comfortable to the heart, yet a good air
has not always a good smell; for as pestilent airs have no very bad smell,
so oftentimes wholesome aires are not very sweet and fragrant: but the odor
and sent of a good air should be interchangeably taken, for one continual
excellent odor or sent oppresses the spirits.

31. Nosegayes are good in the open air, but growing flowers yield the best
odours and sents, as Violets, Gilliflowers, Pinkes, Beane-blossomes,
Linden-buds, Vinebuds, Honey-suckles, Pellitory-flowers, Muske-Roses, (other
Roses yielding no great sent) withered Strawberries, Blackberry-bushes in the
Spring, Wild Mint, Lavendar; and in hot Countries the Orange-tree, Citron,
Myrtle, and Bay: Also walking and sitting in such sweet Airs is very good.

32. Cooling smells are better for the Heart than hot sents: therefore in the
Morning, and at Noone, the steame of perfumes made of Vinegar, Rosewater, and
Wine, put into a Brasse-pan, being received into the Brain, is very good.

33. And wine powrd on the earth dug or turned up, being no sacrifice,
yields a good scent and smell.

34. Also Orange-flower water mingled with Rose Water, and Brisk-wine, and
being smelled unto, or infused into the nostrills, is very good.

35. Small Pills made of Amber, Musk, Lignum Aloes, Lignum Rhodium, Flower
deluce-roots, Roses, Rose Water, and Indian Balsam being chewed, and held in
the mouth, are comfortable for the heart and spirits.

36. Vapors arising from Medicines taken inwardly to strengthen and cherish
the Heart, must be wholesome, clear, and cooling, hot vapors being naught;
for Wine yielding hot vapors, is like Poppey in quality. Clear vapors are
such as have more vapor than exhalation, being not altogether smoaky, and
oily, but also moist.

37. The chiefest Cordials used in diet are Amber-Grise, Saffron, Kermes, being
hot and dry, and for coolers Buglosse, and Borage-roots, Oranges, Lemmons, and
Apples. Also powders of Gold and Pearl do cool the blood, and stomach,
leaving no bad quality.

38. Bezar-stone being not taken in Broth, (...) or Rosewater, but in Wine, or
Cynamon-water, or some other water not hot or strong, is an approved Cordial
for the spirits.

39. Observe also that great constant and Heroical desires do strengthen and
enlarge the heart: and so much of the heart.

40. Opium, Nitre, and other inferior drugs procuring sleep, are good for the
Brain, being the Animal spirits seat and residence, and protected or annoyed
by the stomach; and therefore stomach Cordials are comfortable also for the
Brain, as these Receipts be, three whereof are outwardly and one inwardly
applyable.

41. Bathe the feet every week in a bath made of Lie, Bay Salt, Sage, Camomile,
Fennil, sweet Marjoram, and Angelico leaves.

42. Suffumigations also, or perfumes of dry Rosemary, dry Bayleaves, and
Lignum Aloes, (for sweet Gummes oppress the head) are good every morning.

43. No hot drugs or Spices, except Nutmegs, may be outwardly applied to the
Head, but unto the soles of the feet they may be laid: but anointing of the
Head lightly with Oil, Rose Water, Myrtle-water, Salt, and Saffron mingled
together, is very good.

44. A Morning potion of 3. or 4. grains of Oil, of Bezars stone, with a
little Angelico seed and Cynamon, once in 14 days being taken in the Morning
does strengthen the brain, and thicken and quicken the spirits.

45. All these Cordials taken in Diet do comfort the Brain, variety of
Medicines being the Daughter of Ignorance, many Dishes breeding many Diseases,
and many Medicines effecting few Cures. And so much of the Operation on the
principal parts, for extrusion, and driving out of nourishment.

The Operation on the outward parts, for attracting and drawing nourishment. 6
The History.
1. GOod Digestion of the inward parts, being the chief cause of good
Nourishment, the outward parts must also perform their Offices and Duties,
that the inward faculty may drive out Nourishment, being attracted by the
outward faculty, then requiring most strengthening when Digestion is grown weak.

2. The outward parts by bodily exercise comforted, and warmed, do thereby
cheerfully attract nourishment.

3. But exercises attracting new moisture to the limbs, being violent, does
loosen the limbs, and consume the old moisture.

4. Frication also and rubbing is in the morning very good for the Body, being
afterward lightly anointed with Oil, lest by rubbing, the outward parts, by
Respiration and vapouring should be weakened.

5. Exercise, nibbing and chafing the Limbs together, is also very good, being
moderate, not strayning, or toilesome; for the Body must not respire, nor sweat
too much by rubbing or exercise. Therefore exercise is better abroad than in
the House, and in Winter than in Summer. Also after exercise annoynting is
good, and before and after violent exercises, as Fencers before and after their
prizes were heretofore anointed.

6. Exercise on a fasting stomach, does by sweating loosen the Spirits and
moisture of the Body, and being unhealthfull on a full stomach, is best after
a light breakfast, not of Physical morning potions, or Ray sons or Figs, but
plain meat and Drink moderately taken.

7. Exercise must stir all the Body, not (as Socrates says) the Knees, or
Arms only, but generally all the Limbs of the body, and the posture of the
body should be every hour changed, except in sleeping.

8. Mortification is a kind of Vivification and rene wing, for hair shirts,
whippings, and all outward austerities do strengthen the attractive faculty.

9. Netling is commended by Cardan to be good against Melancholy, but for
raising red blisters on the skin, is not to be allowed. So much of the
operation on the outward parts for attracting and drawing of nourishment.

The Operation on Food and diet, showing which is most nourishing. 7.
The History.
1. PHilosophers might better than Physicians follow common opinion in
condemning many Services and Messes of meat, lengthning not Life, but
preserving health, for a Heterogeneous mixture of meats does more readily
nourish the veins, breeding better moisture than one kind of meat: moreover,
variety excites the Appetite, and the Appetite sharpens Disgestion. So that a
various kind of Diet according unto the seasons of the year, is approoved.

2. Good Sawces are wholesome preparatives to meat, preserving health, and
prolonging life.

3. Course Fare requires strong Drink, and piercing Sawces that may sink into
the meat: but with fine Fare, small Drink is best, and fat Sawces.

4. At Supper the first cup of drink should be drunk warm, and a good draught
of warm drink spiced, taken half an hour before meat, is a good
preparative for the stomach.

5. Meat, Bread, and drink being well dressed, made, and brewed, are most
nourishing, which matters belonging to the Kitching and Buttery, are more
necessary to be known than the Fables of Gold and Pearl.

6. Boiled meat dressed with moist cooling Sawces, does not moysten the Body,
being good in hot sicknesses, but affording no oily nourishment, boyld meats
being not so good as roasted and baked.

7. Meat must be roasted with a quick fuddain fire, not with a slow fire, nor
lie too long at roasting.

8. Solid meats so corned with Salt, that little or no Salt need be eaten
therewith at the Table is good. Salt meat being better for Digestion, than
Salt eaten with meat.

9. Meat should be laid to soake in convenient Lyquors, before it be roasted
or baked, as fish is watered and laid in pickle.

10. Flesh beaten before boiling, becomes tender, for Partridges and Pheasants
taken by Hawking, and Venison killed in Hunting, are very sweet and pleasant
in eating. And some Fish is better by beating. Also hard sower Pears, and
other fruits being rolled and squeezed, do wax sweet and mellow. Flesh beaten
and bruised before laying down to roast, is thereby prepared for Disgestion,
and is very good.

11. Bread well Leavened, but lightly salted, and baked in a very hot oven is
best.

12. Of Drink to lengthen Life Water being no Life prolonger, it is only
observable that the parts of Spiritual Drinks, as Wine, Beer, (...) and
Metheglin, must be subtle, and the spirits gentle, (...) because shortness
and Age do make the parts (...) and clear, but the (...) sharp, therefore
some (...) substance (as was said) must be put in Vessels to allay the
sharpness of the Spirits. Also Drink being kept in continual motion, by
carriage at Sea, or in Carts, or in Bladders hung on Lines and stirred every
Day, will by such motions become thin and clear, and by blending the
spirits, be kept from sowernes, being a kind of putrefaction.

13. Meat should by Dressing be made easy of disgestion for old Folks. But
Distillations of meat are vain conceits, the nourishing and best part
thereof ascending not into vapor.

14. Meat and Drink dissolved and mingled together is easy of Digestion.
Therefore of Chickins, Partridge, or Pheasants, being first parboyled with
water and salt, then wiped and dried, and boiled to a ielly in wine or Ale with
some Sugar, a strong comfortable broth is made.

15. Also Gravie of meat, or mince-meat, and Hodg-podges well seasoned, are
good for old Folks, whose teeth cannot be cheewing, prepare their meat for
Disgestion.

16. The defect of strong (...) for chewing meat, may (...) supplied by making
new (...) grow, hardly effected (...) an inward powerful restoring of the
whole body, or by hardening the Gums by binding medicines to serve insteede
(...) teeth, or by preparing and dressing meat, to need little or no chewing.

17. To exceed sometimes (...) the quantity of meat and drink and to water the
body by great Feasts, and liberal drinking, is sometimes good. So much of the
operation of preparing and dressing of diet.

The operation on the last act of Assimilation or conversion into the like
substance. 8.
THe nature of the last Act of Assimilation or Converting into the like
substance, being the intended effect of the three former Operations, may be
opened and declared without Rules.

The Comment.
1. ALL bodies desire to Assimilate and convert Substances into their own
substance. Flame, Spirit, and Air, being thin and Spiritual, do
courageously perform this work, but thick and gross substances very
weakly, this desire of assimilating being by a stronger desire of rest and
ease restrained.

2. For this Desire of assimilating, restrained in the Body, is ineffectuall,
until it be by heat and Spirit, freed, excited and actuated; and therefore
livelesse bodies do not assimilate, and living Creatures assimilate, Digest,
and convert into their own substance.

3. More heat is required to make hard Bodies assimilate and Digest,
therefore the bodies parts grown hard with Age must be softened, and heat
then weak increased, for helping Disgestion. But of preventing the bodies
hardness, some Rules were delivered, and others shall be given hereafter for
softning the parts.

For increasing heat take this Rule or Axiom.

4. The act of Assimilation incited and provoked by heat, a very accurate
subtle motion, and most powerful when bodily motion, the disturber thereof,
ceases. For a substance of one kind will not separate into parts of diverse kinds
being moved; as Curd will not rise, nor the Whey sink down, the Milk being
gently stirred. Also running water, nor any water or liquor, will not put refie
being continually moved and shaked. Therefore by this Reason this conclusion is
inferred.

5. Assimilation is performed and perfected chiefly in sleep and rest,
especially toward Morning after good digestion: therefore sleeping warm,
using ointments toward morning, or provoking of moderate heat by an oyled
shirt, and sleeping afterward again, are all very good. So much of the last act
of Assimilation, or converting food into the substance of the body.

The Operation for making the body tender and young, having begun to wither,
and grow old, and how to soften the body. 9.
THat good Diet, and restraint of the spirits do by an inward tedious manner
of working, make the Body tender, was formerly showed, an outward and more
speedy means shall now be declared.

The History.
1. AS Medea in the Fable pretended to make Pelias young, by boiling the pieces
of his dissected body in a Kettle with medicinable Drugges: so here in
renewing of Age, the inward parts must be distinguished, and divided with
judgment, and by more particular ways than the body softened.

2. But this dissection must be in some respect performed, not with any Razour,
but with judgment; for the bowels and inward parts being different, their
softning is not effected by the same means, but they must be particularly
softened, and by other ways than those which belong unto the whole Body, which
shall be first declared.

3. Soften the body with Baths and ointments, and the like, according to these
following observations.

4. Baths and Oils soften livelesse bodies, attracting and sucking in liquors,
but not living bodies, working outward.

5. Therefore common mollifiing, softning Baths do rather draw than soften,
and loosen rather than harden the body.

6. The best Baths and Ointments to soften the body, must have these three
properties.

7. Their substance must be like unto the Bodies substance, having an outward
nourishing power.

8. Secondly, that they be compounded with some piercing drugs, infusing the
power of other nourishing drugs into the body.

9. Thirdly, they must have (though in a lesser quantity) some binding
Ingredients, being not sharp, or sower, but oily, and comfortable, that the
other Ingredients, by the exhaling of the body, be not hinderd in working, and
making the Body tender, but may have by the binding of the skin, and shutting
the pores, a stronger operation.

10. The warm Blood of Man, or Beast is most consubstantiall, or like in
substance to man's body. The invention of Ficinus was vain, imagining that
strength might in old age be renewed, by sucking Blood out of the arm of a
young man, for nourishment should not be equal nor like in substance unto the
body nourished, but subordinate, and (...) before digestion: Substances like
the Body being best for outward applications.

11. A Bath of Childrens blood was formerly held a sovereign cure for the
Leprosy, and to purify old corrupted Bodies: So that some Kings using these
luxurious Baths, were envied by the common people.

12. Heraclitus to cure his Dropsy, crept into the belly of an Ox newly
killed.

13. The warm blood of Kitlings does cure Tettars and Ring-wormes, and make
new fleshand skin grow again.

14. To stay the bleeding of an Arm or Limb cut off, or any other wound, put
the remaining part, or the wounded limb into the belly of an Ox that has
been newly opened; for the blood of the limb cut off, or wounded, sucking and
drawing unto it self the warm blood of the beast, does stop, and run back.

15. Pigeons split asunder, and opened, are in dangerous desperate sicknesses
laid to the Patients soles of the feet, the Cures thereby wrought being
imputed to their drawing away the malignity of the Disease; howsoever their
Application does comfort the Head, and animal spirits.

16. But besides these bloody Baths and Ointments, there are other Baths more
handsome, cleanly, and effectual.

17. Baths may be made of nourishing substances like unto man's body, as
Beefe-sewet, Hogs grease, Deeres sewet, Oysters, Milk, Butter, whites of
eggs, wheat flour, sweet wine, Sugar, and Metheglin.

18. With these Ingredients Baysalt and old Wine may be mingled, to make them
penetrate and pierce into the body.

19. Binding Ingredients being oily and comfortable, are Saffron, Masticke,
Myrrh, and Myrtle-berries: and all these Ingredients make an excellent Bath.

20. For the powerful working of this Bath, four Rules are observable.

21. First, before bathing, rub and anoint the Body with Oil, and Salves,
that the Baths moistning heat and virtue may penetrate into the body, and not
the liquors watery part: Then sit two Hours in the Bath; after Bathing wrap
the Body in a seare-cloth made of Masticke, Myrrh, Pomander, and Saffron, for
staying the perspiration or breathing of the pores, until the softning of the
body, having layne thus in seare-cloth twenty four hours, be grown solid
and hard. Lastly, with an ointment of Oil, Salt, and Saffron, the seare-cloth
being taken off, anoint the body.

22. And some days the Bath must be renewed with plasters and ointments in the
aforesaid manner, and this way of softning must continue a month.

23. In bathing a good diet must be kept, and warmth, and warm drinks used.

24. Fomentations or nourishing of natural heat by the warmth of living
bodies is good. Ficinus says, that David was cherished by the Virgin-warmth of
a young maid, who being Anointed after the Persian manner with Myrrh, had
been a delightful reviving fomentation.

25. Barbarossa in his old Age by the Jew his Physician, continually apply to
his stomach and sides young Boys for fomentations: And little Dogs being laid
to the stomachs of old Folks, have kept them warm in the nighttime.

26. Some to avoid Derision, have cut off a piece of their long Nose, or the
crooked bunch thereof, and afterward their Nose being thrust into an incision
made in their Arm, was both healed, and grew into a handsomer fashion and
form, whereby the consent of Flesh in healing Flesh is declared.

28. Prescriptions for softning the particular principal parts, as the
stomach, lights, liver, heart, brain, the marrow of the backbone, the
reins, gall, stanke, veins, arteries, sinews, gristles, and bones, would be
too tedious to set down: no general instructions, but certaines notes for
practice being here delivered.

How the body being purged of old oysture, and filled with new moisture may be
renewed, and made young. 10.
The History.
THese Positions following concerning the principal parts before lightly
touched, are now again enlarged.

1. Plough-oxen spent with labor, being put into new fresh pastures, grow fat,
and fair, their flesh proving afterward in eating very young and tender. So
that flesh may eafily be made tender, and by often softning the flesh the bones
and skin may be softened.

2. Dyets of Guiacum, Sarsa-perilla, China, and Sassafras, being long strictly
kept, do first attenuate or make thin, then consume or devour all the
moisture of the body: for the French pox being grown to gumminesse, and being
got into the marrow, and moisture of the body, has been thereby cured. Some
also by such Dyets being made lean and pale, have afterward grown fat and
fresh-coloured. Therefore in the declining of Age, such Dyets are good to be
kept once in two years, there by to grow young again, as the Snake does by
casting his skin.

3. It is my Opinion, though I am no Heretical Puritan, that Purgations often
and familiarly used, do lengthen Life more than Exercise or sweating. For as
annoynting of the Body, and stopping the pores, and keeping out the air, and
keeping in the spirits, do lengthen Life: So by sweatings and outward
breathings the good spirits and moisture being not easily repaired, are exhaled
and consumed with the excrementitious humors and vapors. But Purgations of
gentle Purgative, not griping the belly, being taken before Meat to prevent
their drying quality, do work chiefly on the humors.

These Perscriptions are true, and the Remedies approved, seeming vulgar, but
being carefully and diligently tried, were found to be good and effectual
Experiments. For so the effects of wise counsel are admirable, and their Order
excellent, but their means of effecting seem vulgar, and common.

The Doors of Death.
THE Doors of Death are Artic. 15 Connection.
Accidents going before, or following after, or coming with Death. For Death
being not violent, but natural, by defect of Nature, does enter at certain
common doors.

The History.
1. THE living spirit subsists by due motion, temperate, cooling, and fit
nourishment. A flame needs only motion and Nourishment, being a simple
substance; the Spirit, a compounded substance, destroyed by approaching nearer
to the nature of flame.

2. A flame, as Aristotle well no ted, is by a greater stronger flame
extinguished, much more the spirit.

3. The flame of a Candle being put into a Glass, and kept very close, is
extinguished by the Air enlarged by heat, and thrusting the flame together.
And fuel lying too close in a Chimney, burns not with a bright flame.

4. Fire also by thrusting and pressing together is extinguished, and a coal
of fire being trodden Or crushed with the Tongs.

5. But concerning the spirits, blood, or fleame getting into the Ventricles of
the Brain, do cause sudden Death, the spirit having no place of residence
or motion.

Also violent Fractures and beating of the head, do cause sudden Death, by
straightning the spirits in the ventricles of the Brain.

7. Opium and other strong Drugs, procuring unsensiblenesse, do by thickning
the spirits, deprive them of motion.

8. Venomous vapors being hateful to the spirits, are deadly poisons, by
whose malignant quality the spirits are oppressed, deprived of their motion, and
made unable to resist so strong an enemy.

9. Extreme Drunkenness and Gluttony have caused sudaine Death, the spirits
not with thick or malignant vapors, (proceeding from Opium or poison) but
with abundance of Vapors being oppressed.

10. With the sudden apprehension of Grief and Fear, conceived at the
relation of unexpected bad tidings, some have suddenly Dyed.

11. The Excessive compression, and enlarging of the Spirits are both deadly.

12. Great and sudden joys have deprived many of their life.

13. Greater Evacuations of water by Dissections for the Dropsy, or violent
and sudden Fluxes of Blood are Deadly, the Blood and spirits do avoyde
vacuity or emptiness, and fill up the empty places repaying hither, slower
Fluxes of Blood procuring want of nourishment, but no pouring back of the
spirits. So much of the compression, and effusion of the spirits causing Death.

14. Stopping the breath is through defect of cooling deadly, by choking and
strangling, the motions of the spirits being not hindered, but cooling
defective; for excessive hot Air drawn in for breath, does choke as soon as
stopping of the Breath. As by burning charcoale, or by the smell of new whited
walls in a close chamber Justinian and others have been choked. Fausta, the
wife of Constantine the great, was strangled by the steame of an exceeding hot
Bath.

15. For breath is drawn in by the Lungs, and breathed forth again every
third part of a minute.

16. The beating of the Pulse, and of the Heart, both by the systole, or
backward motion, or Dyastole, or forward motion, is thrice as swift as
breathing; for the beating of the Heart, could it be without stopping, being
stayed would cause Death sooner than strangling.

17. Delian Dyvers, and PearleFishers, through continual use will hold their
Breath ten times longer than another.

18. Living Creatures having Lungs, hold their breath a shorter or longer time,
as they need more or less cooling.

19. Fishes need less cooling than other creatures, cooling and breathing
themselves at their Gills. And as other creatures cannot endure a hot close
air: so Fish in water quite frozen over, and long covered with Ice, are
choked and strangled.

20. The natural heat of the Spirits is by another more violent heat
oppressed, being unable to endure them both without cooling, as may be seen
in burningfeavers, natural heat being extinguished and Dissipared by hot
putrified Humors.

21. Want of Sleep, is a want of cooling. For motion does rarifie, make
thin, sharpen, and increase the heat of the Spirits. But by sleep their
motion is allayd, and their wandering restrayn'd. For sleep does strengthen and
excite the working of the inward parts and Spirits, and all outward motion, but
makes the living spirit rest from motion. Every 24. hours nature requires 5.
or 6. hours sleep. Though some have miraculously refrained from sleep, for
Mecaenas slept not a great while before he dyed.

22. Nourishment is a third want of Nature, suffered by the parts of the Body,
not the living spirit, subsisting in Idenity and Being, without succession or
renewing. And the reasonable Soul proceeding not from Generation, needs no
reparation, being not subject to Death, as the Animal and Vegative soul,
differing both in Essence and Form from the reasonable Soul. For their
confusion without distinction, was the Original of transmigration, and many
heathen heretical opinions.

23. A healthful body does every day require food, enduring not to fast three
days together, unless enabled by custom; but sick folks can easily fast:
and sleep does nourish, as Exercise makes the body require nourishment And
some miracles of Nature have lived a long time without meat or drink.

24. Dead bodies being kept from putrefaction, will not a long time decay: But
living bodies cannot above three days subsist, this speedy consumption, being
the work of the living spirit, repairing it self, or making the parts need
repairing; and therefore living creatures by sleeping endure longer without
food, sleep being the reception and collection of the living Spirit.

25. A continual Flux or voyding of blood by the Piles, or by vomiting of
Blood, some vein within being opened or broken, or by wounds, does cause
speedy Death. For the Blood of the veins does supply and feed the blood of the
Arteries, and the blood of the Arteries does feed the spirits.

26. Meat and Drink received twice daily, is not all voyded by Extrements,
urine, or sweating, the rest being converted into the moisture and substance of
the body, the body growing not bigger, as the repaired spirits are not in
quantity increased.

27. Nourishment must be so prepared and Dressed that the spirits may work
thereon. For the flame of a Torch is not maintained and kept burning by the
staff, unless it be covered with wax lights, and herbs alone are no
nourishing flood. This does cause the decay in Age, the Spirits clothed with
Flesh and Blood being few and thin, and the moisture and blood, old and hard,
are unable to nourish.

28. The ordinary necessities of Nature are these, continual motion of the
Spirits in the ventrieles of the Brain, beating of the heart every third part
of a moment, Breathing every moment, Sleep and Food within three Days, the
decaying after fourscore years of age of the faculties of Digestion; these
Defects being not seasonably supplied, Death will ensue. So that Death has
three Doors, the spirits failing in motion, cooling, and nourishing.

The living spirit is not like a flame continually lighted and (...) Admonition.
extinguished, without certain duration and continuance. A flame does live in
a flame, being by contrary qualities only extinguished. But all parts of the
Body being to the living Spirit friends and servants, are also comfortable and
serviceable. Therefore the living Spirit is of a middle Nature between flame,
being a momentary substance, and Air being a fixed Substance.

The Destruction of the Organs of the spirits either by Diseases, or violence,
is another Door of Death: And so much of the Form of Death.

29. Convulsions of the Head, and Face, with deep deadly sighing, being a kind
of Convulsion, and the extreme quick beating of the Pulse, the Heart
trembling with the pangs of Death; and sometimes again beating weakly, and
slowly, as the heat begins to fail and faint, are two chief Signs of
Death.

30. The immediate Signs of Death are, great unquietness, tumbling, and
striving, raking with the hands, as if gathering locks of Wool, striving to
take hold, and holding fast, hard shutting of the Teeth, rattling in the (...)
trembling of the under-lip, pale countenance, confused memory, speechlesnesse,
cold sweats, stretching out the Body, lifting up the white of the eyes, and an
alteration of the whole Face, (the Nose becoming sharp, the eyes hollow, and
the cheeks falling) with the Contraction and Convulsion of the Tongue, and
coldness of the lowest parts, and sometimes issuing of Blood, or seed, loud
shreeking, short breathing, the falling of the lower jaws, and the like.

31. After Death there follows immediately a privation or depriving of the
Sense and motion of the Heart, Arteries, Nerves, and Sinews, inability of
standing upright, stiffenesse of the Nerves and limbs, coldness, putrefaction,
and stink.

32. Ecles, Serpents, and Flies, cut in pieces will a great while after moove
and stir, Country people supposing they would, if suffered, join together
again. And the bodies of Birds their heads being cut or plucked off, will
afterward leap and flutter. I remember that I say a Traitor emboweled, whose
heart being cast into the fire, leaped five foot high, and afterward lower
for the space of seven or eight minutes. Also the old tradition of a
sacrificed Ox, that in embowelling lowed, deserves to (...) believed, though it
be more (...) that a man executed and embowelled, after his heart was plucked
out, and in the hang man's hand, was heard to utter three or four words of his
prayers, being more likely than the relation of the (...) Ox, the friends of
the party executed usually feeing the executioner for a suddayne dispatch out
of pain, by the quick performance of his office; but the Priests were not
feed speedily to dispatch their Sacrifices.

33. To raise and recover to life such as faint and fall into a swond (in which
fits many without help would expire) use hot waters; bend the Body forwards,
stop the mouth and nostrils hard, bend and wring the fingers, pluck off
hair from the Beard or head, rub and chafe the Body, especially the face and
outward parts, cast cold water suddenly in the face, shrecke out aloud, hold
Rose Water and vinegar to the nostrils: burning feathers and woollin cloth for
the mother, also the smoke of a hot frying pan is good in sounding, and keeping
the body close and warm.

34. That many laid forth, coffined and buried, were only in a sound, has bin
discovered by digging them up again, and finding their heads beaten and
bruised with striving in the Coffin. Of such a living funeral John Scotus that
subtle Scholar was a memorable example, who by his servant absent at his
burial (but acquainted with those (...) wherein he falling was supposed to
be Dead, and so buried) being dug up again (...) found in the aforesaid
manner with his head and other limbs beaten and (...).

A Player also acting Death to the Life in a sound, thought to put a jest upon
Death, but was buried in earnest at Cambridge, as many can well (...), who were
then (...). I remember that a (...) desirous to make (...) of the pain
suffered by prisoners at their execution, told me, that in hanging (...),
getting upon a stool, and casting himself off from (...), he swung a while
about, and then thought to recover the stool, but could not, without the help
of his friend then present, who asking him what he suffered: He answered that
he felt no pain, but first saw a fire, or a flame, then a kind of black
green mist, and lastly a pale Sea-blew color, usual visions in sowning. Also
a Physician having hanged a man half an hour, recovered him to life by
rubbing and hot Baths, professing also to recover any man after half an hours
hanging, his neck at the first falling down being not broken.

The Differences of youth and Age.
1. THE Scale or Ladder of Artic. 16
Man's life has these steps: (...), Quickening in the (...), Birth, Sucking,
(...), feeding on Pap, and Spoon-meat in Infancy, (...) of teeth at two years
old, secret hair at twelve or fourteen, ability for (...), flowers, hair on
the (...), and under the armeholes, a budding Beard, full growth, full strength
and agility, Graynesse, Baldness, (...) of flowers, and of (...) ability,
inclining to (...), a creature with three feet, Death. The periods and courses
of the mind, as slipperinesse of memory, and such like, not described by
years, shall be hereafter mentioned.

2. The Differences of Youth and Age are these following: In youth the skin
is moist and smooth, in age dry, and wrinkled, especially about the forehead,
and eyes: the flesh in youth is tender, and soft, in age hard; youth is strong,
and nimble, age weak, and unwealdy; in youth good Digestion, in age weak: the
Bowels in youth are soft, and moist, in age salt, and dry; in youth the body is
straight, in age bowed, and crooked; the finews in youth are steady, in age
weak, and trembling, choleric humors in youth, and hot blood, in age
Phlegmatic, melancholy humors, and cold blood, youth prone to Venery, age
slow in performance: the moisture of the Body in youth oily, in age raw, and
waterish, in youth many swelling spirits, in age few, and weak; in youth
spirits thick, and lively; in age sharp, and thin; in youth sharp and
sound senses, in age dull, and decaying; in youth strong sound Teeth, in age
weak, worn, and falling out; in youth colored hair, in age the former
color turns gray; Hair in youth, in Age Baldness, Quick, and strong Pulse
in youth, in Age weak and flow; in Youth sharp (...) Sicknesses and Diseases,
in Age tedious and incurable: Wounds heal soon in youth, in age slowly, in
youth freshcoloured checkes, in Age pale, or of a deep fanguine red; Youth not
much troubbled with Rheumes, Age Rheumaticke; the Body grows fatter only in
Age than Youth. Perspiration and Digestion in Age being bad, and fatness being
the abundance of nourishment over and above that which is perfectly
assimilated and converted into the substance of the Body. And the Appetite is
sometimes in Age increased, by sharp humors, digestion being then weaker:
this and the rest being by Physicians ascribed to the decay of natural heat,
and radical moisture; but dryness in the (...) of Age does precedo coldness,
and the lusty heat of flourishing Youth declines (...) then to coldness.

3. The affections also of youth and age differ: I remember in my youth I was
familiarly acquainted at Poicters in France with an ingenious young Gentleman,
afterward an eminent man, who inveighing against the conditions of Age, would
usually say, that old men's minds being visible, would appear as (...) as their
Bodies, (...) afterward comparing the minds vices in Age to the (...) defects,
saying They (...) skinn'd, and impudent, (...) and (...) and envious; (...) and
(...) and (...) Earth, not Heaven, being their constant Object: (...) Limbs,
wavering, and unconstant; wooked fingered, greedy, and covetous; knees (...)
and fearful, (...) and (...) But to make a more serious Comparison, Youth is
shamefaced, and modest, Age is hardened; Youth is liberal and merciful, Age
is hard; youth emulates, age envies; youth is religious, and fervently zealous;
being unexperienced in the miseries of this World; age cold in piety and
charity, through much experience, and incredulity; youth is forward in defire,
age (...) youth light and inconstant, age grave, and constant; youth is
liberal, bountiful, and loving, age covetous. and wisely provident; youth
confident, and (...) age distrustful, and (...) youth gentle, and (...) age
froward, and disdainful; youth sincere, and simple; age cautelous, and close;
youth haughty in desires, age careful for necessaries; youth a Time-pleaser,
Age a Time-rememberer; youth an Adorer of Superiors, age a Censurer. And by
many other Characters impertinent to the present matter, the different
conditions of youth and age may be described: But the body growing fat in age,
so the Judgment, not the Fancy grows stronger, preferring safe sure courses
before shows and appearances: And lastly, Age loves to (...) and brag, and
being defirous to do least, is desirous to talk most. Poets therefore
feigned, that old (...) was changed into a chirping Grasshopper.

Canons of the Continuation and Form of Death.
CANON 1.
DIssolution or Corruption (...) by transmigration into another Body.

The Explication.
THere is no utter destruction: Corruption being a dissolution into Air, or
(...) into some other body. As the Spider, Fly, and Ant (...) tender, (...)
falling into Amber, (...) therein buried, finding therein both a Death, and
(...) preserving them (...) from Corruption than a Royal Monument. For no Air
being within, there can be no corruption; and the (...) nature of Amber (...)
of no Reception from their substance. Wood, or Roots being put into (...) would
also remain (...) Wax, Honey, and Gum do also preserve (...) corruption.

CAN. 2.
EVery tangible body has Spirit, covered and encompassed with a thick body,
being the cause of consumption, and dissolution.

The Explication.
NO known body on the upper part of the Earth does want a spirit, either by
(...) and concoction of celestial heat, or by other means: for the
concavity and hollownesse of bodies admitting no vacuity or emptiness is
filled with Air, or a spirit But this spirit here mentioned is no power,
efficacy, or perfection, but only a (...) invisible body, yet local,
dimensive, and real: neither is this spirit Air, (as the juice (...) Grape is
not water) but a (...) body like Air, yet (...) but the thick parts (...)
substance (being (...) slow, and almost (...)) would endure longer, (...) the
working, piercing spirit (...) not devour the moisture (...) body, and all
that is (...) vertible into a new spirit, (...) former new made spirits (...)
by degrees (...) together. This is evident the decrease of weight in (...)
bodies, by venting of (...) not increasing the (...) of a body, but yet by
(...) making it grow dry.

CAN. 3.
THE (...) of the spiriti is the cause of Dryness, but by inward detaining and
warking, they do soften, (...) quicken.

The Explication.
THere are four workings of the Spirit; Dryness, Softning, Putrefaction, and
generation of bodies. Dryness is no proper work of the Spirit, but of the
thicker parts, after the venting of the Spirits shrinking and uniting together
to avoid vacuity or emptiness, as burned Bricks: do Sea-coale cakes, stale
Bread and Toasts. Softness, is (...) work of the Spirits, (...) by heat,
whereby the Spirits enlarging not venting, (...) pierce into, and moysten (...)
thicker parts, making (...) soft and limber, as Fire (...) Mettalls, and Wax;
for (...) and other stiff (...) are of a matter fit to (...) the Spirits, and
keep (...) from venting. (...) is a mixed work of the (...) thicker parts; for
after (...) spirit (containing and (...) the parts of the (...)) is vented, all
the parts (...) and return into their (...) Elements; because by the spirits
of substances gathering (...) putrefied bodies stink, (...) the assembling
together of (...) beco^ming light, and (...) the withdrawing of water and
earth, are dissolved, and fall asunder. But generation or quickening being a
mixed work of the spirit, and thicker parts, is performed in another manner,
the spirit being totally detayn'd, swelling, and moving locally: but the
thicker parts being not dissolved, but following the motion of the spirit
blowing and fashioning them into diverse Forms, are generated, and become
bodies: therefore the matter quickened is always clammy, limber, plyant, and
soft, be thereby fit to detayne the spirit, and to yield to the spirits
fashioning of parts, such being also the clammy yielding matter of all
Vegetables, and living Creatures generated of (...) or seed.

CAN. 4.
ALL living Creatures have two Spirits: dead Spirits, (...) those in livelesse
Creatures, (...) the living Spirits.

The Explication.
NEcessary is the consideration of Man's body, as (...) and unnourished, or
(...) and nourished, the (...) showing the ways of (...) the latter of (...)
For there are in the (...) Bones, Skins, Organs, (...) the several limbs of
the (...) body: such spirits as are (...) the Flesh, Bone, and Skin, (...)
separated, and Dead, (...) in a Dead (...) the vital spirits governing and
agreeing with them, is of a different nature, integrall, and constant. They
differ in two respects; mortuall dead spirits are not continued, but disjoined,
and enclosed in a thicker body, as Ayrein Snow, or Froath. But the spirit being
continuate, passing through certain Channels, and totally enclosed, is either
pervious, passing through small pores, or continuate, and resident in a
proportionable quantity to the Body, in a hollow seat or Fountain whence
lesser Rivalets are derived. This seat is the Ventricles of the Brain, being
strait and narrow in the baser sort of living creatures, whose spirits being
spread through the whole body, have no particular (...) residence, as in (...)
Eeles, and Flies, whose (...) being cut asunder will (...) afterward. And
Birds, their Heads being plucked off, will leap and flutter, because their
Heads being small, their spirits have therein no (...) residence: But (...)
have large Ventricles, especially Man: And besides, the vital spirit is
inflameable, being compounded of Flame and Air, as the moisture of Living
creatures is of Oil and Water, the (...) giving it motion and (...) as
inflameable smoke, before it blaze into a flame, (...) hot, thin, and
moveble, being when it is a flame, (...) substance: but the (...) of the vital
spirits is more gentle than the flame of the spirit of wine, being compounded
of an aerie substance, and a mysterious Union of a flaming and aerie nature.

CANON 5.
THe particular parts have natural proper Actions, excited and quickened by the
vital Spirit.

The Explication.
THe several parts have several Actions and Functions; as Attraction,
Retention, Digestion, Assimulation, Sepration, Ejection, and Sensibility,
suitable to the proper Organs in the Stomach, Liver, Heart, Spleen, Gal,
Brain, Eyes, (...) and the rest, and their (...) are actuated by the vigor
and presence of the vital spirits, and by the heat thereof, as Iron draws
Iron, being touched by a Loadstone, and an Egg brings a Chickin being
actuated by the Cocks treading the Hen.

CAN. 6.
MOrtuall dead spirits are consubstantiall, or like in substance to Air, but
the vital spirits are more like a flame.

The Explication.
THe explication of the former fourth Canon declares the meaning of this
present Canon, which shows also that fat oily substances do long retain
their essence, being neither consumed much by the (...) nor very desirous to
(...) into Air. Therefore Flame is not enflamed Air; for Flame and Air (...)
as Oil and Water (...) and by the Canon that (...) the vital spirits are like
(...) substance, is to be understood that they are more enflaming than the
mortuall dead spirits, not more flame-like, or ayrie.

CAN. 7.
THE Spirits desire to multiply, or depart, and congregate with their
connaturalls, or like in substance.

The Explication.
BY this Canon the mortual dead spirits are understood, for the vital spirits
abhor (...) parting out of the body, because they find in a near (...) no
connaturalls, or like (...) sometimes happily flying forth to the (...) parts
of the Body, to (...) some desired object, (...) shunning departure. But the
mortuall dead spirits desire both; for the spirit finding no happy residence in
thick (...) nor its like, being alone, does create and make another, by
endeavoring to multiply and increase in quantity: And it desires also to
depart and resolve into Air; for slender thin substances (being always
moveable) are willingly carried to their like being near, as a bubble of water
is carried to a bubble, flame to flame, and much more willingly does the spirit
depart into the Air, being not carried to a piece like it self, but to a
whole Globe of connaturall and like substance. But the departing and venting of
the spirit into Air, is a twofold action, proceeding from the desire of the
spirit, and the desire of the Air, being an indigent needy substance greedily
gathering and receiving spirits, smells, substances, sounds, and the like.

CAN. 8.
THe detayned spirit having not sufficient matter to beget another spirit, does
soften the thicker parts.

The Explication.
A New Spirit is generated of a matter somewhat near (...) nature of a Spirit,
as of (...) Therefore if the (...) residing in the thicker (...) far
different from their Nature, cannot convert them (...) a spirit, yet it softens
and enlarges them, that it may, being not increased in (...) have a larger
dwelling, and live with more friendly companions in Nature. Also by this
Aphorism the Bodies hardness may be softened by detayning the spirits.

CAN. 9.
THe softning of the parts of the Body is best wrought, when the spirit does
neither depart, nor generate.

The Explication.
THis Canon dissolves a knotty doubt, in softning by detayning the spirits; for
if the spirit not vented do devour inward moisture, the softning of the parts
does not advantage their continuing in their essence, but rather their
dissolution and corruption. Therefore the detayned spirits must be cooled and
restrained, lest they be too active.

CAN. 10.
THE heat of the Spirit to renew and make the Body young, must be strong not
vioent.

The Explication.
THis Canon also dissolving the aforesaid doubt, shows the temper of heat fit
to prolong life; for howsoever the spirits be detayn'd, or not, yet their heat
should rather soften hard substances, than devour soft, softning rather than
drying: For such heat causes good Digestion and Assimilasion; but this (...)
must have these properties: first, slowly, not suddenly enflaming: secondly,
not violent, but moderate: thirdly, equal, not disordered, being sometimes
greater, sometimes lesser: fourthly, not languishing, nor soon extinguished.
This Operation is very subtle and profitable, being partly explained in the
Remedies prescribed for infusing into the Spirits a strong working heat, not
pradatory, or devouring.

CAN. 11.
THE thickning of the Spirits substance does lengthen life.

The Explication.
THis Canon is subordinate to the former; for the thick Spirit is capable of
all those four properties of heat formerly mentioned, the manner of thickning
is showed in the first Operation.

CAN. 12.
A Boundance of spirits are more hasty to depart and get forth, and more
consuming than a small quantity of Spirit.

The Explication.
THis Canon is clear and evident, for the bigger, the stronger. As great
flames breaking forth with greater violence, consume more suddenly; therefore
exceeding plenty, or excessive swelling of the Spirits do hinder long Life.
For Spirits maintaining Life and the Body in good plight are sufficient.

CAN. 13.
THe Spirits equally diffused through the Body, is not so hasty to depart, nor
so devouring as being unequally placed.

The Explication.
A Subundance of spirits generally diffused, is an enemy to durablenesse: so is
store of spirits not dispersed. Therefore the spirit being more diffused,
consumes less; for Dissolution begins in that part where the spirit is loose.
Therefore Exercise and rubbings do lengthen life, because motion does very
finely blend and mingle.

CAN. 14.
THE disordered motion of spirits makes them hastier to depart, and more
consuming than a constant equal motion.

The Explication.
THis Canon holds in livelesse creatures; for inequality is the mother of
Dissolution, but in living (...) (whose Consumption and Reparation is
considerable) Reparation proceeding from Appetite, and Appetite being sharpened
by variety, it is not absolutely, but respectively true, this variety being
rather an alteration than confusion, and a constant inconstancy.

CAN. 15.
THE Spirit in the solid frame of the Body is unwillingly detayned.

The explication.
DIssolution is generally abhorred, but more or less according to the
thickness and thinness of subtances. The thinner bodies being driven into
straighter narrower passages. For Water will run through where Dust will not
pass, and Air is more penetrative and piercing than Water, and yet their
penetration is bounded. For the spirit will not pass through exceeding narrow
pores, thereby to get forth and depart, for the spirit being encompassed with
a hard or oily and clammy body, not easily divisible; is bound and imprisoned,
and not desirous to depart. Therefore the spirit of Mettalls and Stones will
not in an Age depart, unless they be melred or dissolved with strong Corrosive
waters.

In clammy substances also the spirits are not desirous to depart, as in
Gummes, though with less heat dissolved. Therefore the hard juice of the body,
and the closeness of the skin, and the like (caused by dry nourishment,
exercise and cold air) do lengthen life, because they keep the enclosed
spirits from departing.

CAN. 16.
IN oily fat substances not clamy, the spirits are willingly detayned.

The Explication.
THE Spirit not incited by the Antipathy of an encompassing Body, nor fed by
too near likeness of a Body, does not strive much to depart. As in oily
substances being not so trouble some to the spirit as hard substances, nor so
like it as watery substances, nor tempted forth by the flattery of encompassing
Air.

CAN. 17.
THE sudden departure of the watery humor, does make oylinesse endure the
longer.

The Explication.
WAtery spirits, as was said, being like Air, do sooner depart than Air,
oily spirits slower, having not so much affinity with air. But both these
moystures being in most bodies, the watery spirit does vent before the oily,
and the former getting forth by degrees, carries with it the latter. Therefore
light drying is healthful, maling the watery humor expire, not forcing out
the watery humor, there by becoming more perfect, and both hindering
putrefaction, and preserving the body young. And therefore light rubbings and
exercise breathing the body, not procuring sweat, do exceedingly lengthen
life.

CAN. 18:
THE exclusion or keeping out of the air, lengthens life, other inconvemences
being avoided.

The Explication.
THE evolation or departing of the spirit, as was said, is a twofold action,
proceeding from the Appetite of the Spirit and of the Air. The former Action
may be stayed and taken away by Ointments, the Remedies for the inconveniences
ensuing thereon, being prescribed in the second Operation.

CAN. 19.
By young spirits being put into an aged body, the course of (...) may be
suddenly brought about again to youth.

The Explication.
THE Spirits are in Nature like the highest wheel turning about the other
wheels in Man's body, and an especial Engine to lengthen Life. Besides, the
spirits are easily and soon altered. For Operation on the spirits is twofold,
one by Nourishment being slow and indirect: the other sudden, and directly
working on the spirits by vapors, or by affections.

CAN. 20.
THE moisture of the body being hard and oily does lengthen life.

The Explication.
THE Reason is grounded on a former Rosition, that hard and oily substances are
hardly dissipated or dispersed. But yet (as was said in the tenth Operation)
hard moisture (...) less dissipable, is also less reparable, and an
inconvenience therefore joined with a convenience can produce no great effect.
But the oily moisture being not dissipable, and also reparable, is therefore
diligently to be regarded.

CAN. 21.
Sv btile, thin, piercing substances, without gnawing Acrymony or sharpness,
do breed (...)

The Explication.
THis Canon is more difficult in practice than in (...) For all piercing (...)
and sharp substances do (...) and corrode, hardening (...) but the
penetration of the subtle substances without violence, does bedew and water
the body, as was (...) in the fourth and seventh Operation.

CAN. 22.
ASstmilation or Digestion is best performed, when all local motion does cease.

The Explication.
THis Canon in the Comment on the third Operation is sufficiently explained.

CAN. 23.
Nourishment received by outward means, not only by the stomach, would
lengthen life, if it may be effected.

The Explication.
NOurishment does work in a compass course, but infusions more suddenly:
therefore outward nourishment would be good, because the faculties of digestion
do fail in age. And inward Nourishment joined with outward Nourishment by
baths, ointments, and glisters, wonld be more powerful and strong.

CAN. 24.
DIgestion being weak to drive out nourishment, the outward parts must be
comforted to draw forth nourishment.

The Explication.
(...) His Canon and the (...) are not the same: for (...) of outward (...)
differs from Extraction, (...) drawing out of in ward (...) but both by several
(...) do help weakness (...) Digestion.

CAN. 25.
ALL (...) renewing of the Body is wrought either the Spirits, or by softning.

The Explication.
IN the Body there are spirits and parts, where Nourish (...) by a
compasse-course (...) but vapors and (...) do work suddenly on the spirits,
and softning on the parts: yet external Nourishment and softning must not be
confounded, softning intending not to nourish the parts, but make them more
nourishable.

CAN. 26.
SOftning is wrought by like substances, by piercing and shutting substances.

The Explication.
FOr Consubstantials, or like substances do properly soften, conveying
substances drive in, and binding shutting substancesdoe retain, and restrain
Perspiration or breathing forth, being a motion contrary to softning: Therefore
(as was said in the ninth (...) softning cannot be (...) once effected, but by
an (...) proceeding: First, by (...) and keeping out the (...) by thick
Ointments, because the outward thick (...) does not supple the body, but the
subtle vapors thereinto penetrating and piercing. Secondly, by softning (...)
Consubstantialls, and the (...) substances, for Bodies by the gentle touch of
like substances do open and loosen (...) pores. Thirdly, by (...) of the like
substances and (...) restrayning (...) Afterward binding (...) Plasters and
Ointments (...) good and applyable, until (...) subtle softness of the (...)
be grown hard and solid.

CAN. 27.
THE frequent renewing of reparable parts, does bedew and moysten the less
reparable.

The Explication.
IN the beginning of the History, the perishing of the more reparable, and
less reparable parts together, was called the high way of Death, and therefore
the Reparation of these parts should be most intended. For as Aristotle well
observed, that in Plants new sap passing through the boughs, does refresh the
body also: so in like manner, by often repairing the flesh and blood of the
body, the Bones and Membranes, and other less reparable parts, by the passage
of new moisture, and being clothed with new flesh and blood, may be (...)
renewed.

CAN. 28.
COoling not passing by the stemacke, does lengthen life.

The Explication.
FOr a strong cooling of the Blood, is necessary to prolong Life, which cannot
be effected inwardly without hurting the stomach and bowels.

CAN. 29.
COnsumption and reparation being both effected by heat, (...) by their
conjoined Operation (...) length of Life.

The Explication.
ALL great workers are destroyed by the mixture of Natures, helpful and
hurtful in several respects. Therefore Judgment in practice must distinguish
good heates from hurtful.

CAN. 30.
DIseases are curable by Medicines, but Life must be lengthned by Dyets.

The Explication.
Accidental Diseases their Causes being taken away, do cease; but the
continual course of Nature flowing like a River, must be stopped, and turned
back by Dyets, whereof there are two kinds: set diet used at certain times,
and familiar daily Diet. Set Dyets are more powerful, being able to turn
back Natures course, and sooner change and alter the Body than usual Dyets.
In the Intention three set Dyets are only mentioned, the Diet with Opium, the
Diet for softning, and the Diet for making lean, and renewing the Body.

But in daily Diet, these Prescriptions, good also in set Dyets are most
effectual; Nitre, and Drugges subordinate to Nitre, the government of the
Affections, and the kinds of Studies Coolers not passing by the, stomach, oily
Drinks, making the Blood firm, by Potions of the Powder of Pearl, and wood
Drugs, Ointments to keep out the Air and keep in the Spirits, outward
heaters to further (...) after sleep; avoiding inflamers of the Spirits,
infusing into them a sharp heat, as Wines and hot Spices, and the moderate and
seasonable use of Drugges, infusing a strong heat into the Spirits, as
Saffron, Cresses, Garlic, Elecampane, and compositions of Opium.

CAN. 31.
THe living Spirit does immediately perish, being destitute of motion, cooling,
or nourishment.

The Explication.
THese are three Doors of Death formerly mentioned, being the proper and
immediate passions of the spirit. For all the Organs of the principal parts
serve them, in performing their Offices. And the destruction of the Organs does
cause their Defectivenes. Therefore all other ways to Death meet in these
three commonroades. But the Fabric of the parts is the Organ of the spirit,
as the spirit is of the reasonable Soul, being immortal and Divine.

CAN. 32.
FLame is a momentary Substance; Air a fixed; the living spirits in creatures
is of a middle Nature.

The Explication.
THis Canon requires a deeper search, and larger Explication than is here
requisite. Flame is continually generated and extinguished, and continued only
by succession. But air is a fixed body not subject to dissolution, for though
the air does out of moisture generate new air, yet the old air remains,
whence proceeds the over-burdning of the air, mentioned in the title of
Winds. But the spirits participating of the nature of flame and air, is
nourished by Oil being of the same kind with flame, and by air homogeneous
to water. For the spirit is not nourished by an oily or waterish substance, but
by both. And though air and flame, and oil and water, are hardly blended and
compounded, yet they agree in a mixtbody. The air raising quick and delicate
conceits in the Fancy, and the flame enciting noble active Desires in the
Soul. The continuance also of the spirit is compounded, being neither so
momentary as flame, nor so fixed as air. And therefore is not accidentally
extinguished like a flame by contraries, for the spirit is not so hard beset
with Destructive qualities. But the spirits are repaired by lively fresh Blood,
insinuated through the Arteries into the Brain, by a special manner of
reparation, not now to be mentioned.

FINIS.

