THE HISTORY Of the REIGN of KING HENRY THE SEVENTH. Written by the Right
Hon: FRANCIS LO: Virulam, Viscount S. ALBAN. Whereunto is now added a very
useful and necessary TABLE.

London printed by I. H. and R. Y. and are to be sold by Philemon Stephens and
Christopher Meredith. At the Sign of the Golden Lion in Pauls-Churchyard. 1629.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS AND MOST EXCELLENT PRINCE, CHARLES, Prince of Wales,
Duke of Cornwall, Earl of Chester, etc.
It may Please Your Highness,

In part of my acknowledgment to Your Highness, I have endeavored to do
Honor to the Memory of the last King of ENGLAND, that was Ancestour to the
King your Father, and Your self; and was that King to whom both Unions may in
a sort refer: That of the Roses being in him Consummate, and that of the
Kingdoms by him begun. Besides, his Times deserve it. For he was a Wise
Man, and an Excellent King; and yet the Times were rough, and full of
Mutations, and rare Accidents. And it is with Times, as it is with Ways. Some
are more Vp-hill and Downe-hill, and some are more Flat and Plain; and the One
is better for the Liver, and the Other for the Writer. I have not flattered
him, but took him to life as well as I could, sitting so far off, and having
no better light. It is true, Your Highness has a Living Pattern,
Incomparable, of the King your Father. But it is not amiss for You also to see
one of these Ancient Pieces. GOD preserve Your Highness.

Your Highnesses most humble and

devoted Servant,

Francis St. Alban.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF King HENRY the Seventh.
AFter that RICHARD the third of that name, King in fact only, but Tyrant both
in Title and Regiment, and so commonly termed and reputed in all times since,
was by the Divine Revenge, favoring the design of an Exilde man, overthrown
and slain at Bosworth-field: There succeeded in the Kingdom the Earl of
Richmond, thence-forth styled HENRY the Seventh. The King immediately after the
Victory, as one that had been bred under a devout Mother, and was in his
nature, a great Obseruer of religious forms, caused Te Deum Laudamus to be
solemnly sung in the presence of the whole Army upon the place, and was
himself with general applause, and great Cries of Joy, in a kind of Militar
Election, or Recognition, saluted King. Meane-while the body of RICHARD after
many indignities and reproaches (the Dirigies and Obsequies of the common people
toward Tyrants) was obscurely buried. For though the King of his nobleness
gave charge unto the Friars of Leicester to see an honorable interrment to be
given to it, yet the Religious People themselves (being not free from the
humors of the Vulgar) neglected it; wherein nevertheless they did not then
incur any man's blame or censure. No man thinking any ignominy or contumely
unworthy of him, that had been the Executioner of King HENRY the Sixth (that
innocent Prince) with his own hands; the Contriuer of the death of the Duke of
Clarence, his Brother; the Murderer of his two Nephews (one of them his
lawful King in the Present, and the other in the Future, failing of him) and
vehemently suspected to have been the Impoisoner of his wife, thereby to make
vacant his Bed, for a Marriage within the Degrees forbidden. And although he
were a Prince in Militar virtue approved, jealous of the honor of the English
Nation, and likewise a good Lawmakers, for the ease and solace of the common
people: yet his Cruelties and Parricides in the opinion of all men, weighed
down his Virtues and merits; and in the opinion of wise men, even those
Virtues themselves were conceived to be rather fained, and Affected things to
serve his Ambition, then true Qualities ingenerate in his Judgment or Nature.
And therefore it was noted by men of great understanding (who seeing his after
Acts, looked back upon his former Proceedings) that even in the time of King
EDWARD his Brother, he was not without secret Trains and Mines to turn Envy
and Hatred upon his Brothers Government; as having an Expectation and a kind
of Divination, that the King, by reason of his many disorders, could not be of
long life, but was like to leave his Sons of tender years; and then he knew
well, how easy a step it was, from the place of a Protector, and first Prince
of the Blood, to the Crown. And that out of this deep root of Ambition it
sprang, that as well at the Treaty of peace that pussed between EDWARD the
Fourth, and LEWIS the Eleventh of France, concluded by Enteruiew of both Kings
at Piqueny, as upon all other Occasions, RICHARD then Duke of Gloucester, stood
ever upon the side of Honor, raising his own Reputation to the disadvantage
of the King his Brother, and drawing the eyes of all (especially of the Nobles
and Soldiers) upon himself; as if the King by his voluptuous life and mean
marriage, were become effeminate and less sensible of honor, and Reason of
State, then was fit for a King, Andras for the Politic and wholesome Laws
which were enacted in his time, they were interpreted to be but the Brocage of
an Usurper, thereby to woo, and win the hearts of the people, as being
conscious to himself that the true obligations of Sovereignty in him failed,
and were wanting. But King HENRY in the very entrance of his Reign, and the
instant of time, when the Kingdom was cast into his Arms, met with a Point of
great difficulty, and knotty to solue, able to trouble and confound the wisest
King in the newness of his Estate; and so much the more, because it could not
endure a Deliberation, but must be at once deliberated and determined. There
were fallen to his lot, and concurrent in his person, three several Titles to
the Imperial Crown. The first, the title of the Lady Elizabeth, with whom, by
precedent Pact with the Party that brought him in, he was to marry. The
second, the ancient and long disputed Title (both by Plea, and Arms) of the
House of Lancaster, to which he was Inheritour in his own Person. The third,
the Title of the Sword or Conquest, for that he came in by victory of
Battle, and that the King in possession was slain in the field. The first of
these was fairest, and most like to give contentment to the people, who by two
and twenty years Reign of King EDWARD the Fourth, had been fully made
capable of the clearness of the Title of the White-Rose or House of York; and
by the mild and plausible Reigue of the same king toward his Latter time, were
become affectionate to that Line. But then it lay plain before his Eyes, that
if he relied upon that Title, he could be but a King at Courtesy, and have
rather a Matrimonial then a Regal power: the right remaining in his Queen,
upon whose decease, either with Issue, or without Issue, he was to give place,
and be removed. And though he should obtain by Parliament to be continued,
yet he knew there was a very great difference between a King that holds his
Crown by a cicuill act of Estates, and one that holds it originally by the
Law of Nature, and descent of Blood. Neither wanted there even at that time
secret Rumors and whisperings (which afterward gathered strength and turned to
great troubles) that the two young Sons of King EDWARD the Fourth, or one of
them (which were said to be destroyed in the Tower) were not indeed murdered,
but conveyed secretly away, and were yet living: which if it had been true,
had prevented the Title of the Lady ELIZABETH. On the other side, if he stood
upon his own Title of the House of Lancaster, inherent in his Person; he knew
it was a Title condemned by Parliament, and generally preiudged in the common
opinion of the Realm, and that it tended directly to the disinherison of the
Line of York, held then the indubiate Heirs of the crown. So that if he
should have no Issue by the Lady ELIZABETH, which should be Descendents of the
Double-Line, when the ancient flames of Discord and intestine Wars upon the
Competition of both Houses, would again return and revive.

As for Conquest notwithstanding, Sir WILLIAM STANLEY, after some acclamations
of the Soldiers in the Field, had put a Crown of ornament (which RICHARD wore
in the Battle, and was found amongst the Spoils) upon King HENRY'S head, as
if there were his chief Title; yet he remembered well upon what Conditions and
Agreements he was brought in, and that to claim as Conqueror, was to put as
well his own Party, as the rest, into Terror and Fear; as that which gave
him power of disanulling of Laws, and disposing of Men's Fortunes and Estates,
and the like points of absolute power, being in themselves so harsh and odious,
as that WILLIAM himself, commonly called the Conqueror, howsoever he used and
exercised the power of a Conqueror, to reward his Normans, yet he sorbare to
use that Claim in the beginning, but mixed it with a Titularie pretense
grounded upon the Will and designation of EDWARD the Confessor. But the King
out of the greatness of his own mind, presently cast the Die, and the
inconveniences appearing unto him on all parts; and knowing there could not be
any Interreigne or suspension of Title; and preferring his affection to his
own Line and Blood, and liking that Title best which made him independent; and
being in his Nature and constitution of mind not very apprehensiue or
forecasting of future Events a-farre off, but an Intertainer of Fortune by the
Day; resolved to rest upon the Title of Lancaster as the Maine, and to use the
other two, that of Marriage, and that of Battle, but as Supporters, the one
to appease secret Discontents, and the other to beat down open murmur and
dispute: not forgetting that the same Title of Lancaster had formerly
maintained a possession of three Descents in the Crown, and might have proved
a Perpetuity, had it not ended in the weakness and inabilitie of the last
Prince. Whereupon the King presently that very day, being the two and twentieth
of August, assumed the Style of King in his own name, without mention of the
Lady ELIZABETH at all, or any relation thereunto. In which course he ever after
persisted, which did spin him a thread of many seditions and troubles. The King
full of these thoughts, before his departure from Leicester, dispatched Sir
ROBERT WILLOUGHBY to the Castle of Sheriffe-Hutton in Yorkshire, where were
kept in safe custody by King RICHARDS commandment, both the Lady ELIZABETH
daughter of king EDWARD, and EDWARD PLANTAGENET, Son and Heir to GEORGE Duke
of Clarence. This EDWARD was by the Kings warrant delivered from the Constable
of the Castle to the hand of Sir ROBERT WILLOUGHBY; and by him with all safety
and diligence conveyed to the Tower of London, where he was shut up
Close-prisoner. Which Act of the Kings (being an Act merely of Policy and
power) proceeded not so much from any apprehension he had of Doctor Shawes tale
at Paul's Cross, for the bastarding of EDWARD the fourths Issues, in which case
this young Gentleman was to succeed (for that Fable was ever exploded) but upon
a serled disposition to depresse all Eminent persons of the Line of York.
Wherein still the King out of strength of Will, or weakness of Judgment, did
use to show a little more of the Party, then of the King.

For the Lady ELIZABETH she received also a direction to repair with all
convenient speed to London, and there to remain with the Queen Dowager her
Mother; which accordingly she soon after did, accompanied with many Noblemen
and Ladies of Honor. In the mean season the King set forwards by easy
iourneys to the City of London, receiving the Acclamations and Applauses of
the People as he went, which indeed were true and unfeigned, as might well
appear in the very Demonstrations and Fullness of the Cry. For they thought
generally that he was a Prince as ordained and sent down from Heaven, to
unite and put to an end the long dissentions of the two Houses; which although
they had had in the times of HENRY the Fourth, HENRY the Fifth, and a part of
HENRY the Sixth on the one side, and the times of EDWARD the Fourth on the
other, Lucide-interuals and happy Pauses; yet they did ever hang over the
Kingdom, ready to break forth into new Perturbations and Calamities. And as
his victory gave him the Knee, so his purpose of marriage with the Lady
ELIZABETH, gave him the Heart; so that both Knee and Heart did truly bow
before him.

He on the other side with great wisdom (not ignorant of the affections and
fears of the people) to disperse the conceit and terror of a Conquest, had
given order that there should be nothing in his journey like unto a warlike
March, or manner: but rather like unto the Progress of a King in full peace
and assurance.

He entered the City upon a Saturday, as he had also obtained the Victory
upon a Saturday, which day of the Week first upon an Observation, and after
upon Memory and Fancy, he accounted and chose as a day prosperous unto him.

The Major and Companies of the City received him at Shore-ditch: whence, with
great and Honorable attendance and troops of Noblemen, and Persons of Quality
he entered the City; himself not being on Horseback, or in any open Chair,
or Throne, but in a close Chariot, as one that having been sometimes an Enemy
to the whole State, and a Proscribed person, chose rather to keep State, and
strike a Reverence into the people then to fawn upon them.

He went first into Saint Paul's Church, where not meaning that the people
should forget too soon that he came in by Battle, he made Offertorie of
his Standards, and had Orizons and Te Deum again sung, and went to his Lodging
prepared in the Bishop of Londons Palace, where he stayed for a time.

During his abode there, he assembled his Counsel, and other principal
persons, in presence of whom, he did renew again his promise to marry with
the Lady ELIZABETH. This he did the rather, because having at his coming out
of Britain given artificially, for serving of his own turn some hopes, in
cale he obtained the Kingdom, to marry ANNE Inheritresse to the Duchy of
Britain, whom CHARLES the Eight of France soon after married; It bred some
doubt and suspicion amongst diverse, that he was not sincere, or at least not
fixed in going on with the match of England so much desired: which Conceit also
though it were but Talk and Discourse did much afflict the poor Lady
ELIZABETH her self. But howsoever he both truly intended it, and desired also
it should be so believed, (the better to extinguish Envy and Contradiction to
his other purposes) yet was he resolved in himself not to proceed to the
Consummation thereof till his Coronation and a Parliament were past. The one,
least a joint Coronation of himself and his Queen might give any countenance
of participation of Title; The other, least in the intayling of the Crown to
himself, which he hoped to obtain by Parliament, the Votes of the Parliament
might any ways reflect upon her.

About this time in Autumn, toward the end of September, there began and
reigned in the City and other parts of the Kingdom a Disease then new: which
of the Accidents and manner thereof, they called the Sweating Sickness. This
Disease had a swift course both in the Sicke-Body and in the Time and Period of
the lasting thereof: for they that were taken with it, upon four and twenty
hours escaping were thought almost assured. And as to the Time of the malice
and reign of the Disease ere it ceased; It began about the one and twentieth
of September, and cleared up before the end of October, insomuch as it was no
hinderance to the Kings Coronation, which was the last of October: nor (which
was more) to the holding of the Parliament, which began but seven days after.
It was a Pestilent-Feuer, but as it seems not seated in the Veins or Humors,
for that there followed no Carbuncle, no purple or liuide Spots, or the like,
the Mass of the Body being not tainted: only a malign Vapor flew to the
Heart and seized the vital Spirits; which stirred Nature to strive to send it
forth by an extreme sweat. And it appeared by experience that this Disease was
rather a Surprise of Nature, than obstinate to remedies, if it were in time
looked unto. For if the Patient were kept in an equal temper, both for
Clothes, Fire, and Drink, moderately warm, with temperate Cordials, whereby
Natures work were neither irritated by Heat, nor turned back by Cold, he
commonly recovered. But infinite Persons died suddenly of it, before the manner
of the Cure and attendance was known. It was conceived not to be an
Epidemicke Disease, but to proceed from a malignitie in the constitution of the
Air, gathered by the predispositions of Seasons: and the speedy cessation
declared as much.

On SIMON and IVDES Even the King dined with THOMAS BOVRCHIER, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Cardinal: and from Lambeth went by Land over the Bridge to
the Tower, where the morrow after he made twelve Knights-Bannerets. But for
Creations he dispensed them with a sparing hand. For notwithstanding a Field
so lately fought, and a Coronation so near at hand, he only created three:
JASPER Earl of Pembroke (the Kings Uncle) was created Duke of Bedford; THOMAS
the Lord STANLEY (the Kings Father-in-law Earl of Darbie; and EDWARD COVRTNEY
Earl of Deuon; though the King had then nevertheless a purpose in himself to
make more in time of Parliament; bearing a wise and decent respect to
distribute his Creations, some to honor his Coronation, and some his
Parliament.

The Coronation followed two days after upon the thirtieth day of October in
the year of our Lord 1485. At which time INNOCENT the Eight was Pope of Rome;
FREDERICK the Third, Emperor of Almaine; and MAXIMILIAN his son newly
chosen King of the Romans; CHARLES the Eight, King of France; FERDINANDO and
ISABELLA, Kings of Spain; and JAMES the Third, King of Scotland: with all which
Kings and States, the King was at that time in good peace and amity. At which
day also (as if the Crown upon his head, had put perils into his thoughts) he
did institute for the better security of his person a Band of fifty Archers
under a Captain to attend him, by the name of Yeomen-of-his- Guard: and yet
that it might be thought to be rather a matter of Dignity, after the imitation
of that he had known abroad, then any matter of Diffidence appropriate to his
own Case, he made it to be understood for an Ordinance not temporary, but to
hold in succession for ever after.

The seventh of November the King held his Parliament at Westminster, which he
had summoned immediately after his coming to London. His Ends in calling a
Parliament (and that so speedily) were chiefly three; First, to procure the
Crown to be entayled upon himself. Next, to have the Attaindors of all of
his Party (which were in no small number) reuersed, and all Acts of hostility
by them done in his quarrel, remitted and discharged: and on the other side to
attain by Parliament, the Heads and Principals of his Enemies. The Third, to
calm and quiet the fears of the rest of that Party by a Generall-Pardon: not
being ignorant in how great danger a King stands from his Subjects, when most
of his Subjects are conscious in themselves, that they stand in his danger.
Unto these three special Motives of a Parliament was added, that he as a
prudent and moderate Prince, made this judgment; that it was fit for him to
hasten to let his people see, that he meant to govern by Law, howsoever he
came in by the Sword: and fit also to reclaim them to know him for their King,
whom they had so lately talked of as an Enemy or Banished-man, For that which
concerned the Entayling of the Crown; (more then that he was true to his own
Will, that he would not endure any mention of the Lady ELIZABETH: no not in
the nature of Speciall-Intaile,) he carried it otherwise with great wisdom and
measure. For he did not press to have the Act penned by way of Declaration or
Recognition of right: as on the other side, he avoided to have it by new Law or
Ordinance; but chose rather a kind of middle-way, by way of Establishment, and
that under covert and indifferent words; That the inheritance of the Crown
should rest, remain, and abide in the King, etc. which words might equally be
applied; That the Crown should continue to him: but whether as having former
right to it, (which was doubtful) or having it then in Fact and possession
(which no man denied) was left fair to interpretation either way. And again
for the limitation of the Entaile, he did not press it to go further then to
himself and to the Heirs of his body, not speaking of his right Heirs; but
leaving that to the Law to decide: so as the Entaile might seem rather a
personal favor to him, and his children, then a total Dis-inherison to the
House of York. And in this form, was the Law drawn and passed. Which Statute
he procured to be confirmed by the Popes Bull the year following, with
mention nevertheless (by way of Recital) of his other Titles; both of Descent
and Conquest. So as now the wreath of Three was made a wreath of Five, for to
the three first Titles of the two Houses, or Lines, and Conquest, were added
two more; the Authorities Parliamentarie and Papal.

The King likewise in the Reuersall of the Attaindors of his Partakers, and
discharging them of all offenses incident to his service and succor, had his
Will: and Acts did pass accordingly. In the passage whereof, exception was
taken to diverse Persons in the house of Commons for that they were attainted,
and thereby not legal, nor habilitate to serve in Parliament, being disabled in
the highest degree; And that it should be a great incongruitie to have them to
make Laws, who themselves were not Inlawed. The truth was, that diverse of
those which had in the time of King RICHARD been strongest and most declared
for the Kings Party, were returned Knights and Burgesses for the Parliament;
whether by care or recommendation from the State, or the voluntary inclination
of the People: many of which had been by RICHARD the third attainted by
Outlawries, or otherwise. The King was somewhat troubled with this. For though
it had a grave and specious Show, yet it reflected upon his Party. But wisely
not showing himself at all moved therewith, he would not understand it but as
a Case in Law; and wished the Judges to be advised thereupon: who for that
purpose were forthwith assembled in the Exchequer-Chamber (which is the
Councell-Chamber of the Judges) and upon deliberation they gave a grave and
safe Opinion and Advice, mixed with Law and Conuenience; which was, that the
Knights and Burgesses attainted by the course of Law, should forbear to come
into the House, till a Law were passed for the reuersall of their Attaindors.

It was at that time incidently moved amongst the Judges in their Consultation,
what should be done for the King himself, who likewise was attainted? But it
was with unanimous consent resolved, That the Crown takes away all defects and
stops in blood: and that from the time the King did assume the Crown, the
fountain was cleared, and all Attaindors and Corruption of blood discharged.
But nevertheless for Honors sake it was ordained by Parliament, that all
Records wherein there was any memory, or mention of the Kings Attaindor,
should be defaced, cancelled, and taken off the File.

But on the part of the Kings Enemies there were by Parliament attainted; the
late Duke of Gloucester, calling himself RICHARD the Third, The Duke of
Norfolk, the Earl of Surrey, Viscount LOVEL, the Lord FERRERS, the Lord
ZOVCH, RICHARD RATCLIFFE, WILLIAM CATESBY, and many others of degree and
quality. In which Bills of Attaindors, nevertheless there were contained many
just and temperate Clauses, Sauings, and Prouisoes, well showing and
fore-tokening the wisdom, stay, and moderation of the Kings spirit of
Government. And for the Pardon of the rest, that had stood against the King;
the King, upon a second advice, thought it not fit it should pass by
Parliament, the better (being matter of Grace) to impropriate the thanks to
himself: using only the opportunity of a Parliament time, the better to
disperse it into the Veins of the Kingdom. Therefore during the Parliament,
he published his Royal Proclamation, offering Pardon and Grace of
restitution, to all such as had taken Arms, or been participant of any
Attempts against him; so as, they submitted themselves to his mercy by a Day,
and took the Oath of Allegiance and Fidelity to him. Whereupon many came out
of Sanctuary, and many more came out of Fear, no less guilty then those that
had taken Sanctuary.

As for Money or Treasure, the King thought it not seasonable, or fit to demand
any of his Subjects at this Parliament: both because he had received
satisfaction from them in matters of so great importance: and because he could
not remunerate them with any General Pardon, being prevented therein by the
Coronation Pardon, passed immediately before: but chiefly, for that it was in
every man's eye, what great Forfeitures and Confiscations he had at that present
to help himself: Whereby those Casualties of the Crown might in reason spare
the Purses of the Subject; especially in a time when he was in peace with all
his Neighbors. Some few Laws passed at that Parliament, almost for form
sake: amongst which there was One, to reduce Aliens, being made Denizens, to
pay strangers Customs; and another, to draw to himself the Seisures and
Compositions of Italians Goods, for not employment being Points of Profit to
his Coffers, whereof from the very Beginning he was not forgetful; and had
been more happy at the Latter End, if his early providence (which kept him
from all necessity of exacting upon his people) could likewise have attemp'red
his nature therein. He added during Parliament, to his former Creations, the
Innoblement or advancement in Nobility of a few others: The Lord CHANDOS of
Britain, was made Earl of Bathe; and Sir GILES DAWBENY was made Lord
Dawbeny; and Sir ROBERT WILLOUGHBY Lord Brook.

The King did also with great Nobleness and Bounty (which Virtues at that
time had their turns in his Nature) restore EDWARD STAFFORD (eldest son to
HENRY, Duke of Buckingham, attainted in the time of King RICHARD) not only to
his Dignities, but to his Fortunes and Possessions, which were great: to which
he was moved also by a kind of gratitude, for that the Duke was the man that
moved the first Stone against the Tyranny of King RICHARD, and indeed madethe
King a bridge to the Crown upon his own Ruins. Thus the Parliament brake up.

The Parliament being dissolved, the King sent forthwith Money to redeem the
Marquess Dorset, and Sir JOHN BOVRCHIER, whom he had left as his Pledges at
Paris, for Money which he had borrowed, when he made his Expedition for
England. And thereupon he took a fit occasion to send the Lord Treasurer and
Master BRAY (whom he used as Councellor) to the Lord Mayor of London,
requiring of the City a Pressed of six thousand Marks: But after many Parlees,
he could obtain but two thousand pounds. Which nevertheless the King took
in good part; as Men use to do, that practice to borrow Money, when they have
no need. About this time, the King called unto his Priuie-Councell, JOHN
MORTON, and RICHARD FOX, the one Bishop of Elie, the other Bishop of Excester,
vigilant men, and secret, and such as kept watch with him almost upon al men
else. They had been both versed in his Affairs, before he came to the
Crown, and were partakers of his adverse Fortune. This MORTON soon after upon
the death of BOVRCHIER, he made Archbishop of Canterbury. And for FOX, he made
him Lord Keeper of his Priuie-Seale, and afterward advanced him by Degrees,
from Excester to Bathe and Wells, thence to Durham, and last, to Winchester.
For although the King loved to employ and advance Bishops, because having rich
Bishoprics, they carried their Reward upon themselves: yet he did use to raise
them by steps; that he might not lose the profit of the First Fruits, which by
that course of Gradation was multiplied.

At last, upon the eighteenth of January was solemnized the so long expected
and so much desired Marriage, between the King and the Lady ELIZABETH: Which
Day of Marriage was celebrated with greater Triumph, and Demonstrations
(especially on the peoples part) of Joy and Gladness, than the days either of
his Entry, or Coronation; which the King rather noted, than liked. And it is
true, that all his life time, while the Lady ELIZABETH lived with him, (for she
died before him) he showed himself no very indulgent Husband toward her,
though she was beautiful, gentle, and fruitful. But his auersion toward the
House of YORK was so predominant in him, as it found place, not only in his
Wars and Counsels, but in his Chamber and Bed.

Toward the middle of the Spring, the King, full of confidence and assurance,
as a Prince that had been victorious in Battle, and had prevailed with his
Parliament in all that he desired, and had the Ring of Acclamations fresh in
his ears, thought the rest of his Reign should be but Play, and the enjoying
of a Kingdom. Yet as a wise and watchful King, he would not neglect any
thing for his safety; thinking nevertheless to perform all things now,
rather as an Exercise, then as a Labor. So he being truly informed, that the
Northern parts were not only affectionate to the House of YORK, but
particularly had been devoted to King RICHARD the third; thought it would be
a Summer well spent to visit those Parts, and by his presence and application
of himself, to reclaim and rectify those humors. But the King, in his
account of Peace, and Calmes, did much ouer-cast his Fortunes, which proved for
many years together full of Broken Seas, Tides, and Tempests. For he was no
sooner come to Lincoln, where he kept his Easter, but he received news, that
the Lord LOVEL, HVMPHREY STAFFORD, and THOMAS STAFFORD (who had formerly taken
Sanctuary at Colchester) were departed out of Sanctuary, but to what place,
no man could tell. Which advertisement, the King despised, and continued his
Journey to York. At York there came fresh and more certain advertisement,
that the Lord LOVEL was at band with a great power of men, and that the
STAFFORDS were in Arms in Worcestershire, and had made their approaches to the
City of Worcester, to assail it. The King, as a Prince of great and profound
judgment, was not much moved with it; for that he thought it was but a Ragge
or Remnant of Bosworth-Field, and had nothing in it of the maine Party of the
house of YORK. But he was more doubtful of the raising of Forces to resist
the Rebels, then of the Resistance it self; for that he was in a Core of
People, whose affections he suspected. But the Action enduring no delay, he
did speedily levy and send against the Lord LOVEL to the number of three
thousand men, ill armed, but well assured (being taken some few out of his own
Train, and the rest out of the Tenants and Followers of such as were safe to
be trusted) under the Conduct of the Duke of Bedford. And as his manner was to
send his Pardons rather before the Sword then after, he gave Commission to the
Duke, to proclaim pardon to all that would come in: Which the Duke, upon his
approach to the Lord LOVELS Camp, did perform. And it fell out as the King
expected; the Heralds were the Great-Ordnance. For the Lord LOVEL, upon
Proclamation of pardon, mistrusting his men, fled into Lancashire, and lurking
for a time with Sir THOMAS BROVGHTON, after sailed over into Flanders, to the
Lady MARGARET. And his men, forsaken of their Captain, did presently submit
themselves to the Duke. The STAFFORDS likewise, and their Forces, hearing what
had happened to the Lord LOVEL (in whose success their chief trust was)
despaired, and dispersed. The two Brothers, taking Sanctuary at Colnham, a
Village near Abington; which Place, upon view of their Privilege in the Kings
Bench, being judged no sufficient Sanctuary for Traitors, HVMPHREY was
executed at Tiburne; and THOMAS, as being led by his elder brother, was
pardoned. So this Rebellion proved but a Blast, and the King having by this
Journey purged a little the Dregs and Leaven of the Northern People, that were
before in no good affection toward him, returned to London.

In September following, the Queen was delivered of her first son, whom the
King (in honor of the Brittish-Race, of which himself was) named ARTHVH,
according to the Name of that ancient worthy King of the Britains; in whose
Acts there is truth enough to make him Famous, besides that which is Fabulous.
The Child was strong and able, though he was borne in the eight Month, which
the Physicians do preiudge.

THere followed this year, being the Second of the Kings Reign, a strange
Accident of State, whereof the Relations which we have, are so naked, as they
leave it scarce credible; not for the nature of it (for it has fallen out often)
but for the manner and circumstance of it, especially in the beginnings.
Therefore we shall make our Judgment upon the things themselves, as they give
light one to another, and (as we can) dig Truth out of the Mine. The King
was green in his estate; and contrary to his own opinion, and desert both,
was not without much hatred throughout the Realm. The root of all, was the
discountenancing of the House of YORK, which the general Body of the Realm
still affected. This did alienate the hearts of the Subjects from him daily
more and more, especially when they saw, that after his Marriage, and after a
Son borne, the King did nevertheless not so much as proceed to the
Coronation of the Queen, not vouchsafing her the honor of a Matrimonial
Crown; for the Coronation of her was not till almost two years after, when
Danger had taught him what to do. But much more, when it was spread abroad
(whether by Error, or the cunning of Malcontents) that the King had a
purpose to put to death EDWARD PLANTAGENET closely in the Tower: Whose case was
so nearly paralleld with that of EDWARD the Fourths Children, in respect of the
Blood, like Age, and the very place of the Tower, as it did refresh and reflect
upon the King a most odious resemblance, as if he would be another King
RICHARD. And all this time it was still whispered every where, that at least
one of the Children of EDWARD the Fourth was living. Which Bruit was cunningly
fomented by such as desired Innovation. Neither was the Kings nature and
customs greatly fit to disperse these Mists; but contrariwise he had a
fashion rather to create Doubts, then Assurance. Thus was Fuel prepared for
the Spark: the Spark that afterward kindled such a fire, and combustion, was
at the first contemptible.

There was a subtle Priest called RICHARD SIMON, that lived in Oxford, and had
to his Pupil a Bakers son named LAMBERT SIMNELL, of the age of some fifteen
years; a comely Youth, and weli favored, not without some extraordinary
dignity and grace of aspect. It came into this Priests fancy (hearing what
men talked, and in hope to raise himself to some great Bishopric) to cause
this Lad to counterseit and personate the second son of EDWARD the Fourth,
supposed to be murdered; and afterward (for he changed his intention in the
manage) the Lord EDWARD PLANTAGENET then prisoner in the Tower, and accordingly
to frame him and instruct him in the Part he was to play. This is that which
(as was touched before) seems scarcely credible; Not that a False person
should be assumed to gain a Kingdom, for it has been seen in ancient and
late times; nor that it should come into the mind of such an abject Fellow, to
enterprise so great a matter; for high Conceits do sometimes come streaming
into the Imaginations of base persons, especially when they are drunk with
News, and talk of the people. But here is that which has no appearance; That
this Priest being utterly unacquainted with the true Person, according to whose
pattern he should shape his Counterfeit, should think it possible for him to
instruct his Player, either in gesture and fashions, or in recounting past
matters of his life and education; or in fit answers to questions, or the like,
any ways to come near the resemblance of him whom he was to represent. For
this Lad was not to personate one, that had been long before taken out of his
Cradle, or conueighed away in his infancy, known to few; but a Youth that
till the age almost of ten years had been brought up in a Court where
infinite eyes had been upon him. For King EDWARD touched with remorse of his
brother the Duke of Clarences death, would not indeed restore his son, (of
whom we speak) to be Duke of Clarence, but yet created him Earl of
Warwick, reviving his honor on the mothers side, and used him honorably
during his time, though RICHARD the Third afterward confined him. So that it
cannot be, but that some great Person, that knew particularly, and familiarly
EDWARD PLANTAGENET, had a hand in the business, from whom the Priest might
take his aim. That which is most probable, out of the precedent and subsequent
Acts, is, that it was the Queen Dowager, from whom this action had the
principal source and motion. For certain it is, she was a busy negotiating
woman, and in her withdrawing Chamber had the fortunate Conspiracy for the
King against King RICHARD the Third, been hatched; which the King knew, and
remembered perhaps but too well; and was at this time extremely discontent with
the King, thinking her daughter (as the King handled the matter) not advanced,
but depressed: and none could hold the Book so well to prompt and instruct
this Stage Play, as she could. Nevertheless it was not her meaning, nor no
more was it the meaning of any of the better and sager sort that favored this
Enterprise and knew the Secret, that this disguised Idol should possess the
Crown; but at his peril to make way to the Overthrow of the King: and that
done, they had their several Hopes and Ways. That which does chiefly fortify
this Conjecture, is, that as soon as the matter brake forth in any strength,
it was one of the Kings first Acts to cloister the Queen Dowager in the
Nunnery of Bermondsey, and to take away all her lands and estate; and this by
close Council without any legal proceeding, upon farre-fetcht Pretenses; That
she had delivered her two daughters out of Sanctuary to King RICHARD
contrary to promise. Which Proceeding being even at that time taxed for
rigorous and undue, both in matter and manner; makes it very probable there was
some greater matter against her, which the King upon reason of Policy, and to
avoid envy would not publish. It is likewise no small argument that there was
some secret in it, and some suppressing of Examinations; for that the Priest
SIMON himself, after he was taken was never brought to execution; no not so
much as to public Trial (as many Clergiemen were upon less Treasons) but was
only shut up close in a Dungeon. Add to this that the after Earl of Lincoln
(a principal Person of the House of YORK) was slain in Stoke-field, the King
opened himself to some of his Council, that he was sorry for the Earls
death, because by him (he said) he might have known the bottom of his
danger.

But to return to the Narration it self; SIMON did first instruct his
Scholar for the part of RICHARD Duke of York, second son to King EDWARD the
Fourth, and this was at such time as it was voiced that the King purposed to
put to death EDWARD PLANTAGENET prisoner in the Tower, whereat there was great
murmur. But hearing soon after a general bruit that PLANTAGENET had escaped
out of the Tower, and thereby finding him so much beloved amongst the people,
and such rejoicing at his Escape, the cunning Priest changed his Copy, and
chose now PLANTAGENET to be the Subject his Pupil should personate, because
he was more in the present speech, and votes of the people; and it pieced
better, and followed more close and handsomley upon the bruit of PLANTAGENETS
escape. But yet doubting that there would be too near looking and too much
Perspectiue into his Disguise, if he should show it here in England, he
thought good (after the manner of Scenes in Stage Plays and Maskes) to show it
a far of; and therefore sailed with his Scholar into Ireland, where the
Affection to the House of YORK was most in height. The King had been a little
improuident in the matters of Ireland, and had not removed Officers and
Counselors, and put in their places, or at least intermingled persons, of whom
he stood assured, as he should have done, since he knew the strong Bent of
that Country toward the House of YORK; and that it was a ticklish and
unsettled State, more easy to receive distempers and mutations, then England
was. But trusting to the reputation of his Victories and Successes in England,
he thought he should have time enough to extend his Cares afterward to that
second Kingdom.

Wherefore through this neglect, upon the coming of SIMON with his pretended
PLANTAGENET into Ireland, all things were prepared for Revolt and Sedition,
almost as if they had been set and plotted before hand. SIMONS first address
was to the Lord THOMAS FITZ-GERARD, Earl of Kildare, and Deputy of Ireland:
before whose Eyes he did cast such a Mist (by his own insinuation, and by the
carriage of his Youth, that expressed a natural Princely behavior) as joined
perhaps with some inward Vapors of Ambition and Affection in the Earls own
mind, left him fully possessed, that it was the true PLANTAGENET. The Earl
presently communicated the matter with some of the Nobles and others there, at
the first secretly. But finding them of like affection to himself, he
suffered it of purpose to vent and pass abroad; because they thought it not
safe to resolve, till they had a taste of the Peoples inclination. But if the
Great ones were in forwardness, the People were in fury, entertayning this
Airie body or Phantasme with incredible affection; partly out of their great
devotion to the House of YORK; partly out of a proud humor in the Nation, to
give a King to the Realm of England. Neither did the Party in this heat of
affection much trouble themselves with the Attaindor of GEORGE Duke of
Clarence; having newly learned by the Kings example, that Attaindors do not
interrupt the conueighing of Title to the Crown. And as for the daughters of
King EDWARD the Fourth, they thought King RICHARD had said enough for them: and
took them to be but as of the Kings Party, because they were in his power
and at his disposing. So that with marvelous consent and applause, this
Counterfeit PLANTAGENET was brought with great solemnity to the Castle of
Dublin, and there saluted, served, and honored as King; the Boy becoming it
well, and doing nothing that did bewray the baseness of his condition. And
within a few days after he was proclaimed King in Dublin, by the name of King
EDWARD the Sixth; there being not a sword drawn in King HENRY his quarrel.

The King was much moved with this unexpected accident, when it came to his
ears, both because it struck upon that String which ever he most feared, as
also because it was stirred in such a Place, where he could not with safety
transfer his own person, to suppress it. For partly through natural
valor, and partly through an universal suspicion (not knowing whom to trust)
he was ever ready to wait upon all his atchieuements in person. The King
therefore first called his Council together at the Charter House at Shine.
Which Council was held with great secrecy, but the open Decrees thereof,
which presently came abroad, were three.

The first was, that the Queen Dowager, for that she, contrary to her Pact,
and Agreement with those that had concluded with her concerning the Marriage of
her daughter ELIZABETH with King HENRY, had nevertheless delivered her
daughters out of Sanctuary into King RICHARDS hands; should be cloistered in
the Nunnerie of Bermondsey, and forfeit all her lands and goods.

The next was, that EDWARD PLANTAGENET then Close-prisoner in the Tower, should
be in the most public and notorious manner, that could be devised, showed unto
the people: In part to discharge the King of the Envy of that opinion and
bruit, how he had been put to death privily in the Tower; But chiefly to make
the people see the leuitie and imposture of the proceedings of Ireland, and
that their PLANTAGENET was indeed but a puppit, or a Counterfeit.

The third was, that there should be again proclaimed a Generall-Pardon to all
that would reveal their offenses, and submit themselves by a day. And that
this Pardon should be conceived in so ample and liberal a manner, as no
High Treason (no not against the Kings own person) should be excepted. Which
though it might seem strange, yet was it not so to a wise King, that knew his
greatest dangers were not from the least Treasons, but from the greatest. These
resolutions of the King and his Council were immediately put in execution. And
first, the Queen Dowager was put into the Monastery of Bermondsey, and all
her estate seized into the Kings hands, whereat there was much wondering; That
a weak woman, for the yielding to the menaces and promises of a Tyrant, after
such a distance of time (wherein the King had showed no displeasure nor
alteration) but much more after so happy a marriage, between the King and her
Daughter, blessed with Issue-male, should upon a sudden mutabilitie or
disclosure of the Kings mind be so severely handled.

This Lady was amongst the examples of great variety of Fortune. She had
first from a distressed Suitor, and desolate Widow, been taken to the
Mariage-Bed of a Batchellour-King, the goodliest personage of his time; and
even in his reign she had endured a strange Eclipse by the Kings flight, and
temporary depriving from the Crown. She was also very happy, in that she
had by him fair Issue, and continued his Nuptial love (helping her self by
some obsequious bearing and dissembling of his pleasures) to the very end. She
was much affectionate to her own Kindred, even unto Faction; which did stir
great Envy in the Lords of the Kings side, who counted her Blood a
disparagement to be mingled with the Kings. With which Lords of the Kings
blood, joined also the Kings Favorite the Lord HASTINGS; who, notwithstanding
the Kings great affection to him, was thought at times, through her malice and
Spleen, not to be out of danger of falling. After her husbands death, she was
matter of Tragedy, having lived to see her Brother beheaded, and her two
Sons deposed from the Crown, Bastarded in their blood, and cruelly
murdered. All this while nevertheless she inioyed her liberty, State, and
Fortunes. But afterward again, upon the Rise of the Wheel, when she had a
King to her Sonne-in-Law, and was made Grand mother to a Grandchild of the
best Sex; yet was she (upon dark and unknown Reasons, and no less strange
Pretenses) precipitated, and banished the World, into a Nunnery; where it was
almost thought dangerous to visit her, or see her; and where not long after she
ended her life: but was by the Kings Commandment buried with the King her
husband at Windsore. She was Foundresse of Queenes-College in Cambridge. For
this Act the King sustained great obloquie, which nevertheless (besides the
reason of State) was somewhat sweetened to him by a great Confiscation.

About this time also EDWARD PLANTAGENET was upon a Sunday brought throughout
all the principal Streets of London, to be seen of the people. And having
passed the view of the Streets, was conducted to PAVLS Church, in solemn
Procession, where great store of people were assembled. And it was provided
also in good fashion, that diverse of the Nobility, and others of Quality
(especially of those that the King most suspected, and knew the person of
PLANTAGENET best) had communication with the young Gentleman by the way, and
entertained him with speech and discourse; which did in effect mar the
Pageant in Ireland with the Subjects here, atleast with so many, as out of
error, and not out of malice, might be misled. Nevertheless, in Ireland
(where it was too late to go back) it wrought little or no effect. But
contrariwise, they turned the Imposture upon the King, and gave out, That the
King, to defeat the true Inheritor, and to mock the World, and blind the eyes
of simple man, had tricked up a Boy in the likeness of EDWARDPLANTAGENET, and
showed him to the people, not sparing to profane the Ceremony of a Procession,
the more to countenance the Fable.

The Generall-Pardon likewise near the same time came forth; and the King
therewithal omitted no diligence, in giving straight order, for the keeping of
the Ports; that Fugitives, Malcontents, or suspected Persons might not pass
over into Ireland, and Flanders.

Mean while the Rebels in Ireland had sent privy Messengers both into
England, and into Flanders, who in both places had wrought effects of no small
importance. For in England they won to their Party JOHN, Earl of Lincoln,
son of JOHN DE LAPOLE, Duke of Suffolk, and of ELIZABETH, King EDWARD the
Fourths eldest sister. This Earl was a man of great wit and courage, and had
his thoughts highly raised by Hopes and Expectations for a time. For RICHARD
the third had a Resolution, out of his hatred to both his Brethren, King
EDWARD, and the Duke of Clarence, and their Lines, (having had his hand in both
their bloods) to disable their Issues upon false and incompetent pretexts; the
one, of Attaindor; the other, of Illegitimation: and to design this Gentleman
(in case himself should die without Children) for Inheritor of the Crown.
Neither was this unknown to the King, who had secretly an Eye upon him. But
the King having tasted of the Envy of the people, for his imprisonment of
EDWARD PLANTAGENET, was doubtful to heap up any more distasts of that kind,
by the imprisonment of DE LAPOLE also; the rather thinking it Policy to
conserve him as a Corriuall unto the other. The Earl of Lincoln was induced
to participate with the Action of Ireland, not lightly upon the strength of the
Proceedings there, which was but a Bubble, but upon Letters from the Lady
MARGARET of Burgundy, in whose succors and declaration for the Enterprise;
there seemed to be a more solid foundation, both for Reputation and Forces.
Neither did the Earl refrain the Business, for that he knew the pretended
PLANTAGENET to be but an Idol. But contrariwise, he was more glad it should
be the false PLANTAGENET then the true: because the False being sure to fall
away of himself, and the True to be made sure of by the King; it might open
and paue a fair and prepared way to his own Title. With this Resolution he
sailed secretly into Flanders; where was a little before arrived the Lord
LOVEL, leaving a correspondence here in England with Sir THOMAS BROVGHTON, a
man of great Power and Dependencies in Lancashire. For before this time, when
the pretended PLANTAGENET was first received in Ireland, secret Messengers had
been also sent to the Lady MARGARET, aduertising her what was passed in
Ireland, imploring Succoures in an Enterprise (as they said) so pious and just,
and that God had so miraculously prospered the beginning thereof; and making
offer, that all things should be guided by her will and direction, as the
Sovereign Patroness and Protectresse of the Enterprise. MARGARET was second
sister to King EDWARD the Fourth, and had been second Wife to CHARLES,
surnamed the HARDY, Duke of Burgundy; by whom, having no Children of her
own, she did with singular care and tenderness intend the Education of PHILIP
and MARGARET, Grandchildren to her former Husband; which won her great love
and authority among the Dutch. This Princess (having the Spirit of a Man, and
Malice of a woman) abounding in Treasure, by the greatness of her Dower, and
her provident Government, and being childlesse, and without any nearer Care,
made it her Design and Enterprise, to see the Majesty Royal of England once
again re-placed in her House, and had set up King HENRY as a Mark, at whose
overthrow all her actions should aim and shoot; insomuch as all the Counsels
of his succeeding troubles came chiefly out of that Quiver. And she bare such
a mortal hatred to the House of LANCASTER, and personally to the King, as she
was no ways mollified by the Conjunction of the Houses in her Neeces marriage,
but rather hated her Niece, as the means of the Kings ascent to the Crown,
and assurance therein. Wherefore with great violence of affection she embraced
this Ouerture. And upon Counsel taken with the Earl of Lincoln, and the
Lord LOVEL, and some other of the Party, it was resolved with all speed, the
two Lords assisted with a Regiment of two thousand Almaines, being choice and
Veterane Bands, under the command of MARTIN SWART (a valiant and experimented
Captain) should pass over into Ireland to the new King. Hoping, that when the
Action should have the face of a received and settled Regalitie (with such a
second Person, as the Earl of Lincoln, and the Conjunction and reputation of
foreign succors) the fame of it would imbolden and prepare all the Party of
the Confederates and Malcontents within the Realm of England, to give them
assistance, when they should come over there. And for the Person of the
Counterfeit, it was agreed, that if all things succeeded well, he should be put
down, and the true PLANTAGENET received: Wherein nevertheless the Earl of
Lincoln had his particular hopes. After they were come into Ireland, and that
the Party took courage, by seeing themselves together in a Body, they grew
very confident of success, conceiving and discoursing amongst themselves, that
they went in upon far better Cards to overthrow King HENRY, then King HENRY
had to overthrow King RICHARD. And that if there were not a Sword drawn
against them in Ireland, it was a Sign the Swords in England would be soon
sheathed, or beaten down. And first, for a Bravery upon this accession of
power, they crowned their new King in the Cathedral Church of Dublin; who
formerly had been but proclaimed only; and then sat in Council what should
further be done. At which Council though it were propounded by some, that it
were the best way to establish themselves first in Ireland, and to make that
the Seat of the War, and to draw King HENRY thither in person, by whose
absence, they thought there would be great alterations and commotions in
England, yet because the Kingdom there was poor, and they should not be able
to keep their Army together, nor pay their Germane. Soldiers, and for that
also the sway of the Irish-men and generally of the Men-of-warre, which (as in
such cases of Popular tumults is usual) did in effect govern their Leaders,
was eager, and in affection to make their fortunes upon England; It was
concluded with all possible speed to transport their forces into England. The
King in the mean time, who at the first when he heard what was done in
Ireland, though it troubled him, yet thought he should be well enough able to
scatter the Irish as a Flight of Birds, and rattle away this Swarm of Bees,
with their King; when he heard afterward that the Earl of Lincoln was
embarked in the action, and that the Lady MARGARET was declared for it, he
apprehended the danger in a true Degree as it was, and saw plainly that his
Kingdom must again be put to the Stake, and that he must fight for it. And
first, he did conceive, before he understood of the Earl of Lincolnes sailing
into Ireland out of Flanders, that he should be assailed both upon the
East-parts of the Kingdom of England by some impression from Flanders, and
upon the North-west out of Ireland. And therefore having ordered Musters to be
made in both Parts, and having prouisionally designed two Generals, JASPER
Earl of Bedford, and JOHN Earl of Oxford, (meaning himself also to go in
person, where the Affairs should most require it) and nevertheless not
expecting any actual Invasion at that time (the Winter being far on) he
took his journey himself toward Suffolk and Northfolke, for the confirming
of those parts. And being come to S. Edmonds-bury, he understood, that THOMAS,
Marquess Dorset (who had been one of the Pledges in France) was hasting
toward him, to purge himself of some Accusations which had been made against
him. But the King, though he kept an Ear for him, yet was the time so
doubtful, that he sent the Earl of Oxford to meet him, and forth with to
carry him to the Tower; with a fair Message nevertheless, that he should
bear that disgrace with patience, for that the King meant not his hurt, but
only to preserve him from doing hurt, either to the Kings service, or to
himself; and that the King should always be able (when he had cleared
himself) to make him reparation.

From S. Edmonds-bury he went to Norwich, where he kept his Christmas. And from
thence he went (in a manner of Pilgrimage) to Walsingham, where he visited our
Ladies Church, famous for miracles, and made his Prayers and Vows for help
and deliverance. And from thence he returned by Cambridge to London. Not long
after, the Rebels, with their King (under the Leading of the Earl of Lincoln,
the Earl of Kildare, the Lord LOVEL, and Colonel SWART) landed at Fouldrey in
Lancashire, whither there repaired to them, Sir THOMAS BROVGHTON, with some
small company of English. The King by that time (knowing now the Storm would
not divide, but fall in one place) had levied Forces in good number; And in
person (taking with him his two designed Generals, the Duke of Bedford, and the
Earl of Oxford) was come on his way toward them as far as Couentry, whence
he sent forth a troop of Light-Horsemen for discovery, and to intercept some
straglers of the Enemies, by whom he might the better understand the
particulars of their Progress and purposes, which was accordingly done; though
the King otherwise was not without intelligence from Espials in the Camp.

The Rebels took their way toward York, without spoiling the Country, or
any act of Hostility, the better to put themselves into favor of the people,
and to personate their King: who (no doubt, out of a princely feeling) was
sparing, and compassionate toward his Subjects. But their Snowball did not
gather as it went. For the people came not in to them: Neither did any rise or
declare themselves in other parts of the Kingdom for them, which was caused
partly by the good taste that the King had given his People of his Government,
joined with the reputation of his Felicity; and partly for that it was an
odious thing to the people of England, to have a King brought in to them upon
the shoulders of Irish and Dutch, of which their Army was in substance
compounded. Neither was it a thing done with any great judgment on the Party
of the Rebels, for them to take their way toward York: Considering that
howsoever those parts had formerly been a Nurserie of their friends; yet it
was there, where the Lord LOVEL had so lately disbanded, and where the Kings
presence had a little before qualified discontents. The Earl of Lincoln
deceived of his hopes of the Countries concourse unto him (in which case he
would have temporized) and seeing the business past Retract, resolved to make
on where the King was, and to give him battle; and thereupon, marched toward
Newarke, thinking to have surprised the Town. But the King was somewhat before
this time come to Nottingham, where he called a Council of War, at which was
consulted, whether it were best to protract time, or speedily to set upon the
Rebels. In which Council the King himself (whose continual vigilancie did
suck in sometimes causeless suspicions, which few else knew) inclined to the
accelerating a Battle. But this was presently put out of doubt, by the great
aides that came in to him in the instant of this Consultation, partly upon
Missiues, and partly Voluntaries from many parts of the Kingdom.

The principal persons that came then to the Kings aid, were the Earl of
Shrewesburie, and the Lord STRANGE, of the Nobility: and of Knights and
Gentlemen to the number of at least threescore and ten persons, with their
Companies, making in the whole, at the least six thousand fighting men, besides
the Forces that were with the King before. Whereupon the King, finding his Army
so bravely re-enforced, and a great alacrity in all his men to fight, was
confirmed in his former resolution, and marched speedily, so as he put
himself between the Enemies Camp and Newarke; being loath their Army should
get the commodity of that Town. The Earl nothing dismayed, came forwards
that day unto a little Village called Stoke, and there encamped that night,
upon the Brow or hanging of a hill. The King the next day presented him
Battle upon the Plain, the fields there being open and champion. The Earl
courageously came down and joined Battle with him. Concerning which
Battle, the relations that are left unto us are so naked, and negligent
(though it be an action of so recent memory) as they rather declare the
Success of the day, then the Manner of the fight. They say, that the King
divided his Army into three Battles, whereof the vant-guard only well
strengthened with wings, came to fight. That the Fight was fierce and
obstinate, and lasted three hours, before the victory inclined either way;
save that Judgment might be made, by that the Kings Vant-guard of it self
maintained fight against the whole Power of the Enemies, (the other two
Battles remaining out of action) what the success was like to be in the
end. That MARTIN SWART with his Germans performed bravely; and so did those
few English that were on that side, neither did the Irish fail in courage or
fierceness, but being almost naked men, only armed with Darts and Skeines, it
was rather an Execution, then a fight upon them; insomuch as the furious
slaughter of them was a great discouragement and appalement to the rest; That
there died upon the place all the Chiefetaines; That is, the Earl of Lincoln,
the Earl of Kildare, FRANCIS Lord LOVEL, MARTIN SWART, and Sir THOMAS
BROVGHTON; all making good the fight without any ground given. Only of the
Lord LOVEL there went a report, that he fled and swam over Trent on horseback,
but could not recover the further side, by reason of the steepness of the
Bank, and so was drowned in the River. But another Report leaves him not
there, but that he lived long after in a Cave or Vault. The number that was
slain in the field, was of the Enemies part, four thousand at the least; and
of the Kings part, one half of his Vant-guard, besides many hurt, but none of
name. There were taken prisoners amongst others, the Counterfeit PLANTAGENET
(now, LAMBERT SIMNELL again) and the crastie Priest his Tutor. For LAMBERT,
the King would not take his life, both out of Magnanimity, taking him but as
an Image of Wax, that others had tempered and molded; and likewise out of
wisdom, thinking that if he suffered death, he would be forgotten too soon;
but being kept alive, he would be a continual Spectacle, and a kind of remedy
against the like Enchantments of People, in time to come. For which cause he
was taken into service in his Court to a base office in his Kitchen; so that
(in a kind of Mattacina of humane fortune) He turned a Broach, that had worn
a Crown. Whereas Fortune commonly does not bring in a Comedy or Farce after a
Tragedy. And afterward he was preferred to be one of the Kings Falconers. As
to the Priest, he was committed Close prisoner, and heard of no more; the King
loving to seal up his own dangers.

After the Battle, the King went to Lincoln, where he caused Supplications
and Thanksgiuings to be made for his Deliverance and Victory. And that his
Devotions might go round in Circle, he sent his Banner to be offered to our
Lady of Walsingham, where before he made his Vows. And thus delivered of this
so strange an Engine and new Invention of Fortune, he returned to his former
confidence of mind, thinking now, that all his misfortunes had come at once.
But it fell out unto him according to the Speech of the Common people in the
beginning of his reign, that said; It was a token he should reign in labor,
because his reign began with a sickness of Sweat. But howsoever the King
thought himself now in a Haven, yet such was his wisdom, as his Confidence
did seldom darken his Foresight, especially in things near hand. And
therefore awakened by so fresh, and unexpected dangers, he entered into due
consideration, as well how to weed out the Partakers of the former Rebellion, as
to kill the Seeds of the like in time to come: and withal to take away all
Shelters and Harbors for discontented Persons, where they might hatch and
foster Rebellions, which afterward might gather strength and motion. And
first, he did yet again make a Progress from Lincoln to the Northern Parts,
though it were indeed rather an Itinerarie Circuit of Justice, then a
Progress. For all along as he went, with much severity and strict
inquisition, partly by Martial Law, and partly by Commission, were punished,
the Adherents, and Ayders of the late Rebels. Not all by death, (for the Field
had drawn much blood) but by Fines and Ransomes which spared Life, and raised
Treasure. Amongst other Crimes of this nature, there was diligent Inquiry made
of such as had raised and dispersed abruit and rumor, a little before the
Field fought, That the Rebels had the day; and that the Kings Army was
overthrown, and the King fled. Whereby it was supposed that many Succors,
which otherwise would have come unto the King, were cunningly put off, and kept
back. Which Charge and Accusation, though it had some ground, yet it was
industriously embraced and put on by diverse, who having been in themselves not
the best affected to the Kings part, nor forward to come to his aid, were glad
to apprehend this color, to cover their neglect and coldness, under the
pretense of such discouragements. Which cunning nevertheless, the King would
not understand, though he lodged it, and noted it in some particulars, as his
manner was.

But for the extirpating of the Roots and causes of the like Commotions in time
to come, the King began to find where his Shoe did wring him, and that it was
his depressing of the House of YORK, that did rancle and fester the affections
of his People. And therefore being now too wise to disdain perils any longer,
and willing to give some concentment in that kind (at least in Ceremony) he
resolved at last to proceed to the Coronation of his Queen. And therefore at
his coming to London, where he entered in state, and in a kind of Triumph, and
celebrated his Victory, with two days of Devotion, (for the first day he
repaired to Paul's, and had the Hymn of Te Deum sung, and the morrow after he
went in Procession, and heard the Sermon at the Cross) the Queen was with
great solemnity crowned at Westminster, the five and twentieth of November, in
the third year of his reign, which was about two years after the marriage;
Like an old Christning, that had stayed long for Godfathers. Which strange and
unusual distance of time, madeit subject to every man's note, that it was an
Act against his stomach, and put upon him by necessity and reason of State.
Soon after, to show that it was now fair weather again, and that the
imprisonment of THOMAS Marquess Dorset, was rather upon suspicion of the Time,
then of the man, he the said Marquess was set at liberty without
examination, or other circumstance. At that time also the King sent an
Ambassador unto Pope INNOCENT, signifying unto him this his Marriage, and that
now (like another AENEAS) he had passed through the floods of his former
troubles and travails, and was arrived unto a safe Haven: and thanking his
Holiness, that he had honored the Celebration of his Marriage with the
presence of his Ambassador: and offering both his Person and the forces of his
Kingdom upon all occasions to do him service.

The Ambassador making his Oration to the Pope, in the presence of the
Cardinals, did so magnify the King and Queen, as was enough to glut the
Hearers. But then he did again so exroll and deifie the Pope, as made all that
he had said in praise of his Master and Mistress seem temperate and passable.
But he was very honorably entertained, and extremely much made on by the
Pope. Who knowing himself to be Lazy and unprofitable to the Christian
world, was wonderfully glad to hear that there were such Echoes of him
sounding in remote parts. He obtained also of the Pope a very just and
honorable Bull, qualifying the Privileges of Sanctuary (wherewith the king
had been extremely gauled) in three points.

The first, that if any Sanstuarie man did by night or otherwise, get out of
Sanctuary privily, and commit mischief and trespass, and then come in
again, he should lose the benefit of Sanctuary for ever after. The second,
that howsoever the Person of the Sanctuarie-man was protected from his
Creditors, yet his Goods out of Sanctuary should not. The third, that if any
took Sanstuarie for case of Treason, the King might appoint him Keepers to
look to him in Sanctuary.

The King also for the better securing of his estate, against mutinous and
malecontented Subjects (whereof He saw the Realm was full) who might have their
refuge into Scotland, which was not under Key, as the Ports were; For that
cause, rather then for any doubt of Hostility from those parts, before his
coming to London (when he was at Newcastle) had sent a solemn Embassage unto
JAMES the third, King of Scotland, to treat and conclude a peace with him. The
Ambassadors were RICHARD FOX Bishop of Excester, and Sir RICHARD EDGCOMBE
Comptroller of the Kings House, who were honorably received and entertained
there. But the King of Scotland laboring of the same disease that King HENRY
did (though more mortal, as afterward appeared) that is, Discontented
Subjects, apt to rise, and raise Tumuh, although in his own affection he did
much desire to make a Peace with the King; Yet finding his Nobles auerse, and
not daring to displease them, concluded only a Truce for seven years; giving
nevertheless promise in private, that it should be renewed from time to time,
during the two Kings lives.

HItherto the King had been exercised in settling his affairs at home. But
about this time brake forth an occasion that drew him to look abroad, and to
hearken to foreign business. CHARLES the eight the French King, by the virtue
and good fortune of his two immediate Predecessors, CHARLES the seventh his
Grandfather, and JEWS the eleventh his Father, received the Kingdom of
France in more flourishing and spread Estate, than it had been of many years
before; being redintegrate in those principal Members, which anciently had
been portions of the Crown of France, and were after disseuered, so as they
remained only in Homage, and not in Sovereignty (being governed by absolute
Princes of their own) Angeou, Normandy, Prouence, and Burgundy. There
remained only Britain to be reunited, and so the Monarchy of France to be
reduced to the ancient Terms and Bounds.

King CHARLES was not a little inflamed with an ambition to repurchase, and
reannex that Duchy. Which his ambition was a wise and well weighed Ambition;
not like unto the ambitions of his succeeding enterprises of Italy. For at
that time being newly come to the Crown, he was somewhat guided by his Fathers
Counsels (Counsels, not Counselors) for his Father was his own Counsel, and
had few able men about him. And that King (be knew well) had ever distasted the
designs of Italy, and in particular had an eye upon Britain. There were
many circumstances that did feed the ambition of CHARLES, with pregnant and
apparent hopes of Success. The Duke of Britain old, and entered into a
Lethargy, and served with Mercenarie Counselors, father of two only
daughters, the one sickly and not like to continue. King CHARLES himself in
the flower of his age, and the Subjects of France at that time well trained for
War, both for Leaders and Soldiers; men of service being not yet worn out,
since the wars of LEWIS against Burgundy. He found himself also in peace
with all his Neighbour-Princes. As for those that might oppose to his
enterprise; MAXIMILIAN King of Romans, his Rival in the same desires, (as well
for the Duchy, as the Daughter) feeble in means; and King HENRY of England
as well somewhat obnoxious to him for his favors and benefits, as busied in his
particular noubles at home. There was also a fair and specious occasion
offered him to hide his ambition, and to justify his warring upon Britain,
for that the Duke had received, and succored LEWIS Duke of Orleance, and other
of the French Nobility, which had taken Arms against their King. Wherefore
King CHARLES being resolved upon that War, knew well he could not receive any
opposition so potent, as if King HENRY should either upon Policy of State, in
preventing the growing greatness of France: or upon gratitude unto the Duke of
Britain, for his former favors, in the time of his distress, espouse that
quarrel, and declare himself in aid of the Duke. Therefore he no sooner
heard that King HENRY was settled by his victory, but forth with he sent
Ambassadors unto him, to pray his assistance, or at the least that he would
stand neutrall. Which Ambassadors found the King at Leicester, and delivered
their Embassage to this effect. They first imparted unto the King the success
that their Master had had a little before against MAXIMILIAN, in recovery of
certain Towns from him: which was done in a kind of priuacie, and inwardnesse
toward the King; as if the French-king did not esteem him for an outward or
formal Confederate, but as one that had part in his affections and fortunes,
and with whom he took pleasure to communicate his business. After this
Complement, and some gratulation for the Kings victory, they fell to their
errand; declaring to the King, that their Master was enforced to enter into a
just and necessary War with the Duke of Britain, for that he had received
and succored those that were Traitors, and Declared Enemies unto his Person
and State. That they were no mean, distressed, and calamitous Persons that
fled to him for refuge, but of so great quality, as it was apparent that they
came not thither to protect their own fortune, but to infest and invade his;
the Head of them being the Duke of Orleance, the first Prince of the blood, and
the second Person of France. That therefore, rightly to understand it, it was
rather on their Masters part a Defensive War, then an Offensive; as that,
that could not be omitted or forborne, if he tendered the conservation of his
own Estate; and that it was not the first Blow that made the War inuasiue,
(for that no wise Prince would stay for) but the first Provocation, or at least
the first Preparation. Nay that this War was rather a Suppression of Rebels,
then a War with a just Enemy, where the case is; That his Subjects,
Traitors, are received by the Duke of Britain his Homager. That King HENRY
knew well what went upon it in example, if Neighbour-Princes should patronize
and comfort Rebels, against the Law of Nations and of Leagues. Nevertheless
that their Master was not ignorant, that the King had been beholding to the
Duke of Britain in his adversity; as on the other side, they knew he would
not forget also the readiness of their King, in ayding him when the Duke of
Britain, or his mercenary Counselors failed him, and would have betrayed him;
And that there was a great difference between the courtesies received from
their Master, and the Duke of Britain; for that the Dukes might have ends of
utility and Bargain; whereas their Masters could not have proceeded but out
of entire Affection. For that, if it had been measured by a politic line, it
had been better for his affairs, that a Tyrant should have reigned in
England, troubled and hated, then such a Prince, whose virtues could not sail
to make him great and potent, whenever he was come to be Master of his
affairs. But howsoever it stood for the point of obligation, which the King
might owe to the Duke of Britain, yet their Master was well assured, it would
not divert King HENRY of England from doing that, that was just, nor ever
embarke him in so ill grounded a quarrel. Therefore, since this War which
their Master was now to make, was but to deliver himself from imminent
dangers, their King hoped the King would show the like affection to the
conservation of their Masters estate, as their Master had (when time was)
showed to the Kings acquisition of his Kingdom. At the least, that according
to the inclination which the King had ever professed of peace, he would look
on, and stand Neutrall; for that their Master could not with reason press him
to undertake part in the War, being so newly settled and recovered from
intestine seditions. But touching the Mystery of reannexing of the Duchy of
Britain to the Crown of France, either by War, or by marriage with the
Daughter of Britain; the Ambassadors bare aloof from it, as from a Rock,
knowing that it made most against them. And therefore by all means declined
any mention thereof, but contrariwise interlaced in their conference with the
King, the assured purpose of their Master, to match with the Daughter of
MAXIMILIAN; And entertained the King also with some wandering Discourses of
their Kings purpose, to recover by Arms his right to the Kingdom of Naples,
by an expedition in Person; All to remove the King from all jealousy of any
Design, in these hither Parts upon Britain, otherwise then for quenching of
the fire, which he feared might be kindled in his own estate.

The King after advice taken with his Council, made answer to the Ambassadors.
And first returned their Complement, showing he was right glad of the French
Kings reception of those Towns from MAXIMILIAN. Then he familiarly related
some particular passages of his own adventures and victory passed. As to the
business of Britain, the King answered in few words; That the French King and
the Duke of Britain, were the two persons to whom he was most obliged of all
men; and that he should think himself very unhappy, if things should go so
between them, as he should not be able to acquit himself in gratitude
toward them both; and that there was no means for him as a Christian King and
a Common friend to them, to satisfy all obligations both to God and Man, but
to offer himself for a Mediator of an Accord and Peace between them; by which
course he doubted not but their Kings estate and honor both, would be
preserved with more Safety and less Enuis then by a War, and that he would
spare no cost or pains, no if it were To go on Pilgrimage, for so good an
effect; And concluded, that in this great Affair, which he took so much to
heart, he would express himself more fully by an Embassage, which he would
speedily dispatch unto the French King for that purpose. And in this sort the
French Ambassadors were dismissed; The King avoiding to understand any thing
touching the re-annexing of Britain, as the Ambassadors had avoided to mention
it; save that he gave a little touch of it in the word, Envy. And so it was,
that the King was neither so shallow, nor so ill advertised, as not to perceive
the intention of the French, for the inuesting himself of Britain. But first
he was utterly unwilling (howsoever he gave out) to enter into War with
France. A Fame of a War he liked well, but not an Atchieuement; for the one
he thought would make him Richer, and the other Poorer: and he was possessed
with many secret fears, touching his own people, which he was therefore loath
to arm, and put weapons into their hands. Yet notwithstanding (as a prudent
and courageous Prince) he was not so auerse from a War, but that he was
resolved to choose it, rather then to have Britain carried by France, being so
great and opulent a Duchy, and situate so opportunely to annoy England, either
for Coast, or Trade. But the Kings hopes were, that partly by negligence,
commonly imputed to the French (especially in the Court of a young King) and
partly by the native power of Britain it self, which was not small; but
chiefly in respect of the great Party, that the Duke of Orleance had in the
Kingdom of France, and thereby means to stir up Civil troubles, to divert
the French-king from the enterprise of Britain: And lastly, in regard of the
power of MAXIMILIAN, who was Corriuall to the French King in that Pursuit, the
Enterprise would either bow to a pace, or break in it self. In all which, the
King measured and valued things amiss, as afterward appeared. He sent
therefore forth with to the French King, CHRISTOPHER VRSWICKE, his Chaplain, a
person by him much trusted and employed: choosing him the rather, because he
was a Churchman, as best sorting with an Ambassie of Pacification: and giving
him also a Commission, That if the French King consented to treat, he should
thence repair to the Duke of Britain, and ripen the Treaty on both parts.
VRSWICK made declaration to the French King, much to the purpose of the Kings
answer to the French Ambassadors here; instilling also tenderly some ouerture
of receiving to grace the Duke of Orleance, and some taste of Conditions of
Accord. But the French King on the other side proceeded not sincerely, but with
a great deal of art and dissimulation, in this Treaty; having for his end to
gain time, and so put off the English-Succors, under hope of Peace, till he
had got good footing in Britain, by force of Arms. Wherefore he answered the
Ambassador, That he would put himself into the Kings hands, and make him
Arbiter of the Peace: and willingly consented, that the Ambassador should
straight ways pass into Britain, to signify this his consent, and to know
the Dukes mind likewise; well foreseeing, that the Duke of Orleance, by whom
the Duke of Britain was wholly led, taking himself to be upon terms
irreconcilable with him, would admit of no Treaty of Peace. Whereby he
should in one, both generally abroad veyle over his Ambition, and win the
reputation of just and moderate proceedings; and should withal endeare
himself in the Affections of the King of England, as one, that had committed
all to his Will: Nay, and (which was yet more fine) make Faith in him, That
although he went on with the War, yet it should be but with his Sword in his
hand, to bend the stiffenesse of the other party to accept of Peace: and so the
King should take no vmbrage of his arming and prosecution; but the Treaty to
be kept on foot; to the very last instant, till he were Master of the Field.

Which grounds being by the French King wisely laid, all things fell out as he
expected. For when the English Ambassador came to the Court of Britain, the
Duke was then scarcely perfect in his memory, and all things were directed by
the Duke of Orleance; who gave audience to the Chaplain VRSWICK, and upon his
Embassage delivered, made answer in somewhat high terms: That the Duke of
Britain having been an Host, and a kind of Parent or Foster-father to the
King, in his tenderness of age, and weakness of fortune, did look for at
this time from King HENRY (the renowned King of England) rather brave Troops
for his Succors, then a vain Treaty of Peace. And if the King could forget
the good Offices of the Duke done unto him aforetime; yet he knew well, he
would in his wisdom consider of the future, how much it imported his own
safety, and reputation, both in foreign parts, and with his own people, not
to suffer Britain (the old Confederates of England) to be swallowed up by
France, and so many good Ports, and strong Towns upon the Coast, be in the
command of so potent a Neighbour-King, and so ancient an Enemy. And therefore
humbly desired the King to think of this business as his own; and therewith
brake off, and denied any further conference for Treaty.

VRSWICK returned first to the French King, and related to him what had passed.
Who finding things to sort to his desire, took hold of them, and said; That
the Ambassador might perceive now, that which he for his part, partly imagined
before. That considering in what hands the Duke of Britain was, there would be
no Peace, but by a mixed Treaty of force and persuasion. And therefore he would
go on with the one, and desired the King not to desist from the other. But for
his own part, he did faithfully promise, to be still in the Kings power, to
rule him in the matter of Peace. This was accordingly represented unto the King
by VRSWICK at his return, and in such a fashion, as if the Treaty were in no
sort desperate, but rather stayed for a better hour, till the Hammer had
wrought, and beat the Party of Britain more pliant. Whereupon there passed
continually Packets and Dispatches between the two Kings, from the One out of
desire, and from the other out of dissimulation, about the negotiation of
Peace. The French King mean while invaded Britain with great forces, and
distressed the City of Nantes with a strait siege, and (as one, who though he
had no great Judgment, yet had that, that he could dissemble home) the more
he did urge the prosecution of the War, the more he did at the same time,
urge the solicitation of the Peace. Insomuch as during the siege of Nantes,
after many Letters and particular messages, the better to maintain his
dissimulation, and to refresh the Treaty; he sent BERNARD DAVBIGNEY (a person
of good quality) to the King, earnestly to desire him, to make an end of the
business howsoever.

The King was no less ready to revive and quicken the Treaty; And thereupon
sent three Commissioners, the Abbot of Abington, Sir RICHARD TVNSTAL, and
CHAPLEINE VRSWICK formerly employed, to do their utmost endeavors, to manage
the Treaty roundly and strongly.

About this time the Lord WOODVILE, (Uncle to the Queen) a valiant gentleman,
and desirous of honor, sued to the King, that he might raise some Power of
Voluntaries underhand, and without license or pasport (wherein the King might
any ways appear) go to the aid of the Duke of Britain. The King denied his
request, (or at least seemed so to do) and laid strait commandment upon him,
that he should not stir, for that the King thought his honor would suffer
therein, during a Treaty, to better a Party. Nevertheless this Lord (either
being unruly, or out of conceit that the King would not inwardly dislike that,
which he would not openly auow) sailed secretly over into the Isle of Wight,
whereof he was Governor, and levied a fair Troop of four hundred men, and
with them passed over into Britain, and joined himself with the Dukes
Forces. The News whereof when it came to the French Court, put diverse Young
Bloods into such a fury, as the English Ambassadors were not without peril to
be outraged. But the French King both to preserve the Privilege of
Ambassadors, and being conscious to himself that in the business of Peace,
he himself was the greater dissembler of the two, forbade all injuries of
fact or word, against their persons, or Followers. And presently came an Agent
from the King, to purge himself touching the Lord WOODVILES going over, using
for a principal argument, to demonstrate that it was without his priuitie, for
that the Troops were so small, as neither had the Face of a succor by
authority; nor could much advance the Britain affairs. To which message,
although the French King gave no full credit, yet he made fair weather with
the King, and seemed satisfied. Soon after the English Ambassadors returned,
having two of them been likewise with the Duke of Britain, and found things
in no other terms, then they were before. Upon their return, they informed
the King of the state of the affairs, and how far the French King was from
any true meaning of Peace; and therefore he was now to advise of some other
course. Neither was the King himself lead all this while with credulity
merely, as was generally supposed: But his Error was not so much facility of
belief, as an ill measuring of the forces of the other Party.

For (as was partly touched before) the King had cast the business thus with
himself. He took it for granted in his own judgment, that the War of
Britain, in respect of the strength of the Towns, and of the Party, could
not speedily come to a Period. For he conceived that the Counsels of a War,
that was undertaken by the French King, then childlesse, against an
Heire-apparant of France, would be very faint and slow. And besides, that it
was not possible, but that the state of France should be imbroiled with some
troubles and alterations in favor of the Duke of Orleance. He conceived
likewise, that MAXIMILIAN, King of the Romans, was a Prince warlike and potent;
who (he made account) would give succors to the Britains roundly. So then
judging it would be a work of Time, he laid his plot, how he might best
make use of that Time, for his own affairs. Wherein first he thought to make
his vantage upon his Parliament; knowing that they being affectionate unto the
quarrel of Britain, would give treasure largely. Which treasure, as a noise
of War might draw forth; so a peace succeeding might cofer up. And because
he knew his people were hot upon the business, he chose rather to seem to
be deceived, and lulled asleep by the French, then to be backward in
himself; considering his Subjects were not so fully capable of the reasons of
State, which made him hold back. Wherefore to all these purposes he saw no
other expedient, then to set and keep on foot a continual Treaty of Peace;
laying it down, and taking it up again, as the occurrence required. Besides,
he had in consideration the point of Honor in bearing the blessed person of a
Pacificator. He thought likewise to make use of the Envy, that the French
King met with, by occasion of this War of Britain, in strengthening himself
with new alliances; as namely that of FERDINANDO of Spain, with whom he had
ever a consent even in nature and customs; and likewise with MAXIMILIAN, who
was particularly interessed. So that in substance he promised himself Money,
Honor, Friends, and Peace in the end. But those things were too fine to be
fortunate, and succeed in all parts; for that great affairs are commonly too
rough and stubborn to be wrought upon by the finer edges, or points of wit.
The King was likewise deceived in his two main grounds. For although he had
reason to conceive, that the Council of France would be wary to put the King
into a War against the Heire-apparant of France; yet he did not consider,
that CHARLES was not guided by any of the principal of the Blood or Nobility,
but by mean Men, who would make it their Masterpiece of Credit and favor, to
give venturous Counsels, which no great or wise Man durst, or would. And for
MAXIMILIAN, he was thought then a Greater-matter then he was; his unstable and
necessitous Courses being not then known.

After Consultation with the Ambassadors, who brought him no other news, then
he expected before (though he would not seem to know it till then) he
presently summoned his Parliament, and in open Parliament propounded the cause
of Britain to both Houses, by his Chancellor MORTON Archbishop of
Canterbury, who spoke to this effect.

MY Lords and Masters; The Kings Grace our Sovereign Lord, has commanded me
to declare unto you the causes that have moved him at this time to summon this
his Parliament; which I shall do in few words, craving pardon of his Grace,
and you all, if I perform it not as I would.

His Grace does first of all let you know, that he retains in thankful
memory the love and loyalty showed to him by you, at your last Meeting, in
establishment of his royalty; freeing and discharging of his partakers, and
confiscation of his Traitors and Rebels: more then which could not come from
Subjects to their Sovereign, in one action. This he takes so well at your
hands, as he has made it a Resolution to himself, to communicate with so
loving and well approved Subjects, in all Affairs that are of public nature,
at home or abroad.

Two therefore are the causes of your present assembling: the one, a foreign
Business; the other, matter of government at home.

The French King (as no doubt ye have heard) makes at this present hot war
upon the Duke of Britain. His Army is now before Nantes, and holds it
straightly besieged being the principal City (if not in Ceremonte and
Pre-eminence, yet in Strength and Wealth) of that Duchy. Ye may guess at his
Hopes, by his attempting of the hardest part of the War first. The cause of
this War he knows best. He alleges the entertaining and succouring of
the Duke of Orleance, and some other French Lords, whom the King takes for his
Enemies. Others divine of other Matters. Both parts have by their Ambassadors
diverse times prayed the Kings Aids: The French King Aides, or Neutralitie; the
Britons Aides simply; for so their case requires. The King, as a Christian
Prince, and blessed Son of the Holy Church, has offered himself as a
Mediator, to treat a Peace between them. The French King yields to treat,
but will not stay the prosecution of the War. The Britons, that desire Peace
most, hearken to it least; not upon confidence or stiffenesse, but upon
distrust of true meaning, seeing the War goes on. So as the King, after as
much pains and care to effect a Peace, as ever he took in any Business, not
being able to remove the Prosecution on the one side, nor the Distrust on the
other, caused by that Prosecution, has let fall the Treaty; not repenting of
it, but desparing of it now, as not likely to succeed. Therefore by this
Narratiue you now understand the state of the Question, whereupon the King
prays your advice: which is no other, but whether he shall enter into an
auxiliarie and defensive War for the Britons against France.

(...) the better to open your understandings in this Affair, the King has
commanded me to say somewhat to you from him, of the Persons that do
interuene in this Business; and somewhat of the Consequence thereof, as it
has relation to this Kingdom; and somewhat of the Example of it in general:
making nevertheless no Conclusion or Judgment of any Point, until his Grace
has received your faithful and politic aduices.

First, for the King our Sovereign himself, who is the principal Person you
are to eye in this Business; his Grace does profess, that he truly and
constantly desires to reign in Peace. But his Grace says, he will neither
buy Peace with Dishonor, nor take it up at interest of Danger to ensue; but
shall think it a good Change, if it please God to change the inward Troubles
and Seditions, wherewith he has been hitherto exercised, into an honorable
Foreign War. And for the other two Persons in this Action, the French King,
and the Duke of Britain, his Grace does declare unto you, that they be the
Men, unto whom be is of all other Friends and Allies most bounden: the one
having held over him his hand of Protection from the Tyrant: the Other having
reached forth unto him his hand of help, for the recovery of his Kingdom. So
that his affection toward them in his natural Person, is upon equal terms.
And whereas you may have heard, that his Grace was enforced to fly out of
Britain into France, for doubts of being betrayed; his Grace would not in any
sort have that reflect upon the Duke of Britain, in defacement of his former
benefits: for that he is thoroughly informed, that it was but the practice of
some corrupt Persons about him, during the time of his sickness, altogether
without his consent or priuitie.

But howsoever these things do interesse his Grace in his particular, yet he
knows well, that the higher Bond that tieth him to procure by all means the
safety and welfare of his loving Subjects, does dis-interesse him of these
Obligations of Gratitude, otherwise then thus: that if his Grace be forced to
make a War, he do it without passion, or ambition.

For the consequence of this Action toward this Kingdom, it is much as the
French Kings intention is. For if it be no more, but to range his Subjects to
reason, who bear themselves stout upon the strength of the Duke of Britain,
it is nothing to us. But if it be in the French Kings purpose, or if it should
not be in his purpose, yet if it shall follow all one, as if it were sought,
that the French King shall make a Province of Britain, and join it to the
Crown of France: then it is worthy the consideration, how this may import
England, as well in the increasement of the greatness of France, by the
addition of such a Country, that stretches his Boughs unto our Seas, as in
depriving this Nation, and leaving it naked of so firm and assured
Confederates, as the Britons have always been. For then it will come to
pass, that whereas not long since, this Realm was mighty upon the Continent,
first in Territory, and after in Alliance, in respect of Burgundy and
Britain, which were Confederates indeed, but dependant Confederates; now the
one being already cast, partly into the greatness of France, and partly into
that of Austria, the other is like wholly to be cast into the greatness of
France, and this Island shall remain confined in effect within the salt
Waters, and girt about with the Coast-Countries of two mighty Monarchs.

For the Example, it rests likewise upon the same Question, upon the French
Kings intent. For if Britain be carried and swallowed up by France, as the
world abroad (apt to impute and construe the Actions of Princes to Ambition)
conceive it will; then it is an Example very dangerous and universal, that the
lesser Neighbor Estate should be devoured of the greater. For this may be
the case of Scotland toward England; of Portugal, toward Spain; of the
smaller Estates of Italy, toward the greater; and so of Germany; or as if
some of you of the Commons, might not live and dwell safely, besides some of
these great Lords. And the bringing in of this Example, will be chiefly laid
to the Kings charge, as to him that was most interested and most able to forbid
it. But then on the other side, there is so fair a Pretext on the French Kings
Part (and yet Pretext is never wanting to Power) in regard the danger imminent
to his own Estate is such, as may make this Enterprise seem rather a Work of
Necessity, then of Ambition, as does in reason correct the Danger of the
Example. For that the Example of that which is done in a man's own defense,
cannot be dangerous; because it is in another power to avoid it. But in all
this business, the King remits himself to your grave and mature advice,
whereupon he purposes to rely.

This was the effect of the Lord Chancellors Speech touching the Cause of
Britain: For the King had commanded him to carry it so, as to affect the
Parliament toward the Business; but without engaging the King in any express
declaration.

The Chancellor went on:

FOr that which may concern the Government at home, the King has commanded
me to say unto you; That he thinks there was never any King (for the small
time that he has reigned) had greater and iuster cause of the two contrary
Passions of Joy, and Sorrow, then his Grace has. Joy, in respect of the rare
and visible Favors of Almighty God, in girting the Imperial Sword upon his
side, and assisting the same his Sword against all his Enemies; and likewise in
blessing him with so many good and loving Servants and Subjects, which have
never failed to give him faithful Counsel, ready Obedience, and courageous
Defense. Sorrow, for that it has not pleased God to suffer him to sheathe his
Sword (as he greatly desired otherwise then for Administration of Justice) but
that he has been forced to draw it so often, to cut off Traiterous and
disloyal Subjects, whom (it seems) God has left (a few amongst many good) as
the Canaanites among the People of Israel, to be thorns in their sides, to
tempt and try them; though the end has been always (Gods Name be blessed
therefore) that the destruction has fallen upon their own heads.

Wherefore his Grace says; That he sees, that it is not the Blood spilt in
the Field, that will save the Blood in the City; nor the Marshals Sword, that
will set this Kingdom in perfect Peace: But that the true way is, to stop the
Seeds of Sedition and Rebellion in their beginnings; and for that purpose to
devise, confirm, and quicken good and wholesome Laws, against Riots, and
unlawful Assemblies of People, and all Combinations and Confederacies of them,
by Liueries, Tokens, and other Badges of factious Dependence; that the Peace of
the Land may by these Ordinances, as by Bars of Iron, be soundly bound in
and strengthened, and all Force both in Court, Country, and private Houses, be
suppressed. The care hereof, which so much concerns your selves, and which the
nature of the Times does instantly call for, his Grace commends to your
Wisdoms.

And because it is the Kings desire, that this Peace, wherein he hops to
govern and maintain you, do not bear only unto you Leaves for you to sit
under the shade of them in safety; but also should bear you Fruit of Riches,
Wealth and Plenty: Therefore his Grace prays you, to take into consideration
matter of Trade, as also the Manufactures of the Kingdom, and to repress the
bastard and barren Employment of Moneys, to Usurie and unlawful Exchanges,
that they may be (as their natural use is) turned upon Commerce, and lawful
and Royal Trading. And likewise, that our People be set on work in Arts and
Handycrafts; that the Realm may subsist more of it self; that Idleness be
avoided, and the drayning out of our Treasure, for foreign Manufactures,
stopped. But you are not to rest here only, but to provide further, that
whatsoever Merchandise shall be brought in from beyond the Seas, may be
employed upon the Commodities of this Land; whereby the Kingdoms stock of
Treasure may be sure to be kept from being diminished, by any ouer-trading of
the Forrainer.

And lastly, because the King is well assured, that you would not have him
poor, that wishes you rich; he doubts not, but that you will have care, as
well to maintain his Revenues, of Customs, and all other Natures, as also to
supply him with your loving Aides, if the case shall so require. The rather,
for that you know the King is a good Husband, and but a Steward in effect for
the Public; and that what comes from you is but as Moisture drawn from the
Earth, which gathers into a Cloud, and falls back upon the Earth again. And you
know well, how the Kingdoms about you grow more and more in Greatness, and
the Times are stirring; and therefore not fit to find the King with an empty
Purse. More I have not to say to you; and wish, that what has been said, had
been better expressed: But that your Wisdoms and good Affections will supply.
GOD bless your Doings.

IT was no hard matter to dispose and affect the Parliament in this business;
as well in respect of the Emulation between the Nations, and the Envy at the
late growth of the French Monarchy; as in regard of the Danger, to suffer the
French to make their approaches upon England, by obtaining so goodly a maritime
Province, full of Sea-townes, and Havens, that might do mischief to the
English, either by invasion or by interruption of Traffic. The Parliament was
also moved with the point of Oppression; for although the French seemed to
speak reason, yet Arguments are ever with multitudes too weak for Suspicions.
Wherefore they did advise the King, roundly to embrace the Britons quarrel,
and to send them speedy aides, and with much alacrity and forwardness granted
to the King a great rate of Subsidy, in contemplation of these aides. But the
King both to keep a decency toward the French King, to whom he professed
himself to be obliged, and indeed desirous rather to show War, then to make
it; sent new solemn Ambassadors to intimate unto him, the Decree of his
Estates, and to iterate his motion, that the French would desist from
Hostility; or if War must follow, to desire him to take it in good part, if
at the motion of his people, who were sensible of the cause of the Britons as
their ancient Friends, and Confederates, he did send them succors; with
protestation nevertheless, that to save all Treaties and Laws of Friendship,
he had limited his Force, to proceed in aid of the Britons, but in no wise to
war upon the French, otherwise then as they maintained the possession of
Britain. But before this formal Embassage arrived, the Party of the Duke had
received a great blow, and grew to manifest declination. For near the Town of
Saint Alban in Britain, a Battle had been given, where the Britons were
overthrown, and the Duke of Orleance, and the Prince of Orange taken
Prisoners, there being slain on the Britons part six thousand Men, and amongst
them the Lord WOODVILE, and almost all his Soldiers, valiantly fighting. And
of the French part one thousand two hundred, with their Leader, JAMES GALEOT, a
great Commander.

When the news of this Battle came over into England, it was time for the
King (who now had no subrerfuge to continue further Treaty, and saw before his
Eyes, that Britain went so speedily for lost, contrary to his hopes, knowing
also that with his People and Forreiners both, he sustained no small Envy and
disreputation for his former delays) to dispatch with all possible speed his
succors into Britain; which he did under the conduct of ROBERT Lord BROOK
to the number of eight thousand choice Men, and well armed; who having a fair
wind, in few hours landed in Britain, and joined themselves forthwith to
those Briton-Forces, that remained after the Defeat, and marched straight on to
find the Enemy, and encamped fast by them. The French wisely husbanding the
possession of a Victory, and well acquainted with the courage of the English,
especially when they are fresh, kept themselves within their Trenches, being
strongly lodged, and resolved not to give battle. But mean while, to
harrasse and weary the English, they did upon all advantages set upon them
with their Light Horse; wherein nevertheless they received commonly loss,
especially by means of the English-Archers.

But upon these atchieuements FRANCIS Duke of Britain deceased; an accident
that the King might easily have foreseen, and ought to have reckoned upon, and
provided for, but that the Point of Reputation, when news first came of the
Battle lost (that somewhat must be done) did ouerbeare the Reason of War.

After the Dukes decease, the principal persons of Britain, partly bought,
partly through faction, put all things into confusion; so as the English not
finding Head or Body with whom to join their Forces, and being in jealousy
of Friends, as well as in danger of Enemies, and the Winter begun, returned
home five months after their landing. So the Battle of Saint Alban, the
death of the Duke, and the retire of the English succors were (after some
time) the causes of the loss of that Duchy; which action some accounted as a
blemish of the Kings Judgment; but most but as the misfortune of his times.

But howsoever the temporary Fruit of the Parliament in their aid and advice
given for Britain, took not, nor prospered not; yet the lasting Fruit of
Parliament, which is good and wholesome Laws, did prosper, and does yet
continue to this day. For according to the Lord Chancellours admonition, there
were that Parliament diverse excellent Laws ordained, concerning the Points
which the King recommended.

First, the authority of the Star Chamber, which before subsisted by the
ancient Common-Lawes of the Realm, was confirmed in certain Cases by Act of
Parliament. This Court is one of the sagest and noblest Institutions of this
Kingdom. For in the distribution of Courts of Ordinary Justice (besides the
High-Court of Parliament) in which distribution the King's Bench holds the
Pleas of the Crown, the Commonplace, Pleas Civil, the Exchequer Pleas
concerning the Kings Revenue, and the Chancery the Pretorian power for
mitigating the Rigor of Law, in case of extremity by the conscience of a good
man; there was nevertheless always reserved a high and preheminent power to
the Kings Counsel, in Causes that might in example, or consequence, concern
the state of the Commonwealth, which if they were Criminal, the Counsel used
to sit in the Chamber, called the Star Chamber; if Civil, in the
White-Chamber, or White Hall. And as the Chancery had the Pretorian power for
Equity; so the Star Chamber had the Censorian power for Offenses, under the
degree of Capital. This Court of Star Chamber is compounded of good Elements;
for it consists of four kinds of Persons: Counselors, Peers, Prelates,
and Chief-Iudges. It discerns also principally of four kinds of Causes;
Forces, Frauds, Crimes various of Stellionate, and the Inchoations or middle
acts toward Crimes Capital, or heinous, not actually committed or
perpetrated. But that which was principally aimed at by this Act was Force, and
the two chief Supports of Force, Combination of multitudes, and Maintenance or
Headship of great Persons.

From the general peace of the Country, the Kings care went on to the peace
of the Kings House, and the security of his great Officers and Counselors.
But this Law was somewhat of a strange composition and temper. That if any of
the Kings servants under the degree of a Lord, do conspire the death of any of
the Kings Counsel, or Lord of the Realm, it is made Capital. This Law was
thought to be procured by the Lord Chancellor, who being a stern and haughty
man, and finding he had some mortal Enemies in Court, provided for his own
safety; drowning the envy of it in a general Law, by communicating the
privilege with all other Counselors and Peers, and yet not daring to extend
it further, then to the Kings servants in Checkrowle, lest it should have been
too harsh to the Gentlemen, and other Commons of the Kingdom; who might have
thought their ancient Liberty, and the clemency of the Laws of England
invaded, If the will in any case of Felony should be made the deed. And yet
the reason which the Act yields (that is to say, That he that conspireth the
death of Counselors may be thought indirectly, and by a mean, to conspire the
death of the King himself) is indifferent to all Subjects, as well as to
Servants in Court. But it seems this sufficed to serve the Lord Chancellors
turn at this time. But yet he lived to need a General Law, for that he
grew afterward as odious to the Country, as he was then to the Court.

From the peace of the Kings House, the Kings care extended to the peace of
Private Houses and Families. For there was an excellent Moral Law molded
thus; The taking and carrying away of Women forcibly, and against their will
(except Female-Wards and Bond-women) was made Capital. The Parliament wisely
and justly conceiving, that the obtaining of Women by force into Possession
(howsoever afterward Assent might follow by Allurements) was but a Rape drawn
forth in length, because the first Force drew on all the rest.

There was made also another Law for Peace in general, and repressing of
Murders and Man-slaughters, and was in amendment of the Common Laws of the
Realm, being this: That whereas by the Common Law, the Kings-suit in case of
Homicide, did expect The year and the day, allowed to the Parties Suit by way
of Appeal; and that it was found by experience, that the Party was many times
compounded with, and many times wearied with the Suit, so that in the end such
Suit was let fall, and by that time the matter was in a manner forgotten, and
thereby Prosecution at the Kings suit by Indictment (which is ever best,
Flagrante crimine) neglected; it was ordained, That the Suit by Indictment
might be taken as well at any time within the year and the day, as after, not
preiudicing nevertheless the Parties Suit.

The King began also then, as well in Wisdom as in Justice to pare a little
the Privilege of Clergy, ordaining, That Clerks convict should be burned in
the hand, both because they might taste of some corporal punishment, and that
they might carry a Brand of infamy. But for this good Acts sake, the King
himself was after branded by PERKINS Proclamation, for an execrable breaker of
the Rites of Holy Church.

Another Law was made for the better Peace of the Country; by which Law the
Kings Officers and Farmors were to forfeit their Places and Holds, in case of
unlawful Retainer, or partaking in Routs and unlawful Assemblies.

These were the Laws that were made for repressing of Force, which those times
did chiefly require; and were so prudently framed, as they are found fit for
all succeeding times, and so continue to this day.

There were also made good and politic Laws that Parliament against Usury,
which is the Bastard use of Money; And against unlawful Chieuances and
Exchanges, which is Bastard Usury; And also for the security of the Kings
Customs; And for the employment of the Procedures of Foreign Commodities,
brought in by Merchant-strangers, upon the Native Commodities of the Realm;
Together with some other Laws of less importance.

But howsoever the Laws made in that Parliament did bear good and wholesome
Fruit; yet the Subsidy granted at the same time, bare a Fruit, that proved
harsh and bitter. All was inned at last into the Kings Barn; but it was after
a Storm. For when the Commissioners entered into the Taxation of the Subsidy
in Yorkshire, and the Bishopric of Duresme; the people upon a sudaine grew
into great mutiny, and said openly, that they had endured of late years a
thousand miseries, and neither could nor would pay the Subsidy. This (no
doubt) proceeded not simply of any present necessity, but much by reason of
the old humor of those Countries, where the memory of King RICHARD was so
strong, that it lies like Lees in the bottom of men's hearts; and if the
Vessel was but stirred, it would come up. And (no doubt) it was partly also by
the instigation of some factious Malcontents, that bare principal stroke
amongst them. Hereupon the Commissioners being somewhat astonished, deferred
the matter unto the Earl of Northumberland, who was the principal man of
Authority in those Parts. The Earl forthwith wrote unto the Court, signifying
to the King plainly enough in what flame he found the people of those
Countries, and praying the Kings direction. The King wrote back peremptorily,
That he would not have one penny abated, of that which had been granted to
him by Parliament, both because it might encourage other Countries to pray the
like Release, or Mitigation, and chiefly, because he would never endure, that
the base Multitude should frustrate the Authority of the Parliament, wherein
their Votes and Consents were concluded. Upon this dispatch from Court, the
Earl assembled the principal Justices and Freeholders of the Country; and
speaking to them in that imperious Language wherein the King had written to
him, which needed not (save that an Harsh business was unfortunately fallen
into the hands of a Harsh-man) did not only irritate the People, but make them
conceive, by the stoutnesse and haughtiness of delivery of the Kings Errand;
that himself was the Author or principal Perswader of that Counsel.
Whereupon the meaner sort routed together, and suddenly assayling the Earl in
his House, slew him, and diverse of his servants. And rested not there, but
creating for their Leader Sir JOHN EGREMOND, a factious person, and one that
had of a long time borne an ill Talent toward the King; and being animated
also by a base Fellow, called JOHN A CHAMBER, a very Boutefeu, who bare much
sway amongst the vulgar and popular, entered into open Rebellion, and gave out
in flat terms, that they would go against King HENRY, and fight with him for
the maintenance of their Liberties.

When the King was advertised of this new Insurrection (being almost a Fever,
that took him every year) after his manner little troubled therewith, he
sent THOMAS Earl of Surrey (whom he had a little before not only released
out of the Tower, and pardoned, but also received to special favor) with a
competent Power against the Rebels; who fought with the principal Band of
them, and defeated them, and took alive JOHN A CHAMBER, their firebrand. As
for Sir JOHN EGREMOND, he fled into Flanders, to the Lady MARGARET of
Burgundy; whose Palace was the Sanctuary and Receptacle of all Traitors
against the King. JOHN A CHAMBER was executed at York, in great state; for he
was hanged upon a Gibbet raised a Stage higher in the midst of a square
Gallows, as a Traitor Paramount; And a number of his men that were his chief
Accomplices, were hanged upon the lower Story round about him; and the rest were
generally pardoned. Neither did the King himself omit his custom, to be first
or second in all his warlike Exploits; making good his Word, which was usual
with him when he heard of Rebels; that He desired but to see them. For
immediately after he had sent down the Earl of Surrey, he marched toward them
himself in person. And although in his journey he heard news of the Victory,
yet he went on as far as York, to pacify and settle those Countries. And
that done returned to London, leaving the Earl of Surrey for his Lieutenant in
the Northern parts, and Sir RICHARD TVNSTALL for his principal Commissioner,
to levy the Subsidy, whereof he did not remit a Denier.

About the same time that the King lost so good a Servant, as the Earl of
Northumberland, he lost likewise a faithful friend and Allie of JAMES the
third, King of Scotland, by a miserable disaster. For this unfortunate Prince,
after a long smother of discontent, and hatred of many of his Nobility and
People, breaking forth at times into seditions and alterations of Court, was at
last distressed by them, having taken Arms, and surprised the person of Prince
JAMES his son, partly by force, partly by threats, that they would otherwise
deliver up the Kingdom to the King of England, to shadow their Rebellion, and
to be the titular and painted Head of those Arms. Whereupon the King (finding
himself too weak) sought unto King HENRY, as also unto the Pope, and the King
of France, to compose those troubles, between him and his Subjects. The Kings
accordingly interposed their Mediation in a round and Princely manner: Not only
by way of request and persuasion, but also by way of protestation of menace;
declaring, that they thought it to be the common Cause of all Kings, If
Subjects should be suffered to give Laws unto their Sovereign; and that they
would accordingly resent it, and revenge it. But the Rebels that had shaken off
the greater Yoke of Obedience, had likewise cast away the lesser Tie of
Respect. And Fury prevailing above Fear, made answer, That there was no
talking of Peace, except the King would resignehis Crown. Whereupon (Treaty
of Accord taking no place) it came up to a Battle, at Bannocks Bourne by
Striuelin. In which Battle the King transported with wrath and just
indignation, inconsideratly fighting and precipitating the charge, before his
whole numbers came up to him, was (notwithstanding the contrary express and
straight commandment of the Prince his son) slain in the Pursuit, being
fled to a Mill, situate in the field, where the Battle was fought.

As for the Popes Ambassie, which was sent by ADRIAN DE CASTELLO an Italian
Legate) and perhaps as those times were might have prevailed more) it came too
late for the Ambassie, but not for the Ambassador. For passing through England,
and being honorably entertained, and dreceiued of King HENRY; (who ever
applied himself with much respect to the Sea of Rome) he fell into great
grace with the King, and great familiarity and friendship with MORTON the
Chancellor. In so much as the King taking a liking to him, and finding him to
his mind, preferred him to the Bishopric of Hereford, and afterward to that
of Bath and Wells, and employed him in many of his affairs of State, that had
relation to Rome. He was a man of great learning, wisdom, and dexteritle in
business of State; and having not long after ascended to the degree of
Cardinal, paid the King large tribute of his gratitude, in diligent and
judicious advertisement of the occurrents of Italy. Nevertheless in the end
of his time, he was partaker of the conspiracy, which Cardinal ALPHONSO
PETRVCCI, and some other Cardinals had plotted against the life of Pope LEO.
And this offense in it self so heinous, was yet in him aggrauared by the
motive thereof, which was not malice or discontent, but an aspiring mind to the
Papacy. And in this height of impiety there wanted not an intermixture of
leuitie and folly; for that (as was generally believed) he was animated to
expect the Papacy, by a fatal Mockery, the prediction of a Southsaier, which
was; That one should succeed Pope LEO, whose name should be ADRIAN, an aged
man of mean birth, and of great learning and wisdom. By which Character and
figure, he took himself to be described though it were fulfilled of ADRIAN
the Flemming, son of a Dutch Brewer, Cardinal of Tortosa, and Preceptor unto
CHARLES the Fifth; the same that not changing his Christen-name, was afterward
called ADRIAN the Sixth.

But these things happened in the year following, which was the fifth of this
King. But in the end of the fourth year the King had called again his
Parliament, not as it seems for any particular occasion of State. But the
former Parliament being ended somewhat suddenly, in regard of the preparation
for Britain, the King thought he had not remunerated his people sufficiently
with good Laws, which evermore was his Retribution for Treasure. And finding
by the Insurrection in the North, there was coffeehouse abroad, in respect
of the Subsidy, he thought it good to give his Subjects yet further
contentment, and comfort in that kind. Certainly his times for good
Commonwealths Laws did excel. So as he may justly be celebrated for the best
Law giver to this Nation, after King EDWARD the first. For his Laws (who so
marks them well) are deep, and not vulgar; not made upon the Spur of a
particular Occasion for the Present, but out of Providence of the Future, to
make the Estate of his People still more and more happy; after the manner of
the Legislators in ancient and Heroical Times.

First therefore he made a Law, suitable to his own Acts and Times. For as
himself had in his Person and Marriage made a final Concord, in the great
Suit and Title for the Crown; so by this Law he settled the like Peace and
Quiet in the private Possessions of the Subjects. Ordaining, That Fines
thence-forth should be final, to conclude all Strangers Rights; and that upon
Fines levied, and solemnly proclaimed, the Subject should have his time of
Watch for five years after his Title accrued; which if he fore-passed, his
Right should be bound for ever after; with some exception nevertheless, of
Minors, Married-Women, and such incompetent Persons.

This Statute did in effect but restore an ancient Statute of the Realm, which
was it self also made but in affirmance of the Common Law. The alteration had
been by a Statute, commonly called the Statute of Non-claime, made in the time
of EDWARD the Third. And surely this Law was a kind of Prognostic of the good
Peace, which since his time has (for the most part) continued in this
Kingdom, until this day. For Statutes of Non-Claime are fit for times of
War, when men's heads are troubled, that they cannot intend their Estate; But
Statutes, that quiet Possessions, are fittest for Times of Peace, to extinguish
Suits and Contentions, which is one of the Banes of Peace.

Another Statute was made of singular Policy, for the Population apparently,
and (if it be thoroughly considered) for the Soldiery, and Militar Forces of
the Realm.

Enclosures at that time began to be more frequent, whereby Arrable Land (which
could not be manured without people and Families) was turned into Pasture,
which was easily rid by a few Herds men; and Tenancies for Years, Lives, and
At Will (whereupon much of the Yeomanrie lived) were turned into Demesnes. This
bred a decay of People, and (by consequence) a decay of Towns, Churches,
Tithes, and the like. The King likewise knew full well, and in no wise forgot,
that there ensued with all upon this a decay and diminution of Subsidy and
Taxes; for the more Gentlemen, ever the lower books of Subsidies. In remedying
of this inconvenience, the Kings Wisdom was admirable, and the Parliaments at
that time. Enclosures they would not forbid, for that had been to forbid the
improuement of the Patrimony of the Kingdom; nor Tillage they would not
compel, for that was to strive with Nature and Utility. But they took a
course to take away depopulating Enclosures, and depopulating Pasturage, and
yet not by that name, or by any Imperious express Prohibition, but by
consequence. The Ordinance was, That all Houses of Husbandry, that were used
with twenty Acres of Ground, and upwards, should be maintained and kept up
for ever; together with a competent Proportion of Land to be used and occupied
with them; and in no wise to be seruered from them, as by another Statute, made
afterward in his Successors time, was more fully declared. This upon
Forfeiture to be taken; not by way of Popular Action, but by seizure of the
Land it self. by the King and Lords of the Fee, as to half the Profits, till
the Houses and Lands were restored. By this means the Houses being kept up,
did of necessity enforce a Dweller; and the proportion of Land for Occupation
being kept up, did of necessity enforce that Dweller; not to be a Beggar or
Cottager, but a man of some substance, that might keep Hiends and Servants,
and set the Plough on going. This did wonderfully concern the Might and
Manner-hood of the Kingdom, to have Fermes, as it were of a Standard
sufficient to maintain an able Body out of Penury, and did in effect amortize
a great part of the Lands of the Kingdom unto the Hold and Occupation of the
Yeomanrie or Middle-people, of a condition between Gentlemen, and Cottagers,
or Peasants. Now, how much this did advance the Militar Power of the Kingdom,
is apparent by the true Principles of War, and the examples of other
Kingdoms. For it has been held by the general Opinion of men of best
Judgment in the wars (howsoever some few have varied, and that it may
receive some distinction of Case) that the principal Strength of an Army
consists in the Infanterie or Foot. And to make good Infanterie, it requires
men bred, not in a servile or indigent fashion, but in some free and plentiful
manner. Therefore if a State run most to Noblemen and Gentlemen, and that the
Husbandmen and Plough-men be but as their Work-folkes and Laborers, or else
mere Cottagers (which are but Housed-Beggers) you may have a good Cauallerie,
but never good stable Bands of Foot; like to Coppice-Woods, that if you leave
in them Staddles too thick, they will run to Bushes and Briars, and have
little clean Underwood. And this is to be seen in France, and Italy, and
lome other Parts abroad, where in effect all is Noblesse, or Pesantrie, I
speak of People out of Towns, and no middle People; and therefore no good
Forces of Foot: Insomuch, as they are enforced to employ Mercenarie Bands, of
Switzers and the like, for their Battalions of Foot: Whereby also it comes to
pass, that those Nations have much People, and few Soldiers. Whereas the King
saw, that contrariwise it would follow, that England though much less in
Territory, yet should have infinitely more Soldiers of their native Forces,
then those other Nations have. Thus did the King secretly sow Hidraes teeth,
whereupon (according to the Poets fiction) should rise up Armed men for the
service of this Kingdom.

The King also (having care to make his Realm potent, as well by Sea as by
Land) for the better maintenance of the Navy, ordained; That wines and woads
from the parts of Gascoigne and Languedocke, should not be brought but in
English bottomes; Bowing the ancient Policy of this Estate, from consideration
of Plenty, to consideration of Power. For that almost all the ancient Statutes
incite by all means Merchant-Strangers, to bring in all sorts of Commodities;
having for end Cheapnesse, and not looking to the point of State concerning the
Nauall-power.

The King also made a Statute in that Parliament Monitory and Minatory, toward
Justices of Peace, that they should duly execute their office, inuiting
complaints against them, first to their Fellow-Iustices, then to the Justices
of Assise, then to the King or Chancellor; and that a Proclamation, which he
had published of that Tenor, should be read in open Sessions four times a
year, to keep them awake. Meaning also to have his laws executed, and thereby
to reap either Obedience or Forfeitures; (wherein toward his latter times he
did decline too much to the left hand) he did ordain remedy against the
practice that was grown in use, to stop and dampe Informations upon Penal
Laws, by procuring Informations by collusion to be put in by the Confederates
of the Delinquents, to be faintly prosecuted, and let fall at pleasure, and
pleading them in Bar of the Informations, which were prosecuted with effect.

He made also Laws for the correction of the Mint, and counterfaiting of
foreign Coin current. And that no payment in Gold, should be made to any
Merchant-stranger, the better to keep Treasure within the Realm, for that
Gold was the metal that lay in leastroome.

He made also Statutes for the maintenance of Draperie, and the keeping of
Wools within the Realm; and not only so, but for stinting, and limiting the
prices of Cloth, one for the Finer, and another for the Courser sort. Which I
note, both because it was a rare thing to set prices by Statute, especially
upon our Home-Commodities; and because of the wise Modele of this Act, not
prescribing Prices, but stinting them not to exceed a rate, that the Clothier
might drape accordingly as he might afford.

Diverse other good Statutes were made that Parliament, but these were the
principal. And here I do desire those, into whose hands this work shall
fall, that they do take in good part my long insisting upon the Laws, that
were made in this Kings reign. Whereof I have these reasons; Both because it
was the preheminent virtue and merit of this King, to whose memory I do
honor; and because it has some correspondence to my Person; but chiefly,
because (in my judgment) it is some defect even in the best writers of
History, that they do not often enough summarily deliver and set down the
most memorable Laws, that passed in the times whereof they write, being indeed
the principal Acts of Peace For though they may be had in Original Books of
Law themselves; yet that informs not the judgment of Kings and Counselors,
and Persons of Estate, so well as to see them described, and entered in the
Table and Pourtrait of the Times.

About the same time, the King had a Loan from the City of Four thousand
pounds; which was double to that they lent before, and was duly and orderly
paid back at the day, as the former likewise had been. The King ever choosing
rather to borrow too soon, then to pay too late, and so keeping up his Credit.

Neither had the King yet cast off his cares and hopes touching Britain, but
thought to master the occasion by Policy, though his Arms had been
unfortunate, and to bereave the French King of the fruit of his Victory. The
sum of his design was, to encourage MAXIMILIAN to go on with his suit, for
the marriage of ANNE, the heir of Britain, and to aid him to the
consummation thereof. But the affairs of MAXIMILIAN were at that time in great
trouble and combustion, by a Rebellion of his Subjects in Flanders; especially
those of Bruges and Gaunt, whereof the Town of Bruges (at such time as
MAXIMILIAN was there in person) had suddenly armed in tumult, and slain some
of his principal Officers, and taken himself prisoner, and held him in
durance, till they had enforced him, and some of his Counselors, to take a
solemn oath, to pardon all their offenses, and never to question and revenge
the same in time to come. Nevertheless FREDERICK the Emperor would not
suffer this reproach and indignity offered to his son to pass, but made
sharp wars upon Flanders, to reclaim and chastise the Rebels. But the Lord
RAVENSTEIN, a principal person about MAXIMILIAN, and one that had taken the
oath of Abolition with his Master, pretending the Religion thereof, but indeed
upon private ambition, and as it was thought) instigated and corrupted from
France, for sooke the Emperor and MAXIMILIAN his Lord, and made himself an
Head of the Popular Party, and seized upon the Towns of Ipre and Sluice, with
both the Castles. And forthwith sent to the Lord CORDS, Governor of Picardie
under the French King, to desire aid, and to move him, that he on the behalf
of the French King would be Protector of the United Towns, and by force of
Arms reduce the rest. The Lord CORDS was ready to embrace the occasion,
which was partly of his own setting, and sent forthwith greater Forces, then
it had been possible for him to raise on the sudden, if he had not looked
for such a summons before, in aid of the Lord RAVENSTEIN, and the Flemmings,
with instructions to inuest the Towns between France and Bruges. The French
Forces besieged a little Town called Dixmue, where part of the Flemmish Forces
joined with them. While they lay at this siege, the King of England, upon
pretense of the safety of the English Pale about Calice, but in truth being
loath that MAXIMILIAN should become contemptible, and thereby be shaken off by
the States of Britain about this marriage, sent over the Lord MORLEY with a
thousand men unto the Lord DAVBIGNY, then Deputy of Calice, with secret
instructions to aid MAXIMILIAN, and to raise the siege of Dixmue. The Lord
DAVBIGNY (giving it out that all was for the strengthening of the English
Marches) drew out of the Garrisons of Calice, Hammes, and Guines, to the number
of a thousand Men more. So that with the fresh Succors that came under the
Conduct of the Lord MORLEY, they made up to the number of two thousand, or
better. Which Forces joining with some Companies of Almaines, put themselves
into Dixmue, not perceived by the Enemies; and passing through the Town with
some reenforcement (from the Forces that were in the Town) assailed the
Enemies Camp, negligently guarded, as being out of fear; where there was a
bloody fight, in which the English and their Partakers obtained the victory,
and slew to the number of eight thousand Men, with the loss on the English
part of a hundred or there abouts; amongst whom was the Lord MORLEY. They took
also their great Ordnance, with much rich spoils, which they carried to
Newport, whence the Lord DAVBIGNY returned to Calice, leaving the hurt Men, and
some other Voluntaries in Newport. But the Lord CORDS being at Ipre with a
great power of Men, thinking to recover the loss and disgrace of the fight at
Dixmue, came presently on, and sat down before Newport, and besieged it; and
after some days siege, he resolved to try the fortune of an Assault: Which
he did one day, and succeeded therein so far, that he had taken the
principal Tower and Fort in that City, and planted upon it the French Banner.
Whence nevertheless they were presently beaten forth by the English, by the
help of some fresh Succors of Archers arriving by good fortune (at the
instant) in the Haven of Newport. Whereupon the Lord CORDS discouraged, and
measuring the new Succors (which were small) by the Success (which was great)
levied his Siege. By this means, matters grew more exasperate between the two
Kings of England and France, for that in the war of Flanders, the auxiliarie
Forces of French and English were much blouded one against another. Which Blood
rankled the more, by the vain words of the Lord CORDS, that declared himself
an open Enemy of the English, beyond that that appertained to the present
Service; making it a common byword of his, That he could be content to lie in
Hell seven years, so he might win Calice from the English.

The King having thus vpheld the Reputation of MAXIMILIAN, advised him now to
press on his Marriage with Britain to a conclusion. Which MAXIMILIAN
accordingly did, and so far forth prevailed both with the young Lady, and
with the principal persons about her, as the Marriage was consummate by
Proxy, with a Ceremony at that time in these Parts new. For she was not
only publicly contracted, but stated as a Bride, and solemnly Bedded; and
after she was laid, there came in MAXIMILIANS Ambassador with letters of
Procuration, and in the presence of sundry Noble Personages, Men and Women, put
his Leg (stripped naked to the Knee) between the Espousall Sheets; to the end,
that that Ceremony might be thought to amount to a Consummation, and actual
Knowledge. This done, MAXIMILIAN (whose property was to leave things then,
when they were almost come to perfection, and to end them by imagination; like
ill Archers, that draw not their Arrows up to the Head: and who might as
easily have bedded the Lady himself, as to have made a Play and Disguise of
it) thinking now all assured, neglected for a time his further Proceeding, and
intended his Wars. Mean while, the French King (consulting with his Divines,
and finding that this pretended Consummation was rather an Invention of Court,
then any ways valide by the Laws of the Church) went more really to work,
and by secret Instruments and cunning Agents, as well Matrons about the young
Lady as Counselors, first sought to remove the Point of Religion and Honor
out of the mind of the Lady her self, wherein there was a double labor. For
MAXIMILIAN was not only contracted unto the Lady, but MAXIMILIANS daughter was
likewise contracted to King CHARLES. So as the Marriage halted upon both feet,
and was not clear on either side: But for the Contract with King CHARLES, the
Exception lay plain and fair; for that MAXIMILIANS daughter was under years
of consent, and so not bound by Law, but a power of Disagreement left to either
part. But for the Contract made by MAXIMILIAN with the Lady her self, they
were harder driven: having nothing to allege, but that it was done without the
consent of her Sovereign Lord, King CHARLES, whose Ward and Client she was,
and He to her in place of a Father; and therefore it was void, and of no force,
for want of such Consent. Which defect (they said) though it would not euacuate
a Marriage, after Cohabitation, and Actual Cosummation; yet it was enough to
make void a Contract. For as for the pretended Consummation, they made sport
with it, and said: That it was an argument, that MAXIMILIAN was a Widdower, and
a cold Wooer, that could content himself to be a Bridgrome by Deputy, and
would not make a little Journey, to put all out of question. So that the young
Lady, wrought upon by these Reasons, finely instilled by such as the French
King (who spared for no Rewards or Promises) had made on his side; and allured
likewise by the present Glory and Greatness of King CHARLES. (being also a
young King, and a Bachelor) and loath to make her Country the Seat of a long
and miserable War; secretly yielded to accept of King CHARLES. But during
this secret Treaty with the Lady, the better to save it from Blasts of
Opposition and Interruption, King CHARLES resorting to his wonted Arts, and
thinking to carry the Marriage, as he had carried the Wars, by entertaining
the King of England in vain belief, sent a solemn Embassage by FRANCIS Lord
of Luximburge, CHARLES MARIGNIAN and ROBERT GAGVIEN, General of the Order of
the Bonnes Hommes of the Trinity, to treat a Peace and League with the King;
accoupling it with an Article in the nature of a Request, that the French King
might with the Kings good will (according unto his right of Seigniorie and
Tutelage) dispose of the Marriage of the young Duchess of Britain, as he
should think good; offering by a Judicial proceeding to make void the
Marriage of MAXIMILIAN by Proxy. Also all this while the better to amuse the
world, he did continue in his Court and custody the Daughter of MAXIMILIAN,
who formerly had been sent unto him, to be bred and educated in France; not
dismissing or renvoying her, but contrariwise professing and giving out
strongly, that he meant to proceed with that Match. And that for the Duchess
of Britain, he desired only to preserve his right of Seigniory, and to give
her in Marriage to some such Allye, as might depend upon him.

When the three Commissioners came to the Court of England, they delivered
their Embassage unto the King, who remitted them to his Council; where some
days after they had Audience, and made their Proposition by the Prior of the
Trinity (who though he were third in place, yet was held the best Speaker of
them) to this effect.

MY Lords, the King our Master, the greatest and mightiest King that reigned in
France since CHARLES the Great (whose Name he bears) has nevertheless
thought it no disparagement to his Greatness, at this time to propound a
Peace, yea, and to pray a Peace with the King of England. For which purpose he
has sent us his Commissioners, instructed and enabled with full and ample
power, to treat and conclude; giving us further in charge, to open in some
other business the secrets of his own intentions. These be indeed the
precious Loue-tokens between great Kings, to communicate one with another the
true state of their affairs, and to pass by nice Points of Honor, which
ought not to give Law unto Affection. This I do assure your Lordships; It is
not possible for you to imagine the true and cordial Love, that the King our
Master bears to your Sovereign, except you were near him, as we are. He
uses his Name with so great respect; he remembers their first acquaintance at
Paris with so great contentment; nay, he never speaks of him, but that
presently he falls into discourse of the miseries of great Kings, in that they
cannot converse with their Equals, but with Servants. This affection to your
Kings Person and Virtues, GOD has put into the Heart of our Master, no doubt
for the good of Christendom, and for purposes yet unknown to us all. For
other Root it cannot have, since it was the same to the Earl of Richmond, that
it is now to the King of England. This is therefore the first motive that makes
our King to desire Peace, and League with your Sovereign: Good affection, and
somewhat that he finds in his own Heart. This affection is also armed with
reason of Estate. For our King does in all candor and franknesse of dealing
open himself unto you; that having an honorable, yea, and a holy Purpose, to
make a Voyage and War in remote Parts, he considers that it will be of no
small effect, in point of Reputation to his enterprise, if it be known abroad,
that he is in good peace with all his Neighbor Princes, and specially with
the King of England, whom for good causes he esteems most.

But now (my Lords) give me leave to use a few words to remove all scruples and
misse-vnderstandings, between your Sovereign and ours, concerning some late
Actions; which if they be not cleared, may perhaps hinder this Peace. To the
end, that for matters past, neither King may conceive unkindness of other, nor
think the other conceiueth unkindness of him. The late Actions are two; That
of Britain, and that of Flanders. In both which, it is true, that the
Subjects swords of both Kings, have encountered and stricken, and the ways and
Inclinations also of the two Kings, in respect of their Confederates and
Allies, have severed.

For that of Britain; The King your Sovereign knows best what has passed.
It was a War of necessity on our Masters part. And though the Motives of it
were sharp and piquant as could be, yet did he make that War rather with an
Oliue-branch, then a Laurel-Branch in his Hand, more desiring Peace then
Victory. Besides, from time to time he sent (as it were) Blank-papers to your
King, to write the conditions of Peace. For though both his Honor and Safety
went upon it, yet he thought neither of them too precious, to put into the King
of Englands hands. Neither does your King on the other side make any unfriendly
interpretation, of your Kings sending of succors to the Duke of Britain; for
the King knows well, that many things must be done of Kings for satisfaction
of their People, and it is not hard to discern what is a Kings own. But this
matter of Britain is now (by the Act of GOD) ended and passed; and (as the
King hops) like the way of a Ship in the Sea, without leaving any impression
in either of the Kings minds; as he is sure for his part it has not done in
his.

For the Action of Flanders; As the former of Britain was a War of
necessity, so this was a War of Justice; which with a good King is of equal
necessity, with danger of Estate, for else he should leave to be a King. The
Subjects of Burgundy are Subjects in Chief to the Crown of France, and their
Duke the Homager and Vassal of France. They had wont to be good Subjects,
howsoever MAXIMILIAN has of late distempered them. They fled to the King for
Justice, and deliverance from oppression, Justice he could not deny; Purchase
he did not seek. This was good for MAXIMILIAN, if he could have seen it in
people mutined, to arrect Fury, and prevent Despair. My Lords, it may be this
I have said is needless, save that the King our Master is tender in any thing,
that may but glance upon the friendship of England. The amity between the two
Kings (no doubt) stands entire and inuiolate. And that their Subjects swords
have clashed, it is nothing unto the public Peace of the Crowns; it being a
thing very usual in auxiliarie Forces of the best and straitest Confederates,
to meet and draw blood in the Field. Nay, many times there be Aides of the
same Nation on both sides, and yet it is not (for all that) A Kingdom divided
in it self.

It rests (my Lords) that Jimpart unto you a matter, that I know your
Lordships all will much rejoice to hear; as that which imports the Christian
Commonweal more, then any Action that has happened of long time. The King our
Master has a purpose and determination, to make War upon the kingdom of
Naples; being now in the possession of a Bastardslip of Arragon, but
appertaining unto his Majesty, by clear and undoubted right; which if he
should not by just Arms seek to recover, he could neither acquit his
Honor, nor answer it to his People. But his Noble and Christian thoughts rest
not here. For his Resolution and Hope is, to make the Re-conquest of Naples,
but as a Bridge, to transport his Forces into Grecia; and not to spare Blood or
Treasure (If it were to the impawning of his Crown, and dis-peopling of
France) till either he has overthrown the Empire of the OTTOMANS, or taken
it in his way to Paradise. The King knows well, that this is a design; that
could not arise in the mind of any King, that did not steadfastly look up unto
GOD, whose quarrel this is, and from whom comes both the Will, and the Deed.
But yet it is agreeable to the Person that he bears (though unworthy) of the
Thrice-Christian King, and the eldest Son of the Church. Whereunto he is also
invited by the Example (in more ancient time) of King HENRY the Fourth of
England, (the first Renowned King of the House of LANCASTER; Ancestour, though
not Progenitour to your King) who had a purpose toward the end of his time (as
you know better) to make an Expedition into the Holy Land; and by the Example
also (present before his eyes) of that Honorable and Religious War which the
King of Spain now makes, and has almost brought to perfection, for the
recovery of the Realm of Granada from the Moors. And although this
Enterprise may seem vast and unmeasured, for the King to attempt that by his
own Forces, wherein heretofore a Conjunction of most of the Christian Princes
has found work enough; yet his Majesty wisely considers, that sometimes
smaller Forces being united under one Command, are more effectual in Proof
(though not so promising in Opinion and Fame) then much greater Forces,
variously compounded by Associations and Leagues; which commonly in a short
time after their Beginnings, turn to Dissociations and Divisions. But my
(Lords) that which is as a Voice from Heaven that called the King to this
Enterprise, is a Rent at this time in the House of the OTTOMANS. I do not say,
but there has been Brother against Brother in that House before, but never
any that had refuge to the Arms of the Christians, as now has GEMES, (Brother
unto BAIAZETH, that reigns) the fore brauer Man of the two; the other being
between a Monk and a Philosoper and better read in the Alcoran and Auerroes,
then able to weild the Scepter of so warlike an Empire. This therefore is the
King our Masters memorable and heroical Resolution for an Holy War. And
because he carries in this the Person of a Christian Soldier, as well as of
a Great Temporal Monarch; he begins with Humility, and is content for
this cause, to beg Peace at the hands of other Christian Kings. There
remains only rather a Civil Request, then any essential part of our
Negotiation, which the King makes to the King your Sovereign. The King (as
the World knows) is Lord in Chief of the Duchy of Britain. The Marriage of
the Heir belongs to him as Guardian. This is a private Patrimoniall Right,
and no Business of Estate: yet nevertheless (to run a fair course with
your King; whom he desires to make another Himself, and to be one and the
same thing with him) his Request is, That with the Kings Favor and Consent, he
may dispose of her Marriage, as he thinks good, and make void the intruded
and pretended Marriage of MAXIMILIAN, according to Justice. This (my Lords) is
all that I have to say, desiring your pardon for my weakness in the delivery.

THus did the French Ambassadors with great show of their Kings affection, and
many sugared words seek to adulce all matters between the two Kings, having
two things for their ends; The one, to keep the King quiet till the Marriage
of Britain was past, and this was but a Summer fruit, which they thought was
almost ripe and would be soon gathered. The other was more lasting; and that
was to put him into such a temper as he might be no disturbance or impediment
to the voyage for Italy. The Lords of the Council were silent; and said only,
That they knew the Ambassadors would look for no answer, till they had
reported to the King; And so they rose from Council. The King could not well
tell what to think of the Marriage of Britain. He saw plainly the ambition of
the French King was to impatronize himself of the Duchy; but he wondered he
would bring into his House a litigious Marriage, especially considering who was
his Successor. But weighing one thing with another, he gave Britain for lost;
but resolved to make his profit of this business of Britain, as a quarrel
for War; and that of Naples, as a Wrench and mean for Peace; being well
advertised, how strongly the King was bent upon that Action. Having therefore
conferred diverse times with his Council, and keeping himself somewhat close;
he gave a direction to the Chancellor, for a formal answer to the Ambassadors,
and that he did in the presence of his Council. And after calling the
Chancellor to him apart, bade him speak in such language, as was fit for a
Treaty that was to end in a Breach; and gave him also a special Caveat, that
he should not use any words, to discourage the voyage of Italy. Soon after
the Ambassadors were sent for to the Council, and the Lord Chancellor spoke to
them in this sort.

MY Lords Ambassadors, I shall make answer by the Kings Commandment, unto the
eloquent Declaration of you my Lord Prior, in a brief and plain manner. The
King forgets not his former love and acquaintance with the King your Master.
But of this there needs no repetition. For if it be between them as it was,
it is well; if there be any alteration, it is not words that will make it up.

For the Business of Britain, the King finds it a little strange that the
French King makes mention of it, as matter of well deserving at his hand. For
that Deserving was no more, but to make him his Instrument, to surprise one of
his best Confederates. And for the Marriage, the King would not meddle in it if
your Master would marry by the Book, and not by the Sword.

For that of Flanders, if the Subjects of Burgundy had appealed to your King,
as their Chief Lord, at first, by way of Supplication; it might have had a
show of Justice. But it was a new form of Process, for Subjects to imprison
their Prince first, and to slay his Officers, and then to be Complainants. The
King says, That sure he is, when the French King, and himself sent to the
Subjects of Scotland (that had taken Arms against their King) they both spoke
in another Style, and did in princely manner signify their detestation of
Popular Attentates, upon the Person or Authority of Princes. But my Lords
Ambassadors, the King leaves these two actions thus: That on the one side, he
has not received any manner of satisfaction from you concerning them; and on
the other, that he does not apprehend them so deeply, as in respect of them,
to refuse to treat of Peace, if other things may go hand in hand. As for the
War of Naples, and the Design against the Turk; the King has commanded me
expressly to say, That he does wish with all his heart, to his good Brother
the French King, that his Fortunes may succeed according to his Hopes, and
honorable intentions. And whenever he shall hear, that he is prepared for
Grecia, as your Master is pleased now to say, that he beggeth a Peace of the
King, so the King will then beg of him a part in that War.

But now my Lords Ambassadors, I am to propound unto you somewhat on the Kings
part. The King your Master has taught our King what to say and demand. You say
(my Lord Prior) that your King is resolved to recover his right to Naples,
wrongfully detained from him. And that if he should not thus do, he could not
acquit his Honor, nor answer it to his People. Think (my Lords) that the
King our Master says the same thing over again to you touching Normandy,
Guien, Angeou, yea and the Kingdom of France it self. I cannot express it
better then in your own words: If therefore the French King shall consent,
that the King our Masters Title to France (at least Tribute for the same) be
handled in the Treaty, the King is content to go on with the rest; otherwise
he refuses to Treat.

THe Ambassadors being somewhat abashed with this demand, answered in some heat;
That they doubted not, but the King their Sovereigns sword would be able to
maintain his Scepter: And they assured themselves, he neither could nor would
yield to any diminution of the Crown of France either in Territory or
Regalitie. But howsoever, they were too great matters for them to speak of,
having no Commission. It was replied, that the King looked for no other answer
from them; but would forthwith send his own Ambassadors to the French King.
There was a question also asked at the Table, Whether the French King would
agree to have the disposing of the Marriage of Britain with an exception and
exclusion, that he should not marry her himself? To which the Ambassadors
answered; That it was so far out of their Kings thoughts, as they had
received no Instructions touching the same. Thus were the Ambassadors
dismissed, all save the Prior; and were followed immediately by THOMAS Earl of
Ormond, and THOMAS GOLDENSTON Prior of Christ-Church in Canterbury; who were
presently sent over into France. In the mean space, LIONELL Bishop of
Concordia, was sent as Nuntio from Pope ALEXANDER the sixth to both Kings, to
move a Peace between them. For Pope ALEXANDER finding himself pent and locked
up, by a League and Association of the Principal States of Italy, that he
could not make his way for the advancement of his own House (which he
immoderatly thirsted after) was desirous to trouble the waters in Italy, that
he might fish the better; casting the Net, not out of Saint PETER'S, but out of
BORGIA'S Bark. And doubting lest the fears fom England, might stay the French
Kings voyage into Italy, dispatched this Bishop to compose all matters
between the two Kings, if he could. Who first repaired to the French King, and
finding him well inclined (as he conceived) took on his Journey toward
England, and found the English Ambassadors at Calice, on their way toward the
French King. After some conference with them, he was in Honorable manner
transported over into England, where he had audience of the King. But
notwithstanding he had a good Ominous name to have made a Peace, nothing
followed. For in the mean time, the purpose of the French King to marry the
Duchess could be no longer dissembled. Wherefore the English Ambassadors
(finding how things went) took their leave, and returned. And the Prior also
was warned from hence, to depart out of England. Who when he turned his back
(more like a Pedant, then an Ambassador) dispersed a bitter Libell, in Latin
Verse, against the King; unto which the King (though he had nothing of a
Pedant) yet was content to cause an answer to be made in like Verse; and that
as speaking in his own Person, but in a style of Scorn and Sport. About this
time also was borne the Kings second Son HENRY, who afterward reigned. And
soon after followed the solemnization of the marriagee between CHARLES, and
ANNE Duchess of Britain, with whom he received the Duchy of Britain as her
Dowry; the Daughter of MAXIMILIAN being a little before sent home. Which when
it came to the Ears of MAXIMILIAN (who would never believe it till it was
done, being ever the Principal in deceiving himself, though in this the
French King did very handsomely second it) and tumbling it over and over in his
thoughts, that he should at one blow (with such a double scorn) be defeated,
both of the marriage of his daughter, and his own (upon both which he had
fixed high imaginations;) he lost all patience, and casting of the Respects fit
to be continued between great Kings (even when their blood is hottest, and
most risen) fell to bitter Inuectiues against the person and Actions of the
French King. And (by how much he was the less able to do, talking so much the
more) spoke all the Injuries he could devise of CHARLES, saying; That he was
the most perfidious man upon the Earth, and that he had made a marriage
compounded between an Aduoutry and a Rape: which was done (he said) by the just
judgment of God; to the end, that (the Nullitie thereof being so appparant to
all the World) the Race of so unworthy a person might not reign in France. And
forthwith he sent Ambassadors as well to the King of England, as to the King of
Spain, to incite them to War, and to treat a League offensive against
France, promising to concur with great Forces of his own. Hereupon the King
of England (going nevertheless his own way) called a Parliament, it being the
seventh year of his Reign; and the first day of opening thereof (sitting
under his Cloth of Estate) spoke himself unto his Lords, and Commons in this
manner.

MY Lords, and you the Commons, When I purposed to make a War in Britain by
my Lieutenant, I made declaration thereof to you by my Chancellor. But now that
I mean to make a War upon France in Person, I will declare it to you my
Self. That War, was to desend another man's Right, but this is to recover our
own; And that ended by Accident, but we hope this shall end in Victory.

The French King troubles the Christian World. That which he has, is not his
own, and yet he seeks more. He has invested himself of Britain. He
maintains the Rebels in Flanders; and he threatens Italy. For Our Selves, he
has proceeded from Dissimulation, to Neglect; and from Neglect to Contumely.
He has assailed our Confederates: He denies our Tribute: In a word, he seeks
War. So did not his Father, but sought Peace at Our Hands; and so perhaps
will he, when good Counsel or Time, shall make him see as much as his Father
did.

Mean while; let Us make his Ambition, our Advantage; and let us not stand
upon a few Crowns of Tribute, or Acknowledgement, but (by the favor of
Almighty GOD) try Our Right for the Crown of France it self; remembering that
there has been A French King Prisoner in England, and a King of England
Crowned in France. Our Confederates are not diminished. Burgundy is in a
mightier Hand then ever, and never more provoked. Britain cannot help us, but
it may hurt them. New Acquests are more Burden, then Strength. The
Malcontents of his own Kingdom have not been Base, Popular, nor Titularie
Impostors, but of an higher Nature. The King of Spain (doubt ye not) will
join with us, not knowing where the French Kings Ambition will stay. Our Holy
Father the Pope, likes no Tramontanes in Italy. But howsoever it be, this
Matter of Confederates, is rather to be thought on, then reckoned on. For GOD
forbid, but England should be able to get Reason of France, without a Second.

At the Battles of Cressy, Poictiers, Agent-Court, we were of our selves.
France has much people, and few Soldiers. They have no stable Bands of Foot.
Some good Horse they have; but those are Forces, which are least fit for a
Defensive War, where the Actions are in the Assailants choice. It was our
Discords only, that lost France; and (by the Power of GOD) it is the good
Peace which we now enjoy, that will recover it. GOD has hitherto blessed my
Sword. I have in this time that I have Reigned, weeded out my bad Subjects, and
tried my good. My People and I know one another; which breeds Confidence. And
if there should be any bad Blood left in the Kingdom, an Honorable Foreign
War will vent it, or purify it. In this great Business, let me have your
Advice, and Aid. If any of you were to make his Son Knight, you might have
aid of your Tenants by Law. This concerns the Knighthood and Spurs of the
Kingdom, whereof I am Father; and bound not only to seek to maintain it, but
to advance it. But for Matter of Treasure, let it not be taken from the Poorest
Sort; but from those, to whom the Benefit of the War may redound. France is
no Wilderness: and I, that profess Good Husbandry, hope to make the War
(after the Beginnings) to pay it self. Go together in GODS Name, and loose no
time; for I have called this Parliament wholly for this Cause.

THus spoke the King; But for all this, though he showed great forwardness
for a War, not only to his Parliament and Court, but to his Priuie-Councell
likewise, (except the two Bishops and a few more) yet nevertheless in his
secret intentions, he had no purpose to go through with any War, upon
France. But the truth was, that he did but traffic with that War, to make
his Return in money. He knew well, that France was now entire, and at unity
with it self, and never so mighty many years before. He saw by the taste
that he had of his Forces sent into Britain, that the French knew well enough
how to make war with the English; by not putting things to the hazard of a
Battle, but wearing them by long Sieges of Towns, and strong fortified
Encampings. JAMES the Third of Scotland, (his true friend, and Confederate)
gone; and JAMES the Fourth (that had succeeded) wholly at the devotion of
France, and ill affected toward him. As for the Conjunctions of FERDINANDO of
Spain, and MAXIMILIAN; he could make no foundation upon them. For the One had
Power, and not Will; and the Other has Will, and not Power. Besides that,
FERDINANDO had but newly taken breath, from the War with the Moors; and
merchanded at this time with France, for the restoring of the Counties of
Russignon and Perpignian, oppignorated to the French. Neither was he out of
fear of the Discontents, and ill blood within the Realm; which having used
always to repress and appease in person, he was loath they should find him at
a distance beyond Sea, and engaged in war. Finding therefore the
Inconveniences and Difficulties in the prosecution of a War, he cast with
himself how to compass two things. The one, how by the declaration, and
inchoation of a war, to make his Profit. The other, how to come off from the
war, with saving of his Honor. For Profit, it was to be made two ways;
upon his Subjects for the War, and upon his Enemies for the Peace; like a
good Merchant, that makes his gain, both upon the Commodities Exported, and
Imported back again. For the point of Honor, wherein he might suffer, for
giving over the War; he considered well, that as he could not trust upon
the aides of FERDINANDO and MAXIMILIAN for supports of War: so the
impuissance of the one, and the double proceeding of the other, lay fair for
him for occasions to accept of Peace. These things he did wisely foresee, and
did as artificially conduct, whereby all things fell into his lap, as he
desired.

For as for the Parliament, it presently took fire, being affectionate (of
old) the War of France; and desirous afresh to repair the dishonor, they
thought the King sustained by the loss of Britain. Therefore they advised the
King (with great alacrity) to undertake the War of France. And although the
Parliament consisted of the First and Second Nobility (together with
principal Citizens and Townsmen) yet worthily and justly respecting more the
People (whose deputies they were) then their own private Persons, and finding
by the Lord Chancellours speech the Kings inclination that way; they consented
that Commissioners should go forth, for the gathering and leuying of a
Benevolence, from the more able sort. This Tax (called Benevolence) was devised
by EDWARD the Fourth, for which he sustained much Envy. It was abolished by
RICHARD the Third by Act of Parliament, to ingratiate himself with the people;
and it was now revived by the King, but with consent of Parliament, for so it
was not in the time of King EDWARD the Fourth. But by this way he raised
exceeding great sums. Insomuch as the City of London (in those days)
contributed nine thousand pounds and better; and that chiefly levied upon the
wealthier sort. There is a Tradition of a Dilemma, that Bishop MORTON the
Chancellor used, to raise up the Benevolence to higher Rates; and some called
it his Forke, and some his Crotch. For he had couched an Article in the
Instructions to the Commissioners, who were to levy the Benevolence; That if
they met with any that were sparing, they should tell them, That they must
needs have, because they laid up; and if they were spenders, they must needs
have, because it was seen in their Port, and manner of living. So neither
kind came amiss.

This Parliament was merely a Parliament of War; for it was in Substance, but
a declaration of War against France and Scotland, with some Statutes
conducing thereunto; As the severe punishing of Mortpayes, and keeping back of
Soldiers wages in Captains. The like severity for the departure of
Soldiers without license; Strengthening of the Common Law in favor of
Protections, for those that were in the Kings service; And the setting the gate
open and wide, for men to sell or Morgage their lands without Fines for
Alienation, to furnish themselves with money for the War; And lastly, the
voiding of all Scottishmen out of England. There was also a Statute, for the
dispersing of the Standard of the Exchequer, throughout England; thereby to size
Weights and Measures; and two or three more of less importance.

After the Parliament was broken up (which lasted not long) the King went on
with his Preparations for the War of France; yet neglected not in the mean
time the affairs of MAXIMILIAN, for the quieting of Flanders, and restoring
him to his authority amongst his Subjects. For at that time, the Lord of
Rauenstein being not only a Subject rebelled, but a Servant revolted (and so
much the more malicious and violent, by the aid of Bruges and Gaunt) had taken
the Town, and both the Castles of Sluice; as we said before.

And having (by the commodity of the Haven) gotten together certain Ships and
Barks, fell to a kind of Pyraticall Trade; robbing and spoiling, and taking
Prisoners the Ships and Vessels of all Nations, that passed along that Coast,
toward the Mart of Antwerpe, or into any part of Brabant, Zeland, or
Freezland; being ever well victualled from Picardie, besides the commodity of
Victuals from Sluice, and the Country adjacent, and the auailes of his own
Prizes. The French assisted him still underhand; and he likewise (as all men
do, that have been of both sides) thought himself not safe, except he
depended upon a third Person.

There was a small Town some two miles from Bruges, toward the Sea, called
Dam; which was a Fort and Approach to Bruges, and had a relation also to Sluice.
This Town the King of the Romans had attempted often, (not for any worth of
the Town in it self, but because it might choke Bruges, and cut it off from
the Sea) and ever failed. But therewith the Duke of Saxony came down into
Flanders, taking upon him the Person of an Vmpire, to compose things between
MAXIMILIAN and his Subjects; but being (indeed) fast and assured to MAXIMILIAN.
Upon this Pretext of Neutralitie and Treaty, he repaired to Bruges; desiring
of the States of Bruges, to enter peaceably into their Town, with a Retinue of
some number of men of Arms, fit for his Estate; being somewhat the more (as
he said) the better to guard him in a Country, that was up in Arms: and
bearing them in hand, that he was to communicate with them of diverse matters
of great importance, for their good. Which having obtained of them, he sent
his Carriages and Harbingers before him, to provide his Lodging. So that his
Men of War entered the City in good Array, but in peaceable manner, and he
followed. They that went before, enquired still for Innes and Lodgings, as if
they would have rested there all Night, and so went on, till they came to the
Gate, that leads directly toward Dam; and they of Bruges only gazed upon
them and gave them passage. The Captains and inhabitants of Dam also suspected
no harm, from any that passed through Bruges; and discovering Forces a far
off, supposed they had been some Succors, that were come from their Friends,
knowing some Dangers toward them. And so perceiving nothing but well, till it
was too late, suflered them to enter their Town. By which kind of Slight
rather then Stratageme, the Town of Dam was taken and the Town of Bruges
shrewdly blockt up, whereby they took great discouragement.

The Duke of Saxony having won the Town of Dam, sent immediately to the King
to let him know that it was Sluice chiefly, and the Lord RAVENSTEIN, that kept
the Rebellion of Flanders in life; And that if it pleased the King to besiege
it by Sea, he also would besiege it by Land, and so cut out the Core of those
Wars.

The King willing to uphold the Authority of MAXIMILIAN (the better to hold
France in awe) and being likewise sued unto by his Merchants, for that the Seas
were much infested by the Barks of the Lord RAVENSTEIN; sent straightwayes Sir
EDWARD POYNINGS, a valiant man, and of good service, with twelve Ships, well
furnished with Soldiers and Artillery, to clear the Seas, and to besiege
Sluice on that part. The Englishmen did not only coupe up the Lord RAVENSTEIN,
that he stirred not, and likewise hold in strait Siege the Maritime part of
the Town; but also assailed one of the Castles, and renewed the assault so for
twenty days space (issuing still out of their Ships at the Ebb) as they made
great slaughter of them of the Castle; who continually fought with them to
repulse them, though of the English part also were slain a brother of the
Earl of Oxfords, and some fifty more.

But the Siege still continuing more and more strait, and both the Castles
(which were the principal strength of the Town) being distressed, the one by
the Duke of Saxony, and the other by the English; and a Bridge of boats, which
the Lord RAVENSTEIN had made between both Castles, whereby Succors and
Relief might pass from the one to the other, being on a night set on fire by
the English, hco despairing to hold the Town, yielded (at the last) the
Castles to the English, and the Town to the Duke of Saxony, by composition.
Which done, the Duke of Saxony and Sir EDWARD POYNINGS treated with them of
Bruges, to submit themselves to MAXIMILIAN their Lord; which after some time
they did, paying (in some good part) the Charge of the War, whereby the
Almaines and foreign Succors were dismissed. The example of Bruges, other of
the Revolted Towns followed; so that MAXIMILIAN grew to be out of danger, but
(as his manner was to handle matters) never out of necessity. And Sir EDWARD
POYNINGS (after he had continued at Sluice some good while, till all things
were settled) returned unto the King, being then before Bulleigne.

Somewhat about this time came Letters from FERDINANDO, and ISABELLA, King and
Queen of Spaino; signifying the final conquest of Granada from the Moors;
which action in it self so worthy, King FERDINANDO (whose manner was never to
lose any virtue for the showing) had expressed and displayed in his letters at
large, with all the particularities, and religious Punctoes and Ceremonies,
that were observed in the reception of that City and Kingdom: Showing amongst
other things, That the King would not by any means in person enter the City,
until he had first aloof seen the Cross set up upon the greater Tower of
Granada, whereby it became Christian ground: That likewise before he would
enter, he did Homage to God above, pronouncing by an Herald from the Height of
that Tower, that he did acknowledge to have recovered that Kingdom, by the
help of GOD Almighty and the glorious Virgin, and the virtuous Apostle Saint
JAMES, and the holy Father INNOCENT the Eight, together with the aides and
services of his Prelates, Nobles, and Commons: That yet he stirred not from his
Camp, till he had seen a little Army of Martyrs, to the number of seven
hundred and more Christians (that had lived in bonds and servitude as Slaves to
the Moors) pass before his Eyes, singing a Psalm for their redemption, and
that he had given Tribute unto GOD by Alms, and relief, extended to them all,
for his admission into the City. These things were in the Letters, with many
more Ceremonies of a kind of Holy Ostentation.

The King ever willing to put himself into the Consort or Quire of all
religious Actions, and naturally affecting much the King of Spain, (as far
as one King can affect another) partly for his virtues, and partly for a
counterpoise to France; upon the receipt of these Letters, sent all his Nobles
and Prelates, that were about the Court, together with the Mayor and Aldermen
of London, in great solemnity to the Church of Paul's; there to hear a
Declaration from the Lord Chancellor, now Cardinal. When they were assembled,
the Cardinal (standing upon the uppermost step or Halfe-pase before the Quire;
and all the Nobles, Prelates, and Governors of the City at the foot of the
Stairs) made a Speech to them; letting them know, that they were assembled in
that Consecrate place, to sing unto God a New-song; For that (said he) these
many years the Christians have not gained new ground or Territory upon the
Infidels, nor enlarged and set further the Bounds of the Christian-world: But
this is now done, by the prowess and devotion of FERDINANDO and ISABELLA,
Kings of Spain; Who have (to their immortal Honor) recovered the great and
rich Kingdom of Granada, and the populous and mighty City of the same name,
from the Moors, having been in possession thereof by the space of seven
hundred years, and more. For which, this Assembly and all Christians are to
render laud and thanks unto God, and to celebrate this noble Act of the King
of Spain; who in this is not only Victorious, but Apostolical, in the gaining
of new Provinces to the Christian Faith. And the rather, for that this Victory
and Conquest is obtained, without much effusion of blood. Whereby it is to be
hoped, that there shall be gained, not only new Territory, but infinite
souls, to the Church of Christ; whom the Almighty (as it seems) would have
live to be converted. Herewithall he did relate some of the most memorable
Particulars of the War and Victory. And after his Speech ended, the whole
assembly went solemnly in Procession, and Te Deum was sung.

Immediately after the Solemnity, the King kept his May Day at his Palace of
Sheine, now Richmond. Where to warm the blood of his Nobility, and Gallants,
against the war, he kept great Triumphs of Iusting and Tourney, during all
that Month. In which space it so fell our, that Sir JAMES PARKER, and HVGH
VAVGHAH, (one of the Kings Gentlemen-ushers) having had a Controversy touching
certain Arms, that the King at Arms had given VAVGHAN, were appointed to
run some Courses one against an other. And by accident of a faulty Helmet,
that PARKER had on, he was stricken into the mouth at the first course, so that
his tongue was borne unto the hinder part of his head, in such sort that he
died presently upon the Place. Which because of the Controversy precedent, and
the Death that followed, was accounted amongst the Vulgar, as a Combat or
Trial of Right. The King, toward the end of this Summer, having put his
Forces, where with he meant to invade France, in readiness, (but so as they
were not yet met or mustered together) sent VRSWICK (now made his Almoner) and
Sir JOHN RISLEY, to MAXIMILIAN; to let him know, that he was in Arms, ready
to pass the Seas into France, and did but expect to hear from him, when and
where he did appoint to join with him, according to his promise made unto him
by COVNTEBALT, his Ambassador.

The English Ambassadors, having repaired to MAXIMILIAN, did find his power
and promise at a very great distance; he being utterly unprovided of Men,
Money, and Arms, for any such enterprise. For MAXIMILIAN, having neither Wing
to fly on (for that his Patrimony of Austria was not in his hands, his Father
being then living: And on the other side, his Matrimonial Territories of
Flanders being partly in Dowre to his Mother-in-law, and partly not
serviceable, in respect of the late Rebellions) was thereby destitute of means
to enter into War. The Ambassadors saw this well, but wisely thought fit to
advertise the King thereof, rather than to return themselves till the Kings
further pleasure were known: The rather, for that MAXIMILIAN himself spoke as
great, as ever he did before, and entertained them with dilatory Answers; so
as the formal part of their Embassage might well warrant and require their
further stay. The King hereupon (who doubted as much before, and saw through
his business from the beginning) wrote back to the Ambassadors, commending
their discretion in not returning, and willing them to keep the State wherein
they found MAXIMILIAN, as a Secret, till they heard further from him; And mean
while went on with his Voyage Royal for France, suppressing for a time this
Advertisement touching MAXIMILIAN'S poverty and disabilitie.

By this time, was drawn together a great and puissant Army into the City of
London. In which were THOMAS Marquess Dorset, THOMAS Earl of Arundell, THOMAS
Earl of Derby, GEORGE Earl of Shrewsbury, EDMOND Earl of Suffolk, EDWARD
Earl of Devonshire, GEORGE Earl of Kent, the Earl of Essex, THOMAS Earl of
Ormond, with a great number of Barons, Knights, and Principal Gentlemen; and
amongst them, RICHARD THOMAS, much noted for the brave Troops that he brought
out of Wales; The Army rising in the whole to the number of five and twenty
thousand Foot, and sixteen hundred Horse. Over which, the King (constant in
his accustomed trust and employment) made JASPER Duke of Bedford, and JOHN
Earl of Oxford, Generals under his own Person. The ninth of September, in the
eighth year of his Reign, he departed from Greenwich, toward the Sea; all
men wondering, that he took that Season (being so near winter) to begin the
War; and some thereupon gathering it was a Sign, that the War would not
beelong. Nevertheless, the King gave out the contrary, thus: That he
intending not to make a Summer business of it, but a resolute War (without
term prefixed until be recovered France; it skilled not much when be began
it: especially, having Calice at his back; where he might winter, if the
reason of the War so required. The sixth of October, he imbarqued at
Sandwich; and the same day took land at Calice: which was the Rendezvous,
where all his Forces were assigned to meet. But in this his Journey toward the
Sea side (wherein, for the cause that we shall now speak of, he houered so
much the longer) he had received Letters from the Lord CORDS: who the hotter
he was against the English in time of War, had the more credit in a
Negotiation of Peace; and besides was held a man open, and of good faith. In
which Letters there was made an Ouerture of Peace from the French King, with
such Conditions, as were somewhat to the Kings Taste: but this was carried at
the first with wonderful secrecy. The King was no sooner come to Calice, but
the calm winds of Peace began to blow. For, first, the English Ambassadors
returned out of Flanders from MAXIMILIAN, and certified the King, that he was
not to hope for any aid from MAXIMILIAN, for that he was altogether
improuided. His will was good; but he lacked money. And this was made known,
and spread through the Army. And although the English were therewithal nothing
dismayed; and that it be the manner of Soldiers, upon bad news to speak the
more bravely: yet nevertheless, it was a kind of Preparatiue to a Peace.
Instantly in the neck of this (as the King had laid it) came news that
FERDINANDO and ISABELLA, Kings of Spain, had concluded a Peace with King
CHARLES; and that CHARLES had restored unto them the Counties of Russignon and
Perpignian, which formerly were Morgaged by JOHN King of Arragon (FERDINANDOES
Father) unto France, for three hundred thousand Crowns: which debt was also,
upon this Peace, by CHARLES clearly released. This came also handsomely to put
on the Peace: both because so potent a Confederate was fallen off, and because
it was a fair example of a Peace bought; so as the King should not be the
sole Merchant in this Peace. Upon these Aires of Peace, the King was content,
that the Bishop of Excester, and the Lord DAVBIGNEY (Governor of Calice)
should give a meeting unto the Lord CORDS, for the Treaty of a Peace. But
himself nevertheless, and his Army, the fifteenth of October, removed from
Calice, and in four days march sat him down before Bulloigne.

During this Siege of Bulloigne (which continued near a Month) there passed
no memorable Action, no^ Accident of War: only Sir JOHN SAVAGE, a valiant
Captain, was slain, riding about the Walls of the Town, to take a View. The
Town was both well fortified, and well manned; yet it was distressed, and
ready for an Assault. Which if it had been given (as was thought) would have
cost much Blood; but yet the Town would have been carried in the end. Mean
while, a Peace was concluded by the Commissioners, to continue for both the
Kings Lives. Where there was no Article of importance; being in effect, rather
a Bargain, than a Treaty. For, all things remained as they were: save that
there should be paid to the King seven hundred forty five thousand Ducats
in present, for his Charges in that Journey; and five and twenty thousand
Crowns yearly, for his Charges sustained in the Aides of the Britons. For
which Annual, though he had MAXIMILIAN bound before for those Charges; yet he
counted the alteration of the Hand, as much as the principal Debt. And
besides, it was left somewhat indefinitely, when it should determine or expire:
which made the English esteem it as a Tribute, carried under fair Terms.
And the truth is, it was paid both to the King, and to his Son King HENRY the
Eight, longer than it could continue upon any computation of Charges. There
were also assigned by the French King, unto all the King's principal
Counselors, great Pensions, besides rich Gifts for the present. Which whether
the King did permit, to save his own Purse from Rewards, or to communicate the
Envy of a Business, that was displeasing to his People, was diversely
interpreted. For certainly, the King had no great fancy to own this Peace.
And therefore, a little before it was concluded, he had underhand procured
some of his best Captains, and Men of War, to advise him to a Peace under
their Hands, in an earnest manner, in the Nature of a Supplication. But, the
truth is, this Peace was welcome to both Kings. To CHARLES, for that it assured
unto him the possession of Britain, and freed the enterprise of Naples. To
HENRY, for that it filled his Coffers; and that he foresaw at that time a
storm of inward troubles coming upon him; which presently after brake forth.
But it gave no less discontent to the Nobility, and principal persons of the
Army; who had many of them sold or engaged their estates, upon the hopes of
the War. They stuck not to say, That the King cared not to plume his
Nobility and People, to feather himself. And some made themselves merry with
that the King had said in Parliament: That after the War was once begun, he
doubted not but to make it pay it self; saying he had kept promise.

Having risen from Bulloigne, he went to Calice, where he stayed some time.
From whence also he wrote Letters, (which was a Courtesy that he sometimes
used) to the Mayor of London, and Aldermen his brethren; half bragging, what
great sums he had obtained for the Peace; knowing well, that full Cofers of
the King, is ever good News to London. And better News it would have been,
if their Benevolence had been but a Loan. And upon the seventeenth of
December following, he returned to Westminster, where he kept his Christmasse.

Soon after the Kings return, he sent the Order of the Garter, to ALPHONSO
Duke of Calabria, eldest son to FERDINANDO King of Naples; An honor sought
by that Prince, to hold him up in the eyes of the Italians: Who, expecting the
Arms of CHARLES, made great account of the Amity of England, for a Bridle to
France. It was received by ALPHONSO, with all the Ceremony and Pomp that could
be devised; as things use to be carried, that are intended for Opinion. It was
sent by VRSWICK: upon whom the King bestowed this Embassage, to help him,
after many dry Employments.

AT this time the King began again to be haunted with Sprites, by the Magic
and curious Arts of the Lady MARGARET: Who raised up the Ghost of RICHARD, Duke
of York, second Son to King EDWARD the Fourth, to walk and vex the King.
This was a finer Counterfeit Stone, than LAMBERT SYMNELL, better done, and
worn upon greater hands; being graced after, with the wearing of a King of
France, and a King of Scotland, not of a Duchess of Burgundy only. And for
SIMNELL, there was not much in him, more than that he was a handsome Boy, and
did not shame his Robes. But this Youth (of whom we are now to speak) was
such a Mercuriall, as the like has seldom been known, and could make his
own Part, if at any time he chanced to be out. Wherefore, this being one of
the strangest Examples of a Personation, that ever was in Elder or Later Times;
it deserves to be discovered, and related at the full: Although the Kings
manner of showing things, by Pieces and by Dark Lights, has so muffled it,
that it has left it almost as a Mystery to this day.

The Lady MARGARET (whom the Kings Friends called IVNO, because she was to him
as IVNO was to AENEAS, stirring both Heaven and Hell, to do him mischief) for
a foundation of her particular Practices against him, did continually, by all
means possible, nourish, maintain, and divulge the flying Opinion, That
RICHARD, Duke of York (second Son to EDWARD the Fourth) was not murdered in
the Tower (as was given out) but saved alive; For that those, who were employed
in that barbarous Fact, having destroyed the elder Brother, were stricken with
remorse and compassion toward the younger, and set him privily at liberty, to
seek his Fortune. This Lure she cast abroad, thinking that this Fame and
Belief (together with the fresh Example of LAMBERT SIMNELL) would draw at one
time, or other, some Birds to strike upon it. She used likewise a further
diligence, not committing all to Chance. For, she had some secret Espials (like
to the Turks Commissioners for Children of Tribute) to look abroad for
handsome and graceful Youths, to make PLANTAGENETS, and Dukes of York. At the
last she did light on one, in whom all things met, as one would wish, to serve
her turn, for a Counterfeit of RICHARD, Duke of York.

This was PERKIN WARBECK whose Adventures we shall now describe. For, first,
the years agreed well. Secondly, he was a Youth of fine favor and shape.
But, more than that, he had such a crafty and bewitching fashion, both to
move Pity, and to induce Belief, as was like a kind of Fascination, and
Enchantment, to those that saw him, or heard him. Thirdly, he had been from
his Childhood such a Wanderer, or (as the King called him) such a Land-loper,
as it was extreme hard to hunt out his Nest and Parents. Neither again could
any man, by company or conuersing with him, be able to say or detect well what
he was; he did so flit from place to place Lastly, there was a Circumstance
(which is mentioned by one that wrote in the same time) that is very likely to
have made somewhat to the matter; which is, That King EDWARD the Fourth was his
Godfather. Which, as it is somewhat suspicious, for a wanton Prince to become
Gossip in so mean a House; and might make a man think, that he might indeed
have in him some base Blood of the House of YORK: so at the least (though that
were not) it might give the occasion to the Boy, in being called King EDWARDS
God-sonne, or perhaps in sport, King EDWARDS Son, to entertain such Thoughts
into his Head. For, Tutor he had none (for ought that appears) as LAMBERT
SIMNELL had, until he came unto the Lady MARGARET, who instructed him.

Thus therefore it came to pass: There was a Townes-man of Tourney, that had
borne office in that Town, whose name was JOHN OSBECKE, a Convert-Iew, married
to CATHERINE DE FARO; whose business drew him, to live for a time with his
wife at London, in King EDWARD the fourths days. During which time he had a
son by her: and being known in Court, the King either out of a religious
Nobleness, because he was a Convert, or upon some private acquaintance, did
him the Honor, as to be Godfather to his child, and named him PETER. But,
afterward, proouing a dainty and effeminate Youth, he was commonly called by
the Diminutiue of his name; PETER-KIN, or PERKIN. For, as for the name of
WARBECKE, it was given him when they did but guess at it, before examinations
had been taken. But yet he had been so much talked on by that name; as it
stuck by him after his true name of OSBECKE was known. While he was a young
child his Parents returned with him to Tourney. Then was he placed in a house
of a kinsman of his, called JOHN STENBECK, at Antwerpe: and so roued up and
down between Antwerp and Tourney, and other Towns of Flanders, for a good
time; living much in English Company, and having the English Tongue perfect.
In which time, being grown a comely Youth, he was brought by some of the
espialls of the Lady MARGARET unto her Presence. Who viewing him well, and
seeing that he had a Face and personage, that would bear a noble fortune: And
finding him otherwise of a fine spirit, and winning behavior; thought she had
now found a curious Piece of Marble, to carue out an Image of a Duke of York.
She kept him by her a great while; but, with extreme secrecy. The while, she
instructed him, by many Cabinet-Conferences. First, in Princely behavior and
gesture; teaching him how he should keep State, and yet with a modest sense
of his misfortunes. Then she informed him of all the circumstances and
particulars, that concerned the Person of RICHARD Duke of York, which he was
to act: Describing unto him the Personages, Lineaments, and Features of the
King and Queen, his pretended Parents; and of his Brother, and Sisters, and
diverse others, that were nearest him in his Childhood; together with all
passages, some secret, some common, that were fit for a Child's memory, until
the death of King EDWARD. Then she added the particulars of the time, from the
Kings death, until he and his brother were committed to the Tower, as well
during the time he was abroad, as while he was in Sanctuary. As for the times
while he was in the Tower, and the manner of his Brothers death, and his own
escape; she knew they were things that a very few could control. And
therefore she taught him, only to tell a smooth and likely Tale of those
matters; warning him not to vary from it. It was agreed likewise between them,
what account he should give of his Peregrination abroad; intermixing many
things which were true, and such as they knew others could testify, for the
credit of the rest: but, still making them to hang together, with the Part he
was to play. She taught him likewise how to avoid sundry captious and tempting
questions, which were like to be asked of him. But, in this she found him of
himself so nimble and shifting, as she trusted much to his own wit and
readiness; and therefore labored the less in it. Lastly, she raised his
thoughts with some present rewards, and further promises; setting before him
chiefly the glory, and fortune of a Crown, if things went well; and a sure
refuge to her Court, if the worst should fall. After such time as she thought
he was perfect in his Lesson, she began to cast with herself from what coast
this Blazing-starre should first appear, and at what time it must be upon the
Horizon of Ireland; for, there had the like Meteor strong influence before: The
time of the Apparition to be, when the King should be engaged into a War
with France. But well she knew, that whatsoever should come from her, would be
held suspected. And therefore, if he should go out of Flanders immediately
into Ireland, she might be thought to have some hand in it. And besides, the
time was not yet ripe; for that the two Kings were then upon terms of Peace.
Therefore she wheeled about; and to put all suspicion a far off, and loath to
keep him any longer by her (for that she knew Secrets are not long lived)
she sent him unknown into Portugal, with the Lady BRAMPTON, an English
Lady, that embarked for Portugal at that time; with some Priuado of her
own, to have an eye upon him: and there he was to remain, and to expect her
further directions In the mean time, she omitted not to prepare things for
his better welcome, and accepting, not only in the Kingdom of Ireland, but in
the Court of France. He continued in Portugal about a year; and, by that
time, the King of England called his Parliament (as has been said) and
declared open War against France. Now did the Sign reign, and the
Constellation was come, under which PERKIN should appear. And therefore he
was straight sent unto by the Duchess, to go for Ireland, according to the
first designement. In Ireland he did arrive at the Town of Cork. When he
was thither come, his own Tale was (when he made his Confession afterward)
That the Irish-men, finding him in some good Clothes, came flocking about him,
and bare him down, that he was the Duke of Clarence, that had been there
before, And after, that he was RICHARD the Thirds base son; And lastly, that
he was RICHARD Duke of York, second son to EDWARD the Fourth: But that he
(for his part) renounced all these things, and offered to swear upon the holy
Evangelists, that he was no such man; till, at last, thy forced it upon him,
and bade him fear nothing, and so forth. But the truth is, that immediately
upon his coming into Ireland, he took upon him the said Person of the Duke
of York, and drew unto him Accomplices, and Partakers, by all the means he
could devise: Insomuch, as he wrote his Letters unto the Earls of Desmond and
Kildare, to come in to his Aid, and be of his Party; the Originalls of which
Letters are yet extant.

Somewhat before this time, the Duchess had also gained unto her, a near
servant of King HENRY's own, one STEPHEN FRION, his Secretary for the French
Tongue; an active man, but turbulent, and discontented. This FRION had fled
over to CHARLES the French King, and put himself into his service, at such
time as he began to be in open enmity with the King. Now King CHARLES, when
he understood of the Person and Attempts of PERKIN (ready of himself to
embrace all advantages against the King of England; instigated by FRION, and
formerly prepared by the Lady MARGARET) forthwith dispatched one LVCAS, and
this FRION, in the nature of Ambassadors to PERKIN; to advertise him of the
Kings good inclination to him, and that he was resolved to aid him, to
recover his right against King HENRY, an Usurper of England, and an Enemy of
France; and wished him, to come over unto him at Paris. PERKIN thought himself
in heaven, now that he was invited by so great a King, in so honorable a
manner; And imparting unto his Friends in Ireland for their encouragement, how
Fortune called him, and what great hopes he had, sailed presently into France.
When he was come to the Court of France, the King received him with great
honor; saluted, and styled him by the name of the Duke of York; lodged him,
and accommodated him in great State; And the better to give him the
representation and the countenance of a Prince, assigned him a Guard for his
Person, whereof the Lord CONGRESALL was Captain. The Courtiers likewise
(though it be ill mocking with the French) applied themselves to their Kings
Bent, seeing there was reason of State for it. At the same time there repaired
unto PERKIN diverse Englishmen of Quality; Sir GEORGE NEVILE, Sir JOHN TAILOR,
and about one hundred more: and amongst the rest, this STEPHEN FRION, of whom
we spoke; who followed his fortune both then and for a long time after, and
was indeed his principal Counselor, and Instrument in all his Proceedings.
But all this, on the French Kings part, was but a Trick, the better to bow
King HENRY to Peace. And therefore upon the first Grain of Incense, that was
sacrificed upon the Altar of Peace at Bulloigne, PERKIN was smoked away. Yet
would not the French King deliver him up to King HENRY (as he was labored to
do) for his Honors sake, but warned him away, and dismissed him. And PERKIN on
his part was as ready to be gone, doubting he might be caught up under
hand. He therefore took his way into Flanders, unto the Duchess of
Burgundy; pretending, that, having been variously tossed by Fortune, he
directed his course thither, as to a safe Harbor: No ways taking knowledge,
that he had ever been there before, but as if that had been his first
address. The Duchess, on the other part, made it as new and strange to see
him: pretending (at the first) that she was taught and made wise by the example
of LAMBERT SIMNELL, how she did admit of any Counterfeit Stuff; though even
in that (she said) she was not fully satisfied. She pretended at the first
(and that was ever in the presence of others) to pose him and sift him, thereby
to try whether he were indeed the very Duke of York, or no. But, seeming to
receive full satisfaction by his answers, she then fained her self to be
transported with a kind of astonishment, mixed of Joy and Wonder, at his
miraculous deliverance; receiving him, as if he were risen from Death to Life:
and inferring, that GOD, who had in such wonderful manner preserved him from
Death, did likewise reserve him for some great and prosperous Fortune. As for
his dismission out of France, they interpreted it not, as if he were detected
or neglected for a Counterfeit Deceiuer; but contrariwise, that it did show
manifestly unto the World, that he was some Great matter; for that it was his
abandoning, that (in effect) made the Peace: being no more but the sacrificing
of a poor distressed Prince unto the utility and Ambition of two Mighty
Monarchs. Neither was PERKIN for his part wanting to himself, either in
gracious and princely behavior, or in ready and apposite answers, or in
contenting and caressing those that did apply themselves unto him, or in
pretty scorn and disdain to those that seemed to doubt of him; but in all
things did notably acquit himself: Insomuch as it was generally believed
(as well amongst great Persons, as amongst the Vulgar) that he was indeed Duke
RICHARD. Nay, himself, with long and continual counterfeiting, and with often
telling a Lie, was turned by habit almost into the thing heesee med to be; and
from a Liar, to a Believer. The Duchess therefore (as in a case out of doubt)
did him all princely honor, calling him always by the name of her Nephew, and
giving him the Delicate Title of the White-rose of England; and appointed him a
Guard of thirty Persons, Halberdiers, clad in a Party-colored Liuerie of
Murrey and Blue, to attend his Person. Her Court likewise, and generally the
Dutch and Strangers in their usage toward him, expressed no less respect.

The News hereof came blazing and thundering over into England, that the Duke
of York was sure alive. As for the name of PERKIN WARBECK, it was not at that
time come to light, but all the news ran upon the Duke of York; that he
had been entertained in Ireland, bought and sold in France, and was now
plainly auowed, and in great honor in Flanders. These Fames took hold of
diverse; In some upon discontent, in some upon ambition, in some upon leuitie
and desire of change, and in some few upon conscience and belief, but in most
upon simplicity; and in diverse out of dependence upon some of the better sort,
who did in secret favor and nourish these bruits. And it was not long, ere
these rumors of Novelty, had begotten others of Scandal and Murmur against
the King, and his government; taxing him for a great Taxer of his People, and
discountenancer of his Nobility. The loss of Britain, and the Peace with
France were not forgotten. But chiefly they fell upon the wrong that he did
his Queen, in that he did not reign in her Right. Wherefore they said, that
GOD had now brought to light a Masculine-Branch of the House of YORK, that
would not be at his Courtesy, howsoever he did depresse his poor Lady. And
yet (as it fares in things which are current with the Multitude, and which
they affect) these Fames grew so general, as the Authors were lost in the
generality of Speakers. They being like running Weeds, that have no certain
root; or like Footings up and down, impossible to be traced. But after a
while, these ill Humors drew to an head, and settled secretly in some eminent
Persons; which were Sir WILLIAM STANLEY Lord Chamberlain of the Kings
Household, The Lord FITZ-WATER, Sir SIMON MOVNTFORT, Sir THOMAS THWAITES. These
entered into a secret Conspiracy to favor Duke RICHARDS Title. Nevertheless
none engaged their fortunes in this business openly, but two; Sir ROBERT
CLIFFORD, and Master WILLIAM BARLEY, who sailed over into Flanders, sent indeed
from the Party of the Conspiratours here, to understand the truth of those
things, that passed there, and not without some help of moneys from hence;
Prouisionally to be delivered, if they found and were satisfied, that there
was truth in these pretenses. The person of Sir ROBERT CLIFFORD (being a
Gentleman of Fame and Family) was extremely welcome to the Lady MARGARET. Who
after she had conference with him, brought him to the sight of PERKIN, with
whom he had often speech and discourse. So that in the end won either by the
Duchess, to affect, or by PERKIN to believe, he wrote back into England,
that he knew the Person of RICHARD Duke of York, as well as he knew his own;
and that this Young Man was undoubtedly he. By this means all things grew
prepared to Revolt and Sedition here, and the Conspiracy came to have a
Correspondence between Flanders and England.

The King on his part was not asleep; but to Arm or levy Forces yet, he
thought would but show fear, and do this Idol too much worship.
Nevertheless the Ports he did shut up, or at least kept a Watch on them, that
none should pass to or fro that was suspected. But for the rest, he choose to
work by Countermine. His purposes were two; the one, to lay open the Abuse.
The other, to break the knot of the Conspirators. To detect the Abuse, there
were but two ways; The first, to make it manifest to the world, that the Duke
of York was indeed murdered: The other, to prove, that were he dead or
alive, yet PERKIN was a Counterfeit. For the first, thus it stood. There were
but four Persons that could speak upon knowledge, to the murder of the Duke
of York: Sir JAMES TIRREL (the employed-man from King RICHARD) JOHN DIGHTON,
and MILES FOREST, his servants (the two Butchers or Tormentors) and the Priest
of the Tower, that buried them. Of which four, MILES FOREST, and the Priest
were dead, and there remained alive only Sir JAMES TIRREL, and JOHN DIGHTON.
These two the King caused to be committed to the Tower, and examined touching
the manner of the death of the two innocent Princes. They agreed both in a
Tale, (as the King gave out) to this effect: That King RICHARD having directed
his warrant for the putting of them to death to BRACKENBVRIE the Lieutenant of
the Tower, was by him refused. Whereupon the King directed his Warrant to Sir
JAMES TIRREL, to receive the keys of the Tower from the Lieutenant (for the
space of a night) for the Kings special service. That Sir JAMES TIRREL
accordingly repaired to the Tower by night, attended by his two Servants
aforementioned, whom he had chosen for that purpose. That himself stood at the
staire-foot, and sent these two Villains to execute the murder. That they
smothered them in their bed; and that done, called up their Master to see their
naked dead bodies, which they had laid forth. That they were buried under the
Stairs, and some stones cast upon them. That when the report was made to King
RICHARD, that his will was done, he gave Sir JAMES TIRREL great thanks; but
took exception to the place of their burial, being too base for them that
were Kings children. Whereupon another night by the Kings warrant renewed, their
bodies were removed by the Priest of the Tower, and buried by him in some
place, which (by means of the Priests death soon after) could not be known.
Thus much was then delivered abroad, to be the effect of those Examinations.
But the King nevertheless made no use of them in any of his Declarations;
whereby (as it seems) those Examinations left the business somewhat
perplexed. And a for Sir JAMES TIRREL, he was soon after beheaded in the
Tower-yard, for other matters of Treason. But JOHN DIGHTON (who it seems
spoke best for the King) was forthwith set at liberty, and was the principal
means of diuulging this Tradition. Therefore this kind of Proof being left so
naked, the King used the more diligence in the latter, for the tracing of
PERKIN. To this purpose, he sent abroad into several parts, and especially
into Flanders, diverse secret and nimble Scouts and Spies; some faining
themselves to fly over unto PERKIN, and to adhere unto him; and some under
other pretenses, to learn, search, and discover all the circumstances and
particulars of PERKINS Parents, Birth, Person, Travails up and down; and in
brief, to have a Iournall (as it were) of his life and doings. He furnished
these his imployed-men liberally with Money, to draw on and reward
Intelligences: giving them also in charge, to advertise continually what they
found, and nevertheless still to go on. And ever as one Advertisement and
Discovery called up another, he employed other new Men, where the Business
did require it. Others he employed in a more special nature and trust, to be
his Pioners in the maine Counter-mine. These were directed to insinuate
themselves into the familiarity and confidence of the principal Persons of
the Party in Flanders, and so to learn what Associates they had, and
Correspondents, either here in England, or abroad; and how far every one
engaged, and what new ones they meant afterward to try, or board. And as this
for the Persons; so for the Actions themselves, to discover to the Bottom (as
they could) the utmost of PERKINS and the Conspiratours their Intentions,
Hopes, and Practices. These latter Best-be-trust-Spies had some of them further
instructions, to practice and draw off the best Friends and Servants of PERKIN,
by making remonstrance to them, how weakly his Enterprise and Hopes were built,
and with how prudent and potent a King they had to deal; and to reconcile them
to the King, with promise of Pardon, and good Conditions of Reward. And (above
the rest) to assail, sap, and work into the constancy of Sir ROBERT
CLIFFORD; and to win him (if they could) being the man that knew most of
their secrets, and who being won away, would most appall and discourage the
rest, and in a manner break the Knot.

There is a strange Tradition; That the King being lost in a Wood of
Suspicions, and not knowing whom to trust, had both intelligence with the
Confessors and Chaplains of diverse great men, and for the better Credit of his
Espialls abroad with the contrary side, did use to have them cursed at PAVLS
(by Name) amongst the Bead-roll of the Kings Enemies, according to the Custom
of those Times. These Espials plied their Charge so roundly, as the King had an
Anatomy of PERKIN alive; and waslikewise well informed of the particular
correspondent Conspiratours in England, and many other Mysteries were revealed;
and Sir ROBERT CLIFFORD in especial won to be assured to the King, and
industrious and officious for his service. The King therefore (receiving a rich
Return of his diligence, and great satisfaction touching a number of
Particulars) first diuulged and spread abroad the Imposture and iuggling of
PERKINS Person and Travails, with the Circumstances thereof, throughout the
Realm. Not by Proclamation (because things were yet in Examination, and so
might receive the more or the less) but by Court-fames, which commonly print
better than printed Proclamations. Then thought he it also time to send an
Embassage unto Archduke PHILIP, into Flanders, for the abandoning and
dismissing of PERKIN. Herein he employed Sir EDWARD POYNINGS, and Sir WILLIAM
WARHAM, Doctor of the Canon Law. The Archduke was then young, and governed by
his Council: before whom the Ambassadors had audience, and Doctor WARHAM
spoke in this manner.

MY Lords, the King our Master is very sorry, that England and your Country
here of Flanders having been counted as Man and Wife for so long time, now
this Country of all others should be the Stage, where a base Counterfeit
should play the part of a King of England; not only to his Graces disquiet and
dishonor, but to the scorn and reproach of all Sovereign Princes. To
counterfeit the dead Image of a King in his Coin, is an high Offense by all
Laws: But to counterfeit the living Image of a King in his Person, exceeds
all Falsifications, except it should be that of a MAHOMET, or an Antichrist,
that counterfeit Divine Honor. The King has too great an Opinion of this sage
Counsel, to think that any of you is caught with this Fable (though way may
be given by you to the passion of some) the thing in it self is so improbable.
To set Testimonies aside of the Death of Duke RICHARD, which the King has upon
Record, plain and infallible (because they may be thought to be in the Kings
own Power) let the thing testify for it self. Sense and Reason no Power can
command. Is it possible (trow you) that King RICHARD should damn his soul,
and foul his Name with so abominable a Murder, and yet not mend his Case? Or
do you think, that Men of Blood (that were his Instruments) did turn to
Pity in the midst of their Execution? Whereas in cruel and savage Beasts,
and Men also, the first Draught of Blood does yet make them more fierce, and
enraged. Do you not know, that the Bloody Executioners of Tyrants do go to
such Errands, with an Halter about their neck: So that if they perform not,
they are sure to die for it? And do you think, that these men would hazard
their own lives, for sparing another? Admit they should have saved him: What
should they have done with him? Turn him into London Streets, that the
Watchmen or any Passenger that should light upon him, might carry him before a
Justice, and so all come to light? Or should they have kept him by them
secretly? That surely would have required a great deal of Care, Charge, and
continual Fears. But (my Lords) I labor too much in a clear Business. The
King is so wise, and has so good Friends abroad, as now he knows Duke
PERKIN from his Cradle. And because he is a great Prince, if you have any good
Poet here, he can help him with Notes to write his Life; and to parallel him
with LAMBERT SIMNELL, now the Kings Faulconer. And therefore (to speak
plainly to your Lordships) it is the strangest thing in the World, that the
Lady MARGARET (excuse us, if we name her, whose Malice to the King is both
causeless and endless) should now when she is old, at the time when other
Women give over Childbearing, bring forth two such Monsters; being not the
Births of nine or ten Months, but of many years. And whereas other natural
Mothers bring forth Children weak, and not able to help themselves; she
brings forth tall Striplings, able soon after their coming into the World,
to bid Battle to mighty Kings. My Lords, we stay unwillingly upon this
Part. We would to GOD, that Lady would once taste the Joys, which GOD
Almighty does serve up unto her, in beholding her Niece to Reign in such
Honor, and with so much Royal Issue, which she might be pleased to account
as her own. The Kings Request unto the Archduke, and your Lordships, might
be; That according to the Example of King CHARLES, who has already discarded
him, you would banish this unworthy Fellow out of your Dominions. But because
the King may justly expect more from an ancient Confederate, than from a new
reconciled Enemy; he makes his Request unto you, to deliver him up into his
hands. Pirates and Impostures of this sort, being fit to be accounted the
Common Enemies of Mankind, and no ways to be protected by the Law of Nations.

After some time of Deliberation, the Ambassadors received this short Answer.

THat the Archduke, for the love of King HENRY, would in no sort aid or assist
the pretended Duke, but in all things conserve the Amity he had with the
King. But for the Duchess Dowager, she was absolute in the Lands of her
Dowry, and that he could not let her to dispose of her own.

THe King, upon the return of the Ambassadors, was nothing satisfied with
this Answer. For well he knew, that a Patrimoniall Dowry carried no part of
Sovereignty, or Command of Forces. Besides, the Ambassadors told him plainly,
that they saw the Duchess had a great Party in the Archdukes Counsel; and
that howsoever it was carried in a course of conniuence, yet the Archduke
under hand gave aid and furtherance to PERKIN. Wherefore (partly out of
Courage, and partly out of Policy) the King forthwith banished all Flemmings
(as well their Persons, as their Wares) out of his Kingdom; Commanding his
Subjects likewise (and by name his Merchants-Aduenturers) which had a Resiance
in Antwerpe, to return; translating the Mart (which commonly followed the
English Cloth) unto Calice, and embarred also all further trade for the future.
This the King did, being sensible in point of honor, not to suffer a Pretender
to the Crown of England, to affront him so near at hand, and he to keep
terms of friendship with the Country where he did set up. But he had also a
further reach: for that he knew well, that the Subjects of Flanders drew so
great commodity from the trade of England, as by this Embargo they would soon
wax weary of PERKIN, and that the Tumults of Flanders had bin so late and
fresh, as it was no time for the Prince to displease the People. Nevertheless
for forms sake, by way of requital, the Archduke did likewise banish the
English out of Flanders; which in effect was done to his hand.

The King being well advertised, that PERKIN did more trust upon Friends and
Partakers within the Realm, than upon foreign Arms, thought it behooued him
to apply the Remedy, where the Disease lay; and to proceed with severity
against some of the principal Conspirators here within the Realm; Thereby to
purge the ill Humors in England, and to cool the Hopes in Flanders. Wherefore
he caused to be apprehended (almost at an instant) JOHN RATCLIFFE Lord
Fitz-water, Sir SIMON MOVNTFORD, Sir THOMAS THWAITES, WILLIAM DAWBIGNEY, ROBERT
RATCLIFFE, THOMAS CHRESSENOR, and THOMAS ASTWOOD. All these were arraigned,
convicted and condemned for High Treason, in adhering, and promising aid to
PERKIN. Of these, the Lord FITZWATER was conueighed to Calice, and there kept
in hold, and in hope of life, until soon after (either impatient, or
betrayed) he dealt with his Keeper to have escaped, and thereupon was beheaded.
But Sir SIMON MOVNTFORD, ROBERT RATCLIFFE, and WILLIAM DAWBIGNEY were beheaded
immediately after their Condemnation. The rest were pardoned, together with
many others Clerks and Laikes, amongst which were two Dominican Friars, and
WILLIAM WORSELEY, Deane of Paul's: which latter sort passed Examination, but
came not to public trial.

The Lord Chamberlain at that time was not touched; whether it were, that the
King would not stir too many humors at once, but (after the manner of good
Physicians) purge the head last; or that CLIFFORD (from whom most of these
Discoueries came) reserved that Piece for his own coming over: signifying only
to the King in the mean time, that he doubted there were some greater ones in
the business, whereof he would give the King further account, when he came to
his presence.

Upon Al-hallowes-day-euen being now the tenth year of the Kings Reign, the
Kings second Son HENRY was created Duke of York; and as well the Duke, as
diverse others, Noblemen, Knights-Batchlours, and Gentlemen of Quality were made
knights of the Bath, according to the Ceremony. Upon the morrow after
Twelfth-Day, the King removed from Westminster (where he had kept his
Christmas) to the Tower of London. This he did as soon as he had advertisement,
that Sir ROBERT CLIFFORD (in whose Bosom or Budget most of PERKINS secrets were
laid up) was come into England. And the place of the Tower was chosen to that
end, that if CLIFFORD should accuse any of the Great-ones, they might without
suspicion, or noise, or sending abroad of Warrants, be presently attached; the
Court and Prison being within the cincture of one Wall. After a day or two, the
king drew unto him a selected Council, and admitted CLIFFORD to his presence;
who first fell down at his feet, and in all humble manner craved the Kings
Pardon, which the King then granted, though he were indeed secretly assured of
his life before. Then commanded to tell his knowledge, he did amongst many
others (of himself, not interrogated) appeach Sir WILLIAM STANLEY, the Lord
Chamberlain of the Kings Household.

The King seemed to be much amazed at the naming of this Lord, as if he had
heard the News of some strange and fearful Prodigy. To hear a Man that had
done him service of so high a nature, as to save his life, and set the Crown
upon his head; a Man, that enioied by his favor and advancement so great a
fortune, both in Honor and Riches; a Man, that was tied unto him in so near a
Band of alliance, his Brother having married the Kings Mother; and lastly, a
Man, to whom he had committed the trust of his Person, in making him his
Chamberlain. That this Man, no ways disgraced, no ways discontent, no ways
put in fear, should be false unto him. CLIFFORD was required to say over
again, and again, the Particulars of his accusation; being warned, that in a
matter so unlikely, and that concerned so great a Servant of the Kings, he
should not in any wise go too far. But the king finding that he did sadly, and
constantly (without hesitation or varying, and with those civil Protestations
that were fit) stand to that that he had said, offering to justify it upon his
soul and life; he caused him to be removed. And after he had not a little
bemoaned himself unto his Council there present, gave order that Sir WILLIAM
STANLEY should be restrained in his own Chamber, where he lay before, in the
Square Tower. And the next day he was examined by the Lords. Upon his
Examination, he denied little of that wherewith he was charged, nor endeavored
much to excuse or extenuate his fault. So that (not very wisely) thinking to
make his Offense less by Confession, he made it enough for Condemnation. It
was conceived, that he trusted much to his former merits, and the interest that
his brother had in the king. But those helps were over weighed by diverse
things that made against him, and were predominant in the Kings nature and
mind. First, an Ouer-merit; for convenient Merit, unto which reward may easily
reach, does best with kings: next the sense of his Power; for the King thought,
that he that could set him up, was the more dangerous to pull him down. Thirdly,
the glimmering of a Confiscation; for he was the richest subject for value in
the kingdom; There being found in his Castle of Holt forty thousand Marks in
ready money, and plate, besides Jewels, Household Stuff, Stocks upon his
grounds, and other Personal Estate, exceeding great. And for his Revenue in
Land and Fee, it was three thousand pounds a year of old Rent, a great matter
in those times. Lastly, the Nature of the Time; for if the King had been out of
fear of his own Estate, it was not unlike he would have spared his life. But
the Cloud of so great a Rebellion hanging over his head, made him work sure.
Wherefore after some six weeks distance of time, which the King did honorably
interpose, both to give space to his Brothers Intercession, and to show to the
World, that he had a conflict with himself what he should do; he was arraigned
of High Treason, and condemned, and presently after beheaded.

Yet is it to this day left but in dark memory both what the Case of this
Noble Person was, for which he suffered; and what likewise was the ground and
cause of his defection, and the alienation of his heart from the King. His Case
was said to be this: That in discourse between Sir ROBERT CLIFFORD and him, he
had said; That if he were sure, that that young man were King EDWARDS Son,
he would never bear Arms against him. This Case seems somewhat an hard Case,
both in respect of the Conditional, and in respect of the other words. But for
the Conditional, it seems the Judges of that time (who were learned men, and
the three chief of them of the Privy Council) thought it was a dangerous thing
to admit Ifs and Ands, to qualify words of Treason; whereby every man might
express his malice, and blanch his danger. And it was like to the Case (in the
following times) of ELIZABETH BARTON, the Holy-maid of Kent: who had said, That
if king HENRY the eighth did not take KATHERINE his Wife again, he should be
deprived of his Crown, and dye the death of a Dog. And infinite Cases may be
put of like nature. Which (it seems) the grave Judges taking into
Consideration, would not admit of treasons upon condition. And as for the
Positive words, That he would not bear arms against King EDWARDS Son; though
the words seem calm, yet it was a plain and direct Ouer-ruling of the Kings
Title, either by the Line of LANCASTER, or by Act of Parliament. Which (no
doubt) pierced the King more, than if STANLEY had charged his Lance upon him in
the field. For if STANLEY would hold that opinion, that a son of King EDWARD
had still the better right, he being so principal a Person of authority, and
favor about the King; it was to teach all England, to say as much. And therefore
(as those times were) that speech touched the Quick. But some Writers do put
this out of doubt; for they say, That STANLEY did expressly promise to aid
PERKIN, and sent him some help of Treasure.

Now for the Motive of his falling off from the King; It is true, that at
Bosworth Field the King was beset, and in a manner enclosed round about by the
Troops of King RICHARD, and in manifest danger of his life; when this STANLEY
was sent by his brother, with three thousand men to his Rescue, which he
performed so, that king RICHARD was slain upon the Place. So as the condition
of Mortal men is not capable of a greater benefit, than the king received by
the hands of STANLEY; being like the benefit of CHRIST, at once to Save, and
Crown. For which service the King gave him great gifts, made him his
Counselor, and Chamberlain; and (somewhat contrary to his nature) had winked at
the great spoils of Bosworth Field, which came almost wholly to this man's hands,
to his infinite enriching. Yet nevertheless blown up with the conceit of his
Merit, he did not think he had received good Measure from the King, at least
not Pressing-downe, and runningouer, as he expected. And his ambition was so
exorbitant, and unbounded, as he became Sutour to the King for the Earldom of
Chester. Which ever being a kind of Appennage to the Principality of Wales,
and using to go to the Kings Son; his suit did not only end in a Denial,
but in a Distaste. The King perceiving thereby, that his Desires were
intemperate, and his Cogitations vaste, and irregular, and that his former
Benefits were but cheap, and lightly regarded by him. Wherefore the King began
not to brook him well. And as a little Leaven of new Distaste does commonly sour
the whole Lump of former Merits, the Kings Wit began now to suggest unto his
Passion, that STANLEY, at Bosworth Field, though he came time enough to save
his life, yet he stayed long enough to endanger it. But yet having no matter
against him, he continued him in his Places, until this his Fall.

After him was made Lord Chamberlain, GILES Lord Dawbeny, a man of great
sufficiency and valor; the more, because he was gentle and moderate.

There was a common Opinion, That Sir ROBERT CLIFFORD (who now was become the
State-Informer) was from the beginning an Emissary, and Spy of the Kings; and
that he fled over into Flanders with his consent and priuitie. But this is not
probable; both because he never recovered that Degree of Grace, which he had
with the king before his going over; and chiefly, for that the Discovery which
he had made touching the Lord Chamberlain (which was his great Service) grew
not from any thing he learned abroad, for that he knew it well before he went.

These Executions (and especially that of the Lord Chamberlaines, which was the
chief strength of the Party, and by means of Sir ROBERT CLIFFORD, who was
the most inward man of Trust amongst them) did extremely quail the Design of
PERKIN, and his accomplices, as well through Discouragement, as Distrust. So that
they were now (like Sand without Lyme) ill bound together; especially as many
as were English: who were at a gaze, looking strange one upon another, not
knowing who was faithful to their Side; but thinking, that the King (what with
his Baits, and what with his Nets) would draw them all unto him, that were
anything worth. And indeed it came to pass, that diverse came away by the
Thread, sometimes one, and sometimes another. BARLEY (that was
Ioint-Commissioner with CLIFFORD) did hold out one of the longest, till PERKIN
was far worn; yet made his Peace at the length. But, the Fall of this
Greatman, being in so high Authority and Favor (as was thought) with the
King; and the manner of Carriage of the Business, as if there had been secret
Inquisition upon him, for a great time before; and the Cause for which he
suffered, which was little more, than for saying in effect, That the Title of
YORK was better than the Title of LANCASTER; which was the Case almost of
every man (at the least in Opinion;) was matter of great Terror amongst all
the Kings Servants and Subjects: Insomuch, as no man almost thought himself
secure; and men durst scarce commune or talk one with another: but there was a
general Diffidence every where. Which nevertheless made the King rather more
Absolute, than more Safe. For, Bleeding Inwards and shut Vapors strangle
soonest, and oppress most.

Hereupon presently came forth Swarms and Volies of Libels (which are the
Gusts of Liberty of Speech restrained, and the Females of Sedition) containing
bitter Inuectiues, and Slanders against the King, and some of the Council. For
the contriuing and dispersing whereof (after great Diligence of Inquiry) five
mean Persons were caught, and executed.

Mean while, the King did not neglect Ireland; being the Soil where the
Mushromes and Upstart-Weedes (that spring up in a Night) did chiefly prosper.
He sent therefore from hence (for the better settling of his affairs there)
Commissioners of both Robes: The Prior of Lanthony, to be his Chancellor in
that Kingdom; and Sir EDWARD POYNINGS, with a Power of Men, and a Marshall
Commission, together with a Civil Power of his Lieutenant, with a Clause, That
the Earl of Kildare, then Deputy, should obey him. But, the Wilde-Irish (who
were the principal Offenders) fled into the Woods and Bogges, after their
manner: and those, that knew themselves guilty, in the Pale, fled to them. So
that Sir EDWARD POYNINGS was enforced to make a Wilde-Chase upon the
Wilde-Irish: Where (in respect of the Mountains and Fastnesses) he did little
good. Which (either out of a suspicious Melancholy upon his bad Success, or
the better to save his service from Disgrace) he would needs impute unto the
Comfort, that the Rebels should receive underhand from the Earl of Kildare;
every light suspicion growing upon the Earl, in respect of the KILDARE that
was in the Action of LAMBERT SIMNELL, and slain at Stoke-field. Wherefore he
caused the Earl to be apprehended, and sent into England; where, upon
Examination, he cleared himself so well, as he was re-placed in his
Government. But, POYNINGS (the better to make compensation of the Meagernesse
of his Service in the Wars, by Acts of Peace) called a Parliament; where was
made that memorable Act, which at this day is called POYNINGS Law, whereby all
the Statutes of England were made to be of force in Ireland. For, before they
were not: neither are any now in force in Ireland, which were made in England
since that time; which was the tenth year of the King.

About this time, began to be discovered in the King that Disposition, which,
afterward nourished and whet-on by bad Counselors and Ministers, proved the
Blot of his times; which was, the course he took, to crush Treasure out of his
Subjects Purses, by forfeitures upon Penall-Lawes. At this, men did startle the
more at this time, because it appeared plainly to be in the King's Nature,
and not out of his Necessity, he being now in Float for Treasure; For that
he had newly received the Peace-money from France, the Beneuolence-money from
his Subjects, and great Casualties upon the Confiscations of the Lord
Chamberlain, and diverse others. The first-noted Case of this kind, was that
of Sir WILLIAM CAPEL, Alderman of London: Who, upon sundry Penall-Lawes, was
condemned in the sum of seven and twenty hundred pounds, and compounded with
the King for sixteen hundred: And yet after, EMPSON would have cut another
Chop out of him, if the King had not dyed in the Instant.

The Summer following, the King, to comfort his Mother (whom he did always
tenderly love and reuere) and to make Demonstration to the World, that the
proceedings against Sir WILLIAM STANLEY (which was imposed upon him by
necessity of State) had not in any degree diminished the affection he bare to
THOMAS, his brother; went in Progress to Latham, to make merry with his
Mother, and the Earl, and lay there diverse days.

During this Progress, PERKIN WARBECKE finding, that time and Temporizing,
which (whilst his practices were covert and wrought well in England) made for
him; did now, when they were discovered and defeated, rather make against him
(for that when matters once go down the Hill, they stay not without a new
force) resolved to try his adventure in some exploit upon England; hoping
still upon the affections of the Common People toward the House of YORK.
Which Body of Common People he thought was not to be practiced upon, as
Persons of Quality are; But, that the only practice upon their affections,
was, To set up a Standard in the field. The Place where he should make his
Attempt, he chose to be the Coast of Kent.

The King by this time was grown to sueh an height of Reputation for cunning
and Policy, that every Accident and Event, that went well, was laid and
imputed to his foresight, as if he had set it before: As, in this Particular
of PERKINS Design upon Kent. For, the world would not believe afterward, but
the King, having secret Intelligence of PERKINS intention for Kent (the better
to draw it on) went of purpose into the North, a far off, laying an open side
unto PERKIN, to make him come to the Close, and so to trip up his heels,
having made sure in Kent before hand.

But so it was, that PERKIN had gathered together a Power of all Nations,
neither in number, nor in the hardiness and courage of the Persons,
contemptible; but, in their nature and fortunes, to be feared as well of
Friends as Enemies; being Bankrupts, and many of them Felons, and such as lived
by Rapine. These he put to Sea, and arrived upon the Coast of Sandwich and
Deal in Kent, about July.

There he cast Anchor; and to prove the affections of the People, sent some of
his men to land, making great boast of the Power that was to follow. The
Kentish-men (perceiving that PERKIN was not followed by any English of name or
account, and that his forces consisted but of strangers borne, and most of them
base People, and Free-booters, fitter to spoil a Coast, than to recover a
Kingdom) resorting unto the principal Gentlemen of the Country, professed
their loyalty to the King, and desired to be directed and commanded for the
best of the Kings service. The Gentlemen, entering into Consultation, directed
some forces in good number, to show themselves upon the Coast; and some of them
to make signs, to entice PERKINS Soldiers to land, as if they would join
with them: and some others to appear from some other Places, and to make
semblance as if they fled from them; the better to encourage them to land.
But, PERKIN (who, by playing the Prince, or else taught by Secretary FRION,
had learned thus much, That People under Command, do use to consult, and after
to march in order; and Rebels contrariwise run upon an Head together in
confusion) considering the delay of time, and observing their orderly, and not
tumultuary Arming, doubted the worst. And therefore the wily Youth would not
set one foot out of his Ship, till he might see things were sure. Wherefore
the Kings Forces, perceiving that they could draw on no more than those that
were formerly landed, set upon them, and cut them in pieces, ere they could fly
back to their ships. In which Skirmish (besides those that fled, and were
slain) there were taken about an hundred and fifty persons. Which, for that
the King thought, that to punish a few for example was Gentlemans-play, but for
Rascall-People, they were to be cut off every man, especially in the beginning
of an Enterprise; and likewise for that he saw, that PERKINS Forces would now
consist chiefly of such Rabble and scumme of desperate People; he therefore
hanged them all, for the greater terror. They were brought to London, all
rayl'd in Ropes, like a Teame of Horses in a Cart; and were executed some of
them at London, and Wapping, and the rest at diverse places upon the Seacoast
of Kent, Sussex, and Norfolk, for Sea-markes or Light-houses, to teach PERKINS
People to avoid the Coast. The King, being advertised of the landing of the
Rebels, thought to leave his Progress: But, being certified the next day, that
they were partly defeated, and partly fled, he continued his Progress, and
sent Sir RICHARD GVILFORD into Kent in message. Who, calling the Country
together, did much commend (from the King) their fidelity, manhood, and well
handling of that service; and gave them all thanks, and (in private) promised
Reward to some particulars.

Upon the sixteenth of November (this being the eleventh year of the King)
was holden the Serieants-Feast, at Elie-Place; there being nine Serieants of
that Call. The King, to honor the Feast, was present with his Queen at the
Dinner; being a Prince, that was ever ready to grace and countenance the
Professors of the Law; having a little of that, That as he governed his
Subjects by his Laws, so he governed his Laws by his Lawyers.

This year also the King entered into League with the Italian Potentates, for
the defense of Italy, against France. For, King CHARLES had conquered the
Realm of Naples, and lost it again, in a kind of Felicity of a Dream. He
passed the whole length of Italy without resistance: so that it was true which
Pope ALEXANDER was wont to say; That the Frenchmen came into Italy, with
Chalk in their hands, to mark up their lodgings, rather than with swords to
fight. He likewise entered and won, in effect, the whole Kingdom of Naples
it self, without striking stroke. But, presently thereupon, he did commit and
multiply so many Errors, as was too great a task for the best fortune to
overcome. He gave no contentment to the Barons of Naples, of the Faction of
the Angeouines; but, scattered his rewards according to the mercenarie
appetites of some about him. He put all Italy upon their Guard, by the seizing
and holding of Ostia, and the protecting of the Liberty of Pisa: which made
all men suspect that his purposes looked further, than his title of Naples. He
fell too soon at difference with LVDOVICO SFORTIA; who was the Man that
carried the Keys which brought him in, and shut him out. He neglected to
extinguish some relics of the War. And lastly, in regard of his easy
passage through Italy without resistance, he entered into an overmuch
despising of the Arms of the Italians: Whereby he left the Realm of Naples,
at his departure, so much the less provided. So that not long after his
return, the whole Kingdom revolted to FERDINANDO the younger, and the French
were quite driven out. Nevertheless, CHARLES did make both great threats, and
great preparations, to re-enter Italy once again. Wherefore, at the instance
of diverse of the States of Italy (and especially of Pope ALEXANDER) there was
a League concluded, between the said Pope, MAXIMILIAN King of Romans, HENRY
King of England, FERDINANDO and ISABELLA, King and Queen of Spain (for so they
are constantly placed in the original Treaty throughout,) AVGVSTISSIMO
BARBADICO, Duke of Venice, and LVDOVICO SFORTIA, Duke of Millan, for the common
defense of their estates. Wherein though FERDINANDO of Naples was not named as
principal; yet, no doubt, the Kingdom of Naples was tacitly included, as a
Fee of the Church.

There dyed also this year CECILE, Duchess of York, mother to King EDWARD
the Fourth, at her Castle of Barkhamsted, being of extreme years; and who
had lived to see three Princes of her body crowned, and four murdered. She
was buried at Foderingham, by her husband.

This year also the King called his Parliament: where many Laws were made, of
a more private and vulgar nature, than ought to detain the Reader of an
History. And it may be justly suspected, by the proceedings following, that
as the King did excel in good Commonwealth Laws; so nevertheless he had,
in secret, a design to make use of them, as well for collecting of Treasure,
as for correcting of Manners; and so, meaning thereby to harrow his People, did
accumulate them the rather.

The principal Law, that was made this Parliament, was a Law of a strange
nature: rather Just, than Legal; and more magnanimous than provident. This Law
did ordain, That no person, that did assist in Arms, or otherwise, the King
for the time being, should after be impeached therefore, or attainted, either
by the course of the Law, or by Act of Parliament: But, if any such Act of
Attainder did happen to be made, it should be void, and of none effect; For
that it was agreeable to reason of Estate, that the Subject should not enquire
of the justness of the Kings Title, or Quarrel; and it was agreeable to good
Conscience, that (whatsoever the fortune of the War were) the Subject should
not suffer for his Obedience. The spirit of this Law was wonderful Pious and
Noble: being like in matter of War, unto the spirit of DAVID in matter of
Plague, who said, If I have sinned, strike me; but what have these sheep
done? Neither wanted this Law parts of prudent and deep foresight. For, it
did the better take away occasion, for the people to busy themselves, to pry
into the Kings Title; for that howsoever it fell, their safety was already
provided for. Besides, it could not but greatly draw unto him, the love and
hearts of the people, because he seemed more careful for them, than for
himself. But yet nevertheless, it did take off from his Party, that great
Tie and Spur of necessity, to fight and go Victors out of the field;
considering their lives and fortunes were put in safety, and protected, whether
they stood to it or ran away. But the force and obligation of this Law was in
it self Illusorie, as to the latter part of it; by a precedent Act of
Parliament, to bind or frustrate a future. For a supreme and absolute Power
cannot conclude it self, neither can that which is in nature reuocable be
made fixed; no more than if a man should appoint or declare by his Will, that
if he made any Latter will, it should be void. And for the Case of the Act
of Parliament, there is a notable President of it in King HENRY the Eight's
time. Who doubting he might dye in the minority of his Son, procured an Act
to pass, That no Statute made during the minority of the King, should bind
him or his Successors, except it were confirmed by the King under his great
Seal, at his full age. But the first Act that passed in King EDWARD the Sixth
his time, was an Act of Repeal of that former Act; at which time nevertheless
the King was Minor. But things that do not bind, may satisfy for the time.

There was also made a shoaring or underpropping Act for the Benevolence; to
make the sums which any person had agreed to pay, and nevertheless were not
brought in, to be leuiable by course of Law. Which Act did not only bring in
the Areres, but did indeed countenance the whole business, and was pretended
to be made at the desire of those, that had been forward to pay.

This Parliament also was made that good Law, which gave the Attaint upon a
false Uerdict between Party and Party, which before was a kind of Euangile,
irremediable. It extends not to causes Capital, as well because they are for
the most part at the Kings Suite; as because in them (if they be followed in
Course of Indictment) there passes a double Jury, the Indictors, and the
Triers; and so not Twelve Men, but Four and twenty. But it seems that was
not the only reason; for this reason holds not in the Appeal. But the great
reason was, lest it should tend to the discouragement of Jurors in Cases of
Life and Death; if they should be subject to Suite and Penalty, where the
favor of Life makes against them. It extends not also to any Suite, where
the Demand is under the value of forty pounds; for that in such Cases of
petty value, it would not quite the Charge, to go about again.

There was another Law made against a branch of Ingratitude in Women, who
having been advanced by their Husbands, or their Husbands Ancestors, should
alien, and thereby seek to defeat the Heirs, or those in Remainder, of the
Lands, whereunto they had bin so advanced. The remedy was, by giving power to
the next, to enter for a forfeiture.

There was also enacted that Charitable Law, for the admission of poor Suitors
In Forma Pauperis, without Fee to Counselor, Attorney, or Clerk, whereby
poor men became rather able to vex, than unable to sue. There were diverse
other good Laws made that Parliament, as we said before: but we still observe
our manner, in selecting out those, that are not of a Vulgar nature.

The King this while, though he sat in Parliament, as in full Peace, and
seemed to account of the designs of PERKIN (who was now returned into
Flanders) but as a May game; yet having the composition of a wise King (Stout
without, and apprehensiue within) had given order for the watching of Beacons
upon the Coasts, and erecting more where they stood too thin, and had a
careful eye where this wandering Cloud would break. But PERKIN advised to
keep his fire (which hitherto burned as it were upon green Wood) alive, with
continual blowing; Sailed again into Ireland, whence he had formerly
departed, rather upon the hopes of France, than upon any unreadiness or
discouragement he found in that People. But in the space of time between the
Kings Diligence and POYNINGS Commission, had so settled things there, as there
was nothing left for PERKIN, but the blustering affection of wild and naked
people. Wherefore he was advised by his Council, to seek aid of the King of
Scotland; a Prince young, and valourous, and in good terms with his Nobles and
People, and ill affected to King HENRY. At this time also both MAXIMILIAN and
CHARLES of France began to bear no good will to the King. The one being
displeased with the Kings Prohibition of Commerce with Flanders: The Other
holding the King for suspect, in regard of his late entry into league with the
Italians. Wherefore besides the open Aides of the Duchess of Burgundy, which
did with Sails and Oars put on and advance PERKINS designs, there wanted not
some secret Tides from MAXIMILIAN and CHARLES, which did further his fortunes.
In so much as they, both by their secret Letters, and Messages, recommended him
to the King of Scotland.

PERKIN therefore coming into Scotland upon those hopes, with a well appointed
company, was by the King of Scots (being formerly well prepared) honorably
welcomed, and soon after his arrival admitted to his Presence, in a solemn
manner. For the King received him in State in his Chamber of Presence,
accompanied with diverse of his Nobles. And PERKIN well attended, as well with
those that the King had sent before him, as with his own Train, entered the
room where the King was, and coming near to the King, and bowing a little to
embrace him, he retired some paces back, and with a loud voice (that all that
were present might hear him) made his Declaration in this manner.

HIgh and Mighty King, your Grace, and these your Nobles here present, may be
pleased benignely to bow your Ears, to hear the Tragedy of a young Man, that
by Right ought to hold in his hand the Ball of a Kingdom; but by Fortune is
made Himself a Ball, tossed from Misery to Misery, and from Place to Place.
You see here before you the Spectacle of a PLANTAGENET, who has been carried
from the Nurserie to the Sanctuary; from the Sanctuary, to the direful
Prison; from the Prison, to the Hand of the cruel Tormentor; and from that
Hand, to the wide Wilderness (as I may truly call it) for so the World has
been to me. So that he that is borne to a great Kingdom, has not Ground to
set his foot upon, more than this where he now stands, by your Princely
Favor. EDWARD the Fourth, late King of England, (as your Grace cannot but have
heard) left two Sons; EDWARD, and RICHARD, Duke of York, both very young.
EDWARD, the eldest succeeded their Father in the Crown, by the name of King
EDWARD the Fifth. But RICHARD, Duke of Gloucester, their unnatural Uncle, first
thirsting after the Kingdom, through Ambition, and afterward thirsting for
their Blood, out of desire to secure himself; employed an Instrument of his
(confident to him, as he thought) to murder them both. But this Man that was
employed, to execute that execrable Tragedy, having cruelly slain King
EDWARD, the eldest of the two, was moved partly hy Remorse, and partly by some
other mean, to save RICHARD his Brother; making a Report nevertheless to the
Tyrant, that he had performed his Commandment for both Brethren. This Report
was accordingly believed, and published generally. So that the World has been
possessed of an Opinion, that they both were barbarously made away, though ever
Truth has some sparks that fly abroad, until it appear in due time, as
this has had. But Almighty GOD, that stopped the Mouth of the Lion, and saved
little JOAS from the Tyranny of ATHALIAH, when she massacred the Kings
Children; and did save ISAAC, when the hand was stretched forth to sacrifice
him; preserved the second Brother. For I my self, that stand here in your
presence, am that very RICHARD, Duke of York, Brother of that unfortunate
Prince, King EDWARD the Fifth, now the most rightful suruiuing Heire-Male to
that Uictorious and most Noble EDWARD, of that Name the Fourth, late King of
England. For the manner of my Escape, it is fit it should pass in silence, or
(at least) in a more secret Relation: for that it may concern some alive, and
the memory of some that are dead. Let it suffice to think, I had then a
Mother living, a Queen, and one that expected daily such a Commandment from
the Tyrant, for the murdering of her Children. Thus in my tender age escaping
by GODS Mercy out of London, I was secretly conveyed over Sea. Where, after a
time, the Party that had me in Charge, (upon what new Fears, change of
Mind, or Practice, GOD knows) suddenly forsook me. Whereby I was forced to
wander abroad, and to seek mean Conditions for the sustaining of my Life.
Wherefore distracted between several Passions, the one of Fear to be
known, lest the Tyrant should have a new Attempt upon me, the other of Grief
and Disdain to be unknown, and to live in that base and servile manner that
I did; I resolved with my self, to expect the Tyrants Death, and then to put
my self into my Sisters hands, who was next Heir to the Crown. But in this
Season, it happened one HENRY TIDDER, son to EDMOND TIDDER Earl of
Richmond, to come from France, and enter into the Realm, and by subtle and
foul means to obtain the Crown of the same, which to me rightfully
appertained. So that it was but a Change, from Tyrant to Tyrant. This HENRY,
my extreme and mortal Enemy, so soon as he had knowledge of my being
alive, imagined and wrought all the subtle ways and means he could, to
procure my final Destruction. For my mortal Enemy has not only falsely
surmised, me to be a feigned Person, giving me Nicknames, so abusing the
World; but also, to defer and put me from entry into England, has offered
large Sums of Money, to corrupt the Princes and their Ministers, with whom I
have been retained; and made importune Labors to certain Servants about my
Person, to murder or poison me, and others to forsake and leave my Righteous
Quarrel, and to depart from my Service, as Sir ROBERT CLIFFORD, and others. So
that every Man of Reason may well perceive, that HENRY, calling himself King
of England, needed not to have bestowed such great Sums of Treasure, nor so
to have busied himself with importune and incessant Labor and Industry, to
compass my Death and Ruin, if I had been such a fained Person. But the truth
of my Cause being so manifest, moved the most Christian King CHARLES, and the
Lady Duchess Dowager of Burgundy, my most Dear Aunt, not only to
acknowledge the truth thereof, but lovingly to assist me. But it seems that
GOD above (for the good of this whole Island, and the knitting of these two
Kingdoms of England and Scotland in a strait Concord and Amity, by so great
an Obligation) had reserved the placing of me in the Imperial Throne of
England, for the Arms and Succors of your Grace. Neither is it the first time
that a King of Scotland has supported them, that were bereft and spoiled of
the Kingdom of England; as of late (in fresh memory) it was done in the
Person of HENRY the Sixth. Wherefore for that your Grace has given clear
Signs, that you are in no Noble quality inferior to your Royal Ancestors;
I, so distressed a Prince, was hereby moved to come and put my Self into your
Royal Hands, desiring your Assistance to recover my Kingdom of England;
promising faithfully to bear my Self toward your Grace no otherwise, than If
I were your own Natural Brother, and will upon the Recovery of mine
Inheritance, gratefully do you all the Pleasure that is in my utmost Power.

AFter PERKIN had told his Tale, King JAMES answered bravely and wisely; That
whatsoever he were, he should not repent him, of putting himself into his
hands. And from that time forth, though there wanted not some about him, that
would have persuaded him, that all was but an Illusion; yet notwithstanding,
either taken by PERKINS amiable and alluring behavior, or inclining to the
recommendation of the great Princes abroad, or willing to take an occasion of
a War against King HENRY, he entertained him in all things, as became the
person of RICHARD Duke of York; embraced his Quarrel; and (the more to put it
out of doubt, that he took him to be a great Prince, and not a
Representation only) he gave consent, that this Duke should take to wife the
Lady KATHERINE GORDON, daughter to the Earl Huntley, being a near Kinswoman
to the King himself, and a young Uirgin of excellent beauty and virtue.

Not long after, the King of Scots in person, with PERKIN in his company,
entered with a great Army (though it consisted chiefly of Borderers, being
raised somewhat suddenly) into Northumberland. And PERKIN, for a Perfume before
him as he went, caused to be published a Proclamation of this tenor following,
in the name of RICHARD Duke of York, true inheritor of the Crown of England.

IT has pleased GOD, Who puts down The Original of this Proclamation
remains with Sir Robert Cotton, a worthy Preserver and Treasurer of rare
Antiquities: from whose Manuscripts I have had much light for the furnishing of
this Work.
the Mighty from their Seat, and exalts the Humble, and suffers not the
Hopes of the Just to perish in the end, to give Us means at the length, to
show Our Selves armed unto Our Leiges and People of England. But far be it
from Us, to intend their hurt and damage, or to make War upon them,
otherwise than to deliver Our Self and them from Tyranny and Oppression. For,
our mortal Enemy HENRY TIDDER, a false Usurper of the Crown of England,
(which to Us by Natural and Lineall Right appertains) knowing in his own
Heart Our undoubted Right, (We being the very RICHARD, Duke of York, younger
Son, and now suruiuing Heire-male of the Noble and Uictorious EDWARD the
Fourth, late King of England) has not only deprived Us of Our Kingdom, but
likewise by all foul and wicked means, sought to betray Us, and bereave Us of
Our Life. Yet if his Tyranny only extended it self to Our Person (although
Our Royal Blood teaches Us to be sensible of Injuries) it should be less
to Our Grief. But this TIDDER, who boasts himself to have ouerthrown a
Tyrant, has ever since his first entrance into his Usurped Reign, put little
in practice, but Tyranny and the feats thereof.

For King RICHARD, our Unnatural Uncle, although desire of Rule did blind
him, yet in his other actions (like a true PLANTAGENET) was Noble, and loved
the Honor of the Realm, and the Contentment and Comfort of his Nobles and
People. But this our Mortal Enemy (agreeable to the meanness of his Birth)
has trodden under foot the honor of this Nation; selling our best
Confederates for Money, and making Merchandise of the Blood, Estates, and
Fortunes of our Peers and Subjects, by fained Wars, and dishonorable Peace,
only to enrich his Coffers. Nor unlike has been his hateful
Mis-gouernement, and evil Deportments at home. First, he has (to fortify
his false Quarrel) caused diverse Nobles of this our Realm (whom he held
Suspect, and stood in dread of) to be cruelly murthred; as our Cousin Sir
WILLIAM STANLEY Lord Chamberlain, Sir SIMON MOVNTFORT, Sir ROBERT RATCLIFFE,
WILLIAM DAWBENEY, HVMPHREY STAFFORD, and many others, besides such as have
dearly bought their lives with intolerable Ransomes. Some of which Nobles are
now in the Sanctuary. Also he has long kept, and yet keeps in Prison, our
right entirely well-beloved Cosen EDWARD, Son and Heir to our Uncle Duke of
Clarence, and others; withholding from them their rightful Inheritance, to
the intent they should never be of might and power, to aid and assist us at
our need, after the duty of their Liegeances. He also married by Compulsion
certain of our Sisters, and also the Sister of our said Cosen the Earl of
Warwick, and diverse other Ladies of the Royal Blood, unto certain of his
Kinsmen and Friends of simple and low Degree; and putting apart all
Well-disposed Nobles, he has none in favor and trust about his Person, but
Bishop FOX, SMITH, BRAY, LOVEL, OLIVER KING, DAVID OWEN, RISELEY, TVRBERVILE,
TILER, CHOLMLEY; EMPSON, JAMES HOBART, JOHN CVT, GARTH, HENRY WYAT, and such
other Caitifes and Uillaines of Birth, which by subtle inventions and Pilling
of the People, have been the principal Finders, Occasioners, and Counselors
of the Mis-rule and Mischief now reigning in England.

We remembering these Premises, with the great and execrable Offenses daily
committed, and done by our foresaid great Enemy, and his Adherents, in
breaking the Liberties and Franchises of our Mother the Holy Church, upon
pretenses of Wicked and Heathenish Policy, to the high displeasure of
Almighty GOD; besides the manifold Treasons, abominable Murders,
Man-slaughters, Robberies, Extortions, the daily Pilling of the People, by
Dismes, Taxes, Tallages, Beneuolences, and other unlawful Impositions, and
grievous Exactions, with many other heinous Effects, to the likely destruction
and desolation of the whole Realm: shall by Gods Grace; and the help and
assistance of the great Lords of our Blood, with the Counsel of other sad
Persons, see that the Commodities of our Realm be employed to the most
advantage of the same; the entercouse of Merchandise betwixt Realm and Realm,
to be ministered and handled, as shall more be to the Common weal, and
prosperity of our Subjects; and all such Dismes, Taxes, Tallages, Beneuolences,
unlawful Impositions, and grievous Exactions, as be above rehearsed to be
fore-done and laid apart, and never from henceforth to be called upon, but in
such cases as our noble Progenitors Kings of England, have of old time bin
accustomed to have the Aid, Succor, and help of their Subjects and true
Liege-men.

And further, we do out of our Grace and Clemency, hereby as well publish
and promise to all our Subjects Remission and free Pardon of all Bypast
Offenses whatsoever, against our Person, or Estate, in adhering to our said
Enemy, by whom (we know well) they have been misled, if they shall within
time convenient submit themselves unto Us. And for such as shall come with the
foremost, to assist our Righteous Quarrel, we shall make them so far
partakers of our Princely Favor and Bounty, as shall be highly for the
Comfort of them and theirs, both during their Life, and after their Death. As
also we shall by all means, which GOD shall put into our hands, demean our
selves to give Royal contentment to all Degrees and Estates of our People,
maintaining the Liberties of Holy Church in their Entire, preserving the
Honors, Privileges, and Preheminences of our Nobles, from Contempt or
disparagement, according to the Dignity of their Blood. We shall also vnyoake
our People from all heavy Burdens, and Endurances, and confirm our Cities,
Boroughes, and Towns, in their Charters and Freedoms, with enlargement, where
it shall be deserved; and in all points give our Subjects cause to think, that
the blessed and debonaire Government of our Noble Father King EDWARD (in his
last times) is in us revived.

And for as much as the putting to death, or taking alive of our said Mortal
Enemy, may be a mean to stay much effusion of Blood, which otherwise may
ensue, if by Compulsion or fair Promises, he shall draw after him any number
of our Subjects to resist us; which we desire to avoid (though we be
certainly informed that our said Enemy is purposed and prepared to fly the
Land, having already made over great Masses of the Treasure of our Crown, the
better to support him in Foreign Parts) We do hereby declare, That whosoever
shall take or distress our said Enemy (though the Party be of never so mean
a Condition) he shall be by Us rewarded with a Thousand Pound in Money,
forthwith to be laid down to him, and an Hundred Marks by the year of
Inheritance; besides that he may otherwise merit, both toward God and all good
People, for the destruction of such a Tyrant.

Lastly, we do all men to wit, and herein we take also God to witness, That
whereas GOD has moved the Heart of our Dearest Cousin, the King of Scotland,
to aid us in Person, in this our righteous Quarrel; it is altogether without
any Pact or Promise, or so much as demand of any thing, that may prejudice our
Crown or Subjects: But contrariwise with promise on our said Cousins part,
that whenever he shall find us in sufficient strength to get the upper hand
of our Enemy (which we hope will be very suddenly) he will forthwith
peaceably return into his own Kingdom; contenting himself only with the
glory of so Honorable an Enterprise, and our true and faithful Love and
Amity. Which we shall ever (by the Grace of Almighty GOD) so order, as shall
be to the great comfort of both Kingdoms.

But PERKINS Proclamation did little edify with the people of England; neither
was he the better welcome for the company he came in. Wherefore the King of
Scotland seeing none came in to PERKIN, nor none stirred any where in his
favor, turned his enterprise into a Rode; and wasted and destroyed the
Country of Northumberland, with fire and sword. But hearing that there were
Forces coming against him, and not willing that they should find his Men
heavy and laden with booty, he returned into Scotland with great Spoils,
deferring further prosecution, till another time. It is said, that PERKIN
acting the part of a Prince handsomely, when he saw the Scottish fell to waste
the Country, came to the King in a passionate manner, making great
lamentation, and desired, That that might not be the manner of making the
War; for that no Crown was so dear to his mind, as that he desired to
purchase it with the blood and ruin of his Country. Whereunto the King
answered half in sport; that he doubted much, he was careful for that that
was none of his, and that he should be too good a Steward for his Enemy, to
save the Country to his use.

By this time, being the Eleventh year of the King, the Interruption of Trade
between the English and the Flemmish, began to pinch the Merchants of both
Nations very sore. Which moved them, by all means they could devise, to
affect and dispose their Sovereigns respectively, to open the Intercourse
again. Wherein, time favored them. For the Archduke and his Council began
to see, that PERKIN would prove but a Runnagate, and Citizen of the World; and
that it was the part of children to fall out about Babies. And the King on his
part, after the Attempts upon Kent and Northumberland, began to have the
business of PERKIN in less estimation; so as he did not put it to account,
in any Consultation of State. But that that moved him most, was, that being a
King that loved Wealth and Treasure, he could not endure to have Trade sick,
nor any Obstruction to continue in the Gate-veine, which disperseth that blood.
And yet he kept State so far, as first to be sought unto. Wherein the
Merchant-Aduenturers likewise, (being a strong Company at that time, and well
underset with rich Men, and good order) did hold out bravely; taking off the
Commodities of the Kingdom, though they lay dead upon their hands for want of
Vent. At the last, Commissioners met at London, to Treat. On the Kings part;
Bishop FOX Lord Privy Seal, Viscount Wells, KENDAL Prior of Saint JOHN'S,
WARHAM Master of the Rolls, who began to gain much upon the Kings opinion;
VRSWICK, who was almost ever one; and RISELY. On the Archdukes part, the Lord
BEVERS his Admiral, the Lord VERVNSEL President of Flanders, and others. These
concluded a perfect Treaty, both of Amity and Intercourse, between the King
and the Archduke; Containing Articles both of State, Commerce, and
Free-Fishing. This is that Treaty, which the Flemmings call at this day,
Intercursus Magnus; both because it is more complete, than the precedent
Treaties, of the Third and Fourth years of the King: and chiefly to give it a
difference, from the Treaty that followed in the One and twentieth year of
the King: which they call Intercursus Malus. In this Treaty, there was an
express Article against the Reception of the Rebels of either Prince by other;
purporting, that if any such Rebel should be required by the Prince whose
Rebel he was, of the Prince Confederate, that forthwith the Prince
Confederate should by Proclamation command him to avoid the Country. Which if
he did not within fifteen days, the Rebel was to stand proscribed, and put
out of Protection. But nevertheless in this Article, PERKIN was not named,
neither perhaps contained, because he was no Rebel. But by this means his
wings were clipped of his Followers, that were English. And it was expressly
comprised in the Treaty, that it should extend to the Territories of the
Duchess Dowager. After the Intercourse thus restored, The English Merchants
came again to their Mansion at Antwerpe, where they were received with
Procession and great Joy.

The Winter following, being the Twelfth year of his reign, The King called
again his Parliament: where he did much exaggerate both the Malice, and the
cruel Predatory War lately made by the King of Scotland; That that King,
being in Amity with him, and no ways provoked, should so burn in hatred
toward him, as to drink of the Lees and Dreggs of PERKINS Intoxication, who
was every where else detected and discarded: And that when he perceived it was
out of his reach, to do the King any hurt, he had turned his Arms upon
unarmed and unprovided People, to spoil only and depopulate, contrary to the
Laws both of War and Peace: Concluding, that he could neither with Honor,
nor with the safety of his People, to whom he did owe Protection, let pass
these wrongs unrevenged. The Parliament understood him well, and gave him a
Subsidy, limited to the sum of one hundred and twenty thousand Pounds,
besides two Fifteenes. For his Wars were always to him as a Mine of
Treasure, of a strange kind of Ore; Iron at the top, and Gold and Silver at the
bottom. At this Parliament (for that there had been so much time spent in
making Laws the year before, and for that it was called purposely in respect
of the Scottish War) there were no Laws made to be remembered. Only there
passed a Law, at the Suit of the Merchant-Aduenturers of England, against the
Merchant-Aduenturers of London, for Monopolizing and exacting upon the Trade:
Which it seems they did, a little to save themselves, after the hard time
they had sustained by want of Trade. But those Innouations were taken away by
Parliament.

But it was fatal to the King, to fight for his money. And though he avoided
to fight with Enemies abroad, yet he was still enforced to fight for it with
Rebels at home. For no sooner began the Subsidy to be levied in Corne-wall,
but the People there began to grudge and murmr. The Cornish being a Race of
Men, stout of stomach, mighty of Body and Limme, and that lived hardly in a
barren Country, and many of them could (for a need) live under ground, that
were Tinners; they muttered extremely, that it was a thing not to be suffered,
that for a little stir of the Scots, soon blown over, they should be thus
grinded to Powder with Payments: And said, it was for them to pay, that had too
much, and lived idly. But they would eat the bread they got with the sweat of
their brows, and no man should take it from them. And as in the Tides of
People once up, there want not commonly stirring Winds to make them more
rough: So this People did light upon two Ringleaders, or Captains of the
Rout. The one was one MICHAEL JOSEPH, a Blacksmith or Farrier of Bodmin;
anotable talking Fellow, and no less desirous to be talked of. The other was
THOMAS FLAMMOCKE, a Lawyer; who by telling his neighbors commonly upon any
occasion, that the Law was on their side, had gotten great sway amongst them.
This Man talked learnedly, and as if he could tell how to make a Rebellion, and
never break the Peace. He told the People, that Subsidies were not to be
granted nor levied in this case; that is, for Wars of Scotland (for that the
Law had provided another course, by service of Escuage, for those Iourneyes)
much less when all was quiet, and War was made but a Pretense to poll and
pill the People: And therefore that it was good, they should not stand now like
Sheep before the Shearers, but put on Harness, and take Weapons in their
hands: Yet to do no creature hurt; but go and deliver the King a Strong
Petition, for the laying down of those grievous Payments, and for the
punishment of those that had given him that Counsel; to make others beware how
they did the like in time to come: And said, for his part he did not see how
they could do the duty of true Englishmen, and good Liege-men, except they
did deliver the King from such wicked Ones that would destroy both Him and the
Country. Their aim was at Archbishop MORTON, and Sir REGINOLD BRAY, who were
the Kings Skreens in this Envy.

After that these two, FLAMMOCKE and the Blacke-smith, had, by joint and
several Pratings, found tokens of consent in the Multitude, they offered
themselves to lead them, until they should hear of better men to be their
Leaders; which they said would be ere long: Telling them further, that they
would be but their servants, and first in every danger; but doubted not but to
make both the West End and the East End of England to meet in so good a
Quarrel; and that all (rightly understood) was but for the Kings service. The
People, upon these seditious Instigations, did arm (most of them with Bows,
and Arrows, and Bills, and such other Weapons of rude and Country People) and
forthwith under the Command of their Leaders (which in such cases is ever at
pleasure) marched out of Corne-wall, through Devonshire, unto Taunton in
Somersetshire, without any slaughter, violence, or spoil of the Country. At
Taunton they killed, in fury, an officious and eager Commissioner for the
Subsidy, whom they called The Provost of Perin. Thence they marched to Wells:
where the Lord AVDLEY (with whom their Leaders had, before, some secret
Intelligence) a Nobleman of an ancient Family, but unquiet and popular, and
aspiring to Ruin, came-in to them, and was by them (with great Gladness and
cries of Joy) accepted as their General; they being now proud, that they were
led by a Nobleman. The Lord AVDLEY led them on from Wells to Salisbury,
and from Salisbury to Winchester. Thence the foolish people, who (in effect)
led their Leaders, had a mind to beeled into Kent; fansying, that the People
there would join with them, contrary to all reason or judgment; considering,
the Kentish-men had showed great Loyalty and Affection to the King so lately
before. But the rude People had heard FDAMMOCKE say, that Kent was never
Conquered, and that they were the freest People of England. And, upon these
vain Noises, they looked for great matters at their hands, in a cause which
they conceited to be for the liberty of the Subject. But when they were come
into Kent, the Country was so well settled, both by the Kings late kind usage
toward them, and by the credit and power of the Earl of Kent, the Lord
ABERGAVENNIE, and the Lord COBHAM, as neither Gentleman nor Yeoman came-in to
their aid; which did much dampe and dismay many of the simpler sort: Insomuch,
as diverse of them did secretly fly from the Army, and went home. But the
sturdier sort, and those that were most engaged, stood by it, and rather waxed
Proud, than failed in Hopes and Courage. For as it did somewhat appall them,
that the people came not in to them; so it did no less encourage them, that
the Kings Forces had not set upon them, having marched from the West unto the
East of England. Wherefore they kept on their way, and encamped upon
Blacke-heath, between Greenwich and Eltham; threatening either to bid Battle
to the King (for now the Seas went higher than to MORTON, and BRAIE) or to take
London within his view; imagining with themselves, there to find no less
Fear, than Wealth.

But to return to the King. When first he heard of this Commotion of the
Cornish-men, occasioned by the Subsidy; he was much troubled therewith: Not
for it self, but in regard of the Concurrence of other Dangers, that did hang
over him at that time. For he doubted lest a War from Scotland, a Rebellion
from Corne-wall, and the Practices and Conspiracies of PERKIN and his
Partakers, would come upon him at once; Knowing well, that it was a dangerous
Triplicitie to a Monarchy, to have the Arms of a Forreiner, the Discontents
of Subjects, and the Title of a Pretender, to meet. Nevertheless, the
Occasion took him in some part well provided. For as soon as the Parliament
had broken up, the King had presently raised a puissant Army, to War upon
Scotland. And King JAMES of Scotland likewise, on his part, had made great
Preparations either for defense, or for new assayling of England. But as for
the Kings Forces, they were not only in preparation, but in readiness
presently to set forth, vuder the Conduct of DAWBENEY, the Lord Chamberlain.
But as soon as the King understood of the Rebellion of Cornwall, he stayed
those Forces, retaining them for his own service and safety. But therewithal
he dispatched the Earl of Surrey into the North, for the defense and strength
of those Parts, in case the Scots should stir. But for the course he held
toward the Rebels, it was utterly differing from his former custom, and
practice; which was ever full of forwardness and celeritie, to make head
against them, or to set upon them as soon as ever they were in Action. This
he was wont to do. But now, besides that he was attempered by Years, and
less in love with Dangers, by the continued Fruition of a Crown; it was a
time when the various appearance to his Thoughts of Perils of several Natures,
and from diverse Parts, did make him judge it his best and surest way, to keep
his Strength together, in the Seat and Center of his Kingdom. According to
the ancient Indian Emblem; in such a swelling Season, To hold the hand upon
the middle of the Bladder, that no side might rise. Besides, there was no
necessity put upon him, to alter this Counsel. For neither did the Rebels
spoil the Country; in which case it had been dishonor to abandon his
People: Neither on the other side, did their Forces gather or increase, which
might hasten him to precipitate and assail them, before they grew too strong.
And lastly, both Reason of Estate and War seemed to agree with this course;
For that Insurrections of base People are commonly more furious in their
Beginnings. And by this means also he had them the more at Vantage, being
tired and harrassed with a long march; and more at Mercy, being cut off far
from their Country, and therefore not able by any sudden flight to get to
Retrait, and to renew the Troubles.

When therefore the Rebels were encamped on Blacke-Heath, upon the Hill, whence
they might behold the City of London, and the fair Valley about it: the King
knowing well, that it stood him upon, by how much the more he had hitherto
protracted the time in not encountering them, by so much the sooner to dispatch
with them, that it might appear to have been no Coldness in foreslowing, but
Wisdom in choosing his time; resolved with all speed to assail them, and
yet with that Providence, and Surety, as should leave little to Venture or
Fortune. And having very great and puissant Forces about him, the better to
master all Events and Accidents, he divided them into three parts. The first
was led by the Earl of Oxford in chief, assisted by the Earls of Essex and
Suffolk. These Noblemen were appointed, with some Cornets of Horse, and Bands
of Foot, and good store of Artillery wheeling about, to put themselves beyond
the Hill, where the Rebels were encamped; and to beset all the Skirts and
Descents thereof, except those that lay toward London; whereby to have these
Wild Beasts (as it were) in a Toil. The second part of his Forces (which were
those that were to be most in Action, and upon which he relied most for the
Fortune of the Day) he did assign to be led by the Lord Chamberlain, who
was appointed to set upon the Rebels in Front, from that side which is toward
London. The third part of his Forces (being likewise great and brave Forces)
he retained about himself, to be ready, upon all Events, to restore the
Fight, or consummate the Victory; and mean while, to secure the City. And
for that purpose he encamped in Person in Saint GEORGES Fields, putting
himself between the City, and the Rebels. But the City, of London
(specially at the first) upon the near encamping of the Rebels, was in great
Tumult: As it uses to be with wealthy and populous Cities (especially those,
which, for greatness and fortune, are Queens of their Regions) who seldom
see out of their Windows, or from their Towers, an Army of enemies. But that
which troubled them most, was the conceit, that they dealt with a Rout of
People, with whom there was no Composition, or Condition, or orderly Treating,
if need were; but likely to be bent altogether upon Rapine and Spoil. And
although they had heard that the Rebels had behaved themselves quietly and
modestly, by the way as they went; yet they doubted much, That would not last,
but rather make them more hungry, and more in appetite, to fall upon spoil in
the end. Wherefore there was great running to and fro of People, some to the
Gates, some to the Walls, some to the Waterside; giving themselves Alarmes,
and Panick fears continually. Nevertheless, both TATE the Lord Mayor, and
SHAW, and HADDON, the Sheriffs, did their parts stoutly and well, in arming and
ordering the People. And the King likewise did adioyne some Captains of
experience in the Wartes, to advise and assist the Citizens. But soon after,
when they understood that the King had so ordered the matter, that the Rebels
must win three Battles, before they could approach the City, and that he
had put his own Person between the Rebels and them, and that the great care
was rather how to impound the Rebels, that none of them might escape, than that
any doubt was made to vanquish them; they grew to be quiet and out of fear.
The rather, for the confidence they reposed (which was not small) in the three
Leaders, OXFORD, ESSEX, and DAWBENEY; All, men famed and loved amongst the
People. As for JASPER Duke of Bedford, whom the King used to employ with the
first in his Wars, he was then sick, and dyed soon after.

It was the two and twentieth of June, and a Saturday (which was the Day of the
week the King fansied) when the Battle was fought; though the King had, by
all the Art he could devise, given out a false Day, as if he prepared to give
the Rebels Battle on the Monday following, the better to find them
unprovided, and in disarray. The Lords, that were appointed to circle the Hill,
had some days before planted themselves (as at the Receipt) in places
convenient. In the afternoon toward the decline of the day (which was done,
the better to keep the Rebels in opinion that they should not fight that day)
the Lord DAWBENEY marched on toward them, and first beat some Troops of them
from Detford-bridge, where they fought manfully; But being in no great number
were soon driven back, and fled up to their maine Army upon the Hill. The
Army, at that time hearing of the approach of the Kings Forces, were putting
themselves in Array, not without much Confusion. But neither had they placed
upon the first high-ground toward the Bridge, any Forces to second the Troops
below, that kept the Bridge; neither had they brought forwards their Maine
Battle (which stood in array far into the Heath) near to the ascent of the
Hill. So that the Earl with his Forces mounted the Hill, and recovered the
Plain, without resistance. The Lord DAWBENEY charged them with great fury;
Insomuch, as it had like (by accident) to have brandled the Fortune of the Day.
For, by inconsiderate Forwardness in fighting in the head of his Troops, he
was taken by the Rebels; but, immediately rescued, and delivered. The Rebels
maintained the Fight for a small time, and for their Persons showed no want of
courage: but being ill armed, and ill led, and without Horse or Artillery,
they were with no great difficulty cut in pieces, and put to flight. And for
their three Leaders; the Lord AVDLEY, the Blacksmith, and FLAMMOCKE (as,
commonly the Captains of Commotions are but halfe-couraged Men) suffered
themselves to be taken alive. The number slain on the Rebels part, were some
two thousand Men; their Army amounting (as it is said) unto the number of
sixteen thousand. The rest were (in effect) all taken; for that the Hill, as
was said, was encompassed with the Kings Forces round about. On the Kings part
there dyed about three hundred; most of them shot with Arrows, which were
reported to be of the length of a Tailors yard: So strong and mighty a Bow the
Cornish-men were said to draw.

The Victory thus obtained, the King created diverse Bannerets, as well upon
Black Heath, where his Lieutenant had won the Field (whither he rode in
Person to perform the said Creation) as in Saint GEORGES Fields, where his
own Person had bin encamped. And for matter of Liberality, he did (by open
Edict) give the goods of all the Prisoners, unto those that had taken them;
either to take them in Kind, or compound for them as they could. After matter
of Honor and Liberality, followed matter of Severity and Execution. The Lord
AVDLEY was led from Newgate to Tower Hill, in a Paper Coat painted with his
own Arms; the Arms reuersed, the Coat torn, and he at Tower Hill beheaded.
FLAMMOCKE, and the Blacksmith were hanged, drawn, and quartered at Tiburne;
The Blacksmith taking pleasure upon the Hurdle (as it seems by words that
he uttered) to think that he should be famous in aftertimes. The King was
once in mind to have sent down FLAMMOCKE, and the Blac-smith, to have been
executed in Corne-wall, for the more terror. But, being advertised, that the
Country was yet unquiet and boiling, he thought better not to irritate the
People further. All the rest were pardoned by Proclamation, and to take out
their Pardons under Seal, as many as would. So that, more than the blood drawn
in the Field, the King did satisfy himself with the lives of only three
Offenders, for the expiation of this great Rebellion.

It was a strange thing, to observe the variety and inequality of the Kings
Executions and Pardons. And a man would think it, at the first, a kind of
Lotterie or Chance. But, looking into it more nearely, one shall find there was
reason for it; much more perhaps, than (after so long a distance of time) we
can now discern. In the Kentish Commotion (which was but an landfull of men)
there were executed to the number of one hundred and fifty; and, in this so
mighty a Rebellion, but three: Whether it were, that the king put go account
the men that wereslaine in the Field: or that he was not willing to be
seuerein a popular Cause; or that the harmless behavior of this People (that
came from the West of England, to the East, without mischief almost, or spoil
of the Country) did somewhat mollify him, and move him to Compassion, or
lastly, that he made a great difference betwoene People, that did Rebel upon
Wantonness, and them that did Rebel upon Want.

After the Cornish-men were defeated, there came from, Calice to the King, an
honorable Embassage from the French King, which had arrived at Calice a Month
before, and there was stayed in respect of the troubles, but honorably
entertained and defrayed.

The King, at their first coming, sent unto them, and prayed them to have
patience, till a little Smoke, that was raised in his Country, were over;
which would son be: Slighting (as his manner was) that openly, which
nevertheless he intended seriously.

This Embassage concerned no great Affair; but only the Prolongation of Days
for payment of Moneys, and some other Particulars of the Frontiers. And it was
(indeed) but a wooing Embassage; with good respects to entertain the King in
good affection: but nothing was done, or handled, to the derogation of the
Kings late Treaty with the Italians.

But, during the time that the Cornish-men were in their march toward London,
the King of Scotland (well advertised of all that passed, and knowing himself
sure of War from England, whenever those Stirs were appeased) neglected not
his opportunity; But, thinking the King had his hands full, entered the
Frontiers of England again with an Army, and besieged the Castle of Norham in
Person, with part of his Forces, sending the rest to Forage the Country. But
FOX, Bishop of Duresme (a wise man, and one that could see through the Present,
to the Future) doubting as much before, had caused his Castle of Norham to be
strongly fortified, and furnished, with all kind of Munition: And had manned
it likewise, with a very great number of tall Soldiers, more than for the
proportion of the Castle; reckoning rather upon a sharp Assault, than a long
Siege. And for the Country likewise, he had caused the People to withdraw
their Cattle and Goods into Fast Places, that were not of easy approach; and
sent in Post to the Earl of Surrey (who was not far off, in Yorkshire) to
come in diligence to the Succor. So as the Scottish King both failed of doing
good upon the Castle, and his men had but a Catching Harvest of their Spoils.
And when he understood, that the Earl of Surrey was coming on with great
Forces, he returned back into Scotland. The Earl finding the Castle freed,
and the enemy retired, pursued with all celeritie into Scotland; hoping to
have ouer-taken the Scottish King, and to have given him Battle; But not
attaining him in time, sat down before the Castle of Aton (one of the
strongest places, then esteemed, between Barwicke and Edenborough) which in a
small time he took. And soon after, the Scottish King retyring further into
his Country, and the weather being extraordinary foul and stormy, the Earl
returned into England. So that the Expeditions on both parts were (in effect)
but a Castle taken, and a Castle distressed; not answerable to the puissance of
the Forces, nor to the heat of the Quarrel, nor to the greatness of the
Expectation.

Amongst these Troubles both Civil and External, came into England from
Spain PETER HIALAS, some call him ELIAS (surely he was the forerunner of the
good Hap, that we enjoy at this day. For, his Embassage set the Truce between
England and Scotland; the Truce drew on the Peace; the Peace the Marriage; and
the Marriage the Union of the Kingdoms) a Man of great wisdom, and (as those
times were) not unlearned; sent from FERDINANDO and IS ABELLA Kings of Spain
unto the King, to treat a Marriage between KATHERINE their second daughter,
and Prince ARTHVR. This Treaty was by him set in a very good way, and almost
brought to perfection. But it so fell out by the way, that upon some Conference
which he had with the King touching this business, the King (who had a great
dexterity in getting suddenly into the bosom of Ambassadors of foreign
Princes, if he liked the men; Insomuch as he would many times communicate with
them of his own affairs, yea and employ them in his service) fell into speech
and discourse incidently, concerning the ending of the Debates and differences
with Scotland. For the King naturally did not love the barren Wars with
Scotland, though he made his profit of the Noise of them. And he wanted not in
the Council of Scotland those that would advise their King to meet him at the
half way, and to give over the War with England; pretending to be good
Patriots; but indeed favoring the affairs of the King. Only his heart was
too great to begin with Scotland for the motion of Peace. On the other side,
he had met with an Allie of FERDINANDO of Arragon, as fit for his turn as
could be. For after that King FERDINANDO had, upon assured Confidence of the
Marriage to succeed, taken upon him the person of a Fraternall Allie to the
King, he would not let (in a Spanish gravity) to counsel the King in his
own affairs. And the King on his part not being wanting to himself, but
making use of every man's humors, made his advantage of this in such things as
he thought either not decent, or not pleasant to proceed from himself;
putting them off as done by the Counsel of FERDINANDO. Wherefore he was
content that HIALAS (as in a matter moved and advised from HIALAS himself)
should go into Scotland, to treat of a Concord between the two Kings. HIALAS
took it upon him: and coming to the Scottish King, after he had with much
Art brought King JAMES to hearken to the more safe and quiet Counsels, wrote
unto the King, that he hoped that Peace would with no great difficulty cement
and close, if he would send some wise and temperate Counselor of his own,
that might treat of the Conditions. Whereupon the King directed Bishop FOX
(who at that time was at his Castle of Norham) to confer with HIALAS, and
they both to treat with some Commissioners, deputed from the Scottish King.
The Commissioners on both sides met. But after much dispute upon the Articles
and Conditions of Peace, propounded upon either part, they could not conclude a
Peace. The chief Impediments thereof was the demand of the King, to have
PERKIN delivered into his hands, as a Reproach to all Kings, and a Person not
protected by the Law of Nations. The King of Scotland, on the other side,
peremptorily denied so to do; saying, That he (for his part) was no Competent
Judge of PERKINS Title: But that he had received him as a Suppliant, protected
him as a Person fled for Refuge, espoused him with his Kinswoman, and aided him
with his Arms, upon the belief that he was a Prince; And therefore that he
could not now with his Honor so vnrippe and (in a sort) put a Lie upon all
that he had said and done before, as to deliver him up to his Enemies. The
Bishop likewise (who had certain proud instructions from the King, at the
least in the Front, though there were a pliant clause at the Foot, that
remitted all to the Bishops discretion, and required him by no means to break
off in ill terms) after that he had failed to obtain the delivery of
PERKIN, did move a second point of his Instructions; which was, that the
Scottish King would give the King an Enteruiew in Person at Newcastle. But this
being reported to the Scottish King, his answer was; That he meant to treat a
Peace, and not to go a begging for it. The Bishop also (according to another
Article of his Instructions) demanded Restitution of the Spoils taken by the
Scottish, or Damages for the same. But the Scottish Commissioners answered;
That that was but as Water spilt upon the ground, which could not be gotten up
again; and that the Kings People were better able to bear the loss, than
their Master to repair it. But in the end (as Persons capable of reason) on
both sides they made rather a kind of Recesse, than a Breach of Treaty, and
concluded upon a Truce for some months following. But the King of Scotland,
though he would not formally retract his judgment of PERKIN, wherein he had
engaged himself so far; yet in his private opinion, upon often speech with
the Englishmen, and diverse other aduertisements, began to suspect him for a
Counterfeit. Wherefore in a Noble fashion he called him unto him, and
recounted the Benefits and favors that he had done him, in making him his
Allie, and in provoking a Mighty and Opulent King by an Offensive War in his
Quarrel, for the space of two years together. Nay more, that he had refused
an Honorable Peace, whereof he had a fair Offer, if he would have delivered
him; and that to keep his promise with him, he had deeply offended both his
Nobles and People, whom he might not hold in any long discontent. And therefore
required him to think of his own Fortunes, and to choose out some fitter place
for his Exile: Telling him withal, that he could not say, but the English had
forsaken him before the Scottish; for that upon two several Trials, none had
declared themselves on his side. But nevertheless he would make good what he
said to him at his first receiving, which was; That he should not repent him,
for putting himself into his hands; For that he would not cast him off, but
help him with Spipping and means, to transport him where he should desire.
PERKIN, not descending at all from his Stage-like Greatness, answered the King
in few words; That he saw his time was not yet come: But whatsoever his
Fortunes were, he should both think and speak Honor of the King. Taking his
leave, he would not think on Flanders, doubting it was but hollow ground for
him, since the Treaty of the Archduke concluded the year before; but took
his Lady, and such Followers as would not leave him, and sailed over into
Ireland.

This Twelfth year of the King, a little before this time, Pope ALEXANDER (who
loved best those Princes that were furthest off, and with whom he had least to
do) taking very thankefully the Kings late entrance into League, for the
defense of Italy, did remunerate him with an Hallowed-Sword, and Cap-of-
Maintenance sent by his Nuncio. Pope INNOCENT had done the like, but it was not
received in that Glory. For the King appointed the Mayor and his Brethren to
meet the Popes Orator at London Bridge, and all the Streets between the
Bridge-foote and the Palace of Paul's (where the King then lay) were garnished
with the Citizens, standing in their Liueries. And the Morrow after (being
All-hallowes day) the King, attended with many of his Prelates, Nobles, and
Principal Courtiers, went in Procession to Paul's, and the Cap and Sword were
borne before him. And after the Procession, the King himself remaining seated
in the Quire, the Lord Archbishop upon the greece of the Quire, made a long
Oration, setting forth the greatness and Eminency of that Honor, which the
Pope (in these Ornaments and Ensigns of Benediction) had done the King; and
how rarely, and upon what high deserts they used to be bestowed. And then
recited the Kings principal Acts and Merits, which had made him appear worthy
in the eyes of his Holiness of this great Honor.

All this while the Rebellion of Cornwall (whereof we have spoken) seemed to
have no relation to PERKIN; save that perhaps PERKINS Proclamation had stricken
upon the right Vein, in promising to lay down Exactions and Payments, and so
had made them now and then have a Kind-thought on PERKIN. But now these Bubbles
by much stirring began to meet, as they use to do upon the top of Water. The
Kings lenity (by that time the Cornish Rebels, who were taken and pardoned,
and (as it was said) many of them sold by them that had taken them, for twelve
pence and two shillings a-peece, were come down into their Country) had
rather imboldened them, than reclaymed them. Insomuch, as they stuck not to
say to their Neighbors and Contrymen, that The King did well to pardon
them, for that he knew he should leave few Subjects in England, if he hanged
all that were of their mind: And began whetting and inciting one another to
renew the Commotion. Some of the subtilest of them, hearing of PERKINS being in
Ireland, found means to send to him, to let him know, that if he would come
over to them, they would serve him.

When PERKIN heard this News, he began to take heart again, and advised
upon it with his Council, which were principally three; HERNE a Mercer, that
had fled for Debt; SKELETON a Tailor, and ASTLEY a Scriuener: for, Secretary
FRION was gone. These told him, that he was mightily ouerseene, both when he
went into Kent, and when he went into Scotland: The one being a place so near
London, and under the Kings Nose; and the other, a Nation so distasted with the
People of England, that if they had Ioued him never so well, yet they would
never have taken his part in that Company. But if he had been so happy, as
to have been in Cornwall at the first, when the People began to take Arms
there, he had been crowned at Westminster before this time. For, these Kings
(as he had now experience) would sell poor Princes for shoes: But he must
rely wholly upon People; and therefore advised him to sail over with all
possible speed into Cornwall. Which, accordingly he did; having in his
Company four small Barks, with some six score or seven score fighting men.
He arrived in September at Whitsand-Bay; and forthwith came to Bodmin, the
Black-smiths Town: Where there assembled unto him to the number of three
thousand men of the rude People. There he set forth a new Proclamation,
stroaking the People with fair Promises, and humouring them with Inuectiues
against the King and his Government. And, as it fares with Smoke, that never
loses it self till it be at the highest; he did now before his end raise
his Style, intituling himself no more RICHARD, Duke of York; but RICHARD the
Fourth, King of England. His Council advised him, by all means, to make
himself Master of some good walled Town; as well to make his Men find the
sweetness of rich Spoils, and to allure to him all loose and lost People, by
like hopes of Booty; as to be a sure Retrait to his Forces, in case they
should have any ill Day, or unlucky Chance in the Field. Wherefore they took
heart to them, and went on, and besieged the City of Excester, the principal
Town for Strength and Wealth in those Parts.

When they were comne before Excester, they forbear to use any Force at the
first; but made continual Shouts and Outcries, to terrify the Inhabitants.
They did likewise in diverse places call and talk to them from under the Walls,
to join with them, and be of their Party; telling them, that The King would
make them another London, if they would be the first Town that should
acknowledge him. But they had not the wit to send to them, in any orderly
fashion, Agents or chosen Men, to tempt them, and to treat with them. The
Citizens on their part showed themselves stout and loyal Subjects. Neither was
there so much as any Tumult or Division amongst them: but all prepared
themselves for a valiant Defense, and making good the Town. For, well they
saw, that the Rebels were of no such Number or Power, that they needed to fear
them as yet: and well they hoped, that before their Numbers increased, the
Kings Succors would come-in. And, howsoever, they thought it the extremest of
Evils, To put themselves at the mercy of those hungry and disorderly People.
Wherefore, setting all things in good order within the Town, they
nevertheless let-downe with Cords, from several parts of the Walls privily,
several Messengers (that, if one came to mischance, another might passe-on)
which should advertise the King of the State of the Town, and implore his
aid. PERKIN also doubted, that Succors would come ere long; and therefore
resolved to use his utmost Force to assault the Town: And for that purpose,
having mounted Scaling-Ladders in diverse places upon the Walls, made at the
same instant an Attempt to force one of the Gates. But, having no Artillery nor
Engines, and finding that he could do no good by ramming with Logges of
Timber, nor by the use of Iron Bars and Iron Crows, and such other means at
hand, he had no way left him, but to set one of the Gates on fire: which he
did. But the Citizens, well perceiving the Danger, before the Gate could be
fully consumed, blocked up the Gate, and some space about it on the inside,
with Fagots and other Fuel: which they likewise set on fire, and so repulsed
fire with fire; And, in the mean time, raised up Rampires of earth, and cast
up deep Trenches, to serve in stead of Wall and Gate. And for the Escaladaes,
they had so bad success, as the Rebels were driven from the Walls, with the
loss of two hundred men.

The King, when he heard of PERKINS Siege of Excester, made sport with it, and
said to them that were about him, that The King of Rake-hells was landed in the
West, and that he hoped now to have the honor to see him, which he could
never yet do. And it appeared plainly to those that were about the King, that
he was indeed much ioied with the news of PERKINS being in English Ground,
where he could have no retrait by Land; thinking now, that he should be
cured of those privy Stitches, which he had long had about his Heart, and had
sometimes broken his Sleeps in the midst of all his Felicity. And, to set
all men's hearts on fire, he did by all possible means let it appear, that
those, who should now do him service to make an end of these troubles, should
be no less accepted of him, than he that came upon the Eleventh Hour, and
had the whole Wages of the Day. Therefore now (like the end of a Play) a great
number came upon the Stage at once. He sent the Lord Chamberlain, and the Lord
BROOK, and Sir RICEAP THOMAS, with expedite Forces to speed to Excester, to the
Rescue of the Town, and to spread the Fame of his own following in Person
with a Royal Army. The Earl of Devonshire, and his Son, with the CAROES, and
the FVLFORDES, and other principal Persons of Devonshire (uncalled from the
Court, but hearing that the Kings heart was so much bent upon this Service)
made haste with Troops, that they had raised, to be the first that should
succor the City of Excester, and prevent the Kings Succors. The Duke of
Buckingham likewise, with many brave Gentlemen, put themselves in Arms, not
staying either the Kings or the Lord Chamberlaines coming on, but making a
Body of Forces of themselves, the more to indeare their merit; signifying to
the King their readiness, and desiring to know his pleasure. So that according
to the Proverb, In the coming down, every Saint did help.

PERKIN, hearing this Thunder of Arms, and Preparations against him from so
many Parts, raised his Siege, and marched to Taunton; beginning already to
squint one eye upon the Crown, and another upon the Sanctuary: Though the
Cornish-men were become, like Metal often fired and quenched, churlish, and
that would sooner break than bow; swearing and vowing not to leave him, till
the uttermost drop of their blood were spilt. He was at his rising from
Excester between six and seven thousand strong, many having come unto him,
after he was set before Excester, upon fame of so great an Enterprise, and to
partake of the Spoil; Though upon the raising of his Siege, some did slip
away. When he was come near Taunton; he dissembled all fear, and seemed all
the day to use diligence in preparing all things ready to fight. But about
Midnight, he fled with threescore Horse to Bewley in the New-Forrest, where
he and diverse of his Company registered themselves Sanctuarie-men, leaving his
Cornish-men to the Four Winds; But yet thereby easing them of their Vow, and
using his wonted Compassion, Not to be by when his Subjects blood should be
spilt. The King, as soon as he heard of PERKINS Flight, sent presently five
hundred Horse to pursue and apprehend him, before he should get either to the
Sea, or to that same little Island, called a Sanctuary. But they came too late
for the latter of these. Therefore all they could do, was to beset the
Sanctuary, and to maintain a strong Watch about it, till the Kings pleasure
were further known. As for the rest of the Rebels, they (being destituted of
their head) without stroke stricken, submitted themselves unto the Kings
Mercy. And the King, who commonly drew Blood (as Physicians do) rather to
save life than to spill it, and was never Cruel when he was Secure; now he saw
the Danger was past, pardoned them all in the end, except some few desperate
persons which he reserved to be executed, the better to set of his Mercy
toward the rest. There were also sent with all speed some horse to Saint
MICHAELS Mount in Cornwall, where the Lady KATHERINE GORDON was left by her
Husband, whom in all Fortunes she entirely loved; adding the virtues of a
Wife, to the virtues of her Sex. The King sent in the greater diligence, not
knowing whether she might be with Child; whereby the business would not have
ended in PERKINS person. When she was brought to the King, it was commonly
said, that the King received her not only with Compassion, but with Affection;
Pity giving more Impression to her excellent Beauty. Wherefore comforting her
(to serve as well his Eye, as his Fame) he sent her to his Queen, to remain
with her; giving her very honorable Allowance for the support of her Estate:
which she enjoyed both during the Kings life, and many years after. The name
of the White-Rose (which had been given to her Husbands False-Title) was
continued in common speech to her true Beauty.

The King went forwards on his Journey, and made a joyful entrance into
Excester, where he gave the Citizens great commendations and thanks: and
taking the Sword he wore, from his side, he gave it to the Mayor, and
commanded it should be ever after carried before him. There also he caused to
be executed some of the Ringleaders of the Cornish-men, in sacrifice to the
Citizens, whom they had putin fear, and trouble. At Excester the King
consulted with his Council, whether he should offer life to PERKIN, if he
would quit the Sanctuary, and voluntarily submit himself. The Council were
divided in opinion. Some advised the King to take him out of Sanctuary
perforce, and to put him to death, as in a case of Necessity, which in it self
dispenses with Consecrated Places and things. Wherein they doubted not also,
but the King should find the Pope tractable to ratify his Deed, either by
Declaration, or (at least) by Indulgence. Others were of opinion (since all was
now safe, and no further hurt could be done) that it was not worth the
exposing of the King to new Scandal and Envy. A third sort fell upon the
opinion that it was not possible for the King ever, either to satisfy the
world well touching the Imposture, or to learn out the bottom of the
Conspiracy, except by promise of Life and Pardon, and other fair means, he
should get PERKIN into his hands. But they did all in their Preambles much
bemone the Kings Case, with a kind of Indignation at his Fortune; That a Prince
of his high Wisdom and Virtue, should have been so long, and so often
exercised and vexed with Idols. But the King said; that it was the Vexation of
GOD Almighty himself, to be vexed with Idols, and therefore that that was not
to trouble any of his Friends. And that for himself, he always despised
them; but was grieved that they had put his People to such trouble and misery.
But (in Conclusion) he leaned to the third opinion, and so sent some to deal
with PERKIN. Who seeing himself Prisoner, and destitute of all hopes, having
tried Princes and People, Great and Small, and found all either false, faint,
or unfortunate, did gladly accept of the Condition. The King did also (while
he was at Excester) appoint the Lord DARCIE, and others, Commissioners, for
the Fining of all such, as were of any value, and had any hand or partaking in
the aid or comfort of PERKIN or the Cornish-men, either in the Field or in the
Flight.

These Commissioners proceeded with such strictness and severity, as did much
obscure the Kings mercy in sparing of Blood, with the bleeding of so much
Treasure. PERKIN was brought unto the Kings Court, but not to the Kings
presence; though the King (to satisfy his Curiosity) saw him sometimes out of
a window, or in passage. He was in show at liberty, but guarded with all care
and watch that was possible, and willed to follow the King to London. But from
his first appearance upon the Stage, in his new person of a Sycophant or
Iugler, in stead of his former Person of a Prince, all men may think how he
was exposed to the derision, not only of the Courtiers, but also of the
Common People, who flocked about him as he went along; that one might know a
far off, where the Owl was, by the Flight of Birds. Some mocking, some
wondering, some cursing, some prying and picking matter out of his Countenance
and Gesture, to talk of. So that the false Honor and Respects which he had
so long enjoyed, was plentifully repaied in Scorn and Contempt. As soon as
he was come to London, the King gave also the City the solace of this
May Game. For he was conueighed leasurely on Horseback (but not in any
ignominious fashion) through Cheape-side, and Cornwall, to the Tower; and from
thence back again unto Westminster, with the Churme of a thousand taunts and
reproaches. But to amend the Show, there followed a little distance of PERKIN,
an inward Counselor of his, One that had been Servant Farrier to the King.
This Fellow when PERKIN took Sanctuary, chose rather to take an Holy-Habit,
than an Holy-Place, and clad him self like an Hermit, and in that weed
wandered about the Country, till he was discovered, and taken. But this Man
was bound hand and foot upon the Horse, and came not back with PERKIN, but
was left at the Tower, and within few days after Executed. Soon after, now
that PERKIN could tell better what himself was, he was diligently examined;
and after his Confession taken, an Extract was made of such parts of them, as
were thought fit to be divulged, which was Printed and dispersed abroad.
Wherein the King did himself no Right. For as there was a labored Tale of
particulars, of PERKINS Father, and Mother, and Grandsire, and Grandmother,
and Unckles, and Cosens, by Names and Sirnames, and from what places he
travailed up and down; so there was little or nothing to purpose of any thing
concerning his Designs, or any Practices that had been held with him; nor the
Duchess of Burgundy her self (that all the World did take knowledge of, as
the Person that had put Life and Being into the whole Business) so much as
named or pointed at. So that men missing of that they looked for, looked about
for they knew not what, and were in more doubt than before. But the King chose
rather not to satisfy, than to kindle Coals. At that time also it did not
appear by any new Examinations or Commitments, that any other Person of
quality was discovered or appeached, though the Kings closeness made that a
Doubt-Dormant.

About this time, a great Fire in the night time suddenly began at the kings
Palace of Shine, near unto the kings own Lodgings, whereby a great part of
the Building was consumed, with much costly Household Stuff; which gave the
king occasion of Building from the ground that fine Pile of Richmond, which is
now standing.

Somewhat before this time also, there fell out a memorable Accident. There was
one SEBASTIAN GABATO, a Venetian, dwelling in Bristow, a man seen and expert
in Cosmographie and Navigations. This Man seeing the success, and emulating
perhaps the enterprise of CHRISTOPHERVS COLVMBVS in that fortunate discovery
toward the Southwest, which had been by him made some six years before;
conceited with himself, that Lands might likewise be discovered toward the
Northwest. And surely it may be he had more firm and pregnant Conjectures of
it, than COLVMBVS had of this at the first. For the two great Islands of the
Old and New world, being (in the shape and making of them) broad toward the
North, and pointed toward the South; it is likely, that the discovery first
began where the Lands did nearest meet. And there had been before that time
a discovery of some Lands, which they took to be Islands, and were indeed
the Continent of America, toward the Northwest. And it may be, that some
Relation of this nature coming afterward to the knowledge of COLVMBVS, and by
him suppressed, (desirous rather to make his Enterprise the Child of his
Science and Fortune, than the Follower of a former Discovery) did give him
better assurance, that all was not Sea, from the West of Europe and Afric
unto Asia, than either SENECA'S Prophecy, or PLATO'S Antiquities, or the
Nature of the Tides, and Land-winds, and the like, which were the Conjectures
that were given out, whereupon he should have relied. Though I am not
ignorant, that it was likewise laid unto the casual and windbeaten Discovery
(a little before) of a Spanish Pilot, who died in the house of COLVMBVS. But
this GABATO bearing the King in hand, that he would find out an Island endued
with rich Commodities, procured him to man and victual a Ship at Bristow, for
the discovery of that Island, With whom ventured also three small Ships of
London-Merchants, fraught with some gross and slight Wares, fit for Commerce
with barbarous people. He sailed (as he affirmed at his Return, and made a
Card thereof) very far Westwards, with a Quarter of the North, on the
North-side of Tierra de Labrador, until he came to the Latitude of sixty
seven Degrees and an half, finding the Seas still open. It is certain also,
that the Kings Fortune had a tender of that great Empire of the West Indies.
Neither was it a Refusal on the kings part, but a Delay by accident, that put
by so great an Acquest. For CHRISTOPHERVS COLVMBVS refused by the king of
Portugal (who would not embrace at once both East and West) employed his
Brother BARTHOLOMEVS COLVMBVS unto king HENRY, to negotiate for his Discovery.
And it so fortuned, that he was taken by Pirates at Sea, by which accidental
impediment he was longere he came to the king. So long, that before he had
obtained a Capitulation with the King for his Brother, the Enterprise by him
was achieved, and so the West Indies by Providence were then reserved for the
Crown of Castilia. Yet this sharpened the king so, that not only in this
Voyage, but again in the sixteenth year of his Reign, and likewise in the
Eighteenth thereof, he granted forth new Commissions, for the Discovery and
inuesting of unknown Lands.

In this Fourteenth year also (by GODS wonderful providence, that boweth
things unto his will, and hangs great Weights upon small Wyers) there fell
out a trifling and untoward Accident, that drew on great and happy effects.
During the Truce with Scotland, there were certain Scottish young Gentlemen,
that came into Norham Town, and there made merry with some of the English of
the Town. And having little to do, went sometimes forth, and would stand
looking upon the Castle. Some of the Garrison of the Castle, observing this
their doing twice or thrice and having not their minds purged of the late ill
blood of Hostility, either suspected them, or quarrelled them for Spies.
Whereupon they fell at ill Words, and from Words to Blows; so that many were
wounded of either side, and the Scottish-men (being strangers in the Town)
had the worst. In so much as some of them were slain, and the rest made haste
home. The matter being complained on, and often debated before the Wardens of
the Marches of both sides, and no good order taken, the King of Scotland took
it to himself, and being much kindled, sent a Herald to the king to make
protestation, That if Reparation were not done, according to the Conditions of
the Truce, his king did denounce War. The king (who had often tried Fortune,
and was inclined to Peace) made answer; That what had been done, was utterly
against his will, and without his Priuitie. But if the Garrison-Souldiers had
been in fault, he would see them punished, and the Truce in all points to be
preserved. But this answer seemed to the Scottish king but a Delay, to make the
Complaint breathe out with time; and therefore it did rather exasperate him,
than satisfy him. Bishop FOX, understanding from the king, that the Scottish
king was still discontent and impatient, being troubled that the occasion of
breaking of the Truce should grow from his men, sent many humble and
deprecatorie Letters to the Scottish King to appease him. Whereupon King JAMES,
mollified by the Bishops submisse and eloquent Letters, wrote back unto him;
That though he were in part moved by his Letters, yet he should not be fully
satisfied, except he spoke with him; as well about the compounding of the
present differences, as about other matters, that might concern the good of
both Kingdoms. The Bishop aduising first with the king, took his Journey for
Scotland. The meeting was at Melrosse, an Abbey of the Cestersians, where the
king then abode. The king first roundly uttered unto the Bishop his offense
conceived for the insolent Breach of Truce, by his men of Norham Castle.
Whereunto Bishop FOX made such an humble and smooth answer, as it was like Oil
into the wound, whereby it began to heal. And this was done in the presence of
the King and his Council. After, the King spoke with the Bishop apart, and
opened himself unto him, saying; That these temporary Truces and Peaces were
soon made, and soon broken: But that he desired a straiter Amity with the
King of England, discovering his mind; that if the King would give him in
Marriage, the Lady MARGARET, his eldest Daughter, That indeed might be a Knot
indissoluble. That he knew well what Place and Authority the Bishop
deservedly had with his Master. Therefore, if he would take the business to
heart, and deal in it effectually, he doubted not but it would succeed well.
The Bishop answered soberly, that he thought himself rather happy, than
worthy, to be an Instrument in such a matter; but would do his best
endeavor. Wherefore the Bishop returning to the King, and giving account what
had passed, and finding the King more than well disposed in it, gave the King
advice; first to proceed to a Conclusion of Peace, and then to go on with the
Treaty of Marriage, by degrees. Hereupon a Peace was concluded, which was
published a little before Christmasse, in the Fourteenth year of the Kings
Reign, to continue for both the Kings lives, and the ouer-liuer of them, and a
year after. In this Peace there was an Article contained, that no Englishman
should enter into Scotland, and no Scottish-man into England, without Letters
Commendatorie from the Kings of either Nation. This at the first sight might
seem a means to continue a strangeness between the Nations; but it was
done, to lock in the Borderers.

This year there was also borne to the King a third Son, who was christened
by the name of EDMUND, and shortly after dyed. And much about the same time
came news of the death of Charles the French-King; For whom there were
celebrated Solemn and Princely Obsequies.

It was not long, but PERKIN (who was made of Quicksilver, which is hard to
hold or imprison) began to stir. For deceiving his Keepers, he took him to
his heels, and made speed to the Seacoasts. But presently all Corners were
laid for him, and such diligent pursuit and search made, as he was feign to
turn back, and get him to the House of Bethleem, called the Priorie of Shine,
(which had the privilege of Sanctuary) and put himself into the hands of the
Prior of that Monastery. The Prior was thought an Holy Man, and much
reverenced in those days. He came to the King, and besought the King for
PERKINS life only, leaving him otherwise to the Kings discretion. Many about
the King were again more hot than ever, to have the King to take him forth,
and hang him. But the King (that had an high stomach, and could not hato any
that he despised) bid, Take him forth, and set the Knave in the Sockes. And so
promising the Prior his life, he caused him to be brought forth. And within
two or three days after, upon a Scaffold, set up in the Palace-Court at
Westminster, he was fettered and set in the Stocks, for the whole day. And the
next day after, the like was done by him at the Cross in Cheape-side, and in
both places he read his Confession, of which we made mention before; and was
from Cheap Side conueighed and laid up in the Tower. Notwithstanding all this,
the King was (as was partly touched before) grown to be such a Partner with
Fortune, as no body could tell what Actions the One, and what the Other owned.
For it was believed generally, that PERKIN was betrayed, and that this Escape
was not without the Kings priuitie, who had him all the time of his Flight in a
Line; and that the King did this, to pick a Quarrel to him to put him to
death, and to be rid of him at once. But this is not probable. For that the
same Instruments who observed him in his Flight, might have kept him from
getting into Sanctuary.

But it was ordained, that this Winding-Iuie of a PLANTAGENET, should kill the
true Tree it self. For PERKIN, after he had been a while in the Tower, began
to insinuate himself into the favor and kindness of his Keepers, Servants to
the Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir JOHN DIGBIE, being four in number;
STRANGVVAIES, BLEVVET, ASTVVOOD, and LONG-ROGER. These Varlets, with mountains
of promises, he sought to corrupt, to obtain his Escape. But knowing well,
that his own Fortunes were made so contemptible, as he could feed no man's
Hopes (and by Hopes he must work, for Rewards he had none) he had contrived
with himself a vast and tragical Plot; which was, to draw into his Company
EDWARD PLANTAGENET Earl of Warwick, then Prisoner in the Tower; whom the
weary life of a long Imprisonment, and the often and renewing Fears of being
put to Death, had softened to take any impression of Council for his Liberty.
This young Prince he thought these Servants would look upon, though not upon
himself. And therefore after that by some Message by one or two of them, he
had tasted of the Earls Consent; it was agreed, that these four should murder
their Master the Lieutenant, secretly in the night, and make their best of such
Money and portable Goods of his, as they should find ready at hand, and get
the Keys of the Tower, and presently let forth PERKIN and the Earl. But this
Conspiracy was revealed in time, before it could be executed. And in this
again the Opinion of the Kings great Wisdom did surcharge him with a
sinister Fame, that PERKIN was but his Bait, to entrap the Earl of Warwick.
And in the very Instant while this Conspiracy was in working (as if that also
had been the Kings industry) it was fatal, that there should break forth a
Connuerfeit Earl of Warwick, a Cordwainers Son, whose name was RALPH
WILFORD; a young man, taught and set on by an Augustine Friar, called PATRICKE.
They both from the parts of Suffolk, came forwards into Kent, where they did
not only privily and underhand give out, that this WILFORD was the true Earl
of Warwick, but also the Friar finding some light Credence in the People,
took the boldness in the Pulpit to declare as much, and to incite the People
to come in to his Aid. Whereupon they were both presently apprehended, and the
young Fellow executed, and the Friar condemned to perpetual Imprisonment. This
also happening so opportunely, to represent the danger to the Kings Estate, from
the Earl of Warwick, and thereby to color the Kings severity that followed;
together with the madness of the Friar, so vainly and desperately to divulge
a Treason, before it had gotten any manner of strength; and the saving of the
Friars life, which nevertheless was (indeed) but the privilege of his Order;
and the Pity in the Common People (which if it run in a strong Stream, does
ever cast up Scandal and Envy) made it generally rather talked, than believed,
that all was but the Kings device. But howsoever it were, hereupon PERKIN (that
had offended against Grace now the third time) was at the last proceeded with,
and by Commissioners of Oyer and Determiner, arraigned at Westminster, upon
diverse Treasons committed and perpetrated after his coming on land within this
Kingdom (for so the Judges advised, for that he was a Forreiner) and
condemned, and a few days after executed at Tiburne. Where he did again
openly read his Comfession, and take it upon his Death to be true. This was
the end of this little Cockatrice of a King, that was able to destroy those
that did not epsy him first. It was one of the longest Plays of that kind,
that has been in memory; and might perhaps have had another end, if he had
not met with a King both wise, stout, and fortunate.

As for PERKINS three Counselors, they had registered themselves Sanctuarie-men
when their Master did. And whether upon pardon obtained, or continuance within
the Privilege, they came not to be proceeded with.

There was executed with PERKIN the Mayor of Cork, and his Son, who had
been principal Abettors of his Treasons. And soon after were likewise
condemned eight other Persons, about the Tower-Conspiracie, whereof four were
the Lieutenants men. But of those Eight but two were executed. And immediately
after was arraigned before the Earl of Oxford (then for the time High-Steward
of England) the poor Prince the Earl of Warwick; not for the Attempt to
escape simply (for that was not acted; And besides, the Imprisonment not being
for Treason, the Escape by Law could not be Treason) But for conspiring with
PERKIN to raise sedition, and to destroy the King. And the Earl confessing the
Indictment had Judgment, and was shortly after beheaded on Tower Hill.

This was also the end not only of this Noble and Commiserable Person EDWARD
the Earl of Warwick, eldest Son to the Duke of Clarence, but likewise of
the Line-Male of the PLANTAGENETS, which had flourished in great Royalty and
Renown, from the time of the famous King of England King HENRY the Second.
Howbeit it was a Race often dipped in their own Blood. It has remained since
only transplanted into other Names, as well of the Imperial Line, as of other
Noble Houses. But it was neither guilt of Crime, nor reason of State, that
could quench the Envy that was upon the King for this Execution. So that he
thought good to export it out of the Land, and to lay it upon his new Allie
FERDINANDO King of Spain. For these two Kings understanding one another at
half a word, so it was that there were Letters showed out of Spain, whereby
in the passages concerning the Treaty of the Marriage, FERDINANDO had written
to the King in plain terms, that he saw no assurance of his Succession, as
long as the Earl of Warwick lived; and that he was loath to send his Daughter
to Troubles and Dangers. But hereby, as the king did in some part remove the
Envy from himself; so he did not observe, that he did withal bring a kind
of Malediction and Infausting upon the Marriage, as an ill Prognosticke. Which
in event so far proved true, as both Prince ARTHVR enjoyed a very small time
after the Marriage, and the Lady KATHERINE, her self (a sad and a religious
woman) long after, when King HENRY the Eight his resolution of a Divorce from
her was first made known to her, used some words; That she had not offended:
but it was a Judgment of GOD, for that her former Marriage was made in blood;
meaning that of the Erale of Warwick

This fifteenth year of the king there was a great Plague, both in London and
in diverse parts of the Kingdom. Wherefore the king after often change of
Places (whether to avoid the danger of the Sickness or to give occasion of
an Enteruiew with the Archduke, or both) sailed over with his Queen to
Calice. Upon his coming thither, the Archduke sent an honorable Embassage
unto him, as well to welcome him into those parts, as to let him know, that (if
it pleased him) he would come and do him reverence. But it was said withal;
That the King might be pleased to appoint some place, that were out of any
Walled Town or Fortress, for that he had denied the same upon like occasion
to the French king. And though he said, he made a great difference between
the two kings, yet he would be loath to give a President, that might make it
after to be expected at his hands, by another whom he trusted less. The king
accepted of the Courtesy, and admitted of his Excuse, and appointed the place
to be at Saint PETER'S Church without Calice. But withal he did visit the
Archduke with Ambassadors sent from himself, which were the Lord Saint JOHN,
and the Secretary; unto whom the Archduke did the honor, as (going to Mass
at Saint Omers) to set the Lord Saint JOHN on his right hand, and the
Secretary on his left, and so to ride between them to Church The day
appointed for the Enteruiew, the king went on Horse back some distance from
Saint PETER'S Church, to receive the Archduke. And upon their approaching, the
Archduke made have to light, and offered to hold the kings Stirrope at his
alighting; which the king would not permit, but descending from Horse back,
they embraced with great affection, and withdrawing into the Church to a place
prepared, they had long Conference, not only upon the Confirmation of former
Treaties, and the freeing of Commerce, but upon Cross Marriages, to be had
between the Duke of York the Kings second Son, and the Archdukes Daughter;
And again between CHARLES the Archdukes Son and Heir, and MARIE the Kings
second Daughter. But these Blossoms of unripe Marriages, were but friendly
wishes, and the Aires of loving Entertainment; though one of them came
afterward to Conclusion in Treaty, though not in Effect. But during the time
that the two Princes conuersed and communed together in the Suburbs of Calice,
the Demonstrations on both sides were passing hearty and affectionate,
especially on the part of the Archduke. Who (besides that he was a Prince of
an excellent good nature) being conscious to himself, how driely the King had
been used by his Council in the matter of PERKIN, did strive by all means to
recover it in the Kings Affection. And having also his ears continually beaten
with the Councels of his Father and Father-in-law, who (in respect of their
jealous hatred against the French King) did always advise the Archduke to
anchor himself upon the Amity of King HENRY of England; was glad upon this
occasion, to put in ure and practice their precepts, calling the King Patron,
and Father, and Protector, (These very words the King repeates; when he
certified of the loving behavior of the Archduke to the City) and what else
he could devise, to express his love and observance to the King. There came
also to the King the Governor of Picardie, and the Bailiffe of Amiens, sent
from Lewis the French King to do him honor, and to give him knowledge of his
victory and winning of the Duchy of Millan. It seems the king was well
pleased with the honors he received from those parts, while he was at
Calice. For he did himself certify all the News and Occurrents of them in
every particular, from Calice, to the Mayor and Aldermen of London, which (no
doubt) made no small talk in the City. For the King, though he could not
entertain the good will of the Citizens, as EDWARD the fourth did; yet by
affability and other Princely Graces, did ever make very much of them, and
apply himself to them.

This year also did JOHN MORTON, Archbishop of Canterbury, Chancellor of
England, and Cardinal. He was a Wise man, and an Eloquent, but in his nature
harsh, and haughty; much accepted by the King, but envied by the Nobility,
and hated of the People. Neither was his name left out of PERKINS Proclamation
for any good will, but they would not bring him in amongst the Kings
Casting-Counters, because he had the Image and Superscription upon him of the
Pope, in his Honor of Cardinal. He wanne the King with Secrecy and
Diligence, but chiefly because he was his old Servant in his less Fortunes:
And also for that (in his affections) he was not without an inueterate malice
against the House of YORK, under whom he had been in trouble. He was willing
also to take Envy from the King, more than the King was willing to put upon
him. For the King cared not for Subterfuges, but would stand Envy, and appear
in any thing that was to his mind; which made Envy still grow upon him more
universal, but less daring. But in the matter of Exactions, time did after
show, that the Bishop in feeding the Kings humor, did rather temper it. He had
been by RICHARD the third committed (as in Custody) to the Duke of Buckingham,
whom he did secretly incite to revolt from King RICHARD. But after the Duke
was engaged, and thought the Bishop should have been his chief Pilot in the
Tempest, the Bishop was gotten into the Cockeboat, and fled over beyond Seas.
But whatsoever else was in the Man, he deserves a most happy Memory, in
that he was the principal Mean of joining the two Roses. He died of great
years, but of strong health and Powers.

The next year, which was the Sixteenth year of the King, and the year of
our Lord one thousand five hundred, was the year of Iubile at Rome. But Pope
ALEXANDER, to save the Hazard and Charges of men's Iourneys to Rome, thought
good to make over those Graces by Exchange, to such as would pay a convenient
Rate, seeing they could not come to fetch them. For which purpose was sent into
England JASPER PONS, a Spaniard, the Popes Commissioner, better chosen than
were the Commissioners of Pope LEO, afterward employed for Germany; for he
carried the Business with great wisdom, and semblance of Holiness. In so
much as he levied great sums of Money within this Land to the Popes use,
with little or no Scandal. It was thought the King shared in the Money. But it
appears by a Letter which Cardinal ADRIAN, the Kings Pensioner, wrote to the
King from Rome some few years after, that this was not so. For this Cardinal,
being to persuade Pope JULIUS on the Kings behalf, to expedite the Bull of
Dispensation for the Marriage between Prince HENRY and the Lady KATHERINE,
finding the Pope difficile in granting thereof, does use it as a principal
Argument concerning the Kings merit toward that Sea, that he had touched none
of those Deniers, which had been levied by PONS in England. But that it might
the better appear (for the satisfaction of the Common people) that this was
Consecrate Money, the same Nuntio brought unto the King a Brief from the Pope;
wherein the King was exhorted and summoned to come in Person against the Turk.
For that the Pope (out of the care of an Uniuersall Father) seeing almost under
his eyes the Successes and Progresses of that great Enemy of the Faith, had
had in the Conclane, and with the Assistance of the Ambassadors of foreign
Princes, diverse Consultations about an Holy War, and a General Expedition of
Christian Princes against the Turk. Wherein it was agreed, and thought fit,
that the Hungarians, Polonians, and ^^^^nians should make a War upon Thracid;
The French and Spaniards upon Grecia; and that the Pope (willing to sacrifice
himself in so good a Cause) in Person and in Company of the King of England,
the Venetians, and such other States as were great in maritime Power, would
sail with a puissant Navy through the Mediterrane unto Constantinople. And
that to this end, his Holiness had sent Nuncio's to all Christian Princes;
As Well for a Cessation of all Quarrels and Differences amongst themselves, as
for speedy Preparations and Contributions of Forces and Treasure for this
Sacred Enterprise.

To this the King, (who understood well the Court of Rome) made an Answer
rather Solemn, than Serious. Signifying,

THat no Prince on Earth should be more forward and obedient, both by his
Person, and by all his possible Forces, and Fortunes, to enter into this sacred
War, than himself. But that the distance of Place was such, as no Forces
that he should raise for the Seas, could be levied or prepared, but with
double the charge, and double the time (at the least) that they might be from
the other Princes, that had their Territories nearer adjoining. Besides, that
neither the manner of his Ships (having no Galleys) nor the Experience of his
Pilots and Mariners could be so apt for those Seas, as theirs. And therefore
that his Holiness might do well, to move one of those other Kings, who lay
fitter for the purpose, to accompany him by Sea. Whereby both all things would
be sooner put in readiness, and with less Charge, and the Emulation and
Division of Command, which might grow between those Kings of France and
Spain, if they should both join in the War by Land upon Grecia, might be
wisely avoided. And that for his part, he would not be wanting in Aids and
Contribution. Yet notwithstanding, if both these Kings should refuse, rather
than his Holiness should go alone, he would wait upon him, as soon as he
could be ready. Always provided, that he might first see all Differences of
the Christian Princes amongst themselves, fully laid down and appeased (as
for his own part he was in none.) And that he might have some good Towns
upon the Coast in Italy put into his hands, for the Retrait and safeguard of
his Men.

With this Answer JASPER PONS returned, nothing at all discontented. And yet
this Declaration of the King (as superficial as it was) gave him that
Reputation abroad, as he was not long after elected by the Knights of the
Rhodes, Protector of their Order; All things multiplying to Honor in a Prince,
that had gotten such high Estimation for his Wisdom and Sufficiency.

There were these two last years some proceedings against Her etiques, which
was rare in this Kings Reign, and rather by Penances, than by Fire. The King
had (though he were no good Schooleman) the Honor to convert one of them by
Dispute at Canterbury.

This year also, though the king were no more haunted with Sprites, for that
by the Sprinckling partly of Blood, and partly of Water, he had chased them
away; yet nevertheless he had certain Apparitions, that troubled him, still
showing themselves from one Region, which was the house of York. It came so to
pass, that the Earl of Suffolk, Son to ELIZABETH, eldest Sister to king
EDWARD the fourth, by JOHN Duke of Suffolk, her second Husband, and Brother
to JOHN Earl of Lincoln, that was slain at Stocke-field, being of an hasty
and Choleric Disposition, had killed a man in his fury; whereupon the king
gave him his Pardon. But either willing to leave a Cloud upon him, or the
better to make him feel his Grace, produced him openly to plead his Pardon.
This wrought in the Earl, as in a haughty stomach it uses to do; for the
Ignominy printed deeper than the Grace. Wherefore he being discontent, fled
secretly into Flanders, unto his Aunt the Duchess of Burgundy. The king
startled at it. But being taught by Troubles, to use fare and timely Remedies,
wrought so with him by Messages, (The Lady MARGARET also growing by often
failing in her Alchymie, weary of her Experiments, and partly being a little
sweetened, for that the king had not touched her name in the Confession of
PERKIN) that he came over again upon good terms, and was reconciled to the
king.

In the beginning of the next year, being the seventeenth of the king, the
Lady KATHERINE, fourth Daughter of FERDINANDO and ISABELLA, King and Queen of
Spain, arrived in England, at Plymouth, the second of October and was married
to Prince ARTHVR in PAVLES, the foureteenth of November following. The Prince
being then about fifteen years of age, and the Lady about eighteen. The
manner of her receiving, the manner of her Entry into London, and the
Celebritie of the Marriage were performed with great and true Magnificence, in
regard of Cost, Show, and Order. The chief man that took the care was Bishop
Fox; who was not only a grave Councellor for War or Peace, but also a good
Surueyour of Works, and a good Master of Ceremonies, and any thing else that
was fit for the Active part, belonging to the service of Court, or State of a
great King. This Marriage was almost seven years in Treaty; which was in part
caused by the tender years of the Marriage-couple, especially of the Prince.
But the true reason was, that these two Princes, being Princes of great Policy
and profound Judgment, stood a great time looking one upon another Fortunes,
how they would go; knowing well that in the mean time, the very Treaty it
self gave abroad in the World a Reputation of a strait Conjunction, and
Amity between them; which served on both sides to many purposes, that their
several Affairs required, and yet they continued still free. But in the end
when the Fortunes of both the Princes did grow every day more and more
prosperous and assured, and that looking all about them, they saw no better
Conditions, they shut it up.

The Marriage Money the Princess brought (which was turned over to the King by
Act of Renunciation) was two hundred thousand Ducats Whereof one hundred
thousand were payable ten days after the Solemnization, and the other hundred
thousand at two payments Annual; but part of it to be in Jewels and Plate,
and a due course set down to have them justly and indifferently prized. The
Ioynture or Advancement of the Lady, was the third part of the Principality of
Wales, and of the Dukedom of Cornwall, and of the Earldom of Chester; to be
after set forth in seueraltie. And in case she came to be Queeene of England,
her Advancement was left indefinite, but thus; That it should be as great, as
ever any former Queen of England had.

In all the Devises and Conceits of the Triumphs of this Marriage, there was a
great deal of Astronomy. The Lady being resembled to HESPERVS, and the
Prince to ARCTVRVS, and the old King ALPHONSVS (that was the greatest
Astronomer of Kings, and was Ancestor to the Lady) was brought in to be the
Fortune Tellers of the Match. And whosoever had those Toys in Compiling, they
were not altogether Pedanticall. But you may be sure that King ARTHVR, the
Britton, and the descent of the Lady KATHERINE from the House of LANCASTER,
was in no wise forgotten. But (as it should seem) it is not good to fetch
Fortunes from the Stars. For this young Prince (that drew upon him at that
time, not only the Hopes and Affections of his Country, but the Eyes and
Expectation of Forreiners) after a few Months, in the beginning of April,
deceased at Ludlow Castle, where he was sent to keep his Resiance and Court,
as Prince of Wales. Of this Prince, in respect he died so young, and by reason
of his Fathers manner of Education, that did cast no great Luster upon his
Children, there is little particular Memory. Only thus much remains, that
he was very studious and learned, beyond his years, and beyond the Custom of
great Princes.

There was a Doubt ripped up in the times following, when the Divorce of King
HENRY the Eighth from the Lady KATHERINE did so much busy the world, whether
ARTHVR was bedded with his Lady or no, whereby that matter in fact (of Carnal
Knowledge) might be made part of the Case. And it is true, that the Lady her
self denied it, or atleast her Counsel stood upon it, and would not blaunch
that Advantage, although the Plenitude of the Popes power of Dispensing was the
maine Question. And this Doubt was kept long open, in respect of the two
Queens that succeeded MARIE and ELIZABETH, whose Legitimations were
incompatible one with another, though their Succession was settled by Act of
Parliament. And the times that favored Queen MARY'S Legitimation would have
it believed, that there was no Carnal Knowledge between ARTHVR and KATHERINE.
Not that they would seem to derogate from the Popes absolute power, to
dispense even in that Case; but only in point of honor, and to make the Case
more favorable and smooth. And the Times that favored Queen ELIZABETH'S
Legitimation (which were the longer, and the latter) maintained the contrary.
So much there remains in Memory, that it was half a years time between
the Creation of HENRY Prince of Wales, and Prince ARTHVRS death; which was
construed to be, for to expect a full time, whereby it might appear, whether
the Lady KATHERINE were with Child by Prince ARTHVR, or no. Again, the Lady
her self procured a Bull, for the better Corroboration of the Marriage, with a
Clause of (vel forsan cognitam) which was not in the first Bull. There was
given in Evidence also, when the cause of the Divorce was handled, a pleasant
passage, which was; That in a Morning Prince ARTHVR, upon his vp-rising from
Bed with her, called for drink, which he was not accustomed to do, and
finding the Gentleman of his Chamber that brought him the drink to smile at
it, and to note it, he said merrily to him; That he had been in the midst
of Spain, which was an hot Region, and his Journey had made him dry, and that
if the other had been in so hot a Clime, he would have been drier than he.
Besides, the Prince was upon the point of Sixteen years of Age when he died,
and forward, and able in Body.

The February following, HENRY Duke of York was created Prince of Wales, and
Earl of Chester and Flint. For the Dukedom of Cornwall deuolued to him by
Statute. The King also being fast handed, and loath to part with a second
Dowry, but chiefly being affectionate both by his Nature, and out of Politic
Considerations to continue the Alliance with Spain, prevailed with the Prince
(though not without some Reluctation, such as could be in those years, for
he was not twelve years of Age) to be contracted with the Princess
KATHERINE. The secret Providence of GOD ordaining that Marriage, to be the
Occasion of great Events and Changes.

The same year were the Espousals of JAMES King of Scotland, with the Lady
MARGARET, the Kings eldest Daughter; which was done by Proxy, and published at
PAVLES Cross, the five and twentieth of January, and Te Deum solemnly sung.
But certain it is, that the Joy of the City thereupon showed, by Ringing of
Bells, and Bon-fires, and such other Incence of the People, was more than could
be expected, in a Case of so great and fresh Enmity between the Nations;
especially in London, which was far enough off from feeling any of the former
calamities of the War. And therefore might be truly attributed to a Secret
Instinct and Inspiring (which many times runs not only in the Hearts of
Princes, but in the Pulse and Veins of People) touching the happiness thereby
to ensue in time to come. This Marriage was in August following consummate at
Edenborough. The King bringing his Daughter as far as Colli-Weston on the
way, and then consigning her to the Attendance of the Earl of Northumberland;
who with a great Troop of Lords and Ladies of Honor, brought her into
Scotland, to the King her Husband.

This Marriage had been in Treaty by the space of almost three years, from
the time that the King of Scotland did first open his mind to Bishop FOX. The
Sum given in Marriage by the King, was ten Thousand pounds. And the Iointure
and Advancement assured by the King of Scotland, was two Thousand pounds a
year, after King JAMES his Death, and one Thousand pounds a year in present,
for the Ladies Allowance or Maintenance. This to be set forth in Lands, of the
best and most certain Revenue. During the Treaty, it is reported, that the
King remitted the matter to his Counsel; And that some of the Table in the
Freedom of Counselors (the King being present) did put the Case; that if GOD
should take the Kings two Sons without Issue, that then the Kingdom of
England would fall to the King of Scotland, which might prejudice the Monarchy
of England. Whereunto the King himself replied; That if that should be,
Scotland would be but an Accession to England, and not England to Scotland,
for that the Greater would draw the less. And that it was a safer Union for
England, than that of France. This passed as an Oracle, and silenced those that
moved the Question.

The same year was fatal, as well for Deaths, as Marriages, and that with
equal temper. For the Joys and Feasts of the two Marriages, were compensed
with the Mournings, and Funerals of Prince ARTHVR (of whom we have spoken) and
of Queen ELIZABETH, who died in Childbed in the Tower, and the Child lived
not long after. There dyed also that year Sir REGINOLD BRAY, who was noted to
have had with the King the greatest Freedom of any Counselor; but it was but
a Freedom, the better to set off Flattery. Yet he bare more than his just
part of Envy, for the Exactions.

At this time the Kings Estate was very prosperous, Secured by the Amity of
Scotland, strengthened by that of Spain, cherished by that of Burgundy, all
Domesticke Troubles quenched, and all Noise of War (like a Thunder afar
off) going upon Italy. Wherefore Nature, which many times is happily
contained, and refrained by some Bands of Fortune, began to take place in the
King; carrying (as with a strong Tide) his affections and Thoughts unto the
gathering and heaping up of Treasure. And as Kings do more easily find
Instruments for their Will and Humor, than for their Service and Honor; He
had gotten for his purpose, or beyond his purpose, two Instruments, EMPSON and
DVDLEY, (whom the people esteemed as his Horse-Leeches and Shearers) bold men,
and careless of Fame, and that took Toll of their Masters Grist. DVDLEY was
of a good Family, Eloquent, and one that could put Hateful Business into good
Language. But EMPSON, that was the Son of a Sieue-maker, triumphed always
upon the Deed done, putting off all other respects whatsoever. These two
Persons being Lawyers in Science, and Privy Counselors in Authority (as the
Corruption of the best things is the worst) turned Law and Justice into
Worme-wood and Rapine. For first, their manner was to cause diverse Subjects to
be indicted of sundry Crimes, and so far forth to proceed in form of Law;
But when the Bills were found, then presently to commit them. And nevertheless
not to produce them to any reasonable time to their Answer, but to suffer them
to languish long in Prison, and by sundry artificial Devices and Terrors, to
extort from them great Fines and Ransomes, which they termed Compositions and
Mitigations.

Neither did they (toward the end) observe so much as the Halfe-face of
Justice, in proceeding by Indictment; but sent forth their Precepts to attache
men, and convent them before themselves and some others, at their private
Houses, in a Court of Commission, and there used to shuffle up a Summarie
Proceeding by Examination, without Trial of Jury; assuming to themselves
there, to deal both in Pleas of the Crown, and Controversies Civil.

Then did they also use to enthrall and charge the Subjects Lands with Tenures
in Capite, by finding False Offices, and thereby to work upon them for
Ward-ships, Liueries, Primier Seisines, and Alienations, (being the fruits of
those Tenures) refusing upon diverse Pretexts and Delays, to admit men to
trauerse those False Offices, according to the Law. Nay, the Kings Wards after
they had accomplished their full Age, could not be suffered to have Liuerie of
their Lands, without paying excessive Fines, far exceeding all reasonable
Rates. They did also vex men with Informations of Intrusion upon scarce
colorable Titles.

When men were Outlawed in Personal Actions, they would not permit them to
purchase their Charters of Pardon, except they paid great and intolerable
sums; standing upon the strict Point of Law, which upon Out-lawries gives
Forfeiture of Goods. Nay, contrary to all Law and Color, they maintained, the
King ought to have the half of men's Lands and Rents, during the space of full
two years, for a Pain in Case of Out-lawrie. They would also ruffle with
Jurors, and enforce them to find as they would direct, and (if they did not)
Convent them, Imprison them, and Fine them.

These and many other Courses, fitter to be buried than repeated, they had of
Preying upon the People; both like Tame Hawks for their Master, and like Wild
Hawks for themselves; in so much as they grew to great Riches and Substance.
But their principal working was upon Penal Laws, wherein they spared none,
great nor small; nor considered whether the Law were possible, or impossible,
in Use or Obsolete. But raked over all old and new Statutes, though many of
them were made with intention rather of Terror, than of Rigor; having ever a
Rabble of Promoters, Questmongers, and leading Jurors at their Command, so as
they could have any thing found either for Fact, or Valuation.

There remains to this Day a Report, that the King was on a time entertained
by the Earl of Oxford (that was his principal Servant, both for War and
Peace) nobly and sumptuously, at his Castle at Henningham. And at the Kings
going away, the Earls Servants stood (in a seemly manner) in their Liuerie
Coats, with Cognisances, ranged on both sides, and made the King a Lane. The
King called the Earl to him, and said; My Lord, I have heard much of your
Hospitality, but I see it is greater than the speech. These handsome Gentlemen
and Teomen, which I see on both sides of me, are sure your Meniall Servants.
The Earl smiled, and said; It may please your Grace, that were not for mine
ease. They are most of them my Retainers, that are come to do me service at
such a time as this, and chiefly to see your Grace. The King started a little,
and said; By my faith (my Lord) I thank you for my good Cheer, but I may not
endure to have my Laws broken in my sight. My Attorney must speak with you.
And it is part of the Report, that the Earl compounded for no less than
fifteen thousand Marks. And to show further the kings extreme Diligence; I
do remember to have seen long since a Book of Account of EMPSONS, that had
the kings hand almost to every Leaf, by way of Signing, and was in some places
Postilled in the Margent with the Kings hand likewise, where was this
Remembrance.

Item, received of such a one, five Marks, for the Pardon to be procured; and
if the Pardon do not pass, the Money to be repaied; Except the Party be
some other-wayes satisfied.

And over against this Memorandum (of the Kings own hand)

Otherwise satisfied.

Which I do the rather mention, because it shows in the king a Nearenesse,
but yet with a kind of Justness. So these little Sands and Grains of Gold and
Silver (as it seems) helped not a little to make up the great Heap and Bank.

But meanewhile (to keep the king awake) the Earl of Suffolk having been
too gay at Prince ARTHVRS Marriage, and sunk himself deep in Debt, had yet
once more a mind to be a Knight Errant, and to seek Adventures in Foreign
parts. And taking his Brother with him, fled again into Flanders. That (no
doubt) which gave him Confidence, was the great Murmur of the People against
the Kings Government. And being a Man of a light and rash Spirit, he thought
every Vapor would be a Tempest. Neither wanted he some Party within the
Kingdom. For the Murmur of People awakes the Discontents of Nobles, and
again, that calls up commonly some Head of Sedition. The King resorting to
his wonted and tried Arts, caused Sir ROBERT CVRSON, Captain of the Castle at
Hammes (being at that time beyond Sea, and therefore less likely to be
wrought upon by the king) to fly from his Charge, and to feign himself a
servant of the Earls. This Knight, having insinuated himself into the Secrets
of the Earl, and finding by him upon whom chiefly he had either Hope or Hold,
advertised the King thereof in great secrecy. But nevertheless maintained his
own Credit and inward trust with the Earl. Upon whose Aduertisements, the
King attached WILLIAM COVRTNEY, Earl of Devonshire, his Brother-in-Law,
married to the Lady KATHERINE, daughter to King EDWARD the Fourth; WILLIAM
DE-LA-POLE, Brother to the Earl of Suffolk; Sir JAMES TIRREL, and Sir JOHN
WINDHAM, and some other meaner Persons, and committed them to Custody. GEORGE,
Lord ABERGAVENNIE, and Sir THOMAS GREEN, were at the same time apprehended;
but as upon less Suspicion, so in a freer Restraint, and were soon after
delivered. The Earl of Devonshire, being interessed in the blood of York,
that was rather Feared than Nocent; yet as One, that might be the Object of
others Plots and Designs, remained Prisoner in the Tower, during the Kings
life. WILLIAAM DE-LA-POLE, was also long restrained, though not so straightly.
But for Sir JAMES TIRREL (against whom the Blood of the Innocent Princes,
EDWARD the Fifth, and his Brother, did still cry from under the Altar) and
Sir JOHN WINDHAM, and the other meaner ones, they were attainted and executed;
The two Knights beheaded. Nevertheless, to confirm the Credit of CVRSON (who
belike had not yet done all his Feats of Actiuitie) there was published at
PAVLES Cross, about the time of the said Executions, the Popes Bull of
Excommunication and Curse, against the Earl of Suffolk, and Sir ROBERT
CVRSON, and some others by name, and likewise in general against all the
Abettors of the said Earl. Wherein it must be confessed, that Heaven was made
too much to bow to Earth, and Religion to Policy. But soon after, CVRSON
(when he saw time) returned into England, and withal into wonted Favor with
the King, but worse Fame with the People. Upon whose return the Earl was much
dismayed, and seeing himself destitute of hopes (the Lady MARGARET also by
tract of Time, and bad Success, being now become cool in those Attempts)
after some wandering in France, and Germany, and certain little Proiects, no
better than Squibbs of an Exiled man, being tired out, retired again into the
Protection of the Archduke PHILIP in Flanders, who by the death of ISABELLA
was at that time King of Castile, in the right of JOAN his Wife.

This year (being the Nineteenth of his Reign) the King called his
Parliament. Wherein a man may easily guess, how absolute the King took
himself to be with his Parliament, when DVDLEY that was so hateful, was made
Speaker of the House of Commons. In this Parliament, there were not made any
Statutes memorable, touching public Government. But those that were, had
still the Stamp of the Kings Wisdom and Policy.

There was a Statute made for the disanulling of all Patents of Lease, or
Grant, to such as came not upon lawful Summons, to serve the King in his
Wars, against the Enemies or Rebels, or that should depart without the kings
license; With an Exception of certain Persons of the Long-robe. Providing
nevertheless, That they should have the kings Wages, from their House, till
their Return home again. There had been the like made before for Offices,
and by thin Statute it was extended to Lands. But a man may easily see by many
Statutes made in this kings time, that the king thought it safest, to assist
Martial Law, by Law of Parliament.

Another Statute was made, prohibiting the bringing in of Manufactures of Silk
wrought by it self, or mixed with any other Thread. But it was not of Stuffes
of whole piece (for that the Realm had of them no Manufacture in use at that
time) but of Knit-Silke, or Texture of Silk; as Ribbands, Laces, Caules,
Points, and Girdles, etc. which the People of England could then well skill to
make. This Law pointed at a true Principle; That where foreign materials are
but Superfluities, foreign Manufactures should be prohibited. For that will
either banish the Superfluity, or gain the Manufacture.

There was a Law also of Resumption of Patents of Gaoles, and the Reannexing of
them to the Sherifwicks; Privileged Officers being no less an Interruption
of Justice, than privileged Places.

There was likewise a Law to restrain the By-lawes or Ordinances of
Corporations, which many times were against the Prerogative of the King, the
Common Law of the Realm, and the Liberty of the Subject, being Fraternities
in Evil. It was therefore Provided, that they should not be put in Execution,
without the Allowance of the Chancellor, Treasurer, and the two
Chiefe-Iustices, or three of them, or of the two Justices of Circuit where the
Corporation was.

Another Law was (in effect) to bring in the Silver of the Realm to the Mint,
in making all clipped, minished, or impaired Coins of Silver, not to be
current in payments; without giving any Remedy of weight, but with an
exception only of a reasonable wearing, which was as nothing in respect of the
incertaintie; and so (upon the matter) to set the Mint on work, and to give
way to New Coins of Silver, which should be then minted.

There likewise was a long Statute against Vagabonds, wherein two things may be
noted; The one the Dislike the Parliament had of Gaoling of them, as that which
was chargeable, pesterous, and of no open Example. The other, That in the
Statutes of this Kings time, (for this of the Nineteenth year is not the only
Statute of that kind) there are ever coupled, the punishment of Uagabonds, and
the Forbidding of Dice, and Cards, and unlawful Games unto Servants and mean
people, and the putting down and suppressing of Alehouses, as Strings of one
Root together, and as if the One were unprofitable, without the Other.

As for Riot and Retainers, there passed scarce any Parliament in this time
without a Law against them, The King ever having an Eye to Might, and Multitude.

There was granted also that Parliamemt a Subsidy, both for the Temporaltie
and the Clergy. And yet nevertheless, ere the year expired, there went out
Commissions for a general Benevolence, though there were no Wars; no Fears.
The same year the City gave five thousand Marks, for Confirmation of their
Liberties; A thing fitter for the Beginnings of Kings Reigns, than the latter
Ends. Neither was it a small matter, that the Mint gained upon the late
Statute, by the Recoinage of Groats and Halfe-groats, now Twelue-pences and
Six-pences. As for EMPSON and DVDLEY'S Mills, they did grind more than ever.
So that it was a strange thing, to see what Golden Showers powered down upon
the Kings Treasury at once. The last paiments of the Marriage-money from
Spain; The Subsidy; The Benevolence; The Recoinage; The Redemption of the
Cities Liberties; The Casualties. And this is the more to be marueiled at,
because the King had then no Occasions at all of Wars or Troubles. He had
now but one Son, and one Daughter vnbestowed. He was Wise; He was of an
High Mind; He needed not to make Riches his Glory. He did excel in so many
things else; save that certainly Avarice does ever find in it self matter of
Ambition. Belike he thought to leave his Son such a Kingdom, and such a
Mass of Treasure, as he might choose his Greatness where he would.

This year was also kept the Serieants Feast, which was the second Call in
this Kings Days.

About this time ISABELLA, Queen of Castile, deceased; a right Noble Lady,
and an Honor to her Sex, and Times, and the Cornerstone of the Greatness of
Spain, that has followed. This Accident the King took not for News at
large, but thought it had a great Relation to his own Affairs; especially in
two points. The One, for Example; the Other for Consequence. First, he
conceived that the Case of FERDINANDO of Arragon, after the death of Queen
ISABELLA, was his own Case, after the death of his own Queen: and the Case
of JOAN the Heir unto Castile, was the Case of his own Son Prince HENRY.
For if both of the Kings had their Kingdoms, in the right of their Wives, they
descended to the Heirs, and did not accrue to the Husbands. And although his
own Case had both Steel and Parchment, more than the other (that is to say, a
Conquest in the Field, and an Act of Parliament) yet notwithstanding, that
Natural Title of Descent in Blood, did (in the imagination even of a Wiseman)
breed a Doubt, that the other two were not safe nor sufficient. Wherefore he
was wonderful diligent, to inquire and observe what became of the King of
Arragon, in holding and continuing the Kingdom of Castile. And whether he did
hold it in his own Right, or as Administrator to his Daughter; And whether he
were like to hold it in Fact, or to be put out by his Sonne-in-Law. Secondly,
he did reuolue in his mind, that the Stateof Christendom might by this late
Accident have a turn. For whereas before time Himself, with the Conjunction
of Arragon and Castile (which then was one) and the Amity of MAXIMILIAN and
PHILIP his Son the Archduke, was far too strong a Party for France; he
began to fear, that now the French King (who had great Interest in the
Affections of PHILIP the young King of Castile) and PHILIP himself, now king
of Castile, (who was in ill Terms with his Father-in-law about the present
Government of Castile) And thirdly MAXIMILIAN, PHILIPS Father (who was ever
variable, and upon whom the surest Aim that could be taken, was that he
would not be long, as he had been last before) would, all three being potent
Princes, enter into some strait League and Confederation amongst themselves.
Whereby though he should not be endangered, yet he should be left to the
poor Amity of Arragon. And whereas he had been heretofore a kind of Arbiter
of Europe, he should now go less, and be ouer-topped by so great a
Conjunction. He had also (as it seems) an inclination to marry, and
bethought himself of some fit Conditions abroad. And amongst others, he had
heard of the Beauty and virtuous Behavior of the young Queen of Naples, the
Widow of FERDINANDO the younger, being then of Matronall years of seven and
twenty. By whose Marriage he thought that the Kingdom of Naples (having been
a Gole for a time between the king of Arragon, and the French King, and being
but newly settled) might in some part be Deposited in his hands, who was so able
to keep the Stakes. Therefore he sent in Embassage or Message three Confident
Persons; FRANCIS MARSIN, JAMES BRAY-BROOKE, and JOHN STYLE, upon two several
Inquisitions rather than Negotiations. The One, touching the Person and
Condition of the young Queen of Naples. The Other touching all particulars of
Estate, that concerned the Fortunes and Intentions of FERDINANDO. And because
they may observe best, who themselves are observed least, he sent them under
Colorable Pretexts; giving them Letters of Kindness and Complement from
KATHERINE the Princess, to her Aunt, and Niece, the Old and Young Queen of
Naples, and delivering to them also a Book of new Articles of Peace; which
notwithstanding it had been delivered unto Doctor de PVEBLA, the Leigier
Ambassador of Spain here in England, to be sent; yet for that the King had
been long without hearing from Spain, he thought good those Messengers, when
they had been with the two Queens, should likewise pass on to the Court of
FERDINANDO, and take a Copy of the Book with them. The Instructions touching
the Queen of Naples were so curious and exquisite, being as Articles whereby
to direct a Survey, or framing a Particular of her Person, for Complexion,
Favor, Feature, Stature, Health, Age, Customs, Behavior, Conditions, and
Estate, as if the King had been young, a Man would have judged him to be
Amorous; but being ancient, it ought to be interpreted, that sure he was very
Chaste, for that he meant to find all things in one Woman, and so to settle
his Affections, without ranging But in this Match he was soon cooled, when
he heard from his Ambassadors, that this young Queen had had a goodly
Ioynture in the Realm of Naples, well answered during the time of her Uncle
FREDERICK, yea, and during the time of LEWIS the French King, in whose
Division her Revenue fell; But since the time that the Kingdom was in
FERDINANDO'S hands, all was assigned to the Army, and Garrisons there, and
she received only a Pension or Exhibition out of his Coffers.

The other part of the Inquiry had a grave and diligent Return, informing the
King at full of the present State of King FERDINANDO. By this report it
appeared to the King, that FERDINANDO did continue the Government of Castile as
Administrator unto his Daughter JOAN, by the Title of Queen ISABELLA'S Will,
and partly by the Custom of the Kingdom, as he pretended. And that all
Mandates and Grants were expedited in the name of JOAN his Daughter, and
himself as Administrator, without mention of PHILIP, her Husband. And that
king FERDINANDO, howsoever he did dismiss himself of the Name of King of
Castile, yet meant to hold the Kingdom, without Account, and in absolute
Command.

It appears also, that he flattered himself with hopes, that king PHILIP
would permit unto him the Government of Castile during his life; which he had
laid his plot to work him unto, both by some Counselors of his about him,
which FERDINANDO had at his devotion, and chiefly by Promise, that in case
PHILIP gave not way unto it, he would marry some young Lady, whereby to put
him by the Succession of Arragon and Granada, in case he should have a Son.
And lastly, by representing unto him that the Government of the Burgundians,
till PHILIP were by continuance in Spain made as Natural of Spain, would not
be endured by the Spaniards. But in all those things (though wisely laid
down and considered) FERDINANDO failed; But that PLVTO was better to him, than
PALLAS.

In the same Report also, the Ambassadors being mean men, and therefore the
more free, did strike upon a String which was somewhat dangerous. For they
declared plainly, that the People of Spain, both Nobles and Commons, were
better affected unto the part of PHILIP (so he brought his wife with him) than
to FERDINANDO; And expressed the reason to be, because he had imposed upon
them many Taxes, and Tallages, whith was the Kings own Case between him and
his Son.

There was also in this Report a Declaration of an Ouerture of Marriage, which
AMASON the Secretary of FERDINANDO had made unto the Ambassadors in great
secret, between CHARLES Prince of Castile and MARIE the Kings second Daughter;
assuring the king, that the Treaty of Marriage then on foot, for the said
Prince and the Daughter of France, would break; and that she the said
Daughter of France should be married to ANGOLESME, that was the Heir apparent
of France.

There was a touch also of a speech of Marriage between FERDINANDO and Madame
de FOIS, a Lady of the Blood of France, which afterward indeed succeeded. But
this was reported as learned in France, and silenced in Spain.

The King by the return of this Embassage, which gave great light unto his
Affairs, was well instructed, and prepared how to carry himself between
FERDINANDO King of Arragon, and PHILIP his Sonne-in-law, King of Castile;
resolving with himself, to do all that in him lay to keep them at one within
themselves; But howsoever that succeeded, by a moderate Carriage and bearing
the Person of a Common-friend, to loose neither of their Friendships; but yet
to run a Course more entire with the King of Arragon, but more labored and
officious with the King of Castile. But he was much taken with the Ouerture of
Marriage with his Daughter MARIE; Both because it was the greatest Marriage of
Christendom, and for that it took hold of both Allies.

But to corroborate his Alliance with PHILIP, the Winds gave him an
Enter-view. For PHILIP choosing the Winter-Season, the better to surprise the
King of Arragon, set forth with a great Navy out of Flanders for Spain in the
Month of January, the one and Twentieth year of the Kings Reign. But
himself was surprised with a cruel Tempest, that scattered his Ships upon the
several Coasts of England. And the Ship wherein the King and Queen were (with
two other small Barks only) torn, and in great peril to escape the Fury of
the weather, thrust into Waymouth. King PHILIP himself, having not been used
(as it seems) to Sea, all wearied and extreme sick, would needs land to
refresh his Spirits, though it was against the Opinion of his Council,
doubting it might breed Delay, his Occasions requiring Celeritie.

The Rumor of the Arrival of a puissant Navy upon the Coast, made the
Country Arm. And Sir THOMAS TRENCHARD with Forces suddenly raised, not
knowing what the matter might be, came to Waymouth. Where understanding the
Accident, he did in all Humbleness and Humanity inuit the King and Queen
to his House; and forthwith dispatched Posts to the Court. Soon after came Sir
JOHN CAROE likewise, with a great troop of Men well armed; using the like
Humbleness and Respect toward the king, when he knew the Case. King PHILIP
doubting that they, being but Subjects, durst not let him pass away again,
without the Kings Notice and Leave, yielded to their Entreatie^, to stay till
they heard from the Court. The king as soon as he heard the News, commanded
presently the Earl of Arundell, to go to visit the king of Castile, and let
him understand; That as he was very sorry for his Mishap, so he was glad
that he had escaped the Danger of the Seas, and likewise of the Occasion
himself had to do him Honor; and desiring him, to think himself as in his
own Land; and that the king made all have possible to come and embrace him.
The Earl came to him in great Magnificence, with a brave Troop of three
hundred Horse; and (for more State) came by Torch-Light. After he had done the
Kings Message, King PHILIP seeing how the world went, the sooner to get away,
went upon speed to the King at Windsore, and his Queen followed by easy
iourneys. The two kings at their meeting used all the Caresses, and loving
Demonstrations, that were possible. And the king of Castile said pleasantly to
the King; That he was now punished, for that he would not come within his
walled Town of Calice, when they met last. But the king answered, That walls
and Seas were nothing, where Hearts were open; and that he was here no
otherwise, but to be served. After a Day or two's refreshing, the kings entered
into speech of renewing the Treaty; The King saying, That though King PHILIPS
Person were the same, yet his Fortunes and State were raised. In which Case a
Renouation of Treaty was used amongst Princes. But while these things were in
handling, the king choosing a fit time, and drawing the king of Castile into a
Room, where they two only were private, and laying his hand ciuilly upon his
arm, and changing his Countenance a little from a Countenance of
Intertainment, said to him; Sir, you have been saved upon my Coast, I hope you
will not suffer me to wrack upon yours. The King of Castile asked him, What
he meant by that speech? I mean it (says the King) by that same Harebraine
wild Fellow, my subject, the Earl of Suffolk, who is protected in your
Country, and begins to play the Fool, when all others are weary of it. The
King of Castile answered; I had thought (Sir) your Felicity had been above
those thoughts. But if it trouble you, I will banish him. The King replied;
Those Hornets were best in their Nest, and worst then when they did stie
abroad, that his desire was, to have him delivered to him. The King of Castile
here with a little confused, and in a study, said; That can I not do with my
honor, and less with yours; for you will be thought to have used me as a
Prisoner. The King presently said; Then the matter is at an end. For I will
take that dishonor upon me, and so your honor is saved. The King of Castile,
who had the king in great Estimation, and besides remembered where he was, and
knew not what use he might have of the kings Amity, for that himself was new
in his Estate of Spain, and unsettled, both with his Father-in-Law, and with
his People, composing his Countenance, said; Sir, you give Law to me; but so
will I to you. You shall have him, but (upon your honor) you shall not take
his life. The king embracing him, said; Agreed. Says the king of Castile,
Neither shall it dislike you, if I send to him in such a fashion, as he may
partly come with his own good will. The king said; It was well thought of; and
if it pleased him, he would join with him, in sending to the Earl a Message
to that purpose. They both sent severally, and mean while they continued
Feasting and Pastimes. The King being (on his part) willing to have the Earl
sure before the king of Castile went; and the king of Castile being as willing
to seem to be enforced. The King also with many wise and excellent
Persuasions, did advise the king of Castile, to be ruled by the Council of
his Father-in-Law FERDINANDO; a Prince so prudent, so experienced, so
fortunate. The King of Castile (who was in no very good terms with his said
Father-in-Law) answered; That if his Father-in-Law would suffer him to govern
his Kingdoms, he should govern him.

There were immediately Messengers sent from both Kings to recall the Earl of
Suffolk: Who upon gentle words used to him was soon charmed, and willing
enough to return; assured of his Life, and hoping of his Liberty. He was
brought through Flanders to Calice, and thence landed at Dover, and with
sufficient Guard delivered and received at the Tower of London. Mean while
King HENRY (to draw out the time) continued his Feastings and Entertainments,
and after he had received the king of Castile into the Fraternity of the
Garter, and for a Reciprocal had his Son the Prince admitted to the Order of
the Golden-Fleece, he accompainied King PHILIP and his Queen to the City of
London; where they were entertained with the greatest Magnificence and Triumph,
that could be upon no greater warning. And as soon as the Earl of Suffolk
had been conveyed to the Tower (which was the serious part) the Iollities had
an end, and the Kings took leave. Nevertheless during their being here,
they in Substance concluded that Treaty, which the Flemings term Intercursus
malus, and bears Date at Windsore; for that there be some things in it, more
to the Advantage of the English, than of them; especially, for that the
Free-fishing of the Dutch upon the Coasts and Seas of England, granted in the
Treaty of Undecimo, was not by this Treaty confirmed. All Articles that
confirm former Treaties being precisely and warily limited and confirmed to
matter of Commerce only, and not otherwise

It was observed, that the great Tempest which drove PHILIP into England, blew
down the Golden Eagle, from the Spire of PAVLES, and in the fall it fell upon
a Sign of the Black Eagle, which was in PAVLES Churchyard, in the place
where the Schoole-House now stands, and battered it, and brake it down.
Which was a strange stooping of a Hawke upon a Foul. This the People
interpreted to be an Ominous Prognosticke upon the Imperial House, which was
(by Interpretation also) fulfilled upon PHILIP the Emperors Son, not only
in the Present Disaster of the Tempest, but in that that followed. For PHILIP
arriving into Spain, and attaining the Possession of the Kingdom of Castile
without resistance, (insomuch as FERDINANDO, who had spoke so great before, was
with difficulty admitted to the speech of his Sonne-in-Law) sickned soon
after, and deceased. Yet after such time as there was an Observation by the
wisest of that Court, That if he had lived, his Father would have gained upon
him in that sort, as he would have governed his Counsels, and Designs, if
not his Affections. By this all Spain returned into the power of FERDINANDO in
state as it was before; the rather, in regard of the infirmity of JOAN his
Daughter, who loving her Husband (by whom she had many Children) dearly well,
and no less beloved of him (howsoever her Father, to make PHILIP ill beloved
of the People of Spain, gave out that PHILIP used her not well) was unable in
strength of mind to bear the Grief of his Decease, and fell distracted of
her Wits. Of which Malady her Father was thought no ways to endeavor the
Cure, the better to hold his Regal Power in Castile. So that as the Felicity
of CHARLES the Eighth was said to be a Dream; so the Adversity of FERDINANDO
was said likewise to be a Dream, it passed over so soon.

About this time the King was desirous to bring into the House of LANCASTER
Celestial Honor, and became Suitor to Pope JULIUS, to Canonize King HENRY the
Sixth for a Saint; the rather, in respect of that his famous Prediction of the
Kings own Assumption to the Crown. JULIUS referred the matter (as the manner
is) to certain Cardinals, to take the verification of his Holy Acts and
Miracles. But it died under the Reference. The general Opinion was, that Pope
JULIUS was too dear, and that the King would not come to his Rates. But it is
more probable, That that Pope (who was extremely jealous of the Dignity of the
Sea of Rome, and of the Acts thereof) knowing that King HENRY the Sixth was
reputed in the world abroad but for a Simple Man, was affraide it would but
diminish the Estimation of that kind of Honor, if there were not a distance
kept between Iunocents and Saints.

The same year likewise there proceeded a Treaty of Marriage between the
King and the Lady MARGARET Duchess Dowager of Sauoy, only Daughter to
MAXIMILIAN, and Sister to the King of Castile; a Lady wise, and of great good
Fame. This Matter had been in speech between the two Kings at their meeting,
but was soon after resumed; and therein was employed for his first piece the
Kings then Chaplain, and after the great Prelate THOMAS WOLSEY. It was in the
end concluded, with great and ample Conditions for the king, but with promise
De Futuro only. It may be the king was the rather induced unto it, for that he
heard more and more of the Marriage to go on between his great Friend and
Allie FERDINANDO of Arragon, and Madame de FOIS, whereby that King began to
piece with the French King, from whom he had been always before severed. So
fatal a thing it is, for the greatest and straitest Amities of Kings, at one
time or other to have a little of the Wheel. Nay thereis a further Tradition
(in Spaint, though not with us) That the King of Arragon, after he knew that
the Marriage between CHARLES, the young Prince of Castile, and MARIE the Kings
second Daughter went roundly on (which though it was first moved by the King
of Arragon, yet it was afterward wholly advanced and brought to perfection by
MAXIMILIAN, and the Friends on that side) entered into a jealousy, that the
King did aspire to the Government of Castilia, as Administrator during the
Minority of his Sonne-in-Law; as if there should have been a Competition of
Three for that Government; FERDINANDO, Grandfather on the Mothers side;
MAXIMILIAN, Grandfather on the Fathers side; and King HENRY; Father-in-Law to
the young Prince. Certainly, it is not unlike, but the Kings Government
(carrying the young Prince with him) would have been perhaps more welcome to
the Spaniards, than that of the other Two. For the Nobility of Castilia, that
so lately put out the King of Arragon, in favor of King PHILIP, and had
discovered themselves so far, could not be but in a secret Distrust and
Distaste of that King. And as for MAXIMILIAN, upon Twenty respects he could
not have been the Man. But this purpose of the Kings seems to me
(considering the Kings safe Courses, never found to be enterprizing or
aduenturous) not greatly probable, except he should have had a Desire to
breathe warmer, because he had ill Lunger. This Marriage with MARGARET was
protracted from time to time, in respect of the Infirmity of the King, who now
in the two and Twentieth of his Reign began to be troubled with the Gout.
But the Defluxion taking also into his Breast, wasted his Lungs, so that thrice
in a Year (in a kind of Return, and especially in the Spring,) he had great
Fitts and Labors of the Tissicke. Nevertheless, he continued to intend
Business with as great diligence, as before in his Health. Yet so, as upon
this warning, he did likewise now more seriously think of the World to come,
and of making himself a Saint, as well as King HENRY the Sixth, by Treasure
better employed, than to be given to Pope JULIUS. For this Year he gave
greater Alms than accustomed, and discharged all Prisoners about the City,
that lay for Fees or Debts, under forty shillings. He did also make haste
with Religious Foundations; and in the Year following (which was the Three and
Twentieth) finished that of the Sauoy. And hearing also of the bitter Cries of
his People against the Oppressions of DVDLEY and EMPSON, and their Accomplices;
partly by Devout Persons about him, and partly by public Sermons (the
Preachers doing their Duty therein) He was touched with great Remorse for the
same. Nevertheless, EMPSON and DVDLEY, though they could not but hear of
these Scruples in the Kings Conscience; yet as if the Kings Soul and his Money
were in several Offices, that the One was not to intermeddle with the Other,
went on with as great rage as ever. For the same three and Twentieth Year was
there a sharp Prosecution against Sir WILLIAM CAPEL now the second time; and
this was for Matters of Misgouernment in his Maioraltie. The great Matter
being, that in some Payments he had taken knowledge of False Moneys, and did
not his diligence to examine, and beat it out, who were the Offenders. For
this and some other things laid to his Charge, he was condemned to pay Two
Thousand Pounds; and being a Man of stomach, and hardened by his former
Troubles, refused to pay 2 Mite; and be like used some untoward Speeches of
the Proceedings, for which he was sent to the Tower, and there remained till
the Kings Death. KNESVVORTH likewise, that had been lately Mayor of London,
and both his Sheriffs, were, for Abuses in their Offices, questioned, and
imprisoned, and delivered, upon one Thousand four hundred pounds paid.
HAVVIS, an Alderman of London, was put in Trouble, and died with Thought, and
Anguish, before his Business came to an end. Sir LAVVRENCE AILMER, who had
likewise been Mayor of London, and his two Sheriffs, were put to the Fine of
one Thousand Pounds. And Sir LAVVRENCE, for refusing to make payment, was
committed to Prison, where he stayed till EMPSON himself was committed in his
place.

It is no marvel (if the Faults were so light, and the Rates so heavy) that
the Kings Treasure of store, that he left at his death, most of it in secret
places, under his own Key and keeping, at Richmond, amounted (as by Tradition
it is reported to have done) unto the Sum of near Eighteen hundred thousand
pounds Sterling; a huge Mass of Money, even for these times.

The last Act of State that concluded this kings Temporal Felicity, was the
Conclusion of a Glorious Match between his Daughter MARIE, and CHARLES Prince
of Castile, afterward the great Emperor, both being of tender years Which
Treaty was perfected by Bishop FOX, and other his Commissioners at Calice,
the year before the Kings Death. In which Alliance, it seems he himself
took so high Contentment, as in a Letter which he wrote thereupon to the
City of London (commanding all possible demonstrations of joy to be made for
the same) he expresses himself, as if he thought he had built a Wall of
Brass about his Kingdom. When he had for his Sonnes-in-law, a King of
Scotland, and a Prince of Castile and Burgundy. So as now there was nothing to
be added to this great Kings Felicity, being at the top of all worldly
Bliss, (in regard of the high Marriages of his Children, his great Renown
throughout Europe, and his scarce credible Riches, and the perpetual
Constancy of his prosperous Successes) but an opportune Death, to withdraw him
from any future blow of Fortune. Which certainly (in regard of the great
Hatred of his People, and the Title of his Son, being then come to Eighteen
years of age, and being a bold Prince, and liberal, and that gained upon the
People by his very Aspect and Presence) had not been impossible to have come
upon him.

To crown also the last year of his Reign, as well as his first, he did an
Act of Piety, rare, and worthy to be taken into Imitation. For he granted
forth a General Pardon, as expecting a second Coronation in a better Kingdom.
He did also declare in his Will, that his mind was, that Restitution should
be made of those Sums, which had been unjustly taken by his Officers.

And thus this SOLOMON of England (for SOLOMON also was too heavy upon his
People in Exactions) having lived two and fifty years, and thereof Reigned
three and twenty years, and eight Months, being in perfect Memory, and in
a most Blessed Mind, in a great Calm of a Consuming Sickness passed to a
better World, the two and twentieth of April, 1508. at his Palace of Richmond,
which himself had built.

THis King (to speak of him in Terms equal to his Deserving) was one of the
best sort of Wonders; a Wonder for Wise Men. He had parts (both in his
Virtues, and his Fortune) not so fit for a Commonplace, as for Observation.
Certainly he was Religious, both in his Affection, and Observance. But as he
could see clear (for those times) through Superstition, so he would be blinded
(now and then) by Humane Policy. He advanced Churchmen; he was tender in
the Privilege of Sanctuaries, though they wrought him much mischief. He
built and endowed many Religious Foundations, besides his Memorable Hospital
of the Sauoy. And yet was he a great Almes-giuer in secret; which showed, that
his Works in public were dedicated rather to GODS Glory, than his own.
He professed always to love and seek Peace; and it was his usual Preface in
his Treaties; That when CHRIST came into the World, Peace was sung; and when
HE went out of the World, Peace was bequeathed. And this Virtue could not
proceed out of Fear, or Softness; for he was Valiant and Active, and
therefore (no doubt) it was truly Christian and Moral. Yet he knew the way
to Peace, was not to seem to be desirous to avoid Wars. Therefore would be
make Cffers, and Fames of Wars, till he had mended the Conditions of Peace.
It was also much, that one that was so great a Lover of Peace, should be so
happy in War. For his Arms (either in Foreign or Civil VVarres) were
never Unfortunate; neither did be know what a Disaster meant. The War of his
Coming in, and the Rebellions of the Earl of Lincoln, and the Lord AWDLEY
were ended by Victory. The VVarres of France and Scotland, by Peaces sought at
his hands. That of Britain, by accident of the Dukes death. The Insurrection
of the Lord LOVEL, and that of PERKIN at Excester, and in Kent, by flight of
the Rebels, before they came to Blows. So that his Fortune of Arms was still
Inuiolate. The rather sure, for that in the quenching of the Commotions of his
Subjects, he ever went in Person, Sometimes reserving himself to back and
second his Lieutenants, but ever in Action; and yet that was not merely
Forwardness, but partly Distrust of others.

He did much maintain and countenance his Laws. Which (nevertheless) was no
Impediment to him to work his Will. For it was so handled, that neither
Prerogative, nor Profit went to Diminution. And yet as he would sometimes
strain up his Laws to his Prerogative, so would he also let down his
Prerogative to his Parliament. For Minte, and Wars, and Marshall Discipline,
(things of Absolute Power) he would nevertheless bring to Parliament. Justice
was well administered in his time, save where the King was Party: Save also,
that the Councell-Table intermedled too much with Meum and Tuum. For it was a
very Court of Justice during his time, especially in the Beginning. But in that
part both of Justice and Policy, which is the Durable Part, and cut (as it
were) in Brass or Marble (which is The making of good Laws) he did excel.
And with his Justice, he was also a Merciful Prince. As in whose time, there
were but three of the Nobility that suffered; the Earl of Warwick, the Lord
Chamberlain, and the Lord AWDLEY. Though the first two were in stead of
Numbers, in the Dislike and Obloquie of the People. But there were never so
great Rebellions, expiated with so little Blood, drawn by the hand of Justice,
as the two Rebellions of Black Heath and Excester. As for the Severity used
upon those which were taken in Kent, it was but upon a Scumme of People. His
Pardons went ever both before, and after his Sword. But then he had withal a
strange kind of Interchanging of large and inexpected Pardons, which severe
Executions. Which (his Wisdom considered) could not be imputed to any
Inconstancy, or Inequality; but either to some Reason which we do not now
know, or to a Principle he had set unto himself, That he would vary, and
try both ways in turn. But the less Blood he drew, the more he took of
Treasure. And (as some construed it) he was the more sparing in the One, that
he might be the more pressing in the Other; for both would have been
intolerable. Of Nature assuredly he coueted to accumulate Treasure, and was a
little Poor in admiring Riches. The People (into whom there is infused, for
the preservation of Monarchies, a natural Desire to discharge their Princes,
though it be with the unjust charge of their Councillors and Ministers) did
impute this unto Cardinal MORTON, and Sir REGINOLD BRAY. Who (as it after
appeared) as Councillors of ancient Authority with him, did so second his
Humors, as nevertheless they did temper them. Whereas EMPSON, and DVDLEY that
followed, being Persons that had no Reputation with him (otherwise than by the
servile following of his Bent) did not give way only (as the first did) but
shape him way to those Extreamities, for which himself was touched with
remorse at his Death, and which his Successor renounced, and sought to purge.
This Excess of his, had at that time many Glosses and Interpretations. Some
thought the continual Rebellions wherewith he had been vexed, had made him
grow to hate his People. Some thought it was done to pull down their
Stomachs, and to keep them low. Some, for that he would leave his Son a
Golden fleece. Some suspected he had some high Design upon Foreign parts. But
those perhaps shall come nearest the truth, that fetch not their reasons so far
off; but rather impute it to Nature, Age, Peace, and a Mind fixed upon no
other Ambition or Pursuit. Whereunto I should add, that having every day
Occasion to take notice of the Necessities and Shifts for Money of other great
Princes abroad, it did the better (by Comparison) set of to him the Felicity
of full Cofers. As to his expending of Treasure, he never spared Charge which
his Affairs required; and in his Buildings was Magnificent, but his Rewards
were very limited. So that his Liberality was rather upon his own State and
Memory, than upon the Deserts of others.

He was of an High Mind, and loved his own Will, and his own Way; as One
that reuered himself, and would Reign indeed. Had he been a Priuate-man,
he would have been termed Proud. But in a wise Prince, it was but keeping of
Distance, which indeed he did toward all; not admitting any near or full
Approach, neither to his Power or to his Secrets. For he was governed by none.
His Queen (notwithstanding she had presented him with diverse Children, and
with a Crown also, (though he would not acknowledge it) could do nothing
with him. His Mother he reverenced much, heard little. For any Person
agreeable to him for Society (such as was HASTINGS to King EDWARD the Fourth,
or CHARLES BRANDON after to King HENRY the Eight) he had none: Except we
should account for such Persons, FOX, and BRAY, and EMPSON, because they were
so much with him. But it was but as the Instrument is much with the VVorke-man.
He had nothing in him of Vainglory, but yet kept State and Majesty to the
height; Being sensible, That Majesty makes the People how, but Vainglory
boweth to them.

To his Confederates abroad he was Constant and Just, but not Open. But rather
such was his Inquiry, and such his Closeness, as they stood in the Light
toward him, and he stood in the Dark to them. Yet without Strangeness, but
with a semblance of mutual Communication of Affairs. As for little Enuies or
Emulations upon Foreign Princes (which are frequent with many Kings) he had
never any; but went substantially to his own Business. Certain it is, that
though his Reputation was great at home, yet it was greater abroad. For
Forrainers that could not see the Passages of Affairs, but made their
Judgments upon the Issues of them, noted that he was ever in Strife, and ever
a Loft. It grew also from the Aires, which the Princes and States abroad
received from their Ambassadors and Agents here; which were attending the
Court in great number. Whom he did not only content with Courtesy, Reward,
and Priuatenesse; but (upon such Conferences as passed with them) put them in
Admiration, to find his Universal Insight into the Affairs of the World.
Which though he did suck chiefly from themselves; yet that which he had
gathered from them all, seemed Admirable to every one. So that they did write
ever to their Superiors in high terms, concerning his Wisdom and Art of
Rule, Nay, when they were returned, they did commonly maintain Intelligence
with him. Such a Dexterity he had to impropriate to himself all Foreign
Instruments.

He was careful and liberal to obtain good Intelligence from all parts
abroad. Wherein he did not only use his Interest in the Leigers here, and his
Pensioners which he had both in the Court of Rome, and other the Courts of
Christendom; but the Industry and Vigilancie of his own Ambassadors in
Foreign parts. For which purpose, his Instructions were ever Extroame,
Curious, and Articulate; and in them more Articles touching Inquisition, than
touching Negotiation. Requiring likewise from his Ambassadors an Answer, in
particular distinct Articles, respectively to his Questions.

As for his secret Spialls, which he did employ both at home and abroad, by
them to discover what Practices and Conspiracies were against him, surely his
Case required it: He had such Moles perpetually working and casting to
undermine him. Neither can it be reprehended. For if Spialls be lawful
against lawful Enemies, much more against Conspirators, and Traitors. But
indeed to give them Credence by Oaths or Curses, that cannot be well
maintained; For those are too holy Vestments for a Disguise. Yet surely there
was this further Good in his employing of these Flies and Familiars; That as
the use of them was cause that many Conspiracies were revealed, so the Fame and
Suspicion of them kept (no doubt) many Conspiracies from being attempted.

Toward his Queen he was nothing Vxorious, nor scarce Indulgent; but
Companiable, and Respective, and without Jealousy. Toward his Children be
was full of Paternall Affection, Careful of their Education, aspiring to their
High Advancement, regular to see that they should not want of any due Honor
and Respect, but not greatly willing to cast any Popular Luster upon them.

To his Council he did refer much, and sat often in Person; knowing it to
be the Way to assist his Power, and inform his Judgment. In which respect
also he was fairly patient of Liberty, both of Advise, and of Vote, till
himself were declared. He kept a strait hand on his Nobility, and chose
rather to advance Clergymen and Lawyers, which were more Obsequious to him,
but had less Interest in the People; which made for his Absoluteness, but not
for his Safety. In so much as (I am persuaded) it was one of the Causes of his
troublesome Reign: for that his Nobles, though they were Loyal and Obedient,
yet did not Cooperate with him, but let every man go his own Way. He was
not afraid of an Able Man, as LEWIS the Eleventh was. But contrariwise, he
was served by the Ablest Men that were to be found; without which his
Affairs could not have prospered as they did. For VVare, BEDFORD, OXFORD,
SVRREY, DAWBENEY, BROOK, POYNINGS. For other Affairs, MORTON, FOX, BRAY, the
Prior of Lanthony, WARHAM, VRSVVICKE, HVSSEY, FROWICKE, and others. Neither did
he care how Cunning they were, that he did employ; For he thought himself
to have the Master-Reach. And as he chose well, so he held them up well. For
it is a strange thing, that though he were a Dark Prince, and infinitely
Suspicious, and his Times full of Secret Conspiracies and Troubles; yet in
Twenty four years Reign, he never put down, or discomposed Counselor, or
near Servant, save only STANLEY, the Lord Chamberlain. As for the
Disposition of his Subjects in General toward him, it stood thus with him;
That of the Three Affections, which naturally tie the hearts of the Subjects to
their Sovereigns, Love, Fear, and Reverence; he had the last in height, the
second in good measure, and so little of the first, as he was beholding to the
other Two.

He was a Prince, Sad, Serious, and full of Thoughts, and secret Observations,
and full of Notes and Memorialls of his own hand, especially touching Persons.
As, whom to Employ, whom to Reward, whom to Enquire of, whom to Beware of, what
were the Dependencies, what were the Factions, and the like; keeping (as it
were) a Iournall of his Thoughts. There is to this day a merry Tale; That his
Monkey (set on as it was thought by one of his Chamber) tore his Principal
Note-Booke all to pieces, when by chance it lay forth. Whereat the Court (which
liked not those Pensive Accounts) was almost tickled with sport.

He was indeed full of Apprehensions and Suspicions. But as he did easily take
them, so he did easily check them, and master them; whereby they were not
dangerous, but troubled himself more than others. It is true, his Thoughts
were so many, as they could not well always stand together; but that which did
good one way, did hurt another. Neither did be at some times weigh them aright
in their proportions. Certainly; that Rumor which did him so much mischief
(That the Duke of York should be saved, and alive) was (at the first) of his
own nourishing; because he would have more Reason not to reign in the Right
of his Wife. He was Affable, and both Well and Faire-spoken; and would use
strange Sweetness and Blandishments of Words, where be desired to effector
persuade any thing that he took to heart. He was rather Studious than Learned;
reading most Books that were of any worth in the French-tongue. Yet he
understood the Latin, as appears in that Cardinal (...), and others, who
could very well have written French, did use to write to him in Latin.

For his Pleasures, there is no News of them. And yet by his Instructions to
MARSIN and STI^^, touching the Queen of Naples, it seems he could
Interrogate well touching Beau^^^^ He did by Pleasures, as great Princes do
by Banquets, come and look (...) upon them, and turn away. For never Prince
was more wholly given to his Affairs, (...) them more of himself. In so much,
as in Triumphs of Iusts, and Tourneyes, and Balls, and Masks (which they
then called Disguises) he was rather a Princely and Gentle Spectator, than
seemed much to be delighted.

No doubt, in him as in all men (and most of all in Kings) his Fortune wrought
upon his Nature, and his Nature upon his Fortune. He attained to the Crown,
not only from a private Fortune, which might indow him with Moderation; but
also from the Fortune of an Exiled Man, which had quickened in him all Seeds of
Observation and Industry. And his Times being rather Prosperous, than Calm,
had raised his Confidence by Success, but almost marred his Nature by
Troubles. His Wisdom, by often euading from Perils, was turned rather into a
Dexterity to deliver himself from Dangers, when they pressed him, than into a
Providence to prevent and remove them a far off. And even in Nature, the
Sight of his Mind was like some Sights of Eyes; rather strong at hand, than to
carry a far off. For his Wit increased upon the Occasion; and so much the
more, if the Occasion were sharpened by Danger. Again, whether it were the
shortness of his Foresight, or the strength of his Will, or the dazeling of
his Suspicions, or what it was; Certain it is, that the perpetual Troubles of
his Fortunes (there being no more matter out of which they grew) could not have
been without some great Defects, and maine Errors in his Nature, Customs,
and Proceedings, which he had enough to do to save and help, with a thousand
little Industries and Watches. But those do best appear in the Story it
self. Yet take him with all his Defects, if a Man should compare him with the
Kings his Concurrents, in France and Spain, he shall find him more Politic
than LEWIS the Twelfth of France, and more Entire and Sincere than FERDINANDO
of Spain. But if you shall change LEWIS the Twelfth, for LEWIS the Eleventh,
who lived a little before, then the Consort is more perfect. For that LEWIS
the Eleventh, FERDINANDO, and HENRY, may be esteemed for the Tres Magi of Kings
of those Ages. To conclude, If this King did no greater Matters, it was long of
himself; for what he minded, he compassed.

He was a Comoly Personage, a little above Just Stature, well and straight
limmed, but flander. His Countenance was Reverend, and a little like a
Churchman: And as it was not strange or dark, so neither was it Winning or
Pleasing, but as the Face of one well disposed. But it was to the Disadvantage
of the Painter; for it was best when he spoke.

His VVorth may bear a Tale or two, that may put upon him somewhat that may
seem Divine. When the Lady MARGARET his Mother had diverse great Suitors for
Marriage, she dreamed one Night, That one in the likeness of a Bishop, in
Pontifical habit, did tender her EDMUND Earl of Richmond (the Kings Father)
for her Husband. Neither had she ever any Child but the King, though she had
three Husbands. One day when King HENRY the Sixth (whose Innocence gave him
Holiness) was washing his hands at a great Feast, and cast his Eye upon King
HENRY, then a young Youth, he said; This is the Lad, that shall possess
quietly that, that we now strive for. But that that was truly Divine in him,
was, that he had the Fortune of a True Christian, as well as of a Great King,
in living Exercised, and dying Repentant. So as he had an happy Warrefare in
both Conflicts, both of Sin, and the Cross.

He was borne at Pembrooke Castle, and lies buried at Westminster, in one of
the Statelyest and Daintiest Monuments of Europe, both for the Chapel, and
for the Sepulcher. So that he dwells more richly Dead, in the Monument of
his Tomb, than he did Alive in Richmond, or any of his Palaces. I could wish
he did the like, in this Monument of his Fame.

FINIS.
An Index Alphabeticall, directing to the most obserueable passages in the
foregoing History.
A
AN Accident, in it self triuiall, great in effect. page 189 Advice desired
from the Parliament. 53. 57. 98 A Emulation of the English to the French, with
the reasons of it. 61 Affability of the King to the City of London. 198
Affection of k. Henry to the king of Spain. 105 Affection of the king to his
children 241 Aid desired by the Duke of Britain. 53 Aid sent to Britain
62 Aiders of rebels punished. 37 Alms deeds of the king. 229 Ambassadors to
the Pope. 38 into Scotland. 39 Ambassadors from the French King. 41
Ambassadors in danger in France. 49 Ambassadors into France. 94 Ambition
exorbitant in Sir William Stanley. 135 Answer of the Archduke to the kings
Ambassadors. 129 Appeach of Sir William Stanley. 132 Arms of king Henry's
still victorious. 234 Arrows of the Cornishmen, the length of them. 171
Articles between the King and the Archduke. 162 Arthur Prince married to the
Lady Katherine. 203 Arthur Prince dies at Ludlow. 218 Aton Castle in Scotland
taken by the Earl of Surrey. 174 Attainted persons in Parliament, excepted
against. 12 Attaindor and corruption of blood reaches not to the Crown. 13. 24
Avarice of king Henry. 236 Audley General of the Cornish rebels 165
B
BAnishment of Flemings out of the kingdom. 130 Battle at Bosworth field. 1
at Stokefield. 35 at S. Albans in Britain. 62 Bannocks bourne in Scotland. 70
at Black Heath. 168 Behavior of king Henry toward his children. 205
Benevolence to the king for his wars. 100 Benevolence, who the first author.
ibid. Benevolence abolished by Act of Parliament. ibid. Benevolence revived by
Act of Parliament. 100 A Benevolence general to the king. 216 Birth of Hen. 8.
95 Bishops why employed by the king. 16 Blood not unrevenged. 196. 213 Britain
Duchy distressed. 62 Three causes of the loss of the Duchy of Britain. 63
Britain united to France by marriage. 95 Brackenbury refused to murder king
Edw. 2. sons. 123 Broughton Sir Thomas, joined with the rebels. 32 A Bull
procured from the Pope by the king, for what causes. 39 Bulloigne besieged by
king Henry. 110
C
Cardinal Morton dies. 198 Capel Sir William fined. 139. 229 Capp of
maintenance from the Pope. 178 Ceremony of Marriage new in these parts. 80
Chauncery power, and description of that Court. 64 Clifford Sir Robert flies to
Perkin. 122 Reuolts to the king. 125 Clergy privileges abridged. 66
Christendom enlarged. 106 Columbus Christopher and Bartholomeus inuit the
king to a discovery of the West Indies. 189 Confiscation aimed a by the king.
133 Conference between king Henry and the king of Castile, by casualtie
landing at Waymouth. 223 Conquest, the Title unpleasing to the people, declined
by William the Conq. 5. and by the king. 7 Conspirators for Perkin. 121
Contraction of Prince Hen. and Lady Katherine. 207 Conditionell speech does not
qualify words of Treason. 134 Commissioners into Ireland. 138 Commissioners
about trading. 161 Coronation of king Henry. 10 Coronation of the Queen. 38
Counsel the benefit of good. 40 Counsel of what sort the French king used.
51 Counsel of mean men, what and how different from that of Nobles. ibidem.
Lord Cords envy to England. 79 Cottagers but housed Beggars. Counterfeits. 74
Lambert proclaimed in Ireland. 24 Crowned at Dublin. 31 Taken in battle. 35
Put into the Kings Kitchen. 36 Made the Kings Fawlconer. ibid. Duke of York
counterfeit. See Perkin. Wilford another counterfeit, Earl of Warwick. 194
Courage of the English, when. 62 Court, what pleas belong to every Court. 64
Court of Star Chamber confirmed. ibid. Creations. 10 Crown confirmed to king
Henry by Parliament. 11 Cursing of the kings enemies at Paul's Cross, a custom
of those times. 125. 213
D
DAm, a town in Flanders, taken by a slight. 103 Lord Dawbeny. 170 Devices at
Prince Arthurs marriage. 203 Device of the King to divert envy. 111 Decay of
trade does punish merchants 161 Decay of people, how it comes to pass. 73
Declaration by Perkin to the Scottish King. 148 Desires intemperate of Sir
William Stanley. 136 Dighton a murderer of K. Edw. 2. children. 124 Dilemma, a
pleasant one of Bishop Morton. 101 Diligence of the King to heap Treasures. 211
Displacing of no Councellers, nor Servants in all K. Henry's Reign save of
one. 242 Dissimulation of the French King. 46. 48. 81 Dissimulation of k.
Henry in pretending war. 99 A Doubt long kept open, and diversely determined,
according to the diversity of the times. 206 Dowry of L. Katherine. how much
204 Dowry of Lady Margaret into Scotland, how much. 208 Drapery maintained,
how. 76 Dudley one of the kings horseleeches. 209 Duke of York counterfeit. See
Perkin.
E
Earl of Suffolk flies into Flanders, 212. Returns. 225 Earl of
Northumberland slain by the people in collecting the Subsidy somewhat
harshly. 68 Earl of Warwick executed. 195 Earl of Warw. counterfeit. 21. 194
Earl of Surrey enters Scotland. 174 Edmund a third son borne to king Henry,
but died. 191 Edward the fifth murdered. 149 Envy toward the king,
unquenchable: the cause of it. 196 Envy of Lord Cords to England. 79
Enteruiew between the king and Archduke, with the respective carriage of the
Archduke to the king. 197 Enteruiew between the king and the king of Castile.
223 Emblem. 167 Empson one of the kings horseleeches 209 Errors of the French
king in his business for the kingdom of Naples. 143 Errors of king Henry,
occasioning his many troubles. 264 Escuage service. 164 Espials in the Rebels
camp. 33 Espousals of James king of Scotland and Lady Margaret. 207 Exchanges
unlawful prohibited. 66 Exeter besieged by Perkin. 181 The loyalty of the
Town. ibid The Town rewarded with the kings own sword. 184 Execution of
Humphrey Stafford. 18 Iohna Chamber, and his fellow rebels at York. 68 Sir
James Tyrril, murderer of king Edw. 2. sons. 124 Of diverse others 131 Sir
William Stanley 134 For Rebels 138 Perkins company 141 Audley and Cornish
Rebels. 171 Another counterfeit Earl of Warw. 194 Perkin Warbeck. ibid The
Mayor of Cork and his son. 195 Earl of Warwick. 195
F
FAme ill affected. 172 Fame entertained by diverse: the reasons of it. 121 Fame
neglected by Empson and Dudley 209 Fear, not safe to the king. 137 Fines. 72
Without Fines, Statute to sell land. 101 Flammock a Lawyer, a rebel 164
Flemmings banished 130 Flight of king Henry out of Britain into France,
wherefore. 55 Forfeitures and confiscations furnish the kings wants. 14. 27
Forfeitures aimed at 75. 133 Forfeitures upon penal laws taken by the king,
which was the blot of his times 139 Fortune various 26. 36 Forwardness
inconsiderate. 170 Fox made privy Counselor 16 Made L. Keeper of the privy
Seal. ibid. His providence 173 Free fishing of the Dutch 225 Title to France
renewed by the king in Parliament 98 Frion ioynes with Perkin 118 First fruits
16 In forma pauperis, a law enacted for it. 146
G
GAbato Sebastian makes a voyage for discovery 187 Gordon Lady Katherine, wife
to Perkin 153 Granado vindicated from the Moors 105 Guard Yeomen first
instituted 10 Gifts of the French king to king Hen. Counselors and Soldiers.
111 Gratitude of the Popes Legate to king Henry 70
H
HAllowed sword from the Pope. 178 Hatred of the people to the king, with the
maine reason of it. 19 Hearty acclamations of the people to the king 7 K.
Henry his description. 233. etc. His piety 1. 105 He has three titles to the
kingdom 3 Heretics provided against, a rare thing in those times. 202 Herne,
a Counselor to Perkin. 179 Hialas, otherwise Elias to England, how 174 Holy
war 200 Hopes of gain by war 111 Hostages redeemed by the King. 15 Houses
of husbandry to be maintained to prevent the decay of people 75 Histories,
defects in them, what. 76
I
James the third, king of Scotland, his distress and death. 70 Idols vex God
and king H. 185 John Egremond leader of the rebels. 68 Enclosures, their
manifest inconueniencies, and how remedied. 73 Ingratitude of women punished.
146 Innovation desired 20 Incense of the people, what 207 Instructions of Lady
Margaretto Perkin 115 Intercursus Magnus. 162 Intercursus Malus ib 225
Inuectiues of Maximilian against the French king 95 Inuectiues against the king
and Counsel 137 Improuidence of k. Henry to prevent his troubles 20. 23
Improuidence of the French 142 Ioynture of La. Katherine, how much 204 Ioynture
of Lady Margaret in Scotlland, how much 208 Joseph a rebel 164 Ireland
favors York Title. 23 Ireland receives Simon the Priest of Oxford, with
his counterfeit. 23 Irish adhere to Perkin 117 Iubile at Rome. 199 Juno, i. e.
the Lady Margaret, so called by the kings friends 113
K
KAtherine Gordon Perkins wife, royally entertained by k. Henry. 184 Kent
loyal to the King 141. 166 The king the public Steward. 60 Kings, their
miseries 83 King of Rakehels, Perkin so called by king Henry 181 The kings
skreene, who 164 King of France protector of k. Henry in his trouble 54
Kingdom of France restored to its integrity 40 King of France buys his peace
of K. Henry 111 King of Scots enters England. 153. Again 173 Knights of the
Bath 132 Knights of Rhodes elect king Henry Protector of the Order. 202
L
LAncaster Title condemned by Parliament 4 Lancaster house in possession of the
Crown for three descents together. 6 Lambert Simnel, 20. See Counterfeit.
Laws enacted in Parliament. 63 Diverse Laws enacted 215 Law charitable enacted
146 A good Law enacted 145 A Law of a strange nature 144 A Law against carrying
away of women by violence, the reasons of it. 65 Law of Poynings 138 Laws
penal put in execution. 139 A Legate from the Pope 70 Preferred to be Bishop
in England by king Henry ibid. His gratitude to K. H. 70 Lenity of the K.
abused 179 Letters from the king out of France to the Mayor of London. 112 A
Libell 94 Libels, the causes of them 137 Libels, the femals of sedition ibid
Libels, the authors executed 138 A Loan from the City to the king, repaid 76
London entered by king Hen. in a close chariot, wherefore 8 London in a tumult
because of the rebels. 169 London purchase confirmation of their liberties. 216
M
MAle Contents, their effects. 67 Margaret of Burgundy the fountain of all the
mischief to k, Henry 29 She entertains the rebels. 68. 119 She a Juno to the
king 113 She instructs Perkin 115 Lady Margaret desired in marriage by the
Scottish king 191 Manufacture foreign, how to be kept out 60. 215 Marriage of
king Henry with Lady Elizabeth 16 Of the French king with the Duchess of
Britain 95 Of Prince Arthur 203 Mart translated to Calice, the reasons of it
130 Maintenance prohibited by law 64 Merchants of England received at Antwerpe
with procession and great joy 162 A memorable Memorandum of the King. 212
Military power of the kingdom advanced, how. 73 Mills of Empson and Dudley,
what, and the gains they brought in. 216 Mitigations. 209 Money, bastard
employments thereof repressed 59 Money left at the kings death, how much 230
Morton made privy Councellor. 16 Made Archbish. of Canterbury. ib. His speech
to the Parliament 57 Mortons Forke 101 Morton author of the union of the two
Roses 199 Moors expelled Granado 106 Murmuring 22 Murmurs of the people
against the K. 121 Murder and manslaughter, a law concerning it, in amendment
of the common Law 65 Murder of king Edw. 5. 149 Murder of a Commissioner for
the Subsidy 165
N
Navigations of the kingdom, how advanced 75 Neighbor ouerpotent, dangerous,
56 57 Bad News, the effect thereof in soldiers 109 Nobility neglected in
counsel, the ill effects of it 51 Nobility, few of them put to death in king
Henry's time 235 North, the kings journey thither, for what reasons 17
O
OAth of Allegiance taken 14 Oath enforced upon Maximilian by his subjects 77
Oath kept ibid. Obedience neglected, what follows. 70 First occasion of a
happy union 191 Obsequies for the French King, performed in England 192
Obsequies to Tyrants, what 2 An ominous answer of the king. 208 An ominous
prognostic 226 Opinions diverse what was to be done with Perkin 184 Orator
from the Pope met at London bridge by the Mayor 178 Order of the Garter sent to
Alphonso. 112 Ostentation of Religion by the king of Spain 105 Over merit
prejudicial to Sir William Stanley 133 Outlawrics how punished 210 Oxford Earl
fined for breach of the law 211
P
PAcificator, K Henry between the French king and Duke of Britain 50 Pardon
proclaimed by the king. 14. 18. 25 A Parliament called speedily 11 A Parliament
called for two reasons. 52 Another 16. 214 Parliaments advice desired by the K.
53. 57. 98 Passions contrary in K. Henry, joy and sorrow, with the reasons of
both. 58 Peace pretended by the French king. 47 Peace to be desired, but with
two conditions 54 Peace concluded between England and France 111 People, how
brought to decay, the redress of it by the king 73 Pensions given by the king
of France. 111 A Personation somewhat strange. 113 A great plague 196 Edw.
Plantagenet son and heir of George Duke of Clarence 6 Edw. Plantagenet
showed to the people. 27 Plantagenets race ended 195 Perkin Warbeck. History of
him 112 His parentage 114 Godsonne to king Edw. 4. 115 His crafty behavior
114. 120 Favored by the French king. 118 By him discarded 119 Favored by the
Scottish King 47 He yields, and is brought to the Court 186 Set in the
stocks 192 Executed at Tiburne 194 A pleasant passage of Prince Arthur. 206
Policy to prevent war 42 A point of policy to defend the Duchy of
Britain against the French 47. 56 Policy of State 41 Pope sowes seeds of
war 94 Pope, Ambassador to him 38 Poynings law in Ireland 118 Priest of
Oxford, Simon 20 Pretense of the French king. 45. 46 Prerogative how made use
of 235 Price of cloth limited 75 Prisoners Edw. Plantagenet 6 Prince of Orange
and Duke of Orleance 62 Maximilian by his subjects 77 Privileges of Clergy
abridged- 66 Privileges of Sanctuary qualified in three points 39 Proclamation
of Perkin, what effect. 160 Protection for being in the kings service limited
101 Proverb 182 Providence for the future 72
Q
QVeene Dowager, 21. enclosed in the Monastery of Bermondsey 26. Her variety of
fortune 26 Queens College founded in Cambridge. 27 Queen Elizabeth crowned
after two years 38 Queen Elizabeth's death 208
R
REbellion of Lord Louel and Staffords 17 Rebellion iu Yorkshire. 68 Rebellion
how to be prevented 59 Rebellion how frequent in k. Henry's time 68 Rebellion
of the Cornishmen 163 Rebels but half couraged men. 171 Religion abused to
serve policy 213 Remorse of the king for oppression of his people 229
Restitution to be made by the Kings Will. 231 Return of the King from France.
112 Retribution of k. Henry for treasure received of his subjects 71 Revenge
divine 1 Revenge of blood 213 Reward proposed by Perkin 159 Richard the third a
Tyrant 1 Richard slain at Bosworth field. ibid. His ignominious burial 2
Murder of his two Nephews. ib. Jealous to maintain his honor and reputation 3
Hopes to win the people by making laws ibid. His virtues ouerswayed by his
vices. 2. yet favored in Yorksh. 67 Riches of k. Henry at his death 230 Riches
of Sir William Stanley 133 Richmond built, upon what occasion. 187 Riot and
retainers suppressed by Act of Parliament. 216 Rome ever respected by king H.
70 A Rumor false, procuring much hatred to the king 19 Rumor false enquired
after to be punished 37 Rumor that the D. of York was alive, first of the K.
own nourishing. 244
S
SAnctuary at Colneham could not protect Traitors 18 Sanctuary privileges
qualified by a Bull from the Pope in three points. 39 Saturday observed and
fansied by K. Henry 7. 170 Saying of the king when he heard of Rebels 69
Scottish men voyded out of England. 101 Service of escuage 164 Simon the Priest
20 Skreenes to the king, who 164 A slight ingenuous, and taking good effect in
war 103 Sluice besieged and taken ibid. Southsayers prediction mistaken. 71
Speeches 51. 82. 91 Speech of the king to Parliament 96 Speech of Perkin 148
Speech conditional does not qualify words of Treason 134 Speeches bitter
against the king. 111 Sparks of rebellion neglected, dangerous 20 Spies from
the king 124 Sprites, of what kind, vexed k. H. 112 Stanley Sir William
Stanley crowns K. Henry in the field 5 Motives of his falling from the K. 135
Sir Will. Stanley appeached of Treason 132. is confined, and examined, and
confesses, 133. is beheaded, 134. Reasons which alienated the kings
affections. 136 Star Chamber Court confirmed in certain cases. 63 Star
Chamber Court described, what causes belong to it. 64 Statute of non claim 72
Steward public the K. 60 Strength of the Cornishmen 171 Spoils of Bosworth
field 135 Spoils as water spilt on the ground. 176 Subsidy denied by the
inhabitants of Yorkshire and Durham, the reason wherefore. 67 Subsidies denied
by the Cornishmen 163 Subsidy Commissioner killed. 165 Subsidy, how much 163
Swart Martin 30 Sweating sickness 9 The manner of the cure of it. 9 Sweating
sickness, the interpretation the people made of it. 36
T
ATale pleasant concerning the K. 243 Terror among the kings servants and
subjects 137 Tirrill Sir James, a murderer of K. Edw. 2. sons 123 Tirrill
executed 213 Thanks of the king to the Parliament 52 Thanksgiving to God for
the victory 1. 36. 38. 106 Three Titles to the kingdom meet in king Hen. 3
Title to France stirred 93 By the king himself 98 Treasure to be kept in the
kingdom 75 Treasure raised by the King, how. 37 50. 209 Treasure inordinately
affected by the king 211 Treasure how increased 216 Treasure left at the kings
death, how much 230 Trade, the increase thereof considered 59 Trade in decay
pincheth 161 Traitors taken out of Sanctuary, 18 Tower the kings lodging,
wherefore. 132 A Triplicity dangerous 166 Triumph at the marriage of the Lady
Elizab. to k. H. 16 Truce with Scotland 40 Tyrants, the obsequies of the people
to them 2
V
VIctory wisely husbanded by the French 62 Victory at Black Heath 171 Union of
England and Scotland, its first original 174 Voyage of k. Henry into France.
109 Voyage for discovery 188. 189 Vrswick Ambassador 112 Usury 66
W
WAlsingbam Lady vowed to by k. Henry 32 Wards wronged 210 War between the
French king and the Duke of Britain 48 War, the fame thereof aduantagious to
king Henry 49. 50 War gainful to the king 163 War pretended to get money
99 War of France ended by a peace, whereat the soldiers murmur, 111 White
Rose of England 120. 184 Wilford counterfeit Earl of Warw. 194 A Wifes
affection 226 Wooduile voluntarily goes to aid the Duke of Britain 49
Wooduile slain at S. Albans in Britain 62 Wolsey employed by the king. 227
Women carried away by violence, a law enacted against it: the reasons. 65
Women's ingratitude punished by law. 146
Y
YEomen of the Guard first instituted. 10 Yeomanrie how maintained. 73 York
house and title favored by the people. 4. 19 York Title and Line depressed by
k. Henry 6. 16 York Title favored in Ireland. 23 Yorkshire and Durham deny
to pay the Subsidy. 67
FINIS.

