PORTRAITVR of the prodigal son: Lively set forth in a threefold Discourse.

1 Of his Progress. 2 Of his Regresse. 3 Of his joyful welcome home.
Published by Samuel Gardener Batchler of Divinity.

Ezech. 18. verse. 23. Have I any desire that the wicked should die, says the
Lord God? or shall he not live if he return from his ways? AT LONDON, Printed
by P. S. for Nicholas Ling, and are to be sold at his shop at the west end of
Powles. 1599.

To the Right Worshipful sir Hierome Bows Knight, all external, and eternal
happiness.
Whatsoever my learning, and judgment is, sure I am it is the gift of God:
Every gift of God, the more it is occupied, the more it is increased: even as
fire the more it is blown the brighter it burns: or as a sword which the
more it is scowred the more it glistereth: or finally as corn, which the more
it is grinded, Matt. 2^
the more flower it yields. The parable of the Talents insinuates so much,
and daily experience shows no less. I doubt not therefore but that this my
small talent put out unto the excha^gers by his good grace upon it, working in
the hearts of those that shall borrow it, shall be returned to my master with
advantage. The pittaunce of oil of the widow woman's remaining in her pitcher,
^ing. 4
was so increased through the goodness of God, by the hand of his Prophet, as
she had not only enough to supply her daily wants: but sufficient remaining,
to make payment of her debts. The Lord our God has raised up a Prophet from
among our brethren, ^^ut. 18
by whose blessing, I do hope that this little oil of heavenly knowledge,
which God has powered into the vessel of my soul, shall receive such
increase, as besides sufficiency to serve common needs, somewhat shall
redownd to discharge my just debtes due to you and others. Wherefore (right
worthy Knight) take from my hands this deserved labor by your kindness
undeserved. It is most due unto you, for sundry due respects. For first the
dedication of books to men of merit, has bin a very ancient and common
custom, deducted from the practice of the primitive church, and since by the
ancient fathers and schoolmen, and now by the learned of our time and age put
in common use. What you merit of me, I spare to show because I would not
be thought to flatter you: and the rather because your religious love has
been of late so publicly signified, as it seems a thing needless by me
to be rehearsed. In a word (good Knight) I owe unto you, as much as it is
lawful for a man to owe, and therefore I entitle this treatise unto you, in
steed of a parcel of the grand arrerages that are coming unto you. Moreover,
if Saint John did not amiss in superscribing his second epistle which he
made, to his elect Lady, and his third epistle, 2. John. 3. John.
unto his beloved Gaius: I cannot be blamed for consecrating these the fruits
of my studies to my elect, and most beloved Knight. Luke 1
Nay if Saint Luke inscribed his gospel to his most noble Theophilus, which
signifies a friend and lover of God: sithence I am assured that I have happened
upon another Theophilus and lover of Gods word, I think you very worthy of
this history of Saint Luke. And this was the principal inducement yt moved me
to give you this book: for howsoever I might allege aliaunce, and worldly
respects many, yet the regard of your zeal and religion is more moving then
any. You being both of judgment rightly to conceive of it and of worship and
countenance sufficient to defend it, I commit it unto you, and you unto the
almighty, who make your ancient and worshipful name famous still in earth, and
engrosse it and register it in the book of the righteous, in the life that is
to come.

Your worships to be commanded SAMVEL GARDENER.

To the Religious Reader.
THou have here (good Reader) a Manuel of mellistuous meditations, which this
scripture of scriptures, and this story the storehouse, and library of
learning abundantly and fruitfully yields unto thee. Here is the juice of
that pleasant grape, that pure new wine, Matt. 9
which being put into new vessels, refreshes and makes glad the heart of man,
and here is that oil, Psalm. 104
even the grace of God, which makes him to have a cheerful countenance. No
Nect^r, and Ambrosia which the Poets feign to be the drink and meat of the
Gods may compare with this. The Manna of the Israelites, Psalm. 78
and the Angels food, which the Lord did send unto them is nothing aequiualent
and proportionable unto this: John. 6
for those that did eat of that are all dead, but whosoever tastes and feeds
upon this he shall live for ever. For this gives nourishment unto dry and
dead consciences, and puts life into them: Ezech. 37.
as the word of God in the mouth of Ezechiel did to dry and dead bones. The
spirit speaks evidently throughout this whole discourse how as the lord is
just in punishing of sinners: so is he as merciful unto those that do
repent: As in his left hand he holds out a sword ready for to wound us;
so with his right hand he puts forth a shield whereby to defend us. The Lord
is like unto a loving father, who reclaimeth his ryotous, and unruly son with
the rod of his displeasure: but being corrigible, and reformed by his
discipline he throws away his rod, and in mercy embraces him of every
side. Romans 2
Tribulation, and anguish shall be upon the soul of eueryman that does
evil, to the Jew first and also to the Grecian: but to every man that does
good shall be honor and glory, ^al. 6.
and as many as walk after his ways, peace shall be upon them, and mercy,
and upon the Israel of God. So as here he harpeth with the kingly harper
upon these two stringes, and his antheme and song is of mercy and Judgment,
and about these two points is all this story spente. Psalm. 101
Each several man should be another looking glass: but this man is a
spectacle in the Theater of this world, for all men to look upon. In whom
we may see the riches and bounty of the grace of God toward us, Esai. 59
how his hand is not so short but he can save: nor his ears so thick but
he can hear: nor our sins so great, but he can and will release upon our
return with this prodigal man unto him. Here is fulfilled the Aphorism of
the Prophet in the mouth of the Lord. Ezech. 18
I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he repent and live. And
this of the Psalmographe. Truly, Psalm. 73
God is good unto Israel, and to those that be of a true heart: Yea to those
that are of a bad heart too, as this man's president, and example teaches us. We
should rather live by laws then by examples: yet are examples more forcible
with us, and we are led to good or evil by them, and we work by the^ as an
artificer by his rule, and as young scholars, who write by their examples. We
are proane to pattern this prodigal person, in his preposterous and perverse
affections, and we lively bear his image which is earthly, so as this
Poetical fiction fitteth us.

Tantalus a labiis sitiens fugientia captat
Flumina. Quid rides? Horae.
mutato nomine de te
Fabula narratur.
But the Lord renew us all in the inward man, that we may follow him in his
regenerate and renewed disposition, and grant that we may be like him in his
image which is heavenly Therefore in his person take out thine own proportion.
(...)
In his beginning and proceeding in his sin we may clearly see the self same
course, that sin in like sort does so begin and take deep root in us, that
foreseeing the same we may the better either in time prevent it, or else with
speed withdraw our feel out of it. In his infelicitie let us see our own
misery, into which we fall by our wilful iniquity, that sin as a serpent full
of deadly poison may be hated of us, that trembling at his judgment, we follow
not his misgouernment: We tread not in his steps, unless we will be whipped
with his stripes. In the course of his return he chalketh out the way unto us
of our return. His humility, confession and form of supplication must he the
condition of our reconciliation. Last of all, in the happy reconcilement and
return of us prodigal children unto our fathers house, the church of the
living god, behold the Lords goodness, and the blessings which in store the
lord has laid up for all that do repent, and come home unto him, ^^l. 51
^^l. 68 ^^l. 45
they immediately hear of joy and gladness, that the bones which he has broken
may rejoice. The singers go before, the minstrels follow after, and with joy
and gladness shall they be brought, and enter into the Kings palace, where
there is mirth without heaviness, health without sickness, fulness without
scarcity, life without death. Thus have we laid together in one sum matters
of much price, the quintessence and dimensions (as I may so call this history)
of al divinity, so as (to conclude) this treatise is a treasure house which
leads us not to a bare contemplation, but to a full fruition, not to the
naked knowledge, but the use, not to the promise but the practice of the
abundaunt and ouerflowing grace of God unto us most miserable sinners, under
the parable and person of this man the prodigal son, in the sequel
portraied and painted out unto thee, which I wish thee to read religiously,
to meditate upon fruitfullie, and to practice such instructions as it
affoordeth dutifully, and the Lord accompany thee with his grace effectually.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, SAMVEL GARDENER.

A Table of all the Contents of the Chapters contained in this Book.
The first Book.
Cap. 1 OF the Argument, Allegory, and manifold use of this principal parable.
page 1 Cap. 2. Of the common condition of parents in their children, under the
person of the prodigal son his father: and therewithal the estate of the
r^^litant Church. page 10 Cap. 3. The badges and tokens of undutiful children
showed in the example of the prodigal child. page 15 Cap. 4. Of the ignorance
and want of knowledge of his happy estate in his fathers house, the grand
cause of his departure from the house: under which the dangerous effects of our
ignorance, and the happy fruits of the knowledge of Gods word are specified
and expressed. page 22 Cap. 5. Of self love, pride and presumption, another
cause of his departure from his father. page 31 Cap. 6. Of his hastines and
rashness, not having a wise foresight, and prospect to the end: another cause
of his departure from his father. page 35 Cap. 7. What the prodigal son did
when he had received his portion from his father. page 42 Cap. 8. Of the wast
which the prodigal son made of his portion: under which how transitory
worldly riches are, evidently is declared. page 59 Cap. 9. Of the manner how the
prodigal son lauished out his portion: under which the damnable effects of
wh^rdom, and riotous living are displaied. page 5^ Cap. 10. The danger that
comes by evil company, expressed by the danger that the prodigal son fell
into. page 63 Cap. 11. Of the dearth and want, which the prodigal son endured
when he went from his father into a far country: wherein we are taught what
hurt we do our selves by departing from God, to embrace this present world.
page 70 Ca. 12. Of the miserable slavery of the prodigal son: wherein the
slavery of sin is manifested. page 78 Cap. 13. A comparison between the
service of God and the service of the devil: wherein is showed how easy Gods
service is, and how hard the other is, under the hardness of the prodigal
son his service who could not obtain the off all and reuersion of the s^ines
husks. page 86 Ca. 14. An exhortation to avoid sin, and to live a godly life,
the only use and purport of the premises, page 98
The second Book-
Cap. 1. OF our necessary return from sin and conversion unto God: typically
shadowed and set forth unto us in the example of this man's return. page 112 Ca
2. The prodigal son his resolution of the amendment of his life, and of
returning to his father: the fundamental point of our true repentance. page
119 Ca. 3. That we must with the prodigal son join faith to our repentance,
the better to incite and prick us forward to return unto our father. page 129
Cap. 4. Of the benefit of afflictions: an especial mean which God uses to
work our repentance, and to cause our return to our fathers house, with the
prodigal son. page 135 Cap. 5. Of the prodigal son his confession of his
sins, a most necessary effect of our true repentance. page 150 Cap. 6. The
prodigal son his form of confession of his sins. page 159 Cap. 7. Of the
prodigal son his extreme humility considered in the remainder of his
formal confession. ^^d of the commendation and virtue of humil^te. page 174
Cap. 8. How God out of evil things brings forth good, as making the sins
of the prodigal son the occasion of his humble and dutiful confession. page
179 Cap. 9. Of the prodigal son his execution of his purpose, wherein is
considered the present necessity of our speedy repentance, without our
further delaying it. page 184 A prayer. page 193
The third Book.
Cap. 1. That the mere mercy of God is the maine motive of our coming home
to God, and the sole efficient cause of our whole salvation, plainly
insinuated by this circumstance of this History of the father his seeing the
prodigal son, when he was yet a far off. page 198 Cap. 2. Of the mercy
and compassion of this father showed unto the prodigal son. page 205 Cap. 3.
The readiness of God in forgiving sin, and his slownes in punnishing it:
signified by the father his running out to meet his prodigal son. page 212
Cap. 4. Of the other circumstances of the Father his love, showed to his son
by his falling on his neck, and kissing him. page 224 Cap. 5. Of the Royal
Robe, given by the father unto the prodigal son, when he was in presence. page
229 Cap. 6. Of his ring and shoes which were given unto him. page 234 Cap. 7.
Of the banquet, mirth and music wherewith the father welcomed his son. page
241 Cap. 8. Of the joy which God conceiueth of a sinners repentance, considered
in the joy and triumph that is made upon the return of the prodigal son. page
248 Cap. 9. Wherein is showed by the present estate of the prodigal son,
how God mingleth prosperity with adversity. page 253 Chap. 10. That God
usually gives unto a sinner more then he can ask. page 259 Chap. 11. Of the
felicity of the faithful, figured by the mutual mirth and melody that was
made for the joyful welcomming home of the prodigal son. page 263
FINIS.
THE FIRST BOOK. WHICH Sets out the Progress of the Prodigal Son.
The first Chapter. Of the Argument Allegory, and manifold use of this
principal parable.
THere are two sorts of persons who are the subject, and Argument The argument.
of this Parable. The one is the person of a renowned father: the other is of
his children.

This worthy father as he had but two sons, so were they divided, and
diversely disposed. The one of them was indifferently conformable to his
father: but the other was out of course, and most unnatural unto his father.

This yonker, was the younger, not in years, ^ut manners: of so wild,
wilful, and wicked in^lination: as all lewd conditions in him did seem ^o
strive which of them should exceed: all kind of mischief to grow up to a
head: and the mystery of sin so to be complete in him, as no vile quality
could be found in any which did not redounde, and take deep root in him. For
being glutted with his fathers goodness, and surfeted with his bounty;
fullness bred fulsomnesse, prosperity presumption, and familiarity contempt:
So as both his eyes of his understanding being out, he fell as Sampson into
his enemies hands: (...) similitude
and as a hooded Hawke was carried to and fro, whither his lusts led him. In
this sor^^anged he about, and fetched a great compass, and proceeded in his
progress: until by his chargeable travailing by the way, he had lauished out
his substance, and had set out himself as a pattern of pity, in the theater
of this world for all men to gaze upon.

Saint Luke has taken out his image very lively, and in a just proportion
has painted him out unto us, in his orient colors. But first, as it is usual
with Painters, and Lapidaries, he shapeth him vnperfectlie, drawing out his
lineaments, and portraiture with a coal: but afterward he finisheth it,
curiously coming over it with his pensill again, polishing, and adorning it
with silver and gold, and with all kind of beautiful, and costly colors.

We will first view him in his deformed shape in the which we are to loath
him: next we will reuiew him as he is reformed for the which we are to love him.

His form deformed, as he is cast into a coal is described thus. First of
all impatient to attend his fathers death, or to abide his good pleasure: he
challenges sawcily, and imperiously enough his portion of his father, not
only before he could of right demand it, but also before he could rightly
govern it.

Secondly, not contented therewith, his eyes were so evil, because he was
good, as he would no longer tarry in his sight: but whereas his two sons
were the two crutches and supporters of his age to bear up his body, he
cruelly without pity bereaueth him of one, by roauing abroad, and taking his
vagaries, after his sinful pleasures.

Thirdly like a wastgood, and ryotous Ruffian, he so lasheth it on, as his
goods melte like wax, before the heat of the Sun: he brings his goods
and substance to an end, as a tale that is told.

Fourthlie, ietting and iogging up and down, till he tired himself with
riotous spending and running upon the skoare: he purchases at the last
repentance of his pleasure at too dear a rate. A similitu^
For the man and his money being once parted, he was as the Ass travailing in
the day time laden with gold, when the night came disburdened of his
treasure, and turned into the stable with a galled back. For throwing himself
by his rechlesse prodigality, into all extremity, his former prosperous, and
honorable estate in his fathers house, was changed into the basest and
vildest condition in his Masters form. For of a son he became a servant, of
free bond, and in stead of former satietie and plenty, he pined, and was
almost consumed away with want and penury.

But this vexation was his reformation, and his good schoolemaister who gave
him best instruction: For it wrought in him a speedy alteration, and turned
him to a godly sorrow to salvation. It did put a new song into his mouth,
even a dutiful submission to his God. For whilst he stood by the waters of
Babylon he bitterly wept, when he remembered thee O Sion. ^al. 137
His regard of the prosperity of hired servants in his fathers Sion, could
not but make his eyes a fountain of tears standing now by the waters of
trouble, which were ready to run over his soul in this worldly Babylon.

But this his heaviness which endured but for a night, brought unto him all
joy in the morning. For as much rain and great showers, do cause the enemy
who assaulteth any place, similitude
to break up his siege, and give over the place: so the showers of tears,
which gushed from his soul, discomfited, and ^^attered his host of troubles,
which compassed him about, and redeemed, and brought his soul out of
adversity. So as in him this prophecy is fulfilled. ^^l. 68
The Morians land shall soon stretch out her hands unto God. He that before
by reason of his sin, ^^l. 68
was black like a Morian, is now made white by his return from sin, as the
snow in Salmon.

^^l. 68
Though he has lain among the pots, yet now he is as the wings of a Dove, that
is covered with silver wings, and her feathers of gold.

This we shall well see if we shall reuise him in his renewed holiness, in his
perfect form, as he is absolutely shaped out unto us, and oriently trimmed and
expressed in his colors. For in him we may behold, the image of that man that
pleases God, such a one that resigneth and renounceth the world, and is
changed by the renewing of his mind, Rom 12
proving what is the will of God acceptable and perfect. As before he had given
up his members, as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin: Romans 6
so now giving them up as weapons of righteousness unto God. He is no more
proud in his own eyes, but his soul is humbled even as a weaned child: Psalm.
131
casting down himself before his mercy seat, and in fear worshipping
toward his holy Temple: coming with a rent heart, as well as rent
garments, Joel. 2. Psalm. 84
and turning unto the Lord his God: desirous to be a door keeper, or a hired
servant in the house of his God, rather then to converse in this miserable
condition in the tents of the ungodly.

And this his suit has speedy good success, his father beholding him a far
off with the eye of mercy, and graciously embracing him when he was in
presence with the arms of pity. For he did put off his sackcloth and girded
him with gladness, he adorned him with a ring, dignity and great worship
did he lay upon him, he richly did deck a Table for him in despite of his
enemies, he did finally make him glad with the joy of his countenance, and did
wipe away al tears from his eyes.

The allegory ^he allego^^^ of this ^^rable.
and moral application of this parable without constraining it seems to be
this. The father is God: these his two sons, are two sorts of people in the
Church of God: The one of them orderly and of good government contented to
abide in his fathers house and liberties of this church: the other exorbitant,
refractorie and disloyal, gadding abroad after his own fancies, yet humbled
by discipline, and by chastisement reformed. The far Country which he traced,
was his far departure from his fathers Laws, by his wicked lusts. The
substance which he wasted, was the riches of his grace which he divided to him.
The famine he sustained was the want of the bread of eternal life, and
infinite other defectes and wants, unto which a sinner is subject when he is
gone from God. The cruel tyrant whom he served was the Devil whom he
obayed: this farm of his which he attended, was this present evil world, in
the which the Devil reigns. The swine which he kept were unclean spirits,
ungodly companions, the heard into which the Devils do enter, and do
violently throw into the sea of all evil. The husks which rather burdened,
then relieved his stomach, were the light and idle vanities of this world.
His sins which he did feed upon, the alluring baits and inticementes of
the Devil. His return home was his return from sin by speedy repentance:
his welcome home was the gracious acceptance of this his repentance. His first
roabe was his first royalty which Adam lost, and Christ redeemed for us. The
servant who did fetch it were the ministers of his holy word, who bring his
graces to us. The ring was the seal of Gods holy spirit, and a token of his
dignity: whereby he cries Abba father, and is sealed unto the day of
redemption. The shoes of his feet were the preparation of the Gospel of
peace. The fat Calfe that was killed, was Christ slain from the beginning of
the world, for him and us all his prodigal children. The heavenly banquet,
mirth, and music is the joy and happiness which we shall be partakers of in
the kingdom of heaven, all which shall be orderly proved unto us in their
proper places.

Now of this parable there is a manifold use, The use of this parab A similitud^
whether we respect the matter, or manner of this history. It is like to a great
piece of money which contains in it the value of many pieces. It is full of
mysteries, and matters of much moment: albeit in our gross, and carnal minds
we cannot conceive them. It is often seen that things of great price of those
that are ignorant of the virtue of them are utterly rejected: which by men of
judgment who do know their nature are very much accounted of. A similitu^^
A base Country man passes by a King and does him no reverence, because he
knows him not: A similitu^^
A simple Pesant as he walks in the field trampleth under foot many wholesome
simples, which the skillful Apothecary carefully gathers up and makes of
them many healthful confections. In this field wherein we walk, many herbs
and flowers of forcible operations fit to be applied to all wounded
consciences may be gathered of us. There is no one bed in the Lords Eden,
no place of holy Scripture in the whole Bible, which yields more sauory and
comfortable doctrine then this place does. For first the manner and form of
this parable delights very much, as shrowding his matter under a parable and
borrowed speech, and allegorical discourse, and this is the common custom of
Gods spirit for very good causes.

First it serves to strengthen our weak memories, ^hy Christ ^ormeth by
para^s.
that thereby we may better keep in mind his wholesome instructions. For even
as the stomach unless it has a retentiue faculty, to retain and digest the
meat and nourishment that is put into it, 1. (...) help (...) weak ^mories.
^militude
until it has passage through the veins and parts of the whole body to
cherish and to battle it, it receives no good: so unless we lay up, and
keep in our hearts such needful points of doctrine as are taught us from
the word, all preaching is in vain, and our hearing is unprofitable unto us.

^^^ilitude
As precious pearls and jewels, are fastened unto ribbandes that they might not
be lost: so Gods heavenly word an incomparable treasure, and a pearl of
greatest price, is set out in parables, that it might not be lost of us. You
shall have many old persons, that shall very many years remember a
familiar example, or similitude borrowed from such things, as we have here
common use of, which they shall hear from a preacher: when as many other deep
points, and matters of more substance, then examined and discussed, shall be
quite forgotten: and only because proverbs and plausible similitudes, drawn
from daily prac^ize, do take deeper root, and impression in their minds. And
for this cause God does often open his mouth in parables, and declare unto the
people hard sentences of old.

A second cause moving him thereunto, 2 That we may better understand that
which is taught us.
is to lay open and unfold more plainly, that which is ^aught us, that we
may the better conceive it and ^earne it. Aristotle the Philosopher
prescribes ^his course: Vt a notioribus ad minus nota procedamus: That in our
way of teaching by plain and ^nowne things we lead our scholars to the
better understanding of those that are unknown: ^owe because things visible,
object to our senses, ^re better known, then those that are invisible, and
removed from the same; and those that are ^orporall are better conceived then
those that are ^pirituall: hence is it that parables and borrowed speeches from
vulgar and known matters, ^erue as midwiues to further our travail in
hea^enlie knowledge, and do help exceedingly, and ^erue our capacities.

And as this Argument is moving in it self in ^espect of the form and manner
thereof: This parable is the abridgment of the Gospel.
so does it many ways instruct and comfort us, in regard of the subject, and
matter thereof. For I may well term it the Epitome of the Gospel, the
abstract and compendium of the whole work of our redemption. For these two
points are the sum of our doctrine, and our preaching. The doctrine of
Repentance: The forgiveness o^ sins. The sum of the Gospel, Repentance
and forgiveness of sins.
Unto Repentance properly do belong the whole body of sin, and our entire
conversion from our sins to God. The forgiveness of our sins naturally
compriseth the free grace of God, our justification, and whatsoever else
appertain to our Redemption. Now these and each of these, lively are
depainted, as it were in a Table in his fresh colors, in the image and
counterfeit o^ the prodigal son, the matter and argument o^ this famous
history.

The second Chapter. Of the common condition of parents in their children under
the person of the prodigal son his father: and therewithal of the estate of
the militant Church.
THe person of the father by due order being first entreated of: his pitiful
estate in his children is remembered. For being the kindest and best father that
might be, (as bearing the person of God the father) he is a spectacle of the
unhappiest father in one of his children.

He had but two sons: but this fewness I steeme no small part of parents
happiness. For ^hildren being so chargeable in their bringing up, ^^e number
of them how so ever well inclined ^re mainlie burdensome unto many poor
pa^^nts, and do utterly undo them, as well in their ^ood intendements of
their civil education, as of their putting forth to their godly
informati^^n. But herein is all misery, that out of ^wo there must needs
be one in whom all ^ewdnesse, and ungraciousness should abide: of (...) most
rebellious, unnatural, and desperate dis^osition.

This man's estate is set out as a looking Glass A Glass for fathers.
wherein many fathers may behold themselves: ^r this is no rare or strange
example, but such a ^ne as is rife and common in these days, as in ^mes of
old. For ancient records of holy writ ^oe show, how pestilentlie, and
that common^^e the holy fathers have been plagued, and tortu^ed with their
children. Genesis 4.
Of the first brace of sons which the worlds eye did see, was not Caine one
of them? A branded runnagate from the face of the ^arth, unnatural to his
father, unmerciful to his ^rother, heretical toward God (as supposing his
^loudie fact could be hid from God,) flattering ^imselfe in his own
wickedness, until his abominable inventions were found out: and last of all
fulfilling the measure of his sin, dreadfully dispai^ing of the mercy of his
God?

But from Adam to descend to Noah: was (...) luck more fortunate, or his
comfort in his childr^^ greater? Of his lease of sons was there not Cham,
Genesis 9.
whom neither the good counsel of (...) tender father could keep in
compass, nor t^ fearful example of Gods horrible vengeaunce^ the raging
flood could reduce to order, but t^king an advantage of his fathers weakness
ou^whelmed with wine, and thrown into a sleep blowed open his skirts, and
discovered his nake^nesse, and made him the argument of his sport an^ pastime,
and a scorn and derision to those the were about him?

What shall we say of Abraham our father, o^ whose heedefull care of the well
nurturing, Genesis 18.
an^ training up his children, God himself is witness If his lot did fall
into a fairer ground he has caus^ to rejoice: but his eye was not so
watchful, an^ jealous over them, but of his two sons the bas^ begotten
Ismael was a scoffing, eluish and inordinate companion.

To this calamity was Isaac also subject, wh^ was heavily vexed with his
unhappy Esau.

But a load of afflictions was laid upon Jacob by his childrens misgouerment.
Genesis 34.
His only dear daughter and darling Dinah was ravished of Shechem. Genesis 35.
Genesis 37. Genesis 38.
Ruben his eldest son defiled his fathers bed. His Cockney Joseph was sold as
a bondslaue by his sons to the Ismaelites, and transported into Egypt. His
son Judah committed incest with his daughter in law Thamar. And thus was he
^ade a myrrour of of misery by his childrens in^icitie.

Of this matter we have a cloud of witnesses: ^t it is needelesse to heap up
examples in a thing (...) manifest. Helie his two sons Hophney and ^hinees.
David his two sons Ammon and Absa^^, do confirm the same.

Wherefore let the diligent regard of these and ^^ch like examples prepare us
unto patience, when ^^euer it shall please God, to make the disobedi^^ce and
rebellion of our children the chastisement ^f our sins.

Our unnatural children be given us as specta^^es to help our blind eyes, A
similitude
that will not see our ^^lues. By seeing their undutifulness unto us their
^^thers, we may see our own undutifulness unto ^od our Father. Isay. 1.
For he has nourished and brought (...) children, but they have rebelled
against him. It is ^^erefore a just punishment laid upon us, that they should
forget us, because we do forget God. Aug. li. 5 cont. Julian. cap. 2.
It is Gods common course to punish sin by sin, and one sin (as Augustine
says) is the punish^ent of an other, and God permits one sin (...) take
vengeance of another, as afterward shall ^ee proved more at large in his due
place. But that end soever the Lord aymeth at by this kind ^f judgment, it is
no strange thing for which we should be wondered at, or be a Proverb, or by
word in men's mouths, because of our evil qua^^fied, and disposed children.
Parents must not ^eare the iniquity of their children, and their dissolute
lives must not be simply laid unto their ch^^ges. For their eyes will be evil
though they be goo^ an habit and custom, which is got of sin is another
nature, and cannot be forsaken.

Furthermore in the estate of this father in (...) children, we may perfectly
behold the condition of the Church, We are not to fever our selves from the
Church because of the wicked which are in the church.
thereby not obscurely shadow and prefigured. For his two sons are two kind
of people, good and badde, mingled here togith^ and resorting to the Church. It
is not to be look^ for, that the militant Church should be without blemish and
corruption in this world. For it is t^ Lords field wherein the tares do grow up
with t^^ wheat, Matthew. 13 Matthew. 3
and the Lords f^^^re wherein the chafe mingled with the wheat, Matthew. 13
and the draw not wh^^ gathers together al kinds of fish, and other thin^
both good and bad. In David's Court there w^^ a wicked Absalon: in Christ his
school there w^ the traitor Judas: among the company of the de^cons, there
was the crew of the Nicolaitans. The^ is in every thing, as Chrysostom
Chrysostom.
does obseru^ which does consume a thing, as out of wood the comes a worm,
Similitudes
from a garment a Moth, from a green herb a canker, by which the woodde
(...) corrupted, the garment fretted, the flower cons^med. The wicked will here
be among the godl^^ as Saul among the Prophets. 1. Sam.
But there will b^ a time when they shall be separated: the whea^ from the
chafe, Matthew. 3 Mat. 13 Mat. 25
the seed from the Tares, the Cockle from the Darnell, the Sheep from the
Goats, and the intruder without a wedding ga^ment, shall be culled out from
the rest of the ^ompanie. Genesis 4. Genesis 21. Genesis 25. 1. Sam. 15 Ierem. 20 Amos 7
Mat. 25
A partition shall be made between Caine and Abel, Isaac and Ismael, Esau and
Jacob, ^aul and David, Ieremia and Pashur, Amos and Amasiah, Judas and the
Apostles, the five foolish ^irgins and the wise, the citizens of the saints and
^he outcasts of Israel.

In the mean while we must in no case forsake ^he church, because of the
wicked which are in the Church. For did Noah forsake the Arc because of Cham?
Or Peter the Apostles ship because of Judas? If there were not in the Church
sins, what need the Church pray for remission of sins? A similitude
He that leaves the Church because of the bad, is like to him that leaves a
delightful garden full of pleasant flowers, because of bad weeds that do grow
among them.

The third Chapter. The badges and tokens of undutiful children, showed in the
example of the prodigal child.
THe lamentable condition of the father in the son, being thus premissed, and
entreated of in general: the history leads us to a due regard of his
grieuances in particular. And here begins the formal description of the
son, his first image, rude, and imperfect, and drawn out with a coal.

The mind of this man is known by his words, A man is known by his words.
Iud. 12. Matt. 26.
his mouth bewraieth what manner of man he is. As the Ephramites were known to
be Ephramites by their kind of speech, being not able to pronounce
Shibboleth: as the Damsel that kept the door knew Peter by his voice, that
he was a man o^ Galilee: so commonly men's works are known by their words
to be good or evil. If his hear^ be indighting of good matters, Psalm. 45.
his tongue will be the pen of a ready writer. The words are properly the
sound of the mind, and therefore as gold that has not a good sound may be
thought to be counterfeit: A similitude
so the man that has not a good sound cannot be perfect. He that is of the
earth speaks earthly: John 3.
and the mouth of a fool (says the wisdom of Solomon) blurteth out
foolishness. Prou. 15.
As a man by his blistered and exulcerate lips is known to have an Ague: A
similitude
so by our swelling and corrupt words we are known to have an inward and
spiritual Ague. A similitude
If the Bell sounds not orderly without, the wheels of the clock are
distempered within: our inward parts are out of frame, if our tongue run
riot and iarreth out of tune. A Brazen vessel that is empty yields a clear
sound, (...) similitude
if thou be empty of ungodly thoughts, thy voice will not be hoarse, but
the Echo will be loud. Wherefore if thou will set a door before thy deeds,
set a watch before thy words, and do not let open the doors of thy lips,
before thou know what words will enter out. A word once out cannot be
called in, it is good therefore to weigh out words. To rappe out foolish
words, and to excuse them thus: I thought not of them: is the property of a
fool. Wherefore seeing we judge of a man by h^s words as of a Lion by his
pawe, geste we with our selves of this man's affection by his terms of
presumption. For by his own mouth we will condemn him, as Christ did the bad
servant in the Gospel. He pleads law, and imperiously claims his portion
as a debt which was due unto him. Father give me (says he the portion of the
goods, that falls unto me A very impudent and saucie suit, and therewithal
vnre^^onable. For what does this motion insinuate else, but that he is highly
conceited of himself, to be of able government to dispose his own goods, to
go at his liberty, and to do what him ^^st?

In this man's behavior the guise and practice of unruly children is plainly
to b^e seen, such as this declining and almost consumed age plentifully
brings forth: for the name being changed, they so imitate his nature, as
this argument seems properly to be made for them: He that is beer called
the younger, is now a grave elder, and has been the father of innumerable
children like unto himself. As this boy choppeth Logic, and peartlie
communeth with his father for his share: so too many wicked wagst^ings will
parley with their parents, and ^owdlie and lewdlie debate their matters with
them, saying with the ryotous rout in David's time: Our tongues are our own,
we ought to speak, Psa. 12
who is Lord over us? But the Lord has his judgments in store for such, and
their damnation sleeps not.

The scope they drive at in all their expostulatorie and discontented terms,
is the same which is the substance of this man's cauillation, his fathers
inheritance. They are greedy of their gold, as a Crow is of a Carrion, and
in their immoderate lust thereof, they can neither wait their fathers death,
or stay his good leisure: but they must needs enjoy it out of hand, or else
they are greatly sick of the father, and do long for his death, verifying
and fulfilling this saying of the Poet.

Filius ante diem patrios inquirit in annos. The son would have the father
dead, that he might have his gold.

Such iniquity in the hearts of children in all degrees of people generally
prevails, such corruption rules their affections, as very few are found
(howsoever they can dissemble it for civil fashion sake,) that are not
reasonably pleased in themselves with their parents death: whether they be
rich to possess their riches, or of poor estate, thereby to be eased of their
charge.

2. Sam. 18
What incited Absalon to that fury against his father, but his ambitious desire
of his fathers crown and dignity? But his desperate designement escaped not
due punishment: for the revenging God snared him, and strangled him with his
own pride the righteous God that by no means suffers the disobedience of
children A dreadfu^^ example for disobedient children.
to their parents unpunished, made his knotted curled hair, the knots of
death, and to stand in stead of halters to choke him up. And so hanging by the
hairie scalpe between heaven and earth, until he was smitten unto the ground
by Ioab, and miserably finished his accursed life, he is left as an example to
rebellious children of fear and trembling. I pray God this example may warn
such children: that those who tread in the self same steps, may in time take
heed, least justly they be whipped with the self same stripes: And if it may
be as well remembered, as it is ill forgotten, it will curble their wild and
wicked affections, and keep them in obedience.

How they do walk in this man's path and imitate his lewdnes if they do not
surpass it, it is easy to be seen if you suruay the tricks, and fetches
which they use to serve their own turns, to get to their possession the
inheritance, and right and substance of their fathers. Some are taught to
challenge with boldness enough their legacy and portion that was left them by
their mother. Othersome do sue to be overseers of their fathers, and to be
tutors over them, charging them with dotage with the sons of Sophocles, that
they are unable to manage their matters, and therefore they do crave the
government of their goods, and oversight of their persons.

Othersome do flatly charge them with injustice, and unnatural partiality,
that they work not by a rule, leuel and proportion in ye course of their
affections, in heaping upon one more the^ on another without just occasion: as
if it were unlawful for Jacob to love Joseph more then al his brethren, or for
Christ to love his disciple John more then the other of his fellow disciples.

But as they are with this prodigal companion troubled and tormented with a
greedy worm, Disobedient children are great ^^^ders.
which makes them to gape with mouths so wide for their parents substance,
buzzing like the flies that pestered Pharao his Court, and could not be driven
away but they will still return, seize, and prey upon them: so are they always
of a gadding spirit, they are never well, but when they are ranging and their
feet stand upon thorns until they be gone out of their parents house. They had
rather be companions with vain and lewd persons, who may flatter them in their
fondness, then to be in presence of their careful parents, who may train
them up in goodness. They have lost that ear with Malcus that should hear
good counsel, and they follow with Absalon, such kind of counselors, as
lead them to destruction.

A similitude
Herein they do resemble the birds of the air, who, albeit they be never so
well tended in the cage, yet covet they to be out, and to fly abroad,
skipping too and fro, from one twigge unto another. But the birds herein, do
follow but the instinct of their natural inclination which God has given unto
them, whose natural habitation is in the air, never using to light upon the
ground, but when hunger and needful provision of food and other necessities
drive them thereunto, and therefore are excused: but lewd children like
monsters do put off nature, coursing abroad, when nature teaches them to
abide at home, and therefore justly and condignely are accused.

Does not nature teach them there to abide most, where they have most cause?
there to live, where they find greatest love? and not to bereave them of their
comfort and solace in the end of their life, who have been unto them by such
infinite troubles and unspeakable charges, the bginners, authors, and
maintainers of their lives? A similitude
See we not how Spani^ls wait diligently upon their masters, who do use to
feed them, and shall sons give no attendance upon their dear parents, who
not only feed them, but do take such cares for them?

If the love of parents, with all the love again that children can show, can
never be requited, take we heed we turn not thankfulness into sinfulness,
and obedience into stubburnnesse, and natural love into all ungodly lust. He
that rendereth ^ill for good evil shall never (says the wise man) depart out
of his house. Prou. 15.


Christ that desired that the fragments of the ^aues wherewith the people were
sufficed in the wilderness, should be kept as a grateful remembrance ^f that
kindness: no doubt would have such maine ^^d unspeakable benefits which we
receive from ^r parents to be in no wise forgotten. The sorrows which parents
do sustain for their children, be side ^^e many cares of their well doing, as
exceeding (...) number are not to be rehearsed, which no doubt as sharp arrows
would stick sore unto their side^ and would soon overcome the^, were there not
a^ inward love which ouerruled all, making them patient and willing to endure
them. 1. Kin. 4
The tender lo^^ seated and rooted in their hearts, is like the mea^ that
Elisha the man of God did cast into the pott^ whereby the sowernes and
bitterness of death, which was in the pot was taken away, and their mea^ made
sauorie and sweet unto them. The rega^ whereof if children were not graceless
might r^uish their affections, and retain them in obedien^^ and keep them at
home, and weane them from their wild and wanton vagaries, ietting and ia^^ting
like a Post to and fro, who staieth not in a plac^ always turning up and down
like an hour-gla^^ that is turned every hour.

The fourth Chapter. Of the ignorance and want of knowledge of his hap^^ estate
in his fathers house, the grand cause of (...) departure from the house: under
which the dang^rous effects of our ignorance, and the happy fru^^ of the
knowledge of Gods word are specified (...) expressed.
THere was no occasion given him (...) his father why he should so much (...)
like to be in presence with his fath^^ Thy destruction O Israel is of thy s^^^

He might have pleaded iudicially with his so^^ as he did sometimes with the
children of Isra^^ saying in this wise: Mich. 6
O my people what have I done unto thee, or wherein have I grieved thee,
testify against me?

Could his son allege against him his unnatural inclemencie, his unkind
increatie, his want of things necessary? Could he dispute for his departure
from his father, as Jacob did for his departure from his uncle when he
speaks thus, I will depart, Genesis 30.
for Laban his countenance is not toward me now as it was yesterday and three
days ago? Was he so seruilelie detained in obsequie, as he should so
inordinatelie affect this liberty? No no, let God be true, and every man
else a liar, that he may be justified in his sayings, Psalm. 50
and clear when he is judged.

It was his foolishness, and want of experience being the younger brother,
which opened the window unto all mishappes, and violently did throw him into
all extremities. He was as a blind man who could not judge of colors, as a
fleshly man who conceyueth not the things that are of God.

As the Swallows doung did strike Tobias blind: so his fathers bags, the
riches of this world, A similitu Tob 2. Phil. 3
which the Apostle calls doung, bereaved him of the eyes and sight of his
mind. Wordlie men want eyes to see the light of God, and the blessings that
they loose, and the dangers that they run into thereby. They are as dim
sighted as Helie the Priest, who could not see the bright lamp of God burning
in the Temple.

Wherefore l^bor thou for the knowledge of God, and thou shall be most happy.
Then will thou with David desire to dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of thy life, and to visi^e his holy Temple. For in his house is the
fullness of joy, and at his right hand is abundance of pleasures for evermore.

In worldly affairs we have much knowledge. The knowledge of god (...) above
all.
We can judge well of the price of Pearls, of the differences of cloth, of
the virtue of simples, herbs and plants, and of earthly commodities: but of
matters of faith, of grounds of Religion, of the things belonging to the
kingdom of God, we are either altogether or very rudely ignorant. The eyes of
our minds are like to Mowles eyes, (...) similitude
who can see sufficiently to grouell in the earth: but above the earth they
are stark blind, and can see nothing. To deceive our brother, and to make
cunning bargains to oppress one another, to scrape together the muck of the
world, we are wise enough: but whilst we are thus wise we become fools, as the
m^ister of the Gentiles teaches us, (...)
whilst we pres^r^e ^^yre before pearls, earth before heaven, filthy swine
before Jesus Christ, (...) 8.
as the Gergesins did and neglect and despise our own salvation.

As the knowledge of God is all happiness, so the ignorance of him is all
unhappiness.

The Psalmist pointing out the palpable ignorance of god and his word which was
in his people, makes it the consequence of al confusion. They knew not (says
he) they did not understand, (...) 2
and what followed? All the foundations of the earth are out of course.

The Prophet Esaias speaking of the peoples captivity shows that their
ignorance was the cause thereof. My people was led into captivity, Esai. 5
because they had no knowledge.

Moses lamenting the pitiful estate of the distressed Jews, prays unto God
to give them knowledge, to indue them with a wise and understanding heart. Oh
(says he) that they were wise, Deuteronomy. 22
and would understand, and would consider their latter end.

What was the ruin and downfall of the Jews, and overthrow of the Temple but
their carelesnes in religion, their neglect of Gods service, their want of
knowledge? as Christ himself in direct words witnesses when he says: Luke.
19
They shall not leave a stone upon a stone, because thou knew not the time of
thy ^isitation. Aug. lib. 5 confess ca. 4
Infaelix homo qui scit omnia te autem nescit: beatus aute^ qu te scit etiamsi
illa nesciat: qui ^ero and te and illa nouit non pr^pter illa beatior, sed
^ropter te solum beatus est. Unhappy man is he, who knows all things, and
knows not thee: ^appy man that knows thee, though he know^th nothing else:
but he that knows thee, and all ^ings else, is not for them the happier, but
for thee ^nly is he blessed: says Saint Austine. A similitude
The knowledge of God is a bridle to our lusts, and the igno^^nce of God is a
cover to our sins. A similitude
The know^^dge of God is like unto a clock, whereby thou ^aiest know how thy
life is spent. A similitude.
It is like unto a ^ande which serves to beat the dust out of our clothing,
it beats out the pride and presumption of out sins.

Wherefore give thou diligence to know God, not barely, confusedly, and
ingrosse as do the Devils, who do believe and tremble: but particularly in
his attributes, and special properties, that do belong unto him Know his
goodness who loved thee, when thou louedst not him, who came from heaven to
save thee, who spilt his blood upon the earth to redeem thee, who rose again
to justify thee, who went up again to heaven to prepare a place for thee.
Know his power, that thou may fear him, and his mercy that thou may not
despair of him.

The knowledge of God is to be sought out of his word. Exodus 3 Matthew. 17
Would thou know God? see what thou ar^ to him, and what he is to thee, and
thou shall know him. Put off thy shoes as Moses did, do away thy carnal and
worldly lusts, and thou shall talk with him. When Christ would give a sight
to his disciples of his glory, he led them up aloft to the mount of Tabor. We
must ascend up on high with heavenly meditations, if we would attain to a
profound knowledge of him. If thou would known by what means thou should
get this knowledge, hear what Christ counsels thee. John 5
Search the scriptures for in them ye shall have eternal life. In his quasi
in quoda^ speculo homo seipsum considerare potest, Aug. de temp. ^om 10. de ^ia
sexta ^ost Domini^m passionis
qualis sit, vel quo tendat. Qui vult cu^ deo semper esse, frequenter debet
orare and legere: nam cu^ oramu^ ipsi cum deo loquimur, cum legimus deus nobis
cum loquitur. In the scriptures (says saint Augustine) as i^ were in a glass,
we may behold our selves what we are, and whither we tend. He that will be
always conversant with God, he often must pray, and must read often: for when
we pray we speak with God, and when we read God speaks with us.

Now for the better understanding of this word, The necessity of preaching the
word. Mal. 2
which traineth us up to this perfect knowledge, we must repair to the priests
lips, who do keep knowledge, for he is the messenger of the high God, and the
disposer of these secret mysteries. For we cannot of our selves understand
what we read without an interpreter, as the chamberlain of Queen Candace
flatly answered Philip. Acts. 8 Romans 10
To which his judgment saint Paul subscribeth his consent, saying. How can they
believe on him, of whom they have not heard? how can they hear without a
preacher? how can he preach unless he be sent? Must he be therefore sent? Oh
pray we the Lord of the harvest that he would send out more laborers into
his harvest. Matthew. 9 August. ^^
Homo enim sine doctore, est vt caecus sine ductore. A man without a preacher,
is as he that is blind without a leader, which can never find the way. Exodus
10
For our darkness is like the Egyptian darkness, gross, and palpable; so huge
and monstrous as for three days together, no man could see his brother, or
once move out of the place wherein he was before, we know not what we do, while
we open our ears to vain words, and shut them against the words of eternal
life. They that are of God (says our Savior Christ) will hear Gods word.
John. ^
And he concludes that such as are otherwise affected are not of God.

(...) similitude
When a man discourses of the gold of India, of such things which he saw, or
reads of in histories touching the same, such as have a purpose to travel
thither, will diligently harken to that which he shall report: but others who
never look to have doings there, care not what he says, nor will take no heed
thereto. So when as we preach to men, of God, of the kingdom of heaven, of the
treasures which God has laid up in store, for them that love him: such as have
a desire to go to heaven, to see God face to face, to be partaker of his
joys, will give ear to the preaching of his holy word: but such as have no
mind ever to come thither, account not at al of our labor, and ministry, and
make no conscience in hearing our preachings.

The estate of this people is exceeding dangerous, and the contempt of Gods
word is the next ^ore to damnation it self. The P^almograph touching the most
perilous estate and extremity of the Israelites, says that when their soul
abhorred all kind of meat, they were next unto deaths door. As the outward man
without outward meat perishes: so the inward man without his inward and
spiritual food decaieth. This is another meat then we are aware of, and the
want of this exceeds far the want of other meat.

Therefore God by the mouth of Amos threatening an intolerable and most
fearful famine, he says, he will not send a famine of bread, but a famine
of the word of God, the bread of eternal life.

This bread in virtue infinitely surmounteth all other kinds of bread, and
delicates whatsoever. What Nectar and Ambrosia may compare with this? Is there
any mortal meat that is so restoratiue, that it can reduce the dead to life
again? it cherishes and refreshes us whilst we are alive, but it avails
us nothing when we are dead. But the word of God nourishes our dead souls,
and raises them up from their dead works to serve the living God.

Ezechiel very plainly teaches so much by a lively demonstration of dry
bones, Ezech. 37
which the Prophet by the mighty power of the word, brought from death to life
again. There is no sinner so obdurate by a long continued habit, and custom
of sin, and has lien so long dead, as he stinketh with Lazarus in his
coffin and grave through the corruption of his sins: but he may be
mollified, changed and reclaimed, and finally revived, and raised up, and
restored to the church, as Lazarus to his friends by the heavenly voice of
Christ.

Let no man therefore proceed so far in extreme impiety, as in their great
danger of utter shipwreck in the sea of this world, to forsake this anchor hold
their only succor, and the horns of the Altar which they must lay hold upon.

Adam after his grievous and dangerous fall, had no small benefit by hearing of
the word. Genesis 3
I heard (says he) thy voice in the garden, for he was comforted with the
promise of salvation by our Savior Christ the seed of the woman that should
break the serpents head.

A similitude.
The civil magistrate first of all punishes a rogue, and sturdy vagabonde
with the whip: but the second time more grieuouslie by cutting off his ears:
but if he take him having lost his ears as a horrible offender in the highest
degree he puts him to death. So if thou will not amend with the Lords
stripes he will further grieve, and vex thee with Scorpions: and if as a
runnagate from his presence, he finds thee without ears to listen to his
words, he will prepare the instruments of death to grind thy hairy scalpe.

Prou. 7
Therefore dear Christian be in time warned, that thou may be well armed.
Call wisdom thy sister, and understanding thy kinswoman. Seek for heavenly
knowledge, as thou seek for earthly gold, and it shall be given thee. So
shall thou not swerve with the prodigal son, from thy fathers commandments,
but thy soul shall still dwell and inherit the land, thou shall be satisfied
with the ple^teousnesse of his house as out of a river.

Let us therefore open the eyes of our souls, that we may see our horrible
and abominable ignorance the hellish fiend and fury of our souls. Let us
pray with David and say. ^sal. 13
Open mine eyes O lord, that I sleep not in death, Give me understanding, and
I shall search thy law, yea I shall keep it with my whole heart. ^sal. 119
Endue us more and more with knowledge, that thy counsels may be dear unto us,
sweeter then the honey, ^sal. 119
or the honey comb. Then shall we enter into thy gates with praise, and into
thy courts with thanks. Our feet shall stand still in thy gates oh Jerusalem,
and we shall walk before thee, all the days of our life. Those four holy
beasts which Ezechiel did see, were full of eyes, Ezech. 8
because they were full of the knowledge of God, and what says the scripture?
They walked before his face. Lord give us eyes and we shall walk in all true
ways, and al false ways we shall utterly abhor. We shall walk before thy face,
and not take our vagaries with this wandering wight, after our wicked pleasures,
and this grace, the Lord give us for his holy names sake.

The fifth Chapter. Of self love, pride, and presumption, another cause of his
departure from his father.
IT appears by the proud petition of his portion, that he had a great
conceit, and opinion of himself, that he was enough able without his fathers
help if he were at his own hand to dispose of himself. And this his self love
was the beginning of his sin, the breeder of his bane, and the root from
whence all his flowing mischief sprung.

Pride and self love Pride and self love the cause all evil. A similit^
is the fountain of al vice, and the enemy of all virtue. Trees that are
planted in mountains and high places do soonest loose their leaves, and
beautiful blossoms, through the violence of the winds.

A man that looks down from a steep high A similit^
tower, has need of a stayed and well ordere^ brain, or else he may soon be
in danger of falling. In fishermens nets the fry, A similitude
and Menowes, and smaller fish run through, when as the greater ca^no^ pass^ the
net. The proud and great men and Princes of Jerusalem were taken prisoners,
and by Nabuchadnezzar led into Babylon, when the ba^^ and meaner people
generally were enlarged, and set at liberty. In the mountain of Ge^boa, Saul
and his armorbearer, and the proud princes of Israel fell upon the sword.
High minds exalted with pride unto heaven, shall be thrown down to Hell.

Other sinners do depart from God, for commodity or pleasure: but the vain
proud man without any of them both grows graceless, and past shame, and
willingly renounceth even God himself.

similitude
Wherefore slaie this Serpent in the egg, and tame this Jade which will
otherwise cast thee in thy journey to Jerusalem, whilst he is a Colt. Cut
down this evil weed as soon as he sprouteth out as it were in the first grass,
before it bladeth and grows higher.

(...) similitude
Self love is the captain which gives the onset, and makes all the parts of
the body and the mind to wait upon it; and is like the heart that is in the
body, which commands the flesh, the si^ewes, and the veins

He that lou^th himself more then God, is like a traitor in the highest
degree, (...) ^^ilitude
that deserves to loose both life and goods.

A man that stands upon his own will, A similitude
and resolves with himself, This will I do: is like a rude fellow brought
up at home, that prefers his base and beggarly house of claie, before the
stateliest Princes palace, that is builte of Marble.

There is nothing that hurts so much as the having of our wills; overthrow
this foundation, and the proud walls of Hietico, our worldly pleasures will come
tumbling down.

Two loves, do build two Cities: the one is the love of God which builds and
sets up the contempt of thy self; the other is the love of thy self, which
frames, and erecteth a contempt of God. Betwixt these two God, and thy self,
stands thy will: the nearer thou art unto thy self, ye further thou art from
God: and the nearer thou art to him, thou art further from thy self. Romans ^.
Therefore the Apostle saying before that nothing should separate him from the
love of God: it was no marvel that he said afterward, Our conversation is in
heaven. Phil. ^
He loved God much, and therefore he loved himself but little. Wherefore
subdue and kill thy self love if thou will have God to abide in thy soul. Mat.
^.
For Herod must be dead, before that Christ will return into Judea: the
tyrannous law of sin that rules in thy members must be truly mortified,
before thou can enjoy the presence of Gods spirit.

Wherefore Get thee out of thy country and from thy kindred and from thy
fathers house: Genesis 12.
as the Lord willed Abraham: and embrace this sweet counsel which the holy
spirit gives thee to the same effect saying: Hark o daughter, and consider,
incline thine ^are forget thine own kindred, Psalm. 46
and thy fathers house: so shall the king have pleasure in thy beauty, for he
is thy Lord God, and worship thou him.

If we have departed from our fathers house, the church of the living God, and
have forsaken God, to follow Ashtaroth, and have perverted the words of
Christ's prayer and have said: Not thy will, but our wills be done here
upon earth: If with this sinner we have preferred our own ungodly lusts,
before gods holy laws: if we return not with him in the end, our end will be
worser then his beginning was. Gal. 5.
For if we live after the flesh we shall die. Wherefore follow we not Saul who
favored Agag, 1. Sam. 15
and put him in prison, when he was commanded to put him to death. Let us not
keep our affections within us as close prisoners, seeing God has charged us
to mortify and destroy them.

Against the ^oliticians (...) these (...).
There be too many sensual and carnal spirits, who in these dreadful days of
security, wherein we now live, do lean too much to the broken reed of Egypt,
and do run unto the mountains of Samaria, relying wholly without respect of
religion, and care of conscience upon outward policy, carnal wisdom, and
humane reasons; doing what they will, and not what they should, loathing Manna
which they love not, and savoring only of the gross meat of Egypt which they
should not. If they proceed not so far because they dare not, as with Nabal
and David's fool to say, There is no God: but do confess him with their lips:
yet they do utterly deny him in their hearts, they are reprobate and
abominable, and to every good work unprofitable. But howsoever they flatter
themselves a while in their wicked thoughts, with their present prosperity,
thinking, as railing Rabsakah, that our God deceives us in whom we trust the
time shall come when they shall howl and mourn for the miserable adversity which
shall com upon the^: for they are but fatted to the day of destruction as
weathers and Capons, and other fowls are against a great feast, which is a
great day of slaughter.

The s xt Chapter. Of his hastines and rashness, not having a wise foresight,
and prospect to the end: another cause of his departure from his father.
MAn being in honor has no understanding, Psalm. 49.
but is compared unto the beasts that perish, says the kingly Prophet. This
harebrai^d young man by his rashness and foolishnes ran himself violently into
al unhappiness. He was Epimetheus, and not Prometheus, afterward wise, when his
former folly had taught him more wisdom. If there had been any wisdom or
discretion in his doings, he would have weighed the end with the beginning,
and would have as well thought upon the future dangers, as he did upon the
present pleasures of his sins. But his humor was so stirring, and he was so
rashly resolute, as he was fully bent upon his present delight, neither
fearing nor caring for any sorrow that might ensue, (...)
not unfitly resembling such foolish idle boys, who will venture a whipping
rather then they will loose one jot of their pastime with their ^am^so^^
companions.

That which a wise man does in the beginning, a ^^le does commonly in the
latter ending. It is the ^art of wisdom to forecast al things, but folly does
every thing without any regard.

(...)
When the woman that was taken in adultery by the Jews, was conuented by them
before our ^auiour Christ, and they appealed to his judgment for her due
punishment: he stooped down, and with his finger did write upon the ground,
before he would denounce any doom against her. Whereby he insinuates that
we should not rashly determine of a thing, but deliberatelie debate and demur
upon the case, and point at every circumstance which hangs thereupon, with
the finger of discretion.

Wisdom and foresight do prevent such evils, which usually do follow our
folly, and rashness.

(...)
When the Israelites came to Moses to be resolved, in any doubtful and perplexed
matters, Moses did take time to consider of an answer, and did leave them in
suspense, until he had conferred with the Lord about them, and was certified of
his mind. If we would do the like, and especially when we feel any motion
unto sin, as to a private revenge, to any ambition, covetousness, or
uncleanness, we would first ask counsel at the Lords mouth, and stay our
affections, until we hear his judgment and precepts concerning them: we
should curble our iniquities, and not commit such filthiness, with such
greedines as we do.

David was a wise man, and what is said of him? Psalm. 7
I considered (says he) my ways, and I turned my feet unto thy testimonies.
Number. 22
But truly Balaam was an Ass, and more foolish then his ass, for his ass
stood still at the Lords commandment, when the ass his master would have
pricked him forward against his express will.

Wherefore walk we circumspectly, as the Apostle advises us, doing nothing
rashly, Romans 1^
but first let us try what is the good will of God acceptable and perfect.

Joshua thorough hastiness, Iosue ^
giving credit to the forged suggestions of the Gibeonites, not asking counsel
of the Lord before, was beguiled by them. We shall deceive our selves, if we
trust our own affections, and be not wise, and considerate in our actions.

The Virgin Marie would not hastily make answer to the Angel, Luke. 1
greeting her from GOD with a joyful salutation, before she communed with her
soul about his words, and had pondered in her heart, what kind of salutation
the same should be.

If we are not rashly to believe every spirit, 1. John. 4
but by the rule, and Canon of the Apostle, we are first to try the spirits,
whether they be of God or no: we are plain y taught thereby to examine our
thoughts, and to deliberate upon our doings, before we do attempt them.

A similitude.
When a man falls from the top of an high Turret, it may be supposed, that
desperately he did cast himself headlong from the same: but it will not be so
thought, if he descends by degrees, by the staves of a ladder, and comes
down advisedly by equal steps and paces: thou can not do amiss, if thou
proceedest iudicially in thy actions, and by the orderly degrees of discretion,
do foresee, and discuss such events as may befall them. If thou be so
rashly wedded to thy will, as thou will not change it upon better advise; if
like to Rehoboam, thou refusest the judgment of the grauer sort, and inclinest
to the motions of the younger company, permitting thy self to be led by the
line of thy youthful affections: it will fall out ill with thee, as it did
with Rehoboam, and the damage shall be great which thou shall sustain
thereby. ^. K^^. 21.
For as Achab set upon a will to go to war, and obstinately withstanding
Micheas his good counsel, inhibiting this his purpose, fell in the battle,
being wounded unto the death: so must thou needs miscarrie, if thou be
obdurate against all persuasions, and franticklie followest thine own
inclinations, against all admonitions.

Wherefore if such motions arise in thy mind, as do entice thee to cast off
the yoke of thy heavenly father his discipline from thy neck, if with this
lascivious and wanton young man, thou be minded to forsake, and give over his
house, the church of the living God, and with Demas to embrace this present
evil world, ranging after the lusts of thy flesh, and of thy mind: take
example by him, and by his end consider of thy end, for if thou walk after
his pleasures, be assured with thy self that thou shall taste of his sorrows.

Consider therefore of the end without end, and thou shall live without end.
The pleasure is short that delights us here; and the torments are infinite
which shall torment us else where.

If Esau had respected and regarded the end, he had never made bill of sale of
his birthright to his brother for a mess of pottage, which he could not
redeem, and purchase again with a fountain of tears.

If Judas had well considered of the end he had never for a base bribe
betrayed the Lord of life, for the which villainy he could not make amends,
no not with his life.

What was the occasion of the subversion of Jerusalem, but their secure
neglect, Luke. 15
and forgetfulness of the end? they would not know their time as Christ
obiecteth to them of their visitation.

This was the bane of this bransicke boy, who desperately plunged himself into
perdition, having no foresight and forecast of the end. And this will be our
downfall, if our heedefull diligence in time does not prevent it. For we are so
tickled with the toys of this world, and we are more allured with our present
short pleasures, then with all the endless, and unspeakable ioies, which are
promised unto us in the kingdom of heaven.

The outward show and bravery of this world, does carry us with this prodigal
and lost child, from our fathers house. And the cause of it is this, because
we are delighted with this present beauty, and do not foresee his future
deformity. For the uncleanness of it (as Hieremie says of Jerusalem) is in her
feet.

D^^. 3
The world is like Nabuchadnezzar his image, whose head and foreparts were of
gold, but ye legs, and end of it was of clay. Worldly pleasures in the
beginning do shine like gold, but in the end they appear as they are, to be
nothing but earthly. They do blaze like a candle for a time, (...) similitude
but when like a Candle that is burnt unto the socket, they come near unto
their end, they are extinguished with a very noisome savor.

This world gives the best first, as the governor of the feast at the marriage
in Canaan, gave the best wine first. It is the nature of the world, to give a
good dinner, but a light supper: always the least comes at the last, and the
worst in the end.

Wherefore drink thou not of the worlds Circean and inchaunted cup. The whore
of Babylon, tempered her poison of fornication in a cup of gold, wherewith
she made drunken all the princes of the earth. Take thou heed thereof, for
howsoever it seems pleasant at the first taste, there is death in the pot,
bitterness is in the end, it leads thee directly unto hell. Buy not thou
therefore repentance so dear, when thou may purchase heaven at a cheaper
rate. For art thou so mad to desire hurtful things, and to run thy self
willingly into extreme danger, being admonished of it.

If whilst thou art in thy journey travailing by the way, one should meet
thee, A similitude
who should tell thee of thieves and robbers who do beset that way, whither
thou art going, would thou not turn back, or cross another way? I know
that thou would. This life of ours, is nothing but away, wherein we walk
for a certain time. It has been told us often, that many thieves do lie
in the middle way between this worldly Hieticho, and our heavenly
Jerusalem, who lurk in the theeuish corners of the streets to murder the
innocent, to rob us of our goods, even the good graces of God, and to take
away our lives: will we not therefore take heed hereof, and take no other
course.

Therefore as soon as any temptation does arise, consider in the beginning,
unto what danger it may lead thee in the end. Take it by the end, as Jacob
took Esau by the feet, and by the end.

Have God always before thine eyes, and thou can not do amiss, so says
David. Psa. 16
I did set God before mine eyes, therefore I can not fail: wherefore my heart
is glad, and my tongue rejoices, my flesh also does rest in hope.

The Mathematicians do esteem the circular figure, as the perfect figure,
because in a circle the beginning and the end do meet together; therefore
that we may be made perfect, let us in all actions, lay the beginning, and the
end together. And let God who is the Alpha and beginning: be Omega unto us,
and the ending likewise. And let us account all things but doung to gain Jesus
Christ: Phil. 3
so shall we abide always in our fathers house, and our trust shall be in the
tender mercy of God for ever and ever.

The seventh Chapter. What the prodigal son did when he had received his
portion from his father.
IF riches increase, set not your heart thereon, ^sal. 61
says the heavenly Psalmist. It is great riches not to covet riches, and he
possesses much who desires little. To be worldly rich is to be very poor:
to be poor in spirit is the greatest riches. That must needs be vain whose
end is vain, and we ought to have that in greatest detestation, which
hinders the course of our eternal salvation. And this riches do. For as the
Falcon that is full gorged, (...) ^militude
will not come to the lure: so will not we in our worldly prosperity seek
after God. For God is lost in prosperity, and found in adversity. ^^d is lost
^rosperi^^^ and ^^uersity.


The prodigal son, when he had got wealth at will, did shake off all
obedience, and compassed the world, travailed unto the uttermost coasts of the
earth, as far as there was ground, and as far as he could from his fathers
house.

He is carried far that rides upon the devil: for sin leads him, fury
and rebellion spurre^h him forward. Aug quaest. euang q^ast. 33.
Regio longinqua (says Augustine) fuit obliuio dei. The far country which he
sought, was his heart far from God, his utter forgetfulness of his fathers
service.

He went far from God by his sin and wickedness: For by godly obedience we draw
near to God, and by the contrary, he departed far from him.

He departed far from him. How we are said to go far from God.
First of all by an opposite and far differing disposition, God his Volo,
being his Nolo, his will being his nill, and so of the contrary: omitting that
which he should commit, and doing that which should be undone,
preposterouslie perverting and disordering Gods precepts, making them negative
which are affirmative, and affirmative which he has negatiuelie propounded.

Of this departure our Savior Christ speaks, Matthew. 15
using the self same phrase of speech in the same sense, taxing the hypocrisy
of the Scribes and Pharisees. This people draws near unto me with their
lips: but their hearts are very far from me. When as we see two sitting
and talking together, and the one varieth from the other in opinion: we use to
say that the one of them is far from the other. And in this respect may this
prodigal son, and every sinner be properly said to go far from God.

Secondly, he is said to have gone far: in regard of the great and many
sins he did commit, which the more they were, the further they did lead him.
For every sin being a manifest defection and departure from God: they may
be rightly said to depart lesser or further, the lesser or more sins they
do commit. A similitude
As he may be said to go further then an other, that takes more paces or
greater then another.

This mischief was in his far departure, that the further he went the lesser
reckoning he made of his father. There was now such a space by his far
travail between the object and the sense, between his eye, and his fathers
house, as his sight failed him, the only great God did now seem the least to
his carnal eyes. A similitude
For a thing which is great in his own nature, if we behold it sa^e off,
seems little unto us Our eye beams the further they are d^lated and
extended, the thinner they seem, and at the last they vanish quite away, and
are no more seen. The Sun which by the learned judgment of Astronomers, is
far greater then the earth, being so far distant, and removed from our
eyes, seems but of a foot or two bigness unto us.

Is not our case the same? Have not we all like lost sheep departed from the
Church, the sheepe-fold of the Lord, and from Jesus Christ the great shepherd
of our souls, who would, if we would have remained with him, safely brought
us into the green pastures, and would have led us to the waters of comfort?
Have not we all of us gone very far from him by wilful disobedience,
starting a side-like a broken bow? Have we not followed even our own lusts,
and made little reckoning of God, and his religion? It is too manifest that we
have. And what has been the occasion of all this? but only because we have
been glutted and forfeited with Gods goodness: God has too liberally dealt
us out our portions, and we have been too proud of our overmuch prosperity.
Ungodly men we are, Jude.
who have turned the grace of our God into wantonness, and have denied God the
only Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

As this was the iniquity and overthrow of Sodom, fullness of bread, and
idleness: so worldly felicity is our only infelicitie, the only Carbuncle
and destruction of our soul. A similitude
As the serpent will kill them with his poison, which culled him, and cherished
him with their heat: so worldly goods, which through the immoderat heat of our
minds we do gather together, will gnawe our consciences, and like a greedy
worm that never dies will ever be feeding upon our bodies, and our souls.

My elect people (says God) waxed fat: Deuteronomy. 32
and what then, they forsook God that made them, and regarded not the strong
God of their salvation. The Prophet Esaias takes up the self same complaint,
Esai. 5
saying: The Harp, the Timbrell, and the Pipe, are in their feasts: but they
respect not the work of the Lord, neither do they consider the operation of
his hands. If the people do but sit down to eat, and drink we hear by and
by that they rise up to play.

Exodus 32
Wherefore if thou have a mind to serve God, set not thy mind upon this
present evil world. Thou can not look up to heaven with one eye, We cannot
enjoy God and the wo^ld ^ogither.
and upon the earth with the other at one time. Dagon cannot stand before the
Ark of God: we cannot worship God and the Idol of this world. ^uke. 10
One thing is necessary, as Christ tells Martha.

A similitude
If thou grauest with one knife or sewest with one needle, thou shall rid and
dispatch a great deal more work, then thou should if thou wroughtest with
two together, for one of them will hinder an other: so much riches will hinder
thy religion, and the further thou go from the world the nearer thou come
unto God.

There be many Cities and towns corporate, which are endowed with customs and
privileges, differing from others: yet are they not so contrary, but one may
have the freedom of diverse of them at once: But Babylon and Jerusalem,
heaven and earth, God and Mammon, are at such mortal and deadly foade
together, as they may not be matched and combined together. We cannot be a free
Denison in heaven above, and be a bond servant to this wicked world beneath.
There can be no fellowship between righteousness and unrighteousness: Co^, 6
no society with light and darkness, no unity and agreement with God and
Beliall. We cannot be partakers of the table of the Lord, 1. Cor. 10
and of the table of Devils. We read in h^lie scriptures how the Samaritanes
would have confounded these extremities, and mangled Gods religion, 2. King. 17
and mingled therewithal their idolatrous superstitions.

Naaman the Syrian was such a kind of fellow: he was content to offer
incense, 2. King. 5
and sacrifice to God: but with it he would keep still the favor of his
Prince, and the credit of his place, he would repair between times with his
master into the house of Rimmon.

Nicodemus was willing to be a professor, John. 3
and to become Christ's disciple, but he would not come by day, but by stealth in
the night, for fear of the Jews of the loss of his authority, and good
estate in this world.

The gallaunt young Gentleman, Matthew. 19
that showed so much zeal of the Kingdom of heaven, as if he had meaned
presently to have gone thither, would not depart with his worldly
possessions for the purchase of that kingdom. He was of that mind, to have
heaven and the world, or to have no heaven at all. But this could not be,
Matthew. 6
for they are two imperious, and contrary masters, whom no man can serve
together at one time.

As the people of Israel never had Manna, Exodus 16
and the flesh pottes of Egypt at one time: so is it not permitted us to taste
at one time of the delights of heaven, and the pleasures of the world: for
the love of the one breeds the loathsomeness of the other,

As the stomach, if it be distempered with raw humors it cannot relish well
sauourie meat: A similitude
so our souls, o^^rburdened with worldly gross affections, we cannot ta^e of
heavenly consolations.

Exodus ^
When as Pharaoh gave commandment to the Hebrew people to offer sacrifice to
their god in Egypt. Mos^s made answer, that it could not so b^. Shall we
(says he) offer unto God the abominations of the Egyptians?

John 2
When Jesus entered into the Temple of Jerusalem, and chased out the profane
Merchants and copesmates from thence: he did by that example, not obscurely
teach us, that there is no room for such in the Church, whose godliness is
their gain, who trade themselves wholly to the affairs of this world.
Inasmuch therefore as this man's prosperity puffed him up with pride, and drew
his heart far from his due obedience to his gracious father: let us that
stand take heed least we fall: and greatly stand in fear, that when the
world favors us, the devil will most tempt us, and estrange our hearts
from the service of God.

Let us not therefore, f^^ the love of out earthly and worldly portion,
f^^s^ke our heavenly father who is a better portion H s house is little Zoar,
^^n. 19.
the city of refuge, unto which Lot fled, and was pres^^ted when Sodom was
destroyed. In his house are many dwellings, his house is made of gold, and his
gates of precious stones. If we abide there, we shall have riches at our
desire. For riches and plentiousnesse is in his house, and at his righ hand
are abundant pleasures for evermore.

When as Gorgias came in battle against Judas, 1. Mat. 4
and Judas made his solemn oration to the Jews that were in the camp, among
other things which he charged them he peremptorily commanded them, that they
should not be too greedy of the spoil of their enemies, but should stand to
it like men, and first fight manfully and overcome the enemy, and there would
be time afterward enough and enough, to divide the pray among them: so
forasmuch as our life is a warfare, Ephesians. 6
and we fight not only against flesh and blood, but against principalities,
against worldly powers, against spiritual wickedness which is in high places,
let us not too couetously seek worldly wealth. Let us first gird us with our
swords upon our thighs, and march against our enemies, the world, the flesh
and the devil: let us first kill them who seek to kill us and after the
victory and conquest is ours, we shall all of us in heaven with joy and
gladness divide the spoil among us.

The eight Chapter. Of the waste which the prodigal son made of his portion:
Under which how transitory worldly riches are, evidently is declared.
THe holy Prophet well perceiving the bias of the world, how fondly it is
fixed upon imaginary pleasures, and momentanie delights, thus gravely and
vehemently reprooueth their foolishnes: O ye sons of men, ^sal. 4
how long will ye blaspheme mine honor, and have such pleasure in vanity, and
seek after leasing? He accounts worldly pleasures but vanity and leasing,
because they promise us joy and do give us sorrow, they promise us continuance,
and dissemble like hypocrites, and suddenly do forsake us.

This is plainly seen in the history of this man: for be rufled not long in
his iollitie and excess: but he suddenly did sink, and from a great flood
came to a low ebb, his part was soon played, and like to a game-player he
departed from the stage to put off his vesture. For the text shows how not
long after as he parted from his father, so he departed from his fathers
substance.

In him is fulfilled the saying of the Psalmist, Psalm. 37
I my self have seen the ungodly in great power, and flourishing like a
green Bay tree, and I went by, and hoe he was gone: I sought him, but his
place could no where be found. The regard therefore of this so mutable and
transitory a condition of this present world, is argument enough, if there
were no other reason, to weane our souls from the love thereof, to the only
love of God.

A similitude
The world does serve us as the hangman does the thief, who as soon as he
has mounted him to the top of the Gibbet, he throws him down violently,
and so dispatcheth him.

A similitude.
A man knows not his end, but even as a fish is taken with the hook, and as
the bird is snared by the not, and their destruction comes of a sudden: so
suddenly we do perish, and come to a fearful end, even as a dream when a
man awaketh, and even as flowers that scone do fade, and do loose their
virtue. The spider of the dry slime that comes from his body, weaueth a
web with exceeding much labor, to catch a fly, and a little puff of wind,
or a huswiues broom sweepeth down all, and all that labor perishes so we
with daily tormenting our bodies, and vexing our spirits, do weaue us nets
to entangle men, and to bring in riches, which when we have obtained, we
need not much to boast, for we have gotten but a fly, an Egyptian fly, that
is always buzzing about us, and molesting us; and that which is woorst of all,
we can not keep our wealth when we have gotten it, but a little puff of wind
going out of our bodies, we return again unto our dust, and all our thoughts
perish.

It is said of Hanniball, that he knew well enough how to get a victory, but
he know not how to keep it. We know infinite devices and fetches to
attain to riches, but we know no way how to keep them long when we have
attained to them.

Death serves us as traitors. A similitud
For he not only depriueth us of our lives, but despoyleth us of our goods.
Dan. 4
Whilst Nabuchadnezzar was stalking in his gallery, and vaunting himself of
the bravery of his court, and statelines of his Palace, saying, Is not this
great Babell which I have built? suddenly his kingdom was taken from him, and
was expulsed the company and society of men, and driven among beasts.

Dan. 5
Whilst Baltasar was quaffing out of his maine Bowls, and surfeiting himself
with his sinful pleasures: immediately he descried a handwriting upon the
wall, which was the definitive doom of his destruction.

Luke 52
The Epicure in the Gospel, whilst he talked to himself of his store of
come, which he had hoorded and heaped in his Graineryes, as a store for many
years, flattered himself in a foolish supposall of continuance to expende
them, but his hope deceived him, and be not only was pronounced a fool, but
the event proved him one, for his soul even that night was taken from him,
his treasures, and his pleasures could not abide with him.

The whore of Babylon was exceeding drunken with her worldly prosperity:
^euel. 18
but like unto strong drink, it made her so giddie, as she not only
stumbled, but came tumbling down therewith.

(...) similitude
Whilst many waghalters, and ungracious boys ^reake unto an orchard, and
gather much fruit, and do lade their powches and sloppes wirh them: suddenly
comes the Gardener and takes away all which they had couetously lurched, and
dry basteth the^, and so dismisseth the^ with their just reward. Whilst this
ungracious yonker had gathered together his riches and his portion, there were
diverse scouts and gardiners that took him napping, and wrought a speedy wrack,
and consumption of his substance.

The Israelites vexed and turmoiled their bodies in gathering of stubble, Exodus
5
and when they came home laden with their grievous burdens they were lode^ with
stripes, until they roated out for very anguish of heart. This tyrannous
world, like another Pharao puts us to our task, and enioyn this daily to
seek to bring home the stubble of this earth, which when we have done, we are
chu^lishly entreated, and despitefully punished; for we get our wealth in tract
of time, and ^^^fe it in a moment.

Man walks (says David in a vain shadow, Psalm. 49
and d^s^^^eteth himself in vain he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who
shall gather them. It has been an ancient, and it is a true proverb: Fortuna
vitrea est, quae cum splendet frangitur. Fortune is a brickle and weak
vessel, a glass that often when it shyneth, breaks. If thou will gather up
thy wits, and wilt not be blind with thine eyes open, thou shall find such
inconstancy in the whole course of the world, as thou shall have small cause to
put affiance in it. A similitude.
It casts down one to exalt an other it impouerisheth one to enrich an other:
and herein it is not unlike unto an houre-glasse, which emptieth one part to
fill an other, when one is full it is turned up, and the other that is empty is
turned down.

We often see how that a glaring, A similitude
and bright shi^ing morning, breeds a gloomie and rainie day. The Sun
shines clearly early in the morning, and of a sudden it is condensed and
obscured with clouds and foggie air. This expressly shadoweth (...) world, in
the which there is no certainty o^ stay.

If we have friends to day, we have none to morrow: for times do change, and
men change with the times. Matthew. 21
Christ, who at one time was welco^med in the way with green bows: at an
other time was openly whipped with dry rods. Matt. 2^ Mat. 11
At one time to honor him, they strowed the floor with garments: Mat. 17
at another time to shame him, they stripped him of his garments. One time they
cry Hosanna, Matthew. 2^ Mat. 27
and do call him blessed: an other time contrary wise they yell and howl,
saying: Crucify him, crucify him.

A similitude
There is no wise man who will build upon a ground which is not firm, where
the winds that blow, and the rain which fall may beat upon that house, and
the fall of at will be great: but he will build upon a sure foundation which
shall not stir for the rage of any tempest. Let God be our Book upon whom
we build, Psalm. 325
and then (as David says) we shall be like unto mount Sion, which cannot
be removed, but stands fast for ever. Let us not build upon uncertain
riches, for they are like unto the broken staff of Egypt, upon which who so
leans, it falls a pieces.

A similitude
How ^^^sitorie and brief our worldly joys are (...) be more plainly and
evidently showed, then ^y the ^aite by which the fish is caught, and by the
snares by which the bird is suddenly deceived. The fish when he sees a
Worm in the water, skuddeth unto it, swalloweth it up greedily? But this
bait is her bane: for the hook the instrument of present death is covered
with it, and her joy wounds her. The bird flies hastily to kurnels of corn
scattered in the way, and she is fettered with lime-twigges, or entangled with
a net, which was spread in the way for her.

The wise man says thus: I said of laughter, Eccles. 2
thou art mad: and of joy, what is that thou do? Labor thou not therefore
for the meat that perishes, John. 6
but for the meat which endures unto everlasting life. Heb. 11
And covet thou with Moses rather to suffer adversity with the people of god,
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. We are born weeping, and we
shall die sorrowing, and would we live rejoicing?

More sorrow then joy does that father taste of, A similitude
who in one and the self same day, sees his son both to be borne, and
buried, and to have no continuance. The prodigal son spilt his goods like
water that runs apace, it melted like wax before the heat of the fire, it
was no sooner gathered, but it was scattered, what joy then could he have
therein? when as comfort lasted but the twinkling of an eye, but sorows endured
for a long season. Wherefore for as much as this is our condition, we are soon
deprived of the grace of God, our portion in this world lasts not with us:
The mirth of tabrets rests, Esai. 24
the noyce of them that rejoice ends, the joy of the harp cease. 1. Cor. 9
Let us use this world as though we used it not, using worldly substance as
we use oars to row with, A similitude
which we use to lay aside when we come to land, and as stanes in our hands,
whilst we travail by the way, laying them away at our iourneyes end.

The ninth Chapter. Of the manner how the prodigal son lauished out his
portion: under which the damnable effects of whordom, and riotous living are
displaied.
THis ding thrift not only spent, but misspent his portion, he devoured it with
whores, as it is in the clause, and riotously concocted it, as it is inserted
in the beginning of the history.

It had been well with him, if he had sustained but a temporal loss, and
had not lost God as well as his gold: But running over the shoes, he rested
not till he was over the ears. Being once impudent, he grew past grace, being
fallen into Ch^ribdes, he desperately plunged himself into Scylla, the
merciles gulf of perdition and destruction.

Oh how is it to be wished and fervently prayed for, that worldlings, who go
spoiled of their riches to the grave, might not go spoiled of all virtue into
hell?

He is taxed principally for two gross sins, Whoredom and Riot: the very
froath and foam of all sin.

He lived riotously, and the story shows how, even by lashing it on, upon
harlots, and knaves, and inordinate companions. And such mates, such kind of
men always do cull out: For like will to like, as it is in the old proverb.
Such as are wantonly cockered from their cradles and are suffered to lived
^sely without awe or government, as they grow in years, so will they grow in
wantonness, they will be then conso ted with none but wanton companions.

In that the story says that he liu^d in ryotousnes, Ryotousnes and Whordom ye
cause of all sin.
it is as much as if it had sa^^ that he lived in all wickedness. For what
wicked^es does ryotousnesse omit, or what mischief does it not ^ommit? It
mispendeth all the gifts and graces of God in must fearful manner: there is no
grace of God to be found in such, who wallowe in the mire and puddle of this
sin.

The Dove, going out of the Arc of Noah, Genes. 8.
finding no place for the sole of her foot, but unclean carcasses, would not
rest there, Math. 3
but returned to the Arc: so the holy spirit of God, who descended like a
Dove, willing to remain and dwell in our hurts, if he finds them polluted
with this carrion, which is all abomination, it will s^e away from us, and not
abide with us. As the nature of Dones is to delight in clean houses: so the
nature of Gods spirit is to delight in clean souls.

Aspicis vt veniant, ad candida tecta, columb^e: Ouidius.

Accipiet nullas sordida turris, aues.
This fire of the flesh is the fire of hell; Note the saying.
our ryotous diet, gluttony and drunkenness, are the coals that kindle it: the
flame thereof is filthiness: the ashes uncleanness: the smoke infamy: the end of
it a torment to the soul, a destruction to the body, a shortning of our life,
the corruption of good manners, and an absolute transgression of the whole law
of God. Let one fire therefore put out another: for the greater fire does
overcome the lesser. Overcome this lesser fire which burns in thy body, by
setting before thine eyes the greater fire of hell, which utterly shall burn
thy body and thy soul. He that keeps not himself from this fire in earth:
shall be sure to burn in the other fire in Hell, for the Apostle has flat^e
concluded it, That they that do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of
God.

The grieuousnesse of this sin may be judged of sufficiently by the
grieuousnes of the punishment The grievous punishment of whoredom. Aug. lib. 2.
^ont. Dona^stas.
which God at al times has inflicted upon it Hereupon says saint Augustine
Quis dubitauerit hoc esse sceleratius commissum, quod est grauius vindicatu^.
Who does doubt, that that is hainously committed which is of the Lord so
severely punished.

^^n. 7 ^^n. 1^
For Riot and Whoredom, the Lord overwhelmed the first world with water: and
Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities round about, he burnt up with fire: ^^n. 38
^^n 3^
He did smite Onah with sudden death: he wasted and destroyed the city of the
Sichemites, and almost utterly extinguished and raced out the whole tribe of
Benjamin. ^^g. 20. ^^m. ^3 ^in. 11. ^^g. 16. (...). 13
This brought Ammon untimely to his death, Solomon to idolatry, Samson to his
blindness, the adversaries of Susanna to their just destruction, 2. Sam. 12
Number. 25
and David Gods servant unto manifold afflictions. This caused a miserable
massacre among the Israelites, for by reason of this sin, three and twenty
thousand souls were murdered without mercy, and did fall in one day.

Nay further, what may we think of this sin which has been thus punished,
when as diverse others very grievous sins, have escaped unpunished?

How many sins ungraciously committed in Christ's sacred society, by his
domestical disciples did he mercifully remit? and do we read how Riot or
Whoredom has been tolerated in any of them?

Incredulity is a foul fault, Job 20
yet Thomas Didymus was stained with this blot, and all the disciples were
tainted with this, Mark. 16
whom Christ does vpbraide because of their unbelief.

Ambition, and Pride is a venomous Viper, and does more mischief then any man
can divine: Yet the two brethren James and John swelled therewith, Matthew. 20
and the other t^nne were not a little blown, and puffed up with disdain.
Finally at the Passover and last supper what a broile, Luke. 22
and bitter brawle did breed among them about the primacie, whilst each of
them did strive for preferment above others, and communed contentiously which
should be the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?

Malice, Luke. ^
and sugared desire of revenge is a maine mischief: yet two of the Apostles
were fiercely set upon it, and much misled with it, when in their implacable
and inexorable stomachs, they called for a judgment against the Samaritanes,
and would have made Christ the pattern of their peeuishnes, desiring his
authority to command fire from heaven to burn up his adversaries.

Entry is a fret^ing and furious evil: yet one of Christ his household was
diseased therewith. For John did envy it, and seem it very much, that a man
that was not one of their company should have the liberty to use Christ's
comm^ssion, and to practice in his name. Master (says he to our Savior
Christ) we saw one casting out devils in thy name, ^^ke, 5
and we forba^ him because h^ follows thee not with us.

Wha^ shall I say of covetousness the root of ^ll evil, with which his
houshoulde disciple Iud^ was mightily bewi^ched: (...)
For he was a thief, (...) carried the bag.

Last of al, apostasy and defection from the fa^^^^, and the open abiuration
of a known truth, is a sin exceeding dangerous: yet Peter f^ll into it, and at
the voice of a damsel exceedingly raned, and with bitter cursing, perjury,
and banning did deny his master.

Thus have we laid open the nakedness of the disciples and blown open their
skirtes, and have noted such defectes which the scriptures give unto them,
which are odious and horrible: yet find we none branded with this note of
ryotousnesse, or dodded in the face with the black coal of uncleanness.
Revel. 21
For no unclean thing shall enter (says saint John) into the kingdom of
heaven.

The nature of this sin differs from al sins: The difference of whordom
from other sins.
for other sins only do ^^ght against the soul, but this s^^ne sighteth
against the whole man, the body and the soul, it admits no boys play, to
bar any (...).

S^^h as are given and devoted to this sin, are b^^^sh and beastly, Psalm. 30
they are like as David sa^^^ (...) the Horse and Mule without vnderstand^ng.

(...) thine eyes therefore from beholding this (...) it is unlawful for thee
to see, that which is unlawful for thee to desire. Hier 9
Death enters (says (Hieremy) by the windows of thine eyes, the eyes do
shoot the arrow that does wound thy heart.

Withstand thou therefore this temptation and avoid it: let it not scale the
walls, and fortress of thy heart: for then will it reign in thy mortal
body. Extinguish and put out this fire of concupiscence with a fountain of
tears. There are few, who are not in vouch or in age enticed to this sin.
Be advised therefore by the wisdom of Solomon, who prescribes this counsel
in elegant wise. Say unto wisdom, thou art my sister, Prou. 7
and call understanding thy kinswoman* that they may keep thee from the
strange woman even from the stranger that is smooth in her words. Verse. 25.
Let not thine heart decline to h r paths, wander thou not in her wa^e^. For
she has caused many to fall down wounded, and the strong men are al slain by
her: her house is the way unto the grave, which goes down to the chambers of
death.

Now this temptation must be subdued, by eschewing and avoiding it. We are not
to wrestle against this sin, but to avoid it.
Other sins are vanquished, as it were with force of arms by fighting
against them: but there is no wrestling, and striving against this enemy, but
we must turn our backs, and run away from him. Come not near pitch least
thou be defiled with it: this sin will defile thee, if thou come any
thing near it. A similitude
It is no credit for thee, neither is it meet to wrestle and gripple in the
field with him, who has wallowed in the mire, and is all be smeared and dawbed
with dirte, for thou can not choose but be berayed by his filth, howsoever
otherwise thou should cast him to the ground. What king will not choose to
go to war abroad against the face of the enemy, A similitude
when he knows he has false hearted subjects at home? we nourish sins as
traitors in our own bosoms, and we carry them about us. The skirmish
therefore and conflict will be dangerous if we fight at home, let us
therefore go abroad from our inward affections, and then the victory and
conquest may be ours.

Judge. 4
Trust thou not in any case the wife of Heber, for she will beguile thee: she
will offer thee cream out of a Lordly dish: but like a tyrant, with a hammer
she will nail thee to the ground. Thou have many flatterers attending upon
thee, who like Achabs courtiers will daungerously deceive thee. If thou do
trust unto such false prophets thou shall with the Prophet sent to Jeroboam be
eaten of a lion and be devoured whilst there is none to help thee. 1. King. 22
1. King. 13
Run away therefore with a swift foot from this sin, which is like a Crocodile,
who will destroy thee if he sees thee first.

The tenth Chapter. The danger that comes by evil company, expressed by the
danger that the prodigal Son fell into.
WHereas the spirit speaks evidently, that ryotousnesse was the ruin and
downfall of this man: and that his ryotousnes consisted in the vain and bad
company with whom he did converse; with whom and among whom he devoured his
substance, and consumed his inheritance: not only a fit, but a necessary
exhortation from hence does arise, to avoid such companions, by whom we may
fall into the like calamity.

He is an unwise man who seeing his neighbors house on fire before his eyes,
A similitud
will not in due time take heed unto his own. Other men's dangers are fair
warnings unto us, and do plainly teach us, if we will incur no such
judgments, to preuente such occasions as usually do enforce them.

As the company of vilde persons did work this man's woe: so will they be like
wise our bane and co^^^^on, if we follow them in their counsels.

They are worser then thieves; Evil company worser then thieues
for they do but touch those things that are temporal, they rob thee but of thy
purse, or at the extremity do deprive thee of this life: but these do bereave
thee of graces spiritual, they corrupt thy manners, and not only with not
shorten thy mortal life, More infectious then the plague.
but with many prouocations and allurements unto sin do deprive thee utterly
of thy eternal life both in body and in soul.

Ungracious companions do infect more perniciouslie and contagiouslie then the
plague. For as a little spark kindles a great fire; a little leaven sowreth
much dowe: so set thou an ungodly man in the midst of us, and let Satan stand
at his right hand, he will kindle a fire which will not soon be extinguished,
he will quickly draw on copesmates and disciples after him.

If thou would know the inclination of a man, and how he is disposed,
mark but the company whom commonly he keeps. Every creature in his kind
seeks after such mates as are like unto themselves.

Therefore the Lacedaemonians very wisely enquiring after the manners and
behavior of their children, demanded with what plaifellowes, and companions
they were linked, not doubting but they would be like unto such, whose fellowship
they to fancied.

The regard of this animated Elihu to find fault with Job, Job. 34
for that he walked with wicked men.

And this was turned to Christ his reproach, Mat. 9
and ministered matter of much murmr to his adversary, the Scribes and
Pharasies in that he was familiarlie in commons and company with Publicans and
sinners.

Yea this took such impression, and deep root in the ^^art of Simon the
Pharisie, Luke 7
as he doubted of his ^asting, and could hardly be persuaded to think that
man good, who kept with company that were so bad. If this man were a Prophet
(says Simon to himself) he ^ould surely have known, who and what manner of
woman this was, which touches him, for she is a sinner.

And truly this is a dangerous clench and temptation, for it is almost as
difficult to be godly among the wicked as to swim against a raging stream.
Genes. 19.
There be few who live as Lot did among the swinish Sodomites, yet his
righteous soul was vexed with the conversation of the wicked, and he was in
such danger to be destroyed with them, as God sent his Angel to draw him by
the arms, to hale, and dragge him from this City from amongst the^. We cannot
walk so purelie as Christ did among the impure Publicanes, and therefore his
example is no protection unto us: unless we had his piety, let us not assume
unto our selves his liberty. If thou can be holy among unholy people, Non
equidem inuideo, miror magis, I envy it not, but I marvel the more at it.
The doctor of the Gentiles mightily magnified, and extolled the Philippians
because in the midst of a crooked generation they walked upright, ^hil. 2
and shined like bright lights, (...). 2
and burning torches in this world. The Church the spouse of Christ is greatly
graced and commended by her bridegroom in the mystical song of Solomon:
because being a Lilly it thriueth among thorns. It is exceeding hurtful for a
tender and soft Lilly, to spring up and prosper among hard sharp thorns,
wicked men are very pricking thorns unto godly consciences, and their vilde
deeds cannot but wound the simple to the heart. It is hard to live among them,
and to receive no hurt from them.

The detriment and damage which naughtipacks do us, is so much every way, as
if we love our souls we must have no doings with them.

For this cause God his precept in this case is so peremptory in the person of
his people, to us his people, so often given unto us, in the holy scriptures.

(...). 6
The sons of God in contracting themselves with the daughters of men, so
powered out sin as water, as the earth was so stained, and defiled with it, as
for to cleanse it and wash away that filth, the Lord thought it needful to
ouerwhelme it with his flood.

King. 13
The true Prophet who was sent from God into Samaria, fell in company by the way
with a false Prophet, and he was slain for it, the Lord caused a Lion to
devour him up.

King 1^
Iehosaphat King of Israel was a very good king: yet his league and
fellowship with wicked Achab, put him in great danger, and ieopardie of his
life.

The Jews a royal Priesthood and peculiar people, Isai. ^
in combining and commixing themselves with the Gentiles, learned their
manners, and were corrupted with their customs: and thereby as Esaias the
Prophet vpbraideth them, Their silver became dross, their wine was mixed with
water, their Princes were rebellious, and companions of thieues. The similitude
A similitude
which the Prophet borrows from the wine, expresses lively the hurtful
operation of bad men, in the society of the good. For even as wine mingled
with water, loses his heat: so godly men matched with the ungodly, loose
their former zeal, and heat of Gods spirit, and do grow keie cold, or
neither hot nor cold, but utterly unwholesome, and to be spued out. And as wine
delayed, if it loses not all his virtue, yet loses it his orient and fresh
color so if we loose not out goodness by evil company, yet shall we loose
thereby the good name, and opinion before conceived of us: for vices being
drawn from sooner examples and imitated then virtues, vices like ill weeds
growing up naturally of their own accord: we must be circumspect and take heed
of such, who will hale us on violently by their companies to their customs,
and draw us to their detestable, and damnable ways.

When as a sottish fellow, Va^^^ Ma^^^ 7
soothed himself greatly in his custom of conuersing with ungracious
company, and said with shame and impudency though, that (...) rather would
be in company w^^^ light ^om^^ then ^n fellowship with Philosophers Pythaguras
gravely and sharply thus answered him, that swine take more pleasure to be
^^^bed with dirte, then to be washed with pure water.

One infected and contagious sheep will (...) miserable murreme and rotte
upon the w^^^^ flock beside. (...)
With the holy thou shall be (...) (^^^th holy David) but with the f^owa^^e
m^n thou shall learn frowardness. If thou bee^^ bad h^^^ fellowship with the
good and it shall do thee good. F^^he is the best schoolmaster to teach thee
goodness.

(...)
When Saul was among the Prophets, he did (...) prophecy, and he became a
Prophet with them.

(...)
Saint Peter in the company of good disciples, (...) a good confession: but
being with the wic^^^ (...) ^^iestes hall, (...)
he badlie and madly (...) confession. He was as cold in tongue, (...) was then
at a fire of coals, to confess Christ being with the wicked: (...)
as he was hot in (...) before in presence of the godly, to defend his master.

Take thou liking of godly men, and make much (...) and delight thou in their
company, and (...) whether god will not give it a blessing* other ^^ghty men
have fared well for the good sake: hope thou of the like, and I nothing doubt
but that thou shall find the like.

Consider how Laban his estate was bettered, and how be thriued in the world,
whilst he gave entertainment to Jacob in his house, and had him at his
boorde. Did not Laban see it? and did not Jacob plainly late it down unto
him; and show him wherein, saying thus unto him: The little that thou had
before I came is increased into a multitude, Genesis 3^
and the Lord has blessed thee by my coming?

There was corn enough in Egypt: Genesis 3^
Pharao and his nobles had enough, when a horrible famine ^exed all the
countries that were round about: And this God did for good Joseph his sake,
that did dwell among them.

The Lord for good king Iehosaphat his sake, 2 King. 3
sent a gracious rain by his servant Elisha upon the annies aliantes, and
hoastes of wicked people.

D^d^mus that was doubtful in his absence from his good company, in the
presence of his fellows, John. 2^
was afterward very faithful.

On the day of Penticost, when good men were assembled, and were all with one
accord in one place, Act ^^.3.
behold God his good spirit came upon them all, and filled the house and their
hearts with comfort. Thy heart and soul dear Christian, shall receive great
heavenly comfort, by thy company which thou keep with heavenly men.
Wherefore be as careful to make as good choice of thy company with whom thou will live, as thou use to do of the country, and ground wherei^ thou do
live. A similitude
If the children of this wise be so wise in their generation, as they would
fix their worldly houses, and seat themselves in the wholsommest air, and
in the fruitfullest soyl^ so near as they can: be we as wise for to
provide for our souls; the case standing us the more upon, by how much the
soul is better then the body, and the life to come is to be preferred above
this which is present, and let us sea^ our selves among wholesome company, and
godly people.

A similitude
If for thy bodily health thou eschewest such places as are infected with the
plague: for the health of thy soul depart from such houses, as are infected
and plagued with the plague of sin the greatest plague of al. Say thou
therefore with god^^ David, Psalm. 10^
I will keep no company with vain persons, and will have no fellowship with
the ungodly: such a^ tell lies shall not tarry in my house, and a wild person
shall not abide in my sight.

The eleventh Chapter. Of the Dearth and want, which the Prodigal^ son
endured when he went from his Father into a far country wherein we are taught
wh^^ hurt we do our selves by departing from God, to embrace this present world,
IT is a most fearful and horrible thing, to depart from the living God. For
as in his presence is the fulness of joy, and as at his right hand there is
abundance of pleasures for evermore: so where he is not, there can be no
comfort, but the earth is full of darkness and cruel habitation, destruction
and calamity is in our ways, and all the foundatio^s of the earth are out of
course.

Take heed therefore as the Apostle exhorts you, that there be not in any of
you an evil heart, to depart from the living GGD. For one day in his courts is
bettet then a thousand with the ungodly: It is better to be a door keeper in
the house of our God, then to dwell in the tents of the ungodly: for salvation
belongs unto the Lord, and his blessing is upon his people.

If we flee as Jonas, from the God of mercy, Jonas. 1
we shall light as Jonas, upon the God of judgment. As the further a man goes
from the East, A similitude
thereby the nearer he comes to the West: so the further we run from his
goodness, the nearer thereby we run into his vengeance.

The prodigal son, that was wanton and lusty before thorough superfluity, is
now as much humbled and pinched with penury. He came from Gods blessing (as
the plain saying is) into the warm sun: he made a wise change when from
all felicity, he did cast down himself into all extremity, and not only
lauished out his goods unthriftily, but fell into al beggary and necessity most
miserable: and who so fond to pity him, for he reaped worthily the fruit his
folly sowed, and did ^ate the labor of his own hands. Qui cecidit a verbo
deie sur^it, Amb^^^an Lu^. ^5
quia non (...) solo pa^e (...) h^mo, sed in omni verbo dei. Qui recedit a
^on^e ^^it^ qui recedit a the sauro^get: qu^ recedit a sap^^ntia hebetatur^ qui
recedit a virtute dissolu^tur. (...) st^^or^ c^^pit qui thesauros sapientiae
and (...). He that f^l from Gods word grew hungry; because a man lives not by
bread only, but by every word of God. He that forsakes the fountain must
thirst: he that departs from a creasure must want, he that declineth from
wisdom must be foolish: he yt leaves virtue must come to confusion. Therefore
be worthily suffered this want, because he despised the treasures of the
wisdom and knowledge of God.

I appeal unto the judgment of any that is reasonable, (...) similitude
whether he does not worthily perish with thirst, who when as a clear river
runs by his doo^e, not only refuses to draw water from thence ^o ^lacke his
desire, but wilfully runs amain from thence as far as his legs are able to
carry him? This young man enjoyed a lively spring of all ^o^e celestial,
from whence he might have drawn with liberty enough the water of salvation:
but forasmuch as wilfully and obstinately he refused (...), he justly did
fall into this dreadful condemnation.

(...)
The scope therefore that we drive at, and the use that we make of this present
example is this: that to enjoy God is to live in all plenty, and to depart
from him is to fall into all poverty. ^n al plenty^ and to depart from him, is
to ^all into all poverty. A similitude


There is no country village, he it never so mean, and in so great poverty,
but if the king and prince of the people repaireth thither, and kee^^^ Court
there, during that time it abounds with all things, in all respects
necessary: but as soon as the Court breaks up again and the king remoou^th
to another place, it becomes soon as beggarly as it was before: so let any
of us be never so poor and b^se, yet so long as God our heavenly king shall
keep his court in the village of our souls, we shall be satisfied with the
plente^usnes of all things, and we shall abundantly d^^nke of his plea^ures,
as out of a river: but when he remooueth again from us (as he does when we
remove from him and seek strange countries, and commit strange sins) then
are our souls like the drought in Summe^, we are poor and in all misery,
we become the ofsc^mm^ and excrements of the people.

When the Sun which quickens and ^^^eth all things, does depart from any
Country, (...) ^^militud^
the earth forthwith becomes cold and barren, therefore the Winter when the
Sun is most from us, is the deadest time and season of the year: so when God
the Sun of righteousness who by the beams of his grace refreshes us all,
and quickens us a new, being before dead unto sin, departs from our
souls, out hearts grow cold, and we are altogether dead unto every good
work.

As long as our feet stand in thy gates, O Jerusalem, we are well enough. For
who so dwells under the defense of the most high, shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty. But herein is present danger to depart from him, and
forsake his commandments.

A similitude.
The young Chickens so long as they are under the Hen, and are covered with
her wings, are out of ieopardie: but if they straggle and wander abroad, they
are snatched up by the Vulture, and ravenous Kite: so we are sure under God
his protection, for he shall defend us under his wings, and we shall be
safe under his feathers: his faithfulness and truth shall be our shield and
buckler: but if we flitch from him, and take our vagaries after our own
desires, we shall fall forthwith into the pawe of the Lion, and the mouth of
the Bear, and expose our selves as a pray unto the devil.

similitude
If a man's son sickeneth in his fathers house, or be in any want, the father
easily recouereth his health, and supplieth his necessities: but if he
sickeneth, or falls into need in a far Country far distant from his
father, his father by no means can restore or benefit him. If thou be
never so sick in soul, or otherwise distressed, if thou be in Gods house,
and a member of his Church, he will give thee medicine to heal thy
sickness, and he will deliver thee out of al thy troubles but if thou cuttest
off thy self from the society of his house, and fellowshippe of his sa^^es,
and rangest far after the carnal lusts of the flesh, and of the mind,
there is no health or salvation for thee: thou must first return from whence
thou piddest depart, else thou can not in any wise be cured.

If God be thy shepherd thou can want nothing: Psalm. 22
for David sets down that for a (...) conclusion. But what Prince or
Potentate, o^ son of man can say so of himself, that he is in that case
that he wants nothing? The harlot in the Revelation presumed so much, Revel. 3
and made her proud bragges, that she was rich and wanted nothing, but she
lied lewdlie, not knowing that she was naked, poor, and miserable. Only
Christ his poor and tender sheep may truly say, so much. For he has brought
us into green pastures, he has led us to the waters of comfort, he will
conduct us to the paths of righteousness for his names sake.

Albeit we have riches at our desire in this world, and leave the rest of our
substance to our babes, yet is that riches without Gods good grace (the only
true riches) very fearful poverty. Psa. 58
We shall hunger like dogs, and go about the City. We shall eat and not
be filled, we shall drink and not be satisfied: we shall be covered with
clothes, and shall not be warmed, says the Prophet Agg^^. Agg^. ^
Jonas Jonas. 3
was greatly joyful of his Iuie bush, but this comfort continued not because
God frowned on him. For God sent a worm, which in one night did cate it up,
and this his shelter was taken from him, and his head immediately with the
heat of the sun ^ked, and his heart through exceeding griese panted. A worm
shall gnawe and consume our worldly wealth, and then like Jonas our bodies and
souls shall be vexed and sore troubled and we shall roar for anguish and
vexation of spirit.

We cannot moderate and quench our thirst by putting salt unto our mouths:
similitude
o^ extinguish fire by putting Oil into it: it is only God who satisfies
us, worldly riches are like salt making us more chirstie, and greed^er of
more. The covetous always want not only that he has not, but that also
which he has, for he keeps it by him, and dare not use it no not when need
requires it, he is never sufficed: Sed crescit ani^^ nummi, quantum ipsa
pecunta crescit: but covetousness increases with his money, he is ever in
necessity.

Wherefore if thou thi^stest, come unto me (says Christ) and I will refresh
thee. (...)
If thou do hunger open thy mouth wide (says God) and I will fill it. (...)
Delight thou in the Lord, and he will give thee thy hearts desire. (...) 3^
It is a preposterous and mad course, to feed any creature with a contrary
diet, disagreeing with his nature: feed a horse with hay, and not with flesh:
a Lion with flesh and not with grass: man's body with bread and not with
poison: man's soul with God, and not with the world. The prodigal son not
feeding on this food pined with hunger: not tasting of this sweetness, tasted
of bitterness: not having thi^ ^ches sell to all necessity.

(...) when he departed from Gods presence, Genesis 4
w^^ (...) branded runnagate upon the face of the (...).

A^ar when she departed from Abraham's horse what found she abroad but
poverty and affliction? Genesis 16


There was a fierce famine in the land of Egypt where Joseph was not: so must
there neede^ be a horrible want there where our God is not.

The Lions hunger, ^s^^ 32
and suffer christ says the pro^^^^ David but they who put their trust in the
Lord ^^^ant no manner of thing that is good. A cru^ll people like unto Lions
shall s^erue and perish: but God his dear servants in the time of scarcity,
shall have enough.

Do thou desire riches? Psalm. 112
Riches and plentousness^ we which rise. Desire thou beauty? He is fai^^^
th^^ the sons of men. Cant. ^
Thou ar^ fairer my Love. Desires^t thou life? John. 14.
I am the life (says the Lord) and whosoever believes in me, yea though he
we^ dead yet shall he live. Desire thou salvation? He shall save he people
from their sins. To conclude, Matt. 1
they shall want nothing that lead a godly life (...) the Lord is their
portion and their ioynter, he shall maintain their lot: their lot is fallen
into a fair ground, yea they have a goodly inheritance: for he shall give
them their hearts desire, and that not deny them the request of their lips.
He shall seed their mouths with good things, Psa. 20 Psalm. 103
making them strong and lusty like an Eagle, he fills the hung^^ with good
things, Luke 1
and the proud he sends empty away.

Wherefore seek the Lord, and your souls shall live, for they that seek after
strange gods, shall find much trouble: let not him therefore be the least of
our desire, who gives to every one what he can desire.

The xii. Chapter. Of the miserable slavery of the prodigal sons wherein
the slavery of sins is manifested.
THe Prophet Esaias flowting the fondnes of worldly men, who do waste their
wits, and employ their whole endeavors, and even consume themselves to attain
so worldly vanity, (...) 59
says: They weaue the spiders web. The Spider labors much to very little
purpose, for her wearisome webs are wouen only to ensnare, and entangle a
fly: what is the issue of our pensive cares of gathering worldly goods, but
miserable servitude and slavery of soul? They are got with care, kept with
fear, and lost heaviness. (...) 11
They know not what they do, but they work without wit like the builders
of Babel.

Clauous is canonized for a famous fool by common consent, for coaping his
golden and embrodered harness, for brazen and pelting armor.

Reuben and Gad, Number 32
and half Manasseh were gross he besotted doting upon Gilead because it was
good meddowe ground, very fit for Pasture, preferring a plotte of paltrie
Pasture for their Cattle before the mellifluous and pleasant land of Canaan,
which flowed with milk and honey.

The children of Israel were like simple children, Number. ^1
who had rather toil like drudges in the land of Egypt, under a cruel
tyrant, then to live at liberty in the land of Promise under a gentle father.

The Gergesines who preferred their swine before Christ, Matt. 3
what were they else but swinish and sensual?

Aeneas when famous Troy was vanquished, being permitted with the rest of the
Citizens, to carry away with him any one thing which he most of all esteemed,
did choose and take away the gods of his Country, teaching us by his choice,
that God to him was better then, his goods; that God was to be preferred above
the best. Wherefore what a lewd and lost child was this, who preferred the most
vilde and accursed creature, before his only and most blessed Creator? Who
had rather converse contrary to nature with this farmers swine, then to be in
company with his fathers servants: that prefers empty husks a swinish
fodder which his master does deny him, before the Nectar and Ambrosia of his
God, which his heavenly father offers him?

The Israelites preferred their grosser diet, their Onions their Garlic,
their flesh pottes of Egypt, before Angels food, the celestial Manna which
God rained down among them.

Luke 1^
The guests that were invited to the great Supper did choose rather to follow
their private business, which they thought more profitable.

Both th^se sorts of people are to be condemned: yet were they more reasonable
by much then this man: for these men had their pleasure, and profit to mis^rie
them: but this man's action had neither of them both. For what pleasure or
profit did succeed his enterprise, the history now shows us.

First of all casting off the sweet yoke of Christ, and his easy burden in
all servile obsequie he enthra^leth himself unto the intolerable thraldom of
the devil, who forthwith most cruelly and despiteful ie entreats him
baselie and abiectlie reputing of him, transporting and binding him to his
begeerly fa^me, to feed filthy swine, where loades of afflictions were laid
upon his shoulders, and were as great burdens too heavy for him to bear.

What contagious and abominable savors was he constrained to suck up? what
irksome scritchings, clamours, and grunrings, was he enforced to induce? Last
of all, what a fearful famine did torment him, when as he would have crammed
himself with husks, a food rather burdensome then nourishable to his body.
Here was a strange and admirable alteration. His nostrels which before were
continually delighted with incense and perfume, with the redolent and fragrant
odours of his fathers court, were now choked up, smothered and poisoned with
all most rank and detestable smells, fuming up into them in his masters farm.
His ears and senses which before were ^^^kled with the Shackbut, Dulcimer, and
all instruments of Music, were now so grated with all swinish discord, as
he could not hear a more odious and hateful noyce. His food which before
was of the finest flower, was now of the coursest and grossest grain.
Finally, degenerating from a man into a beast, he was worthily dieted, and
fed among beasts.

O consider this ye that forget God, what punishments and afflictions he has
provided for you. If ye rebel with this man, ye shall be plagued with this
man. If ye depart with him from God As Soon as a sinner departs from God, he
falls into the hands of the D^uell. Romans 6.
ye shall fall with him immediately into the thraldom of the Devil: Know ye
not (says the Apostle of the Gentiles) that to whom ye have given your
selves, as servants to obey, ye are made this servant whom ye do obey?
Every sinner upon his departure from God, forthwith falls into the hands
of the Devil. For a sinner is the captive and bondslaue of the Devil, he
has taken him in the wars, and he is his prisoner.

A similitude.
As a ship without a Pilot saileth not whither she should, but whither the
winds and tempests drive her: so a man destitute of the grace of God, and
forsaken of God does not that he should, but that which the devil draws him
unto.

A similitude.
Sin is like unto strong wine, which soon overcomes us, and casts us down
headlong into the temptations of the devil. And when we are once in his claws
and subjection, what misery and calamity does he lay upon us? The misery of a
sinner fallen from God into hands of the devil.
He tieth us up to the rack and manger, he has a fair farm for us, his
swine are our fellow servants, or rather our quarter masters, whom we must
attend upon, and be glad of their reuersions.

When Nebuchadnezzar had taken the king of Judah prisoner, 2. King. ^5
he handled him most miserably: he boa^ed out his eyes, he murdered his
children, he bound him in chains, and carried him to Babylon: when the devil
takes any sinner prisoner, he deals so with him: he puts out the eyes of
the inward man, that he may not see his sin, he keeps him fast bound
with the manacles of sin, that he cannot depart from him, and last of all, he
carries him with him into Babylon the place of confusion.

Judge. 1^
A lively example like unto this may Samson be unto us, whom the pretended love
of Dalila beguiled so much, as he fell into his enemies the Philistines hands,
who plucked out his eyes, bound him to a post, handled him like a slave,
putting him to a sore and tyrannous task to grind in the mill.

The like case almost was the case of the Israelites, who serving under Pharao
that sound citizen, Exodus 15
he tired and almost spent them with successiue extremities, putting their
shoulders to the burdens, and their hands to the making of the pottes, their
whole bodies to hard labor in the mire, and in the clay.

Iocob his estate was but a little better under his unnatural uncle Laban:
Genesis 31
he toyled out of measure in his hard service under him both night and day,
and he changed his wages ten several times together.

This is the condition of all such who serve the devil, or embrace this
present world: they never have any rest: They that serve the devil, and the
world, never have any rest. Job. 9
the bread of affliction, and water of trouble is the portion of their cup. We
may take up the complaint of Job in this case, and say: He will not suffer me
to take my breath, but fills me with bitterness. It is said in the
Revelation, that those who adored and worshipped the beast found no rest:
Revel. 14
so we are sure we shall never have rest, so long as we serve the devil, and
our beastly affections.

All things turn to sorrow to him that is a sinner. All thing turn to
sorrow to a sinner.
If he be in prosperity, he fears he may loose it: if in adversity, he
despayreth to overcome it. He sleeps of both sides in the midst of the
sea. If he receives an injury, good God with what importunity does he
follow it? He repayreth home, tumbleth upon his bed, he turns his face to
the wall with Achab, and pyning in his mind he pineth his body, refuses his
meat, sends for his friends, gathers al his power speedily to ^euenge it.
And this argument might be exaggerated by diverse other circumstances, but it is
a matter needless, in a case so manifest, being as clear as the Sun.

If al were now alive which have ever died since the beginning of the creation,
and they were asked this question, whether that in this life they so lived in
pleasure, as they tasted not of sorrow, or enjoyed prosperity without
following adversity? I am sure that they would not, or could not affirm it.
The slavery of sin is so grievous and importable, as God by the mouth of his
Prophet Hieremie says of it, Ye shall serve other Gods, which shall not let you
rest day nor night. Iare. 6


A similitude Genesis 13
He that serves the Devil, is like the wheel of a clock which never stands
still. The world moves discord between Abraham's and Lots heardsmen, and
will not by any means let them dwell together.

(...) 4.
The world is like to Agar, or mount Sinai in Arabia, which gendreth unto
bondage: if we will be free, let us look up to Jerusalem above, which is the
mother of us all. This is confirmed by the suffrages, and testimonies of the
living, and of the dead.

Solomon living enjoyed all the pleasures which the world could yield him.
(...) 8
I did build houses (says he) I did plant Vineyards, I made gardens and
orc^^rds; and he leads us along with a large discourse of his several
doings, but this is the Epitaph he writes upon them all: All is vexation and
anguish of spirit.

The testimony of the dead is recorded and set down in the book of Wisdom,
Wis. 5
where the damned ghosts in hell do cry and h^wle, saying: We have wearied
our selves in the way of iniquity, we have walked hard ways, and we have not
known the way of the Lord.

Let us therefore loath that which is so bitter and unwholesome to us, otherwise
it will tend to our great danger.

That sick man is in no small peril, A similitude
whose stomach can brook nothing but unwholesome meat: so will it be no less
dangerous to the soul, if thou can savor nothing but thy unwholesome sins.

Thou may not in this world without forfaiture of them, A similitude
carry into strange Countries thy corn, thy wine, thy wares forbidden by the
laws of the land, thy sinful worldly wealth, and temporal pleasures are
wares forbidden, thou may not carry them with thee unto heaven. Let not the
dung of this world therefore put out thine eyes, as the dung of the Swallow
did put out Tobias Tob. ^.
his eyes, that thou might not see the slavery which thy sin leads thee
into. For the remembrance of it will be grievous unto us, and the burden
thereof intolerable. We that serve this citizen with the prodigal son,

Tendimus in Latium, seeds vbi fata quieti^
Nulla dabunt.
There is no quietness or rest to be hoped for, but they dance in a circle,
they are turned round about like unto a whele, and as a door is rolled by the
hinges: so are they rolled with perpetual perturbations.

The xiii. Chapter. A comparison between the service of God and the service of
the devil: wherein is showed how easy Gods service is, and how hard the other
is, under the hardness of the prodigal son his service, who could not obtain
the off all and reuersion of the swines ^^sks.
IT was the hardest service every kind of way that this man did endure. His
labor was as great as his wages small: his thraldom most exceeding, but his
relief most slender: as in drudgerie exceeding all, so in hunger oppressed
above all. He was round about griped and galled with grief, wearied and wasted
with all woeful bondage. He was fiercely assaulted by two bellish fiends, most
extreme ^ormentors of his distressed soul, labor, and famine, which so
enfeebled his mind and subdued his S^^y as he was now almost absorpt, and
consumed of them, they ^ad well nigh quite wasted him, and drawn him d^^^ and
sucked out the blood out of his veins, and his marrow out of his bones.

Was there ever in the world such a master heard of, who commanded so much,
and rewarded so little? who would have all his work done, and will allow
neither money nor meat for the doing it? This is our estate if with this man
we will serve such a master: and rather like rebels turn to the enemy, then
dutiful subjects perform obedience to our liege and sovereign.

It were well therefore that we weighed the conditions of both our masters,
before we leave one, and cleave unto the other: that we would compare the
sweetness of Christ's yoke which we so loath, with the sowrenesse of the devils
service which we so love: the hardness of ye one, with the easiness of the
other: the recompense of the one, with the wages of the other.

He that lays siege and battery to a town, A similitude
has this careful foresight, if so be he be wise, that the charge of this
attempt exceeds not the worth and value of the town: look to it before hand
that thou payest not too dear for the devils service: it is at a dear rate,
it will cost thee the price and worth of thy soul. Our freedom was bought
with a greater price, even the blood of Jesus Christ: take we heed therefore
that we give not our selves as servants to the Devil. A comparison between
the service of God, and the service of the devil.
The prodigal son his service lively sets forth the nature and
condition of the devils service in these three points.

First, his precepts and commands are difficult, he sends him to his farm,
he seruilely co^straineth him, to attend upon his swine.





The easines of Christ's commandments
largely has been showed in the former chapter: let us rather therefore show
the easiness and lightness of Christ his precepts, for his burden is no
burden, but it is a burden not to bear his burden.

If Christ his burden be any thing heavy it is the heaviness of our sins
which causes it. A similitude
A burden of feathers of it self is light, but it is made heavy with putting
lead unto it: sin which hangs upon us heavier then lead, makes Gods
commandments too grievous unto us.

A similitude
The bird is not burdened by the burden of her feathers, but she flies much
more the lighter by them, then if she were without the^: Christ his yoke and
burden make not men to stoop, to be dull and heavy, but iocund and pleasant,
and to be pliable to every good work.

A similitude
If a king should give commandment to his huntsman to hunt, were it a hard
commandment, if therewithal he should furnish him with all things necessary,
as hounds, horses, and such like, or were or were it not rather a very easy
charge? so is it with us: for where as Christ lays his commandments upon us,
he assisteth us with needful graces thereunto, so as we may say with the
blessed Apostle. We are able to do all things in him that strengthens us.

Gods laws are light and comfortable unto us in a double respect. Gods law^
light in a double respect. August.
First for the magnificence of the reward. Secondly, for the assistance of
his holy grace. Indixitopus and promisit mercedem. As he enioyneth us our
task, so he paieth us our wages. Si labor est, attend praemium magnum: si
non est, gratis accipis praemium. If it be a labor, consider thy reward: if
not, thou have thy reward for nothing.

Were the service of God never so laborsome, yet I suppose, that it is not
worth the exceeding waighte of glory, which shall be laid upon us, whilst
we look not upon the things that are seen, but the things that are not seen:
for the things that are seen are mortal, but the things that are not seen
are eternal.

Christ will give unto thee, for the keeping of his commandments eternal
life, in respect whereof all other things are of no account. We should be
most willing to endure any thing for that: Jacob served Laban seven years for
the love of Rachel, Genesis 29
and they seemed unto him but a few days, because he so loved her, the reward
made his labor seem no labor unto him. So for the reward that is laid before
thee, endure any cross, sustain any shame, for the reward will counteruaile
the charge, and abundantly requite thee in the latter end.

Moreover he will strengthen us with his good spirit, whereby whatsoever in it
self is hard shall be easy unto us. Therefore does he call his commandments a
yoke, because a yoke is born by two beasts, and the one does help and ease the
other. The les^^^ ox bears the heavier part of the yoke: Christ the most
lowly and humble in spirit, has taken upon (...) ye greatest burden yt thou
may have ye lighter.

^imili^^^^
A couch or horselitter, which is heavy of it self, is easily borne and carried
with two horses: so is Gods law howsoever in his own nature it seems
combersome, very light and easy, if Christ joins with us, and draws this
chariot, if he does aid us and support us with his spirit.

^militude
Again if Christ his commandments seem hard: it is because thou do
preposterouslie pervert them, and do contrary unto them. There is no law
seems rigorous but that which makes against our affections.

If thou put on a garment, with the rough outside next unto thy skin, and
the inward soft linen outward, it is no marvel if it be grievous unto thee
and y^ can not go with it: but put it on right, and wear it as thou
should, and thou shall not complain of it. Judge of Gods laws and
commandments aright, and measure them not by thy carnal affections, and thou
shall not mislike with them.

Whereas God does charge the rich of this world with their liberal alms to
relieve the poor, the poorer sort like well of this commandment, and approve
it as good when as they would gainesay it, and mislike it as much if they
themselves were rich, as experience proves. If thou do an injury or wrong
unto any man, immediately thou desire it might be forgiven thee: but if
another does offer it unto thee, the like motion that is made to thee seems
unreasonable. It is hard to thee which thou supposest to be easy in an
other, because thy nature and affections do withstand it. Amor meus pondus
meum, amore feror quocunque feror. Aug. de ciuit. de (...) 11 c. 28
My lust is my load, whither soever I am led by affections I am led. Christ
Jesus has made his fathers burden easy for our shoulders. For the yoke of
our burden, and the staff of our shoulders, Isai. 9
and the rod of our oppressor has he broken, as in the day of Midian. But our
servile flesh which fights against the spirit, our evil and sinful lusts
which resist his holy laws, have such pre-eminence and dominion over us, as
they wholly carry us to the obedience thereof: in regard whereof his precepts are
most paineful, his light and easy yoke is most intolerable unto us.

That burden which is light to a sound and strong man, A similitud
is too heavy to him when he is sick and weak. Psa. 74
Our sins have gone over our heads, and are as great burdens too heavy for
us to bear.

The life and duties of a Christian man seems only hard to those who do not
know them, and are not used to them: Acquaint thy self with them, and meditate
thereon, and let thy study, and delight be in them, and they will seem easy
and gentle unto thee.

A similitude
When a man first puts on a new doublet, it seems too straight for him:
but it fitteth him very well when he has worn it a while. Let us put on
Christ Jesus our marriage garment, and let us walk as he has commanded us; if
this garment pincheth at the first assaie, and we cannot go in it: use and
custom will widen it well enough, and make it easy for us.

A similitude
Whilst the Wood is green, the yoke must needs be heavy that is made of it:
but continuance of time that makes it dry, will make it likewise light.

What reason then and wit is in our choice, when as we forsake the beaten and
easy way, and follow crooked and cragged paths? when as we prefer a cruel
bondage before easy liberty? and had rather be a farmer to a hard tyrant, then
an owner, in the house of a merciful father?

^
Secondly, what odds are in their service, herein appear in that the one
pineth us with hunger, and the other fills us with the plenteousnesse of his
house. Between the hoggish husks, and heavenly delicates there is no
proportion, and yet this kind of meat, so mean and miserable could not be
granted him. O horrible slavery and thraldom of the devil, who draws us
unto his service with fair words, promising much, and performing nothing;
promising joy but bringing pain; promising credit, but bringing shame;
promising life, and leading unto death: giving one thing for another, as Laban
served Jacob giving him Leah, when he promised him Rachel. Genes. 29.


The world and the Devil do nothing but beguile us, the pleasures are but
vain which they do show us and yet they keep them from us, after they have
showed them: we cannot serve more niggish, and spiteful masters, for they
will part with nothing.

Such a one was Pharao, Exodus 5
who when as the Israelites had plodded in his claie, and tired themselves in
his sl^uish work he denied them straw, and yet would abate nothing of his
set task, and tale of his brick.

Also such a terrible tyrant was Holofernes, who when as he laid siege to
Bethulia, Judith. 7
he stopped up the streams, and fountains of water which ran thorough the
city, whereby the distressed inhabitants of that place, pinched and oppressed
with the penury of water, receiving every day a portion by a measure, the
scarcity of it did rather torment the^, then any way comfort them, and rather
inflaming then slacking their thirst.

This is the wonted guise of the world and the Devil. It presents to our
eyes a bewtiful woman, A similitu^
only to be with us, and ensnare us with her beauty, and forthwith he snatcheth
her out of our sight, and suffers us not to have comfort in her company,
thereby to add more affliction unto us.

Thou can not be filled with the pleasures of this world, they do rather
famish thee, then any way feed thee. How greedy and vnsufficed is a covetous
man? he is hungry like a dog (as David says) and goes about the City, he
has never his content, but complains still of want; he is of all needy, the
neediest man, for he wants not only that which he has not, but also that
he has: for he has no grace to use it. The Poets speak of the like torment
which Tantalus endured and sustained in hell, who was thirsty in the midst of
the water that streamed by his lips, to which effect the Poet writes thus,
Tantalus a labijs sitiens fugientia captat
Flumina, quid rides? mutato nomine de te
Fabulanarratur.


But God contrariwise plentifully replenisheth our hungry bodies, Luke ^
and fills our souls with goodness. He fills our mouth with good things
(as the blessed virgin in her heavenly himn acknowledges) and the eyes of all
wait upon him, Psalm. 145
and he gives them their meat in due season, as David prophecieth.

Open thy mouth therefore wide, and I will fill it, says the Lord. Ephraim is
fed with the wind, says the Prophet Osea. ^ea. 1^
The things of this world are windy and swelling like the hoggish husks,
that the prodigal young man would have crammed himself with, they only
puff us up, and make us look big, we do not battle, and thrive by them. They
are like the charmed and enchanted meat o^ ^imilitude
Nigromancers, which has only but a bare show of meat without any taste or
savor in it.

Wherefore for this cause let us forsake the world, and renounce the devil, who
sterneth and famisheth us: and cleave we only to the Lord our God, who is our
portion, and inheritance for ever.

The last mark of difference between these two

There is no man who yields to serve any master, but first of all he
indenteth with him for his wages: if thou will needs be a servant to the
world, and a slave to the Devil, serve not for nothing, consider how thy
labor and pains shall be recompensed: which if thou do thou shall have
small encouragement to appertain to them: for their stipend and wages is death.
Romans 6 Psalm. 13^
They do render thee evil for good to the great disquiet of thy soul.

When as Samson was under the subjection of the Philistines, what reward had he
of al his labors, Judge. 16
and travail among them, but al despightful usage, they boaring out his eyes,
and constraining him most sl^uishly to grind at the mill?

When as the Israelites toiled out of measure, Exodus 5
and were clean out of heart in bringing in of stubble, this their hard
sweat, and sorrow was as hardly recompensed, for they had nothing but stripes
at their wearisome return of their cruel taske-maisters.

Genesis 31
Jacob served Laban a long time in all simplicity and faithfulness, and he was
a most profitable servant unto him: yet for all that he could not have his due,
but his wages was changed ten times, and he was very uncivilly and churlishlie
entreated. This is the Bias of the wicked world and the devils fashion: do we
never so much for them, it is either not at all, or very badly regarded.

1. Sam. 2^
They serve us right as Nabal served David, who required his benefits, with
horrible unkindness like a cruel Carle, churlishlie refusing to relieve his
necessity having received many favors at his hands, hoggishly according to
his clownish nature, and grantingly answering the servants of David: who is
David? and who is the son of Ishai? there be many servants now a days that
break every man from his master, shall I then take my bread and my water, and
my flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men whom I know
not whence they be? Nabal by interpretation: a fool, and is a lively figure
of this present world, who in the time of need forsakes them all, who have
stood them in most stead in former times.

^mi^^^ude
The world and the devil are like to an unkind Inkeeper, who makes no account
and reckoning of his guests after they are gone, yea scarce knows them when
they come again, although they have often resorted to that Inn, and have
spent much money. An Inn keeper will sooner know thee by a wrong, then by a
benefit which thou do him. If thou strikest him with thy fist, and give
him a blow which may stick to his ribs, and ill intreatest him, he will long
remember thee: but spend thy thrift with him, and show him al kindness, and he
will soon forget thee.

Wherefore since this service must cost thee to much pain, and does so little
pleasure thee: I warn thee to be wiser and not to toil with the Spider, A
similitude
to weaue a web to entangle a fly: Or with little children all the day long to
spend thy breath, in blowing up of feathers to the ay^e: or in running up and
down with a swift pace after toies, and vain pastimes, whereby both they get
many knocks, and falls, or at the fairest return home at night tired like
dogs.

Betake thee then to such a master, whom thou ought most to serve, and who
will best reward, and requite thy service* thou ought above all to serve the
Lord, and to serve him only, for so is it written. Thou shall not tempt the
Lord thy God, but him only shall thou serve. And he is a most faithful and
liberal rewarder of such as serve him, their labors shall not be in vain in the
Lord: for doubtless he shall withhold nothing that is good from them that live a
godly life, and will be his servant. As he that serves the devil has a
double hell in this world, and the other: so they who serve God, have a double
heaven a most ioiful and most happy life, in this life, and the other.

Wherefore say we with David. Whom have I in earth in comparison of thee? There
is none that does so great things for us, thou art God alone: Thou art our God
and we will praise thee, thou art our king and we will honor thee.

Therefore if thou be not a blind man who cannot judge of colors: if thou will not wilfully stumble with Balaam, thou may soon perceive who is thy
best master, and make choice of him: whether the devil, that loadeth thee
with labor, starteth thee with hunger, and gives thee no wages: or God who
eases thy shoulders of all burdens, whose yoke is easy, who fills thee
with the plenteousnesse, and pleasures of his house; and last of all who gives
thee the reward of thy faith, the salvation of thy soul, unspeakable riches,
which the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither can the heart
of man conceive, which God has laid up in store for his servants.

The fourteenth Chapter. An exhortation to avoid sin, and to live a godly
life, the only use and purport of the premises.
Since the decaie and downfall of this man happened by his sin, as falling
immediately by his departure from his father into the most miserable slavery
of ye devil: it behooves us that stand to take heed least we fall, and in time
prevent such occasions of sin, if we would escape the just punishments of
sin.

The Lacedaemonians, the better to move their children to avoid drunkenness,
would present unto their view their drunken servants, that the sight of their
unseemly, and most beastly behavior might breed in them a loathsome
detestation of this crime. To this end in this discourse hitherto, we have set
before your eyes this man's example, and have blown up his skirts, that ye
might see his nakedness: that at this strange sight ye might blush within your
selves, you might cover your faces with the veil of shame, and not commit such
filthiness.

This man is the perfect pattern of a sinner, and therefore if ye lift to
shape out a sinner, take measure of this manne, for he must have his
proportion. And if ye list to avoid sin, set him before your eyes, and
every way avoid him.

When Augustus Caesar studied with himself to beautify his Empire, and to
make Rome renowned, and to leave it built with marble, being before but of
brick, and acquainted one Apollonius Thyaneus the Philosopher, with this his
princely purpose, and asked his advise for the better dispatch of it, he
replied in this wise: If your Grace be so well minded to effect so good a work,
you must take such a course, as a skilful and expert musician in times past,
did take with his son: who sent him to school to an unskillful Musician,
charging him whatsoever he should see him do, to do the contrary, and he should
do very well, for his fingering, his lessons, and h^^ whole order was naught. In
the like manner (^eere christian) if thou will beautify, and a^or^^ thy soul,
the temple of Gods spirit, and whereas it is now but rude, and vntrim by reason
of thy sin, by which it is dawbed up with distempered mortar, and by
godliness and true zeal, would make it like the polished corners of the
^emple and like the gate of the temple called Beautiful: learn of this
musician, go to school a while with this prodigal young man, whatsoever
hitherto thou have seen him do, do thou the contrary: ^^est thou not how
he departed from his father? how he wasted out his goods? how he served his
enemy? do thou the contrary: o cleave unto thy father, use well his good
gifts, and finally abandon his enemy and thy enemy the devil, and thou shall
li^e for ever.

(...) be ^ppressed.
To do this the better thou must kill this serpent sin in the shel while it is
an egg, before it springs out, and become a bird: this ill weed must be
rooted out at the first, when it begins to bud and first of all to appear,
before it sprouteth forth and be a flower, and ouerspreadeth the ground. It
must be subdued while we are young, least it get dominion and prevail so over
us, as we shall not be able to ouerrule it in our age.

This man in his youth and tender age infected with sin was so bowen therewith,
as if he had not in time bin suppled with ye oil of Gods grace, he must have
bursten and dyed in his sin. Let our youth youth therefore be devoted unto
God, and let us from our childhood as Anna did Samuel, be consecrated unto God.

To insinuate that our prime age belongs unto him, he commanded in the old
law the first borne for an oblation; and the first fruits for a sacrifice: as
also to the like intent and meaning, he ordained that the Levites singled out
to his service and work of ministration, Leuit. 16
should from their childehoode give up themselves unto this his holy
function. The rod and the wand howsoever crooked while it is tender is easily
made straight, A similitude
but when it is grown a vaste, and dry stock, it cannot be righted.

It is mere madness, to shift off duties of devotions with delays, and to put
over godliness to after times. A similitude
Is not he a fond fellow that says I will not break my horse while he is
a Colte, but when he is old, and shall sling me into the dike, and shall cast me
down headlong, and shall break my neck? so in like sort is not he as mad
that shall resolve not to subdue and keep under his body, while it is young,
and may soon be tamed, but shall let it alone till it has vanquished the
spirit, thrown it down into the pit of perdition, and has broken the neck of
it, with the deadly fall which sin has given unto it? It is very good and
godly counsel, which the Poet gives.

Principijs obsta, se^o medicina paratur, Ouidius.

Cum mala, per long as inualuere moras.
It is good to stop an evil in the beginning, that it do not proceed to a
greater mischief: the medicine comes too late when the wound and dis, ease
through sufferance and continuance is grown incurable.

A similitude
It is too late then to wash a garment, which is now consumed, and rotten with
dirt, and filthiness, A similitude
that has long aboade in it. He does peruerslie who having a beautiful
standing cup of gold, and has very precious balm given unto him to put
into the cup, will not put it in, before the cup has stood long before full
of filthy lyquor, and does now retain the force, and strength of the savor
of the liquour: So is he as bransicke and preposterouslie peevish, who when GOD
has given him the precious balm of his holy grace, and his cup may
ouerflowe, he will not accept of it in his young age, but will first fill his
vessel fall of sin and filthiness, till he come to be old.

^ similitude
It is good to withstand the enemy at the first assault, and not to suffer
him to enter into the city, or to chase him out at the first entrance: it is
hard to drive the strong manne out of possession, and it is too late to resist
his forces, when as he has invaded, similitude
and gotten thy strong holds. It is too late for thee to powder thy meat, and
to sprinkle it with salt, already greatly tainted, and much sa^^ring of
corruption, and swarming with Fly blowinges. similitude.
He that minds to prove an expert rider, he will begin betimes, and at
ten years old he will be practicing, and assaying with himself, what he is
able for to do. He that intends a shepherds life, A similitude
will endeavor with a sling to be dealing when he is a boy, he will use himself
betimes to a shepherds scrip, and he will harden himself asore hand, to
abide the wrath, and violence of the seasons.

Thus ye see how in worldly matters we know our opportunities: by these
therefore let us be taught to know our times for our religious duties. Our
youth which is our best time is also the best for the service of God: let us
then in this time seek by all means to subdue sin, and to stir up the
spirit to all works of godliness.

If we do not this, but let our youth have his ryotous race, this will
follow of it: one sin will hale and draw on another, One sin draws on
an other.
so as in short time with this prodigal young man, we shall as it were be
nothing else but sin. Well says learned Gregory. Greg. lib. 25 moral, cap. 12
Peccatum quod per poenitentiam non diluitur, mox suo pondere aliud trahit.
Sin which is not done away with repentance, with the weight and burden of
it, draws another after it. To the like effect, Saint Augustine Aug. lib. 5
contrae Inlianum.
speaks thus. Vnum peccatum est poena alterius, and vnum peccatum Dominus
permittit, vt aliud puniat. One sin is the punishment of another, and God
suffers one sin to take vengeance of another, as it is written in Saint
John his Revelation. Revel. 22
He that is filthy, let him be filthy still.

When as Cain labored of the sin of Envy he staide not there, but his envy
brought forth murder, Ge^. 4
and his murder heresy, supposing he could hide his iniquity from God: and
last of all he fell into utter desperation, the very next door to perdition
and destruction.

In David we have an example of the like. For first sin brought forth lust,
2. Sam. 1^
lust adultery, adultery the murder of an innocent man.

The like may be said of Peter. He first simply denied Christ, Mark 14
he secondly more boldly stood to the denial, but thirdly very
impudentlie he bound it with banning and most accursed swearing.

When as Judas proved a thief, he grew a murmurer, disdaining and grudging
the devotion of Marie Magdalen, ^on. 12
and after that a traitor, and finally a desperate destroyer of himself.

This prodigal companion, when he first became untoward, he never rested
until he grew past grace, and came to the extremity, and top of al inquity.
This is the mischievous operation of sin, these be the dangerous and damnable
effects thereof.

^imilitude
As a stone that is cast into the water, raises up a bubble, and that
immediately raises up another: so one sin occasioneth another, until we grow
obdurate and hardened in our sin.

When Samson gave consent to be bound of Dalila, ^g. 16
he came so into bonds as he could not come out, being first bound with
green cords that were never dried: secondly, being bound more surely with
new ropes, that were never occupied: but thirdly, seven locks of his head
were platted with the threeds of the woofe, and were fastened with a pin: but
last of all he was shaven, and deprived of his strength, and delivered up into
the hands of the Philistines, who did cruelly entreat him: and so from one
mischief he ran into all danger.

So every sinner if he takes not good heed, from one sin falls into a
thousand: his end is far worse then his beginning. ^say. 5.
He draws iniquity (as the Prophet says) with cords of vanity: and sin as
it were with cartropes. He is still faster bound in the devils Chains, till
the iron enter into his very soul, to the destruction of his soul. Osea 4
If a man makes entrance into a sin by swearing, he proceeds with lying,
and breaks out into stealing, whooring, and killing, and blood touches blood.

And what is the cause hereof? Truly only this, in that a sinner has no
feeling of his sin. A sinner has no feling of sin.
One sin does more vex and torment a just man, then huge heaps of sins do
an ungodly person.

There is no element that is heavy in his sphere. A similitu^
If a man that would swim, plungeth himself into the bottom of a river,
albeit he be covered with never so much water, yet is not that water any
burden unto him, so long as he abides and continues in the river: but out of
the river a bucket of that water laid upon his shoulders, is too heavy for
him: for th^^ is the Element out of his place, and by means therefore is
burdenson.

A simili^^^^
A scoppe of water whilst it is in the Well may be haled and dragged to and
fro of a child: but being elevated above his element, and raised v^ ^boue the
top of the water, it requires the strength and force of a man's arm.

A similitude
He that eats Onions, smells not the grosnes and ranknes of their savor,
but another who comes nigh him does soon perceive and feel it. Thou have
swallowed up O sinner, very gross garlic, leekes and onions, and in regard
thereof thy breath^s (...) loathsome to every good man, who shunneth thy
presence, and indureth not thy company: but thou vilde wretch who have no
nostrels, without sense and feeling, art not annoied with the^, they never
trouble or come near thy conscience.

(...) is oppo^te unto all ^^d, and the ^^se of all ^^ll.
And it is no marvel that sin does this evil, because it is all evil in it
self, as being in his nature no positive thing (...) the privation of all
goodness. It is flatly opposite to al virtue, and therefore it must needs be an
exceeding evil. A sinner must needs be deprived of all goodness, because by
sin he shuts himself from God the author of all goodness. As the wife of
Lot by reason of her sin, ^n. 19
was in just judgment molten into a pillar of salt: so is a sinner barren and
fruitles, like unto land that is sowed with salt, which can bring forth no
fruit.

^militude
As there be many who do rise up against a poor widow, and offer her much
wrong, because she has no husband or friend to assist her, and plead her
just cause: so if we loose God (as we do by our sin) the devil and all
creatures seek after our souls utterly to destroy them, saying: God has
forsaken him, Psa. 71
persecute him and take him for there is none to deliver him. David therefore
puts up this his suit to god. Be not thou far from me O Lord: for what then
will follow? Psalm. 51
Many oxen will come about me, many fat Bulls of Basan will compass me
about on every side.

God is willing to abide with thee, wherefore take thou heed thou constrainest
him not by thy wilful sins against his will to depart from thee. If thou
accountest not of him as thou ought, and give him not that honor which is
due unto his name, he has no reason to abide with thee.

If thou placest a strange woman, A similitud^
black and misshapen at the upper end of the Table, and make thy Lady a
peerlesse princess to wait upon the table, and to serve her, is not she
iniuried in the highest manner, and does she not endure the fowlest disgrace
that possibly can be, and has she not good cause to forsake thy fellowship,
and to dwell no more with thee? In the like manner sinful man deals with his
god, preferring his inordinate and loose lusts, the beggarly creatures and
substance of the earth, before the eternal creator of all things, the maker
of the world. For this cause God does stomach this perverse peeuishnes, and
cannot abide it, but thereupon immediately he withdraws himself, and with
himself all his blessings, and his graces from us, and we are worthily served.

(...)
As Jacob when he saw that Laban his countenance was changed against him, and
that he looked sowrely, and grimlie upon him, he resolved with (...) to abide
no longer with him, but to dep^^^ (...) him: so God serves us, if we as Laban
look not upon him as we ought to do, but are of a crooked and froward
disposition.

Exodus 3 3
This is a lamentable and heavy case, and who does not tremble that
considers justly of it? When as God made answer unto the people of Israel
that he would not ascend with such a people, so stubborn and stiffenecked, the
people were driven to their dumps upon it, and wept very bitterly; and so
ought we to do when God forsakes us, and takes his presence and favor from
us.

I might lead you further with a large discourse and treatise of this matter,
for large is the compass and bounds of sin. Infinite reasons might be urged
to enforce us to a hateful detestation thereof: but if there were nothing else
beside, the prodigal son his example and punishment is a motive of much
moment to persuade the same. We might here entreat justly of the grievous
punishments of the life to come in hell fire to be inflicted upon sinners: for
fire and brimstone, storm and tempest, this is the portion of their cup. But
it is enough to consider of the intolerable hell which they endure in this
life, in their tormented consciences.

^ is most (...).
The first hellish torment, is the gnawing and consuming worm of conscience,
which dismaieth the mind, and drives it into a dreadful despair. The end
thereof is as sour, as the beginning was s^ree^e.

As a man when he drinks dead and badde wine, the bitterness of it he
^asteth in the end: A similitude
so man drinking sin as an Ass drinks water, this wine overcomes him,
and he feels the hurt that it does him in the end. Sin shows us a color
as the wine does in the glass, and it presents unto us a vain show of
delight, and it makes us drunken: but by and by it aggrauateth and surchargeth
the heart, and so inflameth it with a fire, and hell of grief, as it suffers
us not to rest, or take any quietness.

As Job Job. 1
in the mids of his troubles and afflictions, wa^ted not a swift messenger to
grate his ears with sorrows, and to bring him bad tidings: so a sinner has
peales and alarums in his ears, crying out against him, rubbing his memory
with a rehearsal of such blessings and benefits which he has lost, and such
curses and judgments which he has run into by sin. These are pricks in
our sides, and thorns in our eyes, which do wound us continually, and
suddenly bereave us of all former joy of our sinful pleasures. 2. Sam. 13
As Ammon as soon as he enjoyed his pleasure of his sister Thamar,
immediately loathed her as much as ever he loved her: so all ungodly
pleasure is suddenly dashed, and is turned into sorrow.

The second torment which sin Sin excuses and c^uereth it self.
procures, is shame and confusion, making us to hold down our heads like
bulrushes, to seek solitary places wherein to hide our heads, our consciences
pronouncing us so guilty of sin, as for very shame we dare not behold the
face of man. As a woman that has a blemish in her face, A similitude
she is always hiding it that she might not seem deformed, when as she that
is beautiful uncovers her face, and is very glad when every one beholds
her: so every sinner deformed with sin, would shroud his sin under the cloak
of shame, and excuse it and hide it as much as he can that it might not be
known and espied in him: as Adam did with God, and David with Nathan, Genesis 3
2. Sam. 11
only the godly and upright man holds up his head, looks up to heaven,
and is not ashamed.

The third torme^tor of a woeful sinner A sinner is tormented with ye fear of
punishment.
is the fear of judgment, which is always before his eyes. He co^sidereth
with himself what he has deserved, and he fears to be recompensed after his
deseruings. His mind runs still upon Gods justice, and his own wickedness:
and thus he is dead even whilst he lives. The fear of death before is more
torment to him then many several deaths,

We may truly say that sin is the serieant and hangman of a sinner. A
similitude
As Soon as a thief espieth the serieant, or sees his Judge, he runs away
albeit none pursues him: he knows that he is in danger of the law, and
dares not adventure to abide trial so a sinner flies when no man pursues
him, says the wisdom of Solomon. (...). 28
He is afraid at the falling of a leaf, he is cast down with fear, and can
not rise again at the sight of God his Judge, who is always in his soul. We
have just cause therefore to be weary in this way of wickedness, so hurtful
unto us as nothing can be more. A similitude
If a cup of gold be given unto us, that is full of poison, we can make use
and profit of this gift, by pouring out the poison, and reserving still the
cup when the p^yson is out, which is never a whitte the worse being washed
clean of us: but sin is from a spreading and pearcing poison, as it
poysoneth the vessel, even the soul and the body wherein it is ^ept, and it
cannot be purged but by the hand of God, and by the water of our Repentance.

The Viper and adder cannot be killed with their own poison: A similitude
but a sinner may be killed with his own poison, even the poison of his sin.
Let us then speedily return from sin, so deadly venomous and poysonable unto
us.

We have all departed with this prodigal son from the obedience of our
father: we have too lasciuiously, riotouslie and wickedlie wasted his
patrimony: we have given our selves with him as servants unto sin, which
has tyrannouslie tormented us as it did him. Thus have we borne ^he image of
the earthie, God grant us grace that we may bear the image of the heauenl^e,
as this man did, of which now immediately we are to entreat.

The end of the first Book of the progress of the prodigal son.
THE SECOND BOOK, Which entreats of the Regresse and happy return home of
the prodigal son.
The first Chapter. Of our necessary return from sin, and conversion unto
God: typically shadowed, and set forth unto us, in the example of this man's
return.
AS there is nothing more hurtful, and detestable then sin, which calls us
from God, estraungeth us from the faith, makes us aliants from the common
wealth of Israel, and last of all does subject us unto eternal death: so is
there nothing more wholesome and profitable then Repentance, ^hereby like lost
sheep we return again unto the shepherd of our souls, we are Citizens
with the saints, and of the household of God, and are made partakers in his
eternal kingdom of eternal ^^^e.

similitude
^^o be (...) ^ou^ beast which is wild, thou put spurs upon thy feet,
and thou hold hard the bridle in thy hand, to curb and to keep him in if
he offers to cast thee, or to run too fast with thee, and to spur and
prick him forward if he be sulleinlie dull, and will not travail with thee,
thou must take this course with thy body, which is thy beast, and with thine
inordinat lusts and affections, which are sensual and beastly. If it would
riotously surfeit with excess, and there is no stay in it, or otherwise be too
slack, or keep at a stay, and abide still in sinfulness: we must bridle him
and quicken him, and put him from this course, and make him pliable and
conformable to his duty. Go not in any wise after thine own lusts as
Syracides advises, Eccles. 18
but wish thou to be led into the paths of righteousness, Psalm 119 Psalm. 73
as David humbly prays. For foolish are we and ignorant, and as a beast
before thee.

This Acolastus and prodigal person, chalketh out the way, and by a right line
leads us all by the right path: we have been wild with him, let us be
tamed with him: we have straied with him, let us go home with him: we have
gone from God, and from our selves with him, let us return to God, and to our
selves with him.

He was before as a frantic fellow, altered in his wits and out of
himself, and therefore in the beginning of his conversion it is said, that He
came to himself. Which Paraphrasis and phrase of speech lively expresses the
nature of sin, which is a madness, Sin is madness.
and departure from our selves, and the condition of our true Repentance, which
is a return and coming to our selves.

The proper names which are given unto Repentance, The names of repentance.
and which signify repentance are given the^ in this sense: The Hebrew word
Schuba and Teschuba, which are used of the prophets seem to be Tropical, and
borrowed speeches taken from travelers that are out of their way, and after
long wandering being told thereof do turn into the way But the Greek word
(...) commonly used in the new Testament iumpeth in signification with this
term here used in this present history, Sa^. 3.^ Ma^k. 1
which comes ab (...), which is folly and madness, whereby through
corruption of reason and judgment, we know not what to do, but are like mad
men that are from our selves. The correction of this madness and reformation
of this foolishness is called (...), whereby upon due deliberation with out
selves, and better advise we return unto our selves. The Latin word
Poenitentia derived a Poena, agrees likewise with our purpose very much, for
our sin breeding shame which is quedam poena, a kind of punishment, in a
tedious loathsomnes and wearisomnes of this punishment we purpose a conversion.
This man through affliction was so humbled and punished, and so ashamed of
himself as he was not himself, and the due regard thereof i^ a sorrowful
submission altered and changed him, and brought him to himself. This was most
necessary for him to do, as without which there had been no recovery of
him. For his coming to himself was the knowledge of himself, the cheifest
point of wisdom, and the original of Repentance, the ordinary and especial
mean of his salvation. For in this coming unto himself, he bethought
himself from whence he first fell, into what he fell, and in what case he
now stood, This touched him to the quick and pricked him at the heart, and
wrought his conversion.

This his example must be our direction, The knowledge of o^ sins the
beginning repentanc^ Exodus 13
and must be unto us as the clowdie pillar, which went before the Israelites to
show them the way: and like the fire that gave them light in the night seeson.
We must commune with hur owe hearts, and enter into our selves, and consider
our condition: we have run a madding without sense of sin, it becomes us
therefore to be sober unto salvation by acknowledging our sins. Without a
dutiful acknowledgement of our sins, there is no remission and pardon for our
sins. Christ never cured any person diseased, who did not first acknowledge
himself to be diseased. The better we know the nature of our malady, the more
ardentlie we affect and desire remedy. Therefore God, as Augustine Aug.
^^^st. 1
says, the more to kindle and inflame this desire of our recovery, would have
us first be touched with a feeling of our infirmity. The Lord therefore of
such whom he cured first of all communed with them about their infirmityes,
that they themselves might acknowledge their miseries: As with Agar what it was
that she did? Genes. ^1. John. 5
And with the diseased man, whether he would be made whole: and with
infinite others remembered in the scriptures. This seems to be ye cause why
christ did not cure any mad men that were gone from themselves, because mad men
can not come unto themselves by the knowledge of themselves, but when they are
fools, they think themselves wise, they so sooth themselves in their
foolishnes, and madness, as there is no reforming them or reducing the^ to
obedience. The first step to health is the feeling of our sickness: for what man
will come to a Physician to be healed, who cannot be persuaded that he is
diseased? The more a man thinks that he is in health, the less he thinks
yt he has need of help. He is dangerously sick who does not know himself to
be sick. For he is blinded with deceit, and perishes for want of knowledge of
himself. So is it with the soul, if being weak and brought very low by
reason of our sin, we do not complain and find our selves grieved, how should
it be restored? how should the wounds thereof that stink and are corrupt, be
mollified with oil, and bound up with clothes, when as we hide our affected
parts, and will take no knowleddge of them? There are too many who disport
themselves with their wicked doings, and make no conscience and account of sin,
persuading themselves tha^ all is done well which they do, be they never so^l.
These be those, who do boast themselves yt they can do mischief, and do set
forth wickedness as a law. They rejoice, (...). 8 ^^militude
as Solomon says, when they have done evil. These men do behold their faces
in a glass which is ^ollow, and deceives them, which presents unto them a
contrary image to that which it is indeed. A similitu^
They behold themselves in the inside of a bright silver spoone, which
obiecteth to our view a perposterous and ouertwhart resembla^ce of our face,
with the beard and chin upward, and the forehead downward. Such as are
frantic, A similitud
when they are in worst case they think themselves best, they laugh and are
merry, and make mowes and spare not, they wilfully resist all means of their
recovery, they are violent and hurtful to their Physicians and friends, who do
seek to do them good. The estate of such as it is most fearful: so it is very
much to be lamented.

Christ could not refrain weeping, Luke 1^
when he saw the people of Jerusalem so affected, so distracted in their
senses, and bereaved of their wits, as they had no knowledge of their time of
visitatio^. In this respect does God because it is so needful, so perempto^ilie
urge the dutiful acknowlegdement and confession of our sins. Genesis 4
When as Cain would have hidden his sin from god, how did god labor with him to
make him know it, by quickening him with questions, and laying before him the
things which he had done? Where is thy brother Abel, says god unto him? When
yt would not serve, but he did shift it of with an other question: am I my
brothers keeper? god left him not so, but sifted him more narrowly, demanding
further of him what he had don? If he would have com to him self, and
acknowledged what he had done, his sin though red and bloody as the skarlet,
should have been washed and made as white as wool, his dutiful confession
had effected his salvation.

(...)
Peter sinned hainously in denying his master, yet by taking notice of it in
due time, and by coming to himself he obtained pardon, and was restored to his
office. Paul was a blasphemer and a bloody man, when he was a Saul, for as the
other Saul persecuted David, so this Saul persecuted the son of David, and the
son of God, 2. Ti^. ^
and made hauock of the church: but being stricken flat unto the ground by a
light from heaven, even at noon day, whereby he was lightened with a knowledge of
himself, he became a worthy professor of Christ, and a myrror among martyrs,
who suffered for his sake. He was received unto mercy, as he himself witnesses.
^^ke. ^
Mary Magdalen, from who^ were cast out seven devils, was a devilish sinner,
sinning without blushing: yet having remorse, and coming to her self, going
behind our savior Christ, and behauing her self with all modesty and tears,
and falling down at his feet with a sorrowful repentance of her former
sins, she was graciously entertained, and made a vessel of his mercy.

(...). 23
It was long before the thief did come to himself, he did put it off so long as
it could be, eue^ to the last hour and moment of time: yet to show that
repentance can not come too late, though it cannot come to soon, he was also
absolved, and that day with christ was his soul in Paradise in his fathers
kingdom.

And this was the happiness of this prodigal person, his return and conversion
prevented his damnation, and was the means of his eternal salvation.

Let every sinner therefore consider of this, let him deny all unrighteousness,
and give himself unto a holy obedience, and learn to know himself. Le^ him
remember what the Church writes unto the angel of the church of Ephesus.
Remember from whence thou art fallen and repent, Revel. 2
and do the first works Return O sinners unto your hearts, as Esaias Esaias. 46
counsels. Consider who thou art, whence y^ came, where thou art, and
whither thou art going. Thou art become a very learned doctor, if thou have
learned to know thy self and thy sins. This learning and knowledge will more
avail thee then all vain philosophy, then all thy study in the liberal arts,
then al thy humane knowledge whatsoever. The knowledge of thy self will teach
thee humility, humility will make thee stand in fear of thy God, the fear
of thy God is the beginning of that wisdom which passes understanding. Many
know many things, yet know they not themselves: they know others, but they
know not themselves: But another man is our Crystal glass, wherein we see
our selves. Let us therefore look upon an other, and especially upon this man's
sin that we may know our sin: and this man's repentance that we may likewise
repent with him.

The second Chapter. Of the prodigal son his resolution of the amendment of
his life, and of returning to his father: the fundamental point of our true
repentance.
THis prodigal son no sooner came by descending into himself, into the
knowledge of his sin: but he proceeded immediately unto a loathsomeness of
himself, and hatred of his sin. He purposes absolutely to renounce his
former course, and now deliberateth, and meditateth with himself of amendment
of his life.

He does not desperately fall into these or such like conceits, or thus reason
with himself in his troubled mind. Go to, for as much as I do see my self
destitute of friends, persecuted of my enemies, utterly forsaken and without
hope of comfort: what remedy? I will wallowe my self in this mire and dirte,
and still remain a vagabond and forlorn person, and dwell among swine: or
otherwise the sooner to avoid this extremity I will try extremities. I will
help my self by robbery and wrong: I will use some fleytes, shifts, and
guiles to bring in a living: I will not fear to make an end of my self, to
bring this my misery and slavery to an end. He has none of these
melancholy and mad muzes: neither is he envious, either of the felicity of
his eldest brother, or of the prosperity of his fathers servants. But his
resolution is to use all submission, to be sorrowful for his sins, to depart
from them, and to return in obedience to his father, and to ask forgiveness
of them: we must conform our selves unto this man, if we will be truly
repentant with this man. True repentance (...) nature ^rue re^tance.
especially consists in the acknowledgement of our sins, in a godly sorrow
and hatred of them, and in a purposed resolution to forsake them. All which
parts were complete and perfect, in the example of this man.

They vainly sooth themselves, who think they can repent, and yet do abide,
and remain in their sins. And therefore they may with Esau, hunte after a
blessing, and go without it. God regards not the flowers and fair show of
repentance, but he would have the fruits which true repentance brings
forth. Mat. 3
Bring forth (says John the Baptist to the Pharisees and Sadduces, who like
unto the fig tree had nothing but fair leaves) the fruits worthy of
amendment of life. It is not enough for us to confess our selves sinners, but
with this confession we must leave our sins and return unto our father. If
we still remain usurers, fornicators, drunkardes, and such like sinners,
there is no repentance in us, and God refuses this repentance which we offer
him, as the gold which is too light, and the grain which wants measure. Our
only Anchorhold, and refuge is the Lord, we must return home and reconcile
our selves to him from whom we have departed by our sin and wickedness. We
must weep with Ezechias, Isai. 38
and turn our faces to the wall, we must cast down our selves at the feet
of Christ, Luke 7
with Mary Magdalen the sinner: we must lament our sins bitterly with Peter:
we must cry unto the Lord, Matt. 26 Ionae. 3 Acts. 2 Romans 12
with our voice with the Ninevites: we must be converted, and amend our lives,
wit^ the repentant Jews: we must be changed by the renewing of our mind: and
being made whole, we must sin no more, John. 5
least a greater plague do come unto us.

The subject and ground of an unfeigned repentance is our exchange of our
former life, and an alteration of the whole man. The mind must be humbled with
a godly sorrow for our former sins, which is the sorrow the Apostle
speaks of, Cor. 7
that makes to salvation.

Wherefore o man consider with thy self, what calamity, and destruction thy
sin does lead thee unto, and bewail thy case in time, and return with speed
from this danger, which otherwise must ensue upon thee.

similitude
If thou should see a most comely, and beautiful virgin, of great birth and
wealth, and passing wisdom, to be married to a sorded and stinking companion,
were not the sight rufull? and would thou not lament her unhappy condition?
thou could do no less. But this is thy case, and thou art the same, for thy
soul as the kings daughter is exceeding glorious, fairer then the daughters
of Sion, and the children of men, comely as the tents of Kedar, ^an^. 1
and as the curtains of Solomon. Wed it not therefore unto slavish sin, let
her not be polluted, and defiled with iniquity.

similitude
The Bucke that is hunted, and pursued with hounds, mourns and howleth: our
sins do hunt us, and follow us as hounds, let us therefore mourn and taste
of sorrow for it.

The daughter of Iepthe went a part to the mountains, ^g, 11
to bewail her Virginity two months together with her maiden company
because she was to die: so since we must die by reason of our sins, and
we know not how soon, oh let us be solitary, and bewail our sins with
the saints that fear God, and repent our selves of them.

Godly men have greatly mourned for other men, as Samuel 1. Sam. 1^
2. Sam. ^^
for Saul, because God had cast him off; and David for Absalon, who was slain
for his wickedness: much more the^ ought we to mourn for our selves, and rend
our hearts, and not our garments, for our infinite transgressions, and to
turn unto the Lord.

When as Michah hastily pursued after those, who had stolen away his gods, and
they demanded of him what he ailed: he dolefully answers, Judge. 17
Have ye stolen away my gods from me, and do ye ask me what Iaile.

This is the sorrow that brings joy at the last, and shall wipe away al
tears from our eyes. For as the Psalmist says, They that go out mourning
shall return home with joy, and bring their she^ues with them. Consider of
what efficacy and virtue it is, and how available it will be to the godly,
The efficacy of a godly sorrow.
when as it has been of that grace and strength, as to bring a blessing even
upon the wicked.

Esau by his weeping extorted and wrong a blessing from his father Isaac, Genesis
2^
albeit his blessing was gone before he came, and bestowed upon Jacob.

A^ the enemies of the Israelites, Exodus 14
the whole host of the Egyptians perished in the waters of the red sea so in
the brackish and salt waters of repentance all our sins the most capital and
deadly enemies to us the Israel and people of God, shall be utterly overthrown
and cast as it were into the bottom of the sea.

Judith. 7
Wherefore as Holofernes when he besieged Bethulia, that he might easier
vanquish it, stopped the fountains and passages of the water, that should run
unto it, to battle and to refresh it: so our adversary the devil, as another
Holofernes, that he might the sooner have the conquest of us whom he daily
does besiege, he would stop the streams, and conduct pipes of our tears,
that they should not gush out of our souls, to water, and refresh us in the
midst of our extremity.

Matt. 2
Wherefore kill Herod that Christ may live: slay thy sins, that thy soul may
live. If we live after the flesh we shall die, Gal 5.
but if we die to the flesh we shall live: and Herod being dead Christ will
return again into Egypt.

As Jacob was called Jacob, which signifies a supplanter, ^en. 3^
before he was called Israel, which is seeing God: so we must first be Jacob
and supplant our sins, and take them by the hee^^ as Jacob did Esau, and give
them a fall, before we can be Israelites, and see God, and be partakers of his
kingdom.

^od. 19
As God gave commandment to stone the beast, which would approach and touch the
mountain: so we drawing near by heavenly meditations to Gods most holy
mountain, it is enioined us to kill the beast, our sensual pleasures, and
sinful lusts, which are nothing else but beastly,

Wherefore pour out thy heart like water, We must repent our selves of all our
sins. Lament. 2
as Hieremy exhorts thee before the face of God: like water not like honey,
oil, or wine. If any other liquour beside water be poured out of a vessel,
somewhat of the liquour will hang unto the sides, or remain in the bottom
especially clammy, and limie substance as oil, and honey, or at the least the
savor of that liquour is still retained, and remains in the cup: if both
these fail yet will the glass, vessel, or cup, draw unto it the outward
color of that liquor, as it were wholly altered and changed into that color.
But water does none of these, for it runs out clearly, it leaves neither
substance, color, or savor at all behind it. Therefore we must (as the
Prophet warns) pour forth our spirits like water, as to our power we may
leave no remainder, no dregs, no substance, no show of sin behind us, but
pour it out al out of the vessels of our hearts,

Wherefore as God commanded Saul to destroy Amalech, and to reserve no creature
alive, 1. Sam, 15
neither sheep, or oxen, or any other thing: Romans 6.
so God commands us utterly that we do abolish the whole body of sin, that
no part of sin be kept alive in us.

When as the Israelites were under Pharao his bondage, Exodus 10
and when as Israel was to sacrifice unto the Lord, Pharao spoke thus unto
Moses and to Aaron. Go sacrifice unto the Lord only let your sheep and cattle
remain. He would have a pledge and assurance of their return, and so would
the Devil have of, his captives, whom he holds in there sin when they
should depart from their sin by true repentance, and return unto GOD. He
would have some sin that we should not repent of that we may leave as a
pawn in his hand of our coming again: But answer thou the Devil as Moses
and Aaron did answer Pharao. All our, Cattle shall go with us, their shall
not remain a hoof behind us, there shall no sin tarry behind us, all
shall be slain and utterly destroyed.

As the Angel, when he delivered Peter out of prison, Act. 1^
he willed him to girde himself, and to bind on his sandales, not to leave
them behind him, least he should be moved to retire again for them: so we
going out of the prison of sin, let us not leave any sin behind, which
may cause us to return and may draw us back after it.

Leuit. 8
The Bullock that was slain by Aaron the priest for a sin offering, was not
only sacrificed, but also all the fat that was upon the inwardes, the kall
of the liver, and the two kidneyes, with their fat were burnt upon the
altar, yea the Hyde, the flesh, the doung was burnt with fire without the
host, as the Lord had commanded Moses. So we for our atonement, must offer
this sin offering, we must burn with fire, and consume all our sins, the
very doung and excrements must be done away, there must be nothing left.

We must serve sin as the altars of idolatry, Deuteronomy. 7
which God commanded should be thrown down, and crushed in pieces. Our sins
which we have worshipped, must be served as the Calfe, which the Israelites
adored: Moses grinded it to powder, and gave it to the people of Israel to
drink, that so he might be sure nothing should remain of it.

But this tractate of true repentance,

True it is, ought the godly to grieve that they have sinned, and also because
it could not be otherwise.

Gratian, and the other Peter Lombarde the master of the Sentences: she rather
wished that she had more such children, she was so far from sorrowing, for
those which she already had. Shall we sin then (says he) that grace may
abound? Romans 6
Nay, God forbid. How shall we that are dead to sin live yet therein?

Wherefore let us who are burdened with our sins, come before God, in a
godly sorrow for them, that he might ease us of them. Let the straie sheep
return unto his shepherd, the sick patient to his Physician, the sinner to
his Savior, the lost son to his merciful father, and the creature to his
Creator who is blessed for ever.

The third Chapter. That we must with the Prodigal son, join faith to our
repentance, the better to incite and prick us forward, to rtturne unto our
father.
Unless a sinner, wit^ the knowledge of his sin, and his godly sorrow
conceived for the same, does also strengthen himself with faith, and hops
of the pardon and forgiveness of it: it nothing at all avails him, it rather
serves as a sword to wound him, then a medicine for to heal him. It is to
no purpose for a man to know where he may have a sword, to take away his
life: rather let us seek where we may have a salve to cure our deadly
wounds and to preserve our life. But our only comfort and remedy is our faith
which withstandeth all temptations, overcomes all assaults, and preuenteth
desperation.

Faith is unto us, Exodus 14
as the fire and clowdy pillar was unto the Israelites, serving to conduct them
in their way out of Egypt, thorough the vaste wilderness: it guides us in the
right way, whilst we travail in the solitary desert of this world toward
the heavenly Canaan.

^ similitude
The strength of an house is in the foundation, and if that be sure the
building will not shake, for any storm and tempest that does beat against
it. Faith is the foundat^on and substance of our building. Faith is the
substance of things hoped for, Heb. ^^
and the evidence of things that are not seen.

Whilst the stern and maine Mast of a ship is found, if in a mighty
tempest, the mariners shall cast out their Anchors into the sea, and
disburden the ship of her heavy freight, it is to be preserved and saved
from shipwreck; but if these fail, and suffer wrack by the weather, it
cannot be that it should escape destruction: so men that are emptied as it
were of their virtues, and suffer their godliness daily to diminish; yet so
long as faith lasts, and remains steadfast, they cannot quite perish: but
let them loose this, there is no help for them, they loose altogether. This
similitude is Paul's, which he uses to this end writing thus to Timothy: 1.
Tim. 1
This commandment commit I unto thee, son Timotheus, that thou should
sight a good fight, having faith, and a good conscience, which some have put
away, and as concerning faith have made a shipwreck.

As Merchauntes, albeit they have sustained great losses, similitude
for two years together, yet a third lucky year makes up all again: so
though we have lost the good graces of God with this prodigal sonn^, yet if
at length we have a good faith with him, we shall well enough overcome, and
recover our former loss, and be in good estate, and happiness again.

What faith this man has, appears by his words: For after he acknowledged
his fathers bounty to his hired servants, he harteneth himself with the hope
of greater kindness, to be extended toward him upon his return, being a
son. And therefore premising and meditating upon this: How many hired
servants in my Fathers house have bread enough, and I die for hunger? He
cheereth himself with a confidence of comfort, saying to himself, I will
arise and go to my Father.

He placed his words in very good rank speaking to great purpose, to move
affections. I: a Son. They: Servants. They: have enough. I: die for hunger.
They many: and yet are replenished, I but one, and lo I am famished.
Therefore it must needs be well with me, if I return home, as it is with
them, who are now at home. I will therefore hie me home, and appear before my
father.

Wherefore unto the true repentance of our sin, consequently of necessity, a
true faith must be adjoined, which only discerns truth from falsehoode,
true repentance from hypocrisy, which stays it self wholly upon the word
of GOD, the foundation thereof, this word being the argument, and subject of
our faith. If therefore we do repent, and bewail our sins: it is manifest
that we are moved, and touched with Gods word, that it has pricked our hearts.
And this good tree cannot but bring forth good fruit, it cannot be idle in the
hearts of the faithful.

In this respect, learned men do make Faith, and Contrition, the two essential
parts and members of repentance. Contrition, whereby we repent that is past:
and faith whereby we hope of grace to come. We go not so fa re with them, as
to make faith a part of repentance: but we hold it needful that it be
matched with repentance, that it go hand in hand with it, that it be not
divorced and divided from it. In man there are two parts whereupon he does
consist, ^^militude
the mind and the body, yet we say not that the mind is a part of the
body, or the body of the mind. The like may be said of faith and
repentance. In the Sun there is his orbicular and round proportion,
similitude
and his light and brightness: yet though they be conjoined, neither is the
form of it a part of this his brightness, neither is his brightness, any
part of his form. So faith and repentance go together in the faithful, and
are not separated; yet one of them is not a member of the other: faith is
joined to it as the original of it, the only motive of it, like unto a
Captain that gives the onset. This holds up our slipperie feet from
falling, and this lifts up those that are down: this makes us to go
thorough fire and water, and orders our goings: this is the victory that
overcomes the world.

This makes us to march out courageously with David against Goliath of Gath,
that uncircumcised Philistine, it teaches our hands to war, and our fingers
to fight, and our arms to break even a bow of steel. Marcellinus Bishop of
Rome, Marcellinus B. of Rome.
having before sacrificed unto Idols, and by faith moved to repentance, boldly
preached that which he denied before, became a martyr for the truth sake, and
confirmed it with his deaths

Cyprian in his sermon and treatise de lapsis, makes mention of Castus and
Aemilius, Castus and Aemiliu^*
who violently coacted to an abiuration of the truth, through extremity of
torments, afterward being reclaimed thorough remorse of conscience,
repenting themselves exceedingl^e of their weakness, grew so strong in the
faith, as they overcame the fire, and brake the ice valiantly, and
courageously did undergo the tyranny of their tormentors.

But what need we heap up foreign examples, seeing we have so many
domestical. The late time of Queen Mary affords us many. Master Fox in his
book of Monuments, does largely entreat of them: among others in London, there
was a certain priest, who thorough fear of the cruelty, and bitterness of
death which was before his eyes, abiured and renounced the true religion and
embraced Popery: But the Balaamite Bishop, Bonner.
the bloody Bull of Basan, not contented with his simple abiuration, demanded
the signature of his hand, and seal unto a prescribed form of recantation,
which he gave him; which this simple poor soul accordingly consigning, and
redeliuering the schedule to the Bishop, departed from him. But returning home
he conceived such sorrow and repentance of his sin, as it working by a
zealous and invincible faith, he reuersed his handwriting, resigned his
consignment, and willed the tyrant to do with him what he list. Let us
therefore be armed with this armor, and we shall be more then conquerors, in
him that loves us. Be we sorrowful for our sins, and have we faith, and
sure hope of the forgiveness of our sins: Faith, without repentance is mere
dissimulation; and repentance without faith causes desperation.

Matt. 3
The Baptist who preached to the Sadduces of judgment, and showed them the axe
that was put to the Tree, to cut them off by reason of their sins, does
also comfort them with a song of mercy, pointing with his finger at the Lamb
of God, ohn. 1
who should take away the sins of the world.

Peter, after that he had pricked the hearts of the Jews, by grating their
ears, with a rehearsal of the circumstances of their cruelty, in desiring a
murderer to be given them, and in crucifieng the Lord of life: he healed
immediately these wounds again, Je^. 3
and gave them a plaster to lay upon their soars willing them to repent and
persuading them to the faith of the forgiveness of their sins.

Paul when he was a Saul, was no sooner stricken down, and felled unto the
ground, by a light which appeared unto him at noone day: but he was raised up
again with a heavenly voice, which comforted and instructed him what he
should do.

Let us therefore walk in the kings high way between fear, and hope. Let
fear afright us with the feeling of our sins: and let us be comforted with
the hope we have of the remission of our sins. The knowledge of our sins,
together with Gods mercy which pardons our sins, being duly considered,
makes us degenerate and lost children with the prodigal son to return home
unto our Father.

The fourth Chapter. Of the benefit of afflictions: an especial mean which God
uses to work our repentance, and to cause our return to our fathers house,
with the prodigal son
But the means which this loving and merciful father uses, to draw home his
wandering, and far gone son, are meet to be considered, of which there are
many, and several kinds; but they may all of them, summarilie be reduced
unto these two chief heads. The first is his externe and outward calling: the
second is his interne and inward lightning us.

From the first root, springs these branches. His calling us by his word,
whereby he teaches us his will and our duty. His private admonitions which
are either given us by our friends for our good, in kindness to win us; or
else by our enemies, in their bitter affections, very forcible in regard of
the hurt they intend us, of themselves to reclaim us. Add hereto his
punishments, his signs of anger, his most dreadful judgments, which are
infinite and unspeakable showed in the heaven, the water, and the earth, all
which are sound alarums and loud thunderpeales, to rouse us out of the dead
sleep and security, in which we live.

But these neither severally nor jointly take effect, unless our hearts be
inwardly mollified, naturally obdurate, and of themselves most deaf unto all
outward warninges. There must be a lightening and illumination inward,
before we will be moved with the calling which is outward. Of the which
purposing peculiarly to entreat in his fit place, in the third Book, upon
the occasion offered by his fathers seeing him a far off, I leave it at this
time: for our drift is now to show the virtue, force, and manifold use, of his
outward judgments, what deep impressions they make in men's affections,
altering and reclaiming their degenerate dispositions.

The fullness of bread, and abundance of pleasures, which this young man had at
will in his fathers house, puffed him up with pride, made him wild and wanton,
and bred in him a loathsomeness and contempt of them. Hereupon he gave himself
to all riot and excess, he became a trauailer, spending without ceasing,
without order and discretion, until all his portion and patrimony was
consumed. Immediately he came to a low ebb, he fell suddenly into all
calamity, and this affliction gave him understanding, and wrought his
conversion. For being in the top and height of his prosperity, God first of
all punished him with want and scarcity, whereby he that bought the
constrained courtesies of many men's knees, with the expenses of so many
pounds being out of his money, he was out of request: they who before did
reverence him as a God, did now reject him and despise him as a dog.
Forthwith slavery ouertooke his beggerie, his bondage as most noisome, so was
it most grieuoussome, for it brought leanness even upon his soul, one might
tell all his bones, and his strength failed him, being now forgotten as a
dead man, and utterly forsaken. He became a worm and no man, an abject from
the company and fellowship of men, living among beasts, hunting after husks,
loving now as much the fragments and reuersion of hogs, as he loathed before
in his fathers house the variety of all delights of the sons of men.

These means God used as motives to stir up his dull spirits, and to quicken
him a fresh, to pluck him by the ears, and to lift him up from his horrible
dunghill of mire and clay, and filthy swine, and to set his feet in a large
room, and to place him among princes, even the princes of his people.

This is the course which commonly God Afflictions ^o b^ing us home to God.
takes with his unruly and rebellious children, to bring them home again.
Voluit pater flagellare longinquum, Aug. ^^m. 8 in Psalm. 138 August. ibid.
vt reciperet propinquum. His father would scourge him a far off, because he
would receive him near at hand. Nam sibene mihi esset sine te, nollem forsitan
redire ad te. For if I might do well without thee, I would not doubtless
return unto thee.

Wherefore, because afflictions do weane us from our sins, and bring us unto
God, it is most needful that God should humble us with afflictions. A
similitude
And he does thereby as the tender mother with her young child, who rubbeth
the ends of her breasts with mustard, or some other thing, to make the infant
forsake his milk, and to leave the dug.

If a mighty Prince should promise unto any, all his wealth and treasure
which is in his treasure-house, similitude
who could unlock and open the door of it, and should therewithal give us
two keys, the one of gold which could not open it, and the other of iron
which could open it though the gold be of a better substance by nature then
the iron, yet in respect that it serves not to so good an end, he is but a
fool who refuses the iron key, to make choice of the golden. God promises
unto us the treasures of his grace, if we will strive to enter into this gate,
we see manifestly that a golden key that is riches and prosperity in this
world, will not open it: but the iron key so row and adversity, will open
that which is shu^te, and bring us to abundance. Oh therefore if we be wise
take we this in our hand and let us go to the lock with it.

Before the grape can yield his orient pleasant wine, A similitude
the juice thereof must first be pressed out by the force of the Winepresse.
We must first be pressed, and oppressed with afflictions, before our best
juice can be wringed from us, and we can more evidently show our faith and
patience.

If God mightily blesses our estate, enricheth us with wealth, backeth us
with friends, increases us with children, Job. 1
what marvel is it if we do serve God: Do we serve God for naught, as the
devil said of Job? But the case is now altered, it is rather to be marvelled,
if in such an estate we do not forget God, and neglect to serve him.
Prosperity leads us far from God with the prodigal son, and adversity
brings us home again with him, and therefore God sends it.

When the young child runs from the mother, and will not come unto her, A
similitu^
the mother causes one to make it afraid with a vizard, or the like, and
immediately the child runs to the mother. We are as young children, who never
run to God but when adversity and fear drives us.

No sooner God prospers us, A simili^
but we look from him, our eyes are only upon him in our need. We are like
dogs, who so long as they are hungry, they fix and fasten their eyes upon
their master: but he no sooner casts down a crust or a bone, but they
presently look downwarde, and they run after that: but when that is eaten,
their eyes as before are lifted up again, and they behold their master.

Genesis ^
The more the waters of the flood increased, the more the Arc of Noah was
lifted up: the more the waters of our trouble do increase, the more we do lift
up our hearts unto God.

The more God afflicts us, the better we learn him. A similitude
An Inkeeper will better take knowledge of that guest that bestows some
blows of him, then he will of him who spends much money of him. Genesis 4^


Joseph his brethren would not vouchsafe to know him in the time of their
prosperity, but famishment made them to go into Egypt, and to find him out.
When God strikes a land with famine, we howl and cry unto him, then we
come with our sackes to Egypt, and then we bring our best presents to the man,

^od. 11
The more the people of Israel were persecuted, the more fervently cried they
unto God: we are these old Israelites, the more we are afflicted, the more we
are obedient.

^e^. 9
The conversion of Saul began at his affliction which made him a Paul: he was
no sooner stricken with a lightning to the ground, but the heart of him was
lightened, and he said unto God: Lord what will thou have me do?

Affliction is one of the strings belonging to the Lords bow, which he makes
ready against the face of us, when we do withstand him, whereby he slays our
sins in us. What moved Adam to a better remembrance of himself, and the
commandment of God, Genesis 3
but the knowledge of his nakedness, the voice of God which called him in the
Garden, the hard task he did put him unto to dig the ground, and with his
sweat to get his living all the days of his life, his casting out of
Paradise, whereby he lived as a banished man upon the face of the earth? God
followed him with his judgments, that he might make him partaker of his
mercies, and draw him to himself.

The like course was taken with David in his sin, when he wilfully had
committed adultery and murder: God not only sent him his Preacher Nathan, to
rebuke him of his sin, but he sent him afflictions to draw him from his
sin, as the incest committed with his daughter Thamar by her brother Ammon,
the slaughter of his son Ammon, the sedition of his son Absalon, his civil
insur^ection, his most fearful execution. All these as summoners cited his
conscience to appear at gods Court and constrained him to come home to God, in
all obedience, from whom he had so started by his former disobedience.

The Scriptures do every where set down unto us this use that we may make
unto our selves of afflictions, that they serve us as wandes, to drive out the
dust that is in our clothing, and make us leave our sins and return to God.

Deuteronomy. 30
After a vehement co^mination of many grievous judgments ripped up, and
denounced by Moses against the Israelits: he infers this clause as the
sequel of them, that they shall turn into their heart, and by them learn to
look into their sins, and return unto the Lord. Answerable whereunto is this
saying of Osea. O^ea. ^
Come let us return unto the Lord for he has spoiled us, and he will heal
us. Ezechiel Ezech. 7
sings the self same song when as he says, Calamity shall come upon
calamity, I will do then according to their ways. The Prophet Jeremy Ie^e.
2.
tells the Israelites, that howsoever at that time they turned their backs,
and not their faces, yet in the time of trouble they should be altered, and
should say unto God arise and help us. To this end David thus powers out his
spirit, and prays unto God. Psalm. 81
Make their faces ashamed O Lord, that they may know thy name. Mala ^n m quae
nos premunt ad deum ire compellunt, says that learned Grego^ie: Afflictions
which do press us do compel us to return to God. King. 18
The Israelits being vexed with a most grievous famine in the time of Elias,
were reclaimed from their wickedness, and called home to God. Chro. 26
King Manass^h afflicted with misery and iron, deuo^tlie and zealouslie gave
himself to prayer. John the Baptist, by thundering out the judgments of God
against Sadduces and sinners, ^at. 3
wrought their conversion. If the prodigal son had not been afflicted, but
might have lived at liberty and pleasure abroad, we should not have heard of
his coming home. But it was affliction, that was his best instruction, and
wrought his conversion.

If we suruay the causes why God afflicts us, The causes for which god
sends afflictions.
we shall learn much patience: troubles shall not come unto us as Iaylors unto
prisoners, but we shall endure them with a quiet mind: for there is a manifold
use that comes of them.

First they serve notably to curble our proud minds, and to tam^ ^^e wanton
lusts of the flesh, which in our prosperit^e is overmuch pregnant, insulting
and preuayling over the motions of the spirit.

When as Peter was commended by his Master Christ, for his good confession,
Matt. 16
he was so perte and proud of this praise, as he presumed afterward most
malapertlie to gainesay him.

The spouse in the Canticles, Cant. 3
being commended by her bridegroom for her suspassing beauty, in comelines
resembling the tents of Kedar, and the Curtains of Solomon, grew thereby so
audacious, as she talked and communed so familiarlie with him, as one friend
with another, putting forth questions, asking him where he fed, and where he
did lay at noone.

Zebedeus his two sons, Matt. 20
because they were so happy, as by fleshly consanguinitie to be allied to
Christ, they presently were so bold, as to claim a prerogative and liberty
by it, to challenge the left hand, and right hand in his kingdom.

Wherefore because worldly favor and prosperity, do so puff us up with pride
as we forget our selves: it is exceeding good that we fall into temptations,
which are good schoolmaisters to train us up in the knowledge of our selves.

A similitude
The master that has a servant lying sick, if he sees that wine is hurtful
for him, gives commandment to alay it with water, which may abate the heat,
and operation of the wine: so God our good master, seeing us his servants to
be very sick of sin, and perceiving that the wine of worldly prosperity is
poysonable unto us, he slacketh the power and hurtful effect of it, by mixing
the water of tribulation with it.

A similitude
That Gentleman that has a Hawke of great account, will vouchsafe the pains
himself in attending and dieting him, he will coy and stroke him with his
own hand, and smooth his feathers, and takes great delight in the often
looking on him: but as he does thus, so he likewise hoodeth him, and f^st tyeth
him by the feet unto the Perch. If this seems strange to him that has no
skill, and is not acquainted with the reason of it, but shall first demand why
he tends and tendereth him so much? Answer will be made, because he so
loves him: If further it be asked, why then he hoodeth, lies and fettereth
him? it will be answered, le^st the Hawke which he so loves should escape and
fly from him: so the Lord deals with his beloved people he feeds and
cockereth us, because we are his darlinges, and he greatly loves us: but he
hoodeth us, and binds us therewithal unto adversity, because we should not
depart away from him, roauing and scouting after our own liberty.

Thus heedfullie did he tend and look unto David, as any man can look unto
his hawke, 1. Sam. 16.17
prosecuting and following him with favor upon favor, ca^ling him from a
shepherd to the government of a kingdom, putting a new heart into him, and
indewing him with the spirit of prophecy in very ample measure, in giving him
a famous field against Goliath, and so renowning him by the slaughter of the
Philistines: as his name grew most glorious, and he became the staff and
subject of the dittie of the damsels of Israel, who playing upon their pipes
and musical instruments sung with one consent, and with sweet concent, Saul
has slain his thousand, but David his ten thousand. These things God did
for him, because he so loved him. But least he should be too proud by them,
the Lord hooded him, and tied him to the perch, in stirring up Saul to be his
persecutor by whose persecutions he was so ensnared and surely tied, as he
could not fly away, for the very snares of death did overcome him, and the
pains of hell it self did overtake him.

Joseph was his fathers only bird, God made him not only gracious in the
eyes of his father, but also amiable and delightful to his mistress: now
least this culling him should be a mean as it were to kill him, as by
hurting his soul, and alluring him from God, he was sold from his father by
his brethren into Egypt, Genesis 27 Genesis 29
and was quite cast out of favor by his mistress, and by his master fast
bound in the prison, as a hawk unto the perch.

1. King. 19
The Lord was ever loving to Elias, and he used familiarly to talk with him,
as a father with his son, or one friend with an other: now least he should be
overmuch conceited with this abundant kindness, and be too fond upon this favor,
the Lord mixed trouble with prosperity, and sent Iezabel to persecute him.

Ezechiel Ezech. 2.
was mightily inspired with the spirit, and had many revelations, but that
these should not make him dote upon himself, and to esteem too highly of
himself, he heard this voice always sounding in his ear, Son of man, that
for all this favor and love of God, he should know himself, that he is but
man. Paul had a lively feeling hereof, ^. Cor. 12
as he himself acknowledges: for least the abundance of Revelations should
extol him, the Angel of Satan was sent unto him to buffet and humble him.
Afflictions therefore serve very well to tame and keep under our sinful
affections.

Secondly, God sends afflictions to his Saints, that not being burdened
with earthly prosperity, we might go the lighter and speedyer unto God, and
fly as it were a bird unto the hill.

It so often happens to wayfayring men, that espying in their traveling a
delightful green hill, A similitude
they take occasion to slack their journey, to go out of the way, to sit
down and rest themselves upon that hill. Wherefore to prevent and cut off such
occasions of lingering and loytring whilst we are in this life, which is as it
were out way, he takes away from us all vain shows of pleasures, that not
being miscarried with the vanity of such flowers, which adorn this green
hill, we might still go forward, and make more haste to heaven.

As God permitted Pharaoh to afflict the Israelits, Exodus 1
that they might have a longing of their departure from Egypt, and love the
land of Canaan: so God would have us his children to be afflicted, that we
might desire to depart from the Egyptian bondage of our sin, and covet our
spiritual inheritance, and Canaan in the kingdom of heaven.

If a man that trauelleth into a far land, may there obtain his hearts
desire, and live as him lists, he will not much desire to return to his own
Country, to live in adversity. For Jacob was willing enough to soiorne with
Laban, so long as Laban well entreated him: but when he was uncivilly demeaned,
and his face was not toward him as it was before, he forthwith resolved upon
his departure, and acquainted Rachell with it.

Thirdly, God exercises his servants with afflictions, to terrify them from
sin, and thereby to give them knowledge of his hatred of sin. For albeit
that God remitteth some men's sins without afflicting them for their sins,
as the theefes upon the Cross, whose sin and punishment he remitted, (...)
23 (...)
saying: This day shall thy soul be with me in Paradise: As the Publicans
who upon his submisse suit for mercy for his sin, ^u^e 23
without further judgment went out of the temple justified and released, and
absolved of his sin: and as Peter's lewd abiuration of the faith, and denial
of his master without further process of justice, according to the desert of
his enormous sin, upon his repentance was discharged of his sin, received
into grace, and restored again unto his office of Apostleship: Lachrimas
Petrilego satisfactiones non lego, says S. Ambrose. I read of Peter's tears,
but I read not of Peter's satisfaction for his sins. (...)
And finally as the Palsy man's whose sins he forgave him, as soon as he
saw him, without inioyning any other thing unto him: yet commonly it is Gods
course with afflictions and rebukes to punish men for sin: and therefore for
the most part, judgment does begin at the Lords house, that the vilde man and
sinner may tremble before him.

Fourthlie, God suffers us to be afflicted here, that we may be happy
elsewhere, to be crucified with Christ in this world, to be glorified with him
in the world to come. So that ye troubles of this life, ground us in the hope
of another life, of the genera^ resurrection, and just retribution that therein
shall be given according to our deeds, either good or evil*

It agrees with Gods justice to punish sinners, and to be merciful to his
servants: now because his servants are here punished, and his enemies
comforted there must be an inuersion and exchange of times, that they may be
succored, and the other tormented, and this is at the general day of
reckning, and after our death upon the departure of the soul out of the body,
which immediately goes to heaven or to hell, at what time is fulfilled the
saying of Abraham to the rich glutton. Luke 1^
Son remember that thou in thy life time did enjoy thy pleasure, and
Lazarus pain: but now is he comforted, and thou art tormented.

Fifthly, God afflicts us to make us conformable to the image of his son,
who suffered al afflictions. If our good master has suffered such sorrows for
us evil servants, why should not we reciprocallie endure sorrows for so good
a master?

He is a cowardly and dastardly soldior, A similitude
who seeing his captain to be wounded and slain in the field before his
face, will not stand to it and abide the trial, and take such part as the
captain does before him. We have Christ his name, and are called Christians,
because that we should live as Christ did. If thy bridegroom Isaac comes out
a foot, thou must imitate Rebecca, and come down from thy cammel, and go a
foot with him. Christ walked here in all adversity and contempt, and hatred of
the world, and will thou be mounted on thy stately stead, and labor to aspire
to the top of al prosperity, and yet be a Christian? It cannot so be come down
and walk as Christ has appointed you to walk, and suffer afflictions as the
dear sons of God, as the son of God did. Thus have we a manifold use of
afflictions: God give us grace to make this use of them.

The fifth Chapter. Of the prodigal son his confession of his sins, a most
necessary effect of our true repentance.
THe prodigal son has hitherto bin occupied about zealous meditations, but
whilst he mused, the fire kindled, and now at the last he speaks with his
tongue. Bethinking himself how he might pacify his father: he thinks it
expedient, and not without good judgment to begin his satisfaction, with a
dutiful confession. Give glory to God my son, says Joshua ^osue 7
unto Achan, when as he persuaded him to confess his sin, insinuating
thereby, that God is greatly glorified by the confession of out sins.

He that will not confess his sins before God, argues great pride and
boldness of mind, and that he sorroweth or cares little for them. It is a
requisite and most needful duty, and the saints of God commonly do use it.

It was David's chief comfort when the hand of God was very heavy on him, and
he had a fierce combat with many strong temptations. For whilst he dolefully
displaieth them unto us, ripping them up by their several circumstances after
this manner: Psalm. 32
My bones consumed away through my daily complaining, for thy hand is heavy
upon me day and night, and my moisture is like the drought in Summer, He ran
unto this as unto his last refuge, saying in this wise: I will knowledge my
sin unto thee, and mine unrighteousness have I not hid. I said I will confess
my sins unto the Lord, and so thou forgauest the wickedness of my sin.

In many of his Odes and heavenly Hymns, the kingly harper harpeth upon this
note: but most tunable, and melodiouslie in the fifty one Psalm, Psalm. 51
he trebbleth and quauereth and capereth upon it. I knowledge my sin, and my
sin is ever before me. Against thee only have I sinned, and done this
evil in thy sight, that thou might be justified in thy saying, and clear
when thou art judged. Behold, I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has
my mother conceived me.

Daniel Dan. 9
did the like, and the brief and form of his confession is this, We have
sinned, we have done wickedlie. Esdras and Nehemias Esdr. 9 Nehem. 1
made such confessions openly for the people. And we are taught the like in
that copy of prayer which is set us by Christ, Matt. 6
when as we acknowledge our selves to be debtors, and do pray unto God that
he would pardon and forgive us our trespasses. Saint John 1. Ioh. 1
commends this duty unto us, in the first of his Canonical, when as he
says: If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins.

Leuit. 16
Confession of sins was Gods own ordinance, instituted by him in the old
church, and commanded to be solemnlie observed and celebrated before the face
of the church, by the priest, at the feast of Purification, the priest laying
his hands upon a Goat, and publicly confessing the sins of the people-

By this we must have access unto God, and this is the door by which we must
enter into favor with him. We must not dote upon our own merits, and
righteousness, which is nothing, if we will be suitors and speeders in our
suits but we must come as poor men with prayer, and submission.

(...) similitude
He is a fond fellow, who sitting by the way side to beg the devotions of people
passing by, shows them his gold, and boasts himself of his wealth and
substance. This is not the mean to move affections, or to toll on a people
to chargeable contributions. Beggars do usually speak of their wantes,
acknowledge their necessities, and present their wounds and swelling soars to
the view of passengers, to stir up compassion. If we will find favor before the
Lord, and would have his eye to pity us, brag we not of our demerits, but
bemoane we our miseries, let us not be in the tuffe, but show we him our
nakedness that he might cloth us, our weakness, sickness, and poverty,
that he might strengthen, heal, and make us rich.

(...) ^^militude
That diseased patient who is in that case, as when he is stricken in a vain by
the Chirurgian, he retains still the corrupt and gross blood, but loses
that which is pure and clean, cannot but saint, and fall under his hand, but
he that does the contrary recouereth himself, and obtains health thereby:
so a sinner that concealeth and keeps in his sins, as it were his gross
blood, and publishes and proclaims his good works, and suffers them as
the purer blood to spin and issue from him, his health is desperate, and cannot
be recovered: but of the other side, he that lets out this infected
substance, and purges himself thereof in all lowliness of mind, by a godly
confession of his misdeedes before God his heavenly Chirurgian, and concealeth
and keeps close his inward virtues and good graces of God as most wholesome
blood which God has given unto him, he shall do very well, and shall be
perfectly restored to his health, and shall live for ever.

It is the nature of the wicked, to paint out their praises, and to spread
abroad their good deeds among men. So did the Sydonian king Balaake very
boldly, Number 22
when he boasted unto Balaam of his altars which he had made, as if God were
purblind, and saw not well enough what a feate he had done, when as not only the
nature of every work, but also all circumstances thereunto belonging, are
well known to him. For when Christ was at table at the Pharisie his house he
not only observed Marie Magdalens action, but also roundly rebuked Simon, by
rehearsing up the specialties of her zealous devotion.

A similitude
He that comes to a Physician to be cured, and hides from him his diseased
parts, and will not make him acquainted with his griefs, how can he have
remedy of the^ at his hands? if we will be eased we must complain, if we will
have a salve let us show our soar, let confession go before, that remission
may follow after. Vain glorious and foolish men, who do set a good dye upon a
bad cloth, and make as it were a flourish before the field, dilating their
deeds, extending and stretching them, as if they were parchment skins upon the
tenters, similitude
they be like unto Hens, who no sooner lay an egg, but they cackle so loud
as all the house may know it. The Pehen is a wiser foul in her kind,
similitude
for she hides her eggs, because she knows that the Pecocke seeks them,
who will suck them if he finds them. Let us be so wise in our generation,
as to hide such good things as God suffers us to bring forth, for there is a
proud Pecocke, even our enemy the devil that seeks to destroy them.

(...) similitude
He that trauaileth by the way, and carries much money with him, commonly has
two purses, he hides one of them in the which he has most, and that he
must draw out upon every occasion, has no more then is needful to defray
expenses, whereby he is sure that if he lights upon thieves by the way, he
loses but a little. This care should we have if we would not be robbed of
such his good blessings which out good God has given us.

^ch. ^
God called Ezechiel and said unto him. Son of man, dig now in the wall. And
when I had dug in the wall, behold there was a door. And he said unto
me, go in, and behold the wicked abominations that they do here. So I
went in, and saw and behold there was every similitude of creeping things,
and abominable beasts, and all the Idolles of the house of Israel painted
upon the wall round about. So, O thou sinful soul, God speaks unto thee,
break a door thorough the stony wall of thy conscience, and enter into thy
heart, see and confess what filthiness is there hid, thou shall find there
similitudes of creeping things, and abominable beasts, even beastly and
vilde affections, and all kinds of sins depainted in this wall of thy soul
and conscience, covetousness, pride, ungodly lusts, and when thou have named
all the sins thou can, yet thou shall cry out with the Prophet and say, and
yet behold more abominations then these.

Moses his hand seemed to be sound, Exodus 4
but when he did put it into his bosom, it was full of leprosy: our deeds
which are the effects of the hand, seem to us sound, but put we our hands a
while into our bosom, lay we them upon our hearts and consciences, out alas,
how are they polluted with a spiritual leprosy.

Sinners may very well be said, to bear the image of creeping beasts, which
Ezechiel did see thorough the door of the wall, according to that which the
Apostle says in his letter to the Romans. They turned the glory of the
incorruptible God, Romans 1
to the similitude of the image of a corruptible man, and of birds, Romans 1
and of four footed beasts, and of creeping things. And this much was
signified in the old law, wherein it was enacted, that no kind of beast should
be offered unto God, which did not ruminate and chew the cud.

Leuit. 11
It may be thou will say, that if thou could call thy sins to thy
remembrance, thou would willingly confess them; but now because thou have
forgotten them long since, thou think thou can not do it. Say not so, but
meditate a while and go apart, and shut up thy self in a private place, and by
contemplation, and studious meditation, they will come to thy remembrance.

^ similitude
When thou have been long abroad in the open air, and come into thy
chamber, it seems at the first, because the glimmering sun has dazeled
thine eyes, to be very obscure, and dark unto thee; but after thou have
continued a while therein all things appear clear and bright enough unto thee:
so when thou considerest with thy self of thy sins, and come home, having
before bin abroad wa^dring after thine own will, at the first sight thou will
not know thy self, the sun shine of this vain and transitory world, has so
dimmed and almost blinded the eyes of thy mind, as thy sins will seem strange
and obscure unto thee: but doubtless after thou have paused a while, and muzed
thereupon, thou shall have enough come into thy memory thou shall have a
sufficient subject of confession given thee to work upon.

Wherefore put thou this duty in practice, as it becomes a good Christian,
for it will make exceedingly for thy good. For those evils which thou have
done shall be turned into thy good, by thy faithfulness herein: A similitude
Even as a Be from four and bitter flowers, draws and gathers most sweet
and pleasant honey: so by the rehearsal of thy sour sins thou shall find
Gods heavenly comfort, to sweeten thy soul.

Thou have not gone further then the Prodigal son, for he went very far, he
wasted all he had long before his return, yet his confession wanted not a
blessing, for he was received and renewed again, and restored by his father
to his former happiness. Thou may have the like, if thou will do the like.
Repentance and a godly confession of our sins comes never too late with
God.

As he that falls by chance into a river up to the middle, yea up to the
chin, may for all that live: A similitud
but if so be his mouth be stopped with water, and the water covers him over
the ears and ouerwhelmeth him, he presentely perishes and sinketh like a
stone: so though we be deeply plunged in sin, yet may we get out and do well
enough, by holding up our heads, and opening our mouths confessing our sins:
but if the streams run over us, and our mouths be shut up, and we be choked
with the water, then must we needs drown, we cannot escape destruction.
Wherefore David said. I opened my mouth and did draw in my spirit. Psalm. 11
So open thou thy mouth wide in a true and lively faith, and thou shall be
saved, thou can not p^^siblie perish, for thy sins which thou now see,
when as thou confessest them thou shall never see more, for God shall drown
them in the bottom of the sea, even as the Israelites were told by God, that
the Egyptian enemies which they did see now they should see no more, Exodus 14
for God would drown them in the water of the red sea.

The devil cannot do us a greater mischief then to stop our mouths, and
therefore he keeps us, ^ similitude
as much as he can from opening our mouths to confess our sins. Wherein he
imitateth the condition of the Wolf, who whenever he falls upon a sheep,
he first of all lays sure hold upon his throat, that so thereby unable to
bleate, the shepherd might not hear his noise, and come out, and reskew him.

Wherefore that thou may escape the pawe of this Wolf and the mouth of this
beast, call upon the heavenly shepherd of thy soul, that he may preserve
thee, and confess thy sins unto him that he may forgive them. It is a common
speech, and saying among men: Confess, and be hanged, which is true in our
confession of our capital crimes before civil magistrates, but it is
contrary with God, for if we confess our sins unto him: He is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, (...)
and the blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin.

The sixth Chapter. The prod^gall son his form of his confession of his
sins.
THis prodigal son absolutely resolving with himself to confess his sins,
Of the benefit of meditation.
he before provides and prepares himself for it. He thinks it not meet
presumptuously to prease into his fathers presence, and without mature and ripe
deliberation, to exhibit up unto him his needful supplication. He gives us
to know that he intends it seriously, and therefore he addresseth himself
unto it advisedly. Therefore he ruminateth, and meditateth before of a set
form of speech that he will utter after.

This his course is very commendable, A similitude
and ought diligently to be followed. For what steward that is wise will not
before he give up his accounts, first bethink himself of the particular
sums which he has laid out, and draw a formal bill, or at the least
conceive in his mind what answer he will make when he comes to his Lord
touching all his demandes, before he be cited and summoned to his audit, and
called upon by his Lord to give up his reckoning.

An advocate, proctor, A similitud
or counsailor at the law studieth before he comes to the bar to plead his
clientes cause upon such cases and points of law, as may persuade his
purpose, and enforce his (...).

^^^pose there appertain as many books, and as ^r^^ study, and as much
conscience to be used of us in spiritual exercises, that we be not unprovided
before the high God, when we appear at his tribunal, but that we before like
to good stewards make our bills perfect, and like good wise lawyers consider of
such matters whereupon we are to speak that we may say with holy David, My
heart is prepared, my heart is prepared. I will sing and give praise.

Whatsoever thing is done without premeditation is proposterous and absurd.
Be not too rash in any thing thou do, but advise thee well before, and
ponder what thou do. The blessed virgin when she was greeted by the
Angel, before she answered ^t she considered upon it: Luke 1
the text says that she pondered with her self what kind of salutation it
should be. This her action answers very well this Canon of the Apostle.
Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they be of God or no.
When the Scribes and Pharisees brought to Christ the woman that was taken in
adultery, and asked his opinion and judgment of the case, ^ohn. 8
he demured upon the matter, and suspended his sentence, stooping down, and
with his finger writing upon the ground: teaching us thereby this wisdom, to
set a watch before our actions, and first of all to write them with the finger
of discretion, ^^^n. 20
before we do attempt them. Mary Magdalen who would rashly have touched Christ
upon his resurrection was rebuked by him: as we shall surely be who shall
rashly and vnpreparedly attempt heavenly matters. Wherefore take we heed how
we walk circumspectly, not as unwise, but as wise, redeeming the time because
the days are evil.

As meat of it self, though it be never so good, A similitude
requires his ordinary and fit seasoning, that it may be more wholesome and
pleasurable to the stomach: so must every good action be seasoned with his
salt, sprinkled and powdered with reason and judgment, that it may be
acceptable and delightful unto God, and therefore before thou speak unto God,
determine before with the Prodigal son what thou will say unto him. But let
us examine his formal confession, which is short, but substantial, full of
spirit and life, and matters of much moment.

First he only mentions his father, Our sins a^^ to be confessed to God only.
to whom he will flee unto, and unfold his sins. He will acquainte no
friend or neighbor of his father, with his defectes and wants: but he will
go to the fountain at the first, to God his only comfort, and help of his
complaint. Against the auricular confession o^ the papists A similitude
And herein he is the wiser. For as he is unwise who seeks health, and help
at his hands, who neither is endewed with learning to counsel him, or
furnished with medicines and means to recover him: so are they not only
foolish, but of all most miserable, who in the most dangerous diseases of their
souls, repair unto such dogleeches and paultrie pesants, who have neither wit
to counsel, or grace to comfort the^. To what end therefore is that
beggarlie rudiment of auticular confession? Our running unto monks and
sacrificing shauelings, whispering in their ears and confessing our sins to
them? an idle ceremony, an invention of man's brain, founded as it is supposed
by Pope Innocent the third, ^^b. 6. ca. 16.
or as So^zomen imagines, ordained by Bishops, especially by ye bishops of
the west parts. There is no precept and warrant for it in the holy scriptures,
albeit to make them serve their lewd fancies, they diuelishlie deprave many
places of the scriptures. But these Balaamites wound themselves with their
own Launcers, and we will cut off the head of Goliath of Gath as David did
with his own sword.

The arguments of the papists for auricular confession propounded and dissolved.
A chief reason which they allege to make their matter good, is an ancient
law provided by God for leprous persons, who are willed by God to resort unto
ye priest, appointed by God to be a judge of their disease. They dispute in
this wise. Leprosy is to be showed unto the priest, and leapers by the Matthew. 8
but sin is leaprosie, and every sinner is a spiritual Leper: Wherefore
every sin is to be showed unto the priest, and every sinner must confess
unto the priest, This argument hangs together like a sick man's dream, and
concludes nothing. I marvel by this argument, why the popish priests do
not draw to themselves all contagious and leprous persons, since this outward
leprosy must be judged of by the priest? If they stand so much upon it, I
could wish, that all noisome and plaguey persons might crowd unto them as
beggars to a dole, to show their botches, carbuncles, and biles, that they
might judge of them. But this leprosy they will say is meerelie allegorical,
it signifies the spiritual leprosy of sin: Then we answer, that the
reason is constrained, there is no certain sense and meaning in an allegory,
for allegories may be wrested, and wroung to and fro, and be diversely
understood. We answer more fully, that the old Leuiticall priesthood is
altered, it is wholly translated to Christ our high priest, to whom now alone
we must confess our sins. That law was civil, and served for those times,
it is now repealed, and is no more in force. Christ willed the leper to go
unto the priest, according to the law, because as yet Moses his law was in
force, and our Savior Christ came to be obedient unto it, as he himself
witnesses, Matt. 5
and not to break it.

Another reason which carries some countenance Mattth. 3
is formed in this wise. They came to John the Baptist, and confessed their
sins, wherefore in the like sort we must come unto the priest, and confess
our sins.

Here we desire more wit of them, for their logic fails them. We yield,
that the confession of sins is necessary, and it is no marvel that the
people did confess them when they came to Iohne for John then baptized, and
they came unto his baptism. Now baptism is the sign, and token of
repentance, and confession of sins is a branch of this Tree, and a member of
repentance. But all this while this their repentance and confession of their
sins, favors not as I can see their auricular confession. For they
confessed their sins publikelie, they came not creeping unto John the
Baptist, and told him privately of them in his ear. This all the dunsicall
Sorbonistes cannot prove, without which we plainly see, that they delude and
mock us, and do prove nothing.

Acts. 1^
and the eighteen verse, of the Ephesians, who confessed and showed their
works, has the self same answer with the former, and one thorn stops
well these two gappes, their confession there, was public, it was not
private, in the priests ear.

James, acknowledge your faults one to another, Jacob. 5
does them as little pleasure as the former testimonies: for the Apostle
speaks of mutual offenses, between neighbor and neighbor, and of mutual
reconcilement to be made between them, by their mutual acknowledgement of
them. The priest stands bound by the tenor of these words, to confess his
own sins, in the peoples ears, as well as the people are in the priests ears.

They dote very much upon this aphorism of Solomon and are much co^ceited in
it. He that hides Pro. 28.13
and forsakes them shall have mercy. But this argument is most weak, it has
no iointes or sinews in it. It wholly respects the confession of our sins
before almighty God, and not the confession of them to the world, and least of
all the auricular papisticall confession.

I might heap up infinite beggarly and doltish reasons, but the more we stir
a dunghill, Esai. 43.11. and 25.
the more it stinketh, and therefore I will not infect your godly senses with
them. God says by the mouth of his Prophet Esaias. I am he, and besides me there
is none that puts away thine iniquities and thy sins. Therefore to whom
should we confess our sins, but only to him who can forgive us our
sins?

The prodigal son in this his form of confession, has a very good Method,
and his words are very suitable, and fall out fitly into his purpose.

He rather chooses to call him father, then his Lord or master, Why the
prodigal son calls him father rather then Lord and master.
albeit he is both, and all in all unto him. For hereby he has boldness, and
access unto his presence.

A son without offense may ask more of his father, then a servant of his
master. The name of a father is an enticing name, it sets wide open the
everlasting gates of mercy, for every prodigal repentant son, Matt. 6
at all times to enter in. Wherefore Christ in his formal prayer, prescribed
unto us, makes an entrance thereunto with this title, and prefixeth in the
forefront, to give grace to such petitions preferred afterward, the sweet
name of Father.

John. 8
The Jews vaunted and boasted exceedingly that they had Abraham to their
father, how ought we much more to rejoice and be glad, having God to be our
father? Romans 8
For if we are sons, we are also heirs, for that is Paul's conclusion. We
can want nothing, Matt. 6 Job. 16
For our heavenly father knows whereof we stand in need: and our heavenly
father loves us as Christ himself says.

Therefore because this title was so encouraging, and so full life, it was with
good reason that this comfortless and almost dead person, did take hold of
this as the City of refuge, and horns of the altar, by which he might be sure
to escape further vengeance, and the hands of the destroier.

he will be our father, and we shall be his children; we cannot have a greater
blessing and happiness, then to have such a father.

Thirdly, it could not be, but that the memory of A similitude
to consort themselves basely with nasty and vild companions. Is it not
intolerable that a kings son should disport himself openly in the streets,
and highwaies with every sorded beggar, filthilie, and shamefullie to nusse
among swine, and to grouel and wallowe in the dirte, and in the mire? This was
the condition of this young man's life, of this peerless prince of the highest
descent, having God, the king of all kings to be his father. And this is the
course and order of our life, who are his brethren, and have all of us one
Father, and are made his children by adoption and grace thorough faith in
Christ Jesus.

Wherefore let the blessed memorial of our new birth, be most deer unto us, 1.
Sam, 10
and let the name of our father be always in our minds, to teach us our
duties, that we may walk as dear children, beseeming such a father.

When as God changed the estate of Saul's life, he changed his heart likewise,
he was no sooner king but a kingly heart was given him. God requires new
hearts of his new borne children: since that now we have such a gracious
father, we must not as before continue graceless children. We read of Aulus
Fuluius A. Fuluius,
who espying his son in his enemies camp, would have slain him with the
sword, saying unto him, that he had not begotten him for Catiline, but his
Country: So God has not begotten us that we shoule serve his enemies, (...)
brutish and swinish sins, but that we should be holy even as he is holy,
and remember our parentage

Demades Demades.
in times past, seeing Philip the king pleasantly disposed, lasciuiously and
wantonly disporting himself with his prisoners and captives, taken in the
wars, vpbraiding them with their servile and slavish condition, thus gravely
and severely censured his folly. Since (says he) fortune and good luck
has laid upon thee the person of Agamemnon, that is of a triumphant and
victorious king, may thou not be ashamed to play the Thersites, that is
the lascivious and wanton companion? so inasmuch, as not fortune and good
luck, but Gods good grace toward us, has given us the dignity to be the
sons of God, why live we in wantonness and sinful pleasure? why do we
follow vanity, and seek after leasing? God has chosen to himself the man
that is godly: if so be, we be his sons, see that we walk worthy of so
great a calling, and let us always use with reverence the name of our Father.

In the process of his speech, he comes to his sins, which because he
cannot account in particulars ^hee thinks it best, to reduce them to a
gross, and to a general sum, saying: I have sinned. If he could have
recited them it would have made to long a discourse to have made relation of
every sinful action, committed by him in every town and place, where soever
he be came since his first departure, but it had been impossible for him to
have remembered them. Psalm. 19
For who does know (says David) how often he offends? He therefore lays
them down in a lump, by this one word Peccaui, I have sinned, comprehending
whatsoever sin he had committed. He makes no excuse, or apology for
himself, he excuses not himself, or accuses others: not his merits but
Gods mercy is the thing he stands upon: for simply and absolutely he says,
that he is a sinner. He accuses not Satan, who tempted him, his friends who
forsook him, or the Planets who brought this evil luck unto him, but
condemns himself: he imitateth Nisus, laying the whole burden of the sin
upon himself, to excuse his Euryalus, whom Virgil brings in speaking in this
manner.

Meme adsum qui foci, in me conuertite ferrum
O Rutuli mea fraus omnis, nihil iste nec ausus,
Nec potuit.
It is I, and none but I, that have sinned. Psa. 51
I cry with David Be merciful unto me after thy great goodness. For I
knowledge my wickedness, and my sin is always before thee. And I say with the
poor Publican: Lord be merciful unto me a sinner. Luke 18
So let us say, and not shift and put off our sins with excusing them, or
extenuating them, Gene. 3
or posting them to others, as Adam did to Henah, and Henah to the serpent, but
take them upon our selves.

He does not only simply confess himself a sinner, but he aggrauateth and
enlarges the grieuousnes of his sins, saying: I have sinned against heaven,
and before thee. It was not nature but especial grace which suggested this
unto him. Flesh and blood revealed not this unto him, but his heavenly father.
For if he would have spoken as a natural man, he would have spoken thus.
Father I have sinned, but I wist not what I did, I had no evil intent and
meaning when I sinned, wherefore it is meet thou should forgive my sin,
and let me have again the liberty of a son. Thus would a carnal man have
pleaded for himself, whereby he should have further damnified himself. He
takes therefore a far wiser course, and by zealous piety entreats tender
pity. Let us do the like, and acknowledge our selves no mean and ordinary
offenders, but desperate delinquents in the highest degree, sinners against
heaven.



Abel, the sins of Sodom, the wickedness of Nineveh the great city, and the
wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all unrighteousness. (...) 1
Therefore we cannot whenever we sin, but sin against heaven.

Again, inasmuch as sin is against natures A similitud^
To what end serves the whole structure of a clock, if the Bell doath not
sound at his due hours? The whole frame of heaven, and workmanship of the
world, are the wheels of the clock, the voice and obedience of man is the Bell
that sounds Gods praise, who disordereth and makes void the whole frame of
this clock, and do it great wrong and sin against it, when as our Bell
strikes not, and our obedience is wanting.

Moreover, by our sin we abuse his heavenly

Add hereunto moreover, that we sin against

Last of all, by esteeming more of earthlye pleasures then of heavenly
delights, by setting our love more upon the world then upon heaven, we sin
against heaven. A similitude
As he sins against thee who vildlie and basely accounts of thee, or
prefers thy son or servant before thee: so he that prefers childish
servile toys before heavenly true happiness and makes more reckoning of the
world then of heaven, as the Gergesites did of their swine before Christ, Mat.
8
sins against heaven,

But he stays not here, but yet proceeds further to a third degree, the
more to enlarge and extend his misdeeds, by inferring this clause upon the
neck of the former, I have sinned before thee. Coram te in ipso penetrali
interiore conscientiae, as Augustine Augu. quaest. ^uang. qu. est, ^^
says, before thee in the strait Closet of my inward conscience. I have done
that evil before thee, which I durst not have done before men. Oh father, I
cared but a little for thee, I should have regarded and reverenced thy presence,
and that should have kept me in awe and obedience, but thy Majesty had no
authority and power with me. I lived looselie, and lewdlie, thou O father
seeing it.

Here is a great exchange in this man. Whilst he was in his sin, he
flattered himself with this vain conceit, that God did not see him, that he
sinned not before him: but turning from his sin, he sees and perceives that
his sin was in his sight. A sinner so lives as if God had no eyes to see
him, or eyeliddes to consider him, but when he shall return to a better mind he
shall put off this foolishnes, and acknowledge with himself that the Lord does
behold him, and that there is no sin that can be hid from him. And if with
this man we come to this good thought that God sees our sins, it will teach
us more conscience, and restrain us from such desperate and presumptuous
sins, which so rifelie we commit, and make us walk more warily. Many a man
would not sin as he does, if he thought that man did see him. Do not thieves
and fornicatours watch their private places to commit their villainies, where
they think none do see them? Doubtless then we would refrain sin, if so
be this thought were rolling in our minds, that the Lord does see us. Dan, 13
We say with the carnal and lecherous Priests who assaulted chaste Susanna. The
Orcharde gate is shut, Psalm. 64
and no man can epsy us, David's Naball says, The Lord does not see it, and
the God of Jacob does not regard it. But ye spiri^e answers him, and calls
him a fool, and co^foundeth his foolishnes. O thou fool, shall he that made
the eye, not see? he that made the ear shall he not hear? he that created
the heart shall not he understand? The Lord knows the hearts of men to be
but vain. Psalm. 1^
For as the same Prophet speaks in another place, The ungodly man cares not
for God, neither is God in all his thoughts: he flattereth himself in his
wickedness, until his abominable ways be found out. God open our eyes that
we may see our selves, and our hearts, that we may know that we stand
before God, that we sin in his sight, who one day will call us to account
for the same, and lay before us the things that we have done.

The seventh Chapter. Of the prodigal son his extreme humility considered
in the remainder of his formal confession, and of the commendation and virtue
of humility.
THe reverence and duty which he resolutely determines to render unto his
father when he comes in his presence is entire and admirable: for he
humbles and abaseth himself to the uttermost. Who is truly penitent and humble
in soul if this man be not? He learneth us our lesson, and prescribes to us
all a pattern of a penitent and broken heart, which is acceptable unto God. I
am not (says he) worthy to be called thy son, make me one of thy hired
servants. Oh extreme humility, yet greatly necessary, because that god is
gracious unto such, but as for the proud he beholds them a far off. And
this the virgin Marie does approve by experience finding it, and therefore she
says: God resists the proud, ^uke. 2
and gives grace to the humble. Aug. tom. 9 (...) temp. Bar^rico, cap. 7
Inclinatur humilitas, hexcitatur misericordia. Humility stoupeth, and mercy
does arise: Dicit se filius indignum, vt ille eum iudicet d^gnum, the son
confesses himself unworthy, that his father may account him worthy.

^sal. 5
He approaches as David through the multitude of Gods mercies toward his holy
temple.

He accounts himself vnwotthie to be called a son, 1. Cor. 15
as Paul did account himself unworthy to be called an Apostle.

He speaks as the Centurion did speak unto Christ, Matt. 8
Lord I am not worthy that thou should enter under the roof of my house.
Genesis 19
And as Abraham did to God, saying: What is dust and ashes that I should speak
unto the Lord? As the mother of the Baptist to the mother of Christ: Luke. 1
Whence comes this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come unto me? As
Peter did to Christ. Depart from me, Luke. 5
for I am a sinful man. And as Abigael unto David, 1. Sam. 25
when as David would marry her. Behold thy servant shall be as a handmaide to
wash the feet of the servants of my Lord. As if he should have said, I dare
not, and I do not make suit unto thee to be as I was before, and to be taken
for thy son. I am unworthy of such favor, I have so disgraced my self, I
have been so dislike thee that I cannot be thy son, vouchsafe me that
mercy, that I may belong unto thee, that I may have a room and service in
thy house, among the company of thy hired servants. I will not be thy son,
but Lord make me thy servant. Psalm. 85
For better it is for me to be a door keeper in thy house, then to keep
swine abroad. One thing therefore do I desire of thee, even that I may dwell
in thy house for ever. For there the swallow has found her a nest, and the
sparrow a place wherein to hide her self, even thy altars o Lord, my king and
my God.

Of this example let us make a godly use, and let us learn humility, it will
avail us much: as it did this man. Matt. 7
Enter says Christ into the strait gate: which must be by humility. For we
cannot pass through a narrow gate, but by stowping low unto it. And better it
is to stoop too much, then an ^uch too little, otherwise he may receive a
knock, and be repelled back.

Matt. 4
Our Savior Christ preached often of humility, because it might be better
learned of us Of whom did he make choice to be his followers, but humble and
base fishermen? Whom he so peremptorily charged with this duty, as he told
them fl^tlie that unless they were lowly and humble like children, Matt. 18
they should not be saved.

Luke 2
Christ by humility was exalted to all dignity. When he was borne in a stable,
and laid among beasts, he was applauded, and glorified by Angels. When as he
was circumcised the eight day, as a sinner, he was then named Jesus, which
signifies a Savior. When he was numbered among the wicked, and between two
thieves crucified, the whole heaven was then obscured, Matt. 27
and the Sun and Moon eclipsed, and he was by his father by signs and
woonders glorified, and by the Centurion standing by and seeing them,
publicly magnfied.

A lowly man without pride, is like an innocent Dove without gall. (...)
similitude


(...) similitude
A tree that is planted in the lower ground, is safer then that which stands
higher upon a lofty mountain: for the winds and tempests have more power
over it He that is the lesser is the greater (says Christ: Luke 14
) The greater because his reward shall be greater: the greater because he is
like unto Christ who is greatest of all. A similitude
As ashes do keep and preserve fire, so our humility where^y we consider our
selves to be but ashes, keeps and cheerisheth the fire of the spirit.

The deeper and lower that the pit is, A similitude
the holesomer and sweeter the water of it is: so the lowlier and humbler thou
art, the more delightful and gracious art thou unto God.

Thou can never loose by thy godly humility, for it will extol thee, and
bring thee unto dignity.

Paul who in humility confessed himself to be the least of the Apostles, 1.
Cor. 15
in labors through God who wrought mightily with him, he exceeded and
surpassed all the rest of the Apostles.

The Baptist who thought so meanly of himself, Matt. 3
as he thought his hand not worthy to untie Christ's shoe, Christ used
that hand to a higher office, and did put it to his head, and was baptized of
it.

The Centurion who adjudged himself unworthy to receive Christ into his
house, Mat. 8
Christ did commend him, and did prefer him above all the people of Israel.
Matt. 18
But Capernaum that looked proudly, and stared up to heaven the Lord depressed,
and threw it down to hell.

When Christ was to manifest his tranfiguration Matt. 17
which made to his glory, he showed it but to three: but when he was
crucified which made to his contempt, he was seen of all, he would be lifted
up and hanged in the air, that all the world might se^ him. It is not
amiss to conceal such things which may tend unto our praise, and to make
them known to few: but it is to good purpose to publish our defectes, and
manifest them unto all.

Thou have no just cause and argument of thy pride, but thou have matter enough
to provoke thee to be humble Vide vnde veneris and crubesce, vbi es and
ingemisce, ^ernard.
quo vadis and contremisce. Look from whence thou art and be ashamed, where
thou art and be grieved, and whither thou shall and be terrified. We see
sometimes a man in respect of his wit little wiser then an Ass, and yet be
sets and rufleth in his silks, and is adorned with his rings and costly
jewels, his outward burden is better then himself; and this man is proud
because of his riches, which an Ass might be as well that is his sumpter
Jade, and carries upon his back more riches then his master. The proudest
upon earth, when he is buried in the earth, is as mean as the vildest here on
earth. A similitude
In Chesse play there are diverse degrees of persons. There is the King, the
Bishop the knight, and the rooke, and there is the abject and paultrie pawn,
these have their differences and rooms by themselves according to their
degrees while the game lasts, but they are all one when they are put into the
bag: Death makes the beggar and the King alike, all are one with him when he
has us in his bag. There are ears of corn in the time of harvest to be
seen in the field, that are higher then others, A similitude
but when the Reapers cut them down, they are bound up together, and then
this difference appears no more between them, for they are threshed and
beaten out together. Let us therefore laying aside all pride, be humble and
meek as it becomes Christians, and as Christ himself by his own example
teaches us.

The eight Chapter. How God out of evil things brings forth good, as making
the sins of the prodigal son the occasion of his humble and dutiful
confession.
IF the prodigal son had not been so sinful, he had not returned to his
father so sorrowful From the excess of his iniquity, did spring this his
dutiful and conformable humility. This commends both the goodness and wisdom
of God to us, who can make our sins redound to his praise and from a matter
so vilde can extort, and wring out such a virtue from us. Is not he a wise
workman, who cannot only skilfully grave in gold and silver, A similitud^
and improoue the purer substance, but also can make use and benefit of the
dross, and can apply it to good service? It is so with God, who is this
cunning craftsman, who not only engraueth in the hearts of his Saints, his
refined metal, the marks of his good grace: but also in prodigal and
pernicious persons, such a one as this was, for a time the very excrementes
and scumme of all people, can work his own will pollishing and bringing them
to so excellent an end.

This fellow wa^ so devoted and sold unto sin, as he seemed wholly to be
turned into sin, and to be nothing but sin. His silver became dross (as
the Prophet Esaias Esai. 1
says) and yet this goldsmith made a costly vessel of it to serve in his
tabernacle.

God would not (as saint Augustine Augu. super Psalm. 104
says) suffer sin to be, but that he knows how to m^ke a virtue of it,
and to turn it unto good: according unto that which the Apostle says: where
sin does abou^d there grace does superabound. He can get himself honor of
Pharao, and all his enemies, and make their sins declare abroad his
righteousness.

Let no man therefore despair of grace, in respect of the greatness and
continuance of sin, God suffers some to go very far to make them know
themselves, to root them in virtue, and to ground them in repentance, and the
better to reduce them to humility of mind.

A similitude
As he that pulls down an old decayed house in miserable ruin, and builds
up a new in the same room, bestows much time about the foundation, that that
being steadfast, the structure and building that is coupled unto it may remain
firm and sure so God for a time lets alone a sinner, and suffers him to
lie as a rotten wall upon the ground: he is long in laying his foundation, that
that being grounded upon godly humility, he might build thereupon his whole
work of piety.

After David had covered himself with sin, 2 Samuel 12 Sin causes humility.
as it were with a garment, and had dwelled in it, adding sin unto sin
after adultery bringing forth murder: when he was taxed at the length for
them and proceeded against by Nathan, he was presently much humbled, and for
ever afterward more provident and advised. Yea he himself had a feeling in
himself, what a cure and good his sin had wrought upon him. For this much he
doubted not to confess, saying: Psalm. 119
It is good for me that thou have humbled me, that I might learn thy law.

Peter by his threefold sin and defection, was ever after better taught to
curble his presumption, and to weigh his own strength, and not so to flourish
before the field, and triumph before the victory. Wherefore when Christ asked
him after the resurrection, whether that he loved him, he appealed to Christ's
judgment, replying confidently, Thou know that I love thee. John. 21
He was before so well warned, as he was now well armed. His former wound
stirred up his spirits, kindled his zeal, and made him more courageous.

Paul was a chosen vessel of Gods grace, 1. Tim. 1
and a dear saint of God, but he was first a persecutor, before he was a
preacher, a Saul that persecuted the true David, before he was a Paul a
professor and worshipper of the son of David. But the common remembrance of
his wonted wickedness, bred in him all humblenes, he had never without doubt
been so exceeding dutiful, had he not before been so exceeding sinful. It
is not to be spoken how his former sins did tame him: as before his sin
was as a sword to wound him, so it served now as a medicine for to heal
him. As often iniquity does bring forth humility: so it does afterward
stir us unto vigilancie. (...) causes ^^gilancie.
The fish will afterward be wary of that place, where she has before been
pricked with the hook, and the birds which have been fettered and entangled
with the snare, and have hurt a wing or joint, will afterward be circumspect,
and will fly the net: so sin, albeit for a time it is hurtful, yet in the
end it is very much profitable, as giving us warning by former mishaps,
hereafter more circumspectly to look unto our steps.

A similitude
So long as the thorn does grow within the vines, they do choke them and
hinder them that they cannot flourish, but if you root them up, and set them
about the vines, they serve as a hedge, and a defense for the vines: so sin
so long as it remains in the mind, and grows within the soul, it pricketh
and wounds the soul exceedingly, but being dug up, and set in the valley
of our sight and rem^mbrance it serves as a wall to guard and preserve us, that
neither the wild Boar that comes out of the forest, nor the Bear that
issues from the wood shall root it up.

We have last of all this benefit by our former sins, that they make us
afterward Sin makes us afterward more religious.
more zealous in Gods service, and to run with David the way of his
commandments. There are none so hot professors of religion, then those who
before have bin stone cold in religion.

As a wayfaring man that is left behind will make the more haste, A similitude
and mend his pace when he sees that his company is far before him, that he
might not either wander he knows not whither, or travel solitarilie: so he
that is put backward and behind by sin, when as he sees it, he strives more
fervently to ouerget his fellows, and makes more haste in his journey toward
heaven.

Thus God (as a cunning and expert physician, A similitude
of poysonable confections makes comfortable electuaries) of sin which is a
rank and most deadly poison, makes approved medicines. Man by his sin
purposes only evil, but God directs and turns it unto good. In a
mischievous mind, Genes. 37. Genesis 50
the confederat brethren sold Joseph into Egypt, but God so disposed it as
Joseph acknowledged, and the end manifested, that he was sent thither for their
preservation.

Saul plotted the murder and destruction of David desiring of him a hundred
foreskins of ye Philistines, 1. Sam. 18
(for he said my hand shall not be upon him but the hands of the Philistines)
but though his eyes were evil, yet was god good, and from this platform of his
ruin and confusion, he took occasion to work his renown, and to make his
name famous by his noble victories.

Judas betrayed his Lord and master, and committed a vilde sin with as
sinful an intention: but God thereupon brought his good work to pass, and
wrought our salvation.

The ninth Chapter. Of the Prodigal son, his execution of his purpose,
wherein is considered the present necessity of our speedy repentance, without
our further delaying it.
THe Prodigal son being full of the spirit, and wholly consecrated unto
heavenly thoughts, he lingereth not that the spirit might cool within him,
but whilst it is hot, and the fire breaks out he follows the effects and
motions of the spirit: for it is reported in the history of him, that he arose
and went unto his father.

In saying that he arose, he insinuates that he did lie down before. In that
he now went unto him, it is to be concluded that before he did stand still,
or turn his back, and went away from him. That it is added to his father, it
is consequent that before he went unto a tyrant.

^e must re^^it while (...) have ^e. ^^el. 3
It is most behoouefull for us to do the like to be obedient to the heavenly
calling, to accept of grace in the time of grace, to open the doors of our
souls when Christ knocks, that he might enter in, and come and sup with us:
we intend a conversion, and return unto God, but we can find no time for it.
All our time is too little for our selves to wast and consume upon our
pleasures and our sins: we dally too much with God in delaying our duties, and
posting off his service from time to time, till there be no time for it: we
must therefore perform our vows which we promise unto God, a timely
sacrifice is most acceptable unto him.

It was too late for the five f^^lish Virgins to knock, Matt. 25 Luke. 16
when as the gate was fast shut against them. And for the rich glutton, to
howl and cry to Abraham, when he was in hell in torments. Christ wills us
while we have light to walk in the light: Ioh. 12 Ioh. 9
for the night will come wherein no man can work. Whilst we have time (says
the holy Apostle) let us do good unto all. Gal 6
And if we will enquire, and seek after God, Esaias Esaias. 54
wills us to seek him whilst he may be found.

The hope of long life which flattereth many, and staieth their repentance, is
erroneous and devilish: for it is presumption and intolerable usurpation, to
arrogate to our selves that which is proper unto God, which is to dispose and
set down the times, having had our answer in this case before in the person
of the disciples, unto whom it was said, It is not for y^u to know the times
and the seasons, Acts. 4
which the father has kept in his own power.

If so be thou had a charter of thy life, and that thou were certified how
long thou had to live: yet should thou not put off thy conversion to the
last, as if God were not worthy to be served with the first. Look how thou
seruest him, thou shall be served of him. If thou give him the lees, and
bottom of thy vessel, thou shall drink of the dregs and bitterness of his
cup. Psalm. 6^
For there is a cup in the Lords hand the wine thereof is red and full mixed, as
for the dregs thereof the ungodly suck them up, says the Prophet David.

When as Jacobs sons should the second time be sent down into Egypt, Jacob
willed them to carry with them the best presents to the man: let us before we
descend into the grave, ascribe unto the Lord who is worthy of all homage, the
best service that we can, the flower of our life, and the vigor of our mind.

Number. 18
God willed in the law, that the best tithes, the fattest sacrifices, and the
chiefest oblations should be given unto him, to signify yt the best of the man
is his portion: he will not be dodged with, and satisfied with the worst, with
our crooked old age, when our senses are decayed, and we are fit for nothing.
Cursed is he (says God by his Prophet Malachy) who offers unto God the lame
and the blind.

He is the fondest fellow that ever was heard of, who falling into a deep
river, (...) similitude
and having present help offered him whilst he yet swimmeth upon the sword
of the water, makes refusal of it, and answers that he will not be helped
before the next year, when as he is in danger to sink presently: so what
shall we say of them, who plunging themselves into the deep pit of sin,
and by the hand of repentance whilst they are recouerable may be dragged
out, do give over this hold, and being in peril of present damnation, do
sl^cke the opportunity of present remedy, and to a year, nay I know not to
how many years, they do put off this offer, and slack this repentance.
Arise thou therefore, sit no longer still: go thou forward out of hand with
the Prodigal son, repair unto thy father, and offer him thy service. It is
not enough to purpose it with him, but to perform it in deed with him.
Rebecca had not only ea^erings of gold, but bracelets thereof likewise: our
arms must be adorned as well as our ears, for it is not sufficient to have
ears to hear, and mouths to speak, but we must also have hands and arms
to work withal. There be many who have Jacobs smooth voice, but they have
Esaus rough hands. Their mouths are far greater then their hands, which is
monstrous in nature, for they word it much, but they work it little. The
fig Tree had fairer leaves but no figs, we are deceitefull Gibeonites, and
painted tombs like Pharisees.

If thou conceiuest in thy mind a repentance, and do not arise and practice
this repentance, but from day to day delaiest it, be thou sure that thou
shall not have it when thou will, it will be far from thee. Consuctudo est
altera natura; Custom is a kind of nature, and habitus induratus, an obdurate
habit, which cannot be forsaken.

If we accustom our selves still to sin, and do not turn from it when God
shows us mercy, and touches our affections with the finger of his grace, it
will be very d^fficult hereafter to forsake it.

1. Sam. 17
David could not endure to have upon him Saul's armor, though it were of
proof, and exceeding costly, and why? but only for want of use, he was
otherwise accustomed.

A similitude
A broom only sweepeth away the dust, it takes not away the dry, and
hardened dirt, an iron shouell must scrape off that: for time and con^inuance
has so fa^^ened it to the ground, as it is hard to get it off. We cannot
prevail against our cust^me of sin, unless God works more effectuall^e
with his power, and draws us more forcibly.

(...) similitude
When as first a man comes to dwell in a poor village, and first drinks of
their troubled and muddy water which that soil yields, it sticks at his
stomach, it much distempereth him, it disagreeth mightily with his nature,
and he wondereth how the people of that place can live with it: but if this man
abides and dwells still among them, his stomach b^i^g used and accustomed
to that drink, it will at last go well down with him, it will seem sauorie
and wholesome enough unto him. In the like sort since sin is as noisome as
puddle water, the stomach of the soul at the beginning cannot away with it,
but it much disquieteth it, insomuch as a sinner is very heavy for it: but
after he has been nusled and traded up in sin, and he has drunk
iniquity (as Job says) as an Ass drinks water, and sin is become as
another nature unto him, he is then altered, he is then pleased, and delighted
with it.

If thou blowest well the candle as soon as it goes out, thou may light it
again thereby: A similitude
but if thou pausest, and staiest a while till the fire that is in the snast
goes out, it cannot be recovered: so if ass one as the good motions of the
spirit which do shine in thy heart like a bright burning candle seem to wax
dim, and to be extinguished, whilst there is yet a little fire, and some
sparks remaining thou do labor to reduce it and bring it to his light, it
may be well effected: but let thou it alone till all the fire be out, and
till it be utterly dead in thee, and it will be a thing impossible to
revive it.

The first, A similitude
and second stroke which the butcher gives the ox, makes him to fling, and
take on exceedingly: but after a while when he is laden with blows, he is
so amazed, and overcome of them, as he remains senceles and past all feeling,
he will not stir, strike him never so much. The first and second blow which
sin gives us, touches our hearts, and affects us grievously, but when
heaps of sins do overtake us, and smite us without end, our consciences then
are seared, as it were with hot Irons, our souls are benumbed, and we sin
without all sense.

Repent we therefore and return we, when we may unto our heavenly Father:
put we it not off from day to day, least suddenly the day of the Lord
comes, and in our security we be destroyed. August^^us.
Poenitentia quae ab infirmo sit, timeo ne ips^^ i^firm^ sit. Poenitentia quae
a moriente fit, timeo ne ipsa moriatur. Our repentance which comes from us
while we are weak is greatly to be seated will be also weak. Repentance
which is deferred til we be about to die, is in great danger likewise to die.
It is therefore very fearful to ouership the seaso^s, and let go
opportun^tie off red us of repentance, It is not only hard to repent in the
end, in respect of want of use, for commonly as a man lives so he dies,
but also it will be as difficult unto him in respect of GOD. Gods grace is
w^kest at the hour of death.
For at the hour of death thy body and mind is weakest, and the devil is
stro^gest. God then does more forsake thee, and the Devil is more ready to
take thee: for God says thus unto us, I called and you would not come, Prou. ^
I will therefore rejoice in your destruction: calamity shall come upon you,
you shall call on me, and I shall refuse to come. To the like purpose the
spirit speaks evidently by his Prophet Hieremy, We have cured Babylon, and
yet she is not healed, behold we will forsake her. (...). 5.
God has good reason utterly to forsake us, when as his calling can take no
place in us. God has no reason to stay our leisures, but it is just, that as
we refuse him when he offers himself to us, that thee should do the like
when we must have need of him. Well says saint Augustine. Hac
animaduersione percutitur peccator, vt moriens obliuiscatur sui, Aug. sermon.
Innocentum.
qui viuens oblitus est Dei. A sinner is worthily punished with this judgment
at his death to be forgetful of himself, who all his life was so unmindful
of his God.

As at the hour of death, The devil is strongest at the hour of death.
Gods grace most does fail us, so at that exigent the Devil most prevails,
with whom he could do nothing in the health of their life, with them he is
most busy in the extremity of their death. And where he then prevails he
gets a great conquest which he cannot loose again. If whilst thou have thy
health, thy strength, and thy best mind, thou art so weak as thou can not
overcome the smallest temptations: how shall thou think thou when thou art
weak and crooked, and thy senses fail thee o^^ come strong illusions? If so
be when the enemy is at the weakest ^hou can not subdue him; there is but
small hope that when thou art weakest, and he at the strongest, you shall do
ought against him. If in thy vigor and pri^e age when thou art lusty as an
Eagle, thou be but a coward: when thou laiest ^edred, environed, and beset
with sicknesses and diseases, thou will not be able to look him on the face.
Psalm. 6
There is no man (says the Psalmist) who in death remembers thee, and who
shall give thee thanks in the pit? Wherefore thou do well, if as Ecclesiastes
Eccle. 12
counsels thee thou remembrest thy Creator in the days of thy youth. If
when thou be able to sin no more, thou surceasest to sin: it may be truly
said, that sin does leave thee, thou leauest not sin.

A similitude
Thou do like the Merchaunt, who in a grievous storm when there is no other
remedy, throws his wares and adventures into the sea, but if the tempest
cease he throws no more in, but laboreth to recover as much as he can of
his former loss again.

Come home therefore unto the Lord thy God, and what good motions God puts
in thy mind, those with this Prodigal and lost son put thou in practice. It
is to too dangerous and thou make the hardest adventure that can be, in
trifling the time, and putting off thy conversion and return unto God, unto
future and l^tter times, which perhaps thou shall not see. I read but of one
that was saved at the last upon his repentance, which was one of the thieves
crucified with Christ. August.
Vnus vt nemo desperet, vnus vt nemo praesumat. There was one that no man might
despair: there was but one that no man might presume. A similitude
When as a man has a great task enioined h m, and but a little time to do
it, he is very foreseeing that this time be well spent, and that nothing of it
be lost: for otherwise this work cannot be done and he cannot have his wages;
our task is our conversion and return to God; our time is this life, which is
short and uncertain; our wages is the salvation of our souls, the inheritance
and possession of the kingdom of heaven. God almighty give us grace to be
careful of our time that we may end our good work and fight a good fight,
and have our happy wages in the world without end.

An abstract of the prodigal son his formal confession, or a sinner his
meditation and humble suit to God for the forgiveness of his sins. A Prayer.
O My gracious God and most merciful father: I thy humble servant, utterly
unworthy to be called thy son, do here submit my self in all obedience unto
thee: and confess before thee my infinite and grievous misdeeds committed,
both against heaven which is thy seat, and earth which is thy footstool. O
Lord I dare not look up unto heaven, I have so sinned against heaven, by
sinning against thee that dwell in heaven, and by making more account of
this world then of heaven. I dare not lift up mine eyes unto thee I have so
sinned against thee, so as the sight of thee fears me, and thy fear most
mighty God is on every side. I do acknowledge my wickedness and my sin is
ever before thee. Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil that
thou may be justified in thy sayings, and clear when thou art judged. I am
he whom thou did vouchsafe by adoption and grace to make thi^e own
son, thou have nourished and brought me up, but I have rebelled against
thee. The Ox did know his owner, and the Ass his masters crib, but I thy
son did not know thee, I thy seed and chosen did not obeie thee. Wherefore
thou gave me over unto my own hearts lusts, and did let me follow
mine own imaginations: So as I committed all kind of filthiness, and
received such recompense of my wickedness as was meet; so as now I am a
stranger and forreiner unto thee, I am not therefore worthy of the name of a
son, O let me be numbered among thy hired servants. O father behold me in
the face of thine anointed, for one day in thy courts is better then a
thousand with the ungodly: I had rather have the place of meanest service, and
to be a door keeper in thine house, then to dwell in the tents of the
ungodly, and sit in the seat of sinners. I am he for whose sake thy only
begotten son became man, bowed the heavens, and came down, made himself of
no reputation, but humbled himself even unto the death, the death of the
cross. Thou have given this son for me a most vilde servant, that of a
servant I might be made a son, by being conformable unto the image of thy
son: but I alas have lived in the flesh, have quenched the spirit, and have
walked like an infidel. I have forgotten God that made me, and the strong God
of my salvation: I have been reprobate and abominable, and unto every good
work unprofitable: whither therefore shall I flee for succor? if I look up to
heaven, I am dismayed, for I have sinned against heaven: if I repair unto
thee. I am yet in misery, for I have sinned against thee. I am he whom thou
did prevent with thy liberal blessings, upon whom thou did bestow a
great portion of thy grace, whom thy tender mercy embraced on every side.
But I have wantonlie and wickedlie wasted them, by living in my lusts and not
in thy laws, by fulfilling the lusts of the flesh, and of the mind, by
working all wickedness and that with greediness. Thou induedst me with
wisdom above others, with a greater knowledge of thy word then others: I was
planted in the house of the Lord, that I might flourish in the courts of my
God by being ingrafted into the body of the Church and communion of thy
saints, and made partaker of thy holy sacraments. Thou have not done so to
other nations neither have other people had such knowledge of thy laws. But
woe is me, I have despised these thy mercies, broken thy covenants, dishallowed
thy most holy and reverend name. I have sinned O father not meanly as other
men, but mightily above other; for I have sinned against heaven thy holy
place before thee the holiest, and in earth, the place where thy name is called
upon: I am not therefore worthy neither do I desire to be called thy son, but
let me be thy servant, and o Lord save thy servant who puts his trust in
thee. O remember not my old sins which I have committed since I went from
thee, but of thy goodness preserve thou him that is appointed to die. Thy great
bounty showed to hired servant remaining in thy house, puts me in hope
of the like to be showed unto me thy Son returning to thy house. Thy
servants have enough, and I thy son O faether like unto a runnagate continue
(...) scarcity: they eat of the plenteousnesse that comes from thy Table,
but I am constrained to beg my bread in desolate places. And this misery O
father, I must needs confess is of my self, for I would needs depart from
thee, the health of my life, the light of my countenance and my merciful God.
Wherefore now sitting by the waters of Babylon, I cannot but weep when I
remember thee O Sion. But turn thou my captivity as the rivers of the south,
and let me hear of joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken
may rejoice. Though I have sinned against thee, yet I come unto thee, and
though thy justice must show vengeance upon sin, yet I appeal unto thy
mercy in thy dear son Christ for the pardoning of my sin. I have sinned
and done wickedlie, yet I know thy mercy is above my sins. One depth
swalloweth up an other, let the depth therefore of thy mercy devour and
swallowe up the depth of my sins. Thy hand is not so short but thou can
save, nor thy ear so thick but thou can hear. Hear me therefore O King
of Heaven now I call upon thee, and be merciful unto my sins, for they
are great. Show some token of kindness which thou do use to show to those
who put their trust in thee before the sons of men: Thou did not repel
the Publican, disdain the Pharisie, refuse the Harlot, or exclude the thief.
Peter who denied thee, and Paul who persecuted thee, upon their return were
received into grace. Father I return, consider my complaint for I am brought
very low: deliver my soul out of trouble, and my life from the bloudthirstie:
and though I be not worthy to be thy son, yet make me thy servant, so I thy
servant shall rejoice in thee, I shall be ever giving of thanks for the
operation of thy hands. Grant this grace oh dear father for Jesus Christ his
sake thy most dear son and my only blessed Savior, Amen.

The end of the second Book of the regresse of the prodigal Son.
THE THIRD BOOK. Discovering of the joyful welcome home of the prodigal Son,
and the honorable entertainment which his Father gave him.
The first Chapter. That the mere mercy of God is the maine motiu^ of our
coming home to God, and the sole efficient cause of our whole salvation,
plainly insinuated by this circumstance of this history, of the father his
seeing the prodigal son, when he was ye^ a far off.
A Reverend and holy Bishop, when as Saint Augustines A Bishops saying of
Augustine.
mother was in exceeding heaviness for her sonne^ perverseness before he was
converted, seeing her strange passions and her aboundaunt tears which she
powered out for him, gravely answered thus: It is impossible for thy son to
perish, for whom such ^eaers are shed. It cannot be expressed how a
sorrowful soul in all humility throwing down it self before his mercy
seat, is acceptable unto God, and gracious in his eyes. It is not possible
that he should be shut out that knocks at his door, or not find comfort
that is sorrowful for his sins, or that his tears should not be put into
the bottell, and GOD should not wipe away all tears from his eyes. Psalm. 126
He that now goes on his way weeping, and bears forth good seed,
doubtless shall come again with joy, and bring his sheaues with him. This
much holy Scripture abundantly does approve, but principally the president
of this prodigal person. For he no sooner cries but the Lord hears him,
no sooner returns but the Lord meets him, naie to manifest his longing
after him, he a far off espieth him, and at hand embraces him.

God the father therefore his abundant mercy toward us his wicked and
rebellious children in this example is set before our eyes. It is here twofold
wise propounded, under which two kinds whatsoever more particularly may be
further illustrated properly is contained. The first is his mercy toward us a
far off: the second is his mercy toward us being nigh and in presence with
him. In the description of the first these notes as evident demonstrations
thereof are premised and prefixed. His seeing him a far off, his falling on his
neck, his kissing him. We will first entreat and discourse of the first, His
seeing him a far off.

He begins with this first, because this is that which chiefly works in
us, for his grace The grace of God, the cause of our conversion. A similitude
and loving countenance must go before, else how should our repentance and
conversion follow after. A sinner is like the Echo which cannot speak first,
but must answer a voice: God must call before we can come: he must speak
first, and then we answer, and say with holy Samuel, Speak Lord for thy
servant hears. 1. Sam. 3
We have nothing of our selves without ye grace of God: For of his fulness have
we al received grace for grace. A similitude
When we behold our face and image in a glass, the shadow of it moves as
the man moves whose image the same is; the countenance thereof cannot look
upward, unless the man himself the substance of that shadow looks upward
first. We are Gods image, as he moves us, so we are moved; we cannot look up
to heaven of our selves, God first must lift up our eyes thereunto.

A similitude
It is easy for any man to kill himself, but impossible again to give life
unto himself: it is easy for a man to kill himself with sin, but it is not
in his power to quicken himself by repentance of his sin. Hence is it that
Christ says. No man comes to the father, Ioh. 6
unless the father who sent me draws him. And that the church prays thus.
Draw me after thee, Cantic. 1.
and we will run unto the savor of thy sweet ointments.

^zech. 2
When as God commmanded the Prophet Ezechiel to raise up himself, and to stand
upon his feet, immediately the spirit of God did come upon him, and set him upon
his feet: he had never been able to have risen of himself, if the spirit had
not helped him.

There be certain birds of very swift flight, A similitude
but therewithal so long winged, as if by chance they fall unto the ground
their train so traileth upon the ground, as they cannot mount up again any
more and recover their flight. It is so with us, who sometimes of a sudden
would soar very high, and as a bird would fly swiftly up to heaven; but our
wings and feathers so spread the ground, as whenever we fall down to it
again, as commonly we do being earthly minded, we rise no more up, unless
that God himself erecteth us by his spirit.

As Rachels cattle could not drink of the water of the brook before Jacob
had rolled away the stone that covered it: Genesis 29
so there is a stone which lays over our hearts, which unless God first
remoueth, we can not drink of the waters of repentance. For it is God only that
mollifieth my heart, and takes away this stone, as the just man Job says.
Job. ^3
The Prophet admiring the power of god, who with water forced out of a stony
rock satisfied his people, exclaimeth in this wise, Which turned ye hard rock
into a standing water, and the flint stone into a springing well: may not we
likewise admire the Lords power, and celebrate his praise, who of his goodness
strikes the stony hearts of sinners, and forces out of them the water of
repentance? Psalm. 114 A similit^^^
There are sundry locks which are so made, as they easily may be locked
without keys: but they cannot again be open without keys. We may lock and
shut out our selves from the kingdom of heaven, but without him that has the
keys of David, to open when no man can shut, and shut when no man can open,
we can not open the door of this kingdom. Turn me O Lord (says the Prophet
Jeremy) and I shall be turned. Th^^r. 2 5
We of our selves do turn from God, and do not turn unto him, unless God
himself does turn us. We are without God as Samson without eyes, and remain
in the blindness and ignorance of our sin. It is God who opens our eyes
and our hearts, delivers us from our sins our spiritual enemies.

God saw the prodigal son a far off, and this immediately brought him
nigh unto him: as he sees us sinners when we are yet far from him, and
think of any thing rather then of him. And this is that which moves our
affections, and reconcileth us again unto him. A similitude
The Sun is of that forcible nature and power, that it pearceth the very
heart of the earth, it engenders gold and diverse other metals in the bowels
thereof: so the reflection of the Sun beams of Gods grace so radiantlie and
forciblie works in men's hearts, as it brings forth the gold of faith out of
them, and diverse other good effects and motions of the spirit. David extolling
the power of God, who rebuking the red sea, made the waters of it stand upon an
heap, and made ye waters of Jordan start aside for the people to go through,
thus wondreth at it, saying: What aileth thee O thou sea that thou fledst,
^^al. 114
and thou Jordan that thou were driven back? But I ceasing not to wonder at
this man's turning back, I expostulate the case thus: What ayleth thee, O thou
sinner that thou fleest, and thou runnagate prodigal son that thou turnest
back? We cannot sufficiently wonder at Gods grace, who made this unclean
wretch the doung of the earth, and the Clay of the streets, purer and brighter
then the stars and Sun before him. Romans 11.
Oh the deepenesse of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God.
What is man that he is so mindful of him? or the son of man whom he should
visit, and see a far off? For our condition is the self same which this
prodigal man's was. For when we were all a far off from him, Ephesians. 2
strangers from his covenant of promise, aliants from the common wealth of
Israel, Ephe. 8
when we were dead in sin: God who is rich in mercy has quickened us, by
graciously beholding us. He has chosen us from all eternity to be his
people, and the sheep of his pasture, but not by our merits, but by his
mercies: not that we chose him, but that he chose us, and saw us a far off,
when we did not see him.

Did not the Lord see Abraham a far off whenas he lived among the idolatrous
Chaldeans, and called him from thence, and made a covenant of salvation with
him, that he would be his God, and the god of his seed? was not Adam before him
seen a far off, whenas he turning his eyes from him, and fleeing from his
presence, God called him unto him, and lifted him up (being desperately
dejected with the shame of sin which he newly had committed) with the
promise of his grace by the seed of the woman, by which this his sin should
again be remitted?

Was not David much exorbitant, and exceeding far from God, when as the Prophet
Nathan was sent unto him to call him home again, and bring him unto God?

Did not God behold the Israelites afar off, from the habitation of his
dwelling, when he did see the misery of them in captivity, and delivered
them out of the hands of their enemies, and brought their feet into a large
room, by planting them in the pleasant promised land of Canaan? What should I
rippe up such variety of examples, as may serve this purpose? Thus he beheld
Matthew the customer, Matt. 9 ^uk. 19 ^ph^. 2
Zacheus the usurer, Paul the persecuter, and us the Gentiles, when we were, as
the Apostle says, a far off, being without hope and without god in ye world,
calling us his people who were not his people; and his beloved, who were not
his beloved. The grace of God therefore seeing us a far off, being in our sins,
draws us from our sins, calls us to a confession, and repentance of our
sins, and pardons all our sins. Without this there is nothing that we can
do of our selves, being not able to think a good thought. God must loose the
bonds of thy neck O captive daughter of Syon. (...). 52
Peter denied his master, and wept not, for God did not look upon him: he
denied him the second time, and yet (...) not weep; for why, as yet the Lord
did not look upon him: he denied him the third time, and he wept bitterly,
but the text says that the Lord did look upon him. Luke. 22
O Lord our God then look upon us, and then we shall with Peter weep
bitterly for our sins.

The second Chapter. Of the mercy and compassion by this father showed unto
the prodigal son.
THe circumstance of the father his seeing his son whilst he was a far
off, being first of all remembered in good order, this inference of his
compassion showed him as an exposition of the same is immediately adjoined.
For God his seeing us is no superficial and bare sight of us, it consists
not in an idle speculation, but he sees us to show mercy, and compassion of
us, and to work our salvation. God sees not his servants as he does the
wicked caitifes, A^nas, Caiphas, Pilate, and such like, who still remain
obdurate and hardened in their sins: but he sees them by bestowing his
graces upon them, as Peter and Andrew: James and John: Mat. 4 Ioh. 1 Luke. 5
Nathanael and Matthew, who forthwith left their nets, the seat of custom,
and ungodly trade of sin, making them Apostles, vessels and ministers of his
great mercy.

There is very great odds between God his Great difference the^ is between
god his seeing us, and man his seeing us.
seeing us, and man his seeing us. Oftentimes one Courtier is heard to say unto
another, Did the Prince to day see thee? and eftsoons he answers I. But what
of that? for he often is never a whit the better for it, for infinite people
do crowde to see the Prince, and the Prince eieth many of them, and yet
thereby benefiteth not any of them. But if God sees us, it is well with us, it
cannot be in vain, but effectual unto us. For the eyes of the lord are the
portall doors of pity, the windows and casements that have a prospect to
salvation. He always beholds us with the eyes of kindness, Gen 19 Exodus 3
Luke. 19 Mark. 14 Acts. 9
as Abraham in Chaldea, Loath in Sodom, Zachee upon the fig tree, Peter in
the high Priests hal, the thief upon the cross, and Paul when he was Saul in
his journey to Damascus.

How happy was this for the prodigal son for his father to see him, for
immediately he had compassion of him: so is it with us, he has mercy on us
as soon as he sees us. Genes. 26.
That we may say with Agar, Thou Lord lookedst on me. The issue whereof was,
that the Lord did hear her tribulation.

Did God at any time look upon any, and did not show him mercy? ^^od. 3
He looked upon the Israelites, and presently he delivered them from the
Egyptians. ^ark. 14
He beheld Peter, and the yse which before covered his heart when he abiured
his Master, melted at the heat and fire of his spirit, and made a great
thawe, so as streams of water, and brinish tears issued from thence. He saw
Matthew as he went by the way gathering up of money, Matt. 9
and forthwith he bestowed a better office of him, and charged him to gather up
souls unto him. He saw certain fishermen, Matt. 4 John. 9
and he ordained them fishers of men. He saw him that was blind from his
birth, and his sight was restored him. He saw multitudes following him, Matthew.
5
and he opened his mouth and taught them. John. 6
He lifted up his eyes and saw another multitude following him, and he
communed with Philip about bread and provision of victuals for them. Luke. 1
He did look on the low estate of his handmaid, and hereupon the virgin
peremptorily concludes, that All generations shall call her blessed.

Gods eyes are compared to the Doves eyes upon the rivers of water, Cant. 5
because they are most pure, clean and simple, far from all evil, and full
of all goodness. Matt. 3
In respect whereof the holy Ghost when he descended, assumed unto himself
the form of a Dove. David unites and knitteth together Gods sight, and Gods
mercy, because toward his Saints they cannot be sundred. Oh Lord look
upon me, Psalm. 24
and be merciful unto me, for I am poor and in misery. Else where he
sings in effect the same dittie, making Gods mercy the effect of his seeing
us. Psalm. 33
The eyes of the Lord are upon the just: and what then? his ears are open unto
their prayers. Psalm 33
Come unto me (says the same Prophet in gods person) and ye shall be lightened.

It cannot be but where there is most light, A similitud^
the place must be warmer; and therefore in the full Moon the nights are
warmer, because the light is stronger: so let God behold us with the brightness
of his countenance, and let the light of his love shine in our hearts, and
they shall be warmed with the zeal of the spirit, and the fire of his mercy
will be kindled within us.

The presence of Gods face is admirable, and unspeakable, for it rauisheth our
hearts, and suddenly changes them, and draws them to obedience. If the
Sun stood still in Gibeon, and the Moon in the valley of Aialon, Joshua. 10
and the mighty walls of Hiericho came topling to the ground at the voice of
God, by his servant Joshua, Iosue 6
no marvel it is though our sins come tumbling down, and we return to God
with the prodigal son, when God himself beholds us a far off to this
purpose and has compassion of us. Psalm 104
For the vast earth trembles at his look, if he but touches the mountains,
they do smoke.

Finally, as all mercy is present toward us, when Gods eyes do behold us:
so all misery and calamity does befall us, when his face is turned from us.

Hereupon says David. When thou turnest away thy face they are troubled, Psalm.
104
if thou take away their breath they die, and return unto their dust. David
once persuaded himself that his estate was so sure as it could not be
altered, when he spoke in this wise, Psalm. 30
I said in my prosperity, I shall never be removed, thou Lord of thy goodness
have made my hill so strong: But the event did put an other song into his
mou^h, and made him to recant, and reuerse this proud boasting saying. Thou
did turn thy face from me, and I was troubled. Wherefore pray we the
Lord to behold us, that he would by no means turn away his face from us,
least as David says, if he makes himself as though he sees us not, we
be as they that go down into the pit: Least all our prayers be made in
vain, and our s^tes do take repulse, he saying unto us as unto the old
Israelites: When ye shall stretch out your hands, Esaias. 1
I will hide mine eyes from you, and though ye make many prayers, I will not
hear you, for your hands are full of blood.

But the prodigal son his former disposition considered, Mercy is to be
showed to ye wicked
the present compassion of the father had of him is worthy to be observed.
For he was a man wholly swallowed up of sin, wilfully walking after his
own wicked ways, there was no fear of God before his eyes: Yet the father
rebukes him not in his indignation, neither does he chastise him in his
heavy displeasure: but he rather chooses to prosecute him with favor which
he did not deserve, then persecute him with judgment which was most due unto
him, Teaching us the like mercy that we would show to such who beseech our
mercy, howesoeuer in regard of their vilde inclinations they be unworthy
of it. There is none can be lewder and more infamous then this fellow upon
whom such abundant favor was extended: to signify that how so ever the
persons are qualified, yet their misery by us must compassionatly be
respected. Matthew. 5
It is the express commandment of Christ that we should be merciful, as our
heavenly father is merciful. Now how he is charitably disposed to the wicked,
herein it is evident, in that he makes the sun to arise on the evil and the
good, Matt. 5
and sends rain on the just and unjust.

The haven is a refuge and relief to all that ariue thereat, A similitude
whether good or bad: as it succoureth innocents, so it often does protect
robbers. God is the haven, to whom whosoever at any time do drive, they shall
rest in safety. If thou do help and relieve unworthy, with them doubtless
will resort unto thee, Genesis 18
some who are worthy. Abraham confusedly without any difference harboring all
strangers, among them unawares received likewise Angels. It is Salomons advice,
Pro. ^5 Romans 12
and Paul ratifieth it, That if our enemy does hunger, we do feed him. Let us
measure others by our selves, and let us do to others in their wants, which
we would wish might be done to us in the like necessities. If God should show
his mercy only to the good, where should the wicked and sinner appear? What
should become of us who are borne in wickedness, and do nothing else but bring
forth ungodliness? We will not exhibit any kindness to our neighbor in his
extremity, because his life offends us: and yet we crave daily for help
at Gods hands, though hourly, diversely and grievously we offend him. With
what face can thou so often beg of God, and art so cruel to a beggar at
the gate, that comes but seldom to thee? Among the five thousand who were fed
by Christ with five loaves and two fishes, John. 6
there were without doubt some evil disposed people: yet Christ does not
sunder and divide them from the rest, but equally without respect of persons,
relieved them together. It is a pithie saying of S. Ambrose: Ambrose.
Misericordia non iudicat de meritis, sed miserijs. Mercy does not consider of
men's merits, but of their miseries. It is the fashion of the world, before
they bestow upon any their alms, to make a scrutinie, and inquitie of their
lives, There must come question upon question, before a poor beggar can have
the smallest devotion: This we may well call Scrutinium diabolicum: a devilish
scrutinie. For so it is in deed when as a needy person does implore our
charity, and we weary him with words, but do very slenderly help him with our
works. This trick we first of al learned of the devil, who te^pting our savior
in his extreme poverty, questioned with him as we do with the poor, whether
he were good: for to the like effect he expostulateth thus, Matt. 4
If thou (says he) be the son of God cast thy self down: making a great
doubt whether he were such a man as were worthy to be relieved in this his
extremity. but of this matter I spare further to entreat, because I have
particularly discoursed at large of it in my book of alms.

This I have thought good to admonish thee of by the way, under the example of
the fathers charity unto his wicked son, that thou may likewise dispose thy
self to be mercifully affected even to wicked people: That so thou might
imitate thy heavenly father, Matt. ^
and be perfect as Christ wills thee, as thy father is perfect.

The third Chapter. The readiness of God in forgiving sin, and his slownesse
in punishing it: signified by the father his running out to meet his prodigal
son*
THe father espying his son a far off, contenteth not himself with the
sight of him, or with barelie pitying him, or weeping for him, and so leaving
him: but he further makes haste, and runs out to meet him, that neither
any other in the way might hinder him, or otherwise the conceit of his fathers
severity unhappily terrify him.

A similitude
By this and other circumstaunces going before, the order that God uses in
receiving a sinner is notably set down. He is like unto a Nurse, who
seeing her tender child venturing to come unto her, that it should not take a
fall, makes speed and runs to it; Or like unto a Vulture, A similitude
or greedy foul, who first seeing his pray a far off, flies swiftly unto
it, seazeth upon it, and afterward deuoureth it: so Go^ first seeing a
sinner a far off, in the uttermost coast and region of sin, takes to him
the wings of mercy, and flies speedily like a swift arrow to him: he
lights upon him, culling him and kissing him, and afterward incorporateth
him, and makes him his own.

The father would not stay until his son should come unto him, and with all
submission upon his knees crave remission, until he had urged him by many
arguments, and pierced his ears and heart with his complaints: it was enough
with him to move him to help him to know his miseries, albeit he came not
into his presence to utter them.

As it is sufficient to move a tender Father to know his sons adversity, A
similitude
that he is fallen into a River, where without speedy help he must needs
be drowned, albeit he grateth not his fathers ears with loud crying unto
him: so is it enough with God that he knows our dangers, that we stick
fast in the deep mire where no water is, or that the streams run over our
souls, albeit we cry not until we wax hoarse unto him, and treble and
beat often upon the name of Our Father. The Lord sees well the anguish of
our minds, and our groaninges cannot be hid from him. And therefore he says
thus by the Prophet Esaias, Before that they cry, I do hear them.

This father in running out to meet his son, testifies his love which he
bears to his son, God is slow in punishing sin.
how ready he was freely to remit whatsoever sin his son did commit. It is
Gods nature so to do: It has always been his custom to be very forward
to show savor to a sinner, and to be unwilling and slow to punish him.

Genes. 3
When as Adam had broken the covenant, and was in the transgression, it is said
that God walked in the Garden in the cool of the day. When as he came to take
vengeance upon sin, he came not down riding upon the heavens, as upon an
horse, neither did he come flying upon the wings of the winds, nay he came
no fast pace, but walking and creeping as it were a Snayle. If he had delited
in our confusion, and did not rather expect our conversion, would he not
think you mende his pace, and make more haste to punish us?

Gene. 7
When as God was purposed to destroy the first world, and wash away the horrible
filthiness of sin, which polluted the earth, with the waters of his rage,
before this his judgment was accordingly executed, it was a hundred years
before to his preacher Noah published. This his exceeding patience, and long
sufferance, argues flatly his slacknes in punishing us: For else he needed not
to have warned them at all, or respited them so long, but might have soon
overwhelmed them.

^ed. 19
When his doom definitive was denounced against Sodom, and her sister Gomorrah,
and her neighbor towns about, he came familiarly to Abraham before, and of set
purpose broke the matter unto him, that he might stay him by entreating for
them. For to signify so much he suffers dust and ashes to dispute with him,
and so far to commune and prevail with him, as if there had been but ten
honest persons in the place, the rest had been preserved and saved for their
sakes. What proof more pregnant can we have then this, of the tender mercy and
loving kindness of the Lord?

Pharaoh was the rankest rebel that I read of, for he spared not to say,
Exodus 14
Who is the Lord that I should let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither
will I let Israel go. Would such a fellow think you have been spared? Yet
the Lord did spare him, and warned him seven times before he would destroy
him. Oh the exceeding bounty of our God toward us.

The Niniuits were a pestilent and perverse people, out of measure sinful,
Jonas: 3
for the outcrie of their sin had sent an Echo up to heaven, and the Lord
had presently decreed their destruction: but though the sword was now drawn
out of the sheath, to wound their hairie scalpe, yet so good a God was he, so
slow to vengeance, and full of mercy, as their repentance mitigated his mood,
and shut up the sword of his anger and judgment again into the scabberd.

By the Arc of the Testimony wherein the law was kept, was the Mercy seat
placed, to signify that as soon as we have offended the law, there is
mercy to be had: Psalm. 130
With the Lord there is mercy (says the Prophet David) and with him is
plenteous redemption.

Now as he is thus backward and slow to anger: The Lord is swift in showing
mercy.
so is he as forward and prone to mercy. As he but walks when he punishes
a sinner, so he runs when he would save a sinner, as he did here to save a
notorious and miserable sinner.

Luke. 19
Christ meaning to divert into Zacheus his house, or rather into his soul, and
to make him of an Usurer and lim of the devil, a son of Abraham, and a child
of God, he looks up to the fig tree whereon Zachee stood, and says, Zachee,
come down at once, and come quickly unto me.

Ioh. 13
To Judas Iscariot the thief and the traitor, when he was plotting and
compassing his treason, the Lord likewise said, Judas that which thou do do
quickly. Judas his treason was the worlds redemption, and therefore he was so
ready, and greedy it should be finished.

Luke. 22
Else where he likewise speaks to the same effect saying, I must be baptized
with a baptism, and how am I grieved until it be ended? This he spoke of
his passion, the cup of our blessing, the earnest and price of our eternal
salvation.

^ctes. 2
When the holy Ghost in the day of Penticost came upon the Apostles, it came
suddenly in a sound from heaven, as of a rushing and mighty wind: It was in
mercy to illuminate and sanctify them, and that was the cause it came
speedily on them.

(...) ^1
The Prophet Esaie declaring the office of Christ in preaching the Gospel,
shows that the subject of this preaching is, to publish Gods readiness to
pardon sinners and his unwillingness to take judgment of them. And to make
proof thereof he compares them together, and makes his clemency to be far
greater, and of longer continuance toward us then his justice. For he
restrains his vengeance, and limiteth it to a day, but he extends his
mercy infinitely beyond it, giving a continuance of time unto it, the space
of a year. For thus the spirit speaks, Isai. 54
To preach the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our
God.

The same Prophet in an other place confirms the same doctrine most
comfortablie unto us, when in the person of God himself he says. A little
while have I forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I gather thee, for a
moment in mine anger I hid my face from thee for a little season; but with
everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee, says the Lord thy redeemer.

The due regard hereof breeds no admiration, but it tends exceedingly to
our consolation: for this is natural and proper unto God, to be gracious and
merciful: it is a strange work to him, as the scriptures say of him to punish
and show vengeance. A similitud^
Even as a Painter when he has elaboratelie finished a picture, if so be he be
constrained in regard of some faults which he finds in it, utterly to blot
out and deface all his work, he is much grieved for it: so when God sees
many defaults, and blemishes in us, who are his workmanship and engraven
image, upon whom he has bestowed such exceeding cost, as varnishing us, and
adorning us with lively colors, which must be reformed, for which cause he
must mar that he has made, and begin his work anew, it cannot but be
grievous and troublesome unto him.

A similitude
If thou would place a stone of great weight upon the roof of thine house,
thou have need of pullies and cables for to rear it: but if thou would
throw it to the ground, thou need do nothing but let it fall from thee, for
it will fall of his accord unto the ground: for naturally heavy things do
tend downward, as those that are light do ascend upward. It is as natural
with God to show mercy to a sinner, as it is for a stone that is heavy to
fall downewarde, for the Sun to shine, for the fire to burn, or any other
thing to perform his nature.

Wherefore thou read every where in the history of Christ of innumerable
mercies which he showed unto many, but thou read not of his punishments
inflicted upon any but only at one time, when he made him a whip, ^n. 2
and chased out of the temple such impure copesmates, as had too abhominably
profaned the temple. Was there ever any that entreated his mercy and did not
obtain it? He healed graciously Malchus his ear, ^^ke. 21
his professed and sworn enemy, then one of the furious and blood thirsty
soldiers who combined together, intending his destruction.

The murmuring Israelites exasperated the Lord exceedingly against them, when
as the spies returning from Chanaan their tidings displeased them: for they so
mutinously muttered against God, as they were threatened of him, that they
should not possess the inheritance promised them, or enter into the land: Yet
after that, when the people were in arms, and prepared unto battle, in the
midst of judgment the Lord could not utterly forget mercy: he is so
naturally disposed to be merciful; and therefore both in anger and love he
says unto them, Do not ascend up, Number. 14
for I am not with you, least ye fall before your enemies. If he had not been
with them, he would not so graciously and lovingly have warned them, that
they should not go up, but would have suffered them to fall upon the sword, and
be a pray unto their enemies. Again, if so be he had been with them, and had
not been angry with them, he would not have said so directly unto them, I am
not with you.

He was with them, and was not with them. He was not with them that they should
have the conquest, and he was with them that they should not be conquered. If
the Lord be thus merciful when men are so sinful, it is thereby manifest that
he is soon satisfied.

The four beasts which Ezechiel did see in a vision had the faces of a Lion,
Ezech. 1
and also of a man in the right side: to signify unto us, yt as he looks
like a lion upon a sinner that cannot repent, utterly to destroy him, whilst
there is none to help him: so when a sinner returns from his sins, and
turns unto him, he has the loving and kind face of a man, and entreats
him familiarlie and kindly as a man.

This father could not be more forward in favor toward this his lost son
then to look out after him, and to cast his eyes about to epsy where he
might see him, and when he had happily seen him a far off, to hic out unto
him, to embrace him to fall on his neck, and kiss him. Al these are good notes
of good nature and affections: but when they do pa^ley, and talk together, the
zeal is admirable which he expresses toward him. For he is so soon pleased,
as no sooner the son begins to speak but the bowels of the father are so
presently moved, as he suffers him not to utter all he meditated, for
before he could come to this clause of his set speech, Make me one of thy hired
servants, the father interrupteth him, and breaks off his speech,
preventing him graciously with his blessings of goodness, and granting
infinitely more then he desired.

Thy God as so rea^^e to show ^is sinner ^h mercy.
The father in great wisdom used this great speed, because his sons estate
and need so required it. For when as a sinner through anguish of sin, is in
extremity as this sinner was, he has need of present comfort to prevent
despair, and ready encouragement to allaie the rage, and fury of his
passions, which otherwise would be very dangerous unto him. For this cause
God uses no delay with such, but immediately upon the forgiveness of sins, he
gives therewithal the riches of his grace; there is no time betwixt them, but
they come both together. The remission of sin, and the gifts of grace come
together.


Before we can recover our bodily health after a great sickness it is a long
time: by little and little, and by degrees we leis^r^ly attain it: for the
body is not of that moment as the soul, therefore there is no such urgent
necessity of the present health of it: for by lingering and time it may do well
enough. It is otherwise with the soul which would languish with grief, and
consume away through continuance of sorrow, and therefore it is necessary it
should have speedy remedy, and therefore God gives it. Our course is q^ite
contrary, for we use all speed to have health of body, but we trifle away the
time, and put off opportunity, which is offered unto us for the health of our
soul. O Jesus! what posting is there vnt^ the Physician upon every complaint
and grieuance of the body? any small occasion drives us to him. If we be but
a little abated of our sleep, or the edge of our stomachs but a little
blunted, we must have his advise, and we must receive some Apothecarie drugges
to restore the same again: But who does complain of his diseased soul, and
repaireth to a Preacher and heavenly Physician to remove his malady? we are
therein wholly distempered, and out of frame, and yet we feel not that.
Abundance of evil humors, ready to choke and quench the good spirit remain
within us, and we seek not to purge them. We should be moved to care more
for our souls, seeing God so cares for them, and not to think the time too
soon for them, since that God himself in so great haste helps them.

Furthermore this readiness of this father to do us good, We are as ready to do
that which is evil, as God is ready to do us good.
should be a spur to prick us forward, and to make us as ready to good. But we
oppositly are as bent to evil, as the Lord is graciously inclined unto our
good. If we imagine any wickedness, and would set forth ungodliness, neither
oars, sails, or winds can serve us, we are so hot and hasty to effect it.
Aaron had not finished and ended his speech, before the Israelites had cast him
their jewels, their bracelets and carerings, and costly ornaments to make a
golden Calfe. They would not so readily like calfes as they were, have bestowed
a piece of gold, as an alms to a poor man the living image of the everliving
God: but they esteemed not what they gave unto a blockish Idol, to a dead
image, the work of man's hands which had no need of it.

I would that this were not our sin, and the names being changed we were not
this people: we can bestow wastfully our gold upon idle and lascivious
pictures, and anticke works; we can stately set them out upon tombs, upon
the gates of our houses, in our gardens, and in every corner of our dwellings,
and they want no cost on them: but dear Christians their fellow servants, the
image of God for whom Christ Jesus died, run up and down, and do lie at our
doors pale and wan thorough hunger, naked, haborles, and in all extremity, and
our eyes behold them not, much less do our hearts pity them. How many be
there who spare not for cost to spend among whores, in the damnable pleasures
of their sins, which turn to their destruction: but will bestow nothing to
godly uses, in zealous affections, which may make to their salvation? The
Prophet taxing our readiness to commit sin, says, We imagine mischief in
our beds. To which purpose says Solomon. Prou. 1
The feet of the wicked run unto mischief. And Hieremie complains in the
like sort. Hierom. 8.9
Every one turned to their race, as the horse rusheth into the battle. Now
contrariwise how slack and slow we are to serve God, I need not to show,
our actions and whole course of life shows it. As we have need of a bit to
draw us back from sin, so we have as much need of a spur to prick us to
God: for we are as heavy and as dull in his service, as we are nimble and
pliable to the world. This did not David, Psalm. 119
when as he says thus. I have run the way of thy commandementes: 1. Cor. 9
And Paul prescribes us an other course, in exhorting us so to run, as we may
obtain. In a worldly race each one labors to outrun an other, to gain a
worldly prize: let us do the like in regard of the reward that is set before
us, if we do thereafter, that we may say with the Apostle. I have fought a
good fight, I have run my race, 2. Tim. 4
I have kept the faith: from henceforth is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the righteous Lord shall give unto me, and not to me
only, but to al those who love his glorious coming.

The fourth Chapter. Of the other circumstances of the Father his love, showed
to his son by his falling on his neck, and kissing him.
Whilst we do consider the Fathers kindness showed to his son, we may say
with holy David: Truly God is go^d to Israel, and to those that be of a true
heart: yea to those that are of a bad heart to, as this person was. For albeit we
have had good proof of his good will by former arguments; yet there follow
greater, who do more evidently declare and teach the same.

Among others, by these circumstances and tokens of grace, His falling on his
neck, his kissing him: the heat and fire of his affections breaks out, and
the light thereof shines clearly as the sun, and as the noone day unto us.
And this will the plainer appear unto us, if we turn our eyes upon the hab^^e
of this son, and view his present miserable infelicity, being such, as if
natural love in the father had not overcome it, it had bredde in him a
loathsome despite and hatred of him. For he came no otherwise then as a common
Rogue unto him, all torn and beggarlie, in filthy and stinking manner, as he
was in when he was enkenneled in the sties, and couched among swine.
Certainly his breath and whatsoever was of him was rank and poisonable as any
unclean carrion: he was no way fit for humane society, yet his sweet Father
embraces him in his arms, culleth and kisseth this ugly monster with the
sweet kisses of his mouth.

This is our condition, and the love of GOD our Father is the same toward us.
For how vilde do we appear in the sight of God, as we are of our selves
naked, miserable, and to every good work abominable? Matt. ^
we have lain among the pots, yea among the swine into which the devils entered,
which violently were thrown from a steep down place, and carried into the sea:
our garments are as menstruous and polluted clouts, patched and pieced, which
(as Adams apro^ which he made him of fig leaves) cannot hide our nakedness, much
less beautify and adorn our bodies: yet our dear father shuts not his
eyes at such a noisome and horrible sight, or stops his nostrils against such
a tanke and outrageous sent: but he claspeth us in his arms, and hides us in
his bosom as an arrowe in the quiver, and sent down his own and only son
among us, to wash us and make us clean, to take away our filthiness, that we
might be presented pure and holy unto him.

In kissing him he declares his entire love unto him, for a kiss among men A
kiss a token of love among men
has always gone current for a pledge and pawn of kindness, which is
professed by it. For because by our mouths we do draw our spirits, and
thereby do unfold the secrets of our hearts, and do utter our thoughts: by
the outward ioining together of our mouths, we do promise an agreement, and
conjunction of hearts.

Gene. 45
Hence it is that Joseph when he opened, and revealed himself unto his
brethren, and would pour out his love in the greatest measure upon them: among
other notes and tokens thereof, he affectionatly fell upon their necks and
kissed them.

Luke. 7
Mary Magdalen the sinner, when she was converted, to testify her love which
she did bear to Christ, she did cast down her self at the feet of Christ,
and most humbly kissed them.

Matt. 26
When Judas the traitor studied with himself what course might be the best to
bring Christ unto his death: he could not devise a more subtle shift, the^
under a kiss, a pretense of kindness to cover his villainy.

Cant. 1
When as the church in the Canticles sueth to her spouse to show his love unto
her, she entreats her husband Christ that he would be so favorable as for
to kiss her with the kisses of his mouth:, that is, that he would manifest
and declare his affections, by manefest and good tokens. The father therefore
protests all love and good will unto his son, and as a seal and confirmation
of it, he binds and seals it up with a kiss, so as now he may fully
satisfy himself and make no doubt of it.

That which is here typically shrouded and shadowed under a parable, is plainly
and substantially in every one of us verified: For this is gods behauior
toward us his lost children, whom upon our return he generally kisseth.

For does not he most manifestly show his love toward us as if he should
kiss us, when as his lips are so full of grace, as he thus affectionately and
graciously greeteth us? As I live, Ezech. 1^
I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he does return and live.
This is to be esteemed, as the kindest and most comfortable kiss, that may be
given unto us: of the like sort is this comfort: John. 3.
So God loved the world as he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have life everlasting. And this: This
is my beloved son, Matt. 3
in whom I am well pleased hear him. As the father thus kisseth us, so does
the son, that we might kiss him, Psalm. 2
least he be angry with us. Who does not wonder at these gracious words which
proceed from his mouth appertaining unto all? Matthew. 1^
Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will ease you. To
the same purpose serve the Sacraments of ye church, which are several sweet
kisses, and as it were the earnest penny, to confirm the covenant that God bath
made unto us. And truly he ioineth himself closely unto us, and straightly
embraces us, and as it were kisseth us, when as by baptism he does receive
us into the lap of the church, incorporateth us into his holy congregation,
makes us the mystical body of his son, espousing us unto him, and with him
intituling us unto his blessed inheritance, purchased by his blood in the
kingdom of heaven.

The like he does by the mystical supper, by which we are instructed that he
is the same, who kisseth and cherishes us, as sustaining us with his blessed
body and blood, which he gave and shed for us to save and preserve us both
bodies and souls unto eternal life.

To these may be numbered all his kinds of benefits, which are inestimable and
unspeakable, of which there is no end, by all which he imbraceth us with the
arms of mercy, and kisseth us with the kisses of his mouth.

It is our duty in regard of this to show love to him, who has so loved us,
yea who has loved us when as we loved not him, who whilst we were enemies
has vouchsafed to die for us. Let his kisses therefore kindle our affections,
and draw us on to kiss him again, who is our love, our dove, our beloved,
our bridegroom, our savior. But how may we justly be ashamed of our selves, yt
we have forsaken our own spouse, and have committed filthiness with strange
flesh? we have wrought folly in Israel, and have committed fornication with the
baude of Babylon, (...)
who with her craft has caused us to yield, and with her flattering lips has
enticed us? The whore of Rome has bewitched our hearts: and her painted face
has ravished our affections. But take we in time the advice of sage Solomon,
and let us prudently follow it, (...)
Hear me now therefore O children, and harken unto the words of my mouth. Let
not thine heart decline to her ways, wander thou not in her paths, for she has
caused many to fall down wounded, and the strong men are all slain by her.
Her house is the way unto the grave, which goes down unto the chambers of
death.

The fifth Chapter. Of the Royal robe, given by the father unto the prodigal
son, when he was in presence.
WE have hitherto discussed diverse main points of rare and strange favor,
showed by the father to his son a far off, and somewhat we have spoken of his
gestures, and actions of love toward him when he drew nigh unto him: but now
far greater remain to be entreated of, admirably expressed when he was in
presence with him.

Now had he fit time, and justice required it, and his sons sins deserved
it, that he should rip up unto him his defaults past, and call to his
remembrance the offenses of his youth, to call him to account of the time
misspent, and to lay open the book of conscience before him.

Some severe father if he had such a son, would have ratled him roundly, and
would have either constrained himself to seem inexorable, or otherwise would
not have accepted of him, but upon conditions of amendment of manners, and of an
absolute obedience afterward: But this father is so fatherly, and full of
favor, as he cannot give himself to rigor and austerity, but as soon as he
sees him, his love is set on fire and burns toward him, so as the coals
that follow are kindled at it, for as soon as he has him he most courteously
enteraineth him: and graciously greeteth him with all loving kindness.

He suffers him not to conclude his speech, though he knew well enough that
he had not much to speak. He should have spoken on, and said as he purposed,
Make me one of thy hired servants, but the father interrupteth him by his
hasty calling to his servants for him, giving more then he himself would have
requested, or his mind conceived. For immediately while the words were in his
mouth he imploieth all his servants about him, to adorn and set him forth, and
provide a banquet for him.

He would thus cloth him, to show us what account he makes of him, how highly
he honoreth him as his own darling, though the other would have sued to be
but his hyreling.

He wills his officers to fetch him the best or the first roabe, His roabe
what it was.
and to adorn him with it. This first roabe was his first dignity, which Adam
lost, and Christ redeemed, Innocence and holiness, and the grace of God, with
the which he was first clothed, whereby he was clothed like unto the sun in
beauty and brightness.

With this roabe was Adam first invested, but by his wilful departure from his
father, he was stripped of it: So as we his sons who do tread in his steps,
are subject to his miseries, and may with him be ashamed of our nakedness.

But God in his Christ, Christ is our roabe.
to us his prodigal converted sons has restored us our robe: for he is the
garment which we must put on, according to that which the Apostle Paul says,
Romans 13
Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. He is the wedding garment mentioned in the
gospel, Matt. 22
without which we may not press unto the heavenly banquet.

His righteousness in us, is the garment of our elder brother, by which we must
attain the blessing of our father, as Jacob by putting on the garment of Esau,
obtained the blessing of his father Isaac. This is he upon whom the kingly
harper diuinelie descanteth in this dainty ditty. O my God, thou art exceeding
glorious, Psalm. 104
thou art clothed with majesty and honor. In him behold the great wonder in
heaven, a woman clothed with the sun. Revel, 12
If so be therefore we do wear his cloth, and become his servants, if we put
on his merits and obedience, our sins shall be covered, and our nakedness
shall be no more seen.

Wherefore bestow thou no more labor upon the old rags which Adam has left
thee. Sow no longer paultry fig leaves, and rotten pieces together, for thy
pains will be lost, and it will not acquit the cost, which thou bestowest on
them. It happens sometime that a poor creature has a garment so old, and
spent with wearing, A similitude
as if it take a rent, it cannot be stitched up, for the threads do break
asunder, they are so rotten and decayed with use, as they are not firm enough
to sustain a new thread or to bear a needle: so our robe of rebellion which
we do carry about us, has been worn so bare by our ancient and long
continuance in sin, as there is no repairing it, but we must leave it as
beggars do their rags, 1. Cor. 1
and cast it upon the hedge, and we must put on a new garment even Jesus
Christ Our wisdom, justification, sanctification and redemption. For he is, as
Chrysostom. very well does say unto the people of Antioch, Chrysostom. ad pop.
Antioche ^um, hom. 21 Romans 6
all in all unto us, our table, our house, our garment, our head, our root. To
this end does Paul say, Whosoever be baptized in Christ must put on Christ,
as he is raised up from the dead, by the glory of his father, so we also
should walk in newness of life: now we put on Christ Jesus by a lively
faith, Ambrose.
and do wear him about us, even as Stephen being in earth touched him in
heaven.

2. Tim. 4
This is to be diligently observed of us, and the rather because there are
erroneous spirits, wholly led by the doctrine of Devils, who do bumbast
themselves with their own righteousness destroying that righteousness which is
by faith.

Revel 3
They do but flatter and deceive themselves with a v^in opinion of that which is
not in them, as the L^^d^nia^^ who^ the spirit taxes saying, Thou say I am
rich and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, and know not how
thou art wretched, and miserable, and p^ore, and blind, and naked. I counsel
thee to buy of me gold tried by the fire that thou may be made rich, and
white raiment that thou may be clothed, and that thy filthy nakedness do
not appear.

Such as go strouting, and ietting about bragging of their works, are like
unto the soldiers against whom in times past king Agesilaus did fight in
battle: who being the leanest and most carionlie creatures which the worlds
eye could see, they quilted and embossed the quarters of their garments with
huge flappes and borders, to appear huge and mighty to terrify their
enemies; but after they were vanquished and slain in the field, and stripped
of these vestments, their lanke and thin sides appeared to their view, and
the enemy scorned them: So if we disrobe iusticiaries, and meritmongers of
their bragging borders, of their conceited and counterfeit righteousness, and
lay them naked to the eye of the world, they will appear the most apish and
ridiculous persons as any one can behold. It is vanity to sooth and please
our selves in that which we ought to be ashamed of: for the wages of our
merits is death. Psalm. 51
We are borne in sin, and conceived in iniquity, Job. 9 Job. 25.
says the kingly Prophet. I feared all my works, says that just man Job.
The stars in Gods sight are unclean, much more a vilde man, says the same
saint. If we consider our own merits we must despair, says the ancient
father Hierome. Hieron. in 6 Esaias.
He that trusts not to his good works, nor hops with himself by his
works to be justified he has only the hope of salvation, and the mercies of
the Lord, says reverend Basil. Basilius.
Being justified by faith we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, as the holy Ghost teaches us. Wherefore let us with the four and
twenty Elders, Revel. 4
spoken of in the Apocalips, Take off the Crowns from our heads, and lay them
down at the feet of the Lamb. Whatsoever work we do, let us lay it at the
feet of Christ, who woorketh in us as Paul teaches, who speaking of his
labors that they exceeded others, he stops and corrects himself, saying,
Not I, but the grace of God in me. We are of our selves as the prodigal son
very poorly, and filthily attyred. It is God the father in his dear son,
who clotheth us in costly and imbrodered garments, with a vesture of gold,
wrought about with diverse colors. Wherefore give glory to God, my son, as
Joshua Iosu^. ^
said to Achan, and boast not of thy self.

The sixth Chapter. Of his ring and shoes which were given unto him
AS he richly araieth him with a royal to be, so he further graceth him,
adorning him with a ring. This ring served for a signet and seal of the
covenant and last will which he makes with him; namely, that he would become
his God, and he should be numbered among his people, that he would be his
father, and he should be his son: he would cancel his former wickedness,
and would not remember his sins any more. And no other end does Augustine make
of it, ^ugust quaest. ^n. quaest.
when he terms the ring, Pignus spiritus sancti, the pledge and earnest of
the holy Ghost.

The use of rings has been very ancient, for Moses in Genesis makes mention
of a ring, which Judas gave to Thamar, as a token of his love.

Rings serve especially to a double purpose. First to be as ornaments of
honor A ring an ornament of honor.
and renown. For which cause in old times the Romans when they sent their
honorable Ambassadors into foreign kingdoms, they had rings given them in
the public sight and face of the people, which served as testimonials of their
honorable callings, and of the dignity and great worship which was laid upon
them. It was not then lawful for any to wear rings who had them not by
public commission given unto them. Of later times a Ring peculiarly
appertayned to the famous order and degree of knighthoode, to distinguish them
from the confused and common sort of people. It was not sufferable in a base
borne brat, to go bragging with a ring, no man might wear any that was not
free borne. Moreover it was not permitted to any to have more then one, yea it
was infamous and very ridiculous to wear more then one. Gracchus noted
Naeuius for a wanton fellow of most effeminate behavior, forasmuch as his left
hand was so painted and gawdie, and daubed with rings. It was always the
custom to wear the ring upon the next finger unto the least upon the left
hand, to be in stead of a Diadem and Coronet upon the top of the heart,
the fountain of all virtue, for as much as a sinewe from thence extends it
self unto the heart, and therefore that the Ring was a sign of virtue this
ancient custom shows.

Secondly, rings served as seals of love, A Ring a seal of love
and pledges of troth plighted each with other. In this respect it has been
the common custom of lovers, to declare their mutual love and good will, by
their joint giving and receiving of rings. Their agreement of minds, and
fitnes of natures, by no other ceremony could be better showed then by a ring
which every one causes to be made fit before it can be worn, for if it be
too wide it slippeth off, or if it be too straight it pincheth too much: So
consorts and companions of our loves must be fit and suitable to us. For if they
be too loose, they will be too slippery, or if they be too straight, we
cannot endure them.

These Rings which passed to and fro between lovers, usually were engraven,
and had seals upon them. Such emblemes and poesies, as might seem to stir
up affections the better, and continue kindness were carved upon them. But
unto such pride and general excess are these times of ours come, as every
triobuler and meanest mate will flant it with a ring. He is no body now adays
who cannot if a massy and weighty ring will do it, out dare a man. You shall
see such sordide and abject fellows carry ringes upon their fingers, as there
is no wise man that knows them, that does not judge that rings are fitter and
seemlier for their feet. You shall have a doltish fellow iette up and down
with a great seal ring, who neither knows one letter from another, neither
has at any time any letter for to seal.

But this man howsoever he now seems base ^n respect of this his former
beastly behauior, for to wear a ring, yet the father not without good
dis^retion adorneth him with it: for howsoever lately ^e was in disgrace, yet
was he at the first of very great account. He descended from a noble and
princely pedigree. He was of the greatest birth and parentage as possibly
could be. God not only gives grace unto a sinner that repents him of his
sins, but with his grace restored whatsoever he had lost by reason of his
sin. He is careful of our credit, estimation, and account in the midst of
our sorrows, Genesis 32 Gene. 41
as of Jacobs in the midst of his service and labors in Mesopotamia, of
Joseph's in prison and misery in Egypt, of David's whilst he was in very mean
estate, 1. Sam. 16 1. Sam. 17
when he kept his fathers sheep, whom he took from the sheepfold, and
preferred and extolled unto the kingdom of Israel.

Why then do we slack and delay our repentance, since we have so liberal
and bountiful a father, who so plentifully rewards the good doer? Would we
that are filthy be rather filthy still, then to be made clean? Had we rather
be bond then free: servants then sons: base then honorable: to go in vilde
raiment, and appear abominable, then to be apparelled richly, and to be
set forth with a ring honorably? Wherefore go thou out of the den of thy
sin, since thou see what blessings God has in store for thee upon thy
forth coming. A similitude
The Conie that concheth closely in the burrow, though he durst nor stir, or
issue out at the noise and clamor and knocking of the warrener, it is not to
be maruailed at; for he knows well enough that if he springs out, he
shall be entangled and catched with a net, which is ouerspred for him and
therefore he rather chooses to be woaried of the Ferret, and to be torn in
pieces by him, then to run himself into such certain danger otherwise. But
there is no such matter to be feared of thee, by thy coming out of the cave of
thy sin wherein thou do lurk when the Lord calls thee: but be thou well
assured, that when thou obeyest the voice of the Lord, and come unto him,
he will embrace thee with his arms, he will kiss thee, and receive thee, and
bestow his rich graces on thee.

His shoes.
But as he does credit and grace him with a ring as a token of his dignity,
that he is the son of God: so he prepares shoes for him, that his feet might
be as hearts feet to run the way of his commandments, that the man of God
might be ready, and provided unto every good work.

That the Jews might be in readiness to celebrate the Passover, according to
Gods ordinance, they were commanded to have shoes upon their feet,
immediately to depart after it was consummated.

Mark. 20
When our savior Christ sent out his Disciples to preach the Gospel, he
wills them that they be shod with Sandals.

The great Doctor of the Gentiles laying out every parcel of the complete
armor of a Christian soldiour, who will fight a good fight, Ephesians. 6
gives him this furniture and munition for his feet, charging him that they
be shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace.

By his feet, that were covered and defended with shoes, we may fitly and
safely understand his affections, and his whole course of life which depends
thereupon: for as the feet do bear up the body, and carry it to and fro
whither they list: so all our actions are carried by our affections, and are
ruled by their fancies.

This much our Savior Christ does insinuate by his washing his Apostle Peter's
feet, and by his replication and answer unto Peter when as he refused it
saying unto him. Ioh 13
If I wash thee not thou shall have no part with me. For indeed all our
actions, and endeavors are so filthy and unclean in his sight, partly through
our natural most sinful corruption which brings forth in us all sordid and
vilde lusts: partly through the custom and condition of the world, which
being wholly set upon evil, enticeth us to filthiness, and that with
greediness, as unless Christ washes us, by giving unto us a clean heart,
and renewing his holy spirit in us, by regenerating us with water, and the holy
Ghost, we can never enter into the kingdom of heaven. Now because there is
none so cleansed from the filth of sin, but that he is daily defiled again
with it. For as they who do enter into a bathe, A similitud^
and do wash their whole bodies, if they do but touch the ground with their
feet, they do so pollute them, and beray them anew as they have need of a
new washing: so we being cleansed from our sins by Christ, and justified
by his grace, we presently set our affections upon earth, and defile our selves
again with our sinful works, so as it is most needful that our feet
should always be purified and made clean. This is done by the preaching of
the word, which guides our feet aright in the works of his laws, and ways
of his commandments, and orders our goinges that our footsteps may not
slide.

Thus the father conferred a threefolde grace A three fold grace.
upon his graceless son. His preventing grace, his following grace, his
finishing and perfitting grace. He prevented him with his grace when he saw
him first, and espied him aloof off, when as he saw not him: when he showed
mercy on him, and did run unto him, and graciously did fall upon his neck
and kissed him. Of this grace the Apostle Paul speaks when as he says.
Gala. 1
He separated me from my mothers womb, and called me by his grace.

He followed him with his grace, when he caused shoes to be put upon his
feet, preparing him, and enabling him to walk in his ways, drawing his feet
out of the net, out of the pit of mire and clay, and bringing them into a
large room, and finally guiding them in the way of peace. Of the same grace
ye same apostle speaks likewise thus. I have labored more then all, nor I,
1. Cor. 15
but the grace of God in me.

Of his finishing grace we shall entreat in the next Chapter, which is showed
by the banquet, mirth and music which was provided for him. And this is that
whereof the same Apostle Paul speaks in this manner: Phil. 3
It is God that works in (...) to will and to perform.

By this man's ornaments we are taught how we a^^ to be c^^a^^ed, if we be his
children, and be with him converted The marks of those yt are to be converted.
from our former sins. We must go arrayed with the wedding garment of
holiness of life, of purity of conscience: Every one of us must be as the
^oet says: Integer vit^, scelerisque pur^^s.

We must have the ring and earnest of the spirit, whereby we are sealed unto the
day of redemption.

Thirdly and lastly, we must have ^h^oes upon our feet, whereby we may walk
w^^^^ offense in our several callings wherein God has placed us: by these we
shall be known whether we be live or counterfeit professors.

The seventh Chapter. Of the banquet, mirth, and mus^^^ wherewith the father
welcomed his son.
THe father does follow his son with such favor, as is strange and
admirable, He had abundantly declared his affections by his former mercies,
but yet that which follows exceeds all the rest. For it is such, as I
suppose our dull senses are not able to conceive, the tongue of men or Angels
in no wise can express. Wherefore being to enter into this huge Ocean sea of
celestial joys, which the righteous lord prepares for repentant sinners, who
do truly turn to him, I faint with Peter when he walked upon the sea, and I
cry out with Peter, Save me master least I perish. Matthew. 13


1. Sam 18
Is it a small thing (says David) to be the kings son? What am I? and what is
my life, or my family of my father in Israel, that I should be son in law
to the King? Much surely must be done unto the man whom the king will honor,
Esther. 7
for, for him must be brought royal apparel which the king uses to wear,
and the horse that the King rides upon, and the crown royal must be set
upon his head, the raiment and the horse must be delivered by the hand of one
of the kings most noble princes, as says Haman to king Ahashurosh. This
honor has been showed to this despised person, as to another Mordecai, the
royal robe by the kings most noble princes his holy ministers has been put
upon him. The crown imperial is now bestowed upon him, now is there triumph,
feasting, and rejoicing in the land of the living. When as Haman was in his
magnificence and prosperity, Esther. 5
and was invited unto the kings table, he could not refrain boasting, he must
needs call his wife and friends together to publish it unto them: we have
just cause to boast our selves of our felicity, that God has prepared a table
for us in despite of our enemies, and we have received the cup of salvation,
and he makes us now to hear of joy and gladness, that the bones which he has
broken might rejoice.

This banquet here mentioned, is not simply and groslie to be taken, but it is
spirituallie to be understood. For we must not so baselie think of the joys
of the world to come, as to place them among the carnal and fleshly delights
of this present evil world. John. 6
Here is another meat then you are aware of, as Savior Christ says. The
kingdom of God is not meat or drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in
the holy Ghost. There is no need of meat and drink in heaven, for we can
die no more, forasmuch as we shall be like unto the Angels, as Christ told
the Sadduces. Wherefore let us not groslie be conceived and deceived with
Mahomet, who was the first that prescribed laws to the Turks and Saracens:
whose God was his belly, whose laws were his lusts, who was carnally minded.
Luke 32
Christ promises to such who abide with him, and continue in temptations, that
they shall have a kingdom, and that they shall eat and drink at his table in
his kingdom But this and such like speeches are figurative, and borrowed and
are taken from the use and practice of princes, who^ they use, whom they
vouchsafe most of all to honor, to call unto their Tables, and prepare
banquets for them.

This f^^st is therefore his honor and renown which his ^ther gives him: and
thereby he sigfieth nothing else but his vn^^ined love toward him. The
c^^^^^en of this w^^d can by no better means express the joys which at any
time they (...), th^^ by making of a f^^st, and therefore (...) most occasion
o^ ^^^^ste, they (...) d^ s^^st among (...) the fathers joy, (...) s^fe
return, (...) joy that his son (...) ^of.

There ^ni^g then of this place is, that his (...) does now ^m^y all honor and
felicity, he i^ now satisfied, to use the words of the kingly ^rop^^^, when
his glory does appear. This table (...) happiness, (...). ^7
and the pleasant Nec^ar, and Ambro^^^ thereof, is joy without sorrow, health
wi^h^ut sickness, strength without weakness, and l ^e wi hout death. In
comparison whereof al worldly joy is heaviness al sweetness sowrenes, all
prospe^^^ most miserable infelicitie. This is that Table which our Savior
Christ preaches of saying: (...). 14
I g^^ to prepare a place for you, and when I am gone and have prepared you a
place, I will come again and take you unto my self, that where I am there may
you be also. Whereunto also answers this his other saying. Father, I will
that those whom thou have given me be with me, (...). 17
that they may see my glory which thou have given me, became thou have loved
me before the foundations of the world were laid.

Under the fat C^^^^, he comprehends the whole course and works our
salvation: for this (...) Calfe is Christ, who (...) is his father (...) before
the (...) and most sweet^ (...) ^n^ ^ed unto ^s, a (...) (...) us (...) the
sin (...) wo^ld and (...) o^^^red up ^^e is (...) now ^^ne, (...)
(...) ^eing put into new v^ss^ls, (...)
(...) the heart of man. He (...) c^m^ ^^owne from heaven, which nour^^, ^h^^,
(...)
(...) seed of (...) in faith unto eternal life. He is the fountain of living
water, John. ^
of which whosoever ^^keth shall not thirst any more. And what i^ he not else.
^^n. 14 John. 16
He is the way by which we enter into the heavenly marriage. He is the
light which dis^sseth darkness, which like the clowdie Pilla^ which went before
the Israelits, gives us light in the night season, 1. Cor. 1
and guides us in the path and way that we should walk Finally he is made
of his ^ather. Wisdom sustification, Sanctification and red^mption. In him the
fulness of the Godheade b^d he does dwell. In him is our r^^hteousnesse, our
peace, Co^ ^ R^^^ 4
our joy in the holy Ghost.

To this purp^^e (...) reverend Chrysost^^, (...)
not a^^^ well, Christ become all things (...) thy ^a^e, thy garment, thy
house, thy (...) and thy root, To whom c^menteth G^^^en. (...) Verbum dei,
and caro dicitur, and panis, and lac, and holera. The word of God is called
flesh, and bread, and milk, and herbs. Answerable hereunto is this of
Nazianzen. ^rig. in Exo. ca. 15. hom. 7 Nazian. in Psalm. 44.
Our Lord Jesus Christ is called the life, the way, the bread, the wine, the
true light, and a thousand things else, so is he also called the sword. Hom.
2. in Cantica.
Origin says, Appellatur panis vitae, vt habeat gustus animae quod degustet.
He is called the bread of life, that the soul may have whereupon to feed.
Oh let us therefore return from our sins, and come home unto our father,
that we may taste how sweet the Lord is. By him alone are our hungry
souls fed, and by nothing else. Whatsoever meat is dressed by any other
Cook, and ministered unto us, it is not nourishable, but poysonable unto us.
For they sell that which is not bread, as Esaias Esaias. 55
witnesses, and they s^rue us with that which is not able to satisfy us: But
in Christ we have whatsoever we can want. All things are ours, as the
Apostle says. So that we may say with David, The Lord is my shephearde, 1.
Cor. 3 Psa. 13
therefore I can want: nothing. And with Paul, Blessed be God, even the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly things in Christ. Ephesians 4
For how can it be but that he who has given his own son for us, Romans 8
should not also give to us all things with him?

To this feasting is adjoined all melody and rejoicing, which has another
understanding, as the former. For thereby the true joy of penitent sinners
as well in this life as in the life to come is very plainly meant.

The Saints of God do rejoice in their beds as the Prophet David says. For
being justified through faith, they have peace toward God, and therefore they
have joy also in afflictions. This is true joy in deed, and all other joy is
counterfeite in respect of this. For joy is aunswerable to desire, as rest is
unto motion: When there is nothing more to be desired, our joy must be
perfect. Now in heaven all out desires are obtained, yea more then we can
desire. For the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, and the heart of
man can not conceive, what God has laid up in store for those that love him.

No marvel then it was that John the Baptist did spring so for joy in his
mothers womb, Luke. ^
and Anna the mother of Samuel sings thus secretly in her soul to God: My
heart rejoices in the Lord, my horn is exalted in the Lord.

Every man's marriage day is joyful unto him, A similitude
and is celebrated with gladness: much more must joy and gladness be in the
dwellings of the righteous when they are converted from their sins to God.

Trees when they first budde, A similitude
and are arrayed with leaves and blossoms of sundry colors, are lovely to
behold: so when a sinner that has been dead through sin, begins to
convert, and to show the blossoms and first fruits of amendment of life, ^e i^
most delightful. But of this subject we shall (...) particularly and largely
discourse in the last Chapter.

The eight Chapter. Of (...) which God conceiueth of a sinners (...) in the
joy and triumph (...) is made upon the return of the prodig^l son^^.
AS the Father makes great io^e, and triumph upon his sons ^^^^rne, so good
^^^^on mou^^ him ther^^^o.

As he is all wisdom, so he does nothing justly, but (...). His (...) and
(...) good^^s and mercy (...).

(...) the (...) property of God, to be (...) is sorrowful of a s^^^^s (...)
other side of his (...) d^^truction, C^^ ^
as when ^^e (...) w^^ld (...) and des^^^^^d (...) sword. (...)
So (...), as it is showed by three ^arabl^s (...) present Chapter, of the
sheep, the (...) which do tend to one and the some affect, a^ Phara^ his
sundry d^^^^^s of the (...) and ^^res of ^^^e. (...)


If there be some earthly judges, who are so tender hearted, A similitude
as being to denounce the definitive doom of death agai^^^ notorious lewd
prisoners standing at the bar^ they cannot refrain weeping when as they
publish it: truly no marvel if such a God have we, who when he is to execute
judgment and justice against enormous sinners, he is moved exceedingly and
with grief does punish them.

He is as a p^inter loath to put out the fair image which he has made. With
the careful huswife, A similitude
he would find his lost gro^te, even us who are his coin, and have the
image and superscrip^ion of Caesar engr^ued upon us. E^^^ ^8
Will Go^^ the death of a sinner? As I live (says God) I will not the death of
a sinner, but rather that he repent and ^ue.

There be some hangmen who being to cut off a leg or an arm of a lewd
traitor, A similitud^
are grieuous^^e affected in their minds at the doing of it, especially if he
be such a one as had been his friend. God is our friend yea he is our
father: he cannot therefore cut us off that are sinners, but sore against his
will, with sorrow he must do it. When as he shall come to condemn this evil
world, the heavens and heavenly creatures, shall put on mourning garments.

The Sun shall be eclipsed, the Moon shall be obscured, all the earth shall
be black and dark round about, to testify how that notwithout great mourning
God our father does condemn us. In like sort whenever a sinner is reclaimed
from his vilde ways, and reconciled unto God, there is great rejoicing among
the Saints in heaven for it. Now because the joy which God conceiueth thereupon
being simply considered, as it is in deed, exceeds our capacities, and
cannot be expressed: the spirit here condiscendeth unto our weakness, speaking
grossly after the manner of men, alluding unto the custom and condition of
our times, under the mirth used at our solemn feasts, shadoweth it unto us.
It is our fashion when as our success answers our desires, and our affairs
fall out luckily, to prepare a feast and banquet for our friends, to impart
to them our joy, being so ravished with it as we can no longer hide it: Such
is God his joy of a sinners true repentance, as because he cannot conceal it
to himself, he makes the musical Instruments to sound it, his friends and
lovers round about are conuented, and made acquainted with it.

^^dg. 16
As the Philistines when they had attached Samson, and had him in safe custody,
the Princes and people were generally assembled, a banquet was provided, a
mutual triumph and rejoicing was celebrated: so when as God takes hold of a
sinner, and has him in his keeping, he calls his Angels, his host of heaven
together, and with them solemnizeth this his joy and gladness, with a most
melodious meeting.

(...) ^^militude
A good Captain when one of his fugitive soldiers retyreth, and fiercely and
venturouslie assaulteth the enemy, and stands to it valiantly, he can not
but be glad and very joyful of him: Our grande Captain Joshua Jesus Christ,
when as we retire unto his band again, unto the unity of the Church, and
do fight against sin our deadly enemy, he cannot blotte our names out of
his Book being entered therein; but he will graciously give us his hand,
welcome us, and give us all joyful entertainment. For commonly such as have
been most rank and horrible sinners, if once they do take a hatred of sin,
and conceive a taste how sweet the Lord is, and do return to him, they
grow more zealous and hot in religion then any other else. They look back
with Miriam, unto the filthy Frogs and plagues of Egypt, unto the
filthiness of their former lives, and to Gods judgments upon such
wickedness, and they praise God with the best members that they have.

A plowman more regards a plot of ground which has bin replenished, A
similitud^
and ouergrowne with thorns, and at last becomes fruitful, the^ he will of
that which never did bear thorns, and yet was never fruitful: he whose
soul has heretofore brought forth the briers and thorns of insatiable lust,
and all kind of wickedness, is much every way accounted of, of God, if at the
length his soul become good soil, Heb. 6
and he brings forth good herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, above
him that lays waste and is utterly unprofitable, albeit heretofore he has
not been so hurtful.

As the hard iron when it is made red hot, is of a fiercer heat then the
billet or coal can be made, A similitude
be it never so red hot, because yt the colder the substance is before, and
more contrary to the fire the never it is after when it is set on fire, and
overcome with the force of it: so an obdurate and hard ^^^ner (...) the fire of
Gods grace takes hold of him, he is more seruent and hot in spirit then the
(...) con^cien^e because the colder he was before, and more (...) ^se to God,
the contrary quality when it is p^^^min^nt and overcomes the contran^
makes his heat and seruor more exceeding. Of the we have very many examples,
as of David, Marie Magdalen, ^eter, Paul.

This joy should rather of right appertain to the son then to the father for
his was the glory gain, and commodity, it made not to Gods benefit. It is
(...) his profit, but our obedience, we do but our (...) were turn to him he
has no need of (...) of our conuert^^n. For it cannot be ^^^d (...) was
heretofore of the Ass and the Colt that ^he Lord has need of us. It was not
David's benefit to be married to Al^g^el, but it was he^ great bles^^ng: ^s it
is ours to be married to our Christ. Yet the father so infi^^^lie loves us as
our good be accounts his good, and therefore he cannot but rejoice for our
good.

The whole Trinity rejoices in unity at our conformity. The father
rejoices because by our repentance he gets more sons whom he may make
princes in all lands. The son is glad, because our repentance makes his
death fruitful and his precious red blood not to be spilt in vain for us. The
holy Ghost triumphs and makes boast hereof, because by our conversion his
horn is exalted, his temple in which he may dwell is enlarged, and made far
more beautiful then the temple ^^y Jews, which was called beautiful, for he
has ^^^^by members which he may quicken, and vessels which he may still
fillful of ye oil of his holy grace. (...) behooves us then much more to
rejoice and care for our selves, seeing the whole Trinity so exceedingly
rejoices and cares for us. Doubtless, by continuing still in our ^ilde
sins, we offer unto the Trinity exceeding wrong, when as we deprive them of
this their joy, and we grieve t^^ much the holy spirit of God, by which we are
sealed unto the day of redemption. The Lord therefore give us his grace to
turn from our sins, to make God joyful of it. For by his joy we shall have
all joy, for in his joy is eternal joy and glory for ever.

The ninth Chapter. Wherein is showed by the present estate of the prodigal
son, how God mingleth prospopitie with adversity.
WHen the sorrows of the prodigal sons heart were enlarged, and he said in
his soul, On when will thou comfort me: then the Lord declared his salvation,
and his mercy did he openly show in the sight of the people. Despair not
therefore O sinner, of the loving kindness of thy God, neither fall thou under
the burden and heavy weight of thy afflictions, for God casts down and
raises up again, he takes the simple out of the dust, and the poor out of
the mire, that he might set them among the princes, even the princes of his
people. As God departs from a sinner for to humble him: so he returns
again unto a sinner to have mercy on him. It is Gods manner to temper and
mingle adversity with prosperity, and prosperity with adversity. He has
two strings to his bow, if one will not serve an other must. But having
sufficiently tamed his son with the sorrow of the one, he now forthwith
refreshes him again with the comfort of the other.

God forsa^eth not his (...) adversity
God does not utterly cast off his children, and forsake his inheritance. But
when the time comes that they return to him he returns to them, and
brings all joy with him.

^uit. 22 ^um. 28
When as God ordained in the old law, diverse set seasons to be consecrated
unto feasting, he preciselie charged, that the first and latter day should be
more solemn and joyful then the rest. In the beginning of our conversion, and
in the end of our perfection, the Lord does minister unto us greater gladness.
We have peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost upon our true
repentance in this present life, and in our perfect consummation and bliss we
shall enjoy all honor and felicity in the life that is to come. Be our
afflictions never so grievous, and come unto extremity, they shall be at the
last all taken away from us, nay the more afflictions we endure here, the more
joys and comforts we shall enjoy else where. Great and unspeakable were the
sorrows of the Israelites whilst they were in Egypt, but the Lord did not
leave them in the midst of them, but delivered them out of al, and gave them
noble victories over all their enemies, so long as they obeyed him. John. 2
If there had been a hundred water pottes at the marriage at Canaa as there
were but six, Christ might and would as easily and willingly have turned
them into wine: so he both can and will turn the waters of our adversities,
though they rage never so much, so as the streams thereof run over our
souls into all kind of comfort as most delightful wine, which gladdeth all
our hearts, if so be we will turn unto him at the last. God gives
prosperity in his due time.
The sufferinges of Gods people cannot be perpetual, but sorrow must depart,
and joy must return at the last.

But yet he suffers us first for good causes to be evil entreated, to
wander to and fro, and to suffer all adversity before he sends us his
gracious help which brings prosperity. 2. King. 4
The widow woman was first brought to all poverty, before by his Prophet he
would supply her necessity. Before the Israelites were delivered, they were
brought to the exigent, the sea was before, and the Egyptians behind them, so
as then there was but small hope left of delivery of them. Jerusalem was
reseu^ and saved from Senacharib, but Rabs^chah and his rabblemenes had sealed
the walls first, and were at the gate^. The woman was cured of her bloody
issue, but first she spent all she had upon Physicians. The prodigal son
was honorably entertained, and with all good things replenished, but first
his father suffered him to be seruilye entreated, yea, almost with famine and
all extremity consumed.

God is not ^^anged.
And yet for all this, in the Lord there is no variableness nor shadow o^
change. The change and alteration is in the creature, and not in the Creator,
who is always the same. A similitude
When first the ship sets out from the haven, and launcheth into the deep,
the land and houses hard by seem to him that is in the ship to rotten to and
fro, and that he himself moves not at all, when as it is quit^ con^^^r^ ^^t
he only staggreth and is ever moving the and ^s immovable, and cannot be
stirred. Sa^^ was very sottish, ^am. ^4
and he reasoned absurdlie when as he said, The Lord has (...) sight a (...)
me. For it was not God that dep^^^^^ from ^^^l (...) it was (...) that departed
(...) God. The ^ather ^eparted not from the prodigal son, but the pro^^^^^
son ^oo^e his vagaries, and depa^ted (...). And this is one case, for God is
always one. (...) similitude
Ima^ine that thou see a man ^^^t^ng (...), and ^ne (...) at his right hand
r^^ch up and (...) is it not manifest that this man that flitcheth and changes
hands is the man that moves, and that the other all the while moves not: so
we when we are at the right hand of Gods mercies, and do wilfully turn by
our sins and wickedness, into the left hand of his judgment, is not this
alteration, and turning wholly in our selves? It is a clear case that it is.
God said indeed by the mouth of his Prophet Jonas, Jonas 1
Yet within forty days, and Nineveh shall be destroyed: And yet Nineveh was
not then destroyed, and yet God was not changeable. For the Ninevites that then
stood at his left hand by reason of their sins, and were then to be stricken,
turned to his right hand by their speedy repentance, and so escaped that
judgment. The prodigal son when he was at Gods God is gracious though
sinners be ungracious
left hand, and should have perished, in time turned unto his right hand, and
so was entertained: God cannot but have a recourse to his wonted mercy. The
stubborn Jews exasperated him mightily, and provoked him wrathfullie to
thunder against them in this manner: Oh sinful nation, Esai. 1
oh people laden with iniquity, the seed of the wicked and corrupt children,
the daughter of Syon shall remain like a cottage in a Vineyard, like a lodge in
a garden of Cucumbers, and like a besieged City. But presently his heat is
allayed and qualified, and he speaks thus mildly and meekelie unto them.
Wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of your works, though your sins
were as Crimson, they shall be made white as snow, though they be red as
Scarlet, they shall be as wool: if ye consent and obey, ye shall eat the good
things of the land. In the like manner speaks the Prophet Amos. Amos. 1
I lift up, upon you even a lamentation of the house of Israel, the virgin
Israel is fallen, and shall no more rise. But by and by he mittigateth his
mood, saying: Seek the Lord and ye shall live. Our sorrows end with sin,
and God turns with a sinner. Judgment is turned into mercy, when sin is
turned into repentance. And this does David in lively sort declare: Psa. 89
If my people forsake my laws, and walk not in my judgments, if they leave
my statutes and keep not my commandments, I will visit their iniquities with
the rod, and their sins with scourges: here is his judgment. But turn
thine eye and behold his mercy: But my mercy and loving kindness will I not
utterly take from him ever. God taxed Adam grieuouslie for his sin, and
laid a very heavy judgment upon him, enioyning him to hard labor, to bring
in his living with the sweat of his face, and turmoyle of his body: but this
labor was stinted and restrained to his time, that it should not be
perpetual, and therefore he adds, until thou return unto the earth from
whence thou came. Gene. 3
And when our first parents sinned, and God was to expel them the pleasant
Paradise, albeit they had grieved him, he had mercy on them, and makes them
garments of beasts skins to defend them from the rage of time, and to
cover their shame, that their nakedness and filthiness might not be seen.
He in sinuateth by this course taken with Adam, that he will take the same
course with Adams children, that in the midst of judgment he will remember
mercy, and the he will upon our conversion show us his comp^^sion. Wherefore
arise from thy sin and Christ, shall give thee life: despair not of his grace,
for he has medicine to heal all our wounds. God wounds us at the first,
but it is to heal and cure us at the last.

The tenth Chapter. That God usually gives unto a sinner, more then he can
ask.
THe prodigal son not only speedeth with his father of his suit, but he
receives of him more then he desired. He made but the motion to be a hired
servant, but the father restored him to the dignity of a son. He prevented
him moreover with his liberal blessings, and graciously received him with all
feasting and rejoicing. Wherein we may see how far God exceeds the manner
of men, and how man's kindness is in no sort proportionable unto the Lords
goodness.

When as Absalon had murdered his brother Ammo^, 2. Sam. 2^
David his father was in some sort contented to be entreated for him: but he
would not grant him access unto his presence, to see his face again. But Gods
good grace is such, as he not only remitteth sinners, but admits them to
his presence, receives them to his table, and suffers the^ continually to
behold their fathers face. It is not therefore without good foresight and
experience of his bounty, that the blessed Apostle Paul tearming God the
father of all mercy, not content therewith adds to his style this just
title, The God of all consolation. He thinks it not enough to say, that he
is merciful, but by amplyfying it thus, he would give unto him a kind of
absolute and ouerflowing mercy. It belongs to mercy only to forgive
sins, but God stays not there, but follows us with his grace preventing
future sins. Upon this my soul receives great comfort: and from hence
(dear Christian) whenever thou humblest thy soul before God, and exhibitest
thy suits and supplications unto him, thou may cheer and comfort thy
perplexed conscience. For this is not written in vain for us, for it serves
lively, as all other scripture given by inspiration to instruct and comfort
us. The meditation therefore whilst I muse upon this man is this, which my
soul makes: That it is usual with God, not only to grant the lawful
requests and petitions of his servants, but also because he best knows our
necessities, to give us such graces as are needful for us, beyond our
requests. Hereof we have instances innumerable in the Scriptures, and we shall
do well when our case requires comfort to meditate upon them. Abraham besought
God only for the life of Ismael, ^^n 17
saying unto God, Oh that Ismael might live before thee. But what was the
comfort which Abraham received? Truly much every way, more then his heart
conceived: for God thus answered him. Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son,
and thou shall call his name Isaac: and as concerning Ismaell I have heard
thee, and twelve Princes shall he beget, and I will make a great nation of him.
Thus beside the life of Ismael which he granted the sum of Abraham's suit, in
his abundant mercy above his desire, he sent him also Isaac, and vouchsafed
such favor and grace to Ismael, as to bless him so, as kings proceeded from
his loins.

Solomon only requested Wisdom for the better carriage of himself in his
government: 1. King. 3
the Lord beside wisdom which he gave him above others, heaped upon him
riches and worldly prosperity far above others.

Ezechias requested but life at Gods hand, 2. King. 20
the Lord not only granted it, but gave him a long life, and graciously
added fifteen years unto his days.

When as the three kings of Israel, Judah, 2. King. 3
and Edom were to war with Moab, and were greatly distressed through want of
water for their host, and for their cattle, and came unto Elisha the man of
God for supply in this behalf: the Lord not only satisfied their hearts
desire, but moreover went out with their armies before them, and gave them
victory over the Moabites.

The widow woman that was deeply indebted, 2. King 4
and had nothing to satisfy her cruel creditor he being urgent, and could
not be answered, but that her two sons must become his bondmen, according to
the law, having nothing else to discharge his accounts. When she came unto
the Prophet, bemoaning her mishap, and required his help to the Lord in her
behalf, she forthwith had such a comfortable relief, as she had Oil enough
given her, not only to defray all kind of arrerages which was all she
desired, but sufficient beside to supply future wantes, which was more then
she desired.

Mark. 9
Those that brought the man of the palsy unto Christ, desired but bodily health
for him: but Christ not only healed his body, but cured his soul likewise,
saying unto him: Son be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee.

The thief besought Christ only to remember him when he came unto his
kingdom: Luke. 23
but Christ moreover promised him Paradise, and that he should be with him
that day in his kingdom.

The ruler requested but life for his son, and Christ gave immediately life
to his son, John. 4
and faith to the father, which the father desired not.

Exodus 33
Moses desired God that he might see his glory, but God answered him, I will
make all my good go before thee. It is easy to rip up many mo examples,
furtherto enlarge this comfortable doctrine, but these may satisfy a believing
Christian. Wherefore let the diligent regard hereof raise up our souls,
whenever they are smitten and cast down with sorrows by reason of our
sins, and doubt we not to approach before him, be we never so sinful, he
being so merciful.

The eleventh Chapter. Of the felicity of the faithful, figured by the
mutual mirth and melody that was made for the joyful welcomming home of the
prodigal son.
THe Catastrophe of this Comedy and conclusion of this history is exceeding
comfortable: for it ends with mirth and joy without end. In this man is
fulfilled this Aphorism of the Prophet, Psalm. 126
He that goes on his way mourning, and carries out good seed, doubtless shall
return home again with joy and bring his sheaues with him.

This man's estate lively represents our future condition. For if we shall
return home from our evil ways unto our fathers house with him, we shall
be partakers of his joy with him: He shall turn our heaviness into joy, he
shall put off our sack cloth, and gird us with gladness. We shall be filled
with the plenteousnesse of his house, and he shall give us drink of his
pleasures, as out of a river.

The holy spirit of God takes a great grace, in shrowding and cowching
matters of maine moment under the fewest words that may be. It is the fashion
of the world in their fabulous discourses to use tedeous circumstances.
Proijcit ampullas, Horat. in a poetic.
and sequipedalia verba: it rappeth on such a tumultuous confusion of words,
as to one thing that is true, you shall have the admixture of innumerable lies.

A similitude
It is the trick of such as are deformed to paint out themselves, and to set a
good die upon a bad cloth to brag it out, and to bear out their blemishes
with their bravery. Such m ate as is unsavory, A similitude
must be set out with such sauce as may stir up the appetite, for otherwise
the stomach cannot digest it: but the simple truth howsoever ^are and naked it
appears, is exceeding beautiful: Solomon in his royalty may not be matched
with it. The truth of Gods word is full of suck and sap, it is meat that
may be rellished without curious cooking it. Lo here how the unspeakable joys
of heaven are trussed up in a word, They began to be merry. And truly when
we have said what we can of the joys of heaven, though we had the tongues
of Angels, we must at the last come to this point, and conclude with the
spirit, That then we shall be merry. For mirth and gladness is the total
sum, ^poc. 7
The Lord shall wipe away all tears from our eyes.

But yet howsoever we cannot wade through the depth hereof: yet cursorilie, and
as it were passing by it, it is not amiss that we take a taste of it.

It is to be distinguished from the momentanie mirth which this world
affoordeth us, deceitful and changeable, (...) 24
For the mirth of tabrets cease, the noise of them that rejoice cease, and
the joy of the harp cease, (...) ^^^ilitude
The miserable mirth of worldlings is like the fond joy of birds, picking up
of corn under nets that are spread for them: And of fishes that greedily
swallow up the bait wherewith the hook is covered. A similitude
As strong poison is often mingled with our pleasant meats; as the whore of
Babylon tempered the dregs of her fornication in a golden bowl of wine: so
sorrow is often shrouded under the veil of joy: our table and delights are
often snares unto us, and the way to death. Such mirth is but in show, it is
no mirth indeed: A similitud^
It is like the Bowlderbushes growing in the fennes, which in the spring and
summer season have a lively green hew, and smell much outwardly, but if you
break them they have nothing at all within them. It is therefore rather to be
frantic and mad, then to be any thing else, to be misled with such mirth,
A similitud^
and who soever are miscarried with it, they resemble mad men, who being in a
phrenzie, and near unto their death, do smile and make laughter. A similitu^^
Whilst the voice of man comes out it promises much matter, for many
things do concur before it be expressed, the tongue, the teeth, the palate,
and the lips; and when all come to all it is nothing but a sound reuerberating
the air: so many things do conspire and meet together to allure us, and
delight us in our worldly merriments, but when our breath goes out of us, and
we return unto our dust, and the earth is our covering, our joy departs from
us.

But our mirth in our fathers house in the life to come, is the only durable
and complete mirth. There we shall see what can be desired, 1, Cor. 2
and beyond our desires. For the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard,
neither can the heart conceive, the things that God has prepared for them that
love him. We shall there hunger no more, neither thirst any more, Revel. 7
neither shall the Sun light on us, neither any heat: for the Lamb which
is in the midst of the throane, shall govern us, and shall lead us unto the
lively fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away al tears from our eyes.

This mirth in some sort may be manifested unto us by the mirth in this
world, which we often upon sundry occurrences do conceive. The mirth is
much which is among friends, kinsfolks and allies upon their joint meeting,
having before been a long time sundred. Genesis 45
When Joseph made himself known to his brethren, it passes the joy that was
then betwixt them. Joseph was so ravished with the sight of them, as he could
not refrain tears, crying out so loudlie, as the house sounded with the noise
of it, the Egyptians heard it, the house of Pharao heard it also. But the
heavens shall clappe their hands, the Saints shall rejoice and sing, ^^uel. 7
crying with a loud voice, saying: Salvation comes of our God, that sits
upon the Throne, and of the Lamb: trebbling and quauering with sweet concent
and assent, (...). 12
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath: when we come unto the mount Syon, and
city of the living God, to the celestial Jerusalem, and company of
innumerable Angels, and to Jesus the mediator of the new Testament, where we
shall all meet together, and sit with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the
resurrection of the just.

At our solemn feasts there use to be solemn joy. Esther. 1
When king Ahashuerosh disposed himself to be merry with his Princes, and
show the riches and glory of his kingdom, and the honor of his Majesty, he
feasted them an hundred and fourscore days together: therefore infinite will
the joy and triumph be in the court of heaven, when the king of all kings
shall feast his dear Saints, not for a time, but for all eternity, and shall
show them his heavenly dignity and felicity which is prepared for them.

It is usual with many to celebrate with mirth the memorial of their birth,
Genesis 40 Mark 6
when it rather occasioneth us with Jeremy Ierem. 20
and Job, Job. 3
to be heavy for it: Pharao solemnized the day of his nativity with
triumphant feasting, and so did Herod: yet this mirth and music was mixed with
mourning, for the one at that time hanged his chief Baker, and the other
beheaded innocent John the Baptist. But in heaven when we solemnize our new
birth, we shall have all joy without mixture of sorrow, there can never any
more misery or calamity befall us.

The wise men of the East were exceeding glad when they saw but the Star,
Matt. 1
which prognosticated and foreshewed the nativity of our savior. Therefore
when we in heaven shall be partaker of his glory, then must needs our
hearts be filled with laughter, and our tongues with joy.

We see how the birds of the air are joyful at the arising of the sun,
chirping and singing, and leaping upon the branches. Wherefore when the son
of righteousness appears comforting our hearts, how ought we to skip like a
Heart, to leap up and down like a young unicorn? Gene. 2
It was a joy to Adam when he was in his prosperity, in his earthly Paradise,
in his created holiness: but afterward when he had transgressed the mandate God
gave him, and did degenerate from his first creation, ^^b. 30
his harp was turned into mourning, and his organes into the voice of them that
weep. What joy then will it be unto us when we are in heavenly paradise, where
we can sin no more, and so consequently can sorrow no more, where are all
kinds of pleasures in abundance, at the right of the father for evermore?

The four leapers when they entered into the Aramites camp, ^ing. 7
and shared out their goods, they mutuallie ioyed one an other for that hap.
Oh therefore let us be joyful together, let us rejoice in our beds For our
joy is as the joy of harvest, (...). 9
and as men rejoice when they divide a spoil. For the host of our sins shall
then be discomfited: when we are in heaven, Satan shall no more have ought to
do with us, death shall be destroyed, and swallowed up in victory, all our
enemies shall fly away before us, and we of Gods household shall divide the
spoil.

Though we hung our harpes upon the willowe trees, when we sat by the waters
of Babylon, yet now O man of God, call for thy instrument, awake lute and
harp, and let us awake early, and let us sing the Lords song in our own land.

If he that has matters of law depending in judicial courts, A similitude
cannot but be glad when his case is put to his counselor and advocate to be
comprimitted and awarded, for he is thereby sure that it will go well on his
side: Why then dear Christian comfort thy sobbing and sighing soul, for this
is thy case, thy sins that pleaded against thee at Gods bar, and were like
to condemn thee, are put to Christ thy savior and redeemer, to vmper and
determine: so as we need not fear, for though we sin we have an advocate with
the father, Jesus Christ the just, 1. John. 1
and he is the propitiation for our sins: our sins shall rather adorn us
then disgrace us, because of him. For it is no disgrace to have a rent garment,
if so be it may be hidden and covered with a lace: our sins are rents, and the
red blood of our sweet savior, is the red lace which has covered the scame
and rupture of our sins.

If the men of Bethshemeth rejoiced with themselves because they had espied the
ark of the Lord: 1. Sam. 6
we shall have much more matter of mirth affoorded us when we shall see the
very heavens open ready to receive us, and we shall epsy Jesus at the right
hand of his father, who has prepared a place for us.

A glad man was Zacheus when so good a guest Luke 19
as Christ diuerted into his house, but gladder may we be that he will
vouchsafe to enter into our souls, that we shall dwell with him, and he with us
in his fathers kingdom world without end.

Mat. 13
The husbandman when he found the treasure in the field, he could not rest for
joy, but forthwith departed, made a sale of all that he had in the world
beside, to make purchase of the field: But all the treasures of God the father
in his son Christ, shall be given unto us. Base therefore in our eyes is the
vanity of this world, we willingly renounce it to make so good a change, and
we are glad of such success.

King. 1
When Solomon was adua^ced to his fathers crown and dignity, all the people
piped with pipes, and reioiced with great joy, so that the earth rang with the
sound of them. We shall see our Christ the king of peace, who has triumphed
valiantly, who has put down all his enemies under his feet very exceeding
glorious, crowned with majesty and honor: our hearts therefore shall be
glad, and our tongs shall rejoice, for the staff of our shoulder, the yoke of
our burden, the rod of our oppressor shall be broken as in the day of Midian.
Wherefore rejoice in the Lord always, ^ 9
and again I say rejoice. Let the floods clap their hands, and let the hills
rejoice. Let the singers go before, and the minstrels follow after, and let the
damsels come playing with their pipes. Let the Levites dance before the arc,
and let the priests be clothed with gladness, and let us all sing praises unto
the holy one of Israel.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by P. S. for Nicholas Ling. 1599.


