An explication and assertion of the true Catholic faith, touching the most
blessed Sacrament of the altar with confutacion of a book written against the
same. Made by Steven Bishop of Wynchester, and exhibited by his own hand for
his defense to the kings majesty's Commissioners at Lambeth.

Anno. 1551.

Certain faults escaped in the prentyng. The rest thou may gentle reader
easily correct thy self.
Leaf. Page Thelyne. ^o. 2. 2. page Lin. 15. for yet it should, read yet if it
should 7 1 penul. for to purpose, read to the purpose 21 1 30 for accasion,
read occasion. 25 2 29 for dimishe, read diminishe. 52 1 25 for sheep, read
sleep. 42 1 23 for co^munica^do, read co^municandis. 54 1 13 for manifestye,
read manifested. 54 1 14 for exhibetie, read exhibited. 55 1 19 for enforeth,
read enforces. 59 1 20 for Tubax, read Tuba. 62 1 13 for fram. read ^rame.
81 1 3 for cunclusion, read conclusion. 81 2 20 for pretens, read presence.
81 1 30 for freundes, read friends. 81 1 31 for possumus, read polluimus. 88
1 22 for cratures, read creatures. 88 1 24 for entrated, read entreated. 88 2
3 for lake, read look. 88 2 6 for feed, read fed. 90 2 6 for speak, read
spoke. 91 2 30 for andeleth, read handeleth. 92 1 8 for hahing, read having. 92
1 10 for sumuch, read so much. 92 1 12 for ityn, read it. 92 1 15 for wrere,
read were. 92 1 15 for ^e, read be. 94 1 1 for Ethinkes, read Ethnikes. 94
(...) (...) for af, read of. 96 1 (...) for (...)se, read likewise. 96 2 ^4
(...), read gives. 97 2 10 for extlude, read exclude. 105 1 1 for auctors,
read auctor. 106 2 16 for this, read these. 107 1 3 for commency, read
commenly. 110 1 6 for hatue, read has. 119 1 31 for deipara (...), read (...)
deipara 121 2 26 for mage, read image. 126 2 18 for dowe, read dove. 131 2 10
for there, read three. 131 2 22 for we, read me. 134 1 4 for which, read with.
134 2 5 for obdy, read body. 136 1 11 for improw, read improve. 136 1 21 for
circu^sta^ce p^se^t, read circu^sta^ce is p^se^t 136 1 23 for supernaturally,
read naturally. 137 1 4 for endures, read abhor^ith. 138 2 1 for disorowe,
read improve. 142 1 14 for godhod, read godhed. 143 2 2 for propositiones, read
propositionis. 145 2 29 for (...), read (...). 145 2 vlt. for (...), read
(...). 146 1 2 for (...), read (...). 146 1 5 for (...), read (...). 148 1 19
for save, read saw. 151 2 9 for Ephesine, read Ephesin.

Finis Tabulae.
The preface.
FOr as much as among other mine allegations for defense of my self in this
matter, moved against me by occasion of my Sermon made before the kings most
excellent Majesty, touching partly the. Catholic faith of the most
precious sacrament of thaltare, which I see now impugned, by a book set forth,
under the name of my lord of Cauntorburies grace: I have thought expedient for
the better opening of the matter, and co^sideryng I am by name touched in the
said book, the rather to utter partly that I have to say by confutatio^ of
that book, wherein I think neuerthlesse no^ requisite to direct any speech
by special name to the person of him that is entitled author, because it may
possible be that his name is abused, wherewith to set forth the matter, being
him self of such dignity and auctorite in the common wealth, as for that
respect should be inviolable. For which co^sideracion, I shall in my speech of
such reproufe as the untruth of the matter necessariely requires, omitting
the special title of the auctor of the book, speak only of thauctor in
general, being a thing to me greatly to be me(...)ed at, that such matter
should now be published out of my lord of Ca^torburies pen, but because he is
a man, I will not wondre, and because he is such a man, I will reuere^rly use
him, and forbearyng further to name him, talk only of the auctor by that
general name.

The confutation of the first book.
THis auctor denies the real presence of Christ's most precious body and
blood in the Sacrament.

This auctor denies Transubstanciation.

This auctor denies evil men to eat and drink the body and blood of Christ
in the Sacrament.

These three denials only impugn and tend to distroy that faith / which this
auctor terms the popish to err in / calling now all popish that believe
either of these three articles by him denied / the truth whereof shall hereafter
be opened.

Now because faith affirms some certaintee: if we ask this auctor / what is
his faith / which he calls true and catholic / it is only this / as we may
learn by his book / that in our Lords supper be consecrate bread and wine /
and delivered as tokens only to signify Christ's body and blood / he calls
them holy tokens, but yet notes that the bread and wine be never the holyer /
he says nevertheless they be not bare tokens / and yet concludes, Christ not
to be spiritually present in them / but only as a thing is present in that /
which signifies it (which is the nature of a bare token) saying in another
place, there is nothing to be worshipped, for there is nothing present / but in
figure and in a sign: which who so ever says / calls the thing in deed
absente. And yet the auctor says, Christ is in the man that worthily
receaueth, spiritually present, who eats of Christ's flesh and his blood
reignyng in heaven, whether the good beleuyng man ascends by his faith. And
as our body is norished with the bread and wine received in the supper: so
the true beleuyng man is fed with the body and blood of Christ. And this is
the sum of the doctrine of that faith which this auctor calls the true
catholic faith.

Now a catholic faith, is an universal faith taught and preached through
all, and so received and believed agreablie and consonant to the scriptures,
testified by such as by all ages, have in their writings given knowledge
thereof, which be the tokens and marks of a true Catholic faith, whereof no
one can be found in the faith this auctor calls catholic.

First there is no scripture that in lettre mainteineth the doctrine of this
auctorsboke. For Christ says not that the bread does only signify his body
absent, nor saint Paul says not so in any place, ne any other canonical
scripture declares Christ's words so. As for the sense and understanding of
Christ's words, there has not been in any age any one approved and known
learned man, that has so declared and expounded Christ's words in his supper,
that the bread did only signify Christ's body, and the wine his blood, as
things absent. And to the intent every notable disagrement from the truth may
the more evidently appear, I will here in this place (as I will hereafter
likewise when the case occurreth) join as it were an issue with An issue.
this auctor, that is to say, to make a stay with him in this point triable
(as they say) by evidence and sone tried. For in this point the scriptures be
already by thauctor brought forth, the leterwherof proves not his faith. And
albeit he traueyleth and brings forth the saying of many approved writers,
yet is there no one of them that writes in express words the doctrine of
that faith, which this auctor calls the faith catholic And to make the issue
plain and to join it directly, thus I say.

No auctor known and approved, that is to say, Ignatius, Policarpe, Iustine,
Irene, Tertullian, Cyprian, Chrysostom, Hilarie, Gregory, Nazianzen, Basil,
Emissen, Ambrose, Cyril, Hierome, Augustine, Damasce^. Theophilacte, none of
these has this doctrine in plain terms, that the bread only signifies
Christ's body absent, nor this sentence, that the bread and wine be never the
holier after consecration, nor that Christ's body is none otherwise present in
the Sacrament, but in a signification: nor this sentence, that the Sacrament is
not to be worshipped, because there is nothing present but in a sign. And
herein what the truth is, may soon appear, as it shall by their works never
appear to have been taught, and preached, received, and believed universally,
and therefore can be called no Catholic faith (that is to say) allowed in the
whole, through and in outward teaching, preached and believed. If this auctor
setting apart the word (Catholic) would of his own wit go about to prove,
howsoever scripture has been understood hitherto, yet it should be
understood in deed as he now teaches, he has herein diverse disaua^tages
and hynderaunces worthy consideracions, which I will particularly note.

First the prejudice and sentence, given as it were by his own mouth against
him self, now in the book called the Catechism in his name set forth.

Secondly that about.vij. C. year ago, one Bertrame (if the book set forth in
his name be his) entreprised secretly the like, as appears by the said book,
and yet prevailed not.

Thirdely Berengarius being in deed but an Archedeacon about.v. C. years past,
after he had openly attempted to set forth such like doctrine, recanted and so
failed in his purpose.

Fourthely Wykclif not much above an hundredth years past enterprised the same,
whose teaching God prospered not.

Fyftely how Luther, in his works, handeled the^ that would have in our time
raised up the same doctrine in Germany, it is manifest by his and their
writings whereby appears the enterprise that has had so many overthrows, so
many rebukes, so often reprofes, to be desperate, and such as God has not
prospered and favored, to be received at any time openly as his true teaching.

Herein whether I say true or no, let the stories try me, and it is matter
worthy to be noted, because Gamaliels obseruacion written in the Acts of the
Apostels is allowed Acts. 5.
to mark, how they prospere and go forward in their doctrine that be auctors
of any new teaching. But all this set aparte, and puttyng a side al testimonies
of tholde church, and resortyng only to the letter of the scripture, there to
search out an understanding. And in doing thereof, to forget what has been
taught hitherto: How shall this auctor establishe upon scripture that he would
have believed? What other text is therein scripture that encountreth with these
words of scripture (This is my body) Whereby to altre the signification of
them? There is no scripture says, Christ did not give his body, but the
figure of his body, nor the geuyng of Christ's body in his supper, verily and
really so understood, does not necessaritly impugn and contrary any other
speech or doing of Christ, expressed in scripture. For the great power and
omnipotency of God, excludes that repugnaunce, which man's reason would
deame of Christ's departing from this world, and placyng his humanity in the
glory of his father.

I^ this auctor, without force of necessity, would induce it, by the like
speeches, as when Christ said: I am the door, I am the ^yne, he is Helias, and
such other, and because it is a figurative speech in them, it may be so here,
which makes no kind of proof, that it is so here: But yet if by way of
reasonyng I would yield to him therein, and call it a figurative speech, as he
does. What other point of faith is there then in the matter, but to believe the
story, that Christ did institute such a supper, wherein he gave bread and wine
for a token of his body and blood, which is now after this understanding no
secret mystery at all, or any ordinance above reason. For commenly men use
to ordain in sensible things remembraunces of them self when they dye or
depart the country. So as in thordinaunce of this supper, after this
understanding Christ showed not his omnipotency, but only benevolence, that
he loved us, and would be remembered of us. For Christ did not say whosoever
eats this token / eats my body / or eats my flesh / or shall have any
profit of it in special / but do this in remembrance of me. And albeit this
auctor would not have them bare tokens / yet, and they be only tokens / they
have no warrant signed by scripture, for any apparel at all. For the sixth of
John, speaks not of any promise made, to the eating of a token of Christ's
flesh / but to the eating of Christ's very flesh / whereof the bread (as this
auctor would have it) is but a figure in Christ's words / when he said, (This
is my body). And if it be but a figure in Christ's words / it is but a figure
in saint Paul's words / when he said: The bread which we break / is it not
the communicacion of Christ's body, that is to say, a figure of the
communicacio^ of Christ's body (if this auctors doctrine be true) and not the
communicacion in deed. Wherefore if the very body of Christ be not in the
supper delivered in deed, the eating there has no special promise, but only
commandment to do it in remembrance. After which doctrine why should it be
noted absolutely for a Sacrament and special mystery, that has nothing
hidden in it, but a plain o^en ordinance of a token, for a remembrance: to
the catyng of which token, is annexed no promise expressly, ne any holiness to
be accounted to be in the bread or wine (as this auctor teaches) but to be
called holy, because they be deputed to an holy use. If I ask the use, he
declares, to signify. If I should ask what to signifye? There must be a
sort of good words framed without scripture. For scripture / expresses no
matter of significacion of special effect. And therefore like as the teaching
is new / to say it is an only figure, or only signifies: so the matter of
signification must be newly divised / and new wine have new bottelles, and be
thoroughly new, after.xv. C. l. years in the very year of Iubile (as they were
wount to call it) to be newly erected and builded in English men's hearts.
Which new teaching, whether it proceeds from the spirit of truth, or no,
shall more plainly appear by such matter as this auctor utters wherewith
to impugn the true faith taught hitherto. For among many other profes, whereby
truth after much travail in contencion / at the last preuayleth, and has
victory, there is none more notable, then when the very adversaries of truth
(who pretend nevertheless to be truths friends) do by some evident untruth
bewray themself. According whereunto, when the two women contended before king
Solomon for the child yet alive. Solomon descerned 3. Reg. 3.
the true natural mother from the other, by their speeches and sayings. Which
in the very true mother, were ever conformable to nature, and in the other, at
the last evidently against nature. The very true mother speak always like
her self, and never disagreed from the truth of nature, but rather then the
child should be killed, as Solomon threatened, when he called for asword,
required rather it to be given whole alive to the other woman. The other woman,
that was not the true mother cared more for victory, then for the child, and
therefore spoke that was in nature an evidence, that she lied calling her self
mother, and saying (let it be divided) which no true natural mother could say
of her own child, whereupon proceeded Salomons most wise judgment, which has
this lesson in it, ever where contention is, on that part to be the truth,
where all sayings and doings appear uniformly consonante to the truth
pretended, and on what side a notable lie appears, the rest may be judged to
be after the same sort, for truth needs no aid of lies, craft or slayte,
wherewith to be supported and maynteined. So as in the intreatyng of the truth,
of this high and ineffable mystery of the Sacrament, on what part thou reader
see traft, slayte, shift, obliquitie, or in any one point, an open manifest
lie, there thou may consider, whatsoever pretense be made of truth, yet the
victory of truth not to be there intended, which loves simplicity,
plainenes, direct speech, without admixcion of shift or color. And that
thou reader might by these marks judge of that is here entreated, by
thauctor, against the most blessed Sacratment, I shall note certain evident
and manifest untruths, which this auctor is not affrayed to utter (a matter
wounderfull, considering his dignity, if he that is named, be the auctor in
deed) which should be a great stay of contradiction if any thing were to be
regarded against the truth.

First I will note unto the reader, how this auctor terms the faith of the
real and substanciall presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament, to
be the faith of the Papists: which saying, what foundacio^ it has, thou
may consider of that follows.

Luther that professed openly to abhore all that might be noted Papish, defended
stoutly the presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, and to be present
really and substancially, even with the same words and terms.

Bucer that is here in England, in a sole^pne work that he wryreth upon the
Gospels, professes the same faith of the real and substa^ciall presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament, which he affermeth to have been believed of
all the church of Christ from the beginning hitherto.

Iustus Jonas has translate a Catechism out of Douch into Latin, taught in
the city of Noremberge in Germanye / where Hosiander is chief preacher, in
which Catechism / they be accounted for no true Christian men that deny the
presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament. The words really and substancially
/ be not expressed / as they be in Bucer / but the word (truly) is there: and
as Bucer says / that is substancially. Which Catechism was translate into
English in this auctors name about two years paste.

Philipp Melancton no Papist / nor priest writes a very wise Epistle in this
matter / to Oecola^padius / and signifiyng soberly his belief of the presence
of Christ's very body in the Sacrament: and to prove the same to have been
the faith of the old church from the begi^nyng / allegeth the saynges of
Irene / Cyprian / Chrysostom / Hilarie / Cyrill / Ambrose / and Theophilacte /
which auctors / he estemeth both worthy credit / and to affirm the presence
of Christ's body in the Sacrament plainly without ambiguitie. He answers to
certain places of S. Augustine and says, all Oecolampadius enterprise / to
depend upon conjectures / and arguments applausible to Idle wits, with much
more wise matter / as that Epistle does purporte / which is set out in a book
of a good volume among the other Epistles of Oecolampadius / so as no man may
suspect any thing counterfecte in the matter. One Hippinus or Oepinus of
Hamborough, greatly esteemed among the Lutherians / has written a book to the
kings majesty that now is / publisshed abroad in prynt / wherein much inueiyng
against the church of Rome, does in the matter of the Sacrament write as
follows. Eucharistia is called by it self a sacrifice, because it is a
remembrance of the true sacrifice, offered upon the cross, and that in it is
dispe^sed the true body and true blood of Christ, which is plainly the same
in essence (that is to say, substance) and the same blood in essence
signifiyng, though the manner of presence be spiritual, yet the substance of
that is present, is the same with that in heaven.

Erasmus, noted a man that durst, and did speak of all abuses in the church
liberally, taken for no Papist, and among us so much esteemed, as his
Paraphrases of the gospel is ordered to be had in every church of this Realm,
declares in diverse of his works most manifestly, his faith of the presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament, and by his Epistles, recommendeth to the
world the work of Algerus in that matter of the Sacrament, whom he notes
well exercised in the scriptures, and the old doctors, Cypria^, Hilarie,
Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, Basil, Chrysostom, And for Erasmus own judgment,
he says we have an inviolable foundation of Christ's own words (This is my
body,) rehearsed again by S. Paul, he says further: the body of Christ is
hidden under those signs, and shows also upon what occasions me^ have erred
in readyng the old fathers, and wysheth that they which have followed
Berengarius in error, would also follow him in repentance. I will not (reader)
encombre the, with mo words of Erasmus.

Peter Martyr of Oxforde taken for no Papist, in a treatise he made of late of
the Sacrament, which is now translated into English, shows how as touching
the real presence of Christ's body, it is not only the sentence of the
Papists, but of other also, whom the said Peter, nevertheless does with as
many shyftes and lies as he may impugn, for that point as well as he does the
Papists for transubstanciation, but yet he does not as this auctor does impute
that faith of the real presence of Christ's body and blood to thonly Papists.
Whereupon reader here I join with thauctor an issue that the faith of the real
and substantial An issue.
presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament, is not the divise of
Papists or their faith only as this auctor does consideratly slander it to
be, and desire therefore that according to Salomons judgment this may serve
for an note and mark, for to give sentence for the true mother of the child.
For what should this mean, so without shame openly and untruly to call this
faith papishe, but only with the enuyous word of Papist to ouermatche the
truth.

It shall be now to purpose to considre the scriptures touching the matter of the
Sacrament / which thauctor prete^dyng to bring forth faithfully as the majesty
thereof requires / in the rehearsal of the words of Christ out of the gospel of
saint John / he begins a little to low and passes over that perteyneth to
the matter and therefore should have begone a little higher at this clause. And
the bread which I shall give you is my flesh / which I will give for the
life of the world? The Jews therefore striued between them self saying: How
can this man give his flesh to be eaten? Jesus therefore said unto them. Uerely
verily I say unto you / except ye eat the flesh of the son of man and
drink his blood ye have no life in you. Who so eats my flesh and drinks
my blood has eternal life and I will raise him up at the last day. For my
flesh is very meat / and my blood very drink. He that eats my flesh and
drinks my blood dwells in me and I in him. As the living father has sent
me / and I live by the father: Even so he that eats me shall live by me. This
is the bread which came down from heaven. Not as your fathers did eat Manna
and are dead: He that eats this bread shall live for ever.

Here is also a fault in the translacion of the text / which should be thus
in one place. For my flesh is verily meat and my blood is verily drink. In
which speech / the verb that cuppleth the words (flesh) and (meat)
together: knitteth them together in their propre significacion / so as the
flesh of Christ is verelymeat as thauctor would persuade. And in these words
of Christ may appear plainly how Christ taught the mystery of the fode of his
humanity / which he promised to give for food / even the same flesh / that
he said he would give for the life of the world and so expresses the first
sentence of this scripture here by me holly brought forth, that is to say. And
the bread which I shall give you is my flesh which I shall give for the life
of the world. And so it is plain that Christ spoke of flesh in the same
sense that Saint Ihon speaks in, saying: The word was made flesh,
signifiyng by flesh the hole humanity. And so did Cyrill agree to Nestorius,
when he upon these textes, reasoned how this eating is to be understood of
Christ's humanity, to which nature in Christ's person is properly attribute,
to be eaten as meat spiritually to norishe man, dispensed and given in the
Sacrament. And between Nestorius and Cyrill, was this diversity in
understanding the mystery, that Nestorius estemyng of each nature in Christ a
several person (as it was objected to him) and so dissoluyng the ineffable
unity, did so repute the body of Christ to be eaten as the body of a man
separate. Cyrill maynteyned the body of Christ to be eaten as a body
inseparable united to the godhed, and for the ineffable mystery of that union,
the same to be a flesh that gives life. And then as Christ says, if we eat
not the flesh of the son of man, we have not life in us, because Christ has
ordered the Sacrament of his most precious body and blood to norishe such as
be by his holy spirit regenerate. And as in Baptism we receive the spirit of
Christ, for the renewyng of our life, so do we in this Sacrament of Christ's
most precious body and blood receive Christ's very flesh and drink his
very blood, to continus and preserve, increase / and augment the life
received, And therefore in the same form of words Christ spoke to Nycodemus of
Baptism: that he speaks here, of the eating of his body and drinkyng of his
blood, and in both the Sacraments gives / dispenses and exhibiteth in deed
those celestial gifts, in sensible elements as Chrysostom says. And because
the true faithful beleuyng men do only by faith know the son of man to be
in unity of person the son of God, so as for the unity of the two natures
in Christ in one person, the flesh of the son of man is the propre flesh of
the soon of God. Saint Augustine said well when he noted these words of
Christ, verily verily / unless ye eat the flesh of the son of man etc. to
be a figurative speech, because after the bare lettre, it seems unprofitable,
considering, that flesh profits nothing in it self, esteemed in thowne nature
alone, but as the same flesh in Christ is united to the divine nature, so is
it, as Christ said, (after Cyrilles exposition) spirit and life, not changed
into the divine nature of the spirit, but for the ineffable union in the
person of Christ thereunto, it is viuificatrix (as Cyrill said) and as the holy
Ephesine council decreed: a flesh geuyng life, according to Christ's words:
who eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will
raise him up at the latter day. And then to declare unto us, how in geuyng this
life to us, Christ uses the instrument of his very human body: it
follows. For my flesh is verily meat, and my blood verily drink. So like as
Christ sanctifies, by his godly spirit: so does he sanctifye us by his
godly flesh, and therefore, repeteth again, to inculcate the celestial thing
of this mystery, and says: he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood,
dwells in me and I in him, which is the natural and corporal union, between
us and Christ. Whereupon follows, that as Christ is naturally in his father,
and his father in him: so he that eats verily the flesh of Christ, he is by
nature in Christ, and Christ is naturally in him, and the worthy receauer, has
life increased, augmented, and confirmed by the participacion of the flesh of
Christ. And because of thin effable union of the two natures, Christ said:
This is the food that came down / from heaven, because God, whose proper
flesh it is, came down from heaven, and has an other virtue, then Manna had,
because this gives life to them that worthily receive it: which Manna, being
but a figure thereof, did not, but being in this food Christ's very flesh
inseperably unite to the godhed, the same is of such efficacy, as he that
worthily eats of it, shall live for ever. And thus I have declared the sense
of Christ's words, brought forth out of the Gospel of Saint John. Whereby
appears, how euidentely they set forth the doctrine of the mystery of the
eating of Christ's flesh and drinkyng his blood in the Sacrament, which must
needs be understood of a corporal eating, as Christ did after order, in
thinstitucion of the said Sacrament, according to his promise and doctrine here
declared.

Now, where thauctor to exclude the mystery of corporal manducacion, brings
forth of Saint Augustine, such words as entreat of theffect and operacion of
the worthy receauyng of the Sacrament: the handelyng is not so sincere, as this
matter requires. For as hereafter shall be entreated, that is not worthily and
well done, may, because the principal intent fails, be called nor done, as
so Saint Augustine says. Let him not think, to eat the body of Christ, that
dwells not in Christ, not because the body of Christ is not received, which
by Saint Augustines mind, evil men do to their condempnacion, but because
theffecie of life fails. And so thauctor by sleight, to exclud the corporal
manducacion of Christ's most precious body, vttreth such words as might
sound Christ to have taught, the dwelling in Christ to be an eating, which
dwelling may be without this corporal manducacion, in him that can not attain
the use of it, and dwelling in Christ is an effect of the worthy manducacion,
and not the manducacion it self, which Christ does order to be practiced, in
the most precious Sacrament institute in his supper. Here thou reader may
see, how this doctrine of Christ, as I have declared it, opens the corporal
manducacion of his most holy flesh, and drinkyng of his most precious
blood, which he gave in his supper under the forms of bread and wine.

Now let us considre the textes of the Evangelists, and Saint Paul, which
be brought in by thauctor as follows.

When they we catyng, Jesus took bread, Mat. 26
and when he had given thanks, he brake it, gave it to his disciples, and
said: Take, eat, this is my body. And he took the cup, and when he had given
thanks, he gave it to them, saying: drink ye all of this, for this is my
blood of the new testament, that is shed for many, for the remission of sins.
But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth, of this fruit of the vine,
until that day, when I shall drink it new with you in my fathers kingdom.

As they did eat, Jesus took bread, and Mar. 14
when he had blessed, he brake it, and gave it to them, and said: Take, eat,
This is my body, and taking the cup, when he had given thanks, he gave it to
them, and they drank of it. And he said to them, This is my blood of the new
Testament, which is shed for many. Uerely I say unto you, I will drink no
more of the fruit of the vine, until that day, that I drink it new in the
kingdom of God.

When the hour was come, he sat down, Luc. 22.
and the.xij. Apostels with him: And he said unto them I have greatly desired
to eat this Pascha with you before I suffer. For I say unto you henceforth, I
will not eat of it any more, until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God. And
he took the cup, and gave thanks, and said: Take this and divide it among you.
For I say unto you, I will not drink, of the fruit of the vine, until the
kingdom of God come And he took bread and when he had given thanks, he brake
it and gave it unto them saiynge: This is my body, which is given for you:
This do in remembrance of me. Likewise also, when he had supped, he took the
cup, saying: This cup, is the new Testament, in my blood which is shed for you.

Is not the cup of blessyng, which we 1. Cor. 10
bless, a communion of the blood of Christ? Is not the bread, which we
break, a communion of the body of Christ: We being many are one bread, and
one body, for we are all partakers of one bread and of one cup.

That which I delivered unto you, I 1. Cor. 11
received of the Lord. For the Lord Jesus, the same night, in the which he
was betrayed, took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it and said:
Take eat, this is my body which is broken for you: do this in remembrance
of me. Likewise also, he took the cup when supper was done, saying: This cup,
is the new Testament in my blood: do this, as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me: For as often as you shall eat this bread and drink of
this cup, ye show forth the Lords death till he come, wherefore, whosoever
shall eat of this bread, or drink of this cup unworthily, shall be guilty of
the body and blood of the Lord. But let a man examine him self, and so eat
of the bread, and drink of the cup, for he that eats, and drynketh
unworthily, eats and drynketh his own damnacion, because he makes no
difference of the Lords body: For this cause, many are weak and sick among
you, and many do sleep.

After these textes brought in, thauctor does in the fourth chapter, begin to
trauers Christ's intent, that he intended not by these words (This is my
body) to make the bread his body: but to signify, that such as receive that
worthily, be members of Christ's body. The Catholic church acknowlegyng
Christ to be very God and very man, has from the beginning of these textes
of scripture confessed truly Christ's intent, and effectual myraculous work,
to make the bread his body, and the wine his blood, to be verily meat, and
verily drink, vsyng therein his humanity wherewith to fead us, as he used the
same, wherewith to redeame us, and as he does sanctify us by his holy spirit,
so to sanctify us by his holy divine flesh and blood, and as life is renewed
in us by the gift of Christ's holy spirit: so life to be increased in us, by
the gift of his holy flesh. So as he that believes in Christ, and receaueth
the Sacrament of belief, which is baptism, receives really Christ's spirit:
So he, that having Christ's spirit, receaueth also the Sacrament of Christ's
body and blood: does really receive in the same, and also effectually Christ's
very body and blood. And therefore Christ in thinstitucion of this Sacrament
said, deliueryng that he consecrated: This is my body. etc. And likewise of
the cup: This is my blood. And although, to man's reason it seems strange,
that Christ standing or sittyng at the table, should deliver them his body to
be eaten: yet when we remember Christ to be very God, we must grant him
omnipotent, and by reason thereof, repress in our thoughts, all imaginacions
how it might be, and considre Christ's intent, by his will preached unto us by
scriptures, and believed universally in his church. But if it may now be thought
semely for us to be so boulde, in so high a mystery, to begin to discuss
Christ's intent: what should move us to think that Christ would use so many
words, without effectual and real significacion, as be rehearsed touching the
mystery of this Sacrament?

First, in the.vi. of John, when Christ had taught of the eating of him, being
the bread descended from heaven, and declaring, that eating to signify
believing, whereat was no murmuryng, that then he should enter to speak of
geuyng of his flesh to be eaten, and his blood to be dronken, and to say he
would give a bread, that is his flesh, which he would give for the life of
the world. In which words, Christ makes mention of two gifts, and therefore
as he is truth, must needs intend to fulfill them both. And therefore, as we
believe the gift of his flesh, to the Jews to be crucified: So we must
believe, the gift of his flesh to be eaten, and of that gift, lyuerie and
seisme (as we say) to be made of him, that is in his promises faithful, as
Christ is to be made in both. And therefore (when he said in his supper): Take /
eat / This is my body: he must needs intend plainly, as his words of promise
required, and these words in his supper purport to give as really then his
body to be eaten of us, as he gave his body in deed to be crucified for us,
aptely nevertheless and conveniently for each effect, and therefore in manner of
geuyng diuersely, but in the substance of the same given, to be as his words
bear wytnes the same / and therefore said. This is my body, that shall be
berrayed for you, expressyng also the use when he said (Take / eat) which
words, in deliueryng of material bread, had been superfluous. For what should
men do with bread, when they take it, but eat it? specially when it is broken?
But as (Cyrill says) Christ opened there unto the^ the practice of that
doctrine he spoke of in the.vi. of Saint John / and because he said, he would
give his flesh for food, which he would give for the life of the world: he
for fulfillyng of his promise said: Take / eat, this is my body / which
words have been taught, and believed to be of effect and operatorie / and
Christ under the form of bread to have been, his very body. According
whereunto (S. Paul noreth) the receauer to be guilty, when he does not esteem
it our Lords body / wherewith it pleases Christ to feed such as be in him
regenerate, to thintente that as man was redeemed by Christ, sufferyng in the
nature of his humanity: so to purchase for man the kingdom of heaven / ioste
by Adams fall. Even likewise in the nature of the same humanitic, giuyng it to
be eaten to norishe man and make him strong to walk and continue his journey,
to emoye that kingdom. And therefore to set forth lively unto us the
communication of the substance of Christ's most precious body in the
Sacrament, and the same to be in deed delivered: Christ used plain words /
testified by the Eua^gelistes. S. Paul also rehearsed the same words in the
same plain terms in the.xi. to the Corinthians / and in the tenth, geuyng (as
it were) an exposion of theffecte, uses the same propre words declaryng
theffecte to be the co^municatio^ of Christ's body and blood. And one thing is
notable touching the scripture / that in such notable speeches uttered by
Christ, as might have an ambiguitie, the Evangelists by some circumstaunce
declared it, or some time opened it by plain interpretacion, as when Christ
said / he would dissolve the temple, and within three days build it again:
The Eua^gtlistes by and by adds for interpretacio^: This he said of the
temple of his body. And when Christ said / he is Helias, and I am the true
vine: the circumstaunce of the text opens the ambiguitie. But to show that
Christ should not mean of his very body when he so spoke: Neither S. Paul
after, ne the Eua^gtlistes in the place, add any words or circumstau^ces,
whereby to take away the propre significacion of the words (body) and (blood)
so as the same might same not in deed given (as the Catholic faith reaches)
but in significacion as thauctor would have it. For as for the words of
Christ: The spirit gives life (the flesh profits nothing) be to declare the
two natures in Christ each in their property apart considered, but not as they
be in Christ's person united, the mystery of which vnio^, such as believed not
Christ to be God could not consider, and yet to insinuate that unto them,
Christ made mention of his descension from heaven, and after of his ascension
thither again, whereby they might understand him very God, whose flesh taken
in the virgyns womb, and so given spiritually to be eaten of us (as I have
before opened, viuisike and gives life. And this shall suffice here, to show
how Christ's intent was to give verily (as he did in deed) his precious body
and blood to be eaten and drunken, according as he taught the^ to be verily
meat and drink, and yet gave and gives them so under form of visible
creatures to us, as we may conveniently, and without horror of our nature
receive the^, Christ therein condiscendyng to our infirmity. As for such other
wranglyng, as is made in the understanding of the words of Christ, shall after
be spoken of, by further occasion.

The auctor utters a great meny words, from the.viii. to the.xvii. chapter
of the first book, declaryng spiritual hungre and thurst and the releuyng of
the same by spiritual feadyng in Christ, and of Christ, as we constantly
believe in him, to the confirmacio^ of which belief the auctor would have the
Sacraments of Baptism, and of the body and blood of Christ to be adminicles
(as it were) and that we by them be preched unto, as in water, bread and wine,
and by them all our senses (as it were) spoken unto, or proprely touched,
which matter in the gross, although there be some words by the way not
tolerable, yet if those words set apart, the same were in the sum granted,
to be good teaching and wholesome exhorcacion, it conteyneth so no more but good
matter, not well applied. For the Catholic church / that professes the
truth of the presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, would therewith use
that declaration of hungre of Christ / and that spiritual refreshyng in
Christ, with the effect of Christ's passion and death, and the same to be
thonely mean of man's regeneracion, and feadyng also, with the differences, of
that feadyng from bodiely feadyng for continuyng this yearthly life. But this
touches not the principal point that should be entreated. Whether Christ so
ordered to feed such as be regenerate in him, to give to them in the
Sacrament, the same his body, that he gave to be crucified for us. The good
man is fed by faith, and by the merits of Christ's passion, being the mean
of the gift of that faith, and other gifts also, and by the sufferyng of the
body of Christ, and sheddynge of his most precious blood on thaultar of the
Cross: which work and passion of Christ is preached unto us / by words and
sacraments, and the same doctrine received of us by faith / and the effect of
it also. And thus far goes the doctrine of this auctor.

But the Catholic teaching, by the scriptures, goth futher, confessing Christ
to feade such as be regenerate in him, not only by his body and blood: but
also with his body and blood delivered in this sacrament by him in deed to us,
which the faithful, by his institucion and commandment, receive with their
faith and with their mouth also, and with those special deynties, be fed
specially at Christ's table. And so God does not only preach in his
sacraments, but also works in them, and with them, and in sensible things
gives celestial gifts, after the doctrine of each sacrament, as in baptism
the spirit of Christ, and in the sacrament of thaultar, the very body and
blood of Christ, according to the plain sense of his words which he spoke:
This is my body. etc. And this is the Catholic faith, against the which, how
thauctor will fortify, that he would have called Catholic, and confute that he
improueth. I intend hereafter more particularly to touch in discussion of that
is said, wherein I will keep this order. First to considre the third book,
that speaks against the faith of the real presence of Christ's most precious
body and blood in the sacrament, then against the fourth, and so return to
the second, speaking of Transubsta^tiation, whereof to talk, the real presence,
not being discussed, were clearly superfluous. And finally, I will somewhat say
of the fifth book also.

The confutation of the third book.
IN the beginyng of the third book, thauctor has thought good to note
certain differences, which I will also particularly consider. It follows in
him thus.

They teach that Christ is in the bread and wine: But we say according to The
auctor.
the truth, that he is in them that worthily eat and drink the bread and wine.

Note here (Reader) even in then^re of the The answer.
comparison of these differences, how untruly the true faith of the Church is
reported, which does not teach that Christ is in the bread and wine (which
was the doctrine of Luther.) But the true faith is, that Christ's most precious
body and blood, is by the might of his word and determinacion of his will,
which he declares by his word, in his holy supper present, under form of
bread and wine, the substance of which natures of bread and wine, is
converted into his most precious body and blood as it is truly believed and
taught in the Catholic Church, of which teaching this auctor can not be
ignoraunte. So as (thauctor) of this book reports an untruth wittyngly
against his conscience, to say they teach (calling the^ Papists,) that Christ
is in the bread and wine, but they agree in form of teaching with that the
Church of England teaches at this day, in the distribution of the holy
communion, in that it is there said the body and blood of Christ to be under
the form of bread and wine. And thus much serves for declaracion of the wrong
and untrue report of the faith of the Catholic church made of this auctor,
in the setting forth of this difference on that part. which it pleases him to
name Papists. And now to speak of the other part of the difference on
thauctors side, when he would tell what he and his say, he conueyeth a sense
craftily in words to serve for a difference: such as no Catholic man would
deny. For every Catholic teacher grants, that no man can receive worthily
Christ's precious body and blood in the Sacrament, unless he has by faith
and charity Christ dwelling in him, for otherwise, such one as has not
Christ in him, receaueth Christ's body in the Sacrament unworthily, to his
condempnacio^. Christ can not be received worthily, but in to his own temple,
which be ye (S. Paul says) and yet, he that has not / Christ's spirit in
him, is not his, As for calling it bread and wine, a Catholic man forbereth
not that name, signifiyng, what those creatures were before the consecracion in
substance. Wherefore appears, how thauctor of this book in the lieu and place
of a difference, which he pretends he would show, brings in that under a
(But) which every Catholic man, must needs confess, that Christ is in them,
who worthily eat and drink the sacrament of his body and blood, or the bread
and wine as this auctor speaks.

But and this auctor would have spoken plainly, and compared truly the
difference of the two teachynges / he should in the second part have said
somewhat contrary to that the Catholic church teaches, which he does not /
and therefore, as he shows untruth in the first report, so he shows a
slight and shifte in the declaracion of the second part, to say that
repungneth not to the first matter, and that no Catholic man will deny /
considering that the said two teachynges be not of one matter, nor shote not
(as one might say) to one mark. For the first part, is of the substance of
the Sacrament to be received, where it is truth, Christ to be present God and
man: The second part is of Christ's spiritual presence in the man that
receaueth, which in deed must be in him before he receive the sacrament, or he
can not receive the Sacrament worthily, as before is said, which two parts may
stand well together, without any repugnaunce, and so both the differences, thus
taught, make but one catholic doctrine. Let us se what the auctor says
further.

They say, that when any man eats the bread and The auctor.
drynketh the cup, Christ goes into his mouth or stomoke with the bread and
wine, and no further: But we say / that Christ is in the hole man, both in body
and soul, of him that worthily eats the bread and drynketh the cup, and not
in his mouth or stomoke only.

In this comparison, thauctor terms the The answer.
true Catholic teaching at his pleasure, to bring it in contempt. Which
doing in rude speech would be called otherwise then I will term it. Truth it
is (as Saint Augustine says) we receive in the Sacrament the body of Christ,
with our mouth, and such speech other use, as a book set forth in the
archbisshoppe of Cantorburies name called a Cathechisme, wills children to be
taught that they receive with their bodily mouth the body and blood of, Christ,
which I allege because it shall appear it is a teaching set forth among us of
late as has been also and is by the book of comen prayor being the most true
Catholic doctrine of the substance of the Sacrament, in that it is there so
Catholiquely spoken of, which book this auctor does after specially allow,
how so ever all the sum of his teaching does improve it in that point. So
much is he contrary to him self in this work, and here in this place not
caryng (what he says) reports such a teaching in the first part of this
difference, as I have not heard of before: There was never man of learning
that I have red, termed the matter so, that Christ goes into the stomoke of
the man that receaueth and no further. For that is written, contra
Stercoronistas, is nothing to this teaching, nor the speech of any gloss if
there be any such, were herein to be regarded. The Catholic doctrine is, that
by the holy conjunction in the Sacrament, we be joined to Christ really,
because we receive in the holy supper, the most precious substance of his
glorious body, which is a flesh geuyng life: And that is not digested into
our flesh, but works in us and attempereth, by heavenly nurrttor, our body
and soul being partakers of his passion to be conformable to his will and by
such spiritual food to be made more spiritual. In the receauyng of which
food, in the most blessed Sacrament our body and soul in them that duly
communicate, works together in due order without other discussyon of the
mystery then God has ordered (that is to say) the soul to believe as it is
taught, and the body to do as God has ordered, knowing that glorious flesh by
our eating can not be consumed or suffer, but to be most profitable unto such
as do accustonie worthily to receive the same. But to say that the church
teaches how we receive Christ at our mouth, and he goes into our stomoke and
no further, is a report which by the just judgment of God is suffered to come
out of the mouth of them that fight against the truth in this most high
mystery.

Now where this auctor in the second part by an aduersiteue with a (But) to
make the comparison, tells what he and his say, he tells in effect that
which every Catholic man must needs, and does confess: For such as receive
Christ's most precious body and blood in the Sacrament worthly, they have
Christ dwelling in the^, who conforteth both body and soul, which the church
has ever taught most plainly, so as this comparison of difference in his two
parties, is made of one open untruth, and a truth disguised, as though it were
now first opened by this auctor and his, which manner of handelyng declares
what sleyght and shift is used in the matter.

They say, that Christ is received in the mouth, and The auctor.
enters in with the bread and wine: We say, that he is received in the heart /
and enters in by faith.

Here is a pretty slaight in this comparison, The answer.
where both parts of the comparison may be understood on both sides, and
therefore, here is by thauctor in this comparison no issue joined: For the
worthy receauyng of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament, is both with
mouth, and heart, both in fact and faith, After which sort (S. Peter) in the
last supper, received Christ's body, whereas, in the same supper, Judas received
it with mouth, and in fact only, whereof S. Augustine speaks in this wise. Non
dicunt ista, nisi qui de me^sa domini August. contra li teras pe til. lib. 2
cap. 47.
vita^sumunt, Sicut Petrus, non iudicium sicut Judas, et tamen ipsa vtrique
fuit vna, sed non vtrique valuit ad vnum, quia ipsi no^ erant vnu^. Which
words be thus much to say: That they say not so (as was before entreated) but
such, as receive life of our Lords table (as Peter did) not judgment, (as
Judas) and yet the table was all one to them both, but it was not to all one
effect, in the^ both, because they were not one. Here (S. Augustine) notes the
difference in the receauer, not in the Sacrament received, which being
received with the mouth only, and Christ entryng, in mystery only, does not
sanctify us, but is the stone of stumblyng and our judgment and condempnacion,
but if he be received with mouth and body, with heart and faith, to such he
brings life and nurrisheme^t, wherefore in this comparison, thauctor has made
no difference, but with diverse terms, the catholic teaching is divided into
two members with a (But) facioned nevertheless, in an other phrase of speech
then the church has used, which is so commen in this auctor that I will not
hereafter note it any more for a fault. Let us go further.

They say that Christ is really in the Sacrame^tall The auctor.
bread being reserved an whole year, so long as the form of bread remains,
but after the receauyng thereof, he flies up (they say) from the receyuer, unto
heaven, as soon as the bread is chawed in the mouth, or changed in the
stomoke. But (we say) that Christ remains in the man that worthily receaueth
it, so long as the man remains a membre of Christ.

This comparison is like the other before, The answer.
whereof the first part is garnished and emblossed with untruth, and the second
part, that the church has ever taught most truly, and that al must believe,
and therefore that piece has no untruth in the matter, but in the manner only,
being spoken as though it diffred from the continual open reachyng of the
church which is not so, wherefore in the manner of it in vtteraunce signifies an
untruth, which in the matter it self is nevertheless most true. For
undoubtedly, Christ remains in the man, that worthily receives the sacrament,
so long as that man remains a membre of Christ. In this first part, there is
a fault, in the matter of the speech, for explicacion whereof, I will examine it
particularly. This auctor says (they say) that Christ is really in the
Sacrame^tal bread being reserved an hole year. etc. The church geuyng faith to
Christ's word, when he said: This is my body. etc. techeth the body of Christ
to be present in the Sacrament under the form of bread: unto which words when
we put the word really, it serves only to express that truth in open words,
which was before to be understood in sense. For in Christ, who was the body of
all the shadows and figures of the law, and who did exhibit and give in his
sacraments of the new law, the things promised in his sacraments of tholde
law. We must understand his words in the institucion of his sacraments
without figure in the substance of the celestial thing of the^, and therefore
when he ordered his most precious body and blood to be eaten and drunken of us
under the forms of bread and wine, we profess and believe that truly he gave
us his most precious body in the Sacrament for a celestial food, to comfort
and strength us in this miserable life. And for the certayntie of the truth of
his work therein, we profess he gives us his body realy that is to say, in
ded his body the thing it self: Which is, the heavenly part of the Sacrament
called (Eucharistia) having the visible form of bread and wine, and co^teinyng
inuisibly the very body and blood of our savior Christ, which was not wont to
be reserved other wise, but to be ready for such as in danger of death call for
it, and the same so long, as it may be used, is still the same sacrament, which
only, time alters not, whereof Cyril wrote to this sense, Cyrillus ad Calo
syriu^ epi scopum. Hesichius in leuit. li. 2. ca. 8
many hundred years past, and Hesichius also, and what ought to be done when by
negligence of the ministre, it were reserved ouerlong. Mary where it likes
thauctor of these differences, to say the church teaches, Christ to fly up
from the receauer unto heaven, so sone as the bread is chawed in the mouth, or
changed it rite stomach, this manner of speech implies as though Christ left
the seat of his majesty in heaven, to be present in the Sacrament, which is
most untrue. The church acknowledges, believes, and teaches truly, that
Christ sytteth on the right hand of his father in glory, from whence he shall
come to judge the world, and also teaches Christ's very body and blood, and
Christ himself God and man, to be present in the Sacrament, not by shifryng of
place, but by the determination of his will, declared in scriptures and believed
of the Catholic church, which articles be to reason impossible, but possible
to God omnipotent. So as being taught of his will, we should humbly submit al
our senses and reason to the faith of his will and work declared in his
scriptures. In the belief of which mysteries is great benefit and consolacion,
and in the vnreuerent search and curious discussio^ of the^, presumptuous
boldness and wicked temerite. I know by faith, Christ to be present, but the
particularite, how he is present, more then I am assured, he is truly present,
and therefore in substance present, I cannot tell, but present he is, and
truly is, and verily is, and so in deed, that is to say, really is, and
unfeignedly is, and therefore in substance is, and as we term it, substancially
is present. For all these aduerbes, really, substancially with the rest, be
contained in the one word (is) spoken out of his mouth, that speaks as he
means, truly and certaynely as Christ did, saying: This is my body that
shall be betrayed for you, who then carried himself in his hands after a
certain manner (as sainet Augustine says) which never man besides August.
Psalm. 33.
him could do, who in that his last super gave himself to be eaten without
co^sumyng: The ways and means whereof, no man can tell, but humble spirits,
as they be taught must constantly believe it, without thinkyng or talkyng of
fliyng or sliyng of Christ again unto heaven, where Christ is in the glory of
his father continually, and is nevertheless, because he will so be present in
the Sacrament, whole God and man, and dwells corporally in him that receives
him worthily. Wherefore (reader) when thou shall again well consider this
comparison, thou shall find true, how the first part is disguised with
untrue report of the commen teaching of the church, howsoever some gloss, or
some private teacher might speak of it, and the second part, such as has
been ever so taught. One thing (I think) good to admonish the reader, that
whatsoever I affirm, or precisely deny, I mean within the compass of my
knowledge, which I speak not because I am in any suspicio^, or dout of that I
affirm or deny, but to avoid the temerite of deniyng (as never) or affirmyng
(as ever) which he extremities. And I mean also of public doctrine by consent
received, so taught and believed, and not that any one man might blindely write
as vtteryng his fansye as this auctor does for his pleasure. There follows in
the auctor thus.

They say that in the Sacrament the corporal The auctor.
members of Christ, be not distante in place on from an other, but that
whersoeuer the head is, there be the fee^e, and whersoeuer the arms be, there
be the legs, so that in every part of the bread and wine is all together,
whole head, whole feet, whole flesh, whole blood, whole heart, whole longes,
whole breaste, whole back, and al together whole, confused and mixte without
distinction, or diversity. O what a folishe and an abominable invention is
this? to make of the most pure and persite body of Christ, such a confuse and
monstrouse body, And yet can the Papists imagyne nothing so folishe, but al
christian people, must receive the same, as an oracle of God, and as a most
certain article of their faith, without whisperyng to the contrary.

This is merueylous Rhetorique, and such The answer.
as thauctor has ouersene himself in the vtteraunce of it, and confesses
himself pretely abused, to the latter end of his years to have believed that,
he now calls so folishe. But to the purpose. In the book of commen prayor
(now at this time) set forth in this realm: At is ordered to teach the
people, that in each part of the bread consecrate, broken, is the hole body of
our savior Christ, which is agreeable to the Catholic doctrine: Upon accasio^
hereof, it likes this auctor to multiply language by enumeracio^ of parts,
and because reason without fay the, directs the bodily eye, to so little a
visible quantity in the hooste. This auctor bears in hand, the Catholic
church to say, and teach, all that fond reason diuiseth, where as the
church, in the doctrine of this mystery, denies all that reason without faith
diuiseth: And therefore, when we acknowledge by faith, Christ's body present,
although we say, it is present truly, really, substancially, yet we say, our
senses be not privy to that presence, ne the manner of it, but by instruction of
faith, and therefore we say, Christ's body to be not locally present, not by
manner of quantite but inuisibly, and in no sensible manner, but meruelously in a
Sacrament and mystery truly, and in such a spiritual manner, as we can not
defyne and determyne, and yet by faith, we know his body present, the parts of
which, be in them self distinct one from an other, in their swne substance,
but not by circumscription of several places to be comprehended of our
capacity, which parts, we can not by demonstracion place, nor by imaginacio^
displace, diminishe, altre, or confound (as this auctor) for his pleasure
reports, who writes mo^st rously in so high a mystery, and impude^tly
bears in hand the Catholic church, to teach that he lysteth to bear in
hand (may by wanton reason) be deduced of their teaching, where as altrue
christian men believe simply Christ's words, and trouble not their heads with
such conseque^ces, as seem to strive with reason. This is in th auctor no
whisperyng, but plainly raylyng, wherein (if he had remembered himself well) he
would not have spoken of all christian men in the receypt of that he ente^deth
to disprove. And if (he would say) he spoke it by an Ironie or skorne, yet it
implies that all had received that he thus mocketh. Which after the sort he
writes, was never divised by Papiste, or other to be so taught, otherwise
then, as this auctor might read it, as an idle argument, to show absurdite in
reason. For in gods works, as the sacraments be, we must think al semelynes
in deed without deformite, eue^ as we believe al gods judgments just and true,
although reason conclude in the^ evident i^iquitie. Ma^s reason when it seems
most galau^t is full of sportes and folly. Gods works be al semelynes, without
confusion, monstre or any such absurdity, as this auctor supposes. Although I
ca^ not, in the sacrament with the eye of my reason, locally distinct Christ's
head from his foot, his leg, from his arm, and where in the book of common
prayor, it is truly said, i^ each part of the bread co^secrat broken to be
Christ's hole body, if one of curiosite would question with me, and I of folly
would answer him first where is Christ's head? I should say here (pointyng with my
finger) he would think it first a little head. The^ he would ask, where is his
foot, and I should say there, and point in the same place again, for there is
noone other left. If he replied that I poynted before the same for the head,
might not the third, a Catholic man, that stood by, (trow you) wisely caiie
us both mad, to goo about to discuss, that we must grant we see not, and
when by faith, we know only the being present of Christ's most preciouse
body, the^ by blind reason, to discuss the manner of being in the situacion of
such parts, as we do not see? Now if there came among us a fourth man as a
mediator, and would do as king Alexander did when he could not open the knot of
Quintus Cur^us makes mention of this fact of Alexander.
Gordius, he did cut it with his sword, if this man should say, I will
releaue this matter, you believe Christ's body is present in deed really, and
substa^cially, leave out really and substantially, and say his body is present
in significacion, and then it may be easily conceived, by reason that Christ's
body being never so great, may be as well signified, by a little piece of bread,
as by a great piece of bread: even as a man may write a great man's name,
as well in smallettres short, as in great letters at lenght. And to commend
further his divise unto us, would percase tell how many absurdities as he
thinks and inconveniences might be avoided by it. This fourth man I speak
of, making him self a mediator unmeet therefore, because he has no
participatio^ with faith: yet if our religion and faith were man's invention, as
that of Numa Pompilius was, should not utter this his conceyte all idelly. For
(...) speaks of a ioly easy way without any misterye or marvel at all. But
our faith, is of hearing, as has been preached contynually from the beginning,
grounded upon the most sure truth of the word of God, and therefore can not be
attempered as man would divise it, to exclude travail in carnal reason. For
then the Sabellians were to be Sabellians.
herkened unto. Who by their heresy took away all the hard and difficile
questions in the mystery of the trinity.

The Arrians also releued much man's Arrians.
reason in consideration of Christ's death, deniyng him to be of the same
substance with his father, which was a pestilent heresye. Now in the
Sacrament to say Christ's body is present only by signification, as it
releueth in some men's indgementes the absurdities in reason, which ought not
to be relieved: So it condempneth all the true public faith testified in the
church from the beginyng hitherto, and shows the learned holy men, to have
wondered in their writings at that which has no wounder at al: to ordeyne one
thing to be the signification of an other, which is practiced daily among men.
But from the beginning the mystery of the Sacrament has been with wounder
merueyled at, how Christ made bread his body, and wine his blood, and under the
figure of these visible creatures, gave inuisibly his precious body and blood
presently there.

tedly, S. Augustyne says: We may not of men's manners esteem the sacraments,
they Contra li^^eras ^eti. lib. 20.
be made by him whose they be, but worthily used they bring reward, unworthily
handled they bring indgeme^t. He that dispenses the Sacrament worthily and he
that uses it unworthily, be not one, but that thing is one, whither it be
handeled worthily or unworthily, so as it is neither better ne worse but life
or death of them that use it. Thus says S. Augustyne and therefore be the
receyuer worthy or unworthy, good or evil, the substance of Christ's Sacrament
is all one as being gods work, who works uniformly, and yet is not in all
that receive of like effect, not for any alteracion or diminution in it, but
for the diversity of him that receives: So as the report made here of the
doctrine of the Catholic church under the name of Papists, is a very true
report, and for want of grace reproved by thauctor as no true doctrine. And
the second part of the comparison on thauctors side, contained under (we say)
by them that in hypocrisye pretend to be truths friends, conteyneth an
untruth, to the simple reader, and yet has a matter of wranglyng to the
learned reader, because of the word (very) which referred to thefecte of
eating the body of Christ, whereby to receive life, may be so spoken, that none
receive the body of Christ with the very effect of life, but such as eat
the sacrament spirituallye, that is to say with true faith worthily. And yet
evil men as Judas, receive the same very body, touching the truth of the
presence thereof, that S. Peter did. For in the substance of the Sacrament,
which is Gods work is no variete, who ordeyneth all (as before) uniformly,
but in man is the variete, among who^ he that receives worthily Christ's
body, receives life, and he that receives unworthily, receives
co^dempnacion. There follows further.

They say that good men eat the body of Christ The auctor.
and drink his blood only at that time when they receive the Sacrament: we say
that they eat / drink and feed of Christ continually / so long as they be
members of his body.

What forehede, I pray you, is so heatdened, The answer.
that can utter this among them, that know any thing of the learning of
Christ's church? In which it is a most common distinction, that there is three
manner of eatynges of Christ's body and blood: one spiritual only, which is
here affirmed in the second part (we say) wherein the auctor and his say, as
the church says. Another eating is both sacramentally and spiritually,
which is when men worthily communicate in the supper. The third is
sacramentally only, which is by men unworthy, who eat and drink in the holy
supper to their co^dempnacion only. And the learned men in Christ's church say
that the ignorance, and want of obseruacion of these three manner of eatynges,
causes the error in thunderstandyng of the scriptures and such fathers
sayings, as have written of the Sacrament. And when the church speaks of
these three manner of eatynges, what an impude^cy is it, to say that the church
teaches good me^ only to eat the body of Christ and drink his blood, when
they receive the Sacrament, being the truth otherwise, and yet a diversity
there is, of eating spiritually only, and eating spiritually and
sacramentally, because in the supper they receive his very flesh and very
blood in deed, with theffectes of all graces and gifts to such as receive it
spiritually and worthily: where as out of the supper, when we eat only
spiritually by faith, God that works without his sacraments, as seems to
him, does releaue those that believe and trust in him, and suffers them not to
be destitute of that is necessary for them, whereof we may not presume, but
ordenarely seek god, where he has ordered himself to be sought and there to
assure our self of his couenauntes and promyses, which be most certaynely
annexed to his sacraments, whereunto we ought to give most certain trust and
confidence. wherefore to teach the spiritual manducacio^ to be equal with the
spiritual manducation and sacramental also, that is to dimishe theffecte of the
institution of the Sacrament, which no Christen man ought to do.

They say that the body of Christ that is in the The (...).
Sacrament, has his own propre tourme and quantity: We say that Christ is
there sacramentally and spiritually without form or quantity.

In this comparison is both slight and craft? The answer.
In the first part of it, which is that they say, there is mention of the body
of Christ which is propre of thumanitie of Christ. In the second part, which
is of (we say) there is no mention of Christ's body, but of Christ, who in his
divine nature, is understood present without a body: Now the Sacrament is
institute of Christ's body and blood, and because the divine nature in
Christicontinueth the unity with the body of Christ, we must needs confess,
where the body of Christ is, there is whole Christ God and man. And when we
speak of Christ's body, we must understand a true body, which has both
form and quantity, and therefore such as confess the true Catholic faith,
they affirm of Christ's body all truth, of a natural body, which although it
has all those truths of form and quantity, yet they say Christ's body is
not present after the manner of quantity nor in a visible form as it was
conuersaunt in this present life, but that there it is truly in the Sacrament
the very true body of Christ, which good men believe upon the credit of Christ
that said so, and knowledge therewith the manner of that presence, to be an high
mystery, and the manner so spiritual, as the ^arnall man can not by discourse
of reason reach it, but in his discourse shall as this auctor does, think it a
vanity and folishenesse, Which folishenesse, nevertheless overcomes the
wisdom of the world. And thus I have opened what they say on the Catholic
part. Now for the other part whereof this auctor is, and with his faith (we
say) the words seem to imply, that Christ's humayne body is not in the
Sacrament, in that it is said, Christ to be there sacramentally and
spirituallye, without form or quantity, which saying has no scripture for
it. For the scripture speaks of Christ's body which was betrayed for us, to be
given us to be eaten. Where also Christ's divinity is present, as accompaniyng
his humanity, which humanity is specially spoken of, the presence of which
humanite, when it is denied, then is there no text to prove the presence of
Christ's divinity specially, that is to say, otherwise then it is by his
omnipotencye present every where. And to conclude this piece of comparison,
this manner of speech was never I think read, that Christ is present in the
Sacrament without form or quantity. And S. Paul speaks of a form in the
godhead, (Qui quum in forma dei esset.) Who Phil. 2.
when he was in the form of God. So as if Christ be present in the Sacrament
without all form, then is he there, neither as God nor man, which is a
stranger teaching the^ yet has been heard or read of, but into such
absurdities in deed do they fall, who entreat irreuerently and untruly this
high mystery. This is here worthy a special note how by the manner of the
speech in the latter part of this difference, the teaching seems to be, that
Christ is spiritually present in the Sacrament, because of the word (there)
which thou reader may compare how it agrees with the rest of this auctors
doctrine, Let us go to the next.

They say that the fathers, and Prophets of the The auctor.
old testament, did not eat the body, nor drink the blood of Christ. We say,
that they did eat his body, and drink his blood, although he were not yet borne
nor incarnated.

This comparison of difference, is clerkely The answer.
conceived, as it were of a ryddle, wherein, nay and yea, when they be opened,
agree and consent. The fathers did eat Christ's body and drink his blood in
truth of promise, whicht was effectual to the^ of redemption to be wrought, not
in truth of presence, (as we do) for confirmation of redemption already
wrought. They had a certain promise, and we a certain present payment: they
did eat Christ spiritually, believing in him that was to come but they did not
eat Christ's body present in the Sacrament, sacramentally, and spiritually, as
we do. Their sacraments were figures of the things, but out conteyne the very
things. And therefore albeit in a sense to the learned men, it may be verefyed,
that the fathers did eat the body of Christ and drink his blood, yet there is
no such form of words in scripture, and it is more agreeable to the
simplicity of scripture, to say the fathers before Christ's natiuite, did not
eat the body and blood of Christ, which body and blood Christ himself truly
took of the body of the virgin Marie. For although S. Paul in the tenth to the
Corinthians, be so understood of some, as the fathers should eat the same
spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink that we do, to which
understanding, al do not agree, yet following that understanding, we may not so
press the words, as there should be no^ difference at al, and this one special
difference S. Augustine notes how their sacraments contained the promise of
that, which in our sacraments is given. Thus he says; and this is evident of
it self, how to us in the holy supper Christ says: (This is my body that
shall be betrayed for you (Take, eat) which was never said to the fathers,
although their faith in substance agreed with our, having al one Christ and
mediator, which they looked for to come, and we acknowledge to be already
come. (Come and to come) as S. Augustine says differs, But Christ is one,
by whom all was create, and man's fall repared, from whom is all fedyng corporal
and spiritual, and in whom al is restored in heaven, and in earth. In this
faith of Christ, the fathers were fed with heavenly spiritual food, which
was the same with ours in respect of the restitution by Christ, and redemption
by them hoped, which is achieved by the mystery of the body and blood of
Christ, by reason whereof I deny not, but it may be said in a good sense, how
they did eat the body and blood of Christ before he was incarnate, but as I
said before, scripture speaks not so, and it is no wholesome facion of speech
at this time, which furthereth in sound to the ears of the rude, the
pestilent heresy, wherein Ione of kent obstinately Ione of Ke^tes obstinacye.
dyed, that is to say, that Christ took nothing of the virgyn, but brought his
body with him from above, being a thing worthy to be noted, how the old heresi,
deniyng the true taking of the flesh of Christ in the virgyns wo^de, at the
same time to revive. When the true deliverance of Christ's flesh in the holy
supper be of us eaten, is also denied. For as it is a mere truth without
figure, and yet an high mystery, godsworke in thincarnatio^ of Christ wherein
our flesh was of Christ truly taken of the virgyns substance: So is it a mere
truth, without figure, and yet an high mystery and gods work, in the geuyng of
the same true flesh, truly to be in the supper eaten. When I exclude figure in
the Sacrament, I mean not of the visible part, which is called a figure of
the celestial invisible part, which is truly there without figure whereby to
empayre the truth of that presence, which I add to avoid cauillatio^. And to
make an end of this comparison, this I say, that this article declares
wa^tones to make a difference in words, where none is in the sense rightly
taken, wit^ a novelty of speech not necessary to be vttred now.

They say, that the body of Christ is every day many The auctor.
times made, as often as there be mas^es said, and that then and there he is
made of bread and wine, we say that Christ's body was never but ones made, and
then not of the nature and substance of bread and wine, but of the substance
of his blessed mother.

The body of Christ, is by gods omnipotency, The answer.
who so works in his word, made present unto us at such time, as the
church prays, it may please him so to do, which prayour is ordered to be
made in the book of common prayour now set forth, Wherein we require of God,
the creatures of bread and wine to be sanctified, and to be to us the body and
blood of Christ, which they can not be, onles God works it, and make them so
to be: In which mystery it was never taught, as this auctor willyngly
mysreporteth, that Christ's most precious body, is made of the matter of bread,
but in that order, exhibitie and made present unto us, by conversion of the
substance of bread into his precious body, not a new body made of a new
matter of bread and wine, but a new presence of the body, that is never old,
made present there, where the substance of bread and wine was before. So as this
comparison of difference is mere wra^glyng and so evident, as it needs no
further answer, but a note: ^o how they be not ashamed to trifle in so great a
matter, and without cause by wrong terms, to bring the truth in slander, (if
it were possible). May not this be accounted, as a part of Gods punishment,
for men of knowledge to write to the people such, matter seriously, as were not
tolerable to be by a scoffer divised in a play, to supply when his fellow had
forgotten his part.

They say that the mass is a sacrifice satisfactory for sin, by the devotion
of the priest that offreth, The auctor
and not by the thing that is offered. But we say that their ^aiyngs a most
heinous, yea, and detestable error against the glory of Christ. For the
satisfaction of our sins, is not the devotion nor offryng of the priest, but
thonly host and satisfaction for all the sins of the world, is the death of
Christ, and thoblation that Christ himself offered ones upon the cross, and
never but ones, nor never none but he. And therefore that oblation, which the
priests make daily in their papisticall masses, can not be satisfaction for
other men's sins, by the priests devotion, but is a mere illusion, and
subtle craft of the devil, whereby Antichrist has many years blinded and
deceived the world.

This comparison is out of the matter of the presence of Christ's most precious
body The answer.
in the Sacrament, which presence (this auctor) in the first part of his
comparison, seems by implication to grant, when he finds fault, that the
priests devotion should be a sacrifice satisfactorie, and not the thing that
is offered, which manner of doctrine (I never red) and I think it myself it
ought to be improued, if any such there be to make the devotion of the priest a
satisfaction. For undoubtedly Christ is our satisfaction wholly and fully, who
has paid our hole debte to god the father, for thappesing of his just wrath
against us, and has ca^celled the byll obligatory (as S. Paul says) that was
against us. For further openyng whereof, if it be asked how he satisfied? we
aniwere, as we be taught by the scriptures, by thaccomplishement of the will of
his father, in his innocent suffryng, his willing and obedient suffering, the
miseryes of this world without sin, and the violent persecution of the
world, even to the death of the cross, and sheddyng of his most precious
blood. Wherein was perfited the willing sacrifice, that he made of himself to
God the father for us, of whom it was written in the beginning of the book that
he should be the body and perfyte acco^plishme^t of al sacrifices, as of whom
all other sacrifices before, were shadows and figures. And here is to be
considered, how the obedient will in Christ's sacrifice, is specially to be
noted, who suffered because he would. Which S. Paul sets forth in
declaration of Christ's humility. And although that willing obedience was
ended and perfited on the cross, to the which it continued from the beginning,
by reason whereof, thoblatio^ is in S. Paul's speech, attribute there unto: yet
as in the sacrifice of abraham, when he offered Isaac, the ernest will of
offryng, was accounted for the offryng in deed, wherpo^ it is said in scripture
that Abraham offered Isaac, and the declaration of the will of Abraham, is called
the offryng. So the declaration of Christ's will in his last supper, was an
offryng of him to God the father, assuryng there his Apostels, of his will and
determination, and by the^ all the world, that his body should be betrayed for
the^ and us, and his precious blood shed for remission of sin, which his
word he co^fermed the^, with the gift of his precious body to be eaten, and
his precious blood to be dronken. In which mystery, he declared his body and
blood to be the very sacrifice of the world, by him offered to God the father,
by the same will, that he said his body should be betrayed for us. And thereby
ascertayned us to be in him willing, that the Jews on the cross seemed to
execute by violence and force against his will. And therefore as christ offered
himself on the cross, in the execution of the work of his will, so he offered
himself in his supper, in declaration of his will, whereby we might be the more
assured of the effect of his death which he suffered willyngly and determinatly,
for the redemption of the world, with a most perfect oblation and satisfaction
for the sins of the world, exhibit and offered by him to God the father, for
the reco^ciliatio^ of man's nature to gods favor and grace. And this I write
because this auctor speaks so precisely, how Christ offered himself never but
ones, whereby (if he mean by ones offryng) the hole action of our redemption,
which was consummate and perfited upon the cross: Al must confess the
substance of that work of redemption, by thoblation of Christ's body on the
cross, to have been absolutely finished, and so ones offered for all. But there
is no scripture, whereupon we might conclude, that Christ did in this mortal
life, but in one particular moment of time offer himself to his father. For S.
Paul describes it to the Philippians, under the Phil. 2.
word of humiliation, to have continued the hole time of Christ's conversation
here, eue^ to the death, the death of the cross. And that this obedience to
God in humility is called offering, appears by S. Paul when he exhorts us
to offer our bodies, which means a continual obedience in thobseruation of
Gods will, and he calls (Oblationem gentium) Romans 12
to bring them to faith. And Abraha^s willing obedience, ready at Gods
commandment to offer Isaac, is called the offering of Isaac, and is in very
deed a true offering and each man offreth himself to God, when he yeldeth to
gods calling, and presents himself ready to do gods will and commandment,
who then may be say de to offer his service (that is to say) to place his
service in sight and before him, before whom, it should be done. And because
our savior Christ, by the decree of the hole trinite roke man's nature upon
him, to suffer death for our redemption, which death, in his last supper, he
declared plainly, he would suffer. We read in S. Cyprian how Christ offered
himself in his supper. fulfillyng the figure of Melchisedech, who by thoffryng
of bread and wine signified that high mystery of Christ's supper, in which
Christ under the form of bread and wine, gave his very body and blood to be
eaten and dronken, and in the geuynge thereof, declared the determination of his
glorious Passion, and the fruit and effect thereof, Which doing was a sweet,
and pleasant oblatio^ to God the father, conteinyng a most perfyte obedience
to Gods will and pleasure. And in the mystery of this supper, was written, made
and sealed a most perfyte testimony, for an effectual memory of Christ's
offering of himself to his father, and of his death and passion with the
fruit thereof. And therefore Christ ordained this supper, to be observed and
continued for a memory to his cummyng: So as we that saw not, with our bodily
eyes Christ's death and passion, may in the celebration of the supper, be most
suredly ascertayned of the truth, out of Christ's own mouth. Who still speaks
in the person of the ministre of the church: This is my body that is betrayed
for you: This is my blood that is shed for you in remission of sin: and
therewith makes his very body truly present, and his precious blood truly
present, to be taken of us, eaten and dronken. Whereby we be assured, that
Christ is the same to us, that he was to them, and uses us as familiarly as he
did them, offreth himself to his father for us, as well as for the^, declares
his will in the fruit of his death, to perteyn as well to us, as to the^. Of which
death we be assured by his own mouth, that he suffered the same to thef: fecte
he spoke of, and by the continual feadyng in this high mystery, of the same
very body that suffed, and feadyng of it without consumptio^, being continually
exhibit unto us a living body, and lively blood, not only our soul is
specially and spiritually comforted, and our body thereby reduced to more
conformable obedience to the soul, but also we by the participation of this
most precious body and blood, be ascertayned of resurrection and regeneration
of our bodies and flesh, to be by gods power made incorruptible, and immortal
to live and have fruition in God with our soul for ever. Wherefore having this
mystery of Christ's supper, so many truths in it, the church has celebrate
the^ al, and knowledged them al, of one certayntie in truth, not as figures,
but really in deed, that is to say, as our body shall be in the general
resurrection regenerate in deed, so we believe we feed here of Christ's body in
deed. And as it is true, that Christ's body in deed is betrayed for us, so it
is true, that he gives us to eat his very body in deed. And as it is true,
that Christ was in earth and did celebrate this supper: So it is true that he
commanded it to be celebrate by us, till he come: And as it is true that Christ
was very God omnipote^t, and very man: So it is true that he could do that he
affirmed by his word himself to do, And as he is most sincere truth: So may
we be truly assured, that he would, and did as he said. And as it is true that
he is most iuss: so it is true that he assisteth the doing of his commandment
in the celebration of the holy supper. And therefore as he is auctor of this
most holy Sacrament of his precious body and blood: so is he the maker of it,
and is the invisible priest, who as Emissene says, Emissen
by his secret power, with his word, chau^geth the visible creatures, into
the substance of his body and blood. Wherein manne the visible priest and
ministre by order of the church, is only a dispenser of the mystery, doing and
saying, as the holy ghost has taught the church to be done and said. Finally
as we be taught by faith, all these to be true: so when wanton reason, (faith
being a sheep) goth about by curiosity to empayre any one of these truths,
the chain is broken, the lynkes sparkle abroad, and all is brought in
daungier to be scattered and scambled at. Truths have been abused, but yet
they be true, as they were before. For no man can make that is true false, and
abuse, is man's fault and not the things. Scripture in speech gives to man
as gods ministre, the name of that actio^, which God specially works in that
ministry. So it pleases God to honor the ministry of man in his church, by
whom it also pleases him to work effectually. And Christ said, they that
believe in me, shall do the works that I do, and greater. When all this honor
is given to man, as spiritually to regenerate, when the ministre says (I
Baptize the) and to remitte sin, to such as fall after, to be also a
ministre in consecration of Christ's most precious body, with the ministration
of other sacraments, benedictions, and prayour. If man should then wax
proud, and glory (as of himself) and extolle his own devotion in these
ministeries, such men should bewraye their own noughtie hypocrisye, and yet
thereby empayre not the very dignity of the ministry, ne the very true fruit
and effect thereof. And therefore when the church, by the ministre prays, that
the creatures of bread and wine, set on thaultare (as the book of commen
prayour in this realm has ordered) may be unto us the body and blood of our
savior Christ, we require then the celebration of the same supper, which
Christ made to his Apostels, for to be the continual memory of his death, with
all fruit and effect, such as the same had in the first institution, Wherefore
when the ministre pronounseth Christ's words, as spoken of his mouth, it is to
be believed, that Christ does now, as he did then. And it is to be noted, that
although in the sacrament of baptism, the ministre says: I baptize the, yet
in the celebratio^ of this supper, the words be spoken in Christ's person, as
saying himself: This is my body that is broken for you, which is not to us
only a memory, but an effectual memory with the very presence of Christ's body
and blood, our very sacrifice, who doing now as he did then, offreth himself
to his father, as he did the^, not to renew that offryng as though it were
imperfite, but continually to refreshe us, that daily fall and decay. And as
(S. John says) Christ is our advocate and entreats for us, or 1. Ioa^. 2.
pleads for us, not to supplye any want on gods behalf, but to releaue our
wantes in edificatio^, wherein the ministry of the church trauayleth to bring
manne to perfection in Christ, which Christ himself does assiste and
absolutely perform in his church his mystical body. Now when we have
Christ's body thus present in the celebration of the holy supper, and by
Christ's mouth present unto us, saying: This is my body which is betrayed for
you, Then have we Christ's body recommended unto us (as our sacrifice) and a
sacrifice propiciatory for all the sins of the world, being the only
sacrifice of Christ's church, the pure and clean sacrifice whereof the
prophet Malachie spoke, and Malach.
whereof the fathers in Christ's church have since the beginning contynually
written, the very true presence whereof, most constantely believed, has increased
from time to time such ceremonies as have been used in the celebration of that
supper, in which by Christ's own mouth we be ascertayned of his most glorious
death and passion and the self same body that suffered, delivered unto us in
mysterye to be eaten of us, and therefore so to be worshipped and acknowledged
of us as our very only sacrifice, in whom, by whom, and for whom our other
private gifts and sacrifices be acceptable and none otherwise. And therefore as
Christ declares in the supper himself an offryng and sacrifice for our sin,
offryng himself to his father as our mediator, and so therewith recommendeth to
his father the church his body, for which he suffers: so the church at the
same supper in their offryng of lauds and thanks, with such other gifts as
they have received from God, join the^ self with their head Christ,
presentyng and offryng him, as one, by whom, for whom, and in whom all that by
gods grace man can do well, is auaylable and acceptable, and without whom,
nothing by us done, can be pleasaunce in the sight of God, whereupon this
persuasion has been truly conceived, which is also in the book of commen
prayour, in the celebration of the holy supper retained, that it is very
profitable at that time when the memory of Christ's death is solemnized, to
remember with prayour all astates of the church, and to recommende the^ to God,
which S. Paul to Timothe seems 1. Tim. 2.
to require. At which time as Christ signifies unto us the certayntie of his
death, and gives us to be eaten, as it were in pledge, the same his precious
body that suffered: So we for declaration of our co^stde^ce in that death and
sacrifice, do kindly remember with thanks his special gifts, and charitably
remember the rest of the members of Christ's church with prayour, and as we
are able, should with our bodily goods remember at that time specially, to
releaue such as have need by poverty, And again, as Christ puts us in
remembrance of his great benefit: so we should thoroughly remember him for our
part, with the true confession of this mystery, wherein is recapitulate a
memorial of al gifts and misteryes, that God in Christ has wrought for us. In
the co^side ratio^ and estimation whereof, as there has been a fault in the
securite of such, as so their names were remembered in this holy time of memory,
they cared not how much they forgot themself: so there may be a fault in
such as neglectyng it, care not whither they be remembered there at al, and
therefore would have it nothing, but a plain eating and drinkyng. How much the
remembrance in prayour may avail no man man prescribe, but that it avails
every christian man must confess. Man may nothing and gate to his devotion. But
s. James said truly Iaco. 5.
(multum valet oration iusti assidua.) It is to be abhorred to have hypocrites
that counterfecte devotion, but true devotion is to be wisshed of God and
prayed for, which is Gods gift, not to obscure his glory, but to set it
forth, not that we should then trust in men's merits and prayers, but laud and
glorify God in the^ (Qui talem potestatem dedit hominibus) one to be judged
able to releue an other with his prayour, referryng all to proceed from God, by
the mediation of our savior and redemer Jesus Christ. I have tarried long in
this matter, to declare that for theffect of al celestial or worldly gifts to
be obtained of God in the celebratio^ of Christ's holy supper, when we call it
the communion: is now prayed for to be present, and is present, and with Gods
favor shall be obtained, if we devoutly, reverently, charitably, and quietly,
use and frequent the same without other Innouacions then thordre of the book
prescribes. Now to the last diffre^ce

They say, that Christ is corporally in many places The auctor.
at one time, affirming that his body is corporally and really present in as
many places as there be hosts consecrated. We say, that as the son
corporally is ever in heaven, and no where else, and yet by his operation and
virtue, the son is here in earth, by whose influe^ce and virtue all things
in the world be corporally regene rated, increased and grow to their perfect
state: So likewise our savior Christ bodily and corporally is in heaven,
sittyng at the righthande of his father, although spirituallye he has promised
to be present with us upon earth unto the worlds end. And when so ever two
or three be gathered together in his name, (...) is there in the mids among
them, by whose spiritual grace al godly men be first by him spiritually
regenerate and after increase and grow to their spiritual perfection in God,
spiritually by faith eating his flesh and drinkyng his blood, although the
same corporally be in heaven.

The true teaching is, that Christ's very The answer.
body is present under the form of bread, in as many hoostes as be consecrate,
in how many places soever the hoostes be consecrate, and is there really and
substancially, which words really and substa^cially be employed, when we say
truly-prese^t. The word corporally may have an ambiguite, and doublenes, in
respecre and relation. One is to the truth of the body present, and so it may
be said, Christ is corporally present in the Sacrament, but (if the word
corporally be referred to the manner of the presence) then we should say
Christ's body were present after a corporal manner, which we say not, but in a
spiritual manner, and therefore not locally, nor by manner of quantity, but in
such a manner as God only knows, and yet does us to understand by faith, the
truth of the very presence, excedyng our capacite to comprehend the manner
(how.) This is the very true teaching to affirm the truth of the presence of
Christ's very body in the Sacrament, even of the same body that suffered in
plain simple evident terms and words, such as can not by cauillatio^ be
mystaken and construed, so nere as possibly ma^s infirmity permits and
suffers. Now let us consider in what sort thauctor and his company which he
calls (we say) do understand the Sacrament, who go about to express the same
by a similitude of the creature of the son, which son (this auctor says)
is ever corporally in heaven, and no where else, and yet by operation and
virtue, is here in year: so Christ is corporally in heaven. etc. In this matter
of similitudes, it is to be taken for a truth undoubted, that there is no
creature by similitude, ne any language of man, able to express God and his
mysteries: For and things that be see^ or herd, might thoroughly express Gods
invisible mysteries, the nature whereof is, that they cannot thoroughly be
expressed, they were no mysteries, and yet it is true, that of things visible,
wherein God works wonderfully, there may be some resemblaunces, some shadows,
and as it were inductions, to make a man astomed, in co^sideracio^ of things
invisible, when he sees things visible so wonderfully wrought, and to have so
merueylous effects. And diverse good catholic devout men have by diverse
natural things gone about to open unto us the mysterye of the trinity,
partly by the son, as this auctor does in the Sacrament, partly by fire,
partly by the soul of man, by the Musicia^s science, the art, the touch,
with the players fyngers, and the sound of the cord, wherein, when wit has
all trauayled the matter yet remains dark, ne cannot be thoroughly set forth
by any similitude. But to the purpose of this similitude of the son, which
son this auctor says is only corporally in heaven and no where else, and in
the earth the operation and virtue of the son: So as by this auctours
supposal, the substance of the son should not be in earth: but only by
operacion and virtue, wherein (if this auctor erreth) he does the reader to
understand, that if he err in co^sideracion of natural things, it is no
merueyle though he err in heavenly things. For because I will not of my self
begin the co^tencio^ with this auctor, of the natural work of the-sonne, I
will bring forth the saying of Martine Bucer now reside^t at Cambridge, who
vehemently and for so much truly, affirms the true real presence of Christ's
body in the sacrament: For he says Christ said not, This Bucer.
is my spirit, this is my virtue, but this is my body: wherefore he says we
must believe Christ's body to be there, the same that did hang upon the cross,
our lord himself, which in some part to declare he uses the similitude of the
son, for his purpose, to prove christ's body present really and substa^cially in
the sacrament, where this author uses the same similitude to prove the body of
christ really abse^t. I will write in here as Bucer speaks it in latin,
expou^dyng the.xxvi. chap. of Mathewe, and the^ I will put the same in english.
Bucers words be these. Vt sol vere vno in loco coeli visibilis circumscriptus
Bucerus.
est, radijs tamen suis, presens vere and substantialiter exhibetur vbilibet
orbis. Ita Dominus etiam si circumscribatur vno loco coeli, arcani and diuini,
id est gloriae patris, verbo tamen suo, and sacris symbolis, vere and totus
ipse deus and homo praesens exhibetur in sacra coena, eoque substancialiter:
qua^ praesentia^ non minus certo agnoscit men's crede^s verbis hijs Dn^i and
symbolis, quam oculi vident and habe^t Solemn praesentem demonstratum and
exhibitum sua corporali luce. Res ista arcana est and noui Testamenti, res
fidei, no^ sunt igitur huc admitte^dae cogitationes de praesentatione cor
poris, quae constat ratione huius vitae etia^ im patibilis and flux. Verbo
Domini simpliciter inherendum est, and debet fides sensuum defectui praebere
supplementum. Which is thus much in English. As the son is truly placed
determinately in one place of the visible heaven, and yet is truly and
substantially present by mean of his beams elsewhere in the world abroad: So
(our Lord) although he be comprehended in one place of the secret and divine
heaven, that is to say, the glory of his father, yet never the less by his
word and holy tokens, he is exhibit present truly, whole God and man, and
therefore in substance in his holy supper, which presence man's mind geuyng
credit to his words and tokens with no less certainty acknowlegeth, then
our eyes see, and have the son present exhibit and showed with his corporal
light. This is a deep secret matter of the new testament, and a matter of
faith and therefore herin thoughts be not to be received of such a
presentation of the body, as consists in the manner of this life tra^sitorie
and subject to suffer. We must simply cleave to the word of Christ, and faith
must releue the defaulte of our senses. Thus has Bucer expressed his mind,
where unto because the similitude of the son does not answer in all parts, he
notes wisely in the^d, how this is a matter of faith, and therefore upon the
foundation of faith, we must speak of it; thereby to supply where our senses
fail. For the presence of Christ, and hole Christ God and man is true,
although we can not think of the manner (how). The chief cause why I bring in
Bucer is this, to show how in his judgment we have not only in earth, the
operation and virtue of the son, but also the substance of the son, by
mean of the son beams, which be of the same sustau^ce with the son, and
can not be divided in substance from it, and therefore we have in yerth the
substa^cial presence of the son, not only the operation and virtue. And
howsoever the son above in the distaunce appears unto us of an other sort,
yet the beams that touch the yerth, be of the same substance with it (as
clerks say) or at the lest as Bucer says, whom I never hard accounted
Papist, and yet for the real and substannciall presence of Christ's very body
in the Sacrament, writes pythely and plainly, and here encountreth this
auctor, with his similitude of the son directly, whereby may appear how
much soever Bucer is esteemed otherwise, he is not with this auctor regarded in
the truth of the Sacrament, which is one of the high mysteryes in our
religion. And this may su^^ice for that point of the similitude where this
auctor would have Christ noon otherwise present in the Sacrament th^n he
promised to be in thassemble of such as be gathered together in his name, it
is a plain abolition of the mysterye of the Sacrament, in the words whereof
Christ's humayne body is exhibit and made present with his very flesh to
feade us, and to that singular and special effect which in the other presence of
Christ in thassemble made in his name, is not spoken of, and it has no
apparaunce of lernyng in scriptures, to conclude under one consideration a
specialtie, and a generality. And therefore it was well answered of him that
said. If I could tell reason, there were no faith, If I could show the like, it
were not singular, which both be notable in this sacrament, where co^de^pnyng
all reason, good men both constantly believe that Christ sits on the right
hand of his father very god and man, and also without change of place, does
nevertheless make himself by his power present, both God and man under the
form of bread and wine, at the prayor of the church and by the ministry of
the same, to give life to such as with faith do accord^yng to his institution
in his holy supper wort^hely receive him, and to the condemnation of su(...)s
do unworthily presume to receive him there. For the worthy receiuyng of who^
we must come endued with christ, and clothed with him semely, in that garment,
to receive his most precious body and blood, Christ whole God and man, whereby
he then dwells in us more abundantly, confirmyng in us the effects of his
Passion and establishyng our hope of resurrection, then to enjoy the
regeneration of our body with a full redemption of body and soul, to live with
God in glory for ever. Thus I have perused these differences, (which well
considered) me think sufficient to take away and appeace all such difference,
as might be moved against the Sacrament, the faith whereof has ever prevailed
against such as have impugned it. And I have not read of any that has
written against it, but somewhat has against his entreprise in his writings
appeared, whereby to confirm it, or so evident untruths affirmed, as whereby
those that be as indifferent to the truth, as Salamon was, in the judgment of
the living child. May discern the very true mother from the other, (that is
to say) who plainly entende the true child to continue alive, and who could
be content to have it distroyed by division. God of his infinite mercy have
pytie on us, and grant the true faith of this holy mystery, (...)rmely to be
conceived in our understandings, and in one form of words, to be uttered and
preached, which in the book of common prayor is well termed, not distaunt from
the Catholic faith in my judgment. These differences end in the.xlviii. leef
in the second column I entende now to touch the further matter of the book
with the manner of the handelyng of it, and where an evident untruth is, there to
join an issue, and where slayte and craft is there to note it in the whole.

The matter of the book, from thence unto the.xlvi. liefe touching the being
of Christ in heaven and not in yerth in out of purpose superflous. The article
of our Creed that Christ ascended to heaven and sits on the right hand of
his father, has been and is most constantly believed of true Christen men,
which the true faith of Christ's real presence in the Sacrament does not touch
or empayre. Nor Christ being wholly God and man in the Sacrament is thereby
either out of heaven, or to be said conuersaunt in earth, because the
conversation is not yearthly, but spiritual, and godly, being thascensio^ of
Christ thend of his conversation in earth, and therefore all that reasonyng of
thauctor, is clearly void to trayuaile to prove that is not denied only for a
slight to make it seem as though it were denied.

After this, the auctor occupyeth a great number of leaves, that is to say,
from the.lvii. leef unto the.lxxiiii. to prove Christ's words (This is my
body) to be a figurative speech. Slight and shifte is used in the matter
without any effectual consecution, to him that is learned.

First thauctour says Christ called bread his body, Christ confessed bread his
body. To this is answered, Christ's calling is a making, as S. Paul says,
Vocat ea quae non Romans 4.
sunt tanq ea quae sint, He calls that be not as they were. And so his
calling (as Chrysostom and the greek commentaryes say is a making, which also
the Catechism teaches translate by Iustus Jonas in Germany, and after by this
auctor in English. Tertullian Tertullianus aduersus Marcione^. lib. 4.
Cyprianus de ce na domini.
says Christ made bread his body, and it is al one speech in Christ being God
declaring his ordinances, whither he use the word call, or make, for in his
mouth to call is to make. Cyprian says according hereunto how bread is by
Gods omnipotency made flesh, whereupon also this speech (bread is flesh) is
as much to say as made flesh, not that bread being bread is flesh, but that
was bread is flesh, by Gods omnipotency, and so this auctor entreatyng this
matter as he does, has partly opened the faith of tra^substanciation. For in
deed bread being bread is not Christ's body, but that was bread is now Christ's
bod^e because bread is made Christ's body and because Christ called bread his
body, which was in Christ to make bread his body. When Christ made water
wine, the spech is very propre to say, water is made wine. For after like manner
of spech, we say Christ iustifyeth a wicked manne, Christ saves sinners, and
the physitio^ has made the sick man whole, and such diet will make an whole
man sick. All these speches be propre and plain, so as construction, but not
made captious and Sophistical to join that was to that now is, forgettyng the
mean work. When Christ said (This is my body) there is no necessity that
the demonstration (this) should be referred to the outward visible matter, but
may be referred to the invisible substance. As in the speech of God the father
upon Christ in Baptism: This is my son. And here when this auctor takes his
recreatio^ to speak of the fainyng of the papists I shall join this Issue in
this place that he understands not An issue.
what he says, and if his knowledge be no better then is uttered here in the
pen, to be in this point clearly co^de^pned of ignorance.

In the.lx. leef thauctor entreats whither it be a plain spech of christ to
say (Eat and drink) speaking of his body and blood. I answer the spech of it
self is propre, co^mau^dyng them present to eat and drink that is proponed
for the^, and yet it is not requisite that the nature of man should with like
common effect work, in eating and drinkyng that heavenly meat and drink, as
it does in earthely and carnali meats. In this mysterye man does as Christ
ordained, that is to say, receive with his mouth, that is ordered to be received
with his mouth, grau^tyng it nevertheless of that dignity and estimation,
that Christ's words affirm, and whither he so does or no, Christ's ordinance
is as it is in the substance of it self alone, whereof no good man judges
carnally or grossly ne discusseth the vnfaythfall question (how) which he can
not co^ceyue, but leueth the depenes thereof, and does as he is bidden. This
misterye receives no man's thoughts. Christ's institution has a property in
it, which can not be discussed by man's sensual reason. Christ's words be
spirit and life, which this auctour wresteth with his own gloss, to exclud
the truth of the eating of Christ's flesh in his supper. And yet for a shifte,
if a man would join issue with him, puts to this spech the words
(grossly) and (carnally) which words in such a rude understanding, be terms
meter to express how dogs devour paunches, then to be inculked in speaking
of this high mysterye. Wherein I will make the issue with this auctour An issue.
that no Catholic teaching is so fourmed with such terms as though we
should eat Christ's most precious body grossly, carnaly, ioynyng those
words so together, For else (carnally) alone may have a good signification, as
Hilarye uses it, but contrariwise spekyng in the Catholic teaching of the
manner of Christ's presence, they call it a spiritual manner of presence, and yet
there is present by gods power the very true natural body and blood of Christ,
hole God and man, without leuyng his place in heaven, and in the holy supper
me^ use their mouths and teathe followyng Christ's commandment in the
receiuyng of that holy Sacrament, being in faith sufficiently instruct, that
they do not ne can not tear, consume or violate that most precious body and
blood but unworthily receiuyng it are cause of their own judgment and
condempnation. Now I will touch shortly, what may be said to the particular
auctorities brought in by this auctor. Origin is noted (among other writers
Origenes.
of the church) to draw the text to allegories, who does not thereby mean to
destroy the truth of the lettre, and therefore when he speaks of a figure,
says not there is a only figure, which exclusive (only) being away, (as it is
not found by any auctor Catholic, taught that the spech of Christ of the
eating of his flesh to be only a figure.)

This auctor has nothing auaunced his purpose. As for spiritual understanding
means not any destruction of the lettre where the same may stand with the
rule of our faith. All Christ's words be life and spirit containyng in the
lettre many times that is above our capacite, as specially in this place of the
eating of his flesh, to discuss the particularities of (how) and yet we must
believe to be true that Christ says (although we can not tell how:) For when
we go about to discuss of gods misterye (how,) then we fall from faith, and
wax carnal men, and would have Gods ways like ours.

Sainete Chrysostom declares himself Chrisosto.
how mysteries must be considered with inward eyes, which is a spiritual
understanding, whereby the truth of the mysterye is not, (as it were by a
figurative spech empayred) but with an humility of understanding in a certain
faith of the truth merueyled at. And here thauetor of the book uses a slight
to ioyn figuratively to spiritually, as though they were always all one,
which is not so.

Saint Augustine according to his rules Augustinus.
of a figurative and propre speech, takes this speech. Except ye eat. etc.
for a figurative speech, because it seems to command in the lettre carnally
understood, an heinous and a wicked thing to eat the flesh of a man, as
man's carnal imaginacion conceyueth it, as appeared by the Capharnites, who
murmured at it. And therefore because only faithful men can by faith
understand this mysterye of the eating of Christ's flesh in the Sacrament, in
which we eat not the carnal flesh of a commen man as the lettre sounds,
but the very spiritual flesh of Christ God and man as faith teaches: It is in
that respect well noted for a figurative speech, for that it has such a
sense in the lettre as is hidden from the unfaithful, So as the same lettre
being to faithful me^ spirit and life (who in humility of faith understand
the same) is to the unfaithful a figure, as conteinyng such a mystery as by the
outward bark of the lettre they understand not: upon which consideracio^ it
seems probable that the other fathers also signifiyng a great secrecy in this
mysterye of the sacrament, wherein is a work of god ineffable, such, as (the
Ethnike ears could not abide) theitermed it a figure, not thereby to diminish
the truth of the misterye, as the propre and special name of a figure does, but
by the name of a figure, reverently to cover so great a secrecy, apt only to
be understood of men beleuyng, and therefore the said fathers in some part of
their works, in plain words express and declare the truth of the mysterye
and the plain doctrine thereof according to the Catholic faith, and in the
other part, pass it over, with the name of a figure, which consideracio^ in
S. Augustins writings may be evidently gathered, for in some place no man more
plainly opens the substance of the Sacrament, then he does, speaking
expressly of the very body and blood of Christ contained in it, and yet
therewith in other places notes in those words a figure, not thereby to contrary
his other plain ^aiyngs and doctrine, but meaning by the word figure, to
signify a secret deep mystery hid de^ from carnal understanding: For avoiding
and expellyng of which carnalitie, he gives this doctrine here of this text:
Except ye eat. etc. which (as I said before) in the bare litteral sense
implies to carnal judgment, other carnal circunstances to atteyne the same
flesh to be eaten, which in that carnal sense can not be but by wickedness. But
what is this to the obeiyng of Christ's co^maundemet in th institucio^ of his
supper, when himself delivers his body and blood in these mysteryes, and
byddeth; Eat and drink, there can be no offense to do as Christ bids, and
therefore S. Augustins rule perteyneth not to Christ's supper, where in when
Christ wills us to use our mouth, we ought to dare do as he bids for that
is spiritual understanding to do as is commanded without carnal thought or
murmuryng in our sensual divise how it can be so. And saint Augustine in the
same place speaking de communica^do passionibus Christi, declares plainly he
means of the Sacrament.

Tertullian speaking of there present acio^ Tertul.
of Christ's very body, in which place he terms it (the same body) speaks
catholiquely in such phrase as S. Hierome speaks, and the^ Tertulila^ says
afterward as this auctor therein truly brings him forth, that Christ made
the bred his body, which bread was in the mouth of the pphet a figure of his
body. Wherefore it follows by Tertullians confession when Christ made the bread
his body, that Christ ended the figure, and made it the truth, making now his
body that was before the figure of his body. For if Christ did no more but make
it a figure still, the^ did he not make it his body as Tertullian himself says
he did. And Tertullian therefore, being red thus, as appears to be most
probable that (that is to say in Turtullian) should be only referred to the
explicacio^ of the first (this) as when Turtullia^ had alleged Christ's words
saying (this is my body) and puts to of his own (that is to say the figure
of my body,) these words (that is to say) should serve to declare the
demonstracion (this,) in this wise (that is to say) this, which the prophet
called the figure of my body, is now my body, and so Tertullian said before
that Christ had made bread his body, which bread was a figure of his body with
the prophet, and now ends in the very truth, being made his body by
conversion as (Cypria^ shows) of the nature of bread into his body.
Tertullian reasoned against the Marcionistes, and because a figure in the
prophet signifies a certain unfeigned truth of that is signified, seeing
Christ's body was figured by bread in the prophet Hieremy. It appears
Christ had a true body. And that the bread was of Christ approved for a figure,
he made it now his very body. And this may be said evidently to Tertullian,
who reasonyng against heretics uses the commodity of arguyng, and gives no
doctrine of the Sacrament to further this auctors purpose. And what advantage
should theretiques have of Tertullian if he should mean, that these words,
This is my body, had only this sense, This is the figure of my body, having
himself said before, that Christ made bread his body. If so plain speech to
make bread his body, contains no more certainty in understanding but the
figure of a body? why should not they say, that a body in Christ should ever be
spoken of a body in a figure, and so no certainty of any true body in Christ
by Tertullians words. This place of Tertullian is no secret point of
lernyng, and has been of Decolampadius and other alleged and by other
catholic men answered unto it, whereof this auctor may not think now as upon
a wranglyng argument, to satisfy a conjecture divised, thereby to confirm a
new teaching. Finally Tertullian terms it not an only figure (which this
auctor must prove) or else he does nothing.

Cyprian shall be touched after, when we Cypria^
speak of him again.

Chrysostom shall open himself hereafter Chrysosto. Hiero.
plainly.

Saint Hierome speaks here very pithely, vsyng the word (represent) which
signifies a true real exhibicio^: for saint Hierome speaks of the
representacion of the truth of Christ's body, which truth excludes an only
figure. For howsoever the visible matter of the sacrament be a fignre, the
invisible part is a truth: Which saincre Hierome says is here represented
(that is to say) made present, which only signification does not.

Saint Ambrose shall after declare himself, Ambrosius.
and it is not denied, but thauctors in spekyng of the Sacrament used these
words, sign, figure, similitude, toke^, but those speeches exclude not the
verity and truth of the body and blood of Christ, for no approved auctor has
this exclusive, to say an only sign, an only toke^, an only similitude, or an
only significacion which is the issue with this auctor.

As for Saint Augustine (ad Bonifacium) Augustinus.
thauctor shall perceive his fault at Martyn Bucers hand, who in his epistel
dedicatorye of his enarracions of the gospels, reherseth his mind of Saint
Augustine in this wise. Est (scribit diuus Augustinus) Secundu^ que^dam Bucerus.
modum sacramentum corporis Christi, corpus Christi, sacrame^tum sanguinis
Christi, sanguis Christi: At secundu^ quem modu^? Vt significet tantum corpus
and sanguine^ Domini absentia? Absit, Honorari enim and percipi in Symbolis
visibilibus corpus and sanguine^ Domini, ide^ passim scribit. These words of
Bucer may be thus englished. Saint Augustine writes, the Sacrament of the
body of Christ is after a certain manner, the body of Christ, the Sacrament of
the blood of Christ, the blood of Christ, But after what manner? that it should
signify only the body and blood abse^t? Absit. In no wise: For the same S.
Augustine writes in many places, the body and blood of Christ to be honored,
and to be received in those visible tokens. Thus says Bucer, who understands
not S. Augustine to say the sacrament of Christ's body, to be Christ's body
after a certain manner of spech, as this auctor does: nor S. Augustine has no
such words, but only (secundum quenda^ modu^) after a certain manner,
whereunto to put (of speech) is an addition more then truth required of
necessite. In these words of Bucer may appear his whole judgment concerning S.
Augustine, who affirms the very true presence of the thing signified in the
sacrament, which truth established in the matter, the calling it a sign, or a
token, a figure, a similitude, or a she wyng, makes no matter when we
understand the thing really present that is signified, Which and it were not in
deed in the Sacrament, why should it after Bucers true understanding of S.
Augustine be honored there? Arguyng upon men's speeches, may be without end,
and thauctor upon diverse respects speak of one thing diuersely. Therefore we
should resort to the pyth and knot of the matter, and see what they say in
expoundyng the special place, without contencio^, and not what they utter in
the heat of their disputacio^, ne to search the dark and ambiguous places,
wherewith to co^founde that they speak openly and plainly.

Thauctor brings in Theodoret a greek, Theodoretus.
whom to discuss particulerly, were long and tedious: one notable place there
is in him, which touches the point of the matter, which place Peter martyr
allegeth in greek, and then translateth it into Latin, not exactely as other
have done to the truth, but as he has done, I will write in here. And then
will I write the same translate into English by one that has translate Peter
Martyrs book, and then will I add the translation of this auctor, and finally,
the very truth of the Latin, as I will abide by, and join an issue with this
auctor in it, whereby thou reder shall perceive with what sincerity things be
handled.

Peter Martyr has of Theodorete this in Latin, which the same Theodorete in a
disputacion P. Martyr.
with an heretic, makes the Catholic man to say. Captusies ijs quae
tetenderas retibus. Neque enim post sanctificatione^, mystica symbola illa
propria sua natura egrediuntur, manent enim in priori sua substa^cia, and
figura, and specie, adeoque and videntur, and palpantur, quc^admodum and antea.
Intelliguntur autem quae facta sunt, and creduntur, and adora^tur, tanquam ea
existentia, quae creduntur. He that translated Peter martyr in English does
express these words thus. Lo thou art now caught in the same net which thou
had set to catch me in. For those same mystical signs, do not depart
away out of their own propre nature, after the halowyng of the^. For they
remain still in their former substance, and their former shape, and their
former kind, and are even as well seen and felt as they were before. But the
things that are done are understood and are believed, and are worshipped,
even as though they were in very deed, the things that are believed. This is
the common translation in to English in Peter martyrs book translated, which
this auctor does translate after his facion thus. Thou art taken with thine
own net, for the Sacrame^tal signs go not from their own nature after the
sanctification, but continue in their former substance, form and figure, and
be seen and touched as well as before. Yet in our minds we considre what they
be made, and dorepute and esteem them, and have them in reverence according to
the same things, that they be taken for. Thus is the translation of this
auctor. Mine English of this Latin is thus.

Thou art taken with the same nets thou did lay forth. For the mystical
tokens, after the sanctification go nota way, out of their propre nature. For
they abide in their former substance, shape and form, and so farfurth, that
they may be seen and felt as they might before. But they be understood that
they be made, and are believed, and are worshipped, as being the same things,
which be believed. This is my translation who in the first se^te^ce mean not
to vary from the other translations touching the remain of substance, shape,
form, or figure, I will use all those names. But in the second part where
Theodorete speaks of our belief what the tokens be made, and where he says
those tokens be worshipped, as being the same things, which be believed, thou
may see reader how this auctour flies the words (believe) and (worship)
which the common translation in english does plainly and truly express,
how soever that translator swarued by color of the word (ta^quam) which
there, after the greek, signifies the truth and not the similitude only, like
as in samet Paul (Vocat ea quae non sunt ta^quam sint) which is to make to be
in deed, not as though they were, And the greek is the (...) as it is here
(...). And it were an absurdity, to believe things otherwise the^ they be, as
though they were, and very Idolatry to worship that is not, as though it were
in deed. And therefore in these two words that they be believed, that they be
made and be worshipped, is declared by Theodorete, his faith of the very true
real presence of Christ's glorious flesh, whereunto the deite is unite: which
flesh. S. Augustine co^sona^tly to this Theodorete said, must be worshipped
before it be received. The word worshippyng put here in English is to
express the word (Adora^tur) put by Peter in latin, signifiyng adoring, being
the verb in greek of such signifycation, as is used to express godly
worship with bowyng of the knee. Now reader, what should I say by this
auctor, that conueyeth these two words, of beleuyng, and worshippyng, and instead of the^, comes in with reverence, taking, reputyng, and estemyng:
whereof thou may esteem how this place of Theodorete pinched this auctor, who
could not but se that adoryng of the. Sacrament signifies the presence of the
body of Christ to be adored, which else were an absurdity, and therefore
thauctor took pain to ease it with other words of calling, beleuyng,
reputyng, and estemyng, and for Adoration, Reverence. Consider what praise this
auctor gives Theodorete, which praise condempneth this auctor sore. For
Theodorete in his doctrine would have us believe the mystery, and adore the
sacrament: where this auctor after in his doctrine professes, there is nothing
to be worshipped at al. If one should now say to me, yeasyr, but this
Theodorete seems to conde^pne transubstantiation, because he speaks so of the
bread, Thereunto shall be answered when I speak of transubstanciation, which
shall be the last. For before the truth of the presence of the substance of
Christ's body may appear, what should we talk of transubstanciation, I will
travail no more in Theodoret, but leave it to thy judgment reader, what
credit this auctor ought to have that ha^dleth the matter after this sort.

As for the use of figurative speches to be accustumed in scripture is not
denied. But Philip Melancton in an epistel to Decolampadius Melancton.
of the Sacrement, gives one good note of observation in difference between
the speches in gods ordinances and commandments, and otherwise. For if in
thundersta^dyng of gods ordinances and commandments, figures may be often
received: truth shall by allegories be shortly subverted and all our religion
reduced to significations. There is no speech so plain and simple, but it
has son piece of a figurative speech, but such as expresses the common
plain understanding, and then the common use of the figure causes it to be
taken as a common propre speech, As these speches, drink up this cup or eat
this dishe, is in deed a figurative speech, but by custume made so common that
it is reputed the plain spech, because it has but one only understanding
commonly received. And when Christ said: This cup is the new testament: the
propre speech thereof in lettre, has an absurdite in reason and faith also. But
when Christ said, This is my body, although the truth of the litteral sense
has an absurdity in carnal reason, yet has it no absurdity in humilite of
faith nor repugneth not to any other truth of scripture. And seeing it is a
singular miracle of Christ whereby to exercise us in the faith, understood as
the plain words signify in their propre sense, there can no reasonyng be
made of other figurative speches to make this to be their fellow and like unto
them. No man denies the use of figurative speeches in Christ's supper, but
such as be equal with plain propre spech, or be expounded by other
Evangelists in plain speech.

In the.lxxiiii. leef this auctor goth about to give a general solution to all
that may be said of Christ's being in earth, in heaven, or the. Sacrament, and
gives instructions how these words of Christ's divine nature figuratively,
spiritually, really, carnally, corpoporally, may be placed, and thus he says:
Christ in his divine nature may be said to be in the earth figuratively in the
sacrament, spiritually in the man that receives, but really, carnally,
corporally, only in heaven. Let us consider the placyng of these terms. When
we say christis in his divine nature every where, is he not also really every
where, according to the true essence of his godhed in deed every where, that is
to say, not in fansye nor imagination, but verily, truly, and therefore really
as we believe so in deed every where? And when Christ is spiritually in good
men by grace, is not Christ in them really by grace? but in fansye and
imagination? And therefore whatsoever this auctor says the word really may not
have such restraint, to be referred only to heaven, onles the auctor would deny
the substance of the godhed, which as it co^prehendeth all being
inco^prehensible, and is every where without limitatio^ of place, so as it is,
truly it is, in deed is, and therefore really is, and therefore of Christ must be
said, whersouer he is in his divine nature by power or grace, he is there
really, whither we speak of heaven or earth. As for the terms carnally, and
corporaly, as this auctor seems to use the^, in other places of his book, to
express the manner of presence of the humayne nature in Christ, I marvel by
what scripture he will prove that Christ's body is so carnally and corporally in
heaven, we be assured by faith grounded upon the scriptures of the truth of the
being of Christ's flesh and body there, and the same to be a true flesh, and
a true body, but yet in such sense as this auctor uses the terms carnai and
corporal against the Sacrament, to implie a grossenes, he can not so attribute
those terms to Christ's body in heaven. S. Augustine after the gross Augu. de
ciui tate dei Grego. Nazia^zenus de baptismo.
sense of carnally, says: Christ reigns not carnally in heaven. And Gregory
Nazia^zen says: Although Christ shall come in the last day to judge, so as he
shall be seen, yet there is in him no grossenes he says. And refers the manner
of his being to his knowledge only. And our resurrection saint Augustine says,
although it shall be of our true flesh: yet it shall not be carnally. And when
this auctour has diffamed as it were the terms carnally, and corporally, as
terms of grossenes, to whom he used always to put as an aduersatiue, the
term spiritually, as thought carnally, and spiritually might not agree in one.
Now he would for all that, place them in heaven, where is no carnalitie, but
all the manner of being, spiritual, where is no grossenes at all, the secrecy
of the manner of which life, is hidden from us, and such as eye has not seen,
or ear herd, or ascended in to the heart and thought of man. I know these
terms carnally and corporally may have a good understanding out of the mouth
of him that had not diffamed them with grossenes or made them adversaries to
spiritual, and a man may say Christ is corporally in heaven, because the
truth of his body is there, and carnally in heaven, because his flesh is
truly there, but in this understanding both the words carnally and
corporally, may be copled with the word spiritually, which is against this
auctors teaching who appoints the word spiritually to be spoken of Christ's
presence in the man that received the sacrament worthily, which speech I do not
disalowe, but as Christ is spiritually in the man that does receive worthily
the Sacrament: So is he in him spiritually before hereceyue, orels he can not
receive worthily as I have before said. And by this appears how this auctor
to frame his general solution has used neither of the terms, really,
carnally, corporally, or spiritually in a convenient order, but has in his
distribution mysused them notably. For Christ in his divine nature is really
every where, and in his humayne nature is carnally and corporally as these
words signify substance of flesh and body continually in heaven to the
day of judgment: and nevertheless after that signification present in the
Sacrament also. And in those terms in that signification the fathers have
spoken of the Sacrament as in the particular solutions to (...)tours hereafter
shall appear. Mary as touching the use of the word figuratively, to say that
Christ is figuratively in the bread and wine, is a saying which this aucro^^
has not proved at all, but is a doctrine before this diverse times reproved
and now by this auctour in England renewed.

Let us now consider what particular answers this auctor diuiseth to make to
the fathers of the church, and first what he says to saint Elements Epistel,
his handelyng whereof is worthy to be noted.

First, he says the Epistel is not Clementes but feigned as he says many other
things Clement.
be for their purpose (he says,) which solution is short and may be sone
learned of noughty men and noughtly applied further as they list: But this I
may say, if this Epistel were feigned of the Bapistes, then do they show
themself fools, that could feign no better but so as this auctor might of
their feigned Epistell gather three notes against them. This auctors notes be
these. First that the bread in the sacrament is called the Lords body, and that
the broken bread be called the pieces and fragmentes of the Lords body. Mark
well reader this note that speaks so much of bread, where the words of the
Epistell, in the part here alleged name no bread at all. If this auctor has
red so much mention of bread in any other part of the Epistel, why brings he
not that forth to fortify his note? I have red after in the same Epistel
(panes sanctuarij) but they would not help this auctors note, and yet for the
other matter joined with them, they would slaundre an other way. And therefore
feyng this auctor has left them out, I will go no further the^ is here
alleged. The calling of bread by enunciation, for a name is not material,
because it signifies that was, but in that is here alleged, is no mention of
bread to prove the note, and to faithful men, the words of the Epistel,
reverently express the remain of the mysteryes, in which when many hosts be
offered in the aultare, according to the multitude that should communicate,
those many hosts, after consecracion, be not many bodies of Christ, but of
many breades one body of Christ, and yet as we teach in England now, in the
book of como^prayour, in every part of that is broken, is the hole body of
our savior Christ. Man's words can not suffice to express gods mysteryes,
nor cannot vttre them so, as froward reason shall not find matter to wrangle.
And yet, to stay reason, may suffice, that as in one loofe of bread broken,
every piece broken, is a piece of that bread, and every piece of the bread
broken, is in it self a whole piece of bread, for every piece has an hole
substance of bread in it. So we truly speak of the hooste consecrate, to
avoid the fancy of multiplicacio^ of Christ's body, which in all the hosts,
and all parts of the hoostes is but one, not broken, nor distribute by pieces,
and yet in a spech to tell, and signify that is broken, called in name the
leaving pieces of the body, portion of the body, residue of the body, in which
neuerthlesse, each one piece is christ's hole body. So as this spech having a
figure, has it of necessity, to avoid the absurdity, whereby to signify a
multitude of bodies, which is not so, and the sou^de of the spech christen
ears do abhor. But this I ask, where is the matter of this auctors note,
that bread is called Christ's body? where, there is no word of bread, in the
words alleged, and if there were, as there is not, it were worthy no note at
all. For that name is not abhorred, and the catholic faith teaches that the
fractio^ is in the outward sign, and not in the body of Christ, inuisibly
present, and signified, so to be present by that visible sign? The second
note of this auctor is, touching reseruyng which Clement might seem to deny,
because he ordered the remain, to be received of the clerks, thinkyng so best:
not declaryng expressly that nothing might be reserved, to the use of the^ that
be abset. The contrary whereof, appears by Iustine the Martyr, who testifies a
reseruacio^ Justinius apol. ij.
to be sent to the^ that were sick, who, and they dwell far from the church
(as they do in su^me places) it may by chance in the way, or trouble in the
sick man, tarry till the morning, or it be received. And Cyril writech
expressly, Cyrillus ad Calosiriu^.
that in case it so does, the mystical benedictio^ (by which terms he calls
the sacrament) remains still in force. When this auctor finds fault, at
ha^gyng up of the sacrament, he blames only his own country and the Isles
hereabout, which fault, linnehod, after he had traueyled other cou^tryes
found here, being the manner of custodye in reseruacio^ otherwise used the^ in
other parties. But one thing, this auctor should have noted of Cleme^ts words,
when he spaketh of fearyng and tre^blyng, which and the bread were never the
holyer, as this auctor teaches, and but only a signification, why should any
man fear or tremble, more in their presence, the^ he does when he hears of
Christ's supper, the gospel red, or himself, or an other saying his Creed, which
in words signify as much as the bread does, if it be but a significacio^? And
peter martyr says, that words signify Peter Marty^
more clearly, then these signs do, and says further in his disputacio^ with
Chedsay, that we receive the body of Christ, no less by words, then by the
Sacramental signs, which teaching (if it were true) why should this
Sacrament be trembled at? But because this auctor notes the Epistel of Clement
to be feigned, I will not make with him any fou^dacion of it, but note to the
reader the third note, gathered by this auctor of Clementes words, which
is, that Priests ought not to receive alone, which the words of the pistle
prove not. It shows in deed what was done, and how the feast is in deed
prepared for the people, as well as the Priest. And I never read any thing of
order in law or ceremony, for biddyng the people to communicate with the
Priest, but all the old prayours and ceremonies sounded as the people did
communicate with the Priest. And when the people is prepared for, and then come
not, but fearyng and tremblyng forbere to come, that then the Priest might not
receive his part alone, the words of this Epistel show not. And Clement in
that he speaks so of leuynges, seems to think of that case of disapointment
of the people that should comme, prouydyng in that case the clerks to receive
the residue, whereby should appear (if there were not store of clerks) but only
one clerk, as some poor churches have no mo, then a man might rather make a
note of Cleme^tes mind, that in that case one Priest might receive alone, and
so upon a chance keep the feast alone. But what soener we may gather, that
note of this auctour remains unproven: that the Priest ought not to receive
alone. And here I dare therefore join an issue with this auctor, that none of
An issue.
his three feigned notes is grounded of any words of this, that he notes a
feigned Epistel, taking the only words that he allegeth here. This auctor upon
occasion of this Epistel, which he calls feigned, speaks more reverently of
the Sacrament then he does in other places, which me think worthy to be noted
of me. Here he says that very Christ himself is not only represe^ted, but also
spiritually given unto us in this table, for so I understand the word
(wherein.) And then if very Christ himself be represented and given in the
table, the auctor means not the material table, but by the word table, the
meat upon the table, as the word Mensa, a table does signify in the.xvi. of
thactes, and the.x. to the Corinthi. Acts. 16 i. Co. 10.
Now if very Christ himself be given in the meat, the^ is he present in the
meat to be given: So as by this teaching very Christ himself is not only
figuratively in the table, that is to say, the meat of the table, which this
auctor now calls representyng, but is also spiritually given in the table,
as these words sound to me. But whither (this auctor will say) very Christ
himself is given spiritually in the meat, or by the meat, or with the meat,
what scripture has he toproue that, he says if the words of christ be only a
figurative spech and the bread only signify Christ's body? For if the words,
of the institucio^ be but in figure, man cannot add of his divise, anyother
substance or effect, the^ the words of christ purport, and so this supper,
after this auctors teaching, in other places of his book, where hewould have it
but a signification, shall be a bare memory of christsdeath, and signify oniy
such co^municacio^ of Christ, as we have otherwise by faith in that benefit of
his passion, without any special communication of the substance of his flesh in
this Sacrament, being the same only a figure, if it were true, that this
auctor, would persuade in the conclusion of this book, although by the way he
says otherwise, for fear percase, and tre^bling, that he co^ceiueth eue^ of an
Epistle, which him self says is feigned.

This auctor says he passes over Ignatius Ignatius Ireneus.
and ireneus, and why? because they make nothing (he says) for the papists
purposed with the word papist thauctor plaieth at his pleasure. But it shall be
evident, that Irene does plainly co^fou^de this auctors purpose, in the denial
of the true presence of Christ's very flesh in the sa crame^t: who although he
use not the words real, and substa^cial, yet he does effectually co^pre he^d
in his speech of the sacrament, the virtue, and sire^ght of those words. And
for the truth of the sacrament, is Ireneus specially alleged, in so much, as
Melanghton, when he writes to ^ip. (...)ict.
Occola^padius, that he will allege none, but such as speak plainly, he
allegeth Ireneus for one, as appears by his said Epistle to Oecola^padius. And
Oecola^padius him self is not trubled so much with answeryng any other to shape
any manner of euasio^, as to answer Ireneus, in who^ he notably stu^bleth. And
Peter Martyr, in his work, grants Irene, to be specially alleged, to who^
(when he goes about to answer) a man may evidently see how he masketh him
self. And this auctor brings in Cleme^ts epistel, of which no great count is
made, although it be not co^te^pned, and passes over ireneus, that speaks
evidently in the matter, and was as old as Clement or not much yo^ger. And
because, Ignatius was of that age, and is alleged by Theodorete, to have written
i^ his Epistle (ad Theodorete Dialogo.iij.
Smirne^ses) whereof may appear his faith of the mystery of the Sacrament, it
shall serve to good purpose, towrite i^ the words of the same ignatius hervpo^
the credit of the said Theodorer, who^ this auctor so much co^me^deth, the
words of ignatius be these, Eucharistias and oblationes no^ admittu^t, quod no^
confitea^tur, eucharistia^ esse carne^ seruatoris nostri Jesus Christi, q^ pro
peccatis nostris, passa est, quam pater sua benignitate suscitauit. Which
words, be thus much i^ English They do not admit (Eucharistias and oblatio^s)
be cause they do not confess, Eucharistia^, to be the flesh of our savior
jesus Christ: which flesh sufred for our sines, which flesh, the the father by
his beniguitie, has stirred up. These be Ignatiue words, which I have not
thoroughly englished, because the word (Eucharistia) ca^ not be well Englished,
being a word of mystery, and (as Ireneus opens both the parts of the
sacrament, heavenly and earthly, visible and invisible. But in that, ignatius
opens his faith thus as he takes Eucharistia, to be the flesh of our savior
Christ that suffered for us, he declares the sense of Christ's words: this is
my body: not to be figurative only, but to express the truth of the very flesh
there given, and therefore (Ignatius says) Eucharistia, is the flesh of our
savior Christ, the same that suffered, and the same that rose again, which words
of Ignatius so pithely open the matter, as they declare. therewith that faith
also of Theodorete that does allege him, so as if this auctor would make so
absolute a work, as to peruscal the fathers sayings: he should not thus lepe
over Ignatius, nor Irene neither, as I have before declared. But this is a
color of Rhethorike called (reiectio^) of that is hard to answer, and is her a
pretty shift or slaight, whereby (thou reader) may consider how this matter is
handled.

As touching Dionisius, a wise reader may Dionysius.
without any note of mine, se how this auctor is troubled in him, and calls
for aid, the help of him that made the greek commentaries upon dionisius, and
pledeth therewith the form of the words really, corporally, se^sibly, and
naturally whereof two, that is to say, really and se^sibly, the old auctors in
sillables used not, for so much as I have red, but corporally and naturaly they
used, spekyng of this sacrament. This dionise spoke of this mystery after the
dignity of it, not contendyng with any other for the truth of it, as we do
now: but extollynge it, as a merueilous high mystery, which if the bread be
never the holier, and were only a signification, as (this auctor teaches,)
were no high mystery at all. As for the things of the Sacrament to be in
heaven, the church teaches so, and yet the same things be in deed present in
the Sacrament also, which is a mystery so deape and dark from man's natural
capacity, as is only to be believed supernaturally, without askyng of the
question (how) whereof. S. Chrysostom makethe an Chrysostomus de Sacerdo. li.
3.
exclamation in this wise.

O great been volence of God toward us, he that sits above with the
father, at the same hour, is holde^ here with the hands of all men, and
gives himself to them that will clapse and embrace him. Thus says
Chrysostom co^fessyng to be above, and here the same things at ones, not
only in men's breasts, but hands also, to declare the inward work of God, in
the substance of the visible Sacrament, whereby Christ is present in the mids
of our senses, and so may be called sensibly present, although man's se^ces
can not comprehend and feale, or taste of him in their propre nature. But as
for this dionise does without argument declare his faith in thadoration he
makes of this Sacrament, which is openly testified in his works, so as we
nedde not doubt what his faith was. As for (this auctors notes) be descaunt
voluntary, without the tenor part, being be like asshamed to allege the text
it self le^t his.iii. notes might seem feigned without ground, as before in
Saint Clementes epistel, and therefore I wyllnot truble the reader with them.

Of Tertullian, I have spoken before, and Ter^ullian.
so has this auctor also, and forgotten here one notable thing in Tertullia^,
where Tertullia^ sai^th, that Christ made the bread his body, not only called
it so, as may appear by Tertullianes words reported, by this auctor before.
This note, that I make now of. Tertulia^, makethe against this auctors
purpose: but yet, it makethe with the truth which (this auctor) should not
impugn. The second note gathered of Tertulian by this auctor, is not true,
for Christ called it his body, and made it his body, as Tertullian says. And
the third note of this auctor is in co^trauersy of readyng, and must be so
understood, as may agree with the rest of Tertullians saynges, which after
my readyng, does evidently prove, and at the lest does not improve the
Catholic doctrine of Christ's church universally received, although it
improueth that which (this auctor) calls here our Catholic doctrine, most
impudently, and untruly reportynge the same.

Origens words be very plain and meaning Origenes.
also, which speak of manifestation and exhibition, which be two things to
be verified, three ways in our religion, that is to say, in the word and re
generation, and the Sacrament of bread and wine (as this auctor ter(...)ithe
it) which Origene speaks not so, but ^hus (the flesh of the word of god) not
mea^yng in every of these after one sort, but after the truth of Scripture in
each of them. Christ in his word is manifested and exhibited unto us, and by
faieth (that is of hearing) dwells in us spirituallye, for so we have his
spirit. Of Baptism. S. Paul says as manny as be Baptized be clade in
Christ. Now in the Sacreme^t of bread and wine (by Orige^s rule) Christ should
be manifestie and exhibitie unto us after the scriptures, So as the Sacreme^t
of bread and wine, should not only signify Christ (that is to say) preach
him, but also exhibit him se^sible (as Origenes words be reaported) here to
be. so as Christ's words (this is my body) should be wordsnot of figure and
sheuyng, but of exhibityng Christ's body unto us, and sensibly, as this auctor
allegeth him, which should signify to be received with our moves, as christ
commanded, when he said, take eat, etc. diversely from the other two ways, in
which by Christ's spirit, we be made participaunt, of the benefit of his
passion wroght in his manhood. But in this Sacrament, we be made participaunt,
of his Godhode, by his humanite exhibit unto us for fode, and so in this
mystery, we receive him man and god, and in the other, by mean of his god head,
be participat, of the effect of his passion suffered in his manhead. In this
Sacrament Christ's manhead is represe^ted and truly present, where unto the
godhead is most certainly united, whereby we receive a pledge of the
regeneration of our flesh, to be in the general resurrection spiritual with
our soul, as we have been in Baptism made spiritual by regeneration of the
soul, which in the full redemption of our bodies, shall be made perfect. And
therefore (this auctor) may not compare Baptism, with the Sacrament thoroughly,
in which Baptism, Christ's manhood is not really present (although the
virtue and effect of his most precious blood be there) but the truth of the
mystery of this Sacrament is to have Christ's body his flesh and blood
exhibited, whereunto, eating and drinkyng is by Christ in his supper
appropriate, In which supper, Christ said: (This is my body) which Bucer
notes, and that Christ said not, this is my sprit, this is my virtue wherefore
after, Origens teaching, if Christ be not only manifested, but also exhibitie
se^sibly in the Sacrament: then is he in the Sacrament in deed (that is to say)
really, and then is he there substanetally, because the substance of the body
is there, and is there corporally al so, because the very body is there, and
naturall^, because the natural body is there, not understanding corporally and
naturally, in the manner of presence, nor sensibly another. For then were the
manner of presence with in man's capacity, and that is false, and therefore the
Catholic teaching is, that the manner of Christ's presence in the Sacrament,
is spiri^ual and supernatural, not corporal, not car(...)all, not natural, not
sensible, not percepti(...)le, but only spiritual, the (how) and manner
whereof, God knows, and we assured by his word know only the truth to be
so that it is there in deed, and therefore really to be also received with our
hands and months, and so se^sibly there, the body that suffered, and therefore
his natural body there, the body of very flesh, and therefore his carnal body,
the body truly, and therefore his corporal body there. But as for the manner of
presence, that is only spiritual, as I said before, and here in the inculcation
of these words, I am tedious (to a learned reader) but yet this auctor enforeth
me thereunto, who with these words carnally, corporally, grossly, sensibly,
naturally, appliyng the^ to the manner of presence, does craftily carry away
the reader from the simplicity of his faith, and by such absurdities, as these
words grossly understood importe, astonneth the simple reader in
consideration of the matter, and uses these words, as dust before their eyes,
which to wipe away, I am enforced to repete thu^derstandyng of these words
oftener the^ else were necessary, these things well considered, no man does
more plainly confound this auctor then this saying of Origene, as he allegeth
it, whatsoever other sentencies he would pyke out of Origene, when he uses
liberty of allegories to make him seem to say otherwise, and as I have
declared before, to understand Christ's words spiritually, is to understand
them, as the spirit of God has taught the church, and to esteem gods
mysteries most true in the substance of the thing so to be, although the
manner excedeth our capacites, which is a spiritual understanding of the same,
and here also this auctor puts in for spiritually, figuratively, to deceive
the reader.

As touching Cyprta^ (this auctor) makes an exposition of his own divise,
which he Cypria nus.
would have taken for an answer unto him. Where as Cyprian of all other, like
as he is ancient within. 25. years of Christ: so did he write very openly in
the matter, and therefore Mela^thon in his Epistle, to Occolampadius did those
him for one, whose words in Melanthon.
thaffirmation of Christ's true presence in the Sacrament had no ambiguitie?
And like judgment, does Hippinus in his book before Hippinus
alleged give of Cyprianus faith in the Sacrament, which two, I allege to
contrauaile the judgment of this auctor, who speaks of his own head, as it
likes him, playnge, with the words gross, and carnal, and vsyng the word
represent as though it expressed a figure only. Hippinus in the said book
allegeth Cyprian to say. libro. 3. ad quirinum, Cyprianus. lib. 3. ad Quirinum.
that the body of our lord is our sacrifice in flesh, meaning as hippinus
says, (Eucharistiam), wherein S. Augustine, as hippinus says further in the
prayor for his mother, speaking of the bread and wine of Eucharistia, says
that in it is dispensed the holy host and sacrifice, whereby was cancelled the
byl obligatory that was against us, and further hippinus says, that the old
men called the bread and wine of our Lords supper, a sacrifice an host and
oblatio^, for that specially, because they believed and taught the true body of
Christ and his true blood to be distribute in the bread and wine of
Eucharistia, and as Augustinus. Hippinus
S. Augustine says ad Ianuarium, to enter in and be received with the mouth
of them that eat. These be hippinus very words, who because he is I think
in this auctors opinion taken for no Papist, I rather speak in his words then
mine own, whom in an other part of this work, this auctor does as it were
for charity by name, slander to be a Papiste, wherefore the said hippinus
words shall be as I think more weighty to oppress this auctors talk the^ mine
be, and therefore how soever this auctor handlethe before the words of saint
Cyprian (De vuctione Chrismatis) and the word (showing) out of epistels: yet
the same Cyprians faith appears so certain otherwise as those places shall
need no further answer of me, he^ having brought forth the judgment of
Hippinus and Melancton, how they understand saint Cyprians faith, which thou
reader ought to regard more then the assertion of this auctor, specially
when thou have read how he has handled Hilarie, Cyril, Theophilact, and
Damassene, as I shall hereafter touch. This answer to hilarie in the.lxxviii.
leef, requires a plain precise Issue, worthy to be tried and apparaunt at
hand. Thallegatio^ An issue.
of Hilarie touches specially me, who do say and mainteyne that I cited
Hilarie truly (as the copy did serve) and did translate him truly in English
after the same words in latin. This is one Issue which I qualifye with a
coppie, because I have Hilarie now better correct, which better correction
sits forth more lively the truth the^ the other did, and therefore that I did
translate was not so much to thaduauntage of that I alleged Hilarie for, as is
that in the book that I have now better correct. Hilaries words in the book
newly corrected be these. Si enim vere verbum caro factum est, et nos vere
Verbum Hilari'.
carnem cibo dominico sumimus, quomodo non naturaliter manner in nobis
existimandus est? qui and naturam carnis nostrae ia^ in^eparabilem sibi homo
natus assumpsit, and naturam carnis suae ad naturam eternitatis, sub sacrame^to
nobis communicandoe carnis admiscuit. Ita enim omnes vnum sumus, quia and in
christo pater est and christus in nobis est. Quisquis ergo naturaliter patrem
in christo negabit, neget prius non naturaliter vel se in christo, vel christum
Sibi inesse, quia in christo pater, and christus in nobis vnum in iis esse nos
faciunt. Si vere igitur, carnem corporis nostri christus assumpsit, and vere
homo ille, qui ex maria natus fuit, Christus est, nosque vere sub mysterio
carnem corporis sui sumimus, and per hoc vnum erimus, quia pater in eo est, and
ille in nobis: quomodo voluntatis vnitas asseritur, cum naturalis per
Sacramentum proprietas perfectae sacrame^tum sit vnitatis? My translation is
this. If the word was made verily flesh, and we verily receive the word
being flesh in our lords meat, how shall not Christ be thought to dwell
naturally in us, who being borne man, has taken unto him the nature of our
flesh that can not be severed, and has put together the nature of his flesh
to the nature of his eternity, under the Sacrament of the co^muni^ of his
flesh unto us, for so we be all one, because the father is in Christ, and
Christ in us. Wherefore who soever will deuye the father to be naturally in
Christ, he must (...) first either him self to be naturally in Christ, or
Christ not to be naturally in him, for the being of the father in Christ and
the being of Christ in us, makes us to be one in them. And therefore if Christ
has taken verily the flesh of our body, and the man that was borne of the
virgin Marie is verily Christ, and also we verily receive under a mystery the
flesh of his body, by means wereof we shall be one, for the father is in
Christ and Christ in us: how shall that be called the unity of will, when
the natural propriety brought to pass by the Sacrement, is the Sacrament of
perfect unity?

This translation differs from mine other, whereat this auctor finds
fault, but wherein? the word (Vero) was in the other copy an adjective, and
I joined it with (Mysterio) and therefore said the true mystery, which word
(mystery) neded no such adjective, (true), for every mystery is true of it
self. But to say as Hilarie truly correct says, that we receive under the
mystery, truly, the flesh of Christ's body that word (truly) so placed,
sits furthe lively the real presence, and substantial presence, of that is
received, and repeteth again the same that was before said, to the more
veheme^cie of it. So as this rorrection is better then my first copy, and
according to this, correction is Hilarious alleged by Mela^gton to
Decola^padius, for the same purpose I allege him. An other alteration in the
translation (thou scist reader) in the word (Perfectae) which in my copy was
(Perfecta) and so was joined to (Proprictas,) which now in the genetiue case
joined to (Vnitatis) gives an excellent sense to the dignity of the
Sacrament, how the natural propriety by the Sacrament, is a Sacrament of
perfect vnitre, so as the pecfite unity of us with Christ, is to have his
flesh in us and to have Christ bodily and naturally dwelling in us, by his
manhood, as he dwells in us spiritually by his god head, and now I speak in
such phrase as Hilarie and Cyrill speak, and use the words as they use the^.
Whatsoever this auctor says, as I will justify by their plain words. And so
I join now with this auctor an Issue, An issue.
that I have not peruerlly used tha^ legation of Hilarie, but alleged him as
one that speaks most clearly of this matter, which Hilarie in his. 8. book
(de Trinitate) en^^eath how many diverse ways we be one in christ, among which
he acco^pteth faith for one The^ he comes to the unity in Baptism, where he
handles the matter above some capacities, and because there is but one
Baptism, and all that be baptized be so regenerate in one dispensation, and do
the same thing, and be one in one, they that be one by the same thing, be as
he says, in nature one. From that unity in Baptism he comes to declare
our unity with Christ in flesh, which he callethe the Sacrament of perfect
unity, declarynge how it is when Christ who took truly our flesh mortal,
in the virgyns womb deliuerethe us the same flesh glorified truly to be
communicate with our flesh, whereby as we be naturally in Christ, so Christ is
naturally in us, and when this is brought to pass, the^ is the unity between
Christ and us perfited, for as Christ is naturally in the father of the same
essence, by the divine nature, and God the father naturally in Christ his son
very God of the same essence in the divine nature: So we be naturally in Christ
by our natural flesh, which he took in the virgyns womb, and he naturally in
us, by the same flesh in him glorified, and given to us, and received of us in
the Sacrement. For Hilarie says in plain words, how Christ's very flesh,
Hilarious.
and Christ's very blood received and dronken (Accepta and hausta) bring this
to pass. And it is notable, how Hilarie compares together the (truly) in
Christ's taking of our flesh in the virgyns womb, with the (truly) of our
taking of his flesh (In cibo dn^ico) in our lords meat, by which words, he
expresses the Sacrament, and after reproves those that said: we were only
unity by obedience, and will of religion to Christ, and by him so to the
father, as though, by the Sacrement of flesh and blood, no propriety of
natural communion were given unto us, whereas both by the honor given unto us,
we be the sons of god, and by the son dwelling carnally in us, and we
being corporally, and inseparably unity in him, the mystery of true and
natural unity is to be preached. These be Hilaries words, for this latter
part, where thou hear reader, the son of god to dwell carnally in us, not
after man's gross imagination, for we may not so think of godly mysteries,
but (carnally is referred to the truth of Christ's flesh, given to us in this
Sacrament, and so is (naturally) to be understood, that we receive Christ's
natural flesh, for the truth of it, as Christ received our natural flesh
of the virgyn, although we receive Christ's flesh glorified incorruptible,
very spiritual, and in a spiritual manner delivered unto us. Here is mention
made of the word (corporal) but I shall speak of that in the discussio^ of
Cyril. This hilarie was before saint Augustine, and was known both of him and
S. Hierom, who called him (Tuba^ latini eloquii) against tharria^s. Never manne
found fault at this notable place of Hilarie. Now let us consider how the
auctor of this book forgets him self, to call Christ in us naturally by
his godhead, which were then to make us all gods by nature, which is over
greatan absurdity, and Christ in his divine nature dwells only in his
father naturally: and in us by grace. But as we reaceiue him in the Sacrament
of his flesh and blood, if we receive him worthily: so dwells he in us
naturally, for the mutual communication of our nature and his. And therefore,
where this auctor reaporteth, Hilarie to make no difference between our union
to Christ in Baptism, and in the supper, let him trust, him no more, that
told him so, or if this auctor will take upon him (as of his own knowledge)
then, I would say (if he were another) an answer in french, that I will not
express. And here upon will I win the Issue, that in Hilarie, the matter is
so plain otherwise An issue.
then this auctour reherseth, as it has no color of defense to the contrary.
And what Hilarie speaks of Baptism, and our unity therein. I have before
touched, and this unity in flesh, is after treated aparte. What shall I say
to this so manifest untruth? but that it confirms that I have in other
observed, how therewas never one of the^ (that I have red), writynge against
the Sacrament: but has in his writings, said somewhat, so evidently in the
matter, or out of the matter, discrepaunte from truth, as might be a certain
mark to judge the quality of his spirit.

Thauctor says, such answer as he made to Hilarie, will serve for Cyrill,
and Cyrill.
in dead to say truth it is made after the same sort, and has even such
an error as the other had, saving it may be excused by ignorance. For where
thauctor trauayleth ^ere to expou^de the word (corporally) which is a sore
word in Cyrill against this auctor, and therefore takes labor to te^pere it
with the word (corporaliter) in saint Paul, applied to the dwelling of the
divinity in Christ, and yet not content therewith, makes further search and
would gladly have somewhat to confirm his fausye out of Cyril himself, and
seeks in Cyrill where it is not to be found, and sekech not where it is to be
found. For Cyrill tells himself plainly, what he means by the word
(corporally) which place and this auctour had found, he might have spared a
great many of words uttered by divination, but then the truth of that place
hinders and qualeth in manner all the book. I will at my peril bring for the
Cyrils own words truly, upon the xvij. Chaptre of saint John.

Corporaliter filius per benedictionis mysticam Cyrillus in Ioa^, Cap, 17
nobis vt homo Vnitur, spiritualiter autem vt deus. Which be in English thus
much to say. The son is unity as man corporally to us by the mystical
benedictio^, spiritually as God. These be Cyrils words, who names the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ the mystical benediction, and
shows in this sentence, how him self understands the words corporally
and spiritually, That is to say, when Christ unites him self to us as man,
which he does, he does, geuynge his body in this Sacrament to such as
worthily receive it, then he dwells in them corporally, which Christ was
before in them spiritually, orels they could not worthily receive him to
theffecte of that unity corporal, and corporal dwelling, by which word
(corporal) is understood no grosues at all, which the nature of a mystery
excludes, and yet keeps truth still, being the understanding only atteined
by faith. But where thauctor of the book allegeth Cyrill in words to deny
the eating of a man, and to affirm the receyuinge in this Sacrament to be only
by faith. It shall appear I doubt not upon further discussion, that Cyrill say
the not so, and the translations of Cyrill into latin after the printe of
basil in a book called (Antidoton) and of hole Cyrils works prynted at colen,
have not in that place such sentence. So as following the testimonye of those
books set forth by public faith in two sondrie places. I should call
thallegation of Cyrill made by this auctour in this point untrue, as it is in
dead in the matter untrue. And yet because the Original error proceeds from
Oecolampadius, it shall serve to good purpose, to direct thoriginall fault to
him: as he well deseruethe to be, as he is noted gyltie of it, whose reputacion
deceived many in the matter of the Sacrament, and being well noted, how the
same Oecolampadius corrupts Cyrill: it may percase somewhat work with this
auctor to considre how he has in this place been deceived by him. I will
write here, the very words of Cyrill in greek, as they be of Oecolampadius
brought forth and publis^hed in his name, whereby the reader that understands
the greek (as many do at this time) may judge of Oecolampadius conscience in
handlyng this matter. The words of Cyrill, be alleged of Oecolampadius to be
these in greek. (...) Cyrillus.
(...). These words be by Oecola^padius translate in this wise. No^ne igitur,
eu^ qui videtur filium and Christum, alium a deo verbo, qui ex deo esse
affirmant: cui apostolatus functio tributa sit? Non enim sacramentum nostrum
hominis manducationem asserit, mentes credeutium ad crassas cogitationes
irreligiose introtrude^s, and humanis cogitationibus subijcere enitens: ea quae
sola, and pura, and inexquisita fide capiuntur. This is Oecolampadius
translacion of the greek, as the same is by Oecolampadius alleged. Which,
compared with the greek, and the congruetie and phrase of the greek tongue
considered, does plainly open a corruption in the greek text. First in the
word (...), which should bea participle in the singular number (...), as
(...), and (...), all which participles, depend of the third person reproved
of Cyrill, and nominative case to the verb (...), which has the nowne (...)
his accusative case, for congruite will not suffer (...) to be the nominative
case, as Deco^la^padius makes it: because (...), and (...) should then depend
on it, which be the masculine gender, and (...), the newtre, and besides that,
the sense has so no good reason, to attribute assertion to the mysterye by
way of declaration, the mystery of nature secret has need of declaration,
and makes none but hides rather: and the mystery cannot declare properly,
that should lead or subdue men to vain imaginacion. But Cyrill entendyng to
reprove the conclusion of him that attributes to that is seen in Christ, the
nature of his humanite, thoffice of thappostle, and so thereby seems to make in
Christ two several persons, estemyng that is seen, another son from the
second person: shows how that man so, (...).
co^cludyng does affirm an absurdity, that is to say, (...)
declares (...)
that (...)
mysterye (...)
of our (humana^ co^mixtione^) for so has the public tra^slacion, and not
(...), which should signify catyng of a man, as Decola^padius would have it,
and cannot with this co^struction to make (...) the accusative case, have any
sense, and then that man so concludyng, may be said therewith (...)
leadyng the mind of the^ that believe, in to slender and dark imaginacio^s or
thoughes, and so (...)
going about to bring under ma^s reasonyngs, such things as be (...)
taken or vnderstaunded by an only simple, bare and no curious faith. And this
is uttered by Cyrill by interrogation: (...), which continues on to the last
word of all that is here written in greek, endyng in the word (...). But
Decola^padies to fram these words to his purpose, corrupts the participle
(...), and makes it (...), whereby he might cut of the interrogatiue, and then
is he yet feign to add evidently that is not in the greek, a copulative
causall (enim) and then when (...) is by the cuttyng of thinterrogation and
thaddition of (enim) made the nominative case, then (...), and (...), depend of
it, because of the gender, and (...) because of tharticle determines the
principal mystery in Christ's person, and after the public translacion, it
should seem the greek word was not (...), but (...) which (in the public
tra^slatio^) is expressed with these two words humana^ co^mixtione^.

This one place, and their were no molike, may show with what conseieuce
Decolampadius handled the matter of the Sacrament: who was learned in the greek
tongue, most exercised in translacions, and had ones written a gra^mer of the
greek, and yet in this place abuses him self, and the reader in perverting
Cyril, against al co^gruites of the speech against the propre signification of
the words, against the convenient connectio^ of the matter, with deprauacion of
the phrase, and corruption of certain words all against the common and
public translacion, and when he has done all this, concludes in thend that
he has translate the greek faithfully, when there is by him used no good faith
at all, but credit and estimacion of learning by him abused, to deceive well
meaning simplicite, and serves for some defense to such, as be bold to use
and follow his auctorites in this matter. As the auctor of the book seems to
have followed him herein, for else the public autentique translations, which
be abroad, as I said of the printes of basell and colen, have no such matter,
and therefore the fault of the auctor is to leave public truth, and search
matter whispired in corners. But thusmuche must be granted, though in the
principal matter, that in the mysterye of the sacrament, we must exclude all
grossenes, and yet for the truth of gods secret work in the sacrament, that
in such, as receive the Sacrament worthily, Christ dwells in them
corporally, as Cyrill says, and naturally, and carnally as Hilarye says. And
with this true understanding, after the simplicite of a Christen faith, which
was in these fathers, Hillarie, and Cyrill, the contencion of these three
enuyous words, in gross capacites grossly taken, natural, carnal, and
corporal, which carnalite has engendered, might sone be much assuaged, and
this auctor also considering with him self, how much he has been over seen
in the understanding of them, and the specialtie in this place of him self,
and Deco lampadius, might take occasion to repent and call home him self, who
wonderfully wandreth in this matter of the Sacrament, and having lost his right
way, breaks up hedges, and leapeth over diches, with a wundrous trauaill to
go whither he would, not being, not yet, (as appears,) determined where he
would rest, by the variety of his own doctrine, as may appear in soundrie
places, if they be compared together.

As for Basil, Gregory Nissen, and Gregoire Basilius Crego. Nissenus Grego.
Nazian zenus.
Nazia^zen, this auctor says they speak little of this matter, in deed they
speak not somuche as other do, but that they speak, is not discrepaunt, nor
contrarieth not, that other before them had written. For in the old church, the
truth of this mystery was never impugned openly, and directly, that we read of,
before Berengarius.v. C. years past, and Berengarius. Bertrame.
secretly by one Bertrame before that, but only by the Messalions who said
the corporal eating did neither good nor hurt.

The Antropomorphites also, who say^e, the virtue of the mystical benediction
endured not to the next day, of whom Cyrill speaks and the Nestorians by
consecution of their lernyng, that divide L. Christ's flesh from the bei^e. And
where this auctor would have taken for a true supposall that Basil, Bregorie
Naz^anzene and Nissene, should take the Sacrament to be figurative only: that
is to be denied. And likewise it is not true that this auctor teaches, that of
the figure may be spoken the same thing that may be spoke of the thing it
self: And that I will declare thus. Of the thing it self, that is, Christ's
very body, being present in deed, it may be said (adore it) worship it
there, which may not be said of the figure. It may be said, of the very thing
being present there, that it is a high miracle to be there, it is above nature
to be there, it is an high secret mystery to be there. But none of these
speeches can be conuenie^tly said of thonly figure, that it is such a miracle,
so above nature, so high a mysterye, to be a figure. And therefore, it is no
true doctrine to teach, that we may say the same of the figure, that may be
said of the thing i^ self. And where this auctor speaks, of spiritual
eating, and corporal eating, he remains in his ignorance, what the word
corporal means, which I have opened, in discussyng of his answer to Cyrill,
faith is required in him that shall eat spiritually, and the corporal eating
institute in Christ's supper, requires by the reuere^r of man's mouth, to
receive our Lords meat and drink, his own very flesh and blood, by his
omnipotency prepated in that supper, which not spiritually, that is to say,
innocently (as S. Augu. In Ioa^. tract. xxvj.
Augustine in one place expounds spiritually) received, brings judgment
and condempnacion, according to Saint Paul's words.

This auctor says that Emissen is shortly Emisse
answered unto, and so is he (if a man care not what he says) as Hilarie was
answered and Cyrill. But else, there can not short or long answer confound
the true plain testymonye of Emissen, for the commen true faith of the church
in the Sacrament. Which Emissen has this sentence. That the invisible Prieast,
(by the secret power with his word) turns the visible creatures into the
substance of his body and blood, saiynge thus: This is my body: And again,
repetyng the same sa^ctificatio^, this is my blood. Wherefore, as at the beck
of him, commaundynge the heightes of heuens, the depenes of the floods, and
largenes of lands, were founded of nothing, by like power in spiritual
Sacraments, where virtue commands, theffect of the truth serves. These be
Emissenes sayings, declaryng his faith plainly of the Sacrament, in such
terms, as can not be wrested, nor writhed, who speaks of a turnyng and
couuersion of the visible creatures, into the substance of Christ's body and
blood, he says not into the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, nor figure
of Christ's body and blood, whereby he should mean a only sacramental
conversion, as this auctor would have it, but he says, into the substance of
Christ's body and blood, declaryng the truth of Christ's body and blood to be
in the Sacrament. For the words (substance) and (truth) be of one strenght,
and show a difference from a figure, wherein the truth is not in deed present,
but signified to be absent. And because it is a work supernatural, and a
great miracle. This Emissen represseth man's carnal reason, and succurreth
the weke faith, with remembrance of like power of God in the creation of the
world, which were brought forth out of time by Emissen, if Christ's body were
not in substance present, as Emissens words be, but in figure only as this
auctor teaches. And where this auctor coupleth together the two Sacraments,
of Baptism, and of the body and blood of Christ, as though there were no
difference in the presence of Christ in either, he puts him self in
danger, to be reproved of malice, or ignorance. For although these mysteryes
be both great, and man's regeneracion in baptism is also a mysterye and the
secret work of God, and has a great maruayle in that effect: yet it
diffreth from the mysterye, of the Sacrament, touching the manner of Christ's
presence and the workyng of theffecte also. For in Baptism our union with
Christ is wrought without the real presence of Christ's humanity, only in the
virtue and effect of Christ's blood the whole trinity there workynge, as
auctor, in whose name the Sacrament is expressly ministered, where our soul is
regenerate and made spiritual, but not our body in deed, but in hope only that
for the spirit of Christ dwelling in us, our mortal bodies shall be
resuscitate, and as we have in Baptism be buried with Christ: so we be
assured, to be part takers of his resurrection. And so in this Sacrament we be
unite to Christ's ma^hode by this divinity. But in the Sacrament of Christ's
body and blood, we be in nature united to Christ as man: and by his glorified
flesh, made part takers also of his divinity, which mystical vnio^
represents unto us the high estate of our glorificatio^, wherein body and
soul shall in the general resurrection, by a meruaylous regeneration of the
body, be made both spiritual, the special pledge whereof, we receive in this
Sacrament, and therefore it is the sacrament (as hilarie says) of perfect
unity. And albeit the soul of man be more precious, the^ the body, and the
nature of the godhead in Christ, more excellent the^ the nature of man in him
glorified, and in Baptism, man's soul is regenerate in the virtue and effect
of Christ's passion and blood, christ's godhead present there without the real
presence of his humanity: although for these respects thexelle^ce of Baptism
is great: Yet because the mystery of the Sacrament of thaltare, where Christ is
present, both man and god, in theffectual unite, that is wrought bitwene our
bodies, our souls and Christ's, in the use of this Sacreme^t signifies the
perfect redemption of our bodies in the general resurrection, which shall be
the end and co^su^mation of al our felicity. This Sacrament of perfect unity,
is the mysterye of our perfect astate, when body and soul shall be all
spiritual, and has so a degree of exelle^ce, for the dignity that is esteemed
in every end and perfection, wherefore the word (spiritual) is a necessary
word, in this Sacrament, to call it a spiritual food, as it is in deed for
it is to work in our bodies a spiritual effect, not only in our souls, and
Christ's body and flesh, and yet a true body and very flesh. And it is
present in this sacrament after a spiritual manner, granted and taught of all
true teachers, which we should receive also spiritually, which is by having
Christ before spiritually in us to receive it so worthily. Wherefore, like as in
the invisible substance of the Sacrament, there is nothing carnal but al
spiritual, taking the word carnal, as it signifies grossly in ma^s carnal
judgment: So where the receyuers of that food bring carnal lusts or desirs,
carnal fancies or imaginatio^s with them, they receive the same precious food
unworthily to their judgment and condempnation. For they judge not truly,
after the simplicity of a true Christen faith, of the very presence of
Christ's body. And this suffiseth to wype out, that this auctor has spoken of
Emissene against the truth.

As touching S. Ambrose, this auctor takes a great entreprise to wrestel with
him, whose plain and evident words must needs be a rule to try his othere
words by, if any might be writhed. What ca^ be more plainly spoken, then S.
Ambrose speaks, when he says these words. It is bread before the consecration
but after it is the body of Christ. By the word consecration, is signified
(as it is here placed) gods omnipote^t work. wherefore, in this place it
co^prehendeth as much as Emissen said in these words (he conuerteth by the
secret power of his word) God is the worker, and so consecration signifith,
the whole action of his omnipotency, in workynge the substance of this high
mystery, and therefore the definition of the word consecration, as it is
generally taken, cannot be a rule to thunderstandyng of it, in this high
mystery, where it is used to express a singular work, as the circumstaunce of
S. Ambrose writing does declare. For as philip Mela^cto^ writes Melancton.
to Oecola^padius, S. Ambrose would never have travailed, to accumulate so many
miracles as he does, speaking of this matter to declare gods omnipote^cie and
he had not thought the nature of bread to be changed in this mystery. These
be melanctons very words. Now to answer the question, (as it were at the
word change), this auctor shall come with a sacrame^ral change which is a
divise in terms to blind the rude reader. S. Ambrose does express plainly
what the change is, when he writes the words before rehearsed.

It is bread before the consecration, but after it is the body of christ, Ca^ a
change be more plainly declared? The nerer way for this auctor had been to have
joined Ambrose with Clement, and called him fained by the Papists, rather then
after theffect of consecration so opened by saint Ambrose himself, to
trauayll to prove what it may signify, if it were in an other matter. And
then to admonish the reader, how the bread and wine have no holiness, which
form of speech, not understood of the people engenders some scruple that
needs not, being no sou^de form of doctrine, for S. Paul speaks and
teaches 1. Ti. 4.
thus, that the creatures be sanctified by the word of God and prayour. And S.
Augustine Augu. de peccatis morta. et remiss. libro. 2. Cap. 26. Cyprian de
cena domini.
writes of sanctified bread to be given to them that be catechized before they
be baptized. And this auctor himself expounds S. Cyprian in the. ^5. leef of
his book how the divinity is poured in to the bread Sacrame^tally, which is
a strange phrase not expressing there Cyprians mind, and far discrepaunt
from the doctrine here.

And in an other place this auctor says, Fo. 85. Pagi. 2.
that as hot and burning iron, is iron still, and yet has the force of fire:
so the bread and wine be turned in to the virtue of Christ's flesh and blood.
By which similitude bread may conceive virtue, as iron couceyueth fyere, and
the^ as we call iron burning, and fireye, so we may call bread virtuous and
holy, onies the auctor would again resemble bread to a whetstone that may
make sharp and have no sharpenes in it at al. Which matter I declare thus to
show that as this auctor dissenteth from truth in other, so he disse^teth from
that he utters for truth him self, and walks in a maze, impugnynge the
very truth in this Sacrament, and would have that taken for a Catholic
doctrine that is not one, and the same doctrine through his hole book, so far
of is it from the hole of Christen teaching, But now let us considre what
speeches of. S. Ambrose this auctor brings forth, wherewith to altre the
truth of the very plain propre speech of S. Ambrose saying: it is bread before
the consecration, but after, it is the body of Christ.

Saint Ambrose as this auctor says in an other place says thus. Before the
been dictio^ of the heavenly words, it is called another kind of thing, but
after the consecration, is signified the body and blood of Christ. And another
speech thus. Before the consecration, it is called an other thing, but after
the consecration it is named the blood of Christ, and yet a third speech where
the word (call) is used before and after both, as thou reader may se in this
auctors book in the. 82 leef. Now good reader was thereeuer man so ouerseen
as this auctor is who sees not. S. Ambrose in these three latter speeches to
speak as plainly as in the first. For in the last speech S. ambrose says it
is called bread before the Co^secratio^, and called the body of Christ after
the consecration. And I would Demand of this auctor, does not this word
(call) signify the truth that is bread in deed before the consecration? which
if it be so why shall not the same word (call) signify also the very truth
added to the words of the body of Christ after the co^secratio^? and
likewise when he says, speaking of the body of Christ the word (signified)
or (named) which is as much as (call) Thee body of Christ is signified there,
for Christ said, This is my body etc. vsyng the outward signs of the visible
creatures to signify the body and blood present, and not abse^t. Was not
Christ the true son of God, because thangel said he shall be called the son
of God. But in these places of S. Ambrose Luc. 2.
to express plainly what he meant by (calling) he puts that word (Call) to
the bread, before the consecration, as well as to the body of Christ after the
co^secratio^, thereby to declare how in his understanding this word (Call)
signifies as much truth in the thing where unto it is added after consecration
as before, and therefore as it is by saint Ambrose called bread before
consecration, signifiyng it was so in deed, so it is called, signified or named
(which three thus plated be all one in effect) the body of Christ after the
consecration and is so in deed, agreeable to the plain speech of saint
Ambrose, where he says: It is bread before the consecration, and it is the
body of Christ after the consecration. As touching the spirituality of the meat
of Christ's body, I have spoken before, but where this auctor adds it
requires no corporal presence, he speaks in his dream being oppressed
with sleep of ignorance and can not tell what (corporal) means as I have
opened before by thauctorite of Cyrill. Now let us se what this auctor says
to Chrysostom.

This auctor notes in Chrysostom Chrysostom.
two places, and brings them forth, and in handlyng the first place,
declares himself to trifle in so great a matter, evidently to his own
reproufe. For where in the second book of his work, entretyng
transubstanciation, he would the same words of Chrysostom by this form of
speech in the negative should not deny precisely. And when Chrysostom says,
do not think that you by man receive the body of god, but that we should not
considre man in the receiuyng of it. Here this auctor does allege those words
and reasons of them as though they were terms of were deny all. But I would
ask of this auctor this question. If Chrisostomes faith had been, that we
receive not the body of God in the Sacrament verily: Why should he use words
Idelly to entreat of whom we received the body of God, which after this
auctors doctrine we receive not at all but in figure? and no body at all which
is of Christ's humanity being Christ, as this auctor teaches spiritually,
that is, by his divine nature in him only that worthily receives, and in the
very Sacrament as he concludes in his book only figuratively. Turn back
reader to the. 36. l^ef in the auctors book and read it with this, and so
considre upon what principle here is made an (Ergo). I will answer that place,
when I speak of transubstanciation, which shall be after answer to the third
and fourth book as the natural order of the matter requiteth.

The second place of Chrysostom that this auctor brings forth he grau^teth
it sou^deth much against him, and favors his adversaries but with co^ferryng
and co^sideryng, he trusts to altre it from the true understanding. And not
to expound, but confou^de the matter, he joins in speech the Sacrament of
baptism with this sacrament (which shifte this auctor used untruly in Hilarie)
and would now bear in hand that the presence of Christ were none otherwise in
this sacrament the^ in Baptism, (which is not so) for in this Sacrament,
Christ's humanity and godhead is really present, and in Baptism his godhead
with the effectual virtue of his blood, in which we be washed, not requiring
by scripture any real presence for dispe^sation of that mystery, as I have
before touched discussyng thanswer of Emissen, where as Chrysostom speaking of
Chrisosto. de Sacerdo. li. 3.
this sacrament whereof I have before spoken, and Melancton allegyng it to
Oecolampadius says thus: The great miracle and great benevolence of Christ is,
that he sits above with his father, and is the same hour in our hands here
to de embrased of us. and therefore where this auctor would not the wo^dre of
gods work in the Sacrament to be wonderful for the work and effect in man,
this is one piece of truth, but in the Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ, the old fathers wonder at the work in the Sacrament, how bread is
changed into the body of christ, how Christ sittyng in heaven God and man, is
also man and God in the Sacrament, and being worthly received dwells in such
carnally and naturally as Hilarie says, and corporally as Cyrill says. How
this can be, no man can tell, no faithful man should ask, and yet it is the
true Catholic faith, to be truly so wrought. For as Emissene says: he that
is thauctor of it, he is the witness of it. And therefore I will make it an
issue with this An issue.
(...) (...) So this auctor has now in this work confessed the tra^slacion
of the catechism, which one in communication would needs have made me believe,
had been his man's doing and not his. Hear now reader, how plainly
Theophilact speaks upon the Gospel^ of Saint John, expounding the.vi.
Chapter.

Take heed that the bread which is eaten of us in the mysteryes is not only a
certain figuration of the flesh of our Lord, but the flesh it self of our
Lord, for he said not, The bread which I shall give is the figure of my
flesh, but it is my flesh. For that bread by the mystical benediction, is
transformed by mystical words and presence of the holy ghost into the flesh of
our Lord. And it should trouble no man, that the bread is to be believed flesh,
for whiles our Lord walked in flesh, and received nurrishme^t of bread, that
bread he did eat was changed into his body, and was made like to his holy
flesh, and as it is customably in man's feadyng served to the sustentacion and
increase of it, therefore the bread now also is changed into the flesh of our
Lord. And how is it then that it appears not flesh but bread? that we
should not loath the eating of it, for if flesh did appear, we should be
vnplesauntly disposed to the communion of it. Now our Lord co^desce^dyng to
our infirmity, the mystical meat, appears such to us, as those we have been
accustomed unto. Hitherto I have faithfully expressed Thiophilactes words, out
of Latin of ^ecolampadins translation, without termyng the substanciall
points, otherwise the^ the words purporte in Latin: By which may appear what
was Theophilacts meaning, what doctrine he gives of the Sacrament, and how
his own words upon S. Mark, be to be understood, when he says. Speciem
quidem panis and vini seruat, in virtutem Theophilact.
autem carnis and sanguinis transeleme^tat, in corruptyng of which words
(this auctor makes) a great matter, when they were not alleged for his, but as
they be his (seruare speciem) may be well translate (form and apparaunce)
because upon Saint John before alleged, he says of the bread, (it appears.)
And as for these words (the virtue of Christ's flesh and blood) must be
understood to agree with the plain place of Theophilacte upon Saint John,
and upon mark also, to signify not only virtue, but verity of the flesh and
blood of Christ. For if Theophilacte by that speech mente the virtue of the
body of Christ, and not the verity of the very body, (as this author says he
did) why should Theophilacte, both upon Saint Mark, and also upon Saint
John, ask this question, why does not the flesh appear? if himself by those
words should teach there were only (...) present the virtue of his flesh,
who, and he had meant so, would not have asked the question, or if he had, would
have answered it thus: Accordyngly (there is no flesh in deed) but the virtue
of the flesh, and that had been a plain answer and such as he would have
made. This auctor wylaske then, why does Theophilacte use this phrase to say,
changed into the virtue of the body of Christ. Here unto I answer, that this
word virtue in phrase of speech manny times, only fills the speech, and
is comprehended in the signification of his genitive following, and therefore as
Luke in the.xxij. Chapter says: (a dextris virtutis Dei,) so in the Acts the
same sentence is spoken (a dextris Dei) both out of one pen, and (a dextris
virtutis Dei) is no more to say then (a dextris Dei) and so is (virtutem carnis
and sanguinis) no more to say, but (in carnem and sanguinem) which sentence
the same Theophilacte has upon Saint John before alleged, in this sayng: The
bread is changed in ^ofiesh, and in mark in this phrase, in to the virtue of
flesh, being: Like these speeches, (a dextris Dei) and (a dextris virtutis
Dei.) Which and it had liked this auctor to have considered: he should have
taken Theophilactes speech as Theophilacte understands himself, and said
the words alleged in the name of Theophilus Alexandrinus, were not
Theophilactes words, and then he had said for so much true (which would do
well among) and the words be not in deed Theophilactes words, nor were not
alleged for his. Now when this author says: they were not Theophilus
Alexandrinus words, that is a large negative, and will be hardely proved
otherwise then by addition of the auctors knowledge, for any thing that he can
find, and so there shall be no absurdite to grant it. And thus I return to
mine Issue with this auctor, that Theophilacte himself has no such meaning
expressed in words as this auctour attributes unto him, but an evident
contrary meaning, saving herein I will agree with this auctour, that
Theophilacte mente not grossly, sensibly, and carnally, as these words sound
in carnarall men's judgments. For we may not so think of Gods mysteryes,
the work whereof is not carnal, nor corporal, for the manner of it. But the
manner spiritual, and yet in the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ,
because Christ is in his very true flesh present, he may be said so carnally
present, and naturally, after Hylary, and corporally after Cyrill,
understanding the words of the truth of that is present, Christ's very body
and flesh, and not of the manner of the presence, which is only spiritual,
supernatural, and above man's cappacitie. And therefore a high mysterye, a
great miracle, a wonderful work: which it is wholesome to believe simplye with
a sincere faith, and dangerous to search and examyne with a curious
imaginacion, such as idelines and arrogaunce would tempte a man unto, and by
diuisyng of a figure, or metaphore, bring it within the compass of our buysie
reason.

This auctor, trauayleth to answer Saint Hierom.
Hierome, and to make him the easyer for him to deal with, he cutteth of that
follows in the same Saint Hierome, which should make the matter open and
manifest: how effectually Saint Hierome speaks of the Sacrament of Christ's
body and blood. There is (says Saint Hierome) as great difference between the
loves called (Panes propositiones) and the body of Christ, as there is between
the shadow of a body, and the body it self, and as there is between an image
and the true thing it self, and between an example of things to come, and the
things that be prefigured by them. Therefore as mekenes, patience, sobriety,
moderation, abstinence of gain, hospitality also, and liberalite should be
chiefly in a Bishop, and among all lay men an excellency in them: so their
should be in him a special chastity, and as I should say, chastity that is
priestly, that he should not only absteyne from an unclean work, but also
from the cast of his eye, and his mind fre from error of thought, that should
make the body of Christ. These be Saint Hiero^s words in this place. By the
latter part whereof, appears plainly how Saint Hierom means of Christ's
body in the Sacrament, of which the loves that were (Panes propositiones) were
a shadow, (as Saint Hierom says) that bread being the image, and this the
truth, that the example, and this that was prefigured. So as if Christ's body
in the Sacrament should be there but figuratively (as this auctor teaches)
then were the bread of proposition, figure of a figure, and shadow of a
shadow, which is over great an absurdite in our religion. Therefore there
cannot be a more plain proof to show, that (by Saint Hieroms mind,)
Christ's body is verily in the Sacrament, and not figuratively only, then when
he notes, (Panes propositiones) to be the figure and the shadow of christ's
body in the Sacrament. For as, Tertullia^ says, (Figura non esset, nisi
veritatis Tertullianus aduersus Marcio. libr. 4.
esset corpus.) The other were not to be called a figure (if that, that
answered unto it,) were not of truth, which is the sense of Tertullians
words. And therefore Saint Hierome could with no other words have expressed
his mind so certainly and plainly, as with these, to confess the truth of
Christ's body in the Sacrament. And therefore, regard not reader, what this
auctor says: For S. Hierom affirms plainly Christ's true body to be in the
Sacrament, the consecration whereof although Saint Hierome attributes to the
ministre: Yet we must understand him, that he takes God, for the auctor and
worker, not withstandyng by reason of the ministery^ in the church, the doing
is ascribed to man, as ministre, because Christ said (Hoc facite) after which
speech, salvation, remission of sin, and the work in other Sacraments, is
attribute to the ministre, being nevertheless the same, the propre, and special
works of God. And this I add, because some he vninstely offended, to hiere
that man should make the body of Christ, and this auctor finds fault
before at the word making, which religiously heard, and reverently spoken,
should offend no man, for man is but a ministre, wherein he should not
glory, and Christ makes not himself of the mattier of bread, nor makes
himself so often of bread a new body: but sittyng in heaven, does as our
invisible Priest work in the ministerye of the visible Priesthode of his
church, and makes present (by his omnipotencye) his glorified body and blood
in this high mystery, by conversion of the visible treatures of bread and wine,
(as Emissene says,) into the same. This auctor of this book (as thou reader
may perceive) applies the figure of the breades called (Panes propositiones)
to the body of Christ to come, where as Saint Hierome calls them the
figure of Christ's body in the Sacrament, and therefore does fation his
argument in this sense. If those breades that were but a figure, required so
much clennesse in them that should eat them, that they might not eat of
them, which a day or two before, had lien with there wives: what clennesse is
required in him that should make the body of Christ? Whereby thou may see
here this auctor has reserved this notable place of Saint Hierome, to the
latter end, that thou should in the end as well as in the mids see him
evidently snarled, for thy better remembrance.

Because this auctor, who hitherto has answered none substanciallye, would
nevertheless be seen to answer all, he wyndeth up six of then in one fardel,
Saint Augustine, Augusti. Sedulius Leo. Fulge^tius Cassiodorus. Gregor.
Sedulius, Leo, Fulgentius, Cassiodorus, and Gregorius, and dispatcheth them
all with an (vt supra) and among them, I think he would have knytte up all
the rest of the learned men of all ages, among whom, I know none that write
(as this auctor do the) of the Sacrament, or impugneth the Catholic faith, as
this author does, by the enuyouse name of Papists. Senes Christ's time, there
is no memory, more then of six, that has affirmed that doctrine, which
this auctour would have called now the Catholic doctrine, and yet not
written by them of one sort, neither received in belyefe in public
profession. But secretly, when it happened, begun by conspiration, and in the
end ever hitherto extincte and quenched. First was Bertrame, The^ Bere^garius,
The^ Wychefe, and in our time Decole^padius, Swinglius, and Ioa^himus Uadianus,
I will not teken Peter Martyr, because such as know him, says he is not
learned: nor this auctor, because he does, but as it were, translate Peter
Martyr, saving he roueth at solutions, as likes his fansye, as I have before
declared, which matter being thus, it is a strange title of this book to call
it the true Catholic doctrine.

Last of al, thauctor abuses himself with Damascene, and goth about to
answer him Damascen.
by making of a sum, which sum, is so wrong accounted, that every man that
reads Damascene, may be auditour to co^trole it. And this will I say,
Damascene writes so evidently in the matter that Peter Martyr for a shifte, is
feign to find fault in his judgment and age, and yet he is. vi(...). C.
years old at the lest, and I say at the lest, because he is rekonned of su^me,
haulfe as old again. And what so ever his judgment were, he writes as
Melancton says, his testimonye of the faith of the Sacrament as it was in his
time. I would write in here Damascens words, to compare them with the same,
collected by this auctor, whereby to disprove his particulars plainly, but the
words of Damascen be to be red, translate already abroad. As for the four
substaunces, which this auctor by account numbreth of Christ, might have been
left vnrekened by tale, because among them that be faithful, and understand
truly, whersoeuer the substance of Christ's very body is, there is also
understood by concomitaunce to be present the substance of his soul as
very man, and also of the godhed as very God. And in the matter of the
Sacrament, therefore contendyng with him that would have the substance of bread
there, it may be said there is in the Sacrament the only, substance of
Christ's body, because the word only thus placed, excludes other strange
substaunces, and not the substaunces, which without contencion be known and
confessed, unite with Christ's body. And so a man may be said, to be alone in
his house, when he has no strangers, although he has a number of his own
men, and Erasmus notes how the euangeliste writes Christ to have prayed
alone, and yet certain of his disciples were there. And if in a contencio^
raised, whether the father and son were both killed in such a field or no, I
defended the father to have been only killed there, and thereupon a wager laid,
should I lose, if by proof it appeared, that not only the father, but also
three or four of the fathers servants were slayue, but the son escaped? And
as in this speech the word (only) served to exclude that was in contencion,
and not to reduce the number to one, no more is it in the speech that this
auctour would reprove, and therefore neded not to have occupied himself in the
matter, wherein I heard him ones say in a good audience himself was
satisfied. In which mind I would he had continued, and having so sclender
stuff, as this is, and the truth so evident against him, not to have
resusc(...) tate this so often reproved untruth, wherein never hitherto any on
could prevail.

The confutation of the fourth book.
THus having perused the effect of the third book, I will likewise peruse
the fourth, and then shall follow in direct course to speak of the matter of
transubsta^ciacio^. In this fourth book thauctor entreteth eating and drinkyng
of Christ's body and blood, and in the first part thereof trauaileth to
conferme his purpose, and in the second part answers as he can to his
adversaries, and so takes occasion, to speak of adoration. His chief purpose
is to prove that euel men receive not the body and blood of Christ in the
Sacrament, which afte^ this auctours doctrine, is a very superfluous matter.
For if the sacrament be only a figure, and the body and blood of Christ be
there only figuratively, whereto should this auctor dispute of evil men's
eating, when good men cannot eat Christ in the sacrament because he is not
there. For by the effect of this auctours doctrine, the Sacrament is but a
visible preaching, by the tokens and signs of bread and wine, that in beleuyng
and reme^bryng Christ's benefits, with reuoluyng the^ in our mind, we should
in faith feade upon christ spiritually beleuyng that as the bread and wine
feadeth and nurrissheth our bodies: so Christ feadeth and nurrisshed our
souls which be good words, but such as the words in Christ's supper do not
learn us, and may be well gathered, not to limite the mystery of the supper,
but to be spoken and taught touching the beleuyng and remembryng Christ's
benefits, with the reuoluyng of the^ in our mind, the^by to learn us how to
feade upon Christ continually, without the use of the visible Sacrament,
Augusti. in sermon domini in mo^te. iibr. 3.
being that called of S. Augustine the invisible sacrament, wherein by faith we
be nurrished with the word of God, and the virtue of Christ's body and blood,
which, the true teaching of the church calls spiritual manducation only,
without which, no man is to be accounted a true membre of the mystical body
of Christ. And therefore who so feadeth upon Christ thus spiritually, must needs
be a good man, for only good men be ^rewe members of Christ's mystical body,
which spiritual eating is so good a fruit, as it declares the tree
necessariely to be God, and therefore it must be and is a certain conclusion
that only good men do eat and drink the body and blood of Christ spiritually,
that is to say, effectually to life. So as this auctor shall have of me no
adversary therein. And if this auctour had prouued that to be the true
doctrine, that Christ's very body and blood, is not present in the visible
Sacrament, then might he have left this fourth book unwritten. For after his
doctrine, as I said before, good men do not eat Christ's body in the
Sacrament under the visible signs, for because it is not there, and then much
less should euel men reach it. In the Catholic teaching, all the doctrine
of eating of Christ, is concluded in two manner of eatynges, one in the visible
Sacrament Sacramental, another spiritual without the Sacrament, And because
in the eating of the visible Sacrament Saint Paul speaks of unworthy, the
same true teaching to open the matter more clearly according to Scripture
notes unto us three manner of eatynges, one spiritual only, which only good
men do feadyng in faith without the visible Sacrament. Another is both
spiritual and Sacramental, which also good men only do, receiuyng the
visible Sacrament, with a true sincere charitable faith.

The third manner of eating, is Sacramental only, which after saint Paul
euel men do unworthily, and therefore have judgment and condempnation, and be
gylty of our lords body not estemynge our lords body there. And here
arristeth the knot of conte^tion with this auctor, who says euel men eat but
the Sacramental bread, whereunto I reply, no more do good men neither, if this
auctors doctrine of the Sacrament be true, seeing he will have it but a figure.
If this auctor will say theffecte is other in good men, then in evil men, I
will not strive therein. But to discuss this matter evidently, we must righely
open the truth and then must considre, the visible Sacraments as they be of
gods ordinance, who directs us where to seek for his gifts, and how, whose
workyng albeit it be not restrained by his Sacraments, and therefore God may
and does inuisibly sanctify and salve as it pleasith him. yet he teaches us
of his ordinarye workyng in the visible Sacraments, and orders us to seek
his gifts of health and life there, whereupon saint Augustine notes how
Baptism among the Augu. de peccatis meri. et remiss. libro. 4. Cap. ^4
Christen men of Aphrike was very well called health, and the Sacrament of
Christ's body called life, as in which God gives health and lefe, if we
worthily use them. Thordinance of these sacraments is gods work, the very
author of them, who as he is himself uniform, as saint James Jacob. 1.
says without alteration, so as David says, his works be true, which is
as much as uniform, for truth and uniform answerith together. As God is all
goodness, so all his works be good. So as considering the substance of gods
works and ordinauces as they be themself, they be always uniform, certain
and true, in there substance, as God ordered them Among men for whom they be
wrought and ordered there is variete, good men, evil men, worthy, unworthy, but
as saint Paul says there is but one Ephe. 4
lord, one faith, one Baptism. And the parable of the sower which Christ
declared Mat. 5.
himself shows a dyuersite of the grounds where the seed did fall, but the
sede was all one, that did fall in the good grownde, and that did fall in the
noughty grownde, but yt fructified only in the good grownde, which seed
Christ calls his word. And in the sixth of saint John says Joan. 6.
his word is spirit and life, so as by the teaching of Christ, spirit and
life may fall upon noughty men, although for their malice, it carries not nor
fructifieth not in them. And saint Augustine according hereunto, In Ioa^.
tract. 27
notes how Christ's words be spirit and life, although thou do carnally
understand them, and have no fruit of them, yet so they be spirit and life,
but not to the, whereby appears the substance of gods ordinance to be one,
though we, in the vsyng of it vary. The promyses of God can not be disapointed
by man's infidelite as S. Paul says, which place Luther allegeth Romans 3.
to show the unity in the substance of Baptism, whither it be ministered to
good or evil. But S. Paul to the Corinthia^s declares it 2. Cor. 2
notably in these words. We be the good savor of Christ in the^ that be
salued, and them that perish. Here S. Paul notes the savor good, and one to
diverse men: but after the diversity in men, of diverse effects in them that
is to say, the savor of life, and the savor of death, which sayng of S.
Paul the greek scolies gathered by (Occumenius) open and declare with
similitudes in nature very aptely. The dowe (they say) and the betel, shall
feade both upon one oynteme^^, and the betel dye of it, and the done
strenghthened by it. The diversity in theffecte, folouing of the diversity of
them that eat, and not of that is ^aten, which is always one. According
hereunto S. Augustine against the Donatistes gives for a rule, the
sacraments to be one in all, although they be not one that receive and use
them. And therefore to knytte up this matter for the purpose, I entende and
write it. For wemust considre the substance of the visible Sacrament, of
Christ's body and blood to be always as of it self it is by Christ's
ordinance, in the understanding whereof, this auctor makes variau^ce, and
would have it by Christ's ordinance but a figure / which he has not proved
(but and he had prowed it) then is it in substance but a figure, and but a
figure to good men. For it must be in substance one to good and bad: and so
neither to good nor bad this Sacrament is otherwise dispensed then it is truly
taught to be by preaching. Wherefore if it be more then a figure, as it is in
dead, and if by Christ's ordynance it has present under the form of those
visible signs of the form of bread and wine, the very body and blood of
Christ as has been truly taught hitherto. Then is the substance of the
Sacrament one always as the oyntement, was whether doves eat of it or betels.
And this Issue, I join with this An issue.
auctor, that he shall not be able by any learning to make any diversity in the
substance of this sacrament, what soever diversity follow in theffect. For the
diversity of theffect, is occasioned in them that receive as before is proved.
And the^ to anuswere this auctor, I say that only good men eat and drink the
body and blood of Christ spiritually, as I have declared, but al good and euel
receive the visible Sacrament of that substance: God has ordained it, which
in it has no variance, but is all one to good and euel. And as for the
Scriptures and doctors which this auctor allegeth to prove that only good men
receyne the body and blood of Christ, I grant it without contention speaking of
spitituall manducation and with lively faith without the Sacrament. But in the
visible Sacrament evil men receive the same that good men do, for the
substance of the Sacrament is by good ordinance all one. And if this auctor
would use for a proof that in the Sacrament Christ's very body is not
present because euel me^ receive it, that shall be no argument, for the good seed
when it was sown did fall in the evil ground, and althought christ dwells
not in the euel man, yet he may be received of the evil man to his
condempnation, because he receive him not to glorify him as of God, as S.
Paul says (Non dijudicans corpus domini), not estemyng our Lords body, And
to all that ever this auctor brings to prove that euel men ear not the body
of christ, (may be said wortely) that spiritually they eat it, not besides the
sacrament, and in the sacrament they eat it, not effectually to life, but
co^de^pnatio^. And that is, and may be called a not eating, As they be said not
to hear the word of God, that hear it not proufitably. And because the body
of Christ of it self is ordained to be eaten for life, those that unworthily
eat condempnatio^, although they eat in deed, may be said not eat, because
they eat unworthily as a thing not well done, may be in speech called not
done in respect of the good effect. Wherefore it was chefly ordered to be done.
And by this rule, thou reader mast discuss all that this auctor brings forth
for his purpose, either out of Scriptures or doctors. For evil men eat not
the body of Christ, to have any fruit by it, as evil men be said not to
hear gods word to have any fruit by it, and yet as they here the word of
spirit and life and never theles perish: so euel men eat in the visible
Sacrame^^ the body of Christ and yet perish, And as I said, thus answerith
the Scripture with the particular saynges of Cypria^. Athanase, Basyl, hierome,
and Ambrose.

As for saint Augustine which this auctor Augusti.
allegeth (De ciuitate dei), the same S. Augustine does plainly say there in
the place alleged, how the good and evil receive the same sacrement, and
addith but not with like proffite, which words this auctor suppresseth and
therefore dealith not syncerely. As for saint Augustine shall be herafter more
plainly declared. Finally, he that receives worthily the body and blood of
Christ has everlasting life, dwells in Christ, and Christ in him, he that
receives unworthily, which can be only in the Sacrament receives not life,
but condempnation. But to encou^tre directly with this auctor, where he
opposith by interrogation, and would be anuswered, whither an unrepentant
sinner that receives the Sacrme^t, has Christ's body with in him or no. Mark
reader this question which declares that auctor talkyth of the Sacrament, not
as himself teaches, but as the true teaching is, although he mean other wise,
for else how could an vnrepe^ta^t sinner receive Christ, but only in the
sacrament unworthily? and how could he receive him unworthily and he were not
there? but to anuswere to the question, I answer no: for it foloueth not, he
received him, (Ergo) he has him in him, for the vessel being not mete, he
departed from him, because he was a sinner, in whom he dwells not. And where
this auctor now become a questioniste, makes two questions of Christ's body,
and his spirit, as tough Christ's body might be divided from his spirit, he
supposes other to be as ignorant as himself. For the learned man will answer
that the euel man by force of gods ordinance in the substance of the Sacrament
received in dead Christ's very body there present, hol Christ, god and man,
but he tarried not, nor Dwelled not, nor fructified not in him, nor Christ's
spirit entered not into that man's soul, because of the malice and
unworthiness of him that received. For Christ will not dwell with Belial nor
abide with sinners. 2. Cor. 6.
And what has this auctor won now by his forked question? wherein he semethe
to glory as though he had embraced an absurdite that he hunted for, wherein he
shows only his ignorance, who puts no difference bytwen thentryag of
Christ into an evil man by gods ordynance in the Sacrament, and the
dwelling of Christ's spirit in an euel man, which by Scripture can not be, ne
is by any Catholic man affirmed. For saint Paul says. In him that
receyuethe unworthily remaynethe judgment, and condempnation. And yet Saint
Paul's words playnelye importe that those did eat the very body of Christ,
which did eat unworthily, and therefore were gyltie of the body and blood of
Christ. Now reader 1. Cor. 11
consider what is before written, and thou shall easelie see what a fond
cunclusio^ this auctor gathers, in the. 97. leaf, as though the teaching
were that the same man, should be both the temple of God and the temple of the
dewel, with other terms wherewith it likes this auctour to refreshe himself
and fayneth an aduersarye, such as he would have, but has none. For no
Catholic man teaches so, nor it is not all one to receive Christ and to have
Christ dwelling in him. And a figure thereof was in Christ's conversation upon
earth, who^ tarried not with all that received him in outward appearance. And
there is noted a difference that sum believed in Christ, and yet Christ
committed Ioh. 3.
not himself to them. And the Gospel prayseth them that hear the word of
God and Luce. 11.
keep it, signifiyng many to here the word of God and not to keep it, as they
that receive Christ by his ordinance in the Sacrament, and yet because they
receive him not according to thentent of his ordinance worthily, they are so
much the worse thereby, through there own malice. And therefore to conclude this
place with thauctor who soever eats Christ's flesh and drynketh his blood
has everlasting life with Saint Paulles exposition, if he does it
worthily, or else by the same Saint Paul he has condempnacion. 1. Cor. 11


In the.xcvij. leaf and the second colu^ne, thauctor begins to trauerse
the words of Saint Paul to the Corinthians, and would distinct unworthy
eating in the substance of the Sacrament received, which cannot be. For our
unworthiness cannot altar the substance of gods Sacrament, that is evermore
all one, howesoeuer we swerve from worthiness to unworthiness. And this I would
ask of this auctor, why should it be a fault in the unworthy, not to esteem
the Lords body, when he is taught, if this auctors doctrine be true, that it
is not there at al? If this bread after this auctors teaching be but a figure
of Christ's body it is then but as Ma^na was, the eating whereof, unworthily,
and unfaithfully was no gilte of Christ's body. Erasmus notes these words of
Saint Erasmus
Paul, to be gilty of our Lords body, to prove the prefence of Christ's body
there, who com pareth such an offender to the jews that did shed Christ's
blood maliciouslye, as those do profane it unprofitably, in which sense the
greek commentaryes do also expound it. And where this auctor brings in the
words of Saint Paul, as it were to point out the mattiere. Let a man
examyne himself, and so eat of the bread, and 1. Cor. 11
drink of the cup, for he that eats unworthily. etc. These words of
examinyng, and so eating, declare the thing to be one, ordered to be eaten, and
all the care to be used on our side, to eat worthily, or else Saint Paul had
not said, and so eat. And when Saint Paul ^ayth eat judgment, and this
auctour will remember himself, he must call judgment the effect of that is
eaten, and not the thing eaten: For judgment is neither spiritual meat nor
corporal, but the effect of the eating of Christ in evil men, who is
salvation to good, and judgment to euel. And therefore as good men eating
Christ, have salvation, so evil men eating Christ, have condempnation, and so
for the diversity of the eaters of Christ's body, follows as they be worthy
and unworthy, the effect of condempnacion or life, Christ's Sacrament and his
work also in the substance, of that Sacrament being always one, and what so
ever this auctor talks otherwise in this matter is mere trifles. And yet he
goth about (because he will make all thing clear,) to answer such authors as
the Papists he says bring for there Augusti.
purpose. And first he begins with saint Augustine who writes as playuelye
against this auctours mind, as I would have divised it, if I had no conscience
of truth more then I see sum have, and might with a secret wish have altered
S. Augustineas I had list. And therefore here I make a plain issue with this
auctour, that in the serchyng An issue.
of Saint Augustine, he has trusted his man, or his friend over negligentely
in so great a matter, or he has willyngly gone about to deceive the reader.
For in the place of Saint Augustine against the Donatistes alleged here by
this auctour, which he would with the rest assoyle: Saint Augustine has
these formal words in Latin. Corpus Domini, and Augu. de baptis. li. 5. ca. 8.
sanguis Domini nihilominus erat etiam illis, quibus dicebat Apostolus: qui
manducat indigne iudicium sibi ma^ducat and bibit. Which words be thus much in
English. It was nevertheless the body of our Lord, and the blood of our Lord
also unto them, to whom thappostel said, he that eats unworthily, eats and
drynketh judgment to himself. These be Saint Augustines words, who writes
notably and evidently, that it was nevertheless the body, and blood of Christ to
them that received unworthily, declaryng that their unworthiness, does not
aultre the substance of that Sacrament, and does us to understand therewith,
the substance of the sacrament, to be the body and blood of Christ, and
nevertheless so though the receyuers be unworthy wherein this auctor is so
ouersene, as I think, there was never learned man before, that durst in a
comen welthe, where learned men be, publish such an untruth as this is, to be
answered in a tongue that men know. Yet Peter Martyr wrote in Latin, and
reioyseth not, I think, to have his lies in English. I will bring in here an
other place of saint Augustine to this purpose. Illud etiam De verbis dn^i.
Ser. 11.
quod ait, qui manducat carnem meam, and bibit sanguinem meum, in me manet and
ego in illo, quomodo intellecturi sumus? Nunquid etiam illos sic poterimus
accipere de quibus dixit Apostolus, quod iudicium sibi manducant and bibant:
quum ipsam carnem manducent and ipsum sangninem bibant? Nuuquid and Judas
Magistri venditor, and traditor impius, quamuis primum ipsum manibus eius
confectum sacramentum carnis and sanguinis eius cu^ caeteris discipulis, sicut
apertius Lucas Euange lista declarat, manducaret, and biberet, mansit in
Christo, Aut Christus in eo? Multi denique qui vel cord ficto carnem illam
manducant and sanguinem bibunt, vel cum manducauerint and biberint, apostatae
fiunt, nunquid manent in Christo aut Christus in eis? Sed profecto, est quidam
modus manducandi illam carnem and bibendi illum sanguinem, quomodo qui
manducauerit and biberit in Christo manet and Christus in eo? Non ergo
quocunque modo quisque manducauerit carnem Christi and biberit sanguiuem
Christi manet in Christo and in illo christus. Sed certo quodam modo, quem
modum vtique ipse videbat, quando ista dicebat. The englisse of these words is
this. That same, that he also says, who eats my flesh and drynketh my blood,
dwells in me and I in him, how shall we understand it? May we understand
also them of whom the Apostle spoke, that they did eat to them self, and
drink judgment, when they did eat the same flesh and drink the same blood,
the flesh it self, the blood it self? did not Judas the mycked seller and
betrayer of his master, when he did eat, and drink (as Lucas the euangeliste
declares) the first Sacrament of the flesh and blood of Christ made with his
own hands, dwell in Christ or Christ in him? Finally many that with a
feigned heart eat that flesh and drink the blood, or when they have eaten and
dronken become apostatas, do not they dwell in Christ or Christ in them? But
undoubtedly there is a certain manner of eating that flesh, and drynkyng that
blood, after which manner, who so ever eats and drynketh, dwells in Christ
and Christ in him. Therefore not in what so ever manner any man eats the flesh
of Christ, and drynketh the blood of Christ, he dwells in christ and Christ
in him, but after a certain manner, which manner he saw when he said these
words. This is the sense of Saint Augustines saiynge in Latin, whereby
appears the faith of Saint Augustine to be in the Sacrament, to be eaten and
dronken, very body and blood of Christ, which for the substance of the
Sacrament, euel men receive as good men do, that is to say, as Saint Augustine
does point it out by his words, the same flesh, and the same blood of Christ,
with such an express speech, as he would exclude all difference, that divise
of figure might imagine, and therefore says (ipsam car nem, ipsum sanguinem.)
Which signifies the self same, in dead, not by name only as the auctor of
the book would have Saint Augustine understood, and when that appears,
as it is most manifest, that Judas received the same being wicked, that good
men do, how the same is before the recept by gods omnipotencye present in the
visible Sacrament, and so not received by the only instrument of faith, which
in evil men is not lively, but by the instrument of the mouth, wherein it
enters with the visible element. And yet as Saint Augustine says, dwells
not in him that so unworthily receives, because the effect of dwelling of
Christ is not in him that receives by such a manner of eating, as wicked men
use. Whereby S. Augustine teaches, the diverse effect to ensue of the
diversity of the eating, and not of any diversity of that which is eaten,
whither the good man, or evil man recyue the Sacrament: If I would here
enco^bre the reader, I could bring forth many mo places of saint Augustine
to the confusion and reproufe of this auctors purpose, and yet notwithstanding
to take away that he might say of me, that I way not Saint Augustine, I
think good to allege and bring forth the judgment of Martyn Bucer, touching
saint Augustine, who understands saint Augustine clear contrary to this
auctor, as may plainly appear by that the said Bucer writes in few words
in his Epistell dedicatorye of the great work he sent abroad of his
enarracions of the Gospelles, where his judgment of Saint Augustine in this
point he utters thus. Quoties scribit etiam Iudam ipsum corpus and sanguinem
Domini sumpsisse? Nemo itaque auctoritate. S. patrum dicet christum in sacra
coena absentem esse. The sense in English is this. How often writes he
(speaking of Saint Augustine) Judas also to have received the self body and
blood of our Lord? No man therefore by the authority of the fathers can say
Christ to be absente in the holy soupper. Thus says Bucer who understands
Saint Augustine, as I have before alleged him, and gathers there of a
conclusion that no man can by the fathers sayings prove Christ to be absente
in the holy soupper. And therefore by Bucers judgment, the doctrine of this
auctour, can be in no wise Catholic as dissentynge from that has been
before taught and believed. Whither Bucer will still continue in that he has so
solenly published to the world, and by me here alleged: I can not tell, and
whither he do, or no, it makes no matter, but thus he has taught in his
latter judgment, with A great protestation that he speaks without respect
other then to the truth, wherein because he seemed to dissent from his freundes
he says, (...). Which words have an imitation of an older sayng, and be thus
much to say. (Socrates is my friend, Truth is my best beloved, Socrates.
and the church most regarded,) and with this (Bucer) closith his doctrine of
the sacrament, after he knew all that zwinglius, and Oecola^padius could say in
the matter. And here I will leave to speak of Bucer and bring forth.
Theodoretus, a man much extolled by this Theodor^^us in eplam. 1. Cor. 2.
auctor, who says plainly in his commentaryes upon S. Paul, how Christ
delivered to Judas his precious body and blood, and declares further therewith
in that sacrament to be the truth. So as this auctor can have no foundation
upon either to maynten his figurative speech, or the matter of this fourth
book, which his words plainly impugn saint Hierome in his commentaties
Hierome.
upon the prophet Malachie has first this sentence. Possumus panem, idest
corpus christi, quando indigni accedimus ad altar, and sordidi mundum
sanguinem bibimus. We defile the bread, that is to say, the body of christ
when we cume unworthily to thalrare, and being fylthy drink the clean blood.
Thus says S. Hierome who says fylthy men drink the clean blood, and in an
other place after the same Saint Hierome says. (Polluit christi mysteria
indigne accipiens corpus eius and sanguine^.) He that vnworthly receives the
body and blood of Christ defyleth the mysteries. Can any words be more
manifest and evident to declare S. Hieroms mind how in the visible sacrament
men receive unworthily, which be evil men the body and blood of Christ and
yet these plain places of authority dissembled of purpose, or by ignorance
passed over this auctor, as tough This auctor.
all things were by him clearly discussed to his intent, would by many
co^ceytes furnishe and further his matters, and therefore plays with our
ladies smyling rocking her child and many good mowes, so unseemly for his
person that it makes me almost forget him and my self also. But with such
matterhe fills his leaves forgettyng himself makes me^tio^ of the
cathechisme by him translate, thoriginall whereof, co^futeth these two parts of
this book in few words being prynted in germany, wherein besides the matter
wryte^, is setforth in pictur the manner of the ministering of this sacra me^t,
where is the altar with ca^del light let forth the priest apparelled after the
old sort, and the man to receive kneling barehed and holdyng up his hands,
whiles the priest myuis^reth the host to his mouth, a matter as clear contrary
to the matter of this book as is light and darkness, which now this auctor
would color with speeches of auctors, in a book written to instruct rude
children, which is as sclendre an excuse as ever was hard, and none at al when
thoriginall is looked on.

Emissene to stir up men's devotion cumyng Emissen
to receive this Sacrament, requires the root and foundation thereof, in the
mind of man as it ought to be and therefore exorteth men to take the sacrament
with thande of the heart, and drink with the dranght of the inward man,
which men must needs do that will worthily repare to this feast. And as
Emissene speaks these devout words of thin ward office of the receyuer, so
does he in declaration of the mystrie show, how the Invisible priest with
his secret power by his word does convert the visible cratures in to the
substance of his body and blood, whereof I have before entrated. This auctor
upon these words deuontly spoken by Emissene say the there is required no
corporal presence of Christ's precious body in the Sacrament, continuynge in
his ignorance what the word corporal means. But to speak of Emissene if
by his fay the, the very body and blood of Christ were not present upon the
altar, why does he call it a reverend altar? why to be fed there with
spiritual meats? and why should faith be required to lake upon the body and
blood of Christ, that is not there on thaltare, but as this auctor teaches
only in heaven. and why should he that cummeth to be feed honor those
mysteries there, and why should Emissene allude to thande of the heart and
draught of the inward man if the hand of the body and draught of thoutwarde
man had none office there? All this were vain cloquence, and a mere abuse and
illusion, if the Sacramental tokens were only a figure and if there were no
presence but in figure? why should not Emissene reather have followed the plain
spech of tha^gel to the women that sought Christ, (Iesum quaeritis non est hic)
ye seek Jesus he is not here, And say as this auctor does this is only a
figure, do no worship here, goo up to heaven, and down with thaltare for fear
of illusion which Emissene did not, but called it a reverend altar, and
inuiteth him that should receive to honor that food, with such good words as
before so far descrepau^te from this auctors teaching, as may be, and yet from
him he takes occasion to speak against adoration.

As touching thadoratio^ of Christ's flesh in the Sacrament (which adoration
is a true confession of the holemans soul, and body, if there be opportunite,
of the truth of God in his work) is in my indgement well setforth in the
book of common prayor, where the priest is ordered to knele, and make a prayor
in his own, and the name of all that shall communicate, confessyng therein that
is prepared there, at which time nevertheless, that is not adored that the
bodily eye sceth, but that which fay the knows to be there inuisibly
present, which and there be nothing (as this auctor now teaches) it were not
well. I will not answer this auctors eloquence, but his matter, where it might
hurt, as in the wrong report of Saint Augustine, who speaking of the
adoration of Christ's flesh given to be eaten, does so fation his speech, as
it cannot with any violence be drawn, to such an understanding, as though S.
Augustine should mean of thadoryng of Christ's flesh in heaven as this auctor
would have it. S. Augustine speaks of the geuyng of Christ's flesh to us to
ea^e, and declares after, that he means in the visible Sacrament, which
must be Inuisibly understood and spiritually, not as the Capharnaites did
understand Christ's words carnally to eat that body cut in piaces, and
therefore there may be no such imaginations to eat Christ's body after the
manner he walked here, nor drink his blood as it was shed upon the cross, but
it is a mystery and sacrament that is godly of gods work supernatural above
man's understanding, and therefore spiritually understood shall give life,
which life carnal understanding must needs exclude. And by these my words I
think I declare trully saint Augustines meaning of the truth of this
Sacrament, wherein Christ gives truly his flesh to be eaten, the flesh he
speak of before, taken of the virgin. For the spiritual understanding that
saint Augustine speaks of, is not to exclude the truth of gods work in
the Sacrament, but to extlude carnal imagination, from musyng of the manner of
the work, which is in mysterye such as a carnal man can not comprehend. In
which matter if saint Augustine had had such a faith of the visible
sacrament, as this auctor says himself has now of late, and calls it
Catholic saint Augustine would have uttered it as an expositor plainly in
this place and said there is but a figure of Christ's body, Christ's body and
flesh is in heaven, and not in this visible Sacrament, Christ's speech that
was esteemed so hard, was but a figurative speech and where Christ said (This is
my body) he meant only of the figure of his body, which manner of saynges
saint Augustine uses not in this place, and yet he could speak plainly and
so does he declarynge us first the truth of the flesh, that Christ gives to
be eaten, that is to say the same flesh that he took of the virgen. And yet
because christ geneth it not in a visible manner nor such a manner as the
Capharnaites thought on, nor such a manner as any carnal man can conceive,
being also the flesh given in the Sacrament not a common flesh but a lively,
godly, and spiritual flesh.

Therefore saint Augustine uses words and speech, whereby he denies the gift
of that body of Christ, which we did see, and of the blood that was shed: so
as by affirmation and denial so nere together of the same to be given and the
same not to be given: the mysterye should be thus far opened, that for the
truth of the thing given it is the same, and touching the manner of the
geuynge and the quality of the flesh given, it is not the same. And because
it is the same, Saint Angustine says before we must worship it, and yet
because it is now an hidden godly mysterye, we may not have carnal
Imaginations of the same, but godly, spiritually, and inuisibly understand it.
And because saint Hierome, who was of saint Augustines time, writes in his
commentaries Hierony mus ad Ephesios. (...).
upon saint Paul, (Ad Ephesios,) that may serve for the better opening
hereof, I will write it in here. The words be these. The blood and flesh of
Christ is two ways understood, either the spiritually and godly of which
him self said, my flesh is verily meat and my blood is verily drink, and
unless ye eat my flesh and drink my blood ye shall not have everlasting life.
Or the flesh which was crucified and blood which was shed with the spear,
According to this division, the diversity of flesh and blood, is taken in
Christ's saints that there is one flesh, that shall see the salnatio^ of
God, an other flesh and blood that can not possess the kingdom of heaven.

These be S. Iheromes words. In which thowe see reader a denial of that
flesh of Christ to be given to be eaten that was crucified, but the flesh
given to be eaten to be a godly and spiritual flesh, and a distinction made
between them as is in our flesh, of which it may be said that the flesh we
walk in here, shall not see God, that is to say, as it is corruptible
according to the text of S. Paul, flesh and blood shall not possess heaven and
yet not withstanding we must believe and hope with Job truly, that the same
our flesh shall see god in heaven, after which division, likewise we receive
not in the Sacrament Christ's flesh that was crucified, being so a visible and
mortal flesh, but Christ's flesh glorified incorruptible and impassible a
godly and spiritual flesh, And so that is but one in substance and always
so: the same one is nevertheless for thalteration in the manner of the being of
it divided and so called not the same, wherein saint Hierome and saint
Augustine, used both one manner of speakinge and saint Hierome resemblinge the
division that he rehersith of christ's flesh, to the division of our flesh in
the resurrection, does more plainly open, how the same may be called not
the same, because we believe certainlye the resurrection of the same flesh we
walk in, and yet it shall be by the garment of incorruptibilite not the same
in qualite, and so be verified the scriptures that flesh shall not possess
heaven and I shall see god in my flesh. And here I will note to the reader by
the way saint Hierome wrireth this distinction of Christ's flesh, as a matter
aggreed on, and then in catholic doctrine received, not of his invention, but
in the catholic faith, as aprincipal established, which declares the
belef, to have been of that very godly, and spiritual flesh, given really in
the Sacrament. For else to eat only in faith is spiritually to remember
Christ flesh, as it was visiblie crucified, wherein was accomplished thoblacon
for our sins, and saint Poule wills us in the supper, to show forth, and
to profess the death of Christ, for so Christ would have his death continually
expressed, till his cumminge. And if saint Hierome with other should have
meant of the eatinge of Christ as he sits in heaven reigninge, this
distinction of Christ's flesh, were an idle mattier, and out of purpose, to
compare the distinction in it, to be like the dinstinction of our flesh to
enter into heaven, and not to enter in to heaven, the same and not the same.
And thus I say that this place of saint Hierome shows so evidently both his
and saint Augustines faith that writ at the same time, as there cannot be
desired a more evident matter.

But to return to saint Augustine touching adoration if the very flesh of
Christ were not in the Sacrament truly present, which is as much to say as
in substance present, if it were not in dead present that is to say reallye
present, if it were not corporallye present that is to say, the very, body of
Christ there present god and man? If thiese truths consentinge in one were
not there saint Augustine would never have spoken of adoracion there. No More
he does says this auctor there, but in heaven, let saint Augustines words
quod I be indge, which be thiese, no man eatith that flesh but he first
worshipith it. It is found out how such a 98. Psalm.
footstool of the lordesfote should be worshipped and not only that we do not
sin in worshippinge but we do sin in not worshippinge it. Thiese be saint
Augustines words, which before cannot be draiwen to an understanding of the
worshippinge of Christ's flesh in heaven, where it remains co^tinuallye
glorified, and is of all men Christened, continually worshipped. For as saint
Poule says Christ is so e(...) that every range should co^fess that our (...)
Christieis in the (...) (...).
glory of his father. So (...) the (...) of Christ there in tha^^ are (...)
glory (...)re he reigns, has neither (before) ^e (after) but an (ever)
continual worshipping in glory. Wherefore saint Augustine speakinge of a
(before) must be understood of the worshipping of Christ's flessh present in
the Sacrament, as in the dispensation of his humilite, which Christ cessith
not to do reigninge in glory for although he has fynished his humble patible
conversation, yet he continues his humble dispensation in the parfection of
his mystycall body, and as he is our invisible priest for ever, and our
advocate with his father, and so for us to him a mediator, to who^ he is
equal, so does he vouchesaulf in his supper which continues to make an
effectual remembrance of his offringe for us, of the new testament, confirmed
in his blond, and by his power makith himself present in this visible
Sacrament, to be therein of us truly eaten and his blood truly droncken, not
only in faith, but with the truth and ministry of our bodily mouth, as god
has willed and commanded us to do which pre(...) of Christ in this (...) of
(...) to releaue us (...) us spiritually, we (...) (...). Augustine said,
before we ^ake and we (...) syne (...)ing, but we (...) not adoring,
remembringe the divine nature unite to Christ's flesh, and therefore of flesh not
seuerid from the godhed which admonishme^t of saint Augustine, declarith he
meant not of the worshippinge of Christ's flesh in heaven, where can be no
daungier of such a thought where all tungs confess Christ to be in the glory
of his father, of which christ as he is there in glory continually to be
worshhipped, it were a cold saying of saint Augustine to say we do not
sin in worshippinge Christ in heaven, but sin in not worshippinge as though
any could have dowbted whither Christ should be worshipped in his humanite in
heaven being inseparable, unite to the divinity. And when I say in his
humanite I speak not properly as that mystery requires, for as Christ's
person is but one of two perfect natures, so the adoration is but one as Cyrill
declares it, and therefore abhors thadition of a syllable to speak of
coadoration. And will this auctor attribute to saint Augustine such a
grossnesse to have written and given for a lesson, that no man synneth to
worship Christ's flesh in heaven reiguinge in glory? wherefore taking this to
be so far from all probabilite, I said before these words of saint
Augustine, cannot be drawn with any teynters to stretche so far as to reach
to heaven, where every Christen man knowith and professith the worshippinge of
Christ in glory as they be taught also to worship him in this dispe(...)tion
of (...) humility when he makes present himself in this Sacrament, whom we
should not receive into our mouth before we adore him and by saint Augustines
rule, we not only not sin in adoringe, but also sin in not adoringe him.
And for the more manifest confirmation that saint Augustine ought thus to be
understood, I shall bring in saint Ambrose saying, of whom it is probable,
S. Augustine to have learned that he writethe in this matter saint Ambrose
words in his Ambrosi. de spu^ ca^cto libr. 3. cap. 12.
book de spiritu sancto. lib. 3. cap. 12. Non mediocris igitur question, and
ideo diligentius co^sideremus quid sit scabellu^, Legimus enim alibi. Caelum
mihi thronus, terra aute^ scabellum pedum meorum. Sed nec terra adoranda nobis,
quia creatura est dei, videamus tamen ne terram illam dicat adorandam propheta,
quam dominus Jesus in carnis assumptione suscepit. Itaque per scabellum, terra
iutelligatur, per terram autem caro christi, quam hodie quoque in mysteriis
adoramus, and quam apostoli in Domino Jesus (vt supra diximus) adoraruut, neque
em^ diuisus christus, sed vnus. which words may be englished thus. It is
therefore no mean question, and therefore we shoould the more diligently
consider, what is the foot stool. For we read in an other place, heaven is
my throne and the earth the foot stool of my feet. But yet the earth is not
to be worshipped of us, because it is a creature of god. And yet let us see
though lest the prophet mean that earth to be worshipped, which our Lord
Jesus took in the taking of flesh. So then by the footstool let the earth
be understood, and then by the earth the flesh of Christ, vhiche we do now
Worship also in the mysteries, and which the apposteles as we have before
said worshipped in our lord I hesu, for Christ is not divided but one.
Hitherto S. Ambrose, whereby may appear how saint Ambrose, and saint
Augustine, took occasion to open there faith and doctrine touching adoracion,
upon discussion of the self same words of the prophet david* And S. Ambrose
expressly notith our adoracion in the mysteries, where we worship christ's
flesh I nuisiblie present, as the appostelles did, when Christ was visibly
present with the^. And thus with thiese so plain words of saint Ambrose
consonante to those of saint Augustine, and the openinge of S. Augustines
words as before, I trust I have made manifest, how this auctor trauaileth
against the stream, and laborith in vain to wrieth saint Augustine to his
purpose in this matter. The best is in this auctor that he audeleth saint
Augustine no worse then the rest, but all after one sort, because they be all
of like sort against his new catholic faith, and conferme the old true
catholic faith or do not improve it. For of this high mystery, thauctors
write sum more obscurely, and decklye, then other, and use diuersites of
speeches, and words where with the true doctrine has been of a very few
impugned, but ever in vain, as I trust in god shall be most in vain, Hahinge
this auctor vttred such untruths with sumo^he blind ignorance, as this
work well wayed and considered, that is to say, who made ityn, when he made
it, and of like how many were, or might have been and should have been of
counsel in so great a matter who if there wrere any e all reprouid in this
one work, all such circumstaunces co^sydered this book may do as much good
to releaue such perplexite, as altercacion has engendered, and so do as god
service to the truth, as was meant there by to hindre and Impair it. And this
shall suffice for an auswere to this fourth book.

The confutation of the second book.
Having declared how much again all truth this auctor would bear in hand,
that the real presence, the corporal presence, and substanciall presence of
Christ's most precious body and blood in the Sacrament, is not the true
Catholic doctrine, but a divise of the Papists, which is a term wherewith
this auctor does vncharitablye charge the kings true subjects, among whom
he knows a great many to be of that faith he calls now Papists: But
setting words a part and to cume to the mattier as I have showed this auctor
to err partelye by willfulnes, partelye by ignorance in thunderstandyng of
the old auctors, concerning the true real presence of Christ's body and blood
in the Sacrament: So I trust to show this auctor ouerseen in tharticle of
transubstantiacion. For enter whereunto, first I say thus, that albeit the
word transubstantiacion, was first spoken of by public auctorite in that
assemble of learned men of Christendom, in a general consayle, where the
Bysshppe of rome was present, yet the true matter signified by that word, was
older and believed before, upon the true understanding of Christ's words, and
was in that counsel confessed, not for the auctorite of the Bishop of rome,
but for thauctorite of truth, being tharticle, such as touches not the
auctorite of the Bishop of rome, but the true doctrine of Christ's mysteries,
and therefore in this realm, thauctorite of rome c^ssing, was also confessed
for a truth by all the clergy of this realm in an open co^saile, specially
discussed, and though the hardenes of the law that by parliament was
established, of that and other articles has been repelled, yet that doctrine
was never hitherto by any public consaile or any thing set forth by
auctorite empayred, that I have hard, wherefore me thinks this auctor should
not improve it by the name of the Bishop of rome, seeing we read how truth was
vttred by Balaa^ and caiph as also, and Number. 22 Ioha^. 11.
S. Paul teaches the Philippe^ses that whither it be by co^tencion or envy,
so Christ be preached the person should not empaire thop^ing of truth, if it be
truth, which Luther in deed would not allow for truth impugning tharticle of
transubsta^tiacio^, not meaning thereby as this auctour does to empayre the
truth of the very presence of Christ's most precious body in the Sacrament of
the aultare, as is a for said. In the discussion of which truth of
tra^substa^tiacio^, I for my part should be specially defended by two means
wherewith to anoyde the envious name of Papist. One is that zuinglius himself,
who was no Papist as is well known, nor god christian man as sum said neither,
says play^ly writing to luther in the matter of the sacrament it must needs be
true that if the body of Christ be really in the sacrament, there is of
necessite transubstantiacion also. Wherefore seeing by luthers travail who
fan^red not the bishop of Rome neither, and also by evidence of the truth
most certain and manifest it apperith that according to the treue catholic
faith Christ is reallye present in the sacrament, it is now by Suinglius
judgment a necessary consequence of that truth to say there is
transubstantiacion also, which shall be one mean of purgation that I defend
not transubstantiacion as dependinge of the bishop of Romes determination,
which was not his absolutely, but of a necess(...)e of the truth, housoeuer it
likes dun^ or gabriel, to write in it, whose sayings this auctor uses for
his pleasure. An other defense: is that this auctor himself says that it is
over great an absurdite to say that bread insensible with many other terms
that he addith should be the body of Christ, and therefore. I think that the
(is) that is to say, the inward nature and essence of that Christ delivered
in his supper to be eaten and dro^cken, was of his body and blood, and not of
the bread and wine, and therefore can well agree with this auctor that the
bread of wheat is not the body of Christ / nor the body of Christ made of
it as of a matter, which consideracions will enforce him that believes the
truth of the presence of the substance of Christ's body, as the treue
catholic faith teachith, to assent to transubstantiacion, not as determined
by the church of Rome, but as a co^seque^t of treuth believed i^ the mystery
of the sacrament, which transubstantiacio^ how this auctor would impugn, I will
without quarrel of e^uious words consider, and with true opening of his
ha^deling the mattier: doubt not to make the reader to see that he fights
against the truth.

I will pass over the vnreuerent handelinge of Christ's words (This is my
body) which words I hard this auctor (if it be the same that is named) ones
rehearse more seriously in a sole^^^e open audience to the conviction and
condempnacion (as folowid, of one that erroncously mainteyned against the
sacrament the same that this auctor callith now the catholic faith. But to
the purpose the simplicite of faith in a Christen man's breast, does not so
precisely mark and stay at the sillables of Christ's words, as this auctor
pretendith, and knowinge by faith the truth of Christ's words, that as he said
he wrought do not measure gods secret working, after the prolacion of our
sillables, whose work is in one instau^ce how soever speech in us require a
successiue vttrau^ce, and the manner of hand linge, this auctor uses to bring
the mystical words in co^te^pte were meater in an. Ethinkes mouth to ieste
out all, then to pass the lips of such an auctor to play which the
syllables after this sort, for although he may read in sum blind gloss that
in the instante af the last syllable gods work is to be accounted wrought
being a good lesson to admonish the ministre to pronounce al. Yet it is so
but a private opinion and reverently vttred, not to put the virtue in the
Last syllable nor to s^orne the Catholic faith after which manner taking
example of this Auctor. If an Ethnike jest of (Fiat lux) at (fi) was nothing
and then at (at) was yet nothing (at lu) was nothing but a little litell
peringe put an (x) to it and it was suddenly (Lux) and then light, what Christen
man would handle either place thus? and therefore reader let this enter of the
matter serve for an argument with what spirit this matter is handled, but to
answer that this auctor notes with an exclamacon, Oh good lord how would
they have bragged if christ had said this is no bread. Here I would question
with this auctor whither Christ said so or no? and reason thus. Christ's body
is no material bread, Christ said This is my body, ergo he said this is not
bread. And the first part of this reason this auctor affirms in the 59
leaf. And the second part is Christ words, and therefore to avoid this
conclusion thonly way is to say, that Christ's speech was but a figure, which
the catholic doctrine says is false? and therefore by the catholic doctrine
Christ's saying This is my body, says in effect This is no bread, whereat
this auctor says they would brage if Christ had said so. In speech is to be
considered that every yea co^teineth an nayin it naturaly so as whosoever says
This is bread, says it is no wine, whosoever says this is wine, says it is
no bread. If a lapidarie says this is a diamo^de, he says it is no glass,
he says it is no crystal, he says it is no white safyer, So Christ saying
this is my body, faith it is no bread which plainnes of speech caused
Suinglius to say plainlye, if there be present the substance of the body of
Christ there is transubstantiacion, that is to say, not the substance of
bread, and therefore who will plainelye deny transubstantiacion must deny the
true presence of the subs^ance of Christ's body as this auctor does, wherein I
have first conuynced him and therefore use that victory for his overthrow in
transubstantiacion. I have showed before how Christ's words were not
figurative when he said, this is my body, and yet I will touch here such
testimony, as this anctor bringith out of Hilarie, for the purpose of
transubstantiacion in the, xxv. leefe of this book in thiese words. There is
a figure says H^^arie / for bread and wine be out wardly seen, and there is
also a truth of that figure, for the body and blood of Christ be of a truth
inwardelye believed. Thiese be Hilaries words as this auctor allegith the^, who
was he says within 350 years of christ. Now I call to thy Judgment good
reader could any man divise more pithiewordes for the proof of the real
presence of Christ's body and blood, and the co^de^pnacio^ of this auctor that
would have an only figure? Here in hilaries words is a figure compared to
truth, and sight but wardly to belief inwardly. Now our belief is grounded
upon gods word which is this: This is my body, in which words hilarie
testifies that is inwardly believed is a truth, and the figure is in that is
see^ outwardly, I take hilarie here as this auctor allegith him. whereby I ask
the reader is not this auctor auerthrowe^ that christ speech is not
figurative, but true and proper being inwardly true that we believe? Ye will
say unto me what is this to tra^substa^tiacio^, to the reproufe whereof, it was
brought in? because he says bread, and wine are seen. First I say, that it
overthrows this auctor fortruth, of the presence of christ's body, and every
overthrow therein, overthrows this auctor in tra^substa^tiacio^, not by
auctorite of the church of Rome, but by consequence in truth as Suinglius
says, who shall serve me to avoid papistrie. If one ask me, what say ye
then to hilarie that bread and wine aresee^? I say they be in dead see^, for
they appear so, and therefore be callid so, as Isaac said of Jacob, it was his
voice, and yet by his sense of feling, denied him Esau, which was not Esau,
Gene. 27.
but was Jacob, as the voice from within did declare him. If ye will ask me
how can there (according to hilaries words) be in the outward visible
creatures any figure, onles the same be in dead, as they appear bread and
wine? I will answer even as well as this out ward obiecte of the se^sible
hearynes of Jacob, rese^blinge Esau was a figure of christ's humanite and of
the ve ry humanite in dead. Thus may Hilarie be answered to anoyde his
auctorite from contraryinge tra^substa^tion. But this auctor shall never avoid
that him self has brought out of hilarie, which ouerthro weth hi^ in his
figurative speech, and consequently in his denial of tra^substantiation also,
as shall appear in the further handling of this matter.

Where this auctor in the 18 leaf co^parith these S. Poules words, The bread
that we break, is it not the communion of the body of christ, to be
thexpo^mdyng of christ's words This is my body I deny that for christ, words
declared the substance of the sacrament when he said This is my body and S.
Paul declarith the worthy use of it according to Christ's institucion, and by
the words (the bread that we break) does signify, the hole use of the supper,
wherein is breakyng, blessyng, thauckes giving, dispe^sing, receiui^g, and
eating So asonely breakyng is not the communion, and yet by that part in a
figure of speech. S. Paul means all, being the same as appears by the
scripture, a term in spech to go break bread (although it be not always so
taken) whereby cosignifie to go celebrate our lords supper, and therefore bread
in that place may signify the commen bread as it is adhibite to be
consecrate. which by the secret power of god turned in to the body of
Christ, and so distribute and received, is the communion of the body of christ
as the cup is likirise of the blood of Christ, after the benediction, which
benediction was not spoken of in the bread, but yet must be understood, As
for Christ's calling of bread his body, is to make it his body who as saint
Paul says calls that is not, as it were, and so makethe it to be. Primo.


Thargumentes this auctor uses in. 19. and. 20. leef of thordre of Christ's
speeches as the evangelists rehearse them, be captious diuises of this auctor,
in case he knowethe what saint Augustine writes, or else ignorance if he
has not red saint Augustine, (De doctrina Christiana) where he geuteh a rule
of recapitulatio^ as he calls it, when that is told after that was done
before, and therefore we may not argue so firmly upon the order of the telling
in the speech. S. Augustine brings an example Augustinus de doctrina (...).
libro. 3. Cap. 36.
that by order of tellyng, Adam was in paradise or any tree was brought forth
for feadyng, with diverse other, wherewith I will not enco^bre the reader.
Theuangeliste reherseth what Christ said, and did simplye and truly, which
story we must so place in understanding, as we tryfle not the mystery, at
stayng and stoppyng of lettres and syllables. And therefore though the word
(take, eat) goo before the words (This is my body) we may not argue that
they took it and eat it before christ had told them what he gave them, and
all these often rehersalles of bread, with he took bread, he brake bread, and
blessed bread, and if ye will add held bread, all this induce no consequence
that he therefore gave bread. For he gave that he had consecrate, and gave that
he made of bread. If Christ when he was tempted to make stones bread, had
taken the stones and blessed them and delivered them saiynge, This is bread,
had he then delivered stones, or rather that he made of stones bread? Such
manner of reasonyng uses Peter Martyr, as this auctor does, whose folly I may
well say he saw not to eschwe it, but as appears rather to follow it. And
yet not content to use this fond reasonyng, this auctor calls Papists to
witness, that they might lawgh at it, because the Eua^geliste tells the
story so as Christ said, (drink) and then could after what it was, this
auctor fansieth that the Apostels should be so hasty to drink ere Christ had
told them what he gave, which and they had, I think he would have stayed
the cup with his hand, or bid them rary, whiles he had told them more, I
will no further travail with this resonyng, which it is pity to hear in such
a matter of grauite, of such consequence as it is: both in body and soul. We
may not tryfle with Christ's words after this sort. When S. Paul says, we
be partakers of one bread, he speaks not of material bread, but of Christ's
body our heavenly bread, which to all is one, and cannot be consumed, but
able to fead all the world, and if this auctor gives credit to Theodoretus,
whom he calls an holy man, the^ shall he never find the Sacrament called
bread after the sanctificacion, but the bread of life, the like whereof should
be in an Epistell of Chrysostom, as Peter Martyr allegeth, not yet prynted, by
whose auctorices if they have any, as in there place this auctor makes much
of them, al these arguments be al tryfles, for all the namynge of bread by
Christ, and Saint Paul and all other, must be understood before the
sanctificacion and not after. And if thou reader lokest after upon Theodoretus,
and that Epistell, Thou shall find true that I say, whereby all this
questyoning with Papists is only a dalyinge for this auctour pleasure
against his own auctors, and all learning.

In the third Chapter written in the.xxi. leaf it troubles this auctour that
the doctrine of transubstantiacion, is in his Judgment against natural
reason, and natural operacion, in the entrye of which matter he grants
wisely that they should not prevail against gods word, and yet he says,
when they be joined with gods word they be of a great moment to co^ferme any
truth, wherein if he means to confirm gods word by reason, or gods
mysteryes by natural operacion, mine understanding cannot reach that
doctrine, and is more strange to me, then this auctor makes transubstantiacion
to be to him. As for the reason of (vacuum) declares a (vacuum) that nature
abhors not. And if we speak after the rules of nature, quantite fills the
place rather then substance. And shortly to answer this auctor, it is not said
in the doctrine of transubstautiat io^, that there remains nothing, for in
the visible form of bread, remains the propre obiec^e of every sense truly,
that is seen with the bodily eye, is truly seen, that is felt is truly felt,
that is sauered is truly sauered, and those things corrupt putrify,
nurrisne and consume after the truth of the former nature, God so ordryng it
that create al, using singulerly that creature of bread not to unity it unto
him as he did man's nature, to be in bread impanate, and breaded as he was in
flesh incarnate. And as for reason in place of service as being inferior to
faith, will agree with the faith of Transubstantiacion welynoughe. For if our
faith of the true presence of Christ's very body he true, as it is most true
grounded upon the words of Christ. (This is my body:) Then reason yeldyng in
that truth, will not strive with transubsta^tiacio^, but plainly affirm that by
here Judgment, if it be the body of Christ it is not bread. For in the rule
of come^ reason, the grant of one substance is the denial of an other, and
therefore reason has these co^clusio^s througly, what soever is bread, is no
wine, what soever is wine, is no milk, and so forth. And therefore being ones
believed this to be the body of Christ, reason says by and by, it is not
bread, by the rule aforesaid, whereby appears how reason does not strive
with transubstantiacion, being ones conquered with faith of the true presence
qf Christ's body, which is most evident, and no whitte darkened, by any thing
this auctour has brought. As for natural operation, is not in all men's
Judgments as this auctour takes it, who seems to repute it for an
inconvenience to say that the accidents of wine do sour and wax vinegre.
But Wlpian a man of notable learning, is not afraid to write, in the law.
In venditionibus de contrahenda emptione, in the pandectes, that of wine and
vinegre there is (prope eadem vsia) in manner one substance, wherein he shows
him self, far against this auctors skill, which I put for an example to show
that natural operations have had in natural men's judgments diverse
consideracio^s, one sumtime repugnante to an other, and yet the auctors of both
opinions called Philosophers all, Among which sum thought (for example) they
spoke wisely that esteemed all thing to altre as swiftelye as the water runs
in the stream, and thought therefore no man could vttre a word being the same
man in the end of a word, that he was when he began to speak, and used a
similitude. Like as a man standing in one place cannot touch the same one
water twice in a runnynge stream, no more can a man be touched the same man
twice but he altreth as swiftely as does the stream. These were laughed to
skorne, yet they thought themself wise in natural speculation. Aristotel
(that is much esteemed and worthily) fansyed a first matter, in all things to
be one, in which consideracion he seems to be as extreme in a stay, as the
other fond Philosophers were in mouynge. By which two extremites I condemn
not natural speculation, wherewith I think God pleased, for man to marvel in
co^te^placion of his inferior works, and to tame his rash witin the
inexplicable, variete of it, but to use it so, as to make it an open adversary
to relligion, it is me seems without all purpose. The doctrine of
transubstantiacion does not teach no earthly thing to remain in the
Sacrament, but contrary wise that the visible form of bread and wine is there
as the visible sign of the Sacrament, and to be the same in greatness, in
thicknes, in weight, in savor, and taste, in propriete also to corrupt,
putrify, and nurrish as it did before, and yet the substance of those visible
creatures, to be converted into the substance (as Emissene says) of the body
of Christ. And here will reason do service to faith to say if there be a
conversion in dead as faith teaches, and none of the accidents be converted,
then the substance is converted, for in every thing all is substance and
accidents, but the accidents be not chaunhed, and yet a change there is, it
must needs be then that substance is changed. Which deduction reason will
make and so agree with transubstantiacion inconvenient due service. And thus I
have gotten reasons good will, whatsoever this auctor says, and from the
ground of faith have by reason deduced such a conclusion to prove
transubstantiacion, as onles he destroy the true faith of the presence of
Christ's very body (which he cannot,) must needs be allowed. And as for
natural operacion of putrifiynge, engenbryng wor^es, burning, and such
experiences, which being, the substance of bread absent, this auctor
thincketh cannot be so, when he has thought througly, he can of his thought
conclude it only to be marvel, and it be so, as against the comen rules of
philosophy, wherein as me seems it were a nerer way, as we be admonished to
leave serchyng of (how) of the work of god in the mystery of Christ's
presence, being that the celestial part of the Sacrament, so not to search
(how) in thexperience of thope racion of nature, of the visible earthely part
of the Sacrament. When God sent Ma^na in deserte, the people saw many
meruayles in it, besides the come^ operacion of nature, and yet they never
troubled them self with (howes.) And as one very well Writes, it is
consonante that as there is a great miracle in the work of god to make there
present the substance of the body of Christ: so likewise to knowledge the
miracle in the absence of the substance of bread, and both the heavenly and
earthely part of the Sacrament to be myraculouse, and so many miracles to be
joined together in one agrees with the xcellencie of the Sacrament. As for
thobiectio^s this auctor makes in this matter be such as he finds in those
scolasticall writers, that discuss as they may or labor theraboute wherewith
to satisfy idle imaginacions, and to make learned men prompt and ready to say
sumwhat to these tryfles, whose arguments this auctor takes for his
principal fondacion. For plain resolution and auoydyng whereof, if I would
now for my part bring for the there solutions and answers, there were a
part of scole Theology, so brought into English, to no great praise of either
of our lernings, but our vain labor to set abroad other men's trauayles to
trouble rude wits with matter not necessary, and by such *vnreuerent
disputynge, and altercacio^ to hinder the truth. Finally all that this auctor
reherseth of absurdity repugneth in his estimacion only to the conclusion of
philosophy, which should nothing move the humble simplicite of faith in a
christian man, who merueyleth at gods works and reputeth can not comprehend
the ways and means of them.

As in ansvveryng to the third Chapittre I have showed how reason received in
to faythes service does not strive with tra^substa^tiatio^, but agrees well
with it: so I trust to show how man's senses which this auctor calls the
five wits be no such direct adversaries to tra^substanciation, as a matter
whereof they can no skyll. And therefore to a question this auctor asks in
thend of the second column (...) the. 22. sect which is this. If we believe
our senses in thaccidentes, why may we not do the like of the substance? I
answer thus that the senses can no skyll of substance as learned men speak of
substance, nor this auctor neither, if a man should judge him by this question.
For and a sensual man, one that folowith his rude senses would say, Tume
hither master scoler I here much talkyng in this world of substance, and
accidence, and if he were of a merry nature, would say his litel boy had learned
his accidence, but himself wo^teth not perfitely what substance means, as
clerks term it, and bringyng forth a piece of bread, an other of chese, and a
pot of ale: would desire the scoler to learn him the substance of them, and
show it with his finger, and show him also what difference, between the
substance of bread, chese and ale, I think the scoler with thaduise of all at
Cambredge and Oxforde also, could not do it, and the more the scoler should
travail with such a rude man so sensual in the matter, I think he should
be the further of, onles the sensual man would set a part his rude wits and
learn of the scoler sum reasonable understanding which is that the substance
is the inward nature, wherein those that be accidents do naturally stay, the
quantite immediately, and the rest by mean of quantite, in which the rest may
be said to stay, which words were new divinity to this man, who touching
the bread would ask the scoler rowndely, Tallest thowe not this substance,
this good rownde thick piece that I handle? The scoler would answer, sir as I
shall answer yone, you will say I play the sophister, for I must speak
learning to you that you ca^ no skill of, and be not angry though I tell you,
so for and ye were learned, ye would not ask me this question, for substance as
it is properly understood to be of this or that thing, is properly neither
seen by it self or felt, and yet by reason, comprehended truly to be in that
we feel and see, nevertheless in come^ speech and in the speech of such as
for the purpose speak, after the com^^ (...), (...) word (...) is used to
signify that is (...) or felt, and so ye may say ye see the substance or feale
the substance of bread, and yet yet ye (...) (...) (...) see but the color,
and by it the largeness, and feale the heat, or coldenes, moisture, or
drynes, weight, or lightness, hardenes, or softnes, thicknes, and thynnes. If ye
will learn what substance is ye must leave your outward se^ces and consider in
your understanding how in every thing that is, there is a stay, which we
call a substance, being the principal part of every thing, which failing we
say that special thing not to be, As where the substance of bread is nor,
there that special thing bread is not, because bread is as every other natural
visible thing is, of two parts substance and accidents, now if the one
part that is to say substance be not there, which can be but by miracle, then
is no bread proprely there, because the one and chief part is not there, and
yet I say not nothing is there, for the other part remanynge has a being as
gods visible creature and may be called the visible part of the bread, and
therefore the outward kind and form of bread and thappara^ce of bread and a
true se^sible part of bread, and therefore be called also by the name of bread,
not that it is so properly, but after the come^ speech and capacite of me^, and
may be called the nature of bread signifiyng the propriete and the matter of
bread signifiynge the grossenes. The rude man I think would herat say, here is
sophistry in dead, for here is substance and no substance, matter of bread
and no bread, appearance of bread and no bread, called bread and no bread, this
is to play iugling where it happens. Wherein this rude man for want of true
understanding of the words and perfect consideration of the matter speaks
thus fondely, who if he should their upon require the scoler to show him sum
difference of the very substance between bread, and chese, and ale, what could
the learned scoler answer here, but eue^ fra^kly declare his ignorance and say
I know none, which is as much to say as I know their is a difference, but I
wot not what it is. Whereunto I trow the rude man would say to the scoler, the^
art thowe with all thy learning as very a fool as I, to speak of a
difference and ca^ not tell what it is. Now if the scoler should utter eue^th
extremite of his learning in propretermes, and say I know bread is no chiese
and chiese is none ale, and of there accide^tal parts I ca^ in deed show
differences, but of the very substance none. The rude man if his nature were
not very dull, would laugh rowndely to here a scoler utter for a point of
lerning, that bread is no chiese, and chiese is none ale, which who so knows
not, is a very fool, and merrily to knit up the matter would keape the
accide^tes of his bread, chiese, and ale for himself, and give the substance to
the scoler if he can divide it, as a reward for his cunning to his better
nurcitour. And this I write after this gross sort, to (...) that this matter
of substance, is not (...) understood, as se^ces exercised (...) perceive it
and how ma^s outward se^ces ca^ not as this auctor would have it be judges of
the inward nature of substance, which reason persuades to be, vsinge the
service of the senses for induction of the knolege of it, in which judgment
upon there reaporte happens many times much deceyte. Titus liuius, speaks
of a great number of diverse dishes of meat, made in a solemn supper, whereat
the g^stes wondered, to see such a variete at that time of the year, and when
they demanded of it, answer was made, the substance was but one all hogs
flesh, so as thalteration in the accidents, deceived there Judgments. That
stone which among many thought to have sum skill, has been taken for a
precious diamonde, has after by cunning lapidaries, been Judged to be but a
white safier, and contrary wise. So easlye may our judgment upon the report
of our senses fall in error, not that the senses be properly deceived, but
rather the man that is grossly sensual, and judges fondly by the^. For the
very substance is not the propre obiecte of any of the five wits, but of
their report considered in reason denied, and fomtyme gessed at, where of
ensues great error and (quid pro quo) among the potycaries and learned also in
things strange, where of they have but accidental marks. Wherefore upon
co^fideracio^ of the premises it may easly appear how the question of this
auctor, why the se^ces be not believed, in knowledge of substa^ces, as in knolege
of accide^tes may bereasonally answered. And the^ if the judgment of reason in
thestimation of godeds natural works and denyinge that this substance, when
by accidents it should seem otherwise, reason does stay sensualite, and when
men of experience knowledge, and credit, have determined such a certain stone
to be a very true dyamonde, other ignora^te will be ashamed to say the contrary.
And if a man fearinge himself deceived to have bought one kind of drunges for
an other, and yet mistrusting wisely his own iugme^t, caused it to be wiened
by men of knolege, good faith and honesty, if they affirm it to be the very
thing, this manne will then condemn his own imagination and upon credit
call it so, and take it so to be, wherefore if in thiese things I say reason
does in a man stay sensualyte, and if knowledge with honesty rules the
judgment rude of understanding, and finally if credit among men be so
much regarded, how much more convenient is it, that faith in gods word
(wherein can be no deceit as there is in men) should altre and change, man's
judgment in reason, and bring it in to thobedience of ^ayth^ Of that is bread
after the judgment of our reason, after the report of our se^ces, Christ
determines unto us the substance of that to be his body saying. This is my
body, why shall not now a true christian man answer ever according to his
faith, to say and profess the same, to be the substance of christ's body
upon credit of Christ's words, as well as the carnal man will upon reaport
of his senses conclude in reason, there to be the substance of bread? whereby
is not taken away the credit of our senses as this auctor supposes, which
have there obiectes still true, as they had before. For the color, greatness,
sauore, and taste, al remain truly with thexperyences of them as before. Upon
whose reaporte reason neueethelesse now reduced to the obsequie of faith,
forbeareth reuerentlye, to conclude against the truth of faith, but
according to faith confesses the substance to be the very substance of
Christ's body, and the accidents to remain in their very true nature,
because faith teaches not the contrary, and that it agrees with the rule
of faith so to be, and therefore remains a very true greatness, thicknes, and
wayght, which may be called in comen speech, substance, signifiynge the
outward nature, and in that sense, Theodorete reasonynge with an heretic
semethe to call it, because Having spoken of substance remainynge, he
declares what he means by it, adding it may be seen and felt as before,
which is not the nature of substance properlye, but by like comen speech
that remains may be called matter, as Origene called it wherein also
remaynethe true savor, and taste with true propriete to corrupt, or putrify,
and also nurrishe, God for ordrynge (...) faith of the true manhood in Chr^ste
is truly byleued, by true preachinge there of, and by the scriptures, not by
the outward senses of mean which al together we must confess, could be no
certain ineui^able prouf there of. And therefore Christ appearinge to his
disciples goinge in to Ema^s opened the scriptures to them, for the prouf of
his death, that he suffered as very man, and yet he used also in some part to
preach to there senses, with sensible exhibition of himself unto the^, and so
all Christ's doings which were most true, do bear testimony to the truth,
but in there degree of testimony, and the fealinge of saint Thomas being (as
saint Gregory says) miraculeuse, serves for prouf of an other thing, that
gods workein miracle, does not empaire the truth of the thing wrought, and
so saint Thomas touched then Christ, as truly by miracle, after his
resurrection, in his body glorified, as if he had touched his body before
glorificacion. Finally in Christ's acts or his ordinances be no illusions,
all is truth and perfect truth, and our senses in the visible forms of bread
and wine, be not illuded, but have there proper obiectes in those accidents,
and reason in carnal understanding, brought and subdued in obsequie to faith,
does in the estimacion of the host consecrate, yield to faith, according
whe^unto we confe^ ^ruely, the same to be the body of Christ.

Where this auctors would all the Papists to lay their heads together. etc.
I know no such Papists, but this I say without further counsel which
this auctor with all his counsel shall not avoid. We believe most certainly
the resurrection of our flesh, and be persuaded by Catholic teaching, that
the same flesh by participation of Christ's godly flesh in the Sacrament,
shall be made incorruptible, Joan. 6.
and yet not after the judgment of our senses, and conclusions gathered of
them, considering the manner of the continual consumptio^ of the said bodies,
whereof sum philosophers have at lenght after their reason declared their mind,
whom Christen men co^tem^e withal thexperie^ce of senses, which they allege
being vehement in that matter, we read in scripture of the fedyng of Angels,
when ^oth received Genesis 18.
them, I will spend no mo words herein, but having avoided this authors
reasonyng against tra^substantiacio^. Now let us examine his authorities. First
he begins with Iustine the Martyr. Whose words be not truly by this author
here reported, which be these truly translate out of the greek. When the
Justinius.
Prieast has ended his thanks geuyng, and prayours, and all the people has
said, Amen, they whom we call deacons give to every one then present, a part
of the bread, and of the wine and water consecrated, and carry part to those
that be absente, and this is that food, wh^che is among us called
(Eucharistia,) whereof it is lawful for no man to be partaker except he be
persuaded those things to be true that be taught us, and be baptized in the
water of regeneracion, in remission of sins, and ordreth his lif^ after the
manner, which Christ has taught. For we do not take these for commen bread or
drink, but like as Jesus Christ our Savior incarnate by the word of God,
had flesh and blood for our salvation, even so we be taught the fode,
(wherewith our flesh and blood be nourrisshed by alteracion) when it is
consecrate by the prayour of his word, to be the flesh and blood of the same
Jesus incarnate. For the Apostelles in those there works, which be called
Gospelles, teach that Jesus did so command them, and after he had taken the
bread, and ended his geuyng tankes, said, do this in my remembrance, This is
my body. And like wise taking the cup after he had given thanks, said: This
is my blood and did give them to his Apostels only. And here I make an issue
with this author, An issue.
that he wittyngly corrupts Iustine in the allegacion of him, who writes not
in such form of words, as this author allegeth out of his second Appologie,
nor has any such speech, (The bread, water, and wine in this Sacrament, ar
meats ordained purposely to give thanks to God,) and therefore be called
(Eucharistia,) nor has not these words (they be called the body and blood of
Christ) but has in playue words, that we be taught this food consecrate by
gods word, to be the flesh and blood of Christ, as Christ in his incarnation
took flesh and blood, nor has not this form of words placed to have that
understanding, (how the same meat and drink is changed into our flesh and
blood,) for the words in Iustine speaking of alteracion of the fode, have an
understanding of the fobe, as it is before the couse cracion, showing how
Christ used those creatures in this mystery, which by alteracion nurrish our
flesh and blood. For the body of Christ, which is the very celestial
substauce of the host consecrate is not changed, but without al alteracion,
spiritually nurrisheth the bodies and souls of them, that worthily receive the
same to immortalite. whereby appears this authors conclusion (that bread and
wine remain still, which is turned into our flesh and blood,) is not deduced
upon Iustines words, truly understood, but is a gloss, invented by this
auctor and a peruertyng of Iustines words, and there true meaninges. Whereupon I
may say, and conclude, even as this au ctor erreth in his reasonyng of mother
wit against transubsta^tiacion, eue^ so erreth he in the first allegatio^ of
his auctorites by plain mysceportynge, let it be further named or thought on
as the thing deserves.

Next Iustine, is Iren in thallegatio^ of who^, this auctor makes also an
untrue report who has not this form of words in the fourth book (contra
Vale^tinu) that the bread wherein we give thanks unto God although it be of the
earth, yet when the name of God is called upon, it is not then commen bread,
but the bread of thanks geuyng, having two things in it, one earthely, and
the other heavenly. This is Irene alleged by this auctor, who I say writes
not in such form of words. For his words be these. Like as the bread which
is of the earth, receiving the calling of God, is now no commen bread, but
(Eucharistia) consistynge of two things, earthely, and heavenly, so our
bodies receyuynge (Eucharistia) be no more corrup^^b^e. This be Irenes words,
where Irene does not call the bread receyuinge the calling of God, the bread
of thanks geuyng, but (Eucharistia) and in this (Eucharistia) he shows how
that, that he calls the heauely thing, is the body and blood of Christ, and
therefore says in his first book, when the chalice mixed and the bread broken
receive the word of God, it is made (Eucharistia) of the body and blood of
Christ, of which the substance of our flesh is stayed and increased. And how
say they that our flesh is not able to receive gods gift, who is eternal
life which flesh is nurrished with the body and blood of Christ? These be also
Irenes words, whereby appears, what he meant by the heavenly thing in
(Eucharistia,) which is the very presence of Christ's body and blood. And for
the plain testimonye of this faith, this Irene has been commee^y alleged,
and specially of Melancton to Decolampadius, as one most ancient, and most
plainly testifiyng the same. So as his very words truly alleged, overthrow
this author in the impugnation of Christ's real presence in the Sacrament,
and therefore can nothing help this auctors purpose against transubstautiation.
Is not this a goodly and godly enter of this author, in the first two
auctorities that he brings in, to corrupt them both? As for Drigene in
Drigene
his own words says, the matter of the bread remains, which as I have
before opened, it may be granted, but yet he terms it not as this auctour
does, to call in material bread. Whenne God formed Adam of Gene. (...).
claye, the mattier of the claye remained in Adam, and yet the material claye
remained not, for it was altered into an other substance, which I speak not to
compare equallye the fourmynge of Adam to the Sacrament, but to show it not to
be all one to say the material bread and the matter of bread. For the
accidents of bread may be called the matter of bread, but not the material
bread, as I have sumwhat spoken thereof before: but such shifts be used in
this matter, notwithstanding the importance of it.

Saint Cypriaus words, do note impugn Cyprian
transubstantiacio^, for they tend only to show that wine is the creature,
appointed to the celebration of this mysterye, and therefore water only is no
due matter according to Christ's institution. And as the name wine must be
used before the consecration, to show the truth of it then, so it may also
be used, for a name of it after, to show what it was, which is often used.
And in one place of Cyprian by this author here alleged, it appears Saint
Cyprian by the word wine, signifies the heavenly wine of the vineyarde of the
Lord of Saboth, calling it new wine and alludynge therein to David. And this
does Cyprian show in these words, he we shall we drink with Christ new
wine of the creature of the vine, if in the sacrifice of God the father, and
Christ we do not offer wine? Is not here mention of new wine of the creature
of the vine, what new wine can be, but the blood of Christ, the very wine
consecrate by gods omnipotencye of the creature of the vine offered? And
therefore this one place may give us a lesson in Cyprian, that as he uses the
word wine to signify the heavenly drink of the blood of Christ, made by
consecration of the creature of wine, So wheithe names the bread consecrate
bread, he means the heavenly bread Christ, who is the bread of life. And so
Cyprian can make nothing by those words againue transubstantiacion, who
writes plainly of the change of the bread by gods omnipotencye into the
^^e^he of Christ, as shall after appear, where this author goes about to
answer v(...) him.

As touching Emissene by whose words Emissen
is expresselye testified the truth of the real presence of Christ, in the
Sacrament, and also the sense of the doctrine of transubstantiacion, this
auctor makes himself bold over him, and so bold that he dare corrupt him,
which Emissen writes not that man is turned in to the body of the Church.
And here I make an issue with this author, that Emissene Anissue.
has not that word of turnyng in that place, and man to be turned into the
body of the Church, is no convenient speech to signify a change in him that
is regenerate by baptism. He in deed that is thruste out of the chauncell for
his misdemeanour in service time, may be said turned into the body of the
Church. But Emissene speaks not so here, but because the same Emissene
declarynge the mysterye of the Sacrament, says the visible creatures be
turned into the substance of the body of Christ, this auctour thought it
would sound gaylye well, to the confusion of that ^^ewe doctyne of tournynge,
to speak in Baptism of the turnyng of a man in to the body of the Church.
And it may be comenly observed in this author, when he allegeth any auctorite
of others, he brings forth the same in such form of words, as he would
have them, and not as they be, for the most part or very often, and ones of
purpose were over often in so high a matter as this is. And yet in this
Emissins authorite afteral the pain taken to reforge him. Emissens doctrine
play nely confounds this authors teaching. This author makes a note that
there is in man baptized, nothing changed outwardely, and therefore in the
Sacrament neither, and it must be granted. For the doctrine of
transubstantiation teaches not in the Sacrament any outward change. For the
substance of the bread and wine is an inward nature, and so is substance of
one defined. And to speak of the thing changed, then as in man the change is
in the soul, which is the substance of man: So for the thing changed in the
visible creatures should be also changed, and is changed, the substance of the
bread and wine to answer theirin to the other. And we must considre how this
comparison of the two chaunges is made as it were by proportion. Wherein each
change has his special end and term, (whereunto): and therefore according to
term and end, has his work of change, special and several both by gods
work. Thus I mean, The visible creatures has there end and term whereunto
the change is made, the very body and blood of Christ, which body being a
trut body we must say is a corporal substance. The soul of man has his end
and term a spiritual alteration, incorporall, to be regenerate the son of
God. And then the doctrine of this Emissene is plain this, that each change is
of like truth, and then it follows that if the change of man's soul in
Baptism be true and not in a figure: The change likewise in the Sacrament is
also true and not in a figure. And if manues soul be the chunge in Baptism be
in dead that is to say, really made the son of God: then is the substance
of the bread, which is as it were the soul of the bread. (I am bold here in
speech to use the word soul ^o express proportion of the comparison,) but
even so is the inward nature of the bread, which is substance, turned and
changed in to the body of Christ, being the term and end of that change.
And here I say so, not to declare the manner, but the truth of thend, that is
to say, as really and in deed the change is in the substance of bread, as in
the soul of man, both these chaunges be marvelous, both be in the truth of
there change, whereunto they be changed of like truth and realite, to be done
in deed, they resemble one an other in the secrecy of the mystery, and the
ignorance of our senses, for in neither is any outward change at all, and
therefore there was never man tryppyd himself more hansomely to take a fall,
then this auctour does in this place, not only in corruptyng euydently and
notably the words of Emissene with ow^ purpose, where by nevertheless showed
his good will, but also by setting forth such matter, as ouerturneth all his
teaching at ones, For now thauctor must say the change in man's soul by
Bap^isme, to be there made the son of God, is but in figure and
signification, not true and real in deed, or else grant the true Cathelique
doctrine of the turn of the visible creatures in to the body and blood, of
Christ, to be likewise not in figure and signification, but truly, really, and
in deed. And for the thing changed, as the soul of man in man's inward
nature is changed: so the inward nature of the bread is changed. And then is
that evasion taken away, which this author uses in an other place of
Sacramental change, which should be in the outward part of the visible
creatures to the use of signification. This author notes thage of Emissen, and
I note with all how plainly he writes for confirmation of the Catholic
teaching, who in deed because of his auncientie and plain writynge for
declaracio^ of the matter in form of teaching with out conte^tion, is one,
whose authorite the church has much in allegation used to the conviction of
such as have impugned the Sacrament either in truth of the presence of
Christ's very body, or transubstantiation, for the speaking of the inward
change, does point as it were the change of the substance of bread, with
resemblyng thereunto the soul of man changed in Baptism. This one author not
being of any reproved and of so many approved, and by this in thallegacion,
after this manner corrupt, might suffice for to conclude all brablyng against
the sacrament. But I will exame^ mo particularities. I have before answered to
Hilarie, to Hilarie.
whom nevertheless I should aptely have said sumwhat now to note, how he
distincteth owtwardly and inwardly by believe and corporal sight. For owtwardly
as Emissene says we ^e no change, and therefore we see after consecration as
before, which we may therefore call bread, but we believe that inwardly is,
which as Emissene says is the substance of the body of Christ, whereunto
the change is made of the inward nature of bread as by the comparison of
Emissen does appear.

These words of Epiphanius do Epiphanins.
plainly over turn this auctors doctrine of a figurative speech, for a
figure can not give life, only (...) (...) life, and the speech of this (...)
of the Sacrament, does necessaryly implye beary true presence of Christ's body
auctor or life. And then as often as the author is over throune in the truth
of the presence, so often is he (by zuinglius rule) overthrown in
tra^substanciation. As for the name of bread is granted because it was so, and
transubstantiation does not take away, but it is meat because of the visible
matter remaining. This sayings be sought out by this author, only to
wrangle, not taken out, where the mystery is declared and preached to be
taught as a doctrine thereof, but only signified by the way and spoken of
upon occasion, the sense whereof faithful men know otherwise then appears,
at the first readynges to the carnal man, but by such like speeches the
Arrians impugned the divinity of Christ.

Chrysostom speaks in this place of Chrysostom.
wine, as Cyprian did before, against those that offer no wine but water.
Chrysostom saiethe thus, Christ used wine, and I grant he did so, For he did
consecrate that creature and as Emissene says, turned it in the celebration
and dispensation of these mysteries. But this sayng towcheth nothing the
doctrine of tra^substantiatio^. The second saying of Chrysostom which I never
red, but in Peter martyrs book, who says it is not printed, this sentence
toucheh this auctours doctrine much, If the bread by consecration, be
delivered from the name of bread, and exalted to the name of our lords body.
Now consider reader, if this manner of speech by Chrysostom here means an
effectual namynge, to make the substance of the body of Christ present, as
Chrysostom in his public approved works is understood of all to teach,
then is the deliverance from the name of bread, of like effect, to take a
way the reason of the name of bread, which is the change in substance
thereof. Or if this auctor will say that by the name of bread, Chrysostom
understands the bare name, how can that stand without reprouse of saint
Paul? who after this authors mind calls it bread after consecration, and
so do many other by this author alleged, here percace may be said what should
I reason what he meant, when he says plainly the nature of bread still
remains. To this I say that as Chrysostom in this place (of an epistell not
published by credit) says that the nature of bread remains, so Cyprian
that was older then he, says the nature of bread is changed, which
Chrysostom in his other works, by public credit set a broad, seems not to
deny. Now the word (nature) signifies both the substance, and also
propriete of the nature. The substance therefore after Cypria^ by the word of
god is changed, but yet the proper effect is not changed, but in th
accidents remain with out illusion by which diverse signification and
acception of the word nature both the sayings of S. Cyprian and Saint
Chrysostom (if this be his saying) may be accorded, and not with standing the
contrariete in lettre, agree nevertheless in sense by twene themself and agree
with the true doctrine of transubstantiacion. Add to this how the words of
Chrysostom next following this sentence, alleged by this auctor, and as it
seems of purpose left here out, does both confound this authors enterprise
and confirm the true doctrine which words be these, (and is not called two
bodies but one body of the son of God) of Chrysostom I shall speak again
herafter.

Saint Ambrose does not (as this author Ambrosius.
would have it) impugn transubstantiacion, but confirms it most plainly?
because he teaches the true presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, which
he says is by change and things still remaining, and that may be verified in
the owtwarde visible matter, that is to say, the accide^tes remaining with
there propre effects which therefore may worthly be called things. And here
I would ask this author, if his teaching as he prete^deth were the catholic
faith, and the bread only signified Christ's body, what should neade this
force of gods word, that S. Ambrose speaks of, to bring in the creation of
the world, whereby to induce man's faith in this mystery to the belife of it?
As for th example Baptism to show the change in man's soul, whereof I have
spoken, declaryng Emissene, serves for an induction not toleaue to our owtward
se^ces, ne to mistrust the great miracle of God in either, because we see none
outward experience of it, but else it is not necessary the resemblance shall
answer in quality, otherwise then as I said before, each part answeryng his
convenient proportion, and as for there comparison of resemblaunce Baptism
with the Sacrament, this auctour in his doctrine specially reproves, in that
he can not I think deny, but man by regeneration of his soul in Baptism, is
the partaker of holiness, but as for the bread, he specially admonishes it is
not par taker of holiness by this consecracion, but how soever this auctor in
his own doctrine snarleth himself, the doctrine of S. Ambrose is plain, that
before the consecration it is bread, and after the consecration, the body of
Christ, which is an vndowbted affirmacion then to be no bread, how so ever
the accidents of bread do remain.

In the. 26. leef this auctor brings forth two sayings of S. Augustine,
which whau Augustinus.
this auctor wrote, it is lik he neither thought of the third or first book of
this work, For these two sayings declare most evidently, the real presence
of Christ's body and blood in the sacrament, affirmyng the same to be the
sacrifice of the Church, whereby apperith it is no figure only. In the first
saying of S. Augustine is written thus, how faith shewith me that bread is
the body of Christ, now what soever faith shewith is a truth, and then it
follows that of a truth it is the body of Christ which speech bread is the
body of Christ is as much to say, as it is made the body of Christ, and made
not as of a matter, but as Emissen wrote by conversion of the visible creature
in to the substance of the body of Christ, and as S Austen in the same
sentence writes it is bread before the consecration, and after the flesh of
Christ, As for the second saying of saint Austen, how could it with more
plain words be written, then to say that there is both the Sacrament and the
thing of the Sacrament, which is Christ's body calling the same sacrifice of
the Church. Now if Christ is body be there, it is trulither and i^ deed there
which is real Mark (...) reader.
If there, as for there in a figure were to say not there in truth, and in deed,
but only signified to be abse^t which is the nature a of figure in his propre
and special speech. But saint Austen says even as the auctour brings
hiforth, and yet he have his privy nyppe by the way thus, It is said of S.
Augustine, there be two things in this sacrifice, which be conteyued in it,
whereof it consists so as the body of Christ is conteyued in this sacrifice by
S. Augustines mind, According whereunto saint Augustine is alleged to say in
the same book from whe^s the auctour took this saying. Also these words
followynge, under the kinds of bread and wine which we see, we honor things
invisible that, is to say the flesh and blood of Christ, nor we do not
likewise esteem these two kinds as we did before the consecration, for we
must faithefully confess before the consecracion to be bread and wine that
nature formed and after consecracion the flesh and blood of Christ which the
benediction has consecrate Thus says saint Augustine as he is alleged out of
that book, which in deed I have not, but he has the like se^ce in other
places, and for honoringe of the invisible heavenly things there, which
declare the true and real presence, saint Augustine has like in his book
(de Cathechisandis rudibus) and in the 98. psalm, where he speaks of
adoration. This may be notable to the reader how this author concludes him
self in the real presence of Christ's body by his own collection of saint
Augustines mind, which is as he confesses in his own words notynge saint
Augustine, that as the person of Christ consistethe of two natures, so the
Sacrament consists of two natures of thelleme^tes of bread and wine and of
the body and blood of Christ, and therefore both these natures do remain in
the Sacrament, These be this autours own words, who trauaylynge to co^founde
transubstantacion confounds evidently himself by his own words towching
the real presence, For he says the nature of the body and blood of Christ
must remain in the Sacrament, and as truly as the natures of the ma^hode and
godhode were in Christ, for thereupon he argues. And nowelet this auctor chose
whether he will say any of the natures, the manhod, or the godhode were but
figuratively in Christ, which and he do, then may he the better sa^e for the
agreement of this doctrine the nature of the body and the blood of Christ is but
figuratively in the Sacrament. And if he say (as he must needs say) that the
two natures be in Christ's person really, naturally, substantially, then must
he grant by his own collectio^, the truth of the being of the nature of the
body and blood of christ to be like wise in the sacrament, and thereby call
back all that he has written against the real presence of Christ's body in
the sacrament, and abandon his divise of a presence by signification, which is
in truth a plain absence, as himself spekith also openly, which open speech
cannot stand, and is improued by this open spech of his own likewise, where he
says the nature of the body and blood of Christ remain in the sacrament, the
word (remain) being of such signification, as it betokenith not only to be
there, but to carry there and so there is declared the sacrifice of the Church,
which mystery of sacrifice is perfited before the perceptio^, and so it must
be evident how the body of Christ is there, that is to say on thal tere before
we receive it, to which altar S. Augustine says we cum to receive it. There
was never ma^ouerturned his own assertio^s more evidently, then this author
does here in this place, the like whereof I have observed in other that ha^ue
written against this sacrament who have by the way said sum what for it, or
they have brought there treatise to an end. It will be said here howsoever
this auctor does overthrow himself in the real p^^e^ce of christ's very body,
yet he has pulled down tra^substa^tiatio^, and ^oas crafty wresteles do,
falling them self, on there bake to throw there fellow over the^. But it is not
like, for as long as the true faith, of the real presence sta^dith, so long
standith tra^substa^tiatio^, not by authority of determination but by a
necessary co^seque^ce of the truth as I said before, and as zuinglius defe^deth
plainly, and as for these places of S. augustine may be answered unto, for
they speak of the visible matter and eleme^te, which remain truly in there
propriety of their nature, for so much as remains, so as their is true real
and bodily matter of thaccide^tes of bread and wine not in fa^sy or
imagination, whereby their should be illusio^ in the se^ses, but so in deed as
thexperie^ce does show and the change of substance of the creatures in to a
better substance, wuld not impayr the truth of that remains, but that
remains, does indede remain which the same natural effects by miracie that
it had when the substance was there which is one maruail (...) this mystery, as
their were diverse more in ma^na the figure of it. And then a miracle in gods
workinge does not empayre the truth of the work. And therefore I noted before,
how saint Thomas did towche Christ, after his resurrection truly, and yet
it was by miracle, as saint Grigorie writes. And further we may say
towching the comparison that when a resemblaunce is made, of the Sacrament to
Christ's person, or contrariwise of Christ's person to declare the Sacrament,
we may not press all parts of the resemblance, with a through equality in
consideracion of each part by it self, but only have respect to the end,
wherefore the resemblaunce is made. In the person of Christ be joined two holl
perfect natures inseperably unite, which faith the nestorians impugned, and yet
unite witout confusion of them, which confusion Theutichians in consequence of
their of error affirmed, and so arguments be brought the Sacrament, where with
to convince both as I shall show answeringe to Gelasius. But in this place
saint Augustine uses the truth most certain of the two natures in Christ's
person, whereby to declare his belief in the Sacrament, which belief as
Hylarie before is by this auctor alleged to say, is of that is inwardly, For
that is owtowardly of the visible creature, we see (he has) with our bodily
eye and therefore therein is no point of faith, that should need such a
declaracion, as S. Augustine makith. And yet making the comparison, he
reherseth both the truths on both sides sayng. As the person of Christ
consists of God and man, so the sacrifice of the Church consists of two
things, the visible kind of the elemente, and the invisible flesh and blood,
finishing the conclusion of the similitude, that therefore their is in the
sacrifice of the Church, both the Sacrament and the thing of the Sacrament,
Christ's body, That is which is inuiuisible and therefore required declaracio^,
that is by S. Augustine opened in the comparison that is to say the body of
Christ to be there truly, and their with that neded no declaration that is to
say the visible kind of the element is spoken of also as being true, but not
as a thing which was intended to be proved, for it neded not any prouf as the
other part did, and therefore it is not necessary to press both parts of the
resemblaunce so, as because in the nature of Christ's humanite their was no
substance converted in Christ, which had been contrary to thordre of that
mysterye, which was to yoyne the holl nature of mane to the godhed in the
person of Christ, that therefore in this mystery of the Sacrament, in the which
by the rule of our faith Christ's, body is not impanate, the conversion of the
substance of the visible eleme^tes should not therefore be. If truth answerith
to truth for the proportion of the truth in the mystery that is sufficie^te.
For else the natures be not so unite in one hipostasic in the mystery of the
sacrame^te as they be in Christ's person, and the flesh of man in Christ by
vnio^ of the divinity, is a divine spiritual flesh, and is called and is a
lively flesh, and yet thauctor of this book, is not afraid to teach the
bread in the sacrament to have no participatio^ of holiness, wherein I agree not
with him, but reason aganiste him with his own doctrine, and much I could say
more, but this shall suffice. The words of S. Augustine for the real presence
of Christ's body be such as no mane ca^ wreste, or writh to an other sense,
and with their force have made this auctor overthrow him self in his own
words. But that S. Augustine says towching the nature of bread and the
visible eleme^te of the sacrament wih out wresting or writhing may be agreed in
co^uenie^r understanding with the doctrine of tra^substa^tiation, and therefore
is an authority familier with those writers that affirm tra^substanciatio^ by
express words, out of whose qui ner this author has pulled out this bolt,
and as it is out of his bowese^te, turns bake and hitteth himself on the
forhed, and yet after his fashion by wrong and untrue tra^slatio^ he sharpened
it somewhat, not with out su^ punissheme^t of god evidently by the way by his
own words to overthrow himself. In the second colu^ne of the 27 leaf, and
the first of the 28 leaf, this auctour makes a process in declaration of
herises in the person of Christ, for co^uictio^ whereof this authr says the
old fathers used arguments of two examples, in either of which examples were
two natures to gyther, the one not perishing nor co^founding the other. One
example is in the body and soul of man. An other example of the sacrament in
which be two natures, as inowarde heavenly, and an owtwarde earthly, as in man
their is a body and a soul. I leave out this auctours own judgment in that
place and of the (o reader) require thine, whither those fathers that did use
both these examples to the co^fusio^ of heretics, did not belief as apperith
by the process of their reasoning in this point, did they not I say hele ne
that, even as really and as truly, as the soul of man is present in the body,
so really and so truly is the body of christ) which in the sacrament is the
inward invisible thing as the soul is in the body, present in the sacrament,
for else and the body of Christ were not as truly and really present in the
sacrament, as the soul is in man's body, that argument of the sacrament had
no two things present so as thargume^t of the body and soul had, whereby to
show how two things may be to gether witout co^fusio^ of either, each
remaining in his nature, for if the teaching of this auctour in other parts of
this book were true, the^ were the sacrament like a body lyinge in a traunse,
whose soul for the while were in heaven and had no two things but one bare
thing, that is to say, bread, and bread never the holyer with signification
of an other thig so far abse^t, as is heaven from earth, and therefore to say as I
problabli think, this part of this second book against transubstantiacion
was a collection of this auctour when he minded to mayntaine luthers opinion
against tra^ substa^ciacio^ only, and to strive for bread only, which not
with stonding the new enterprise of this author to deny the real presence,
is so ferce and vehement, as it ouerthroueth his new purpose, or he cumith in
his order in his book to entreat of it. For there can no demonstracion be made
more euidente, for the catholic faith of the real presence of Christ's body in
the Sacrament, then that the truth of it was so certainly byleued, as they took
Christ's very body as verily in the sacrament, even as the soul is present in
the body of man.

S. Chrisostomes words in dead, if this Chrisostomus.
auctour had had them either truly translate unto him, or had taken the pains
to have truly translate them himself which as peter martyrsaieth be not in
printe, but were found in florence, a copy whereof remains in tharche deacon
or Archebisshoh of Caunterburies hands or else if this author had reaported
the words as they be ttanslate in to english out of peter martyrs book,
wherein in sum point the translator in English, seems to have attained by
guess the sense more perfitely, the^ peter martyr utters it hiself. if either
of this had bee^, done the matter should have seemed for so much the more plain.
But what is this to make foundation of an argume^te upon a secret copye of an
epistell vttred at one time i^ diverse se^ses? I shall to which one special
point, peter martyr says in late^, who^ the translator in english therein
follows, that the bread is reputed, worthy the name of the lords body. This
author englishyng the same place turnith it (exalted to the name of the lords
body) which words of exalting cum nerer to the purpose of this auctour to have
the bread but a figure and there with never the holyer of it self. But a figure
ca^ne never be accounted worthy the name of our lords body, the very thing of
the Sacrament, onles there were the thing in deed, as there is by conversion,
as the Church truly teaches. Is not here reader a meruelouse diversity in
report, and the same so setforth as thowe that cannest but read english
maiste evidently see it, God ordringe it so as such varieties and
contradictions should so manyfestely appear where the truth is impugned? Again
this auctor makith Chrysostom to speak stra^gely in the end of this
authority, that the divine nature restith in the body of Christ, as thowgh the
nature of man were the stay to the divine nature, wheir as in that union the
rest is an ineffable mystery, the two natures in Christ to have one
subsistence called and termed an hypostasie, and therefore he that has
translate peter martyr in to english does translate it thus. The divine
co^stitutio^ the nature of the body adyoyned, thiese two both to gyther, make
one son and one person.

Thou reader maiste compare the books that be a broad of Peter martyr in
laten, peter martyr in english and this auctours book, with that I write and
so deem whither I say true or no. But to the purpose of saint Chrisostomes
words (if they be his words) he directs his argument to show by the my
sterie of the Sacrament, that as that as in it, there is no confu^ion of
natures, but each remains in his propriety. So likewise in Christ the nature
of his hodheade does not confound the nature of his manhood, If the visible
creatures were in the Sacrament by the presence of Christ's body the r^ truly
present, being invisible also as that body is impalpable also as that is,
incorruptiptible also as that is, then were the visivisible nature altered, and
as it were confounded, which Chrisostom says is not so, for the nature of
the bread remains, by which word of nature is, conveniently signified the
propriete of nature. For prouf whereof, to show remayninge of the propriety
with out alteracion, Chrisostom makes only the resemblance, and before I have
showed how nature signifies the propriety of nature, and may signify the
owtward part of nature that is to say, thaccide^tes being substance in his
propre signification, the inward nature of the thing of the conversion whereof,
is specially understood transubstantiation.

Now follows to answer to Belasius, who abhorrynge both the herises of
Eutiches, Gelasius
and Nestorius in his treatise, against the Eutichia^s forgets not to
compare with there error in extremity one the one side, thextreme error of
the Nestorians one the other side, but it principally entendeth the confusion
of the Eutichians with whom he was specially troubled. These two herises, were
not so gross as thauctour of this book reports them, wherein I will writ
what Uigilius says. (Inter Nestorii ergo quonda^ Ecclesiae
Constantinopolitanae non rectoris, Uigilius diaio. 4.
sed dissipatoris, non pastoris, sed praedatoris, sacrilegum dogma and
Eutichetis nefariam and detestabilem sectam, ita serpe^tinae grassationis sese
calliditas temperauit, vt vtrumque sine vtriusque periculo, plerique vitare non
possint: dum si quis Nestorii perfidiam damnat, Euchicetis putatur errori
succumbere rursum dum Eutichianae haeresis impietate^ destruit, Nestorii
arguitur dogma erigere.) These be vigilius words, in his first book, which
be thus much in English. Between thabominable teaching of Nestorius, sumtyme
not ruler but waster, not past o^r, but pray sercher of the church of
co^sta^tinople, and the wicked and detestable sect of Eutiches, the craft of
the deuels spoiling so facioned it self, that me^ could not avoid any of the
sects without danger of the other. So as whiles any man rde^pneth the falsenes
of the nestoria^, he may be though fallen to the error of the Eutichian, and
whiles he distroyeth the wickedness of the eutichianes herisie he may be
chale^ged to realeue the teachinge of the Nestorian. This is the sentence of
vigilius, By which appears how these herisies were both subtely conveyed,
without so plain contradiction as this auctor either by ignorance or of
purpose fayneth, ashthowh the nestoria^ should say, Christ was a perfect man,
but not God, and the Eutichian clean contrary very God, but not man. For if the
herisies had been such, vigilius had had no cause to speak of any such
ambiguitie as he notith that a man should hardely speak against the one, but
he might be suspected to favor the other. And yet I grant that the
Nestorians sayings might implie christ not to be God, because they would two
distinct different natures to make also two distinct persons, and so as it
were two Christ's, the one only man, and the other only God, so as by there
teachinge God was neither incarnate, nor as Gregory Nazianzene says man
deitate, for so he is termed to say. The Eutichians as Saint Augustine says
reasoninge against the Nestoriaus, becam heritiques themself, and because we
confess truly by faith but one Christ the son of God very God, The
Eutichians say, although there were in the virgins womb before thadunation
two natures, yet after thadunation, in that mystery of Christ's incarnacion
there is but one nature, and that to be the nature of God, into which the
nature of man was after there fansye transfused and so confounded, whervppon by
implication a man might gather the nature of the humanity not to remain in
Christ after the adunation in the virgins womb. Gelasius detestinge both
Eutiches and Nestorius in his process vtterith a catholic meaning against
the^ both, but he directith special arguments of the two natures in man, and
of the two natures in the sacrament, chefely against the Eutichians to prove
the nature of man to continue in Christ after the adunatio^, being no
absurdity for two different natures to co^stitute one, the same remaining two
in there propriety, and the natures to be (aliud,) and (aliud,) which
signifies different, and yet in that not to be (alius,) and, (alius) in person
which the Eutichians abhorred, and catholiquely, for so much against the
Nestorians, who by reason of two natures would have two persons, and because
those Nestorians fansied the person of Christ patible to suffer all aparte:
therefore they denied Christ conceived God or borne God, for thabolitio^ of
which part of there herisie, and to set forth the unity of Christ's person,
The blessed virgin was callid deipara ((...),) gods mother, which the
Nestorians deluded, by an exposition, grauntinge she might so be callid because
her son they said was afterward God, and so she might be called gods
mother, as an other woman may be called a bisshopps mother, if her son be
made a bisshoppe afterward although he departed no bishop from here.

And hereof I writ thusmuche, because it should appear that Gelasius by his
arguments of the sacrament, and of the two natures in man went not about to
prove that the godhed remained in Christ after his incarnacion, as thauctour of
this book would have it, for the Nestorian said the godhed was an accession
to Christ afterward by merit, and therefore with the^ there was no talk of
remaining, when they esteemed Christ's nature in his conception singular, and
only by gods power conceived, but only man. And again theutichiane so
affirmed the co^tinuaunce of the divine nature in Christ after the adunation,
as Gelasius had no cause to prove that was granted, that is to say, the
remain of the divine nature, but one the other side to prove the remain of
the human nature in christ, which by the Eutichians, was by implicacion
rather denied. Nestorius divided God and man, and granted always both to be
in Christ continually, but as two persons, and the person of Christ being God
dwelling within the person of Christ being man, and as Christ man increased,
so Christ God dignified him and so divided one Christ in twopersons, because of
the two natures so different, which was against the rules of our faith and
distroyed thereby the mystery of our redemption. And the Eutithians
affirmynge catholiquely to be but one person in Christ, did perniciously say
there was therefore but one nature in Christ, accomptynge by implication the
human nature transfused in to the divine nature and so confounded. And to
show the narrow passage vigilius speak of, Cyrillus a catholic auctour,
because writynge of the unity of Christ's person, he expressed his meaning
by the word (nature) signifyinge the holl of any one constitution, which more
properly the word person does express. Theutichians would by, that word
after gather that he favored there part, so taking the word at a vauntage.

And because the same Cyrillus, used the word subsistence to signify
substance, and therefore said in Christ there were two subsistences, meaning
the divine substance and humane substance, forasmuch as the word
subsistence is used to express the person that is to say hypostasie: There
were that of that word f^owardely understood would gather he should say,
that there were two persons in Christ, which was the nestoria^s herisie that
he impugned, Such captiousnesse was there in words, when arrogant men cared
not by what mean to maintain there error, these were both pernicious
herises, and yet subtle and each had a maruaylous pretense of the defense of
the glory of God, even as is now pretended against the sacrament. And either
part abused many scriptures, and had notable apparaunces for that they said,
so as he that were not well exercised in scriptures, and the rules of our
faith might be easily circumuented. Nestorius was the great Archibishoppe of
Constantinoble, unto whom cyrill that condempnith his herisie, writes that
seeing he sclau^derith the holl Church with his herisie, he must resist him
although he be a father, because Christ says, he that louith his father Mat.
10.
above me, is not worthy me. But Nestorius as appears althowgh he used it
ilfauerdly had much learning and cloked his herisie craftily, denying the
gross matter that they imputed to him to teach two Christ's, and other
specialities laid to his charge, and yet condempnynge the doctrine of Cyrill,
and professyng his own faith in his own terms, could not hide his herisie
so, but it appears to be and conteyne in effect that he was charged with, and
therefore an admonishment was given by a catholic writer. Believe not Nestorius
thowgh he say he teach but one Christ. If one should here ask what is this
to the purpose to talk so much of these sects, I Answer, this knowledge
shall generallye serve, to note the manner of them that goo a boute to deceive
the world with false doctrine, which is good to learn: An other special
service, is to declare how the auctour of this book, either does not know
the state of the matter in these herises he speaks of, or else misreporteth
them of purpose. And the arguing of Gelasius in this matter well opened, shall
give light of the truth of the mystery of the Sacrament. Who against the
Eutichians uses two arguments of examples, one of the two different natures
to remain in one person of man, and yet, the Eutichians diffamed that
conjunction, with remaining of two different natures, and called it (...),
double nature, and Gelasius to encontre that term says, they will with there
(...) one nature reserve not one Christ and hole Christ. And if two different
natures, that is to say soul and body make but one man, why not so in Christ?
For where scripture speaks of the outward man and inward man, that is to
show (Gelasius says) two diverse qualities in the same man, and not to divide
the same man into two men, and so inte^deth to show there owght to be no
scruple to grant two differente natures to remain in there propriete, for
fear that every diverse nature should make a diverse person, and so in Christ
divide the unity, concluding that the integrity of Christ cannot be but both
the natures different remaining in there property. Carual imagination troubled
the Eutichians, to have one person of two such different natures remaining in
there properte, which the Nestorians releued with devise of two persons, and the
Eutichians by confusion of the human nature. Then cummeth Gelasius, to the
argument of example from the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, and
notes the person of Christ to be a principal mysterye, and the Sacrament an
image and similitude of that mysterye, which sense his words must needs have,
because he calls Christ the principal mysterye, and as in one place he
says the image and similitude of the body and blood of Christ, so by and by
he calls the Sacrament the image of Christ. And here, the words image and
similitude, express the manner of presence of the truth of the things
represented, to be, understood only by faith, as inuisibly present. And
Saint Ambrose by this word mage, signifies thexhibition of truth to man in
this life. And to show the Sacrament to be such an image, as conteyneth the
very truth of the thing, whereof it is the image. Gelasius declares in
framynge his argument in these words. As bread and wine go into the divine
substance the holy gooste bringyng it to pass, and yet remain in the
propriety of there nature, so that principal mysterye, those natures
remayninge, whereof it is declared unto us true and hole Christ to continue. In
these words of Gelasius where he says the bread and wine go into the divine
substance, is plainly declared the presence of the divine substance, and
this divine substance, can signify none other substance, but of the body and
blood of Christ, of which heavenly nature, and earthely nature of the bread
and wine, consists this Sacrament the image of the principal mysterye of
Christ's person. And therefore as in the image be two diverse natures and
different remayninge in there propriety. So likewise in the person of Christ,
which is the conclusion of Gelasius argument, should remain two natures. And
here were a great danger, if we should say that Christ's body, which is
the celestial nature in the Sacrament, were there present but in a figure,
for it should then implye, that in Christ's person the principal mysterye,
it were also but in a figure. And therefore as in the mysterye of Christ's
person, ordened to redeem us, being the principal mystery there is no
figure, but truth in consideracion of the presens of the two natures, whereof
Christ is: So in the Sacrament being a misterye ordered to feade us, and the
image of that principal mystery, there is not an only figure, but truth of the
presens of the natures earthely and celestial. I speak of the truth of
presence, and mean such an integrity of the natures present, as by the rules
of our faith, is consonante and agreeable to that mystery, that is to say, in
the person of Christ perfect God and perfect man, perfect God to be incarnate,
and perfect man to be deitate, as Gregory Nazianzene terms it. In the
Sacrament, the visible matter of the earthely creature in his propriety of
nature, for the use of significacio^ is necessariely required, and also
according to the truth of Christ his words, his very body, and blood, to be
inuisibly with integrite present, which Gelasius calls the divine substance.
And I think it worthy to be noted, that Gelasius speking of the bread and
wine, recites not precisely the substance to remain, but says the substance,
or nature, which nature he calls after propriety, and the disiu^ctiue may be
verified in the last, and it is not necessary, thexa^ples to be in all parts
equal, as rusticus diacom^s handles it very lernedly co^tra Acephalos. And
Gelasius in opening the mystery of the Sacrament,, speaks of tra^sitio^ of
the bread, and wine into the godly substance, which word transition, is mete
to express transubstantiacio^, and therefore S. Thomas expressed
tra^substantiacio^ with the same word transire, writing. (Dogma datur
Christianis quod in carne^ tra^sit panis and vinu^ in sanguine^.) But in the
mystery of Christ's person, there is no tra^sition of the deity into the
humanite, or humanite into the deity, but only assumption of the humanite
with adunacio^ of those two natures, and of two perfect natures so different one
person and one Christ, who is God incarnate, and man deitate, as Gregory
Nazianzene says, withoutmutation, co^uetsion, trausitio^, transelementation,
or transubstantiation, which words be propre, and special to express, how
(Eucharistia) is co^stitute of two distre^t natures, an heavenly, and earthly
nature, a mystery institute after the example of the principal mystery,
wherewith to feade us with the substance of the same glorious body that has
redeemed us. And because in the co^stitution of this mystery of the sacrament,
there is a tra^sitio^ of the earthly creature into the divine substance, as
Gelasius, and S. Thomas term it, and mutacion as Cyprian, and Ambrose teach
it, which Theophilactus expresses by the word tra^seleme^tacion, Emissen by
the conversion, and all these words reduced into there one propre sense
expressed in one word of transubstantiacion: it cannot be convenient where the
manner of the constitution of two mysteries be so different, there to require a
like remaining of the two natures, whereof the mysteryes be, In the mysterye of
Christ's person, because there was not of any of the two different natures
eythex mutation, transition, conversion, or trauselementation, but only
assumption of the humanity, and adunation in the virgyns womb, we cannot say
the godhed, to have suffered in that mysterye, which were an absurdity, but to
have wrought the assumption, and adunation of man's nature with it, nor man's
nature by that assumption, and adunation diminished, and therefore profess
truly Christ to be hole God and whole man, and God in that mysterye, to be made
man, and man God, where as in the Sacrament, because of transition, mutation,
and conversion of there earthely creatures, wrought by the holy ghost, which
declares those earthly creatures to suffer in this conversion, mutation, and
transition, we knowledge no assumption of those creatures, or adunation with
the heauthly nature, and therefore, say not, as we do, in the principal
mysterye, that each nature is holly the other, and as we profess God
incarnate, so the body of Christ breaded, and as man is deitate, so the bread
is corporate: which we should say, if the rules of our faith could permit,
the constitution of each mysterye to be taught a like, which the truth of gods
morde does not suffer. Wherefore although Gelasius, and other argue from the
Sacrament, to declare the mysterye of Christ's person, yet we may not press
the argument to distroy, orco^founde the propriety of each mysterye, and so
violate the rules of our faith, and in the authors not press the words
otherwise then they may agree with the Catholic teaching, as those did in
the words of Cyrill, when he speak of nature and subsistence whereof, I made
mention before to be remembered here in Gelasius, that we press not the word
substance and nature in him: but as may agree with the transition he speaks
of, by which word other express transubsta^tiacio^. And against theutichians,
for to improve there confusion, it suffiseth to show two different natures to
be in the Sacrament, and to remain in there propriety, and the divine nature
not to confound the earthely nature, nor as it were to swalow it, which was
the dreme of the Eutichians. And we must forbere to press, all parts of
thexample in the other argument, from the person of man, being one of body
and soul, which the Church does profess in symbol Athanasij of all
received. For Christ is one person of two perfitte natures, whereof the one
was before the other in perfection and creator of the other, the one
impassible, and the other passible. Man is of the soul and body one, two
different natures, but such as for there perfection required that unity,
whereof none was before other perfect, of Christ we say, he is consubstantiall
to his father, by the substance of his godhed, and consubstantiall to man, by
the substance of his manhod, but we may not so say, man is consubstantial by
his soul to angels, and consubstantiall in his body to bestes, because then we
should deduce also Christ by mean of us to be consubstantial to beasts, and
thus I writ to show that we may not press thexample in every part of it, as
thauctor of this book upon Gelatius, who ouerturneth his doctrine of the
figure. And if that I have Here said, be well considered, there may appear
the great ignoraunci of this author in the alleginge of Theodorete, the
applinge of him, and speaking of Nestorius in the end. For as the Eutichians
reasonynge (as Saint Augustine says) to co^fonude the Nestoria^s, fell in to
an absurdity in the co^fusio^ of the two natures in christ: so Theodoretus
reasonyng against the Eutichia^s, fell in a vehement suspicio^ to be a
nestoria^, like as S. Augustine reasonyng against the maniches for defense of
fre will seemed to speak that the Pellagia^s would allow, and reasoning against
Pelagians, seemed to say that the manachees would allow, such a danger it is
to reduce extremities to the mean, wherein Saint Augustine was better purged
then Theodorete was, althowgh Theodorete was reconciled. But for example of
that I have said, this argument of Theodoretus against the Eutichians to
avoid confusion of natures in Christ, shows how in the sacreme^t (where
the truth of the mysterye of the two natures in Christ may be as it were in a
similitude learned). the presence of the body of Christ there in the
Sacrament, does not altre nature, that is to say, the propriety of the
visible creatures. This saying was that the Nestoryans would draw for there
purpose to prove distincre persons, against whom, Cyril trauayled to show
that in the Sacrament the flesh of Christ that was given to be eaten, was
given not as the flesh of a comen man, but as the flesh of Godde, whereby
appeared the unity of the godhed to the manhood in Christ in one person, and
yet no confusion as Theodoretus does by his argument Declare. But whither the
prynters negligence, or this auctours oversight, has confunded, or confused
this matter in the vtterynge of it, I can not tell, For the auctour of this
book concludes solemly thus by induction of the premises, that even so the
body of Christ was after thascension Changed in to the godly substance. I
wene the printer left out a (not) and should have said not changed, in the
Godly Substance, for so the sense should be as Peter Martyr reaporteth
Theodorete. And yet the triumph this auctore makethe against them, he calls
for his pleasure Papists, with his forked dylemma makes me Doubt, whither he
wiste what he said, or no: because he brings in Nestorius so out of purpose,
saying the Papists, must either grant the Substance of bread and wine to
remaylie, orelles to be of Nestorius heresy that the nature of Godhed remained
not.

This auctoure of the book for the name of Nestorius, should have put
Entiches, and then said for conclusion, the nature of manhood remained not in
Christ. And although in Theodorete the substance of bread is spoken of ^o
remain, yet because he doch after expound himself to speak of that is seen,
and feit he femeth to speak of Substance after the comen capacity, and not
as it is truly in learning understood, an inward invisible and not
palpable nature, but only perceived by understanding, so as this outward
nature that Theodorete speaks of, may according to his words trewly
remain not with standing trausubstantiaction, This auctoure Declares
plainly his iguoraunce not to perceive, whither the argument of Theodorete
and Gelasius tends, which is properly against the Eutichians rather then
the Nestorians. For and no propertye of bread remain, it proves not the
Godhed in Christ not to remain, but the humanity only to be as it were
swalowed up of the divinity which the Eutichians intended and specially after
Christ's resurrection, against whom the argument by Theodorere is specially
brought, howesoeuer this auctor confounbeth the Nestoryans and Eutichians names
and takes one for an other, which in so high a matter is no small fault,
and yet no great fault among so many, other howger and greter, as be in this
book committed, wherein this auctor not seeing how little he has done,
concludes yet as constantly as though he had thrown all down before him,
entendyng to show that the doctrine of transubstantiacion depends only of
anctorite which is not so, vsyng the sayings of duns and Gabriel (as he
reports them) for his purpuse, because they (as he says) bost them self
what they could do if the determina, cion of the consaille were not, and thus
every idle speech may have estimacion with this auctor against the received
truth. And from this point of the matter, the auctour of this book, makes a
passage with a litell sport at the^ he fansieth or likes to call so English
Papists by the way, entreprise to answer all such as he supposes reasons
for transubstanciation and auctorites also.

First he finds himself mirth in deuisynge as he calls them the Papists,
to say that Christ is made a new, which, fansye if it were so, is against
the real prefence as well as transubstantiacion. In which words because every
wise reader may ese how this auctor plays: I will say no more but this,
Christ is not made a new, nor made of the substance of bread as of a matter,
and that to be the Catholic doctrine, this auctor if he be right named
knows welynough, and yet spends two leanes in it.

The solution to the second reason is almost as foundely handled, alludynge
from impanatio^ to Inaquation, although it was never said in Scripture, this
water is the holy ghoost, but in baptism to be water and the holy ghost also,
and of the dowe is not said this is the holy ghoost, but the holy ghost
descended as in the resembla^ce of a dowe. The substance of bread is not
adnihilate because gods work is no adnihilation, who gives all being, and
adnihilacion is a defection of the creature from God, and yet Christ's body is
not augme^ted by the substance of bread, in which body it ends by co^nersio^,
as in the better without adnihilatio^, which is a changyng by miracle. And when
this auctor knows this, or should have known it, or has forgotten it, he
writes like one that were ignorant, and had red no thing in the matter, as it
were to make himself populer, to join himself in ignorance with the rude
unlearned people. A third reason this auctor frames himself, werby to take
occasion to afferme how the.vi. chaptre of saint John should not apperteyne to
the Sacrame^tal ma^ducation, the contrary where of, apperith as well by the
words of Christ in that.vi. chaptre, saing I will give, not I do give, which
promise was fullfilled in the supper as also hy the catholic writers and
specially by Cyril, and therefore I will not Ioh. 6.
further strive with this auctour in that matter but see how he can assoyle
thauctorites, whereunto he enters with great confidence.

First in Cyprian who speaks playnelie in the matter, this auctor fyndetha
fault that he is not holly alleged, whereupon this auctor brings in the
sentence followinge not necessary Cyprianus.
to be rehearsed, for the matter of transubstantiacio^, and hansom to be
rehearsed for the overthrow of the rest of this auctours new catholic faith,
and whither that now shall be added was material in the matter of
transubstanciacion, I require the Judgment of the (o reader).

The first words of Cyprian be these. This bread which our lord gave to his
disciples changed in nature, but not in outward form, is by the
o^mnipotencye of gods word De c^^na dn^i.
made flesh. These be Cyprianus words then follow thies, As in the person of
Christ the humanite was seen and the divinity hidden, even so the divinity
ineffably infused it self in to the visible Sacrament, Thus says Cyprian as I
can english him to express the word (infudit) by (latin english) not liking
the^ glishe word shed, because in our english tongue it resembles spillyng
and euacuation of the hole, and much less I can agree to use the word
powrynge although (infunde) in laten, may in the use of earthly things
signify so, because pouring notes a successiue workyng, whereas gods work is
in an instant and for that respect never sheddynge, But this auctor had a
fa^sye to use the sound of the word powryng, to serve instead of an argument
to improve transubstantiacion, meaning the hearer or reader in the conceyuyng
of the sense of Cypryan thus termed, should fansye the bread in the visible
Sacrament, to be like a soppe whereupon lyquor were powered, which is a kind of
deprauation, as thou reader by consideration of Cyprians words, and meaning
may est perceive, which Cypria^, has sheued how the bread is made flesh by
the omnipote^cie of gods word, and made by change. The^ because this mystery
of the Sacrament, in consideration of the two natures, celestial, and earthly,
resembles the principal mystery of Christ's perso^ne, S Cypria^ says in
se^ce, that as in the person of Christ the humanite was seen and the divinity
hidden, so likewise in this Sacrament visible, is also the divine nature
hidden. This is the se^ce where for declaracio^ of the work of god presetyng
his divine nature, there is used the verb (infudit) in latin, by which word
the motion of the divine nature is spoken of in scriptures, not because it is a
liquide substance to be poured, as thauctor of this book englishethit,
signifiyng a successiue operation, but rather as a word, if we should scanne
it, as this auctor would, signifiyng the co^tinua^ce of the term feo^ whence,
to the term whereunto with out leauyng the one by motion to the other, for
there is in the godly nature no local motion, and therefore we say, christ not
leaving his father descended from heaven, and being in earth was also in heaven,
which co^fusio^ in sum part rese^bleth, but ma^s words ca^ not express gods
divine operacio^s. To the purpose the first word of Cypria^ show the manner of
the co^stitucion of this sacrament, to be by muracio^ of the earthly creatures,
in to the body and blod of christ And the by the words following, sheueth the
truth of the substance of the sacrament, to thinte^t we might use our repair
to it, and frame our devotion according to the dignite of it, este ming as S.
Paul says our lords body, for the more evident declaration whereof, S.
Cypria^ by example of the mysterye in Christ's person, sheueth Christ's
humanite, and divinity present in the visible sacrament, of which divinity,
there is special mention against such, which fansied the flesh of Christ to
begyuen, to be eaten, as divided from the divine nature, which was the heresy
of the Nestoria^s, and such other denying, thereby the perfect unite of the two
natures in Christ, which the holy Sinode of Ephesus did specially co^dempne, as
other fathers in there wrytinge did specially preue^te with distinct writing
against that error, and therefore saint Cyprian not content to show the
presence of Christ's flesh by mutacon of the bread, does after make special
mention of Christ's divinity, not correcting that he had said before, but
further opening it, And so vtterby condempneth the teaching of thauctor of
this book, towching the presence of Christ to be only figura tiuely. Cyprian
says that in the sacrament is the truth, and then there is present the true
flesh of Christ, and the godhed truly, which devotion should knowelege and as
for transubsta^ciation according to the first words of saint Cypria^, the
bread is changed not inform, but in nature, which is not in the proprietes
of nature, nor in the operacion of nature, neither in quantite, or qualite of
nature, and therefore in the inward nature, which is properly substance. This
is the plain direct understanding, not by way of addition, as this auttor of
his ymaginatio^ diuiseth, who uses the word spiritual, as a stop, and
opposition to the catholic teaching, which is not so and clerelye without
earnyng compares with this Sacrament, the water of Baptism, of which we
read not written that it is changed, as we read of the bread, and therefore
the resemblaunce of water in Baptism, is used only to blind the rude reader
and serves for a shifte of talk to wind out of that matter that cannot be
answered, and as evil debtors shake of there creditours with a by
communicacion, so this auctor conueyeth himself away at a back door by
water, not doing first as he promised to answer, so as he would avoid
Cyprian directly by laud.

Answering to Chrysostom, this auctor Chryso.
complayneth, as he did in Cyprian, of malicyous leauyng out of that, which
when it is brought in, does nothing empayre that went before. Chrysostom
would we should consider the secret truth of this mystery, where Christ is
the Invisible Priest, and ministers in the visible church by his visible
minister, the visible Priest, whereof Chrysostom would by his words put us
in remembrance, not deniyng thereby the visible ministerye no more then he does
in his other words deny the visible form of bread, and yet would we should
not look only upon that, but whither faith directs us, that is to say, upon
the very body of Christ there inuisiblye present, which faith knows, and
knows it to be there the very body, and there therefore to be no bread,
which bread this true confession of Christ's body present by faith excludes.
But touching the Priest Saint Chrisostomes words do by no mean teach us that,
there is no visible Priest, but to think that the body of Christ is
delivered of Christ's hands, which excludes not in like sort the ministre
visible, as faith does the substance invisible of bread in the Sacrament. The
one saiynge of Chrysostom is a godly exhortacion according to the truth, the
other is a doctrine of faith in the truth, we be not taught that the Priest is
Christ, but we be taught that the substance of the bread is made Christ's
body. And then the question in the words of Chrysostom (See thou bread) is
as much to say, as remembrest thy faith? as being one of the faithful that
know? which term Saint Augustine used. And then Chrysostom to conferme
our faith in so high a mysterye, declares how we should think Christ to
deliver his body himself as a thing far exceeding man's power to do it.
And with other heavenly words sets forth the greatenesse of that
mysterye, with words of godly and good meditacion conueniente for so high a
matter to adourne it accordynglye, which because they be wholesome and mete
allegoryes, wherewith to draw and lift up our minds to celestial thoughts,
we may not thereby esteem the substance of that mysterye, to be but in
allegorye, here in flede of a solution the auctor fylieth three whole leaves
with pro^fe of tha^ is not necessary. how a denial by comparison is, not
utterly a denial, which is in deed true, and as one was answe^ed a^
Cambridge when he pressed the respon^all, what say ye to mine argument which
was not in deed of his own making? The responsall les^e his Latin, and toulde
the opp(...) before all his country frindes in plain English, It is a good
argument sir quod he, but no thing to the purpose, and so is of this matrier
the entreatynge of denial by comparison good, but nothing to the purpose
here, and it is an obseruacion that requires good judgment, or else may
thereby be induced many absurdities. Chrysostom as I said before speaking to
the Christen man, seems to ask whither he uses his faith or no, For if he
sees bread, he sees not with faith, which sees the body of Christ there
presence, and so no bread. If the Christen man think of passage through him
of the celestial fode, he has therein no spiritual thought, such as faith
engenders, and therefore says Chrysostom (absit) here in these words of
Chrysostom is no denial with comparison, and therefore this auctour might
have spared his treatise in these three leaves, For in those words, when
Chrysostom says, Think not thou receyuest the body of Christ by a man.
etc. There this auctour so neglects his / own rule, as in his third book
he makes a solemn argument that by those Chrisostomes words we receive not
the body of Christ at all, seeing Chrysostom says, we may not think we
receive it by man. So little substancially is this matter handled, as a man
might say here were many accidental words without a substance, or miracle,
how strange so ever the same seem to this auctor otherwise.

Now let us here what this auctor will say to Saint Ambrose. He reherseth
him at good lenght, but translateth him for advantage. As among other in one
place where Saint Ambrose says. This Sacrament which thou receyuest, is
made by the word of Christ, this auctor translateth, is done by the word of
Christ, because making must be understood in the substance of the
Sacrament chiefly before it is received, and doing may be referred to the
effect chieflye, for which purpose, it should seem thauctor of this book
cannot away with the word made, where at it pleases him in an other place of
this book to be merye, as at an absurdity in the Papists, when in deed both
Saint Ambrose here, Saint Cyprian, and Saint Hierome also in there places
use the same word speaking of this Sacrament, and of the wonderful work of
God in ordenyng the substance of it, by such a conversion as bread is made the
body of Christ. But as touching thanswere of this auctor to Saint Ambrose,
it is diverse. For first he does trauerse thauctoritie of the book, which
allegation has been by other here to fore made, and answered unto in such
wise, as the book remains Saint Ambroses still, and Mela^cton says it
seems not to him unlike his, and therefore allegeth this very place out of him
against Oecolampadius. This auctor will not stick in that allegation: but for
answer says that Saint Ambrose says not that the substance of the bread,
and wine is gone, and that is true, he says not so in syllables, but he says
so in sense: because he speaks of a change so playnelye in the bread into
that it was not, whereunto this auctor for declaration of change says, the
bread and wine be changed into an higher astate, nature, and condition, which
three words, of astate, nature, and condition, be good words, to express the
change of the bread into the body of Christ, which body is of an other
nature, an other state, and condition, then the substance of the bread
without comparison higher. But then this auctor adds, (to be taken as holy
meats, and drinks) wherein if he means to be taken so, but not to be so, as
his teaching in other places of this book is, the bread to be never the
holyer, But to signify an holy thing: then is the change nothing in deed
touching nature, but only as a cowarde may be channged in apparel to play
Hercules, or Sampsons part in a play, himself thereby made never the hardyer
man at all, but only appointed to signify an hardye man, of which man's
change, although his astate, and condition might in speech be called
changed for the time of the play, yet no man would term it thus to say,
his nature were changed, whither he mente by the word nature the substance of
the man's nature, or property, for in these two points he were still the
same man in Hercules coote, that he was before the play in his own, so as if
there be nothing, but a figure in the bread, then for so much this auctors
other teaching in this book where he says, the bread is never the holyer, is
a doctrine better then this, to teach a change of the bread to an higher
nature, when it is only appointed to signify an holy thing? And therefore
this auctours answer garnished with these there gaye words of astate, nature,
and condition, is divised but for a shifte, such as agrees not with other
places of this book nor in it self neither. And where Saint Ambrose
merueyleth at gods work in the substance of the Sacrament, this auctour
shifteth that also to the effect in him that receives, which is also
marvelous in dead, but the substance of the Sacrament is by Saint Ambrose
spiritually merueyled at, how bread is made the body of Christ the visible
matter outwardely remayninge, and only by an inward change, which is of
the inward nature, called properlye substance in learning, and a substance
in deed, but perceived only by inward understanding as the substance
present of Christ's most precious body, is a very substance in deed of the
body inuisiblye present, but present in deed, and only understood by
most true and certain knowledge of faith. And although this auctor notes how
in the examples of mutacion brought in by Saint Ambrose, the substaunces never
the less remained the same: that skilleth not, for the wonder of those
meruelles serve for an induction to releaue the weak faith of man in this
miracle of the Sacrament, and to repress the arrogancy of reason, presumynge
to search such knowledge in gods secret works, whereof if there might be a
reason given, it neded no faith. And where there is a like, there is no
singularite as this miracle in the Sacrament in notablye singular and therefore
none other found like unto it. The Sacramental mutation, which this auctor
newly so terms, is a mere shifte to avoid among such, as be not learned,
the truth of gods miracle in this change, which is in deed such as Saint
Ambrose speaks of, that of bread is made the body of Christ, which Saint
Ambrose in an other place, terms it the grace of the body of Christ, and all
is one for it is a great grace, to have the body of Christ for our food
present there. And out of Christ's mouth, calling the body of Christ, is
making the body of Christ, which words calling, signifiynge, namynge used
in saint Ambrose wrytynges, do not limite Christ's words, and restrain them
to anonely calling, an only signifiyng, or an only naming, but give an
understanding agreeable to other of Sainrt Ambrose words, that show the bread
after consecracion to be the body of Christ, the calling to be understood a
real calling of the thing that so is made, and likewise a real signifiynge
of the thing in deed present, and a real namynge, as the thing is in deed.
As Christ was named (Jesus), because he is the savior of his people in deed.
And thus perusynge this auctors answers, I trust I have noted to the reader,
with how small substance of matter this auctor impugneth transubstanciation,
and how slenderly he goes about to answer such auctors, as by their several
writings conferme the same, besides the consent of Christe^dom universally
receyuyng the same. And how in the mean way, this auctor has by his own
hands pulled down the same untrue doctrine of the figurative speech, that
himself so lately has divised, or rather because this matter in his book
goes before, he has in this second book marred his frame, or ever he
cummeth to the third book to set it up. In the second volume of the. 43.
leef, the auctor goes about to note. 6. absurdites in the doctrine of
transubstantiation, which I entende also to peruse, This first is this.

First if the Papists be demanded what thing it The auctor
is, that is broken, what is eaten, and what is chawed, with the teath lips,
and mouth in this Sacrament, they have nothing to answer, but thaccidentes.
For as they say bread, and wine be not the visible elements in this Sacrament,
but only there accidents, and so they be forsed to say that accidents be
broken, eaten, Dronken, chawed, and swalowed without any substance at all,
which is not only against all reason, but also against the doctrine of all
ancient auctors.

This is accounted by this auctor, the The an^wer.
first absurdire, and inconvenience, which is by him rhetorically setforth
with uppes, and mouth, and chawynge, not substanciall terms to the matter, but
accidental. For opeuynge of which matrer, I will repete sum part again of
that I have written before, when I made the scoler answer the rude man in
declaration of substance, which is that, albeit that sensible thing which
in speech uttered after the capacite of comen understanding, is called
substance be comprehended of our senses: yet the inward nature of every
thing which is in learning properly called substance is not so distinctly
known of us, as we be able to show it to the senses, or by words of
difference to distinct in diverse kinds of things one substance from
another. And herin (as Basil Basilius homil. 1. H^x a He(...)eron.
says) if we should go about by separation of all the accidents to discer^e
the substance by it self alone, we should in the experience fail of our
purpose and end in nothing in deed. There is a natural consideration of the
abstractes, that can not be practiced in experience. And to me, if it were
asked of comen bread, when me breeke it, whether we break the substance, or
only the accidents, first I must lernedly say, if the substance be broken,
it is by mean of the accident in quantite, and then if it like me, to take my
pleasour without lernyng in philosophy, as this auctor does in divinity
against the catholic faith, to say in division we break not the substance of
bred at all, the heresy in philosophy were not of such absurdite, as this
auctor maynteyneth in divinity. For I have some probable matter to say for me,
where he has none, For my strange answer, I would say that albeit a natural
thing as bread consisting of matter, and essencial form which qua^tite, and
thereby other accidents cleauyng and annexed may be well said to be in the hole
broken, as we see by experience it is: yet speaking of the substance of it
alone, if one should ask whether that be broken, and it should be answered ye,
the^ should the substance appear broken and hole al at one time, seeing in
every broken piece of bread, a hole substance of bread, and where the piece of
bread broken is so little a crumme, as can no more in deed be divided we say
nevertheless the same to be one substance very bread, and for want of
convenient qua^tite bread in diuisible, and thus I write to show that such an
answer to say the accide^ts be broken, has no such clear absurdite, as this
auctor would have it seem. But leaving of the matter of philosophy to the
scoles, I will grant that accide^tes to be without substance is against the
come^ course of natural things, and thefore theri^ is a special miracle of
god. But when the accide^tes be by miracle without substance as they be in the
visible pert of the sacrament: the^ the same accide^tes to be broken, cate^,
and dro^ke^ with all thaditio^s this auctor for his pleasur makes theri^, is no
miracle, or marvel, and as for absur dite no poi^t at al, for by qua^tite
which remains is al division. we ought to confess, and good christen men do
profess, the mysterye of the Sacrament to be supernatural, and above the order
of nature, and therefore it is a travail in vain to frame the consideration of
it to agree with the terms of philosophye, But where this auctor says that
nothing can be answered to be broken but the accide^tes: yes verily, for in
time of conte^cio^, as this is to him that would ask, what is broken, I would
in other terms answer thus, That thou see is broken. And the^ if he would
ask further, what that is, I would tell him the visible matter of the
Sacrament, under which is present Inuisibly the substance of the most precious
body of Christ, if he will ask yet further, Is that body of Christ broken, I
will say no. For I am learned in faith, that that glorious body now impassible
can not be broken, or divided, and therefore it is holy in every part of that
is broken, as the substance of bread is in comen bread in every part that is
broken, according whereunto, it is in the book of comen prayour setforth, how
in each part of that is broken, is the hole body of our savior Christ. If this
questioner be further curious and say, is not that, that is broken bread? I
would answer, as a beleuynge man by faith truly no, For in faith I must call
it, because it is truly so, the body of Christ inuisibly there, and the
breaking to be not in it, but in the visible sign. Yea ye will call it so
says this questioner, but yet it is bread: Nay quod I, my says is a most
certain truth, and believes things as they verily be, for Christ's word is
of strenght, not only to show, and declare as other men's words do, but
therewith effectual to make it so to be, as it is by him called. And this I
write because howsoever clerks soberly entreat the matter (such as mind well
I mean) to consider accide^tes, and substance which terms the rude
understand not, it is not necessary therefore in those terms, to make answer
to such as be co^tentiously curious, who labor with questions to dissolve the
truth of the mystery, in declaracio^ whereof, we as men stumble and term it
otherwise then we should, that is no Inco^uenie^ce in the mystery, but an
imparfection in us that be not able to express it, not having such gifts of
god as other have, nor studyinge to atteyne lernyng as other have done. And
whatsoever in scoles with a devout mind to aus were al captious questions
has for thexercitation of men's senses been moved soberly and by way of
argument objected: that is now picked out by this auctor, and brought to the
comen peoples cares in which it might sound evil they not being able to make
answer theru^to, whereby they might be snarled, and inta^gled with vain fanses
against that truth, which before without curiosite of questions, they truly
and constantly believed. Finally the doctrine of the sacrament is simple and
plain, to have the visible fourmes of bread and wine for signification, the
thing whereof in the very body and blood of Christ, which being the truth of
the hole it is no absurdite to confess truly the parts as they be if
occasion require, howesoeuer it sounds to the Ethnike or carualic man's
ears, for whose satisfaction there is no cause why the truth should be altered
into alye, wherewith to make melody to there vndersta^dinges. For howsoever
carnal reason be offended with spiritual truth, it forces not but against the
hole consent of the ancient doctors, no doctrine ca^ be instified, with whose
restimonie, how the faith of the church in the sacrament now agrees, it is
manifest howsoever it likes this auctor to reaporte the contrary.

Secondly these Transubsta^tiators do say contrary to all learning: that
accidents of bread and The auctor.
wine do hang alone in thaire without any substance: wherein they may be
stayed: and what may be said more folyshelye.

The master of the sentences she winge diverse men's sayings in discussio^ (as
they can) The answer. sententia (...). di(...)t. 9. q. 10.
of this mystery tells what sum say that had reather say sum what, then
nothing, which this auctor rehersith, as a determinacion of the church, that
in deed makes no doctrine of that point so, but acknowlegith the mystery to
excede our capacite. And as for the accidents to be stayed, that is to say,
to remain without there natural substance, is without difficulty believed of
men that have says considering thalmightie power of Christ, whose divine body
is there present. And shall that be accounted for an inconvenience in the
mystery, that any one man says whose saying is not as a full determinacio^
approved? If that man should encontre with this auctor, if he were a live so to
do, I think he would say it were more tolerable in him of a zeal to agree
with the true doctrine to utter his co^seyte fo^dly, then of a malice to
disse^t from the true doctrine this auctor so fondly to improwe his saying.
But if he should oppose this auctor in learning, and ask him how he will
understand (Fiat lux) in the creation of the world, where the light stayed that
was then create, But I will proceed to peruse the other absurdities.

Thirdly that the substance of Christ's body is there The auctor.
really: corporally: and naturally / present without any accidents of the
same. And so the papists make accidents to be with out substance and
substance without accidents.

How Christ's body in circu^sta^ce present The answer.
no man ca^ define, but that it is truly present, and therefore really present,
corporally also and but yet supper naturally, with relation to the truth of the
body present and not to the manner of prese^ts which is spiritual excedyng our
capacit^, and therefore therein with out drawyng away accide^tes, or adding, we
believe simply the (...) howsoever it likes this auctor with out the book to
(...) it at his pleasur, and to speak of substance without accide^tes, and
accide^tes without substance: which perplexite in words cannot ieste out the
truth of the catholic bilyefe. And this is on thauctours part nothing but
iestinge with a wrong surmise and supposall as though men had inui^ted, and
ymagined that which by force and truth of the scripture all good men have and
must believe, that is to say, the true presence of the substance of the body
and blood of Christ in the Sacrament according to the words of Christ: This
is my body, which exclude the substance of bread, declaringe the substance of
the body of Christ, to be acknoweleged, and professed in the Sacrament, by the
true faith of a Christian man. Compare with this, what this auctor writes in
his 9 difference, in the 47 leaf of his book, and so consider the truth of
this reaport and how this auctor agrees with himself.

Fourthly they say that the place where the bread and wine be, has no
substance there to fill that The auctor.
place, and so must there needs be granted (vacuum) which nature abhors.

This auctor goes a bout to find so many absurdites that he speaks he woteth
not The answer.
what, and where he sees and fealith quantite, acco^mpteth the place void for
want of substance, as though in consideration of comen natural things
severally as they be in nature, it were the substance that filled the place and
not rather quantite, although in the natural order of things there is no
quantite without substance, and is in this Sacrament only by miracle. There
wanted a substance in consideracion of this absurdity, and was such a
vacuum, as nature playnelye endures.

Fiftely they are not asshamed to say that substance The auctor.
is made of accidents, when the bread mouldeth or is turned into worms, or
the wine sowreth.

True beleuyng men are not ashamed to confess The answer.
the truth of there faith, whatsoever arguments might be brought of experience
in nature to the contrary. For Christ's works we know to be true by most
certain faith what mouldeth in bread, or sowreth in wine, we be not so assured,
or where on worms engendre, it is not so fully agreed on among men. The
learned lawer Ulpian writes (as I have before alleged) that wine and vinegre
have in manner one substance so as when wine sowreth and is vinagre in manner the
same substance remains in whom it is thought no absurdity to say by that
means that the accidents only sower. And if we agree with the Philosophers
that there is (Materia prima) which in all things is one, and alters not,
but as a new form cummeth, takes a new name, fansinge that as one wave in
the water thrusts a way another, so does one form an other: it should seem
by this conclusion all alteracion to be in accidents, and the corruption of
accidents to be the generation of new accidents, the same (Materia prima)
being as it were (substancia) that alters not. And this I write that may be
said as it were to make a title to this auctours certayntie which is / not so
sure as he makes it. Among men have been marvelous fancies in co^sideracion
of natural things, and it is to me a very great absurdite of that secret,
and therefore to our knowledge an uncertain work, to deduce an argument,
wherewith to impugn our certain faith. But to cum nerer to the purpose, it is
wrong borne in hand, that we affirm worms to be engendered of accidents,
but when the worms be engendered we grant the worms to be, and will rather
say whereof they be we cannot tell, then to say that substance is made of
accide^ces, and that doctrine is not annexed to the faith of
transubstantiacion, and such as entreat those chances and accidents do not
induce that conclusion, but do reasonably avoid it. And yet by the way in
mouldyng and sowrynge it should me seems be properly said that the accidents
moulde, and the accidents sour, because we call moulde bread, bread, so were
wine, wine, and in wine as I said before made vinigre, the former substance
has been in lernyng accounted in manner to remain, so as this auctor
ouershoteth himself when he matcheth generation of worms with mouldyng and
sowryng, which differ so far in there speculation. But even as this auctors
wit is ouerturned in consideracion of the true faith, so does it appear
perverted in consideracion of natural things. The.vi. absurdite is this.

Sixthly that substance is nuxrished without substance The auctor.
by accide^^es only, if it chance any catt, mouse, dog or any other thing
to eat the Sacramental bread or drink the Sacramental wine.

It has been heard without fables of certain The answer.
men that have lived and been nurrished with sauors only and in gold and
certain precious stones that they give a kind of nurritour to an other
substance without diminution of their substance, experience has showed it so,
and therefore the principel or maxim that this auctor gathers, has no such
absurdite in it, as he notes to say that substance is nurrished without
substance. But when vermyne by chance happen to devour any host, as I am
sure they cannot violate Christ's most precious body: so what effect follows
of the rest, what needs it to be discussed? If it nurrisheth, then does that
effect remain although the substance be not there, If every nourritour must
needs be of substance, then would those that discuss those chances say the
substances to return, but hele gates shall not make me speak against my
faith. And if I be asked the question whither the visible matter of the
Sacrament nurrishe, I will answer yea, Ergo says he there is substance. I
deny it he shall now from the effect to the cause argue by physike, I shall
disprowe the conclusion by thauctorite of faith, who is it most mete should
yield to other? And if in nature many things be in experience countrarye to
the general rules, why may not one singular condition be in this visible
mattier of the Sacrament, that the ouelye substance being changed, all other
parts, proprieties, and effects may remain? Is it an absurdite for a maid
to have a child, because it is against the rules of nature? Is it an
absurdite the world to be made of nothing because the philosopher faith of
nothing cummeth nothing? The principal of nature is that whatsoever has a
beginning has an end, and yet it is no absurdite to believe our souls, to
have a beginning without end, and to be immortal. Wherefore to conclude this
mattier, it is a great absurdite in this auctour, to note that for an absurdite
in our faith, which repugueth only to the principles of philosophy or
reason, when that is only to be accounted for an absurdite, that should
repugne to the scripture, and gods will, which is the sta^derd to try the rule
of our faith. How soever reason or Philosophy be offended it forces not, so
gods teaching be embraced, and persuaded in faith which needs no such
playsters and salues, as this auctour has divised, to make a sore where none
is, and to corrupt that is whole. The best playstor and medicine that could
now be devised were to leave a part questions and idle talk, and mekely to
submit our capacites to the true faith and not to ouerwhelme our
understandings with search and enquire, whereof we shall never find au end
entering the botomlesse secrecye of gods mysteryes. Let us not seek that is
above our reach, but that God has commanded us let us do. Each man impugneth
an others learning with words, none controlleth an others living with better
deeds. Let all endeavor themself to do that God commands, and the good
occupation thereof shall exclude all such idelnesse as is cause and occasion
of this vain and noisome curiosite. And now to return to this auctour
whiles he seath a more in an other man's eye, he fealeth not a beam in his
own. Who recommendeth unto us specially Theodorete whom he calls an holly
Bishop, and with him does bring forth a peace of an Epistle of Saint
Chrysostom. The doctrine of which two joined with the doctrine of this auctor
in such sense as this auctour would have all understood to be called
Catholic, touching the faith of the Sacrament has such an absurdite in it
as was never heard of in religion. For this auctour teaches for his part,
that the body of Christ is only reallye in heaven and not in deed in the
Sacrament, according whereunto this auctor also teaches the bread to be very
bread still, which doctrine if it be true as this auctour will needs have it,
then join unto it the doctrine of the secret Epistle of Chrysostom, and
Theodorete whose doctrine is that after the consecracion, that is consecrate
shall be called no more bred, but the o^dy of christ By these two doctrines
joined together it shall appear that we must call that is consecrate, by a
name of that we be learned by this auctour it is not, and may not by the
doctrine of Theodorete call it by the name of that which this auctor teaches
us in deed it is. As thus, It is in deed bread, quod this auctor, but call it
not so, quod this Theodorete, It is not in deed the body of Christ, quod this
auctor, but yet in anywise call it so quod Theodorete. Here is plain
simulacion, and dissimulacion both together. For by forberynge the name of
bread according to Theodoretes teaching, we dissemble and hide that it is by
this auctors teachinge, and by vsinge the name of our Lords body according to
Theodoretes teaching, we feign it to be that it is not, by this auctors
teaching which says there is only a figure, and by this means in so high a
mysterye we should use untruths on both sides in simulacion and
dissimulacio^, which is a marvelous teaching. I deny not but things
signifiyng may have the name of that they signify by a figure of speech: but
we read not in any doctrine given that the thing signifiynge should have the
name by figure and be delivered from the name of that it is in deed. And yet
this is now the teaching of this auctour in defense of his new Catholic
faith joined with the teaching of Theodorete, and the secret Epistel of S.
Chrysostom, as this auctor would have the^ understood. But those men
Theodorete and Chrysostom in the sense they mente as I understand the^ taught
a true doctrine. For they take the name of the body of Christ in the sacrament
to be a real namynge of the body of Christ there present in deed, and
therefore a true perfect name, which as S. Chrisostomes secret Epistel says,
the thing is worthy to have declaryng, by that worthynes the thing named to be
their in deed. And likewise I understand the other name of bread worthily done
away, because the substance, Whereupon in reason the name was grounded, is
changed according to the true doctrine of transubstantiacion, therefore that
name of bread in there doctrine is truly laid away, although Theodorete
writes the visible matter of bread and wine to be seen and felt as they were
before, and therefore says there substance which there signifies the outward
nature is seen and felt to remain, which terms with convenient understanding
may thus agree with the Catholic teaching of tra^substantiacion and so in
the Sacrament on every part both in the heavenly and earthely part to be a full,
hole, and perfect truth, as the high mystery being the sacrament of our perfect
unite in body and soul with Christ, does require. Whereby in my Judgment as
this auctour has against his own determinacion in this enterprise vttred that
confermeth the truth of the real presence of Christ's most precious body in the
Sacrament, which he does in special entreatyng the wor^es of Saint Augustine
in the.xxvij. leaf of his book besides that in diverse other places he does
the like: so bringynge us forth this Theodorete and his secret Epistle of
Saint Chrysostom, he has brought forth that may serve to convince him in
transubstantiacion. Howbeit as for transubstantiacion Suinglius takes it
truly for a necessary consequence of the truth if there be in the Sacrament
the real presence of Christ's body as there is in deed. For as a carnal man
not instruct by faith as well after consecracion as before as he is of the earth
speaks and calls it bread, and asking him what it is will never answer
otherwise, and if one asked him whither it were the body of Christ would
think the questioner mocked him, so the faithful spiritual man answeryng to
that question what it is, would after consecracion according to faith, answer
the body of Christ, and think himself mocked if he were asked is it not
bread? onles he had been taught Christ to have said it had been both his
body and bread. As for calling it by the name of bread which it was, he would
not greatly s^ike and one thing may have many names, but one thing is but one
substance, whereby to answer to the question what it is, saving only in the
person of Christ wherein we know united the two substa^ces of god and man. And
this matter I repete and sumaryly touch again to leave in the readers breast
the principal point of our biliefe of this misterye to be of the real
presence, that is to say unfeigned substantial prece^ce, and therefore the true
presence of Christ's most precious body in the Sacrament, which has been in
all ages taught, and been as it is the Catholic faith of Christendom, as
appears by the testimony of the old auctors in all ages, in whose
particular words although there may be sum time cau(...)lacions: yet I will
note unto the reader, fouer marks and tokens emprinted raither in those old
auctors deeds, the^ words which be certain testimonies to the truth of there
faith of real presence of Christ's most precious body in the Sacrament. The
first mark is in the process of arguyng used by them to the conviction of
heretics by the truth of this Sacrament, wherein I note not their particular
sentences which sometime be dangerous speeches, but their hole doings. As
Irene who was in the beginning of the church, argues against the
valentinians, that denied the resurrection of our flesh, whom Irene reproves
by the feadynge of our souls and bodies with the divine glorified flesh of
Christ in the Sacrament, which flesh, and it be their but a figure, then it
should have proved the / resurrection of our flesh slenderly and as it were
but figuratyuely. And if the Catholic faith had not been then certainly
taught, and consta^tly believed without variaunce, Christ's very flesh to be in
deed eaten in that mystery: it would have been answered of the heretics it
had been but a figure, but that appears nor, and the other appears which
is a testymonye to the truth of matter in deed. Hilarie reasonynge Hilarious. 8.
libro de ^^tim.
of the natural coniuction between us, and Christ by mean of this Sacrament,
expresses the same to com to pass, by the receyuynge truly the very flesh
of our lord in our lords meat, and thereupon argues against the Arria^s,
which Arrians, if it had not been so really in deed, but all was spiritually
so as there was no such natural and corporal communion in deed as Hilarie
supposed, but as this auctor teaches a figure, and it had been the Catholic
doctrine so: that argument of Hilarie had been of no force. S. Chrisostom,
Belasius and Theodorete argue of the truth of this mystery to convince the
Appollinaristes, and Eutichians, which were noon argument if Christ's very
body were not as really present in the Sacrament for the truth of presence, as
the godhed in the person of / Christ, being theffect of thargument this, that
as the presence of Christ's body in this mystery does not altre the properties
of the visible natures, no more does the godhode in the person of Christ
extinguishe his humanite, which against those heretics served for an
argument to exclud confusion of natures in Christ, and had been a dangerous
argument to be embrased of the Nestorians, who would hereby have furdred there
heresy, to prove the distinction of natures in Christ without any union, for
they would have said. As the earthly, and heavenly natures be so distinct in
the Sacrament as the one is not spoken of the other, so be the natures of the
humanite and godhod not united in Christ, which is false, and in the
comparynge we may not look that all should answer in equalite, but only for
the point it is made for, that is, as in the Sacrament the visible clement is
not extinguished by the presence of Christ's most precious body, no more is
Christ's humanite by his godhode, and yet we may not say, that as in the
Sacrament be but only accide^tes of the visible earthly matter, that therefore
in the person of Christ be only accide^tes of the humanite. For that misterye
requires the hole truth of man's nature, and therefore Christ took upon him
the hole man, body and soul. The mysterye of the Sacrament requirethe the
truth of the accidents only, being the substance of the visible creatures
converted into the body and blood of Christ. And this I write to prevent such
cauillations as some would search fore. But to return to our matter all these
arguments were vain, if there were not in the Sacrament the true presence of
Christ's very body, as the celestial part of the Sacrament, being the
visible forms therthly thing. Which earthly thing remains in the former
propriety with the very presence of the celestial thing. And this suffiseth
concerning the first mark. An other certain token is the wondryng and great
meruelyng that the old auctours make, how the substance of this Sacrament is
wrought by gods omnipotency. Baptism is merueled at, for the wonderful
effect that is in man by it, how man is regenerat, not how the water, or the
holy ghoost is there. But the wondre in this Sacrament is specially directed to
the work of God in the visible creatures, how they be so changed into the
body and blood of Christ, which is a work of god wrought, before we receive
the Sacrament. Which work Cyprian says is inestable, that is to say, not
speakable, which is not so Cyprian de coena dn^i.
if it be but a figure, for then it may easily be spoken, as this auctour
speaks it with ease (I think) he speaks it so often. Of a presence by
signification if it may so be called, every man may speak and tell how, but
of the / very presence in deed and therefore the real presence of Christ's
body in the Sacrament, no creature can tell how it may be, that Christ
ascended into heaven with his human body, and therewith coutinually reignying
there should make present in the Sacrament the same body in deed, which Christ
in deed works, being nevertheless then at the same hour present in heaven,
as S. Chrisosostom does with a maruayle say. If the maruayle were only of
gods work in man in theffect of the Sacrament, as it is in Baptism, it were
an other matter, but I said before the wrondre is in the work of God, in the
substance of the Sacrament, before it be received, which declares tholde
auctours that so wondre to understand the real presence of Christ's very
body, and not an only signification, which has no wondre at all. And
therefore seeing S. Cyprian wondreth at it, and calls the work inestable, S.
Chrisostom wondreth at it, S. Ambrose wondreth at it, Emissen wondreth at it,
Cyrill wondreth at it. What should we now doubt whether their faith were of a
signification only as this auctour would have it, which is no wondre at all,
or of the real presence which is in deed a wonderful work. Wherefore where
this manifest token, and certain mark appears in the old fathers their can
no constructio^ of sillables, or words dissuade, or peruerte the truth thus
testified. A third token their is by declaration of figures as for example S.
Hierom when he declares upon thepistel (Ad Titum) so advisedly at lenght how
(Panes prepositiones) were the figure of the body of Christ in the Sacrament:
that process declares the mynds of that auctor to be that in the Sacrament is
present the very truth of Christ's body not in a figure again, to join one
shadow to an other, but even the very truth to answer the figure, and
therefore no particular words in S. Hierome can have any understanding
contrary to his mind declared in this process. Fourthly an other certain
mark is where the old auctours write of the addration of this Sacrament,
which can not be but to the things, godly, really present. And therefore S.
Augustine writing in his book de (Catechizandis rudibus) how the Invisible
things be honored in this Sacrament, meaning the body and blood of Christ,
and in the. 98. Psalm speaks of adoration. Theodoretus also spekyng
specially of adoration of this Sacrament. These auctours by Theodoretus.
Dialogo. 3.
this mark that is most certain, take away all such ambiguite as men might
by suspicions, divination, gather sumtyme of their several words, and declare
by this mark of adoration plainly their faith to have been, and also their
doctrine understood as they meant of the real presence of Christ's very
body and blood in the Sacrament, and Christ himself God, and man to be their
present, to whose divine nature and the humanite unite thereunto, adoration may
only be directed of us. And so to conclude up this matter forasmuch as one of
these four marks, and notes may be found testified and apparaunte in the
anucient writers, with other words and sentences conformable to the same: this
should suffice to exclude al arguments of any by sentences and ambiguons
speeches, and to uphold the certeynte of the true Catholic faith in deed,
which this auctour by a wrong name of the Catholic faith impugneth, to the
great slander of the truth and his own reproach.

The confutation of the fifth book.
AS touching the fifth book the title whereof is of thoblation and sacrifice of
our Savior Christ somewhat is by me spoken before, which although it be
suffitie^t to the matter, yet somewhat more must also be now said, whetwyth to
encountre thauctors imaginations and surmises with the wrong construyng of the
Scriptures, and Auctors to wrest them besides the truth of the matter and there
meaning.

This is agreed and by the Scriptures playnelie taught that the oblation, and
Sacrifice of our Savior Christ was, and is a perfect work ones consummate in
perfection without necessity of reiteration, as it was never taught to be
reiterate, but a mere blasphemy to presuppose it. It is also in the Catholic
teaching grounded upon the scripture agreed, that the same sacrifice ones
consomate, was ordained by Christ's institution in his most holy supper to be
in the church often remembered and showed forth in such forte of showing, as
to the faithful is seen present the most precious body and blood of our
Savior Christ, under the fourmes of bread and wine, which body and blood the
faithful church of Christen people grant and confess according to Christ's
words to have been betrayed and shed for the sins of the world and so in the
same supper represented, and delivered unto them, to eat and feade of it
according to Christ's commandment, as of a most precious and acceptable
sacrifice, acknolegyng the same precious body and blood, to be the sacrifice
propitiatory for all the sins of the world, whereunto they only resort,
and only account that the very perfect oblacion and sacrifice of Christen
people, through which all other sacrifices necessariely be accepted and
pleasant in the sight of God. And this manner of showing Christ's death and
keeping the memory of it, is grounded upon the scriptures, wryte^ by the
Eua^gelistes, and S. Paul and according thereunto preached, believed, used, and
^reque^ted in the church of Christ universally and from the beginning. This
auctor uttering many words at large besides scripture, and agenst scripture to
depratie the Catholic doctrine, does in a few words (which be in deed good
words and true) co^fonde and overthrow al his enterprise, and that issue will
I ioinewith him, which shall suffice, for the co^futacion of this book. The
few good words of the auctor, which words I say confound the rest,
consiste in these two points. One in that the auctor allows the Judgment of
Petrns Lombardus, touching thoblacion, and sacrifice of the church. An other
in that thauetor confesses the Counsel of Nice to be an holy concell, as it
has been in deed confessed of al good Christen men, Upon these two confessions
I will declare the whole enterprise of this fifte book to be overthrown. First
to begin with the council of Nice, the same has opened the mysterye of the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ in this wise, that Christen men
believe the lamb that takes away the sins of the world to be situate upon
gods board, and to be sacrificed of the Priests, not after the manner of other
Sacrifices. This is the doctrine of the council of Nice, and must then be
called an holy doctrine and thereby a true doctrine, consonante to the
Scriptures, the foundation of all truth. If thauctor will deny this to have
been the teaching of the counsel of Nice, I shall allege therefore the
allegacion of the same by Decolampadius, who being an aduersarye to the truth,
was yet by gods providence ordered to bear testimony to the truth in this
point, and by his mean, is published to the world in greek as follows,
which neuerthlesse may otherwise appear to be true. (...) (...). Iterum etiam
hic in diuina mensa, ne humiliter intenti simus ad propositum panem and
poculum, sed mente exaltata fide intelligamus, situm esse in sacra illa mensa,
illum Dei agnum, qui tollit peccata mundi, sacrificatum a sacerdotibus, non
victimarum more: and nos praeciosum illius corpus, and sanguinem vere sumentes,
credere haec esse resurrectionis Symbola. Ideo non multum accipimus, sed parum,
vt cognoscamus quonia^ non in satietatem, sed sanctificationem. These words
may be Englished thus: Again in this godly table, we should not in base, and
love consideracion direct our understanding to the bread and cup set forth,
but having our mind exalted, we should understand by faith to be situate in
the table the lamb of God, which takes away the syunes of the world
Sacrificed of the Priests, not after the manner of other Sacrifices, and we
receauynge truly the preciouse body, and blood of the same lamb, to believe
these to be the tokens of our resurrection: And for that, we receive not much
but a little, because we should know that not for saturitie and fillynge, but
for sanctification. This holy Council of Niece has been believed universally
in declaration of the mysterye of the Trinity and the Sacraments also. And ^o
them that confess that council to be holy, as thauctor here does, and to such
as profess to believe the determinacio^ of that council, in the opening of
the mysterye of the Trinity with other words the Scripture uses, although
they express such sense as in the Scripture is contained. Why should not all
such likewise believe the same council in explicacion of the Sacraments,
which to do, thauctor has bound him self, grauntyng that council holy. And
then we must believe the very presence of Christ's body and blood on gods
board, and that Priests do their sacrifice, and be therefore called
sacrificers. So as those names, and terms be to be honored, and religiously
spoken of, being in an holy council uttered and confessed, because it was so
seen to them and the holy ghost, without whose present assistynge and
suggession believed to be there, the council could not nor ought not to be
called holy. Now if we confer with that council of Nice the testimonye of
the Church beginning at S. Dionise, who was in the time of the apostelles, and
after him coming to Irene, who was nere thapostels, and the^ Tertulliane. And
so S. Cypria^, S. Chrysostom, S. Cyril, S. Hierome, S. Augustine and from that
age to Petrus Lo^bardus, all spoke of the sacrament to the same effect, and
termed it for the word sacrifice and oblacion, to be frequented in the church
of the body and blood of Christ, as may be in particularitie showed, whereof I
make also an issue with the auctor. An issue.


For the other point in that thauctor approved the judgment of Petrus
Lombardus in the matter, what should I more do, but write in the words of
Petrus Lombardus as he has them: which be these in the fourth book the.xij.
Chapter alleged by thauctor. Post haec quaeritur, si quod gerit sacerdos, pro
pry dicatur sacrificium, vel immolatio, and si Christus quotidie immoletur,
vel semel tantum immolatus sit? Ad hoc breuiter dici potest, illud quod
offertur, and co^secratur a sacerdote, vocari sacrificium, and oblationem, quia
memoria est and representatio very sacrificij and sanctae immolationis factae
in ara crucis, and semel Christus mortuus in cruce est, ibique immolatus est in
semetipso quotidie aute^ immo latur in sacramento, quia in sacramento, recor
datio fit illius, quod factu^ est semel: vnde Augustinus. Certum habemus, quia
Christus resurgens ex mortuis ia^ non moritur: etc. tamen ne obliuiscamur quod
semel factu^ est, in memoria nostra omni anno fit, scilicet quando pascha
celebratur, Nunqnid totiens Christus occiditur? sed tantum anniuersaria
recordatio repraesentat quod olim factum est, and sic nos facit moueri tanq
videamus Dominum in eruce: Item semel immolatus est Christus in semetipso, and
tame^ quotidie immolatur in sacramento: Quod sic intelligendum est: quia in
manifestatione corporis and distinctione me^ brorum, semel tantum in cruce
pependit, offerens se Deo patri hostiam redemptionis efficacem, eorum scilicet:
quos praedestinauit. Item Ambrosius. In Christo semel oblata est hostia ad
salutem potens, quid ergo nos? No^ne per singulos dies offerimus? Et si
quotidie offeramus: ad recordatione^ eius mortis fit, and vna est hostia, non
multae: quomodovna and no^ multae: quia semel immolatus est christus, hoc autem
sacrificium exemplu^ est illius idipsum, and semperidipsum offertur, proinde
hoc ide^ est sacrificiu^, alioquin dicetur quonia^ in multis locis offertur,
multi sunt Christi, no^, sed vnus vbique est Christus and hie plenus existe^s,
and illic plenus, sicut quod vbique offertur vnu^ est corpus, ita and vnu^
sacrificiu^, Christus hostiam obtulit, ipsam offerimus and nu^c, sed quod nos
agimus recordatio e^st sacrificij: Nec causa suae infirmitatis reperitur, quia
perficit hominem, sed nostrae, quia quotidie peccamus. Exhis colligitur esse
sacrificiu^ and dici quod agitur in altari, and Christu^ semel oblatu^ and
quotidie offerri, sed aliter tu^c, aliter nu^c, and etia^ quae sitvirtus huius
sacramenti ostenditur: scilicet: remissio peccatoru^ venalium, and
perfectiovirtutis. The English hereof is this, After this it is asked whether
that the priest does, may be said properly a sacrifice or immolacio^: and
whether christ be daily i^molate or only ones? Wheru^to it may be shortly
answered, that which is offered and consecrate of the priest, is called a
sacrifice and oblacio^, because it is a memory and represe^tacion of the true
sacrifice and holy immolation done in thalter of the cross. And Christ was
ones deed on the Cross and there was offered in him self, but he is daily
immolate in the sacrament, because in the sacrament there is made a memory of
that is ones done, whereupon S. Augustine, we are assured that Christ rising from
Romans 6.
death dies not now. etc. Yet lest we should for get that is ones done, i^ our
memory every year is done, viz: as often as the pascha is celebrate, is Christ
as often killed? only a yerly remembrance repre^e^teth that was ones done and
causes us to be moved as though we save our Lord on the cross. Also Christ
was ones offered in him self, and yet is offered daily i^ the sacrament which is
thus to be understood, that in open shewi^g of his body and distinction of
his me^bres he deed ha^ge only ones upon the cross offering himself to god the
father an host of rede^ptio^ effectual for the^ who^ he has predestinate, also
S. Ambrose: in christ the host was ones offered being of power to health, what do
we the^? do we not The same words has Chrysostom homel. 17. ad hebr.
offer eueri day? and if we offer eueri day, it is done in the remembrance of
the death of him, and the host is one, not many, how one and not many? because
christ is ones offered. This sacrifice is thexe^ple of that the same, and
always the same is offered therefore this is the same sacrifice, or else it may be
said because it is offered in many places, there be many Christ's, which is
not so, but one Christ is each where, and here full and their full, so as that
which is offered every where is one body, and so also one Sacrifice: Christ
has offered the host, we do offer the same also now: But that we do, is a
remembrance of the sacrifice, Nor their is no cause found of the own inuaiy
ditie because it per^teth the man, but of us because we daily sin: Hereof it
is gathered that to be a sacrifice and to be so called that is done in
thaltare, and Christ to be ones offered and daily offered, but otherwise then,
and otherwise now, and also it is showed what is the virtue of this Sacrament,
that is to say, remission of ver^al sin and perfection of virtue. This
writes Petrus Lombardus, whose judgment because this auctor allows, he must
grant that the visible church has Priests in ministry that offer daily,
Christ's most precius body and blood in mystery, and then must it be granted
that Christ so offered him self in his supper. For otherwise then he did
cannot now be done. And by the judgment of Petrus Lombardus, the same most
precious body and blood is offered daily that ones suffered and was ones
(...)ede, And also by the same Petrus judgment which he confirms with the
saynges of other this daily offryng by the priest is daily offered for sin,
not for any imperfection in the first offering, but because we daily fall. And
by Petrus judgment appears also how the priest has a special function to
make this offering, by whose mouth god is prayed unto (as hesithius says) to
make this sacrifice, which Emissene notech Hom^l. de cowore et Sa^guine domini.
to be wrought by the power of the invisible priest. By Petrus Lo^bardus also,
(if his judgment be true as it is in deed) and thauctor confesses it so to
be) that is done in thaulter is not only called a sacrifice but also is so,
and the same that is offered ones and daily to be the same, but otherwise then
offerid and otherwise now. But to the purpose, if thauctor will stand to the
judgment of Petrus Lo^bardus, al his sift bookee of this (...) is cler(...)
defaced. And if he will now call back that again, he might more co^pendionsiye
do the same in the hoole treatice, being so far ouerseene as he is therein. The
Catholic doctrine reaches not the daily sacrifice of Christ's most precious
body and blood to be an iteration of the ones perfited sacrifice on the cross,
but a sacrifice that represents that sacrifice, and shows it also before
the faithful eyes and refreshyth the effectual memory of it, so as in the
daily sacrifice withowt weddyng of blood, we may see with the eye of faith the
very body and blood of Christ by gods mighty power, without dinision
distinctly exhibit, the same body and blood that suffered and was shed for us
which is a lively memorial to stir up our faith and to consider brefly
therein the great charity of God toward us declared in Christ. The Catholic
doctrine teaches the dailye sacrifice to be the same in essence that was of
fered on the Cross ones, assured thereof by Christ's words when he said:
This is my body that shall be betrayed for you. The offering on the Cross was
and is propiciatorye and satisfactorie for our redemption and remission of
sin, whereby to destroy the tyranny of sin, theffect whereof is given and
dispe^sed in the sacrament of Baptism, ones likewise ministered and never to be
it erate, no more the^ Christ can be crucified again, and yet by virtue of the
same offering such as fall be reieued in the sacrament of penance. The daily
offering is propitiatory also, but not in that degree of propitiatio^, as for
redemption, regeneracio^, or remission of deadlye sin which was ones
purchassed, and by force thereof is in the sacrame^rs ministered, but for the
increase of gods favor, the mitigacio^ of gods displeasure provoked by our
infirmities, the subduyng of te^ptacions and the perfection of virtue in us.
All good works, good thoughts and good meditacions may be called sacrifices
and the same be called sacrifices propitiatory also, for so much as in there
degree god accepts, and takes them through the effect and strenghte of the
very Sacrifice of Christ's death, which is the reconciliacion between God and
man, ministered and dispensed particularlye as God has appointed, in such
measure as he knows. But Saint Paul to the Hebrews exortyng men to
charitable Hebr. 13.
deades says, with such sacrifices God is made favorable, or God is
propitiate, if we shall make new English. Whereupon it follows because the
Priest in the daily Sacrifice does as Christ has ordered to be done for
showing forth and remembrance of Christ's death, that act of the Priest
done according to gods commauudement must needs be propitiatorye and provoke
gods favor, and ought to be trusted one, to have a propitiatorye effect
with God to the members of Christ's body, particularly, being the same done
for the whole body in such wise as God knows the dispensacion to be met
and convenient, according to which measure, God works most iustlye and most
mercyfullye, otherwise then man can by his judgment discuss and determine. To
call the daily offering a Sacrifice satisfactory must have an understanding
that signifies not the actio^ of the Priest but the presence of Christ's most
precious body and blood the very Sacrifice of the world ones perfytely
offered being propiciatorie and satisfactorie for all the world, Or else the
word (satisfactorie) must have a significacio^ and meaning, as it has
sometime that declares thacceptio^ of the thing done, and not the propre
contreuaile of thactio^, after which sort man may satisfy God that is so
merciful as he will take in good worth for Christ's sake man's imperfite
endeavor, and so the daily offering may be called a sacrifice satisfactorie,
because God is pleased with it being a manner of worshipping of Christ's
passion according to Christ's institution. But otherwise the daily sacrifice
in respect of the actio^ of the priest can not be called satisfactorye, and it
is a word in deed that sounds not well so placed, althowgh it might be saved
by a signification, and therefore think that word rather to be well expounded,
the^ by captius understanding brought in slander when it is used, and this
speech to be frequentide that thonlie immolacio^ of Christ in him self upon
thaulter of the Cross is the very satisfactorye Sacrifice for reconciliacion
of man kind to the favor of God. And I have not red, the daily sacrifice of
Christ's most precious body to be called a sacrifice satisfactorye, but this
speech has in deed been used, that the Priest should sing satisfactorye,
which they understand in the satisfaction of the Priests duetye, to attend
the prayer he was required to make, and for a distinction thereof they had
prayer sometime required without special limitacion and that was called to
pray not satisfactorye. Finally man by any his action to presume to satisfy
God by way of counteruail is a very mad and furiouse blasphemy. Where the
auctor citynge S. Paul englisheth him thus, that Christ's Hebr. 7.
Priesthode cannot pass from him to an other. This words thus framed be not
the simple and sincere expression of the truth of the text. Which says that
Christ has a perpetual Prieasthode, and the greek has a word ((...))
which the greek schools express and exponde by the word ((...)) signifiyng
the Priesthode of Christ ends not in him to go to an other by succession as
in the tribe of leui, where was among mortal men succession in thoffice of
Priesthode, but Christ lives ever, and therefore is a perpetual everlasting
Priest, by whose authority Priesthode is now in this visible Church as S.
Paul 1. Tim. 4. et ad Titu^. 1.
ordered to Timothe and Tite, and other places also confirm, which Priests
visible ministers to our invisible Priest offer the daily Sacrifice in
Christ's church, that is to say with the very presence by gods omnipote^cye
wrought of the most precious body and blood of our savior Christ showing
forth Christ's death and celebratyng the memory of his supper and death
according to Christ's institucion so with daily oblacion and sacrifice of the
self same Sacrifice to kendle in us a thankful remembrance of all Christ's
benefittes unto us. And where thauctor would avoid all the testimonye of the
fathers by presence yt should be but a manner of speech, the Canon of the
Council of Nice before rehearsed and the words of it, where mysteries be
spoken of in propre terms for doctrine, auoydeth all that shifte and it has
no absurdity to confess that Christ in his supper did institute for a
remembrance of the only sacrifice the presence of the most precious substance
to be (as the Canon of the concell in propre terms teaches) sacrificed by the
Priests to be the pure sacrifice of the church there offered for the effect of
thencrease of life in us, as it was offered on the Cross to atcheue life unto
us. And S. Cyrill who for his doctrine was in Epistola ad Nestor.
great authority with the counsel Ephesme, writes the very body and blood
of Christ to be the lively and unbloody Sacrifice of the church, as likewise
in tholde church other commenly termed the same and among other Chrysostom
who^ thauctor would now have 1^. hom. ad Heb.
seem to use it but for a manner of speech, which in deed Chrysostom does not,
but does truly open, thunderstanding of that is done in the church, wherein by
this sacrifice done after the order of Melchisedech, Christ's death is not
iterate but a memory daily renewed of that death, so as Christ's offering on
the Cross ones done and co^summate to finish all sacrifices after thordre of
Aaron, is now only remembered according to Christ's institucio^ but in such wise
as the same body is offered daily on thalter that was ones offered on thalter
of the Cross, but the same manner of offering is not daily, that was on
thaulter of the cross, for the daily offering is without bloodshed and is
termed so to signify that blood sheding ones done to be sufficient. And as
Chryyostome opens it by declaracion of what manner our sacrifice is, that is
to say, this daily offering to be a remembrance of the other manner of
sacrifice ones done, and therefore says rather we make a remembrance of it:
This sayng of Chrysostom does not empayre his former words where he says, the
host is the same offered on the cross and on thalter, and therefore by him the
body of Christ that dyed but ones is daily present in deed, and (as the Concel
of Nice says) sacrificed not after the manner of other Sacrifices and (as
Chrisostom says) offered, but the death of that preciouse body only daily
remembered and not again iterate. And where thauctor says thold fathers calling
the supper of our. Lord a sacrifice, meant a Sacrifice of laud and thanks
geuyng. Hippinus of Hambrough no Papist, in his book dedicate to the kings
Majesty that now is, says otherwise and notes how the old fathers called it
a Sacrifice propiciatorye, for the very presence of Christ's most precious
body there (thus says he) which presence all Christen men must say requires
on our part lauds and thanks geuynge, which may be and is called in
Scripture by the name of Sacrifice, but that Sacrifice of our lauds and
thanks geuynge cannot be a Sacrifice geuyng life, as it is noted by Cyril the
sacrifice of the church to do, when he says it is (viuificu^) which can be
only said of the very body and blood of Christ. Nor our Sacrifice of
lauds and thanks geuynge cannot be said, a pure and clean Sacrifice whereby
to fulfill the prophecy of Malachie, Malac. 3.
and therefore the same prophecy was in the beginning of the Church
understood to be spoken of the daily offering of the body and blood of
Christ for the memory of Christ's death according to Christ's ordinance in
his supper, as may at more lenght be opened and declared. Thinkyng to
theffecte of this book sufficient to have encountered the chief points of
thauctors doctrine with such contradiction to them as the Catholic doctrine
does of necessity require, the more particulare confutacion of that is untrue
of thaduersarie part, and confirm acio^ of that is true in the Catholic
doctrine, requiryng more time and ley sure then I have now, and therefore
offering my self ready by mouth or write to say further in this matter as
inalbe required: I shall here end for this time, with prayour to almightye God
to grant his truth, to be acknowledged and confessed, and vnisormely to be
preached and believed of al, so as all contencion for understanding of religion
avoided which hyndreth Charity, we may give such light abroad as men may
see our good works and glorify our father, who is in heaven with the son
and holy ghost in one unity of godhed reignyng without end.

Amen.

