THE SOCIETY OF THE ROSARY. Newly Augmented.

Gaude MARIA Virgo, cunctas haereses sola interemisti in vniuerso mundo.

the virgin Mary with the infant Jesus

Dignare me laudare te Virgo sacrata.
Da mihi virtutem contra hosts tuos.
THE PREFACE to the Reader.
AFTER the general deluge and innudation of the wholle world in the time of
Noe, Genesis 6.
Almighty GOD placed in the clouds his Rainbow, as a token and obligation
that he would no more destroy the world with water. How general a deluge of
heresy and of all manner of iniquity our miserable country has these late
years sustained we yet feel by the experience of the calamity thereof: and it
is to pitiful to remember how many souls have already perished thereby.
Neither do we see any other relief in so great distresses: than to make our
humble recourse unto our merciful Lord, and earnestly to desire of his
sovereign greatness: that shutting up the deapth of hellish lakes, Genesis 8.
and the mighty cataracks of his heavy displeasure; these deadly fluddes may
cease from the earth, and all creatures be restored to their former saftie. One
singular occasion of hope we might have of so great a benefit: if it would
please him but once to show this sign of his Testament with mankind, his
gloriouse rainbow, which discovering unto the world most bewtifull colors
might signify the caulme and fair weather, which were at hand: This rainbow I
mean to be the glorious Virgin, a most beutifull sign of Gods frenship with
men, and such a token of his singular mercy, that when he has often times
loaded the skies with the heavy clouds of his iminentiven gence, he
nevertheless looking upon so glorious and beloved a creature, not appointed by
him for wrath and anger, but chosen for a figure of mercy and peace, and
therefore most worthily called the mother of mercy: forgerting our iniquities,
and as it were in a manner his own Justice; withholds his severe
punishments, and in steed of brimstone and fire, which those clouds should
send upon us, leads us In nube diei, Psalm. 77
and tota nocte in illuminatione ignis by the clouds of his mercy in the day;
and all the night by the comfort of his heavenly lights. I could here
discourse at large how worthily this B. Virgin may be called a rainbow, and how
many excelent comparisons may be made thereof unto her: of the variety of her
virtues, of the perfection of her great excelencies figured in rou^dnes, Apoc.
4.
of the statelines of that seat which God did choose in her for his own
person But sufficient it is for our purpose, that she is in special manner a
rainbow against Heretics: wher-as the Church generally sings, she has
destroyed all heresies in the wholle world, and therefore is a particular sign
and aboade of the ceassing thereof: From this bow there goes none but chose^
arrows taken forth of the quiver of God him self, yea arrows of the
salvation of our Lord, arrows of salvation against Siria; that is, arrows of
salvation both in tranquillity of the Church; and also against all the enemies
of Israel, and the Church of God in the time of tentation and disturbance.
Neither wants it a mystery, that this bow is bent upwards toward heaven:
Cant. 4
for it not only recerueth the strength from God, to whom it looks: but
wounding first the heart of God himself, from thence receives all comfort for
his servants and confusion at the last for his wicked enemies.

This when I consider, and waighing also with my self, how true it is of her
which is spoken of the wisdom of God, with which she was so aboundantlye
endowed; that she preuenteth those which desire her for to show her self
first unto them: that she seeks with great diligence for those that are
worthy of her, Sap. 6
and shows her self in the ways pleasantly unto them: and with all
prouide^t care runs to meet the^. I fully persuade my self, that it is in
our own power to win her, and to obtain from heaven a new rainbow: which
being a sign of god, cannot signify falsely, but most certainly foretell
our comfort and relief. It is in our power. I say: yet not except we desire
her: she seeks for us but so, if we be worthy of her: she shows her self
pleasant, but unto those that she meets in the ways to seek her: for whom
she bou^tifully provides all manner of good.

I present therefore unto my most dear country with the same love and
affection with which I would if so it pleased God present it my blood, a
singular mean of winning this Virgins favor, and such a mean as by her self
has here tofore been presented unto the world, and now undoubtedly by her
self also not vnmind full of her ancient Dowry, is offered unto our country
the Society of the holy Rosary: an ancient means even from S. Domincks time
of rooting out of heresy. Which albeit both in time past, and now of late
years it has been embraced in our country, with great devotion: yet neither
has it hitherto been so generally used neither the nature and profit there of
so perfitly known, as for so great a good were required. for (as the
scripture says) A hidden wisdom, and an unseen treasure, Eccl. 20
what profit is there in the^ both? Wherefore I thought it my part, knowing
what opportunity our country men may have to be admitted unto the
participation of this treasure, diligently to search out and briefly to set
down what so ever either necessarily does belong or any way might be
profitable to the enjoying of the same: fully persuading my self that as
spiritual men in these Catholic countreies are wont to say of the^ selves;
so the beads must be to our afflicted brethren, in steed of all manner of
armor or weapons: for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty
to God, 2. Cor. 1
unto the destruction of munitions, distroying Councelles, and all loftines
extolling it self a against the knowledge of God. Which persuasion of mine unto
those which shall duly weigh the perfection and excelencies of this most
glorious Virgin, cannot any way be judged false: for therefore is she called a
well settled array of a pitched army, because she mightily ouercometh, Cant. 6.
not only her own, but also her devout clients adversaries. Which singular
protection we can no way deserve more conveniently: then by such service as
her self has elected and commended unto us, and of it self does yield us
such commodities as in the treatise shall appear. Yet this must I confess,
that I have for the most part framed my self, unto the simpler sort: for such
are they which most please our Lady, and in which she-most delights: my
intent having been in this little treatise, that as the beads are the unlearned
man's book; so also such persons might here find whatsoever is necessary for
their devotion. And yet doubt I not, but any Catholic mind will judge the
same work not to be unprofitable unto whosoever of never so great knowledge
with a certain spice of heretical pride, will not contemn ordinarye
Catholic helps of devotion. Accept therefore (gentle Reader) this my present:
and with convenient diligence and study use the same. Which if thou do: I
doubt not, but howsoever it may displease curiouse eyes, it will not be
displeasing to our B. Lady, not without unspeakable profit to our wholle
country, the^ the which two things next unto Gods glory I desire nothing more.
Farewell.

A BRIEF DIScourse of the Devotion of our B. LADY.
EVEN as with all manner of deceitful subtelties and blasphemous untruths,
heresy does ever go about to derogate unto the glory of the most sovereign
Queen of heaven and earth: so is it the part of every zealous Catholic with
as much care and diligence, to procure to set forth, amplify, and increase,
her wonderful praises, and most deserved honor. Whereas therefore in this little
treatise we are to set down one of the most special devotions and services
that the holy Church uses unto the glory of this B. Virgin: I think it
necessary that before we enter into the principal discourse it self, we
briefly for the behoof of the unlearned set down, wherein the devotion, and
service of so high a creature does consist.

Two things therefore are required, for the wholle perfection of that which we
call the devotion of our Lady. First, for to have a deep and settled conceit of
her worthiness and greatness, next unto Almighty God him self, above all
spiritual and corporal creatures. Secondly to derive from such due
estimation, an earnest study, and endeavor for her honor and the glory of
God, and our own profit, of doing and performing whatsoever may become us.
Concerning the first therefore, I will here only touch amongst her infinite
privileges only a few, and such as either without heresy cannot be doubted of:
or are by the firm consent of the wholle Church, most constantly believed: or
may with godly devotion be gathered out of the holy scriptures and ancient
Fathers: leaving the large proofs thereof unto many learned books which of this
point are every where extant.

25 singular privileges of our Blessed Lady.
1 That as she is in all manner of virtues and dignities, far exceeding all
other creatures; so was she before all worlds appointed and chosen to so great
highness; in so much, that ab eterno, Almighty God considering and beholding so
singular a work of his hand, next unto him self and the humanity of our
Savior, had a special delight and repose in her.

2 When the time came that so excellent a creature should be brought into the
world, she was foretold by Angelical revelation unto both her barren parents,
eue^ as before even from the beginning of the world, she had in sundry ways
been both prefigured and promised.

3 Her Body, although it were conceived according to the natural order of man's
generation, yet was both the matter ministered thereunto with such devotion as
became so holy parents: and there wanted not the special cooperation of the
holy Ghost, preparing (as the Church sings) the habitation of the son of
God. Whence it did proceed, that in perfection of beauty and complexion, she
was such, as is credibly to be thought never to have been subject to such
particular defects of body, as are either caused by the euilnes of complexion
or inflicted for punishment of sin, or procured by disordered life: and that
in her person she did carry such a show of heavenly comelines and majesty, that
a great Saint beholding her, said, Dion. Areop.
that if he had not other wise ben taught by his faith: he would have deemed
her to have some Godhead within her.

4 When the time came that her Body should be quickened with a reasonable soul,
(which in all others in the very creating within a body by carnal generation,
descending from ADAM co^tracteth original sin, and gives life, and being
to a child of wrath:) she only was exempted from such deformity, and
presently made the child of God, and ever from that time full of grace and of
all virtue: although in the process of her most holy life, she continually
increased the same, especially at the conceauing of the son of God, and the
coming of the holy Ghost unto all the Apostles.

5 She had then such abundance of grace bestowed on her from God, D. Tho 5.
Par. q 27. ar. 5 Psa. 86.
that she far exceeded the grace of all Angels and holy souls: so that she
laying her foundatio^s above so many high hills, we may not any way conceive
unto what a hight so perfect a sa^ctuarie grew before her death. Neither wanted
she any grace or gift of the HOLY GHOST, as of Prophecy, working miracles,
and such like, although whilst she lived in this world, it was convenient for
the confirmation of the doctrine of Christ, that he only and his Apostles should
work miracles. But she has above all other Saints since her assumption into
heaven: received that power of her son and daily in all countreies practiced
the same.

6 As diverse holy Fathers do testify, Amb. and Beda in Luc. vide Aug. ep. 57
that S. IHON Baptist when he was sanctified in his mothers womb, had the use
of his freewill: voluntarily co^curring to the acceptance of that grace which
he then received; which is not obscurely signified unto us in the Gospel it
self: where we read that the Infant exulted in joy, which argues knowledge
of the cause of so great joy: so is it also most worthily to be thought of this
Virgin: for that general rule of all Divines and holy Fathers, that whatsoever
privilege has been granted unto any pure creature, is to be in a higher
degree attributed unto her. And it were very agreeable unto her other
privileges, to think the same use of reason to have still continued in her:
especially whereas the wholle Church attributes such discretion unto her, as
well the space of her infancy being with her Parents: as also when being
three year old she went of her own accord to present her self with great
devotion to the service of God, in the Temple: And the gifts of God, Romans 11.
(as S. PAVL teaches us) being always without repentance: it was not
convenient that she above all other should ever loose that which she once
received.

7 Her holy nativity and presentation were unto the holy persons which were by
the inspiration of God made privy unto her greatness, and to the hope of the
redemption of Israel now at hand; a cause of such joy as never before had been
in the world: all being full of Gods miracles and heavenly comfortes.

8 The bolines of her life even from the beginning unto the end thereof was such
that it was void from all sin, not only mortal but also venial. Aug. lib.
de not. and great. c. 36.
Yea she was wholly delivered from that inclination unto evil, and difficulty
in that which is good which we all received from ADAM; not only in her
conceiving of CHRIST, but also from her first immaculate conception; when
being free from Original sin, she was also exempted from the sequel
thereof, which the Divines call fomes peccati: so that in all her life the
inferior powers of her soul, could never be moved without the direction of
reason.

9 As her life was more holy the^ ever of any other creature: so did she abound
with more heavenly visitations, then ever was granted unto any being
continually guarded and waited upon with Angels: yea, Exe. 33. 2. Cor. 12
if unto S.PAVL and MOISES was showed in this life the very essence and glory
of God, as the Divines after S. AUGUSTINE and other holy Fathers do more
probably judge then must we also for the rule aforesaid not doubt, but unto
this Virgin the same privilege at some time or other was granted: which so
great gifts of God she always concealed with unspeakable humility,
preferring her self to no creature, but always ready to become the servant of
all.

10 She was the first which vowed unto God her virginity and that without any
insttuctions of any as well as without example.

11 She had by the special work of God joined with her unspeakable virginity
the fecunditie of a mother; and whatsoever is perfect in marriage; unto which she
yielded her self not purposing to diminish her sacred purity, but by most
certain reulation assuringe her self of the perpetuety thereof: that so the
son of God might be borne in wedlock, she preserved from infamy, and so
great a mystery of the incarnation of our Savior Christ, concealed from the
Devil, and there should not want unto her self and her son in this
miserable life the necessary comfort of a fosterer Saint JOSEPH her spouse:
who^ presently after the marriage she caused to vow also virginity, making
them selves a perfect pattern of so many couples as by their example have in
the Church of Christ undertaken the same.

12 She by her holiness and singular perfection deserved that the son of God
should be incarnat and take flesh in her immaculate womb, for this word of
deserving or meriting does S.AUGUSTINE use when he yields the reasons why
she was every way free from sin: Lib. de not. and great. 1. 36.
Quia concipere ac parere meruit eum quem constat nullum habuisse peccatu^:
Because she deserved to conceive and bring forth him, whom it is manifest to
have had no sin: yet this merit do we not so understand, as though the work
of the incarnation it self could be deserved: but that supposing that God of
his mere liberallitie and goodness determined the same, she might deserve of
God with an imperfite kind of merit, (which the Divines call de congruo) that
what he was determined to do, he should do, both the sooner, and take her as an
instrument of his goodness, and gratiousnes in the same. And yet such was her
base conceit of her self, that so far she was from the expectation or
imagination of so great a benefit, that she desired to be the handmaid and
slave of whatsoever woman were to be the Mother of the MESSIAH of the world,
whom she knew by the profoundest intelligence of the holy Scriptures which
ever any creature had, of which she was a continual student, to be borne of a
woman a Virgin. Esa. 5
For as she had learned most highly to conceive of God, and his appointed
Mother: so had she also used her self with sincerity to humble her self in
the fight of God, that he might exalte her, and therefore dare I boldly say,
that if this most absolute Virgin, Iac. 4 1. Pet. 5
had not been so worthily disposed, as in deed she was, for so great a
sacrament: Almighty God would not have sent his Son. For as he had ordained
before all the world the most holy incarnation of his only son: so had he
also ordaind together with the privileges of the humane nature of his son:
the dignity of her from who^ he was to take the same. Yet do I not say that
Gods providence could be deceived herin: but that he would with the same
foresight provide both the end and the means of so great an end. And as our
savior him self whatsoever he did for our salvation, although he did it with
order and commaundme^t from his Father, yet he did it voluntarily and freelye:
Even so she which was thought fit of God him self for so great a work,
although Almighty God him self was the chief author of her worthiness: yet
did she freely and voluntarily concur unto our redemption: by making her
self with Gods especial grace a fit mother for our Redeemer. Whereby we
learn what devotion, reverence, and gratfulnes we should carry to so great a
benefactrice.

13 The plenitude of time which God in his eternal wisdom had ordained being
now come: the Angel GABRIEL comes to bring her these ioifull tidings, and
with great reverence, as not presuming to call her by her proper name, says
unto her, Hail full of grace: when she nothing frighted with the sight of a
young man (for such figure the Angel bore) as one much accustomed to the
conversation of Angels: was only amazed with such honorable speeches: yet
being certified by the Angel of what God had determined of her, and of the
saftie and security of her vowed Virginity, she freely gave her consent. But
what consent? Such a consent as brought the Son of God into the world. He. 4.
super Missus est.
For as S. BERNARD says, she spoke a word, which was, Behold the handmaid of
our Lord, be it unto me according unto thy word, and presently she received in
her most chaste womb the eternal word of God; equal unto the Father; and the
holy Ghost When as she had always been the Temple of the holy Ghost, so now
she was first made the workhouse of the same eternal spirit, framinge within
her an eternal house for the wisdom of GOD, Prou. 9
which was Christ our Lord: and secondly the Mother and Temple of the son of
God, who corporally dwelled within her for the space of nine months. A most
happy consent: and most glorious son, wherein Almighty God him self made
his Tabernacle, for the redemption of the wholle world. Psa. 18
And o base and ungrateful heart, who wilt not acknowledge and reverence so
great a benefit.

14 Presently after the conceiving of Christ, as though neither she her self
nor Christ our Savior newly come into the world could be idle, and not attend
to the work of our redemption: she went to her cosen Elizabeth: although in
show to visit her being great with child: yet also to sanctify her burden
which she had within her For he which now dwelled within MARY, by her sacred
voice, as by an instrument, sanctified him which was to be the Precursor of the
true Messiah: and endewed him with those virtuous habits, which brought forth
afterward such holy actions, as the scripture yeldeth testimony of.

15 Without all sorrow, pain, indecencie, prejudice to her Virginal
integrity, she alone, as only worthy to be privy to such a mystery (when all
things were at quiet silence, and the night in her course was at the midst of
her journey) received in her Angelical hands from the Kingly seat of her
sacred womb, the omnipotent word of God, and laying him in a manger, nourished
him with her most pure breasts; and was present at the homage and fealty which
by the holy Angels with heavenly melody was yielded unto him.

16 She was the principal imposer of that most comfortable name of Jesus,
confirmed with the first effusion of that sacred Blood, which was to take away
the sins of the world.

17 She had not only an intrincicall familiarity with the son of God, and
was a principal scholar of his; but he vouchsafed also to be subject unto her,
she having a motherly right and authority over him, and he with his labor and
toil gaining great part of her liuelehode, for the space of thirty years,
especially after S. Joseph's death.

18 All the Apostles and Disciples having abandoned her holy son, she
forsook him not, but acco^paning him unto the Cross, and contemplating him
thereon, suffered in her aflicted mind (yet without any excess or disorder of
passion) whatsoever he suffered in his divine Body: was commended most carefully
by him to his most tenderly beloved Disciple: received his naked body with
motherlye familiarity in her sacred lap: and with most certain expectation of
his Resurrection, after she had buried him returning home, all the Disciples
although not having lost the faith of that point which they had not as yet
perfectly received yet not sufficiently persuaded of the same Resurrection.

19 She was the first unto whom he appeared after his glorious resurrection.
For although of such apparition there be no mention in the Gospel: yet of this
affection to his loving Mother we need not doubt, but that as the Church
sings: Prima meretur gaudia, quae plus ardebat caeteris: She deserved the
first joy, which did love more then the rest; And the delay between his
resurrection and the apparition unto Mary Magdalene; is an argument that first
he appeared unto his Mother. And he had so determined, that for the salvation
of mankind, two such notable personages living necessarily together, as was him
self and his glorious Mother; his only greatness should be showed first: which
being fully commended unto men, he would afterward make known the
excelencies of his Mother, even unto the worlds end. With whom before he had
showed any only private favors, and therefore in the Gospel there is not
mention made of her many privileges, but only of such things as belong to the
necessary confirmation of the faith.

20 After the Ascension of our Savior, she was the mistres of the Apostles,
Luc. 2.
when they went to preach in the world, and to the Eua^gelists going about to
write the Gospel. For she had diligently laid up in her heart, such things as
her son, for our salvation had done, and such as none but her self could be
witness of.

21 At the coming of the holy Ghost, she received alone, as much grace, as all
the other Apostles and Disciples, S. Bona. in specu.
such being the love of her dear son unto her, and so great her capacity,
according unto which Almighty God not permitting his vessels to remain
empty, does always infund his holy gifts and graces.

22 Having for the space of fifteen years after her sons Ascension, both
been a great comfort to the millitant Church, and having also received as much
joy of the conversion of souls, and the name of her son spread about the
world, and continually visited with singular devotion, the places where she
remembered the fruitful stepps of our Savior for our redemption: Being warned
by an Angel of her death, and all the Apostles miraculously present, she
yielded her soul, with unspeakable comfort and quietness, amongst so holy a
company, and with heavenly melody of Angels, into her sons own bosom, who
most lovingly had invited her, and most ioifully received her into his heavenly
Tabernacle in recompense of the harbor received by her.

23 Her body having been with great solemnity and many sacred hymns, both of
the holy Apostles, and also of Angels committed unto the sepulcher, the Angels
continued also for the space of three days in the same place with their
heavenly melody.

24 The third day her sacred body with far greater solemnity and ioies of
Angels, being again restored unto the glorious soul, was in the bosom of her
dear son, whom she had so often entertained in her blessed lap, assumpted
up into heaven being more reverent and holy, then heaven itself having
contained that which heaven could not contain.

25 She was exalted to such dignity, as she had been before the beginning of
the world chosen unto: that is, to be Queen of Angels, and of all Saints; and
of all the world, an especial advocate unto her Son for all mortal creaturs
Other Saints are in deed made by God Kings over the world, Apoc. 5.
as the scripture teaches us: but although they have a subordination of
degrees of glory in those diverse mansions; Io. 14.
yet are they not Kings one over another, but partners and fellows of so great
a felicity. This is the privilege of our B. Lady, that she only is exalted
above all Angels and Saints, being made so much the more better the^ they
all, by how much the more perfect a name she has received, then they. For unto
whom at any time of his Angels or Saints has he said, Heb. 1 Ber. ser. 2. de
aduen. Do. Cant. 4. and 7.
thou art my mother? and having this very convenient privilege unto her wholle
life, and former dignities, that as we received Christ by her, so by her,
Christ does at our death especially receive us. Finally by her as the Neck of
the Church from Christ her son, the head thereof, we receive all manner of
spiritual and heavenly good I will therefore conclude with the saying of S.
Bernard wonderfully discoursing of this Virgins name Mary: which signifies
star of the Sea. O thou whosoever do perceive thy self in the flux of
this world rather to be tossed in the midst of storms and tempests, than to
walk upon the earth: turn not away thy eyes from the brightness of this
star, if thou will not be overwhelmed with storms: if winds of tentations
do arise, if thou do incurr the rocks of tribulations, look upon the
star call upon Mary. If thou be tossed with the waters of pride, Ambition,
Detraction, Emulatio^: look upon the star, call upon Mary. If Sloth, Anger,
or Covetousness, or alurement of the flesh do shake the ship of thy mind: look
upon Mary. If thou be troubled with the enormity of crimes, confounded with
the uncleanness of conscience, frighted with the horror of judgment, and
beginnest to be swalowed into the gulf of sadness, or into the deapth of
despair: think upon Mary. In dangers, in distresses, in doubtful cases,
think upon Mary, call upon Mary. Let her not depart from thy mouth, let her
not depart from thy heart. And that thou may obtain the releife of her
prayer, do thou not swerve from the example of her conversation. Following
her, thou straiest not: calling upon her, thou despairest not: thinking upon
her, thou errest not: she holding thee thou fallest not: she protecting thee,
thou fear not: she being thy guide, thou faintest not: she being merciful,
thou shall ariue, and so in thy self thou shall feel by experience, how
worthily it is said. And the name of the Virgin was Mary.

Now for the second part, thus it behooves every true Christian to be devout of
our B. Lady.

1 To be stirred up to the admiration of God himself, who has showed his
power in so gloriouse a creature of his hands.

2 To Imitate her particular virtues.

3 To conform our selves to her diverse affections which she had in her
wholle life, to rejoice with her ioifullnes, to have compassion of her sorrows,
to congratulate with her glory.

4 To yield her such honor and reverence as she deserves: to admire her, to
love her, to praise her to acknowledge her as our special patron, to dilate
her praises unto the world, to salute her with diverse devout prayers,
specially with the Aue Maria, to acknowledge with tha^kfull mind the benefits
received from her, and by her means to commend our own necessities and of our
friends and of the wholle Church unto her, to offer all our actions yea and our
selves unto God by her, to exhibit unto her, that exterior reverence and
honor, which is agreeable unto the practice of the holy Church and of all
devout persons: finally to acknowledge her as our mother in all things having
recource unto her as her tender children, preparinge our selves for her feasts
and expecting them as in the which we may hope to receive singulercomforts and
at our death reposing a special hope in her protection. These things, dear
Brother if thou will practice: I doubt not but thou shall not only highly
please this most B. Virgin, but thy self shalt reap such benefits as she
uses liberally to bestow on her devout Favorites.

THE TABLE OF THE Chapters contained in this Treatise.
Of the beginning, largenes, and profit of this Society. Cap. 1 The ordinances
or decrees of the Society of the Rosary, with an explication thereof. Cap. 2 A
breife summary of the Graces or indulgences, of this Society of the Rosary with
the names of the Popes which granted the^. Cap. 3 Of the Stations of Rome. Cap,
4 The 15 mysteries of the holy Rosary. Cap. 5 Of other manner of saing of
beads. Cap. 6 The manner of distributio^ of the life of our Savior and of our
Lady for the Corone of 63. Aues for those which shall desire to use the same
although the Corone may be said without such particular memory. Cap. 7 An
other Rosary of the B. Virgin Mary much like unto the former but divided
according to the acts of our Savior Christ for the Rosary of 5. Paters and
50. Aues out of Ludouicus Blosius. Cap. 8. An other like exercise of the life
and Passion of Christ, consisting of 5. Paters and 50 Aues. Ca. 9 Another manner
of dividing the Rosary of 150 Aue Mary's, accorto the mysteries of the life of
our Savior taken out of the Italian book of the Rosary. Cap. 10 Twenty
Propositio^s to prove the Catholic custom of saying the Rosary out of
Franciscus Costerus. Cap. 11. An explication of our Lords prayer An exposition
of the Angelical salutation. Cap. 13. Diverse other devotions. Cap. 14. Our
Ladies Litanies
OF THE BEGINNING, LARGENES and PROfitte of this Society. Cap. 1.
AMONGST diverse companies or Societies, religiously instituted and most
deuoutlye followed and reverenced in the Church of God, one of the most
ancient, general, and profitable is, that which being instituted in the
honor of the most blessed and immaculate Virgin MARY mother of God, and
patroness of all distressed mortals, is commonly called the Society of the
holy Rosary

The first Founder and beginner thereof was the glorious light of Gods Church S.
DOMINICK who about 400. years ago not being contented to have instituted a
noble order of religious persons, The Antiquity.
as well Freers as Nuns, which in their several houses and with most
perfect rules serving Almighty GOD, have spread their zeal and devotion,
over all the world: did also extend his charitable care and providence even to
all sorts of people, and with his singular wisdom and in flamed love of
souls, by the inspiration no doubt of the holy Ghost, and special revelation
of the same glorious Virgin, knit together in one band of a mutual Society,
all kind of devout Christians.

For this devout Saint, The generality. Romans 1.
considering with S. PAVL, that he was debtour to the simple as-well as unto
the wise, and waying with himself that there were many seculer persons, whom
either want of will might withdraw, or necessity of their estate and condition
might hinder from the strait path of Evangelical perfection: found
notwithstanding a means for the^ to kindle and nourish devotion, and with great
facility to pray and obtain by the most effectual intercession of so great
an advocate all manner of good and perfect gifts, from the only geuer and
bestower thereof the FATHER of lights. From which so fruitful means, should
be excluded neither the husba^dman in the fields, nor the trauailer in his
journey, nor the labourer with his toiling, nor the simple by his unskillfulness
nor the woman by her sex, nor the married by their estate, nor the young by their
ignorance, nor the aged by their impotencie, nor the sick by their infirmity,
nor the poor for want of ability, nor the blind for want of sight, yea the
Religious them selves of both sexes, at all times and in all places, when they
may want either books or other ordinary helps of spirit, (although this be
not one of the least among many others wherewith they abound) might hereby
find no small increase of comfort, fervor, and devotion, in so much that we
see by experience, that there is not any devout Christian, and which has care
of his soul, but in what estate soever he live, if he have convenient
opportunity, he seeks by giving his name unto this holy co^fraternity, to
become a clie^t or pupil of the most glorious Virgin.

Wherein we may see the singular profit and commodity which redou^deth unto us
by the same. The profitte and commodity.
For if it be so general a devotion, in the wholle Church of God, as we have
said: then undoubtedly we may say that one profitte which hereby we may reap,
is the facility of an acceptable service of God, for that devotion which
repugneth to no estate or condition, but may so easily be performed, not
requiring more knowledge, then to say the Pater noster, and Aue Maria, nor any
more charge the^ the price of a pair of Beads, nor any choice of place or
situation of body, but as it shall like the party, either to stand, site, lie
walk or kneel: especially having no burden of conscience or charge of sin
if it be omitted: who sees not the^ how easy it is, and with what facility
it may be observed? yea who sees not how great and careless a negligence, and
how contemptuous a singularity it were, to omit so general a profession? This
facility is also the greater for that there being diverse Societies of our
LADY, Diverse Societies of our Lady.
every one of which does laudably endeavor to advance the honor of so holy a
creature, to their own singular great gain of devotion, virtue and merit:
in every one are diverse bonds either of rehearsing some certain prayers
every day, or of often Confessing and Receiving, or of some more stricte
observance then is necessary or easy and expedient for every Christian: But
in this of the Rosary, that it may the rather be embraced of all: though there
be spiritual rewards almost for every godly action, in which every man
according to his devotion may exercise him self: yet is there no general bond,
but only to the rehearsing of the Beads thrice a week, as shall be showed
hereafter, One only necessary bond in this Society.
and that without the incurring of any sin by the omission thereof, as has
been said before, yea and that also may be supplied by an other, who
performs the due exercise for his brother, being either sick or otherwise
hindered: as afterward shall appear But besides the facility there are other
more singular commodities herein. For secondly there is the special patronage
and protection of the same most blessed and glorious Virgin. The patronage of
our Lady.
For although she be worthily called a most loving advocate of all faithful
Christians, yet there no doubt does her care more abou^d, where she has most
mercifully chosen and gathered, and knit together such as she means
singulerly to tender, she having declared by sundry miracles, the familiar
rpouide^ce which she carries over this her family. Godly meditation.
Thirdly in this devotion of the Rosary is daily with great fruit remembered the
principal points of the life of our Savior, and of his holy Mother, in so
much that the danger, of which the Prophet complains, when he says that the
wholle earth was brought to desolation, Hier. 12
because there was not who did meditate or ponder in his heart: by this devout
exercise of Christian duty, is by all estates of men utterly avoided: whilst
every devout Catholic, dailye when he says his beads, does as it were in a
book read and reuerentlye lays before his eyes, Christ our Savior incarnat
in his Mother, The 15. mysteries of the Rosary.
sanctifying JOHN Baptist his holy Precursor, lying in a manager, offered up to
his Father in the Temple, teaching the Doctors, praying in the Garden, cruelly
whipped crowned with thorns, carrying his Cross and exalted thereon for our
redemption, rising again, ascending into heaven, sending his holy Spirit and
gracious gifts unto men, taking up with childly affection his most holy
Mother, even corporally unto heaven and exalting and crowning her over all his
holy Saints and Angels. Whereof what gratitude, what humility, what charity,
what spurs unto all virtue may be ingendered in Christian minds, let every
one consider: it is not our purpose now to expound And although this manner of
remembering the life of Christ, may be practiced by any one which is not of this
Society: yet both this manner of dividing and religiously honouringe these holy
mysteries, was first commended of S. DOMINICKE to this holy confraternitie, not
without a special revelation (as it is credibly thought) of the B. Virgin, and
such virtuous practice will then be more acceptable, when it is performed with
a relation, and respect, as of one of this so favored a Society.

4 Fourthlye this holy Society has many Indulgences or Pardons annexed unto
the saying of the Rosary: Indulgences.
as shall hereafter appear. Of the profit whereof as it is not lawful for any
Catholic to doubt, so were it to long here to entreat. Only this will I say:
that although there be perhapps many greater Indulgences granted unto diverse
Grains, then these of this confraternity, yet are not these to be neglected,
but rather greatly to be esteemed for to causes. First for so many other
commodities as are in this Societye: which cannot be obtained without saying
once a week the Rosary, for respect of this Society. Wherefore although one
would for desire of greater Indulgence apply the saying of his Beads unto
other grains, yet is it very expedient thrice a week to apply his intention
unto the Society of the Rosary, saying his beads as a member thereof, for than
is he sufficiently disposed to receive the fruits of the same Society,
although he should never so often besides by saying the same seek the
INDVLGENCES of hallowed grains. Secondly for that a sufficient cause being
required for the value of an Indulge^ce as the Divines do teach, these
Indulge^ces being confirmed by so diverse Popes, and having the value of a cause
from the influence of so diverse members, which in this Society every where tend
unto one end of the service and honor of God and his blessed Mother, must of
necessity have an undoubted and more abundant effect.

5 Fifthly, there is in this confraternitie an inestimable treasure of the
mutual participation of all the good works done by the persons of the same,
The participation of spiritual good.
and of the wholle order of S. Dominick as well Freers as Nuns. So that besides
the general influence which for the communion of Saints in the Church of God,
is from one member of Christ his mystical body unto another, by which one
member reioiceth with another, suffers with and for an other, and the
abounda^ce of one supplieth the want and poverty of an other, so that both be
in gods grace (without the which neither Indulgences may be obtained, nor the
participation of good works either given or received.) There is a more
special benefit and participation in this Society by the particular
application of those which may by authority distribute so great a treasure of
all that Fasting, Praying, Watching, Alms, and other works of Christian
piety, as are by so many so godly so far dispersed persons every day and
moment performed.

6 Last of all, the benefitte of this Society lasts after death also as shall
be showed also hereafter. The benefit after death.
For when the Souls departed, in the flames of Purgatory yeldeth satisfaction
for sins not perfectly remitted in this world, it may by the ordinary
suffrages of Gods Church, be relieved, as unto all Christians departed in Gods
grace is common. But he which for a soul departed of this SOCIETY offers
the usual devotions of the same, besides the value which such devotions may
have of them selves comes laden with the treasures and merittes of diverse
other members of the Church to be applied for the relief of the distressed
soul. All which so great commodities shall more plainly appear in the summary
following of the ordinances or statutes and graces of this Society. Which has
been faithfully drawn forth of an Italian book of the Rosary set forth at
Rome about 8. or 9. years sithe^ce by the Reverend General of S. DOMINICKS
order unto whom especially the admission into this Society does belong,
although I understand to my great comfort that there be diverse within our
Realm which have either immediatelye from the same General or by some other
lawful means the like authority.

THE ORDINANCES or decrees of the Society of the Rosary, with an explication
thereof. Cap. 2.
AS by the gloriouse Father, and Founder of the order of Preachers, S.
DOMINICKE, this holy Rosary was planted, and this divine manner of prayer
instituted: so unto the Reu. Fa. General of the same Order as his successor
and heir does it only belong to give authority and license to institute and
ordain the said Societies: to substitute and give leave to inrole and receive
in them; and to do every other necessary act as by many Popes has been
granted and confirmed; And more-ouer by Julius 3. and Pius 5. expressly
declared, that the confraternities without his leave and authority instituted,
be anulled and do not enjoy any Indulge^ce or privilege.

2 In every Covent and Church of the order of Preachers ought this holy company
be and not in other; this being a proper inheritance and institution of that
order. In Cities, Towns, or Villages, where there is no Covent or Church of
the order of Preachers it may be placed in other Churches with leave of the
said Reverend Father General, yet so that one company only there be in each
Town or place for to avoid confusion: and if afterward the Freers of the order
come to the said places to dwell, and build there a Covent or Church, unto
them as unto true and lawful heirs the said company, Altar and all kind of
commodity, and appertenances is understood to be brought and transferred.

This is understood of Legacies or Rents left to the maintenance of the Altar
or Chapel of the Society

3 In every Church where the said Company is, there ought to be their
particular Altar, or Chap pell, called of the holy ROSARIE with some devout
figure or Image of the most holy Virgin, and of the mysteries of the holy
Rosary; there must be also the Rectors and heads of the said company, to
avoid all confusion: There must be a particular book, where the names and
surnames of all the perons of the company must be written.

Note that here is not signified any bond or necessitye of frequenting this
Church or Chapel, for those which cannot conveniently come so far: but they
may at their pleasure upon holy days go unto their own parish Church or
other which they shall like. But it is very convenient, that then every one go
to the proper Church of this Society, when there is any proper exercise of the
same or any spiritual gain to be reped as shall be seen hereafter. Yet so
long as our Country remains in the present estate, it is good and sufficient
that every household procure their ordinary Altar stone to be deputed unto this
SOCIETY by those which may admit therein, because of the special Indulgences
to be received, at the first entry as shall appear.

4 Those who have auctority and leave as is aforesaid, to inrol and receive
into the said company, ought to receive and inroule all such as devoutly
demand it, with out any reward or payment at all, both because it is a
spiritual and holy thing, and all so to the end that as well the rich as the
poor may enjoy this treasure, as also for that the holy company has been
instituted and ordained not for the benefit of him which receives, but of him
which is received, and it is sufficient to be in one place and once inrouled.

This manner of inrouling being not convenient in our country for respects too
well known: it suffices that after the names be once taken of such as enter,
they be torn. Yet is it expedient, that when opportunity shall be offered,
every one cause himself aute^tically to be inrouled, that so both God may be
in the number of his devout servants more highly glorified and they may also
be as it were sole^nly accepted, and confirmed in that which first they
received.

5 Neither those which are alive only, but also those which are dead those
poor souls which are in purgatory may be enrolled and made partakers of so
great a good, if any one for godly affection will make them to be inroled and
will say for them the holy Rosary.

6 In the like manner if any person shall cause to be said for him self the
Rosaty, he also obtains and enioieth so great a benefitte.

7 All those which are enrolled in this holy company of the Rosary, are bound
to say the Rosary at the least once a week. And for their better commodity it
is granted them that they may divide it and say five Tennes at a time: which
make fifty Aues and five Paternosters: notwithstanding by omitting either by
forgetfulness, or occupation, there is no sin incurred, but the fruit is
lost, which should have been gotten by saying: and also the participation of
the good works of the other brethren.

By the name of Rosary, The division of the Rosary.
is hear always understood the Psalter of our LADY, which co^teineth fifteen
mysteries, to every one of which, are applied one Pater noster and ten Aues,
so that in the wholle there are fifteen Pater nosters and a hundred and fifty
Aues, which in imitation of the Psalter of David of so many Psalms, made
imediatelye unto God, makes a kind of Psalter unto our LADY. This Psalter or
Rosary is divided into three parts, every one of which is called the third
part of the Rosary or one part of the Rosarye very fitly containing five of
the aforesaid mysteries, thereby represe^ting unto us the memory of the wounds
of our Savior, in the several parts of the ioifull, dolorouse and gloriouse
mysterries of the ROSARY. Although in diverse other Indulgences of hallowed
Grains this word Rosary signifies the third part only, when it is joined with
this word Corone, as when it is said, whosoever shall say the Rosary or Corone.
For then certain it is, that the third part is only signified, and the meaning
of the word Coron is that pair of beads which in the remembrance of the life
of our Lady contains 63. Aues and 6. The Corone of our Lady.
Pater nosters, some also use very well at the end of every third part of the
Rosary to say the Creed although it be no necessary part thereof.

Note also that when in the Indulgences following there is required in any day
that the wholle Rosary be said, then you may not divide it into several days,
and it is also more secure to say all at once.

Finally if one be once admitted and for negligence omit to say the Rosary, he
cease not for all this to be of the Society, and may returning to his wonted
devotion without any new admission obtain the accustomed graces and
benefittes.

8 There are celebrated four anniuersaries in the year, for the souls of the
brethren departed in the Churches of the Society, after the 4 principal
festiuities of our blessed LADY, the Nativity, Purification, Annunciation, and
Assumption, at which every one ought to be present, praying for those souls,
that the same piety may be used toward them.

9 Every first Sunday in the month, there is made a solemn and devout
procession of the holy Rosary after Eue^song, to the which they should in any
wise come together, as-well for the Indulgences and treasures which they may
gain, as that they may be present to honor the most sacred Virgin their
advocate and Lady, and all devoutly united to ask her help.

These two last articles cannot) as it is manifest (be preformed in our
Country

10 After that the Priest has written them which devoutly demand to enter into
this company, the Corone or Rosary being laid upon the Altar, with a stole
about his neck, he blesses the beads, saying the prayer following.

This benediction if one can not conuenie^tly come to him, which receives him,
but only sends his name to be enrolled, is not necessary neither if the
beads were ever blessed before.

Hence also does it appear that there is no other thing necessary, What is
necessary in this Society.
for the obtaining of the benefits of this Society, but to say once aweeke the
Psalter of our LADY, and whosoever thincketh otherwise, requiring either other
ordinary prayers, or frequenting of Sacraments, or any solemn profession at
the first entrance: does confound this Society, being a general corporation
over all the world, with other particular Societies of our Lady in several
places binding themselves to more strict obseruances, the^ were easy to be
vndertake^ of all that variety of persons, which is by this Society embraced.
Although who-soeuer is of any other particular Society of our LADY receiuig
therein a particular fellowshipe, and incorporation in that place where such a
Society is instituted, will withal for the general devotion unto this, as
insttuted by the express revelation of our Blessed LADY (as it is credibly and
deuoutlye thought) seek to be here enrolled if he were not before, which I
thought good to note least any should either be confounded with variety of
opinions, or deterred with more heavy burdens, from so profitable a devotion.

THE PRAYER FOR the blessing of the Beads.
Versic. Adiutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.


Resp. Qui secit coelum and terram.


Versic. Domine exaudi orationem mea^.


Resp. Et clamor meus ad te veniat.


Versic. Dominus vohiscum.


Resp. Et cum spiritu tuo.


OMNIPOTENS and misericors Deus, qui propter nimiam charitatem tuam qua
dilexisti nos, filium tuum vnigenitum Dominu^ nostrum Iesum Christum pro
Redemptione nostra, de coelis in terram descendere and de Beatissimae Virginis
Mariae vtero Angelo nunciante carnem suscipere voluisti, vt nos eriperes de
potestate Diaboli: Obsecramus immensem clementiam tuam, vt haec signa Rosarij
in honorem and laudem eiusdem genetricis filij tui, ab Ecclesia tua fideli
dicata, Been dicas and San ctifices eisque tantam infundas virtutem Spiritus
Sancti, vt quicunque horum quodlibet secum portauerit, atque in domo sua
reuerenter tenuerit, ab omni host visibili and inuisibili semper et vbique in
hoc seculo liberetur, and in exitu suo a Beatissima Virgin Maria Dei genetrice
tibi plenus bonis operibus presentari me reatur. Per eundem Dominum nostiu^
Iesum Christum filium tuum, qui tecu^ viuit and regnat per omnia secula
seculorum. Amen,

Aspergat ea. Sacerdos aqua benedicta: In nomine Patris, and Filij, and
Spiritus Sancti. Amen.

A BRIEF SVMMArie of the Graces, or Indulgences of this Society of the Rosary,
with the names of the Popes which granted them. Cap. 3
WHo faieth the Aue Maria or reverently names the holy name of JESUS gains
60. days. Vrbanus. 4 and Joan. 22


By saying the wholle Rosary 15. years, Sixtus 4.
and 15. quarantenes.

A quara^tene is an Indulgence, or releasing of 40. days penance. Inno. 8


A pleanary Indulge^ce once in life and again in the hour of death

The Indulge^ces of the stations of Rome, Leo. 10
by visiting that day five Altars, or one five times devoutly saying, five
Paters and Aues for every one.

What the Stations are, it shall appear in the Chapter following.

For saying the wholle Rosary 10. years, and 10. quarantenes, Idem A certain
Legate. Idem.


Also for the whole Rosary 120 days.

For being present every Saturday in the Church of this Society at the Salve
Regina, 40 days.

For saying five Paters and Aues in the Feasts of the Anunciation, Idem.
Nativity, Visitation, Purification, and Assumption of our Lady: 100 days.

For saying the whole Rosary 120

For visiting the Altar of the To sary at Rome, A Patri arch. Pius. 4
every feast of our Lady a plenary.

The same by accompaning the procession which is made every first Sunday in the
month. Idem.


Having Received the day of the Annunciation of our LADY: Pius 5. granted those
which follow and confirmed all those which are before.
by saying the Rosary, a Plenary.

By saying the ROSARY in the days of the Nativity, Purification, Visitation,
and Assumption, of our Lady, 10. years and 10 quarantenes.

By saying the Rosary any day whatsoeuet, 40. days.

By naming devoutly Jesus Maria, every time 7 days.

At the first entering, by Confessing and Receiving at the Altar or Church of
this Society, and saying at the least one part of the ROSARY for the peace of
the Church: a Plenary.

The same is granted unto the^ which in the end of their life have Confessed
and Received.

By saying one part at the least of the Rosary, (having first Received the
days of Easter, the Annu^ciation, and Assumption of our Lady: 10. years and
10. quarantenes.

By saying at the least one part of the Rosary in the festival days of the
mysteries of the Rosary, 7. years and 7 quarantenes of enioined penances.

The same for saying at the least once a week the wholle Rosary.

To all Christians (although not of the Society) for accompaning the Procession
of every first Sunday in the month, are granted 7 years and 7 quarantenes of
enioined penances.

Those which are of this confraternitie, are partakers of all the good works,
which are done by other petsons of the same, as also by the wholle order of S.
Dominicke as well of Freers as of Nu^nes

Here is diligently to be considered that we may so both stop the blasphemous
and venomous mouths of Herticks, Of the nature of Indulgences.
and by Catholics make the fruit of these Indulgences to be enioied, that no
Indulgence can be obtained out of the state of Gods grace. Therefore whosoever
feels his mind wounded with any mortal sin, or purpose, or desire, or
deliberate affection and liking of the same: let him before he seek Indulgence
reconcile him self unto God, either by the Sacrament of penance, or if he can
not conveniently, at the least by perfect sorrow and repentance, and steadfast
purpose of amendment, and of Receiving the Sacrament of penance at convenient
time, without which disposition of mind none can ever obtain Gods grace and by
which disposition he may at any moment according unto Gods most gracious
promise and mercy. For an Indulgence is a remission of temporal punishment due
unto sins already forgiven and not possible therefore to be applied but to him
which having forsaken sin is in Gods holy favor. And hereby may thou
confound the graceless ignorant heretic.

Also for the better understanding of the nature of Pardons: the meaning of so
many days or years of Pardon is, that look how much pain of PVRGATORY we
could redeem with so many days or years of such penance as might by reason be
imposed upon us for to match our faults (our devotion, earnest sorrow and
purpose of satisfaction considered) so much by the Indulgence of so many days
or years is taken away. Neither is it necessary that we might live so many
years whereas perhapps the world shall not last so long as the years of some
Indulgences, for sufficient it is, that we may deserve so many years of
punishment, which the justice of God may by the severity of the painefully
inflict in one hour of the fire of Purgatory: And to gross is the ignorance
of our heretics, who think that he that has a hundred years of pardon may by
the Popes leave sin without remorse all his life as by this which we have
said is most evident.

It is also to be understood that one may apply the saying of his beads for
whatsoever necessity of his own or of others except where in the Indulge^ce
it is other wise required: To what inte^tion the beads are to be employed.
neither is he bound to say the Rosary once a week, for the Society, so that
saying it for what purpose he will, he intend to say it as a member of the
Society, and for to obtain the gtaces of the same.

OF THE STATIons of Rome. Cap. 4
THERE has been at Rome a continual holy custom of the people for these 1000
years at the least at diverse times sole^nly to visit certain principal
Churches, therein to offer up their devotions jointly with one mind for their
own necessities and of the wholle Church of God. These solemn, religious and
devout meetings are commonly called Sations. And by diverse Popes there has
been granted unto the foresaid Churches either specially in those days in
which the Stations are there kept, or generally all the wholle year very great
and large Indulgences. I will here therefore note the days and places of the
same Stations, as for the Indulgences it is sufficient here to advertise, that
in every one of these Churches they are very great and never less then of
ten thousand years. Yet because often times there is a Plenary Indulgence
and the delivery of a soul out of Purgatory, I will expressly set down when
either of these so great graand favors may be obtained, which thing will be
also profitable for those which by hallowed Grains will gain the Stations.

1 The first Sunday in Auent at Sancta Maria Mayor. 2 The 2. Sunday at S.
Cross in Jerusalem a Plenary. The 3 Sunday at S. Peter. 4 Wednesday in the
Imber week at S. Maria Mayor. 5 Friday in the Imber week at SS. Apostoli. a
Plenary. 6 Saturday at S. Peter. 7 The 4. Sunday at SS. Apostoli. a Plenary. 8
Christmas Eve at S. Maria Mayor. 9 In the night following at the Chapel of
the Cribbe in the same Church. a plenary 10 Christmas day in the morning at S.
Anastasia a Plenary. 11 At the third MASS on Christmas day at S. Maria Mayor.
12 On S. Steuens day at Saint Steuens a Plenary. 13 Saint JOHN'S day at Sancta
Maria Mayor. 14 Innocents day at S. PAVLE a plenary. 15 Newyeeres day at S.
Mariatrans Tiberim. a Plenary. 16 Twelfe day at S. Peter. a plenary. 17 The
Sunday of Septuagesima at S. Laure^ce extra muros. a soul out of Purgatory 18
The Sunday of Sexagesima at S. PAVL. 19 The Sunday of Quinquagesima at S.
Peter. 20 Ashwednesday at S. Sabina a plenary. 21 Thursday ar S. George. 22
Friday at SS. JOHN and PAVL 23 Saturday at S. Triphon. a Plenary. 24 The first
Sunday in Lent at S. JOHN Laterane. a Plenary and infinite Indulge^ces. 25
Monday at S. Peter in vinculis. a Plenary. 26 Twesday at S. Anastasia a Plenary
and a soul out of Purgatory. 27 Wednesday at Sa^sta Maria Mayor. 28 Thursday
at S. Laurence in Palisperna. a Plenary. 29 Friday at SS. Apostoli. a Plenary.
30 Saturday at S. Peter a plena. 31 The 2 Sunday in Lent at S. Maria in
Nauicella. 32 Monday at S. Clement. 33 Twesday at S. Balbina 34 Wednesday at S.
Cecely. 35 Thursday at Sancta Mariatrans Tiberim. 36 Friday at S. Vitalis. 37
Saturday at S. Peter and Marcelline a plenary. 38 The 3 Sunday in Lent at S.
Laurence extra muros a soul out of Purgatory. 39 Monday at S. Mark. 40 Twesday
at S. Potentiana. 41 Wednesday at S. Sixtus. 42 Thursday at SS. Cosma and
Damianus. 43 Friday at S. Laurence in Lucina. 44 Saturday at S. Susan. a
Plenary. 45 The 4 Sunday in Lent at S. Cross. a Plenary and a soul out of
Purgatory. 46 Monday at SS. qnatuor Coronati. 47 Twesday at S. Laurence in
Damaso. 48 Wednesday at S. Paul. 49 Thursday at S. Siluester. 50 Friday at S.
Eusebius. 51 Saturday at S. Nicholas in carcere. a Plenary. 52 The 5 Sunday in
Lent at S. Peter. 53 Monday at S. Chrisogon. 54 Twesday at S. Cyriacus. 55
Wednesday at S. Marcellus 56 Thursday at S. Apollinaris. 57 Friday at S.
Steuens. a soul out of Purgatory. 58 Saturday at S. John ante portam latinam:
a soul out of Purgatory. 59 Palm Sunday at S. JOHN Lateran: a Plenary twice.
60 Monday at S. Praxedes a plenary. 61 Twesday at S. Prisca: a Plenary. 62
Wednesday at Sansta Maria Mayor: a Plenary. 63 Thursday at S. John Lateran a
Plenary twice. 64 Friday at S. Cross: a Plenary and many other Indulge^ces 65
Saturday at S. John Lateran a Plenary. 66 Easter day at Sancta Maria Mayor: a
Plenary. 67 Monday at S. Peter: a Plenary. 68 Tuesday at at S. Paul: a
plenary. 69 Wednesday at S. Laurence extra muros: a soul out of Purgatory. 70
Thursday at SS. Apostoli. a plenary. 71 Friday at Sancta Maria Rotunda. 72
Saturday at S. John Lateran a Plenary twice. 73 Low Sunday at S. Pa^cratius a
plenary twice. 74 On S. Marks day at S. Peter. 75 Monday in Rogation week at
Sancta Maria Mayor. 76 Twesday at S. John Lateran. 77 Wednesday at S. Peter. 78
Ascension day at S. Peter. 79 Whitson Eve at S. John Lateran: a Plenary. 80
Whitsonday at S. Peter: infinite Indulgences and a Plenary. 81 Monday at S.
Peter in vinculis a plenary. 82 Twesday at S. Anastasia. 83 Wednesday at Sa^sta
Maria Mayor. 84 Thursday at S. Laurence extra muros a soul out of Purgatory.
85 Friday at SS. Apostoli: a plenary. 86 Saturday at S. Peter a soul out of
Purgatory. 87 Wednesdaye of the Imber week in September at Sancta Maria Mayor.
88 Friday of the same week at SS. Apostoli. a Plenary. 89 Saturday following
at Saint Peter.
THE FIFTEEN Mysteries of the holy Rosary. Cap. 5.
THIS devout kind of Psalter or Rosary of our B. Lady co^taine 15. principal
mysteries of the life of Christ and our Lady: for every part of the life of
our Savior did very specially appertain unto his holy mother, Luc. 2.
as who did ponder in her heart and diligently weigh whatsoever her most beloved
son wrought in the world and whose soul was perced with every dent of that
most sharppe sword which caused grief and so row to him, who^ she had lodged
in her affection for ever; no less the^ harbored for some months in her
sacred womb, Romans 12
and who finally had learned that lesson of S. PAVL to morn with the morners
and to rejoice with the ioifull.

This Psalter I say of 15 Pater nosters and 150 Aues is first divided into
three parts, every one of which may be recited a part by it self, as we have
said above, and represents unto us, as well one of the most holy persons of
the B. Trinity, as one of the three kinds of mysteries of Christ and our
Ladies life, that is either ioifull, or dolorous, or glorious. Every one of
these parts first, very fitly represe^teth unto us both the wounds of our
Savior and the spiritual liberty which we obtained thereby, the number of
fifty signifying a perfect Iubiley and release of all bondage as we will show
hereafter: Leuit. 25
then does it also contain five mysteries, which whilst we are saying every
ten Aues with the Pater noster belonging thereunto, going before; are devoutly
to be laid before the eyes of our mind: affectuously imagining that we are
kneeling in the closet of our Blessed Lady, before her sacred person, where she
talks with the Angel, or in Zacharies house where John Baptist by her voice
is sanctified in his mothers womb, and leapeth for joy or in the Cribbe where
the son of God in a new shape manifests him self unto the world, and is
honored of the wholle multitude of Angels, shepheardes, and Sages. And the
like of other so holy and devout mysteries although they which have more
leisure and fealing of so heavenly matters, may with more fruit spend some
little time in meditating of every mystery, not saying any thing, and then
afterward say the Pater and Aues thereunto belonging: or having first
rehearsed them, afterward meditate, which being done they may go forward to
an other mystery. Neither yet do I think that the simpler sort whose capacity
cannot reach to the remembrance of so many several mysteries is bound for the
obtaining of the graces appertaining to this Society to think actually of
every mystery: although it be the more sure way and more profitable and not
very difficult to remember if they first cause every misterve to be expounded
unto them by some more skillful then them selves. Which now although I would
willingly do, yet am I not by my other business permitted. Wherefore for the
larger explication of these mysteries I refer every one to a very profitable
book extant in our tongue and with great frut practiced by diverse in our
country, of the mysteries of the Rosary: yet will I not every place where in
the holy scripture each misterye may be read at large. These are therefore the
mysteries of the holy Rosary.

The five Ioifull Mysteries.
1 The Annunciatio^ of our Lady. Luc. 1
2 The visitation of S. Elizabeth. Luc. 1
3 The nativity of Christ. Luc. 2
4 The purification. Luc. 2
5 The invention or findinge of Christ among the Doctors in the Temple. Luc. 2

The five dolorous Masteries
1 The prayer in the Garden. Luc. 22
2 The whipping. Joan. 19.
3 The crowning with Thorn. Mat. 27.
4 The carrying of the Cross. Joan. 19.
5 The Crucifying and death of Christ. Mat. 27.

The five glorious Mysteries.
1 The Resurrection of Christ. Mat. 1^
2 The Ascension. Act. 1.
3 The sending of the holy Ghost 4 The Assumption of our Lady into heaven. Act.
2.
Cant. 8
5 The Coronation and exaltatio^ of our Lady above all Angels and Saints.
Thus much have I thought necessary to be here declared, for the perfect
information of whosoever desires to know what belongs unto this devout
Society, and to be pertaker of the benefit thereof.

Now before I proceed any farther, I have judged it very convenient to ad here,
two brief admonitions of two things, which may greatly appertain unto the
knowledge and use of this so great a treasure.

First that albeit, as we said above in the first chapter, What benefit one
which is in deadly sin may reap hereby.
no manner of person being out of the blessed favor of Almighty God, and in
the miserable estate of mortal sin, can either enjoy these Indulgences or
any other; or be partaker of the good works and satisfaction of others: yet
ought not any man which for human frailty, may perhaps either sometime fall
into deadly sin, or remain most lame^tably in the same; be thereby terrified
from this most wholesome medicine and comfortable sanctuary of the Blessed
Virgins protection. For first concerning the entry into this Confraternity:
although it be desired that every one at that time dispose him self to Gods
grace by receiving the holy Sacraments, and there is, as has been said,
aspeciall Indulgence granted to that end: yet that this is not altogether
necessary, the very practice of this Society does show, which receives those
which are absent, and not in case or possibility to receive holy Sacraments,
neither ever exacteth the same as necessary of such, when they are admitted. As
for the being afterward in estate of sin, true it is that it hinders those
benefittes, as we said before: yet does it not hinder but that so long as one
remains in the unity of holy Church, and says his Rosarye or our Ladies
Psalter every week; the common prayers and suffrages of this wholle Society
are applied unto him also as a member thereof. Wherefore although he have not
that infallible measure of fruit of their satisfactio^s, which if he were in
grace he should receive: yett is this no small help besides the general
communion of the prayers of the wholle CHVRCH, to have such particular relief,
whereby Gods wrath may be the easier appeased and he the more every day
disposed unto repentance and perfect conversion.

The Feast of the Rosary.
Secondly it is to be understood, that GREGORY the 13. in the year of our Lord
1573. the first day of April, for a perpetual memory and thanksgiving unto
God and our Blessed Lady for the triu^phant victory received the year before
over the Turks, See the book of the Rosary in Italia^
instituted a solemn feast, under the title of the feast of the Rosary, every
year to be cellebrated, on the first Sunday of october. whereas the year
before on the like Sunday, being than the 7 of the same month, so gloriouse a
victory was obtained, not without the special intercession (as he says) of
the Mother of God, whose devout Clients through the wholle world, the same
day, as being the first Su^day of the month, religiously according to their
laudable custom made their ordinary processions: whereas also this devout
manner of prayer, was by holy Saint Dominicke first instituted, for the
appeasing of Gods wrath, and the obtaining of our Ladies intercession against
most perniciouse heresies with which France and Italy in his time was sore
vexed. as also more largely is to be seen in the letters of Pius 5. in the 17.
of sept. 1569. where he after diverse of his Predecessors confirms the same
Society, and seriously commends it unto all devout Christians, as a
sovereign and necessary remedy for all the common euells of our age.

This feast of the Rosary is only to be observed such first Sunday of October
(understanding that Sunday) which is in deed the first within the month, not
that which is nearest unto the beginning of the month) where there is any Chap
pell or Altar of this Society, after the manner of a high dubble feast, with the
office of our Lady, according to the manner of her other feasts.

Thus much I thought would be as well for thy comfort (gentle Reader) to
know, as for the general benefit of CHRIST his Church in this miserable time
to observe.

OF OTHER MANner of saying the Beads. Cap. 6.
NOw that I have briefly set down what necessarily belongs to this devout
Society: I will for the farther comfort of the persons of the same, show also
unto the^ how they may in their beads find variety of other repast, and
greater store of dainty dishes thereby to provoke their appetite, which in this
kind of food ca^ never exceed in gluttony. Yet will I first admonish the^ (as I
have also touched before) that in no case they omit for any other kind of
devotion in the beads, to say the wholle Rosary in every week, but that
being done, they may satisfy their devotions according as they shall find
most comfort and delight.

There is therefore an other kind of saying the beads which is called the
Corone of our B. LADY, very much frequented of devout people, The corone of our
Lady.
which consists of 6. Pater nosters and 63. Aues in remembrance of her most
holy life which abounded with so many virtues that it may be as ( S. Lib. 2. de
virg.
Ambrose says) a pattern of all goodness to all sorts of me^. And though
there be no necessary cause thereof: yet have some so divided these Aue Mary's
that in every one is recorded some several mystery of the life of Christ and
our Lady, so that no principal point of either is omitted as we will afterward
set down. This is of great fruit and comfort, but not for the simple
although such also may very well and do every where rehearse this Corone
without special remembrance of so many diverse mysteries.

A third kind of beads or at the least of saying of the beads there is, The
corone of our Lord.
in which to the honor of our Savior Christ are rehearsed 33 Pater nosters
and as many Aue Mary's This is called the Corone of our Lord in worship of
his holy life which in this world continued 33 years.

Some also use a Corone of the five wounds of our Lord at every wound saying
one Pater noster and five or ten Aue Mary's. Of the 5 wou^des


There is also an other kind of devotion which may be used either with the
beads or without of saying 15 Pater nosters and Aues which devotion perhaps
might grow of the imitation of those 15 Psalms, Of the 15. Paters and Aues.
which are commonly called graduall, which as some say were wont to be song on
high days by the Levites on the fiftene stairs goeing up to the Temple, by
which with singular devotion and more the^ ordinary grace and alacrity our
Lady being 3 year old and carried to be presented in the Temple her self,
ascended to offer her self to Almighty God not without great admiration of
her devout Parents; or as some other say were made to signify certain degrees
or stepps of perfection in Gods service, which did singulerly shine in this
Virgin. or else this custom of saying 15 Paters and Aues might be first
commended, for that according to the opinion of some devout Doctors, by
revelation made unto some conte^platiue holy person, who says every day 15
Paters and Aues in one year shall make up the number of all the wounds which
our Savior received of his barbarous tormentors, counting with every stripe of
his whipping, the cruel prickings of the sharp thorns wherewith he was
crouned: so that one day in a year which is not leap year, Ludolphus de vita
Christi. Par. 2. c. 52.
the said number of 15 Paters and Aues be dubled. Or finally the cause of this
devotion might be for the respect of those 15 years which our Lady lived
after her sons afcentio^ in most special quiett and hope and continual
visitatio^ of Angels and comfort of the dilating the glorious name of her son
by his Apostles and other Disciples, a thing no doubt worthy of no small
consideration, when she did evidently see eue^ in this life; fulfilled the
Prophecy long before made by her self, that all generations should call her
blessed. This do I the rather set down in this place because set down in this
place because that all my Countrei-men should know, An Indulge^e for any
Christian what soever.
that what-soeuer faithful of Christ (yea although he be not of this Society of
which in this place we entreat shall say fifteen Paters and Aues for all
those which are in mortal sin, shall for every time that they do so
charitable a deed, obtain the remission of the third part of their sins.
Which Indulgence has been of long time granted and is so authentical that I
will be a warrant to all my countrei-men that it is no way cou^terfeited as it
may be some Indulgences have been in time past.

Finally every devout Christian may after these forms above mentioned, Other
forms of saying the beads.
religiously honor either the niue orders of holy Angels, by whom our life
under God is protected in this world. Or the 12 glorious Apostles of our
Savior the first Pastors and founders of Christian faith. or the seven
effusions of blood of our Lord. or the seven joys, or the seven sorrows which
our B. Lady had in this life. Or offer up a proportionable devotion for
whatsoever thing according to the custom of holy Church is observed in any
mystical number.

But because I have here made mention of the joys and sorrows of our B. Lady
which are not altogether the same with those ioifull and sorrowful mysteries
of the holy Rosary: I will here briefly for every ones comfort set the^ down.

The 7 joys of our B. Lady.
1 The Annunciation. 2 The visitation of S. Elizabeth. 3 The nativity of
Christ. 4 The coming of the three Kings. 5 The Resurrection of our Savior 6
The Ascension. 7 The coming of the holy Ghost
The 7 sorrows of our Lady.
1 The circumcision, which in that our Saviors blood was with such pain shed
forth: was most sorrowful but in the impositio^ of his glorious name most
comfortable. 2 The flying into Egypt. 3 The loss of our Savior for three
days. 4 The departure of our Savior to his bitter Passion. 5 The meetinge of
our Savior carrying his Cross. 6 His Crucifying and that which passed upon the
Cross. 7 The beholding him dead upon the Cross, in her sacred lap, and at
the Sepulcher.
The seven effusions of Blood of our Savior according to the doctrine of S.
Bernard. lib. de Pass. Do. cap. 36.
1 The Circumcision. 2 The Prayer in the garden. Luc. 2 Luc. 22
3 The pulling of his beard when they mocked him in Caiphas house according to
that of Esaias the Prophet. c. 50. I gave my body to those which did strike, and
my cheeks to those which pulled them. 4 The Whipping. Joan. 19. Mar. 27. Mat.
27. Joan. 19.
5 The Crowning with thorns. 6 The Nailing to the Cross. 7 The peacing of his
Side.
THE MANNER OF DIstribution of the life of our Savior and of our Lady for the
Corone of 63. Aues for those which shall desire to use the same, although the
Corone may be said without such particular memory Cap. 7.
1. Pater:
THE first Pater noster to ask imitation of our Lady.

1. Aue.
Of the Conception of our Lady.

2 Of her Nativity. 3 Of her Presentation. 4 Of her life in the Temple. 5 Of
her Despousation and the vow that both she and S. Joseph made of Virginity. 6
Of the Annunciatio^ of the Angel. 7 Of the Conception and Incarnation of
Christ. 8 Of the Visitatio^ of S. Elizabeth 9 Of the suspicion of S. Joseph. 10
Of our Ladies voyage to Bethlem.
2. Pater.
To ask humility and true poverty of spirit.

1 Aue.
Of the Nativity of Christ.

2 Of the Shepheardes coming unto him by the warning of the Angel. 3 Of the
Circumcision. 4 Of the three Kings coming. 5 Of the Purification. 9 Of the
flight into Egypt. 7 Of the finding of our Lord in the Temple. 8 Of our
Saviors Obedience and subjection from 12 years to 30. 9 Of his going forward
in age, wisdom, and grace, before God and man. 10 Of his departure from his
Mother to go to preach.
3. Pater.
To ask the inspiration and light of the holy GHOST, for to know and follow
the doctrine of Christ.

1 Aue.
Of the Baptism of Christ.

2 Of his Fasting and te^ntation in the wilderness. 3 Of S. JOHN'S showing of him
saying Ecce agnus Dei that is behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the
sin of the world, whereby Christ did begin to gather Disciples 4 Of the
turning water into wine and other miracles. 5 Of the Preaching of Christ. 6 Of
the reproaches and injuries offered of the Jews. 7 Of his Travails, iorneis,
and viages. 8 Of his often watching and praying. 9 Of the washinge of the
Disciples feet. 10 Of the last Supper and institution of the B. Sacrament.
4 Pater.
To ask patience in adversity.

1 Aue.
Of the Prayer and sweat of Blood in the garden.

2 Of his taking by Judas and the rest. 3 Of his carrying to Annas house where
he had a blow on the ear. 4 Of Caiphas house and the trou 5 Of his bringing to
Pilate and wrongful accusations. 6 Of the mockery done unto him with a white
garment in Herodes house. 7 Of his Scourging. 8 Of the Coronatio^ with thorns
9 Of his showing to the multitude Ecce homo and their cries Crucifige. 10 His
Condemnation and Barabas his liberation.
5 Pater.
To ask true sorrow of our sins and compassion with Christ.

1 Aue.
Of the carrying of the Cross.

2 Of our Ladies meeting of him. 3 Of the delivering of the Cross to Simon
Cyrineus. 4 Of his Nailing to the Cross. 5 Of the lifting up of the Cross. 6
Of the gaul and viniger given him to drink. 7 Of his seven words and
together of his death, crying Pater in manus tuas co^mendo Spiritum meum. 8 Of
the pearcing of his Side. 9 Of the laying him down from the Cross into his
sorrowful Mothers lap. 10 Of his devout burial.
6. Pater.
To ask of Christ a spiritual joy and peace together with him rising from the
dead.

1. Aue.
Of the Resurrection of Christ,

2 Of his Ascension. 3 Of the expectation of the holy ghost of all the
Disciples with our Lady. 4 Of the coming of the holy ghost. 5 Of the dividing
of the Apostles through the world. 6 Of the joy which our Lady had hearing the
great works done by them. 7 Of her often visiting the holy places which our
Sauoiour had been in. 8 With what diligent devotion she prepared her self to
her death drawing near. 9 Of her most holy death in the presence of all the
Apostles than alive. 10 Of her solemn burial.
7. Pater.
To ask a true despising of the world, and desire of heaven.

1. Aue.
Of the raising again of her most pure body.

2 Of her assumption into Heaven in the arms of her dear Son. 3 Of her
Exaltation and Coronation above all Angels and pure creatures.
Last of all Pater noster to the B. Trinity giving thanks for our Lady such a
notable gift bestowed on the world.

There is no need for to spend any more time in these points than whilst at
other times the Beads are said. But it is sufficient devoutly to remember at
every Aue Mary such mystery as is here set down: which also may be observed
in the two Chapters following although for the better conceiving of the
several points I thought good to set them down at large: or if at any time
any would spend more time therein.

ANOTHER ROSARY of the B. Virgin Mary much like unto the former but divided
according to the acts of our Savior Jesus Christ, for the Rosary of 5. Paters
and 50 Aues, out of Ludouicus Bolsius. Cap. 8.
The first part.
PATER noster etc. Aue Maria etc. O benign and sweet Mary, The beginning and
ending of this petition is to be added in every one
pacify our most clement Redemer Jesus, who^ thou a most pure Virgin, upon the
Angels annunciation did conceive by the holy Ghost in the city of Nazareth
and bear 9. months in thy most chaste womb. Cause that we may please thy most
sweet son Jesus Christ, and destrue to see him and thee in heaven. Amen.

2 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. who being conceived within thee thou, full of
God, did go with speed unto thy cosen Elizabeth, and salute her, and humbly
exhibit thy service unto her. Cause that we etc.

3 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Whom thou a most pure Virgin did bring
forth in Bethlem, in a most vile stable, not only without all pain, but also
with unspeakable joy, and being borne did presently adore him as true and
very God with a devout mind. Cause that we etc.

4 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Whom thou did foster with thy virginal
milk being as yet a little crying child, and swathed in cloutes did lay him
in the man ger upon hay and straw. Cause etc.

5 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Whom yet newborn the Angels in most ioifull
manner showed to the Shepheardes: and with cheerful voices giving lauds and
praises unto him, song peace to men of good will. Cause. etc.

6 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Whom the Shepheardes speedely repairing to
Bethle^ found laid in a Maunger, and adored with great joy and admiration.
Cause etc.

7 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who the 8. day after his Nativity voutsafedto
shed his most pure blood for us, and to be circumcised, and to be named Jesus
for our comfort. Cause etc.

8 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Whom the Sages coming from the East, devoutly
sought, and being replenished with great joy, came by the direction of a Satrre
into Bethlem: and there humbly adoring him, they devoutly offered unto him,
Gould, Frankencense, and Mirrhe. Cause etc.

9 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Whom, when the 40. day was come thou did
according to the law present in the Temple, and being redeemed with the host
of those which were of the poorer sort, did offer unto god the Father with a
most grateful heart. Cause etc.

10 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc, Whom thou like a most faithful mother, by
the admonition of an Angel did carry into Egipte for fear of Herod, and at
the last broughtest him back again into the city of Nazareth. Cause.

The second part.
1 PATER noster etc. Aue Maria etc. O benign and sweet Mary etc. Whom thou a
Virgin mother did loose in Jerusalem when he was 12. years old, and
seeking, and inquiringe for him with an heavy heart, did find him with joy,
three days after in the Temple. Cause etc.

2 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who being subject unto thee, thou did
diligently nourishe with a motherly care, and nevertheless did always
exhibit an holy reverence unto him, as to the most high and mighty God. Cause
that we etc.

3 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who, in the 30. year of his age, would
humblye be Beptized by his servant IHON in the River of Jordan, whereas
notwithstanding he being the most innocent Lamb of GOD, never contracted any
spot of sin. Cause etc.

4 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who in the Desert 40. days and 40. nights,
fasted without eating any thing, and so being the Lord of heaven and earth made
his abode among the wild beasts. Cause that we etc.

5 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who for our salvation refused not to be
tempted of the Devil, and showed us the way to overcome Satan. Cause etc.

6 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who travailing by cities, castells and
villages, preached diligently the Gospel of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
willingly sustained for our sakes all toiles and weariness of body. Cause etc.

7 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who often watched whole nights in prayer: and
fuffered for our sakes hunger, thirst, cold, heat, and diverse persecutions,
with a most mild heart. Cause etc.

8 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who conuersing amongst men, did mercifullye
succor all afflicted persons, and wrought very many miracles, and readily gave
pardon unto Mary Magdalene, and other sinners that were truly penitent, and
co^uersed familiarly with them. Cause etc.

Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who being transfigured upon the Mount before
three Disciples shined in fact like the Sun and maiestically showed the
excelencie of his glorious body. Cause. 10 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who
coming to Jerusalem to suffer for us, as a meek and humble King satte upon an
Ass, and in the midst of those praises which the people song unto him,
looking upon the city, wept.

The third part.
PATER noster etc. Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who, at his last supper humbly
upon his knees washed the feet of his Disciples: and with unspeakable charity
instituted the most excelent Sacrament of the Eucharist. Cause that we may
please. etc.

2 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who going with his Disciples in to the garden
of the Mount Oliuet was stricken with a great sadness for our sakes, and praying
a long space together, through the vehemency of th anguishes and distresses
that he was in, fell into a bloody sweat, that issued from all parts of his
body. Cause etc.

3 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who went out to meet his enemies, and
voluntarily offered him self unto them and refused not to take a kiss of
Judas that betrayed him. Cause etc.

4 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Whom, those wicked men apprehended
irreverently, and as a male factour and a thief, most shamefully bound with
hard and cruel bands. Cause etc.

5 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who being bound, was brought oprobriously unto
the high Priest and at the hands of one of his servants received a most cruel
and violent blow. Cause etc.

6 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who in the house of Caiphas was accused by
false witnesses, and defiled with stinking spittle, and scornfully hoodwinked,
and barbarously beaten with strokes and buffettes, and most unworthily
blasphemed. Cause etc.

7 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who being brought to Pylate inco^temptible
manner, stood before him with a lowly and cheerful countenance, and humbly
passed over with silence the false accusations of the Jews. Cause.

8 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Whom, Herod despised being sent unto him, and
wisely using silence before him: and put upon him as upon a fool a white and
ridiculous garment. Cause.

9 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who in the judgment Hall was unseemly
stripped of his clothes, and barbarously bound unto a Pillar, and rent and cut
most cruelly with whips, and miserably begoared with his own blood. Cause.

10 Aue Maria etc. O benign. Who^ unjust persons for more reproach, clothed
with a purple robe and crowned with sharp thorn, and adored in scornful manner
grinning with their teeth and struck with a reed, and filthely spit upon and
beat with cruel strokes. Cause.

The fourth part.
PATER noster etc. Aue Maria etc. O benign. etc. Who bearing a crown of
thorn and a purple garment, was brought by Pilate out of the Judgment Hall
and showed to the Jews, and by them with a great and tumultuous cry, required
to the death of the Cross. Cause etc.

2 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Whom Pilate unjustly adjudged to death and
delivered over to the Jews pleasure: and he then being by them presently
loade^ with the huge beam of the Cross did patiently bear with great pain
and torment thisignominiouse Tree upon his torn shoulders, and being made the
scorn of men, and the outcast of the people, meekly went forward to the Mount
Caluary. Cause etc.

3 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who at the place of Caluary was made to drink
of wine mingled with mirrh and bitter gaul, and shamfully stripped of his
clothes and cruelly bored through both hands and feet with nails, and so
fastened upon the Cross. Cause.

4 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who being naked, wounded and had in contempt,
did hang for us upon the tree of the Cross, and suffered most bitter pains,
and shead his most precious blood. Cause that we etc.

5 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who, when he did hang upon the Cross between
two thieves, and was scorned and blasphemed of the Jews; meekly showed
patience, and more then that, prayed unto his Father for his blasphemous
crucifiers. Cause etc.

6 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. who mercifully forgave the these all his
sins being truly penitent, and most liberally promised him the ioies of
Paradise. Cause etc.

7 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who tenderly took compassion of thee, his
most dearly beloved mother standing under the cross in bitter grief and
sorrow, and commended thee to his Disciple S. John, and gave thee as a mother
unto him and us all. Cause etc.

8 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who suffered his Passion without relief of
any sensible consolation: in so much as to show the greeuousnes of his
torments, he cried out with a loud voice that he was forsaken. Cause.

9 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who hanging upon the Cross al pale without
blood, said that he was vehemently athirst, but they gave him to drink naught
else but gaul and viniger in that extreme calamity. Cause etc.

10 Aue Matia etc. O benign. Who being near death commended his spirit into
the hands of his Father: and having now ended the work of our redemption like
a good Shepherd of mere love gave his life for his sheep. Cause etc.

The fifth part.
PATER noster etc. Aue Maria. O benign. etc. Who having tasted death for our
sakes upon the Cross did presently of his great charity descend into Hell
according to the soul, and mightily delivered from thence his elect. Cause
that we etc.

2 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Whose most holy Side was in thy presence
opened with a spear, and loving Heart wounded from whence issued for our
behoofes precious blood and the water of salvation. Cause etc.

3 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Whom being taken down from the Cross thou
did receive (as we devoutly believe) into thy bosom and lap, and did
plentifully bathe with tears and lovingly embrace and kiss. Cause.

4 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Whose most holy Body Joseph and Nichodemus
with godly devotion, imbalmed with spices and wrapped in a Syndon and laid in
the Sepulcher. Cause etc.

5 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who the third day coming forth like a
conqueror out of the shutt and sealed Sepulcher, with his own force rose from
the dead, replenished with most desired joy of thee his beloved mother and the
rest of his friends. Cause etc.

6 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who the forty day after his refurrectin
ascended gloriously in to Heaven, and sits as a noble triumpha^t conqueror
at the right hand of his Father. Cause etc.

7 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who sent the holy Ghost upon the Apostles and
other of the faithful, and by him did marueilously comfort stre^gthen, lighten
and in struct them. Cause. etc.

8 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who exalted thee his most dear mother being
assumpted into heaven above the quires of Angels and placed thee there as the
most Sovereign Queen and Emperesse. Cause etc.

9 Aue Maria etc. O benign etc. Who in the end of the world is to com as Judge
in great Majesty, to render horrible punishments to the reprobate and eternal
joys to the just. Cause etc.

10 Aue Maria etc. o benign etc. Who is the most amiable and desired glory of
the Saints and with the Father and the holy ghost lives and reigns God
world without end. Cause etc.

Laus Trinitati fulgidae,
Patri, Nato, Paraclito,
Laus Virgini Deiparae,
Nunc, and per omni seculu^.
Amen.
AN OTHER LIKE EXercise of the life and Passion of Christ, consisting of 5.
Paters and 50. Aues Cap. 9.
A Prayer to the wound of the right foot.
O Most loving and sweet Jesus Christ, Pharetra diuini amoris.
unto thee be praise, honor, and glory, for the wou^d and grief of thy right
foot. In this most holy wound, I do lay down and commend unto thee all may
of ingratitude, infirmity, baseness, and want of mine: beseeching thee through
thy infinite goodness, to destroy all these things in me and to cleanse and
heal me: Also to take away from me, whatsoever is in me that displeases thee:
and to power into me all things that do please thee: and that thou guard,
direct, and keep me in thy grace, free from all sin to my lives end. Amen.

Pater noster. 1.

O my Lord Jesus Christ, I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, that
have created me, and do hitherto conserve and keep me, sinning daily against
thee, and although most unworthy, do cherish me with benefits. Grant me I
beseech the, that I may know thee my Creator, and with fear and reverence
faithfully serve thee, perfectly obey the, and with my wholl heart always study
to please thee.

Aue Maria. 1

O my Lord Jesus Christ, I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, that
have fore-chosen a most noble Virgin to be thy mother, which being
prefigurated before, and of holy parents conceived and borne without sin,
thou have replenished with virtues and all good things. Grant me grace I
beseech thee, that I may perfectly know my sins, and mine own base
condition, and with true contrition and an holy hatred to bewail them, and to
detest and eschew whatsoever is displeasant in thy sight.

Aue Maria 2

O my Lord Jesus Christ, I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, which
have inspired, that most amiable maid, the most honest and beautiful Virgin
Mary, which was to be thy mother, to offer and dedicate her self unto thee to
be thy temple, and to vow perpetual virginity. O Blessed Jesus, grant me most
perfect chastity both of mind and body, and most fervent devotion, simplicity,
purity, and stablenes of heart.

Aue Maria. 3

O my Lord Jesus Christ, I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, that
would have that most chaste Virgin Mary, to be espoused to JOSEPH a virgin,
and both to be preserved immaculate in purity. O that I could obtain that
grace and favor at thy hands, that I might overcome and contemn the world,
with all the vices and concupiscences thereof, and always adhere and cleave
unto thee, with a most burning and sincere love.

Aue Maria. 4

O my Lord Jesus Christ, I adore thee, bless thee and give thee thanks, that
have voutsafed to salute the most holy Virgin by an Angel, and to make her
fruitful by the holy Ghost, and to be incarnate in her womb. O most sweet
Jesus, I hu^blie beseech thee to make my heart so free from all sin and vice,
that it may be unto thee a perpetual habitation.

Aue Maria. 5.

O my Lord Jesus Christ, I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, that
have vouchsafed to be carried nine months in the womb of a Virgin, and to
be known and foretold by thy precursor not yet borne. I humbly beseech thee,
so to wound my heart with thy most chaste love, that it may loathe all
worldly things, and without intermission feel and perceive thee the inhabit
our, and Possessour thereof.

Aue Maria. 6

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks,
whom the immaculate Virgin brought forth whth-out pain, destitute of lodging
in a strange place. O most sweet Jesus, I humbly beseech thee always to
replenish my heart with the grace of true and perfitt contrition, that I may
deserve to be unto thee a child of eternal adoption.

Aue Maria. 7

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, who
in poverty and cold being laid in a manger, art praised by Angels, and
adored by Shepherdes. Grant that in thy service I never wexe cold, or faint
and relent in thy laud and praise.

Aue Maria. 8

O my Lord Jesus Christ I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, that
have voutsafed to be circumcised and wounded, and for our comfort to be named
Jesus. I humbly beseech thee by the she ding of thy precious blood, that I may
deserve thoroughly to be cle^sed, and always to be preserved from all fault and
offense.

Aue Maria. 9

O my Lord Jesus Christ, I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, that
were sought, adored and honored with gifts by the three Sages. O most sweet
Jesus, give me grace always to resign and offer my self wholly unto thee, and
that I may spend and employ all my strength, and all that whasoeuer I am or can
be at any time, in thy love, honor and pleasure.

Aue Maria. 10

A Prayer to the wound of the leafte foot.
O MOST loving and sweet Jesus, unto thee be praise, honor, and glory, for
the wou^d and grief of thy leafte foot. In this wound I do bide all my
negligences, trespasses and debtes, beseeching thee to supply them, and to
justify me, and to replenish and confirm me with thy eternal grace, in which
I may grow and increase, and which I may never have the power to lose.

Pater noster. 1.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, that
thou would be offered in the Temple, and with the most pure Virgin thy
mother be subject to the law. O most sweet Jesus, give unto me most perfect
humility, whereby I may detest all the glory of the world, forsake all honor,
and devoutly submit my self, and become obedient to every man for thy sake.

Aue Maria. 1.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, that
in thy infancy with thy blessed mother did suffer the persecution of
Herod, together with the flight and banishment into Egypt. Grant that I may
willingly and patie^tly bear all adversity, and faithfully cleave unto thee
in all tribulation.

Aue Maria. 2.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, that
remaininge in the Temple, being sought for by thy mother, after three days
werte found again. O most sweet Jesus I humbly beseech thee, that with my
wholle heart and with a zealous desire I may fervently thirst after thee,
incessantly seek thee, and so happily find thee, that I may never loose thee
again.

Aue Maria. 3

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, that
did live secretly with thy mother thirty years unknown, and would be
thought the son of a Carpenter. I humbly beseech thee, that thy grace may
root out all arrogancy in me, and extinguish all pride, that I may not love
to be seen, or to set forth my self, but to be unknown, and to be accounted
base and vile.

Aue Maria. 4.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, that
for our sakes did voutsafe to be baptized in Jordan and by thy Father to be
declared from Heaven. Grant that I, by continual tears may be cleansed from
all sins and vices, that I may deserve always wholly to be drunk with the
love of thee and desire of the life to come.

Aue Maria. 5

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, that
fasting in the Desert, did voutsafe to be tempted by the Devil. O most
sweet Jesus protect me with thy grace, and make me to escape all the deceites of
the Devil, and in thy power to overcome all temptations.

Aue Maria. 6

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks,
that for the health of fowls, weart wearied out with prayers and continual
preaching. Grant me fervently to thirst thy honor and the health of souls,
and for the same zealously to spend my body and all that I have.

Aue Maria. 7

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks,
which have so honored marriage with thy presence, and with thy first miracle,
and did bountifullye heal all those that were needy and infirm: Grant me
an heart full of pity, compassion, and all kind of mercy, where by, I may
afford the benefit and affect of a most perfect love and charity unto all men,
and that especially unto my enemies.

Aue Maria. 8.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks for
thy benign familiarity, which thou full of pity and mercy did exhibit
unto Mary Magdalen, Zacheus, Matthew, and the woman taken in aduoutry, and other
Penitents more. Grant me the grace of most profound humility, perfect meeknes
benignity and charity.

Aue Maria. 9.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks,
that in the midst of many praises and much honor, did weep upon
Jerusalem. O most swet Jesus, power into me the zeal of perfitte charity, that
in all places I may detest and abhor, from all contempt of thee, and
irreuerence toward thee; and for every sin whatsoever, I may be sorry from
the very bottom of my heart, and that I may have a very sensible feeling of
the euells that happen unto any of my neighbors, as if they were my own.

Aue Maria. 10.

A Prayer to the wound of the right hand.
O MOST loving and sweet Jesus, unto thee be praise, honor, and glory, for the
wound and grief of thy right hand. In this wound I do hide and commend unto
thee, all my actions and endeavors. And whatsoever by thy grace is wrought in
me or by me, that thou may preserve, sanctify, and make perfect the same, to
the honor and glory of thy holy name.

Pater noster. 3

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks,
that weart sold by one of thy own Disciples, unto the Jews that did
persecute thee and conspire thy death. O sweet Jesus, grant me grace to take as
well evil as good at thy hand: amiddest them all to be thankful: for every of
the^ in particular to love thee more and more: and to retain peace,
tranquillity of heart, and charity with all men.

Aue Maria. 1.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks,
that leaving thy mother at Jerusalem, did eat the Paschall with thy
Disciples, and with exceeding humility wash their feet. I most humbly beseech
thee that for thy love, I may willingly forsake all things, prefer thee
before all things, in all things and above all things love thee, and gladly
submit my self to every man's service for thy sake.

Aue Maria. 2.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks,
that instituting the B. Sacrament of the Altar, did deliver it unto thy
Disciples, and leave it unto us. O most sweet Jesus inflame my heart to the
hungar of this venerable Sacrament, that with a most burning desire, and chaste
affection, humility, reverence, and most sinceare devotion, I may frequent it,
when and so often as it shall stand with thy gracious favor.

Aue Maria. 3.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks,
that being most desirous to suffer, and with all sad and fearful, did
thrice in prayer resign thy self unto thy Father, and falling into a great
agony, did sweat blood. I humbly beseech thee, that in all adversity and
tentation, I may always fly to thee for refuge, and put my trust and
confidence in thee only: and forsaking my self, commit, offer, and resign me
unto thee only.

Aue Maria. 4.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, who
being taken by thy enemies, were bound, blasphemed and wickedly abused. I
humblye beseech thee make me free from all vices, and captive in thy love: that
I may exceedingly wish and desire to be despised, and to suffer injuries and
contumelies.

Aue Maria. 5.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks,
that being brought to Annas, did patiently bear the blow that his servant
gave unto thee. Grant that I may love them thathate me, render good for evil,
and plentifully afforde unto all, the affecte of sweetness and charity.

Aue Maria. 6.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks,
that in the house of Caiphas did bear the false witness of those that did
accuse thee, and mercifully respecting Peter when he denied thee thrice, didist
recall him to the tears of Penance. O most merciful IESV, grant me grace
perfectlye to bewail my sins, ingratitude and negligences, and with all my
heart study and endeavor to please thee.

Aue Maria. 7.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks,
that being condemned, spitted upon, beaten, and blindfolded, did also
suffer very many other unworthy abuses. I humbly beseech thee that thy love may
be so fervent in me, that I may hate to be had in estimation and desire, and be
glad with all my heart, to be unknown, to be despised, and to suffer.

Aue Maria. 8.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, that
being unjustly accused before Pilate, with great humility did hold thy
peace. O good Jesus, bridle my tongue with a great and mighty fear of thee that
I may abstain even from all idle speech, and that I may willingly and
desirously offer my self to all manner of humble offices.

Aue Maria. 9

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, that
being despised by Herod were also mocked by a ridiculouse garment, and scorned
amongst many reproaches and so brought back again unto Pilate O most sweet
Jesus, grant me grace to think well of all men, to judge or despise none to
prefer all men before my self, and allwaies to think of my self more
basely.

Aue Maria. 10.

A Prayer to the wound of the leafte hand.
O MOST loving and sweet JESUS, for the wound and grief of thy left hand, I
give the humble and hearty thanks: into this wound I do offer unto thee, and
eftsons commend, all the gifts, benefits, and graces, and whatsoever thou have
bestowed upon me, most miserable and ungrateful wretch: and I humbly beseech
thy mercy by every of those drops of blood that issued from thence: that thou will preserve, confirm make perfect, and increase them all in me to the glory
of thy name: that humility and charity may day by day increase in me
according to thy will and pleasure.

Pater noster. 4

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, that
for my sake did vouchsafe to be stripped of thy clothes, to be bound unto a
Pillar, to be scourged all thy body over, to be wounded and begoared with
blood: grant me now so patiently to suffer thy scourges and to bear them with
such will and affection, that by thy pains and meritts being fully purged, I
may presently after my departure out of this life, deserve to be with thee in
joy, where I may please thee, praise thee, and love thee for ever more.

Aue Maria. 1.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks,
which did suffer a crown of thorn to be pressed upon thy head, and
withal many scorns and mockes, and buffets, and spittings for my sake: sweet
Jesus imprint in my heart a continual memory of thy Passion, that may
incessantly move my mind to co^punction, wound and wholly swallow up my mind
melting and co^suming it in thy love.

Aue Maria. 2

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, that
not-withstandinge thou were from top to toe, full of miseries, wounds, and
griefs, and so brought out and presented to the people, yet notwithstanding
such was the envy of the Jews, that they demanded to have thee crucified and
Barrabas to be kept alive: O most sweet Jesus, mortify and extinguish in me all
pride and desire of glory, all envy and all manner of vices: and make me truly
humble and meek of heart. O Passion most noble, of my Lord and Savior, wound
my soul, O precious wounds of my true lover ravish and make drunk my mind.

Aue Maria. 3.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, that
standing innocently for my sake before the tribunal seat, were content to be
condemned to death: and to be made a stale to thy enemies, by this charity of
thine, I beseech thee O my God to grant me grace, never to backbite, never to
judge, condemn or despise my neighbor or ever to give ear or consent to
others herin.

Aue Maria. 4.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, for
all and singular thy greifes and sighs, when amongst many reproaches and
stripes, bearing thy Cross, thou did in the presence of thy mother, fall
under thy burden: grant unto me most meek Jesus, to embrace with most fervent
devotion, the Cross of perfitt denial, and mortification of my self, and to
imitate the steps of thy virtues with most perfect charity.

Aue Maria. 5.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks,
whose members were al discovered, and greifes and wounds renewed by the
strippinge of thy clothes, I humbly beseech thee, that thou will cause my heart
perfitly to be purged from all unprofitable thoughts: that with the continual
presence of thy visitation, I may deserve every day to be renewed, and wholly to
be absorpe with the most fervent love of thee.

Aue Maria. 6.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, that
were cruelly stretched upon the Cross, and fastened with nails, not having
any comlynes or beauty, but being as a leaper, and one stricken by God. grant me
that I may be nothing in my own sight, but that I may despise my self, and
endeavor to greater and better things and employ all the forces of my soul
and body, in thy love and pleasure.

Aue Maria. 7.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee, thanks,
that being placed between two thieves, did patiently bear the blasphemies
of those that did vpbraid thee: and praying for thine enemies did promise
Paradise to the penitent thief. Grant me grace most perfitly to mortify al
vices in my self, and with a most burning desire continually to aspire unto
thee the true Paradise.

Aue Maria. 8.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, for
the grief where with thy heart was cloven, when thou did commend unto thy
Disciple S. JOHN thy most faithful and compassionate mother: O most sweet
Jesus grant me, so to be affected and occupied in the reverence and love of
her that I may deserve always to be protected cherished and governed by her,
as by a most loving mother.

Aue Maria. 9.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks,
that amiddest the bitter torments of thy pains, did cry out that thou werte
forsaken: at what time also, thou being then tormented with a most burning
thirst, had not one drop of water given unto thee, but gaul and viniger.
O most sweet Jesus, cause that in all tentatio^ and pressure, I may fly unto
thee, thirst and hungar after thee, and loath all worldly things.

Aue Maria. 10.

A Prayer to the heart of Jesus.
O MOST loving and sweet Jesus: unto thee be praise, honor, and glory for the
wound of thy heart: into this wound I do offer, commit, and resign unto thee my
heart, all my powers, forces, ntents, and affections, beseeching thee by the
effusion of the blood and water that ran from the, that thou thy self alone
wilt possess and govern me, and with the most fervent fire of thy love,
consume devour and unite me unto thee. Amen.

Pater noster. 5.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, for
thy most innocent and most painful death, that is, for the dolorous separation
of thy most holy soul from thy most noble body; O my God, my Savior, my hope
and my crown, grant me perfectly to dye to all vices and concupiscences, and
to all inordinate love of my self, and that I may live to thee only, and
immovably cleave to thee.

Aue Maria. 1.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, for
that loving wound wherewith thy heart being pierced did yield unto us blood
and water. wound I beseech thee my heart with the spear of thy love that I may
neither think nor desire any other thing then thee my Lord God crucified for
me, nothing may please me, nothing may affecte me, but thou only my God, my
joy and my life.

Aue Maria. 2.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, for
the pitiful taking down of thy body from the Cross, and for the mornefull
lamentation of thy mother and thy friends. I humbly beseech thee that the
memory of thy Passion may fill all my senses, and may so wholly rauishe and
possess me, that I may see no other thing, taste no other thing, know no other
thing, then thee my Lord crucified and dead for my sake.

Aue Maria. 3

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks,
that would be wrapped in a Syndon and be buried in an other man's Sepulcher.
I humbly beseech thee to bury my heart, senses, and all my forces in thee, and
by thy love venite them unto thee, and make me as it were insensible and
without feeling in all things, which stand not with thy liking.

Aue Maria. 4.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks,
that did voutsafe to descend into hell and to deliver the Fathers that were
there in captivity. O most sweet Jesus let the virtue and force of thy Passion
and blood now also descend into Purgatory and yield refreshing unto all the
souls.

Aue Maria. 5.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks,
that rising from death did appear gloriouse first unto thy mother, and then
unto Mary Magdalene and the Apostles. O most sweet Jesus grant me perfectly to
die to all vices, passions, and disordered manners, to live unto thee, to
please thee, and to taste and desire heavenly things only.

Aue Maria. 6

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, that
did ascend into heaven with the triumph of Angels and the company of the
Fathers I humblye beseech thee that my mind may alaies languishe in thy love,
loath all worldly things and fervently hunger and thirst thee alone, and that
nothing may delighte me, nothing make me glad but thou o my Lord Cod.

Aue Maria. 7.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks,
that have given the holy ghost, and sent thy Disciples to convert the world:
give me most pure simplicity of heart and perpetual stablenes of mind: give
me most fervent most faithful and constant charity that the holy ghost may
fill govern and posesse me to the end that he may make me worthy to be more
and more replenished with the gifts of his grace.

Aue Maria. 8.

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks,
that have glorified thy Mother assumpted in body and soul and have given her
unto us most mighty and merciful: By her merittes grant me thy grace and
perseverance in all goodness that I may never relent in thy service, nor by
indiscretion ever exceed.

Aue Maria. 9

O my Lord Jesus Christ; I adore thee, bless thee, and give thee thanks, that
art to come as Judge and to give either punishment or reward. O most merciful
Jesus, grant me so to finish my wholle life according to thy pleasure, that
my soul departing out of the body may go immediately unto thee her Creator
with great love toward thee where she may praise and bless thee for ever in
thy glory with all thy Saints. Amen.

Aue Maria. 10.

ANOTHER MANNER OF dividing the Rosary of 150. Aue Mary's, according to the
mysteries of the life of our Savior taken out of the Italian book of the
Rosary. Cap. 10.
Contemplations upon the first ioifull Mysteries Of the Annunciation. Pater
noster
MISSVS est Angelus Gabriel a Deo in ciuitatem Galileae cui nomen Nazareth.
Luc. 1.


The Angel Gabriell was sent of God into a city of Galilee, called Nazareth.

Aue Maria.

Ad virginem desponsatam viro cui nomen erat Joseph, Luc. 1.
de domo David et nomen Virginis Maria.

To a Virgin dispoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David:
and the Virgins name was MARIE

Aue Maria.

Et ingressus Angelus ad eam dixit Aue gratia plena, dominus teeum, benedicta
tu in mulieribus. Luc. 1.


And the Angel being entered in, said unto her, Hail full of grace, our Lord
is with thee: bles sed art thou among women.

Aue Maria.

Quae cum audisset turbata est in Sermon eius et cogitabat qualis esset ista
Salutatio. Luc. 1.


Who having heard, was troubled at his saying and thought what manner of
Salutatio^ this should be.

Aue Maria.

Et ait Angelus ei ne time as Maria inuenisti enim gratiam apud Deum.

And the Angel said to her, Luc. 1
fear not Mary, for thou have found grace with God.

Aue Maria.

Ecce concipies in vtero et paries filiu^, et vocabis nomen eius Iesum

Behold thou shall conceive in thy womb, Luc. 1
and shall bear a son and thou shall call his name Jesus.

Aue Maria.

Hic erit magnus and filius Altissimi vocabitur.

He shall be great, Luc. 1
and shall be called the Son of the most High.

Aue Maria.

Dabit illi Dominus Deus Sedem David patris eius and regnabit in domo Jacob in
aeternum et regni eius non erit finis. Luc. 1


Our Lord God shall give him the Seat of David his father: and he shall reign
in the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end.

Aue Maria.

Dixit autem Maria ad Angelum, quomodo fiet istud quoniam virum non cognosco.
Luc. 1


And Mary said to the Angel, How shall this be done because I know not man?

Aue Maria.

Et respondens Angelus dixit ei, Spiritus Sanctus superueniet in te, et virtus
Altissimi obumbrabit tibi, ideoque quod nascetur ex te Sanctum, vocabitur
filius Dei. Luc. 1


And the Angel answering, said to her, The holy ghost shall come upon thee,
and the power of the most high shall ouershadow thee. And therefore also that
which of thee shall be borne holy, shall be called the son of God.

Aue Maria.

Dixit autem Maria ad Angelum, ecce ancilla Domini fiat mihi secundum verbum
tuum. Luc. 1.


And Mary said to the Angel, Behold the ha^dmaid of our Lord be it done to me
according to thy word.

Contemplations upon the Second joyful mystery. Pater noster.
EXVRGENS Maria in diebus illis abijt in montana cum festi natione in ciuitatem
Judah. Luc. 1.


And Mary rising up in those days, went unto the hill country with speed,
into a city of Judah.

Aue Maria. Luc. 1.


Et intrauit in domu^ Zachariae et salutauit Elizabeth.

And she entered into the house of Zachary, and saluted Elisabeth.

Aue Maria.

Et factum est vt audiuit salutationem Mariae Elizabeth. Luc. 1.


And it came to pass: as Elisabeth heard the salutatio^ of Mary.

Aue Maria.

Exultauit infans in vtero eius. Luc. 1
The infant did leap in her womb.

Aue Maria.

Et repleta est Spiritu Sancto Elizabeth et exclamauit voce magna et dixit.
Luc. 1.


And Elisabeth was replenished with the holy Ghost: and she cried out with a
loud voice, and said.

Aue Maria.

Benedicta tu inter mulieres et benedictus fructus ventris tui.

Blessed art thou among women and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. Luc. 1.
Aue Maria.

Et vnde hoc mihi vt veniat matter Domini mei ad me? Luc. 1


And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord does come to me.

Aue Maria.

Ecce enim vt facta est vox salutationis tuae in auribus meis, exultauit in
gaudio infans in vtero meo.

For behold as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, Luc. 1
the infant in my womb did leap for joy.

Aue Maria.

Et beata quae credidisti quonia^ perficientur ea quae dicta sunt tibi a
Domino.

And blessed art thou that believed, Luc. 1
because those things shall be accomplished that were spoken to thee by our Lord.

Aue Maria.

Et ait Maria: Magnisicat anima mea Dominum and exultauit spiritus meus in Deo
salutari meo. Luc. 1


And Mary said, my soul does magnify our Lord, And my spirit has reioiced
in God my Savior.

Aue Maria.

Mansit autem Maria cum illa quasi mensibus tribus, and reuersa est in domum
suam. Luc. 1


And MARIE tarried with her about three months: and she returned into her
house.

Aue Maria.

Conte^plations upon the third joyful mystery. Pater noster.
EXIIT edictum a Caesare Augusto, Luc. 2
vt describeretur vniuer sus orbis.

There came forth an edict from Caesar Augustus that the wholle world should be
enrolled.

Aue Maria.

Ascendit aute^ and Joseph a Galileae de ciuitate Nazareth in Bethlem. Luc. 2


And Joseph also went up from Galilee out of the city of Nazareth into Bethlem.

Aue Maria.

Vt profiteretur cum Maria desponsata sibi vxore pregnante. Luc. 2


To be enrolled with MARIE his despoused wife that was with child.

Aue Maria.

Factum est aute^ cum essent ibi, impleti sunt dies vt pareret, and peperit
filium suum primogenitum. Luc. 2


And it came to pass, when they were there, her days were fully come that she
should be delivered. And she brought forth her first begotten son.

Aue Maria. Luc. 2


Et pannis eum inuoluit and reclinauit eum in presepio quia non erat eis locus
in diuersorio.

And swadled him in clothes, and laid him down in a manger: because there was
not place for them in the Inn.

Aue Maria.

Et Pastores erant in regione eadem vigilantes and custodientes vigilias noctis
super gregem suum. Luc. 2


And there were in the same country sheapherdes watching, and keeping the
night watches over their flock.

Aue Maria. Luc. 2


ET Angelus Domini dixit illis, Ecce euangelizo vobis gaudium magnum, quia
natus est vobis hodie Saluator, qui est Christus Dominus in ciuitate David.

And the Angel of our Lord said to them. Behold I Euan gelize to you great
joy. Because this day is borne to you a SAVIOVR, which is Christ our Lord, in
the city of David.

Aue Maria.

Et subito factus est cum Angelo multitudo militiae coelestis laudantium Deum,
Luc. 2.
and dicentium.

And suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the heavenly army,
praising God, and saying.

Aue Maria.

Gloria in altissimis Deo, Luc. 2.
et in terra pax hominibus bonae voluntatis.

Glory in the highest to God: and in earth peace to men of good will.

Aue Maria. Luc. 2.


Et veneru^t festinantes Pastores and inuenerunt Mariam and Joseph, et infantem
positum in praesepio. Luc. 2.


And the Sheapherds came with speed: And they found MARIE and Joseph, and the
Infant laid in the manger.

Aue Maria.

Et reuersi sunt Pastores glorificantes and laudantes Deum in omnibus quae
audierant and viderant sicut dictum est ad illos. Luc. 2


And the Shepherds returned glorifying and praising God in all things that
they had heard and seen, as it was said to them.

Contemplations upon the fourth ioifull mystery. Pater noster.
POSTQVAM impleti sunt dies purgationis Mariae. Luc. 2


After the days were fully ended of the purification of MARY

Aue Maria.

Tulerunt Iesum in Jerusalem vt sisterent eum Domino.

They carried Jesus into Jerusalem, Luc. 2.
to present him to our Lord.

Aue Maria.

Et ecce homo erat in Jerusalem cui nomen Simeon, iustus and timoratus
expectans consolatione^ Israel.

And behold there was a man in Jerusalem, Luc. 2.
named Simeon, and this man was just and religious, expecting the co^solatio^
of Israel.

Aue Maria.

Et responsum acceperat a Spiritu Sancto non visurum se mortem nisi prius
videret Christu^ Domini.

And he had received an answer of the Holy Ghost, Luc. 2.
that he should not see death unless he saw first the Christ of our Lord.

Aue Maria.

Et venit in spiritu in templum Simeon. Luc. 2.


And Simeon came in spirit into the temple.

Aue Maria.

Et cum inducerent puerum Iesum parents eius accepit eum Simeon in vlnas suas
and benedixit De um and dixit. Luc. 2.


And when his parents brought in the child Jesus, Simeon took him into his
arms, and blessed God, and said.

Aue Maria.

Nune dimittis Domine seruum tuum in pace. Luc. 2.


Now thou do dismiss thy servant O Lord, in peace.

Aue Maria.

Quia viderunt oculi mei salutare tuum quod parasti ante faciem omnium
populorum. Luc. 2.


Because mine eyes have seen, thy Salvation, which thou have prepared before
the face of all peoples.

Aue Maria.

Et erant pater eius and matter mirantes super his quae dicebant ur de illo.
Luc. 2.


And his father and mother were marueiling upon these things, which were
spoken concerning him.

Aue Maria.

Et erat Anna Prophetissa, and loquaebatur de illo omnibus qui expectabant
redemptionem Israel. Luc. 2.


And there was Anne a Prophe tisse, and she spoke of him to all that expected
the redemption of Israel.

Aue Maria.

Et vt perfecerunt omnia reuersi sunt in ciuitatem suam Nazareth. Luc. 2.


And after they had whollye done all things, they returned into their city
Nazareth.

Contemplations upon the fifth ioifull mystery. Pater noster.
CVM Factus esset Jesus annorum duodece^ ascenderunt parents eius Hierosolimam
secundum consuetudinem diei festi. Luc. 2


When Jesus was twelve years old, his parents went up into Hie rusale^
according to the custom of the festival day.

Aue Maria.

Consummatisque diebus cum redirent remansit puer Jesus in Jerusalem, and non
cognouerunt parents eius. Luc. 2.


And having ended the days, when they returned, the child JESUS remained in
Jerusalem, and his parents knew it not.

Aue Maria.

Existimantes autem illum esse in comitatu venerunt iter diei, and requirebant
euminter cognotos and notos. Luc. 2.


And thinking that he was in the company, they came a days journey, and sought
him among their kinsefolke and acquaintance.

Aue Maria.

Et non inuententes regressi sunt in Jerusalem requirentes cum. Luc. 2.


And not finding him, they returned into Jerusalem, seeking him.

Aue Maria.

Et post triduum inueneru^t illum in templo sedent em in medio Doctorum
audientem illos and interrogantem. Luc. 2.


And after three days they found him in the temple sitting in the mids of
the Doctors, hearing them, and asking them.

Aue Maria.

Stupeba^t autem omnes qui eum audiebant super Prudentia et responsis eius.
Luc. 2


And all were astonished that heard him, upon his wisdom and answers.

Aue Maria.

Et dixit Matter Jesus ad illum, fili quid fecistinohis sic? Luc. 2


And the mother of Jesus said to him, Son why have thou so done to us?

Aue Maria. Luc. 2.


Ecce pater tuus and ego dolentes quaerebamus te.

Behold thy father and I sorowing did seek thee.

Aue Maria.

Et ait ad illos, Luc. 2
quid est quod me quaerebatis? nesciebatis quia in his quae patris mei sunt
oportet me esse.

And he said to them, what is it that you sought me? did you not know, that I
must be about those things, which are my fathers?

Aue Maria.

Et ipsi non intellexerunt verbu^ quod loquutus est ad illos, Luc. 2
and descen dit cum illis and venit Nazareth, and erat subditus illis.

And they understood not the word that he spoke unto them. And he went down
with them and came to Nazareth: and was subject to them.

Aue Maria.

Et Jesus proficiebat sapientia aetate and gratia apud Deum and homines. Luc. 2


And Jesus proceeded in wisdom and age, and grace with God and men.

Contemplations upon the first Sorrowful Mystery. Pater noster. Joan. 18.

EGRESSVS est Jesus cum Discipulis suis trans torrente^ Cedron, vbi erat hortus
in quem introiuit.

Jesus went forth with his Disciples, beyond the torre^t Cedron where was a
Garden, into the which he entered.

Aue Maria.

Et cum peruenisset ad locu^ dixit illis, orate ne intretis in tentatione^.
Luc. 22.


And when he was come to the place, he said to them, pray, lest ye enter into
tentation.

Aue Maria.

Spiritus quidem promptus est, caro autem infirma. Mat. 26.


The spirit indeed is prompt, but the flesh weak.

Aue Maria.

Et ipse auulsus est ab eis quantum iactus est lapidis and positis genibus
orabat dicens: Luc. 22
Pater, si vis, transfer a me calicemistum.

And he was pulled away from them a stones cast: and kneeling he prayed,
saying, Father if thou will, transfer this chalice from me.

Aue Maria.

Veruntamen non mea, sed tua vo luntas fiat.

But yet not my will, Luc. 22.
but thine be done.

Aue Maria.

Iterum abijt and eundem sermonem dicens, Mat 2.6.
fiat voluntas tua.

He went again, and prayed, saying the self same word, thy will be done.

Aue Maria.

Ft cum surrexisset ab oratione inuenit Discipulos suos dormientes
praetristitia. Luc. 22


And when he was risen up from prayer, he found his Disciples slay ping for
pensifenes.

Aue Maria.

Et ait Petro, Simon dormis? non potuisti vna hora vigilare mecum. Mar. 14.


And he says to Peter, Simon sleep thou? could thou not watch one hour
with me?

Aue Maria.

Et factus in agonia prolixius orabat. Luc. 22.


And being in an agony, he prayed the longer.

Aue Maria.

Et factus est sudor eius sicut gut tae sanguinis decurrentis in terram. Luc.
22.


And his sweat became as drop pes of blood trickling downve p-on the earth.

Aue Maria.

Apparuit autem illi Angelus Domini de caelo confortans eum. Luc. 22.


And there appeared to him an Angel from heaven, strengthening him.

Contemplations upon the Second Sorrowful misterye. Pater noster.
MINISTRI Iudeorum compraehenderunt Iesum et liga uerunt eum. Joan. 18.


The ministers of the Jews apprehended Jesus, and bound him.

Aue Maria.

Et viri, Luc. 22
qui tenebant illum illudebant ei caedentes.

And the men that held him, mocked him, beating him.

Aue Maria.

Obtulistis mihi hunc hominem quasi auertentem populum. Luc. 22.


You have presented unto me this man, as auerting the people.

Aue Maria.

Et ecce ego coram vobis interogans nullam causam inuenio in homine isto, ex
his in quibus eum accusatis. Luc. 23.


And behold I examining him before you, have found no cause in this man of
those things wherein you accuse him.

Aue Maria.

Sed neque herodes, nam remisi vos ad illum et ecce nihil dignum morte actum
est ei. Luc. 23.


No, nor Herod neither. for I sent you to him, and behold, nothing worthy of
death is done to him.

Aue Maria.

Emendatum ergo illum dimittam. Luc. 23.


I will chasten him therefore and dimisse him.

Aue Maria.

Tunc ergo appraehendet Pilatus Iesum and flagellauit. Joan. 19.


Then therefore Pilate took Jesus and scourged him.

Aue Maria.

Videns Pilatus quia nihil profici ret, accepta aqua lauit manus coram populo.
Mat. 27.


Pilate seeing that he nothing prevailed, taking water he washed his hands
before the people.

Aue Maria.

Et dixit innocens ego sum a sanguine iusti huius. Mat. 27.


And said I am innocent of the blood of this just man.

Aue Maria.

Tunc dimisit illis Barrabam, Mat. 27
Ie sum autem flagellatum tradidit eis vt crucifigeretur.

Then he released to them Barrabas, and having scourged Jesus delivered him
unto them for to be crucified.

Contemplations upon the third sorrowful misterye. Pater noster.
MILITES Praesidis susceperunt Iesum in praetorium. Mat. 27.


The Preside^ts souldiars took Jesus into the Palace.

Aue Maria.

Et congregauerunt ad eum vniuersam cohortem. Mat. 27.


And gathered together unto him the wholle band.

Aue Maria.

Et exeuntes eum chlamyde^ coccineam circundederunt ei. Mat. 17.


And stripping him, put a scarlate cloak about him.

Aue Maria. Mat. 27.


Et plectentes coronam de spinis imposuerunt super caput eius.

And platting a crown of thorns, put it upon his head.

Aue Maria.

Et posuerunt arundinem in dextra eius. Mat. 27.


And put a reed in his right hand.

Aue Maria.

Et expuentes in eum, Mat. 27.
acceperu^t arundinem and percutiebant caput eius.

And spitting upon him, they took the reed, and smote his head

Aue Maria.

Et genuflexo ante eum, Mat. 27.
illudebant ei dicentes, Aue Rex Iudeorum.

And bowing the knee before him, they mocked him, saying, Hail King of the
Jews.

Aue Maria.

Et caeperunt quidam conspuere eum, Mat. 27.
and velare faciem eius, and colaphis eum caedere and dicere ei: Prophetiza.
Mar. 14.


And certain began to spit upon him, and to cover his face, and to beat him
with buffetes, and to say unto him, Prophecy.

Aue Maria.

Et ministri alapis eum caedebant

And the servants gave him blows. Mar. 14.


Aue Maria.

Exiuit ergo Jesus for as, portans coronam spineam, and purpureu^ vestimentum.
Joan. 19.


Jesus therefore went forth carrying the crown of thorns, and the purple
vestiment.

Aue Maria.

Et dixit eis Pilatus: Joan. 19.
Ecce homo

And Pilate says to them, Lo the man.

Contemplations upon the fourth Sorrowful mystery. Pater noster.
TVNC ergo Pilatus tradidit eis Iesum vt crucifigeretur. Joan. 19.


Then therefore Pilate delivered Jesus unto them for to be crucified.

Aue Maria.

Susceperu^t autem Iesum, Joan. 19.
and eduxerunt eum.

And they took Jesus and led him forth.

Aue Maria.

Et baiulans Jesus sibi Crucem exiuit. Joan. 19.


And Jesus bearing his own Cross he went forth.

Aue Maria.

Exeuntes autem inueneru^t hominem Cyrenaeum nomine Simone^, Mat. 27.
hunc angariauerunt vt tolleret cru cem eius.

And going they found a man of Cyrene named SIMON: him they forced to take up
his Cross.

Aue Maria.

Sequebatur autem illum multa turba populi and mulieru^, quae plangebant and
lamentabantur eum. Luc. 23


And there followed him a great multitude of people, and of women which bewailed
and lamented him.

Aue Maria.

Conuersus autem ad illos Jesus, dixit: Filiae Jerusalem, nolite flere super
me. Luc. 23.


But Jesus turning to them, said Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not upon me.

Aue Maria.

Sed super vos ipsas flete, et super filios vestros. Luc. 23.


But weep upon your selves and upon your children.

Aue Maria.

Quoniam ecce venient dies, in quibus dice^t: Luc. 23
Beatae steriles et ventres qui non genuerunt and vbera, quae non lactauerunt.

For behold the days shall come wherein they will say: Blessed are the barren,
and the wombes that have not borne, and the pappes that have not given suck.

Aue Maria.

Si in viridi ligno hoc faciunt, Luc. 23
in arido quid fiet?

If in the green wood they do these things, in the dry what shall be done?

Aue Maria.

Ducebantur autem and alij duo nequam cum eo vt interficerentur. Luc. 23


And there were led also other two malefactors with him to be executed.

Aue Maria.

Et venerunt in locum qui dicitur Golgotha quod est Caluariae locus. Mat. 27.


And they came into the place that is called Golgotha, which is the place of
Caluarie.

Conte^plations upon the sift Sorrowful mystery. Pater noster.
POSTOVAM venerunt in locu^ qui vocatur Caluariae, ibi crucifixerunt eum. Luc.
23.


And after they came to the place which is called Caluarie: there they
crucified him.

Aue Maria.

Tunc crucifixi sunt cum eo duo latrones, vnus a dextres and vnus a sinistris.
Mat. 27.


Then were crucified with him two thieves: one on the right hand, and one on
the left.

Aue Maria.

Jesus autem dicebat, Pater dimitte illis quia nesciunt quid faciunt. Luc. 23


And Jesus said, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

Aue Maria.

Et dixit latroni Jesus, Amen dico tibi, Luc. 23.
hodie mecum eris in Paradiso.

And Jesus said to the thief, Amen I say to thee: this day thou shall be with
me in Paradise.

Aue Maria.

Et dixit matri suae Mulier ecce filius tuus. Joan. 19.


And he said to his mother: woman behold thy son.

Aue Maria.

Deinde dicit diseipulo: Ecce matter tua. Joan. 23.


After that, he says to the Disciple, Behold thy mother.

Aue Maria.

Clamauit Jesus voce magna, dicens: Deus meus, Deus meus vt quid dereliquisti
me? Mat. 27.


JESUS cried with a mighty voice, saying, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me?

Aue Maria.

Vt co^summaretur scriptura dixit: Sitio. Joan. 9.


That the scripture might be fulfilled, he says, I thirst.

Aue Maria.

Cum ergo accepisset Jesus acetum dixit: Co^summatum est.

JESUS therefore when he had taken the viniger, said, Joan. 19.
It is consummate.

Aue Maria. Luc. 23


Et clamans voce magna Jesus ait. Pater in manus tuas commendo spiritum meum.

And Jesus crying with a loud voice, said, Father, into thy hands I commend my
spirit.

Aue Maria.

Jesus autem iterum clamans voce magna emisit spiritum.

And Jesus again crying with a mighty voice, Mat. 27.
yielded up the ghost.

Contemplations upon the first Glorious Mystery. Pater noster.
MARIA Magdalena, Mar. 16.
et Maria Iocobi, and Salome emerunt aromata vt venientes vngerunt Iesum.

Marie Magdalene and Marie of James, and Salome bought spices, that coming they
might anoint Jesus.

Aue Maria.

Et ecce terrae motus factus est magnus and prae timore exteriti sunt custodes
and facti sunt velut mortui. Mat. 28.


And behold there was made a great earthquake: And for fear, the watchme^ were
frighted, and became as dead.

Aue Maria.

Angelus autem Domini descendit de coelo, Mat. 28.
and reuoluit lapidem and sedebat super eum.

An Angel of our Lord descended from heaven: and rolled back the stone and
sat upon it.

Aue Maria.

Et Angelus dixit mulieribus: no lite timere vos: Iesum qui crucifix us est,
quaeritis: non est hic: Mat. 28.
surrexit enim, sicut dixit.

And the Angel said to the women, fear not you, you seek Jesus that was
crucified: he is not here: for he is risen, as he said.

Aue Maria.

Venite and videte locu^ vbi positus erat Dominus. Mat. 28.


Come and see the place where our Lord was laid.

Aue Maria.

Sed, ite, dicite discipulis eius, and Petro quia surrexit.

But go, Mar. 16.
tell his Disciples and Peter that he is risen.

Aue Maria.

Ecce praecedet vos in Galileam, ibi eum videbitis sicut dixit vobis. Mar. 16.


Behold he goes before you in to Galilee: there you shall see him as he told
you.

Aue Maria.

Et exierunt cito de monumento cum timore and gaudio magno, Mat. 28.
currentes nunciare Discipulis eius.

And they went forth quickly out of the monument with fear and great joy
running to tell his Disciples.

Aue Maria.

Et ecce Jesus occurrit illis, dice^s Auete. Mat. 28.


And behold Jesus met them, saying, Al bail.

Aue Maria.

Illae autem accesserunt, and tenuerunt pedes eius and adorauerunt eu^

But they came near and took hold of his feet, and adored him. Mat. 28


Aue Maria.

Tunc ait illis Jesus. Mat. 28.
Nolite timere. Ite nunciate fratribus meis, vt eant in Galileam, ibi me
videbunt.

Then Jesus said to them, fear not, go tell my brethren that they go into
Galilee, there they shall see me.

Contemplations upon the second Glorious Mystery. Pater noster
PREBVIT seipsum viuum post Passionem suam in multis argumentis. Act. 1


He showed him self alive after his passion in many arguments.

Aue Maria.

Per dies quadraginta apparens Apostolis and loquens de regno Dei. Act. 1


For forty days appearing to his Apostles, and speaking of the kingdom of
God.

Aue Maria.

Igitur, qui conuenerant interrogabant eum dicentes, Act. 1
Domine si in tempore hoc restitues regnu^ Israel?

They therefore that were assembled, asked him, saying, Lord, whether at this
time will thou restore the kingdom to Israel.

Aue Maria.

Dixit autem eis. Non est vestru^ nosce tempora vel momenta, Act. 1
quae Pater posuit in sua potestate.

But he said to them: It is not for you to know times or moments, which the
Father has put in his own power.

Aue Maria. Act. 1


Sed erit is mihi testes in Jerusalem, and omni Iudaea, and Samaria, and vsque
ad vltimum terrae.

But you shall be witnesses unto me in Jerusalem, and in all Iewrie, and
Samaria, and even to the utmost of the earth.

Aue Maria.

Et cum haec dixisset videntibus illis, Act. 1
eleuatus est and nubes suscepit eum ab oculis eorum.

And when he had said these things, in their sight he was elevated: and a
cloud received him out of their sight.

Aue Maria. Psa. 46


Ascendit Deus in iubilo, et Do minus in voce tubae.

GOD ascended in exceeding joy, and our Lord in sound of trum pet.

Aue Maria. Act. 1.


Cumque intuerentur in coelum euntem illum ecce duo viri astiterunt iuxta illos
in vestibus albis.

And when they beheld him going into heaven, behold two men stood beside them
in white garments.

Aue Maria.

Et dixerunt Viri Galelaei quid statis aspicientes in coelum? Act. 1.


And said, ye men of Galilee, why stand you looking into heaven?

Aue Maria.

Hic Jesus qui assumpt us est a vo bis in coelum, sic veniet quemadmodum
vidistis eum euntem in coelum. Act. 1.


This Jesus which is assumpted from you into heaven, shall so come as you have
seen him going into heaven.

Aue Maria. Luc. 24.


Et factum est dum benediceret illis, recessit ab eis and ferebatur in coelum.

And it came to pass whiles he blessed them, he departed from them, and was
carried into heaven.

Contemplations upon the third Glorious Mystery. Peter noster.
TVNC reuersi sunt Hierosolimam, Act. 1.
a monte qui vocatur Oliueti, qui est iuxta Jerusalem Sahbathi habens iter.

Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mount that is called Oliuet, which
is by Jerusalem, distant a Saboths journey.

Aue Maria. Act. 1.


Et cum introissent in caenaculu^ ascenderunt vbi manebant Petrus and Ioannes,
Iacobus and Andreas, Philippus and Thomas, Bartholomeus et Mathaeus, Iacobus
Alphaei and Simon Zelotes and Judas Iacobi.

And when they were entered in, they went up into an upper chamber, where abode
Peter and John, James and Andrew, Phillippe and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew,
James of Alphaeus and Simon Zelotes, and Jude of James.

Aue Maria.

Hi omnes erant perseuerantes vnamiter in oratione cum mulieribus and Maria
matre Jesus. Act. 1.


Al these were perseuering with one mind in prayer with the women and Mary the
mother of Jesus.

Aue Maria.

Et cum complerent ur dies Pentecostes, Act. 2.
erant omnes pariter in eodem loco.

And when the days of Pentecost were accomplished, they were all together in
one place.

Aue Maria.

Act. 2.
Et factus est repent de caelo sonus tanquam aduenientis spiritus vehementis.

And suddenly there was made a sound from heaven, as of a vehement wind coming.

Aue Maria. Act. 2.


Et repleuit tota^ domum vbi er^at sedentes Apostoli.

And it filled the wholle house where the Apostles were sitting.

Aue Maria.

Et apparuerunt illis dispertitae linguae, Act. 2.
tanquam ignis.

And there appeared to them parted tongues as it were of fire.

Aue Maria.

Sedit que supra singulos eorum. Act. 2.


And it sat upon every one of them.

Aue Maria.

Et repleti sunt omnes Spiritu Sancto.

And they were all replenished with the holy Ghost. Act. 2.


Aue Maria.

Et caeperunt loqui varijs linguis prout Spiritus sanctus dabat eloqui illis.
Act. 2.


And they began to speak with diverse tongs, according as the holy ghost
gave the^ to speak.

Aue Maria. Mar. 16.


Illi autem profecti praedicauerunt vbique Domino cooperante and sermone^
confirmante, sequentibus signis

But they going forth preached every where: our Lord working withal, and
confirming the word with signs that followed.

Contemplations upon the fourth Glorious misterye. Pater noster. Cant. 2.

SVRGE propera amica mea, columba mea, formosa mea, and veni.

Arise, make haste my love my dove, my beautiful and come.

Aue Maria. Cant. 2.


I am enim hiems transijt, Imber abijt and recessit.

For now the winter is past, the shower is gone, and ceased.

Aue Maria.

Ostende mihi faciem tuam, sonet vox tua in auribus meis. Cant. 2.


Show me thy face let thy voice sound in my ears.

Aue Maria.

vox enim tua dulcis, and facies tua decora. Cant. 2.


For thy voice is sweet, and thy face comely.

Aue Maria.

Quae est ista, quae ascendit per desertum sicut virgula fumi ex aromatibus
myrrhae, Cant. 3.
and thuris, and vniuersi pulueris pigmentarij?

What is she, that ascended through the desert like to a strea^e of perfumed
smoke, arising from odoriferous gummes of Myrrh, and incense, and all manner of
sweet powder of the perfumer.

Aue Maria.

Quae est ista, Cant. 6.
quae progreditur quasi aurora consurgens?

King Solomon arose to meet with Bethsabe his mother, and he adored her, and
did fit upon his Throne.

Aue Maria.

Positusque est Thronus matri Regis quae sedit ad dexteram eius. 3. Reg. 2


And a Throne was placed for the mother of the King, who did sit at his right
hand.

Aue Maria.

Et dixit ei Rex: 3. Reg. 2
pete matter mea neque enim fas est vt auerta^ faciem tuam.

And the King said to her: Demand O mother: for it is not law full that I
disdain thy face.

Aue Maria.

Tu gloria Jerusalem, Iudi 15.
Tu laeti tia Israel, Tu honorificentia populi nostri.

Thou art the glory of Jerusalem, thou art the joy of Israel, thou art the
honor of our people.

Aue Maria. Esther. 2


Adamauit illam Rex plusquam omnes mulieres and posuit diademae regni in capite
eius.

The King loved her a boue all women, and put the diadem of his kingdom upon
her head.

Aue Maria. Psalm. 44.


Astitit Regina a dextris eius in vestitu deaurato: circundata varietate.

The Queen stood at his right hand in a Clothing of gold, embrodered with
variety.

Aue Maria.

Posuit in capite eius coronam de lapide precioso. Psa. 20.


He put one her head a crown of precious stone,

Aue Maria.

Corona aurea super mitram eius expressa signo Sanctitatis. Eccl. 45.


What is she, that increasseth as the break or drawning of the day?

Aue Maria.

Pulchra vt luna, electa vt Sol, Cant. 6
terribils vt castroru^ acies ordinata

Fair as the moon, pure as the soon, terrible as an armic set in battle
array.

Aue Maria.

Tota pulchra es amica mea, Cant. 4.
and macula non est in te veni de libano sponsa mea, veni de libano, veni:
coronaberis.

My love thou art altogether beautiful, and no spot is in thee, come from
Libanus my spouse, come from Libanus, come thou shall be crowned.

Aue Maria.

Ascendam in palmam, Cant. 7.
et appreda^^^^ ^ructus eius.

I will go up into the date tree and I will take the fruits thereof.

Aue Maria. Psa. 72


Tenuisti manum dexteram meam: and in voluntate tua deduxistime, and cum gloria
suscepistime.

Thou have sustained my right hand, and thou have lead me according to thy
will, and thou have received me with glory.

Aue Maria.

Assumpta est Maria in caelum gaudent Angeli laudantes benedicunt Dominum.

Marie is assumpted into Heaven, the Angels rejoice, and praising they bless
our Lord.

Contemplations upon the fifte Gloriouse Misterye Pater noster.
SVRREXIT Rex Solomon in occursum Bethsabe matris, 3. Reg. 2
ado rauit que eam, and sedit super Thronum suum.

A crown of gold upon her mitre, in which was engraued Sanctity to our Lord.

Aue Maria.

Et gaudebit sponsus super sponsam and gaudebit super te deus tuus. Isa. 62.


And the bridegroom shall rejoice at his spouse, and thy God shall rejoice at
thee.

Aue Maria.

Ornaui te ornamento, Eze. 16.
and dedi armillas in manibus tuis and torque^ circa collum tuum, and dedi
inaure^ super os tuum and circulos auribus tuis and corona^ decoris in capite
tuo.

I have araied thee with an ornament, and I have put bracelets on the wrestes
of thy hands, and a chain about thy neck. And I have put a jewel on thy
forehead, and earings in thy ears, and a most comely croune on thy head.

Aue Maria.

Signum magnum apparuit in caelo: Mulier amictasole, Apo. 12
and luna sub pedibus eius and in capite eius corona stellarum duodecem.

A great sign appeared in heaven: a woman clothed with the sun, and the
moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars

AN EXPLICATION of the Aue Mary Bell.
THE Bell is wont thrice a day to be knoled to prayers: At Morning, Noone, and
Night: that Christians might remember, if they can not oftener, at the least
yet thrice a day, to serve God in prayer: At morning the beginning of the day,
by referring all the future actions to Gods glory: At noone the very midde
course of the day, to refresh the wearied soul with a short prayer, as the
body is relieved with meat: and at evening, by taking account of the soul of
all her actions.

And at these hours is the B. virgin Mary saluted, that through the excelent
benefittes at those hours bestowed, whereat she was present, she would
vouchsafe to get us mercy of her dearly beloved son. For at the toling in the
morning, is renewed the memorial of Christ's Resurrection, who risen from
death did then appear to his most B. mother: The toling at noone, is in
remembrance of Christ's passion, whereat the B. Virgin was present: And at night
in remembrance of Christ's incarnation in her blessed womb.

At the first toll.

Angelus Domini nunciauit Mariae and concepit de Spiritu sancto.

Aue Maria.

At the second toll.

Ecce Ancilla Domini, fiat mihi secundum verbum tuum.

Aue Maria.

At the third toll.

Et verbumcaro factum est, and habitauit in nobis.

Aue Maria.

I desire the gentle Reader to amend these faults escaped. In the discourse of
the Devotion of our Lady Page. 5. Line. 17. read. which by carnal propagation
is derived from Adam. Pa. 8. l. 8 read: as well for the space. Pa. 11. L. 6
read: unspotted virginity. Pa 13. l. 13. read: was to be borne. Pa. 50. l. 22.
read Presentation.

TWENTY PROPOSITIons to prove the Catholic custom of saying the Rosary of
the Blessed Virgin, out of Franciscus Costerus. Cap. 11.
1 THAT the custom of saying the ROSARY of the most B. Virgin Mary, by
Christian Catholics of ancient times received, is not blasphemous,
Diabolical or Superstitious as the Sectaries do fondlye and falsely give out,
but holy, devout and religious; we do make plain demonstration in these breife
Arguments following.

In the Rosary there be 5 things the Name, the prayers, the Repetition of the
prayers, the number of the same, and the Beads, wherewith we pray. All which
are void of all superstition therefore the custom of saying the Rosary, is not
superstitious.

2 The name of the Rosary, 1. The name of the Rosary.
is a most sweet name: for as much as it signifies no other thing then a
certain spiritual garland made of certain mystical words, as it were Roses
taken out of the Gospel, which we offer unto the Virgin of all virgins the
mother of God. For garlandes are ordinarily used for to adorn the heads of
virgins.

And as for Prayers, 2. The prayers of the Rosary.
they are with out all controversy most holy. For of our Lords prayer Christ
him self is the author. And of the Angelical salutation the Angel Gabriell
and Saint Elizabeth. Which the Catholic Church, to the intent that it might
have a form of Prayer, also has concluded, with this short petition used by
ancient Fathers. Holy Mary mother of God, pray for us Sinners, now and in the
hour of our death. Amen.

4 The repetitio^ also of the Prayers, 3 The repetition of the same prayers.
because it is much available to the stirring up and inflaming of the affecte
of him that prays, it cannot but be most religious. we read that the three
children in the furnace, in lauding and praising almighty God, did in every
verse repeat a certain half verse And that most religious Orator king David,
in his psalms does often repeat now one word now more words sometime a wholl
verse and surely in the psalm 118 which has 176 verses and is daily read in
the Church, he repeteth in a manner the same thing some what varying the words
only.

5 Our Lord him self also in some places has not obscurely required this
repetition in him that prays. For the 11 of Saint Luke, when he taught his
Disciples the manner how to pray he annexed forthwith a Parable of him that
could by no means get three loaves of his friend but by often knocking at his
gates. And in the 18 chapter when he had taught that his Servants ought
always to pray, and not to cease he added an other parable of a widow, which
because with often asking she was tedious in the end made the Judge to
condescend to her request.

6 But thou will say perhapes that these parables do prove that perseverance
in prayer is speceally necessary. I do not doubt of that But they prove also
thus much, that by repetition it comes to pass that we persevere and do not
cease. For if when we must pray, our Lords prayer is to be said. Luc. 11.
When ye pray (says Christ) say Father hallowed be thy name, how ca^ we
persevere in such short form of praying, except that we often repeat our
Lords prayer.

7 Again thou will say that our Lord in that very institution Mat. 6 did
admonish that Those which did pray should not speak much where the greek
word is Battologin proper unto those, that do vainly repeat one thing often.
I answer, that Christ does there reprehe^d only the vain babbling of the
heathens, that did think God as well as men, would be delighted with
eloquence and affected speeches.

8 A notable place for to clear this kind of repetition from all
superstition, L. 4. divine. instit. c. 28
we find in Lucta^tius where the difference between superstitious persons and
those that are religious or devout alleged by Tully: L. 2. de not. deorum.
(For that says he, those pray to their Gods whole days together, these do
it with moderation) he disproueth in these words. What reason is there (says
he) that to pray for the health of his children once, should be the part of a
religious or devout man, and to do the same ten times should be an act of
superstition? for if it be very good to do it once, how much more to do it
oftener? If the first hour be good, therefore the wholle day also. If one host
or Sacrifice be well pleasing, more pleasing doubtless are more Sacrifices,
because duties and services being multiplied, do rather meritte then offend.
For those servants do not seem unto us worthy of hatred that have been daily
and howerly diligent in their service, but rather to be beloved. And again
says he This argument holds in the contrary. For if to pray and offer
Sacrifice wholle days be a fault: therefore to do it once, is also a fault.
And why should the name of a fault be attributed unto that, which is as honest
and just a thing as can be wished? For as Cicero says, Religious men have
their name a relegendo, that is because they often handle with diligence and as
it were read again those things which do appertain to the worship of God:
why therefore should they that do the same often in one day, loose the name of
religious men? for as much as by the daily use and custom it self, they do
more diligently read again those things wherewith God is honored. Thus far
Lactantius

9 By which speech it is evidently proved, that they are not only not
superstitious, that do often repeat the same kind of prayers in the Rosary, but
that it is better and more acceptable to God, rather often, then once to
repeat the same: And besides, that there can be nothing more just and honest,
then this kind of repetition. Finally, that those that pray in this manner of
the Rosary, are properly Religious: as who do diligently by daiely use and
custom read over and ruminate those things that appertain to the worship of
God.

10 There follows the number of the prayers of the Rosary free also from the
same touch of superstition. 4 The number of prayers. Esa. 6. Apoc. 4.
For the Angels in Esaias the Prophet and the Beasts in the Apocalips, which
never rested neither day nor night do thrice repeat one word to the honor of
God: Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Saboth. Psa. 118.
The Prophet David 7 times in the day pronounced praise unto Almighty God,
whose example the Church following, has distributed the diume office into 7
diurnall and nocturnal hours Christ praying in the garden repeated one and the
same speech, Luc. 22
thrice. Thrice also did S. Paul request our Lord that the Angel of Satan
might depart from him. 2. Cor. 12
And that S. Bartholemew did pray upon his knees an hundred times day and
night Abbias his own scollar witnesses. we read in Palladius and Socrates that
S. Macarius one of the most ancient An chorits recited every day an hundred
prayers unto almighty God: Paulus Aegiptius three hundred, and a certain
virgin seven hundred.

11 Now if number be not void of a godly and mystical signification, as in
deed it is not, neither in the number of the Rosary nor in the examples
alleged: Esa. 11 See Hie romans S. Amb. l. de spir. san. c. 20 Aug. l. 1 de ser.
domi. in most. c. 3. and l. 2 de doct. Chri. c. 7
(for the number of three signifies the B. Trinity, and the number of seven
betokens the gifts* of the holy ghost) then is there nothing in the number
but that which may easily be proved. For we do repeat our Lords prayer five
times to putt us in mind of the five wounds of Christ. And to every such
prayer we do adioine 10 Aue Mary's that we may remember the 10 commandments of
God And those Aue Mary's we do repeat 50 times in the whole Rosary, Greg. ho
19. in Eze. and l. 1 mor. c 28
that by the intercession of the B. Virgin through the merittes of our Lords
Passion we may attain full remission of sins which is signified in holy
Scripture by the number of fifty being a number of Iubiley as appears. Leuit.
25.

12 Now there remains the Beads wher-with we pray, 5. The Beads.
in which the simple may perhapps think that there is some kind of
superstition, but in deed there is none at all. For although Christ's faithful
people do use them now co^mendably, as a manifest badge or toke^ of the Roman
Religion: yet the use of them was for no other cause at the first brought into
the Church (as holy Fathers make mention) then to the intent that by sensible
touching, and view of the beads we should not easily be deceived in the
finishing of the number of prayers.

13 It is recorded by ancient Historiographers. Palladius, Sozomenus,
Cassiodorus, that the famous Anchorite Paulus of Libia the father of fine
hundred Moncks had wont to pay every day five hundred prayers as a tribute unto
almighty God: And to the intent that he might not be deceived in the number, he
cast a little stone into his bosom at the end of every prayer: Also that Saint
Clare a most holy woman, did repeat certain Pater nosters unto our Lord and
kept account of them by a heap of little stones, her acts recorded do
testify. In su^me of what a^tiquity the use of beads is, the ancient stones of
Sepulchers do well declare unto us.

14 Therefore to no other end, were beads (as it seems) used at the first then
as Places and Images were by Orators of old, for to keep the remembrance of
words and matter. Or as counters by Merchants for to count great sums of money
or as by the Catholic Church the Crosses, and Images of Christ, and his
Saints which serve to this end for to preserve the memory of the life of
Christ and his Saints.

15 And that they have been reduced afterward to a certain number so to put
folks in mind; and that the Popes benediction is annexed with most ample
Indulgences, and that sometime they are set out with medalls or Crosses of
silver, brass, or wood: these things have not as some do cauell, increased
superstition, but Religion,

16 For as Iosue the Captain of the holy host, Ios. 4
at what time the children of Israel passed over Iordane dry footed, commanded
that twelve great stones should be devoutly and religiously carried out of the
chanel of the River into the Tents to this end, that if any should ask of the
posterity what mean these stones? the perpetual tumemory of there wonderful
passage might be recorded: So have our ancestors devoutly and religiously
annexed five beads in every Rosary that are greater then the rest, that the
Heretics laughing thereat and asking what mean these five beads? what
means the wholle Rosary? Answer may be made: that they are significatio^s of
the five wounds which Christ suffered for them and us. And that the Rosary is a
certain sum or abridgme^t of the new Testament and Christian doctrine.

17 For they that have known the manifold use of the Rosary are not ignorant,
that the number of beads therein contained do serve to renew the memory of all
the mysteries of the life of Christ and of the blessed Virgin, and of the
principal points of the Catholic religion, as of the B. Trinity, the
Incarnation and Passion of Christ, the worship of God and his Saints, the ten
Commandementes, Justification and life everlasting. Which brief sum or
abridgme^t is doubtless so much the more profitable amongst the common people:
by how much farther the use thereof is extended then the use of books. For it
may be read even of the unlearned, of the blind, of those that travail on
horse back or in wagons or such like: finally in most dark and obscure places.

18 And the benediction of the POPE does nothing else but with solemn words
consecrate the beads, The benedictio^ of the Pope.
otherwise profane of them selves, to the devout and wholesome use of the
faithful, as by ancient custom of the Church, Water, Salt, Chalices,
Candles, Herbs, and the Churches them selves are by the benediction of a
Priest consecrated to an holy use. For sanctified (says the Apostle) is every
creature by the word of god and prayer. 1. Tim. 4 The Indulgences anexed.


19 And that the Indulgences annexed to the benediction, are very profitable
there is no doubt. for by these the faithful people being encouraged do in
greater number, and with greater zeal and feruencie pray unto Almighty God,
for most weighty causes: For the increase of the Catho lick Church, for the
concord of Christian Princes, for the rooting out of heresies. For these are
the points that for the most part are mentioned in the form of all Indulgences.

20 And as for the Images of gold, silver, Crosses, and Me dalles.
or wood annexed unto the beads; they have neither any mystical signification
nor use: other then the very Images in Churches. that is, to put us in mind of
the acts of Christ and his Saints, that in, or before the^, we may reverence
and call upon that which by them is represented unto us.

A BREIFE EXPLIcation of our Lords Prayer. Cap. 12
THe Preface of this Prayer, Franciscus Costerus.
has few words, full of mysteries. Father, is a name of love, signifying
first of all, that he which goes about to pray, must not be the enemy, but
the friend, yea the child of Almighty God, having laid aside all will to sin
hereafter, and being sorrowful, and penitent for his sins past.

Secondly, that he must come to Almighty God, with great confidence, because
that of a Father all things are to be expected.

Our. thou do not say mine, but our. which is a name common to all. for God
is the Father of all, as well one as an other respecting all indifferently, as
well poor as rich: Therefore with this Prayer must co^cur first charity
toward neighbors, whereby thou may love all the children of God and wish
well unto them. then Humility: that thou preferrest not thy self, before any
other.

which art in heaven. Here first is signified, that unto this prayer must be
brought a mind lift up to heavenly things, and excluding earthly cogitations.
Secondly, a great reverence of the wholle man as well external as internal,
because he is an heavenly not an earthly Father. Thirdly, that nothing is to be
demanded of an heavenly Father, but heavenly things.

Here after do follow the 7 petitions whereof the 4 first, do pray for good
things to be granted, the 3 later for euels to be removed.

Hallowed be thy name. that is to say: I give thee thanks for thy benefits and
I desire, that thy name, goodness and Majesty may be well known unto all men,
praised of all men, and published in all places, and especially I beseech thee
that I in all my actions and words may seek thy glory, and refer all that I
have to thy honor, and the profit of my neighbors.

2 Thy Kingdom come. That is, I wish that thou O Lord, may reign all the
world over, and that all dominion of the Deuell being abandoned, thou may
possess all the Kingdoms of the world: and especially that sin may not
reign in my mortal body; but that thou may rule and govern all my powers
and forces, and direct and bring me to the kingdom of heaven.

3 Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. that is: Grant I beseech thee
grace unto thy people, that they may obey thy commandments: Furthermore in
every of our acttio^s do thou make known unto us thy will. Finally my self, O
Lord, I do resign wholly to thy will, so that thy name may be praised, and
sanctified by me, and thou having excluded the kingdom of sin, may only
and wholly reign in me: thou may do with me, and dispose of me, as it shall
stand best with thy most holy will and pleasure.

4 Give us this day our daiely bread. that is, nourish and feed my soul, and
my body with convenient food: my soul with thy word: that I may always have a
taste and feeling thereof, when it is by preaching, or prayer, or by any other
means proposed unto me. Moreover with thy most sacred body also: unto the
often and deuoutreceauing whereof, I do desire to be moved, and stirred up and
my body, with daily food and sustinance, and with things not superfluous, but
necessary, not wrongfully gotten, but with dew labor justice and equity.

Here follows the three euels which we desire to be removed.

5 And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
that is, the euells past: to wit, the sines whereby we have offended thee, by
the Passion of thy Son do thou gratis and freely forgive: the venial and
quotidian sins: by sorrow and the virtue of this Prayer, instituted by thy
self: and the more grievous or mortal sins, by the Sacrament of penance: to
which Sacrament that we may come devoutly, grant I beseech thee convenient
time, grace, and devotion. And although I may seem to forgive my neighbors
all offenses from the very bottom of my heart: yet do thou also afford me thy
special help, and assistance, that I may never bear in mind any offense
whatsoever.

6 And lead us not into te^tation. that is, drive away from us future euels,
not suffering us at any time to consent unto sin, nor to give occasion, that
we be forsaken by thee: And if by our default we chance at any time to fall,
that our hearts be not hardened, but that they may presently rise from sin and
be converted.

7 But deliver us from euel. Amen Turn away O Lord present euells from us,
famine, war, pestilence, and other corporal calamities, as also
prosperities, that are not behoofefull for the health of the soul. Also all
spiritual euells, unto which our co^cupisce^ce, which always makes war
against the spirit, is inclined: that from it, if not wholly yet in part we
may be exempted.

AN EXPOSITION of the Angelical Salutation. Cap. 13.
NEXT after our Lords prayer the Angels Salutation is usually said,
Francisous Costerus.
for two causes: First certes that we may know that not by our own meritt,
are the petitions aforesaid either to be obtained, or expected, but by Christ
Jesus incarnate: who by this Salutatio^ made by the voice of an Angel, invited
the virgin his mother to give her consent to his incarnation. And secondly that
we may learn that we have in heaven, a Patroness and advocate of our
business unto the eternal King, unto whom we committ the care of our
requests, and supplications put up unto Almighty God, that by her petitions, we
may obtain and have our cause solicited for us.

Hail. that is, be thou ioifull, happy and secure. The B. Virgin being
saluted, will for her meek and benign charity, return Salutation back
again.

Mary. her proper name, which signifies Lady, and Starr of the Sea.

Full of grace. that is, adorned with the grace of God, and Justice, and
replenished with all manner of vertewes in her soul, and in all the powers
thereof.

Our Lord is with thee. thy thoughts words, and works, are pleasing unto God.
there is nothing in thee which may displese him. and therefore was God never
absent from thee, and thou always art united unto God in heaven.

Blessed art thou a mougst all women, that is, thou above and beyond all other
women art blessed first because thou art a mother and a Virgin: Then, because
the mother of God: thirdly, because advanced to the highest dignity, that
could be given unto the women kind: that is to say: to be Queen of heaven,
and earth, to be the next unto Almighty God, and above all creatures. There is
one only man that excels the, Christ King of the world both God and man.
For two chief and principal offices and dignities there were to be bestowed: one
unto a man, to be King of the world: an other unto a woeman to be the Queen
of the world: that, Christ has: this, thou have granted unto thee.

And Blessed is the fruit of thy womb Jesus. that is: thy Son is true and
perfect man: the same is also the Son of God, and God above all things
blessed for evermore, unto whom we owe praise thanksgiving and benedictio^ for
infinite causes: And especially for this that he has provided us thee his
mother, as Lady Patroness and Advocate.

Holy Mary mother of God pray for us sinners, now and in the hour of our
death. Amen. worthily may thou ask: because as our Lady and maistresse thou
have care of us: and it is not hard for thee to obtain: because he is thy
son whom thou do ask. And to thee we make our prayer, that by thee we
may obtain all good things, by whom we have received the Auctor of all
goodness.

DIVERSE OTHER devotions necessary or convenient for every Christian to use.
Cap. 14.
The manner of examining a man's conscience to be used every night least God
perhaps calling us out of this life, do find us unprepared
1 THE first is to give thanks to our Lord God, for the fits which he has
bestowed upon us, both generally, and especially of that day.

2 The second, to ask grace for to know our sins and to avoid them.

3 The third to take account of our soul orderly, by every hour since we
rose, first of our thoughts, then of our words, with the same order, and also
of our deeds.

4 The fourth, to demand pardon of our sins.

5 The fifth to purpose amendment with Gods grace. and so to say a Pater
noster. Aue Credo Confiteor. Salve Regina and a Pater noster also to our
guardian Angel: and especial Patrons with other prayers, according to every
ones devotion.

The Himne of our Lady called (Salve Regina) which for the devout, and
general use thereof in the wholle Church is worthily to be learned even of the
simpler sort.
Salve Regina, Matter miserecordiae: Vita, dulcedo, and spes nostra salve. Ad te
clamamus, exules filii Euae. Ad te suspiramus gementes, and flentes in hac
lacrimarum valle. Eia ergo aduocata nostra, illos tuos miserecordes oculos ad
nos convert; Et Iesum benedictum, fructum ventris tui, nobis post hoe exilium
ostende. O clemens, o pia, o dulcis virgo Maria.

Verse. Ora pro nobis sancta Dei genetrix.

Res. Vt digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi.

CONFITEOR Deo omnipotenti, Beatae Mariae semper Virgini, beato Michaeli
Archangelo, beato Ioanni Baptistae, Sanctis Apostolis Petro and Paulo, omnibus
Sanctis, and tibi Pater: quia peccaui nimis cogitatione, verbo, and opere, mea
culpa, mea culpa, mea maxima culpa. Ideo precor beatam Mariam semper Virgine^,
beatum Michaelem Archangelu^, beatum Ioannem Baptistam, Sanctos Apostolos
Petrum and Paulum, omnes Sanctos, and te Pater, orare pro me ad Dominum Deum
nostrum.

The same in English.
I Confess unto almighty God to Blessed Mary, always a virgin, to Blessed
Michaiell Archangell, to Blessed Ihon Baptist, to the holy Apostles Peter and
paul and to all the Saints This is to be said only at Confession, and Mass.
(And to you my ghostly Father) that I have grievously sinned in thought word,
and deed. my fault, my fault my most great fault. Here you must leave until
you have don your Confession. as above
Therefore I pray blessed Mary always a virgin, blessed Michaiel Archangell,
blessed JOHN Baptist the holy Apostles Peter and Paul and all the Saints, (And
you my ghostly Father) to pray for me unto out Lord God.

The manner of commending our selves to God in the morning.
1 FIrst making the sign of the Cross: to give thanks unto God for all his
benefittes, and particulerly that he has preserved us that night.

2 Secondly. To offer him our body and soul.

3 Thirdly. To demand of his divine majesty, that whatsoever we do that day
following may be to his honor and glory.

4 Fourthly: to make a steadfast purpose to avoid that day all affection or
occasion of that sin which we are most inclined unto.

5 Fifthly: to say our devotions, as before, adioining some devout exercise or
meditation if our state and leisure will permit.

The manner of preparing our selves unto Confession.
1 FIrst: to examine diligently our conscience as above, from the last
Confession which we made. remembering the kinds and number of every sin, as
much as we are able.

2 Secondly: to have an express actual and deep sorrow for all which is past.

3 Thirdly: to make an express and resolute purpose of amendment, and of
avoiding at the least all mortal sins.

4 Fourthly: to confess all our sins wholly and sincerely, hiding nothing
which is with in.

5 Fifthly: to fulfill the penance inioined so soon as we conveniently may,
if the ghostly Father have not appointed a certain time for the fulfilling
thereof.

The convenient disposition for receiving.
1 FIrst, to have made a sufficient Confession: and to go to the blessed
Sacrament, without any conscience of mortal sin not confessed.

2 Secondly: to go with humble preparation, not only of devout prayers the same
day, but of many other devotions and preparations the days before.

3 Thirdly: to come fasting at the least from the midnight before: and chaste
even from lawful acts.

4 Fourthly: having with great attention and devotion once received: with
devout meditations and prayers to accompany so great a gheste, at the least for
the space of a quarter of an hour before, any other never so necessary
business, and after with convenient leisure to spend the day in deuotio^s
avoiding all manner of vanities and worldly behavior.

5 Fifthly, to use the convenient composition of body as follows.

The composition of body in receiving.
1 Let the hands be held before the breast, not lifted so high that they may
hinder the Priest.

2 Let the head be conuenie^tly lifted up, and inclined unto neither side, that
without difficulty the mouth may be reached.

3 Let the eyes be shutt or bent downward: for it is unseemly at that time,
either to look upon the Priest, or to turn the eyes other where.

4 Let the mouth be altogether quiett, without any reading or moving of
lips, reasonably open, and not gaping.

5 Let the tongue touch the side of the lip (not to much put forth) that it
may receive the host, and bring it into the mouth and that being reverently
held so long that it be moistened, it may be let down into the body. For it is
not to be chewed with the teeth, nor to be brought to the roof of the mouth,
but to be swallowed (if it may be) before the ablution.

6 Let the wholle body be erected and quiet without any motion. Sighines,
blowings, grownings, knocking of the breast, exclamatio^s, vocal prayers, and
other like things, which often times bring danger either of the fall of the
host, or of the touching of the teeth, or lips in the time of receiving are
to be omitted.

7 After the receiving of the holy host, let the head not indecently be cast
down, but remain erected with the hands joined before the breast until the
ablution, which every one ought to take.

8 Finally for the space of a quarter of an hour after receiving let spitting
be avoided. which if it can not be: at the least it is decent to spitte where
it may not be trodden on.

AN ADDITION OF Diverse Indulgences granted to the Society of the Rosary
Since the time of Pius. V. whose Indulgences were last of all rehearsed in the
first editio^ of this book: there have been by Greg. 13. and Sixtus. V.
diverse other Indulgences granted to this devout Confraternitie, which are
hereafter set down for every ones comfort, out of the book of the ROSARY
printed at Venice Anno. 1587.
Gregory the 13. has granted to every one of this Confraternitie, which being
contrite and confessed, and having received shall visit every first Sunday in
the month, and every festiuitie of our B. Lady the Altar of the Rosary in the
Church of S. Dominicke at Cremona, there praying for the concord and union of
Christian Princes, extirpation of heresies, and exaltation of our holy mother
the Church: a plenary indulgence.

Minerua at ROME, on the first Sunday of October, praying for the intentions
aforesaid: a plenary indulgence.

Pauia, for every day he shalll do the same praying as above: 100 days. The
like to those which are present at the ordinary Processions there.

The like, to such as accompany the Banner of the holy Rosary when the Brethren
are carried to burying; or are present at the anniuersaries for the Brethren
deceassed: or shall visit the sick Brethren, exhorting them to the receiving
of the holy Sacraments of the Church.

Also a plenary to all Christians that shall visit the aforesaid altar
praying as above, on the third Sunday of April and the first Son day of
October.

aforesaid Churches: so that at home before some devout image he say the
Rosary or Corone. or.7. Psalms.



Also he co^municateth all the Indulgences already granted to any special
places of this Co^fraternity, or hereafter to be granted, to all other places
whatsoever, where the same Co^fraternity shall be. Which is to be noted. for
this is the cause why here before were set down some indulgence, of special
places.

Sixtus. 5. Confirms and renueth all that was granted by his Predecessors.
and moreover he grants to such Brethren as are in journey or on the sea, and
shall say the wholle Rosary: to those also which are sickely, or other wise
lawfully hindered so that they cannot visit the Churches or Chapells of the
Rosary on those days in which are celebrated the feasts of the mysteries of
the Rosary or be present at the Procession of every first sunday in the month:
if they say the third part of the Rosary: so that they have a firm purpose of
confessing and receiving when the Church has appointed: a plenary indulgence.
or any other indulgences granted or here after to be granted to those which
personallye are present at those days in the Churches or Chapels

Thus much of the Indulgences granted to this Co^fraternity and although many
undoubtedly may be left out: yet besides diverse plenary indulgences to be
gotten at special days as has been said by just account made many years a
go it has been found: that every Brother for saying the Rosary gains
indulge^ces of seue^ty seven years and 240. days. So that it is verily
thought that now it is very much incresed.

the virgin Mary with the infant Jesus

OUR LADIES LITANIES.

Which for their devotion are worthy to be said even of those which understand
them not: in the honor of the Blessed Virgin.

LITANIAE DE D. VIRGIN IN AEDE Loretana dici solitae.
In periculis and angustiis, in rebus dubiis Mariam cogita, Maria^ inuoca, non
recedat ab ore, non recedat a cord. Et vt impetres eius orationis suffragium,
non deseras conuersationis exemplum.
KYrie eleison.
Christ eleison.
Kyrie eleison.
Christ audi nos.
Christ exaudi nos.
Pater de caelis Deus, miserere nobis.
Filiredemptor mundi Deus, miserere nobis.
Spiritus sancte Deus, Miserere no bis.
Sancta Trinitas vnus Deus, Miserere nobis.
Sancta Maria, ora pro nobis.
Sancta Dei genitrix, ora pro no.
Sancta Virgo Virginum, ora.
Matter Christi, ora pro nobis.
Matter diuinae gratiae, ora pro no.
Matter purissima, ora pro nobis.
Matter castissima, ora pro nobis.
Matter inuiolata, ora pro nobis.
Matter intemerata, ora pro nobis.
Matter amabilis, ora pro nobis.
Matter admirabilis, ora pro nobis.
Matter Creatoris, ora pro nobis.
Matter Saluatoris, ora pro nobis
Virgo prudentissima, ora pro.
Virgo veneranda, ora pro nobis.
Virgo predicanda, ora pro nobis.
Virgo potens, ora pro nobis.
Virg clemens, ora pro nobis.
Virgo fidelis, ora pro nobis.
Speculum iustitiae, ora pro nobis.
Seeds sapientiae, ora pro nobis.
Causa nostrae letitiae, ora.
Vas spirituale, ora pro nobis
Vas honorabile, ora pro nobis.
Vas insigne deuotionis, ora.
Rosa mystica, ora pro nobis.
Turris Dauidica, ora pro nobis.
Turris eburnea, ora pro nobis.
Domus aurea, ora pro nobis,
Foederis arca, ora pro nobis.
Ianua caeli, ora pro nobis.
Stella Matutina, ora pro nobis.
Salus infirmorum, ora pro nobis.
Refugium peccatorum, ora.
Consolatrix afflictorum, ora.
Auxilium Christianorum, ora.
Regina Angelorum, ora.
Regina Patriarcharum, ora.
Regina Prophetarum, ora.
Regina Apostolorum, ora.
Regina Martyrum, ora.
Regina Confessorum, ora.
Regina virginum, ora.
Regina Sanctorum omniu^, ora.
Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mu^di, parce nobis Domine.
Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mu^di, exaudi nos Domine.
Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mu^di, miserere nobis.
Verse. Post partum Virgo inuiolata permansisti.


Respon. Dei genetrix intercede pro nobis.


Oration.
GRatia^ tuam quaesumus Domine mentibus nostris infunde, vt qui Angelo
nunciante Christi Filii tui incarnatione^ cognouimus, per passionem cius and
crucem, ad resurrectionis gloria^ perducamur. Per eunde^ Christu^ Dominum
nostrum. Amen.

OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui facis mirabilia magna solus, praetende super
famulos tuos, and super congregationes illis commissas spiritum gratiae saluta
ris, and vt in veritate tibi placeant, perpetuum rorem tuae benedictionis
infunde. Per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum. Amen.

Defend, quaesumus Domine, beata Maria semper Virgin intercedente, istam ab
omni aduersitate familiam, and toto tibi cord prostratam, ab hostiu^ propitius
tuere cleme^ter insidiis. Per Christu^ Dominum nostru. Amen.

ALIAE LITANIAE DEIPARAE VIRGInis Mariae.
KYrie eleison.
Christ eleison.
Kyrie eleison.
Christ audi nos.
Christ exaudi nos.
Pater de caelis Deus, miscrere nobis.
Fili redemptor mundi Deus, miserere nobis.
Spiritus sancte Deus, Miserere no bis.
Sancta Trinitas vnus Deus, Miserere nobis.
Sancta Maria, ora pro nobis
Sancta Dei genitrix, ora
Sancta virgo virginum, ora
Die Lunae and Iouis praeelectio. Monday and Thursday.

Sancta Maria ab aeterno ordinata ora pro nobis
Inter omnes praeelecta ora
Patribus caelitus promissa ora
Mysticis praefigurata miraculis
Oraculis praenuciata propheticis ora pro nobis
Desideriu^ colliu^ eternoru^ ora
Conceptio.
Sancta Maria sine peccato concepta, ora.
Serpentis caput conterens ora.
Lucerna in extincta ora.
Speculum sine macula, ora.
Lilium inter spinas ora.
Terra sacerdotalis immunis, ora.
Natiuitas.
Sancta Maria regali progeny exorta ora pro nobis.
Virga de radice Iesse, ora.
Virga Moysis, ora pro nobis.
Stella Jacob, ora pro nobis.
Aurora consurgens, ora.
Praesentatio in templo, and virtutes.
Sancta Maria in Templo praesentata, ora pro nobis.
Vniuersas filias supergressa, ora.
Scala Jacob, ora pro nobis.
Mulier fortis, ora pro nobis.
Singular virginitatis exemplar, ora pro nobis.
Nardus odorifera, ora.
Fide conspicua, ora pro nobis.
Candelabrum aureum, ora.
Altar thymiamatis, ora.
Balzamum aromatizans, ora.
Virgula fumi ex vniuersis aromatibus, ora pro nobis.
Desponsatio, Annunciatio, and Visitatio.
Sancta Maria iusto Joseph despo^sata, ora pro nobis.
Mons Domini in vertice montium praeparatus, ora.
Ab Angelo humiliter salutata, ora pro nobis.
Gratia plena, ora pro nobis.
Inter mulieres benedicta, ora.
Sponsa Dei, ora pro nobis.
Sancto spiritu obumbrata ora.
Ancilla Trinitatis humillima, ora
Mulier circumdans virum, ora.
Paradidisus voluptatis, ora.
Ciuitas Dei, ora pro nobis.
Domus sapientiae, ora.
Causa nostrae laetitiae, ora.
Solium gloriae Dei, ora.
Thronus Salomonis, ora.
Templum Domini, ora.
Sacrarium Spiritus sancti, ora.
Sanctuarium Dei, ora.
Tabernaculum Dei cum hominibus, ora pro nobis.
Tabernaculum tui creatoris, ora.
Tabernaculum foederis, ora.
Arca testimonii, ora.
Vas aureum caeleste manna continens, ora pro nobis.
Quae Elizabeth cognata^ visitasti, ora pro nobis.
Die Martis and veneris partus
Terra germinans saluatore^, Tuesday and Friday.
ora.
Lignum vitae, ora pro nobis.
Virga florens Aaron, ora.
Nauis institoris de long portans panem, ora pro nobis.
Mensa panis propositionis, ora.
Botrus Cypri, ora pro nobis.
Fons lucis, ora pro nobis.
Puteus aquarum viuentium. ora.
Virginitas ante partum in partu and post partum
Sancta Maria virgo perpetua, ora.
Rubus ardens incombustus, ora.
Maria vellus Gedeonis ora
Mons de quo sine manibus scissus est lapis ora pro nobis.
Porta Orientalis clausa ora
Hortus conclusus ora pro nobis
Fons signatus ora pro nobis
Conuersatio cum Filio.
Sancta Maria a Pastoribus and Magis inuenta ora pro nobis
Legi purificationis sponte subiecta, ora pro nobis.
Nubes Dominileuis, ora.
Egyptum cum Filio ingressa, ora.
Ex Egypto reuersa, ora.
Cum Filio dulciter co^uersata, ora
Quae Filium triduo quaesisti ora
Quae Filium in templo inuenisti.
Deficiente in nuptiis vino Filium deprecata ora
Quae stabas iuxta cruce^ Filii ora
Virgini Ioanni comme^data ora
Doloris gladio transfixa ora
Filii resurrectione exhilerata ora
In die Pentecostes Spiritu sancto repleta ora pro nobis
Assumptio and Coronatio.
Sa^cta Maria spiritualibus deliciis affluens ora pro nobis
Super choros Angeloru^ exaltata Matter honorificata ora
Mulier amicta Sole ora
sub cuius pedibus luna ora
Duodecem stellis coronata ora
Regina coelorum ora
Regina a dextris Filii astans ora
In vestitu deaurato varietate circundata ora pro nobis
Quam lauda^t astra matutina ora
Cuius pluchritudine Sol and luna mirantur ora pro nobis
Cuius vultum depreca^tur omnes diuites plebis ora
Die Mercurii and Sabathi Praeconia. Wednes day and Saturday.

Sancta Maria super omnes speciosa ora pro nobis
Pulchra vt luna ora pro nobis
Electa vt sol ora pro nobis
Gloria Jerusalem ora
Letitia Israel ora pro nobis
Honorificentia populi nostri ora
Orbis terraru^ Margarita pretiosa.
Cedrus in Libano exaltata ora
Cypressus in monte Sion ora
Palma in Cades ora
Plantatio rosae in Hierico ora
Terebinthus ramos honoris and gratiae extendens ora
Cunctis generationibus beatissima predicata ora
Intercessio
Sancta Maria aduocata nostra ora pro nobis
Propitiatorium altissimi, ora.
Propitiatoriu^ vniuersae terrae, ora.
Dei and hominum mediatrix, ora.
Per quam post Deum totus viuit orbis terrarum ora
Vena vita ora pro nobis
Aquae ductus caelestium gratiaru^, ora pro nobis
Fons perennis curationum ora
Fons vniuersam terram irrigans, ora pro nobis
In qua omnis spes vitae and virtutis, Cuius spiritus super mel dulcis ora pro
nobis
Fauus distillans ora pro nobis
Arca Noesalutaris ora
Ciuitas refugii ora pro nobis
Vrbs fortitudinis ora pro nobis
Castrorum acies ordinata ora
Cunctas haereses sola interimens, ora pro nobis
Clypeus omnibus in te sperantibus ora pro nobis
Stella matutina ora pro nobis
Porta coeli ora pro nobis
Matter viuentium ora pro nobis
Matter misericordiae ora
Matter timoris and agnitionis ora
Matter sanctae spei ora pro nobis
Matter pulchrae dilectionis ora
Sancta Maria Domina Angelorum ora pro nobis
Decus Patriarcharum ora
Vaticinium Prophetarum ora
Praeconium Apostolorum ora
Confortatrix Martyrum ora
Exemplar Confessorum ora
Lumen Virginum ora
Regina Sanctorum omnium ora
Salus infirmorum ora
Refugium peccatorum ora
Consolatrix afflictorum ora
Auxilium Christianorum ora
A cunctis periculis, Libera nos mediatrix nostra.
Ab omni peccato Libera nos
A subitanea and improuisa morte Libera nos mediatrix nostra.
Ab insidiis Diaboli Libera nos
Ab ira and odio and omni mala voluntate Libera nos
A spiritu fornicationis Libera
A morte perpetua Libera
Peraeternam praelectione^ tuam, Libera nos mediatrix nostra.
Per immaculatam conceptionem tuam Libera nos
Per sanctam natiuitatem tua^ Libera nos mediatrix nostra.
Per venerabilem presentationem tuam Libera nos
Per mellifluum nomen tuum Libera nos mediatrix nostra.
Per caelestem in terris conuersationem tua^ Libera nos
Per purissimam desponsationem tuam Libera nos
Per admirabilem annunciatione^ tuam Libera nos
Per superuenientis in te Spiritus sancti obumbratione^ Libera
Per humilem visitationem tuam Libera nos.
Per virgineu^ partu^ tuum Libera
Per intemeratam virginatem tua^ Libera nos
Per mundissimam purificationem tuam Libera nos
Per gladium doloris qui pertransiit anima^ tuam, Libera nos
Per gaudia resurrectionis Filii tui, Libera nos
Per superfluentem in die Pentecostes gratiae plenitudine^, Libera nos
Per gloriosam assumptione^ tuam, Libera nos
Per admirabilem coronationem tuam Libera nos
Per viscera misericordiae tuae. Li.
Peccatores, Te rogamus audi nos.
Vt veram poenitentiam nobis im-impetrare digneris Te roga
Vt Ecclesiae sanctae cunctoque populo Christiano pacem and vni tatem impetrare
digneris, Te rogamus audi nos.
Vt exercitum Catholicum conseruare digneris Te roga
Vt societates tibi peculiari obsequio deuotas, conseruare and augere digneris,
Te roga
Vt nosmetipsos in tuo sancto seruitio, confortare and conseruare digneris Te
rogamus
Vt mentis and corporis integram puritate^ nobis impetrare digneris Te rogamus
Vt fidei, spei, and charitatis augmentum nobis impetrare dig neris Te rogamus
Vt verae humilitatis omniumque virtutum presidia nobis impetrare digneris Te
roga
Vt nos ab host protegere, and hora mortis suscipere digneris, Te rogamus audi
nos
Vt omnibus fidelibus defunctis requiem aeternam impetrare digneris Te rogamus
Matter Dei Te rogamus
Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mu^di, parce nobis Domine.
Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mu^di, exaudi nos Domine.
Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mu^di, miserere nobis.
Ver. Ora pro nobis sancta Dei genitrix.
Resp. Vt digni efficiamur promisionibus Christi,
Oration.
PIetate tua quaesumus Domine nostroru^ solue vincula peccatorum, and
intercedente beata Maria, cum omnibus Sa^ctis tuis, nos famulos tuos,
benefactores atque loca nostra in omni sanctitate custodi, omnesque
consanguinitate, affinitate atque familiaritate nobis coniunctos, a vitiis
purga, virtutibus illustra, pacem and salute^ nobis tribue, hosts visibiles
and inuisibiles remove, carnalia desideria repelle, aerem salubre^ and
fertilitatem indulge, amicis and inimicis nostris charitatem largire, atque
vrbem N. cum omnibus in ea habitantibus, ab omni peste, infideliumque feritate
and potentia illaesam conserua, and omnibus fidelibus viuis and defunctis, in
terra viuentium vitam and requiem aeternam concede; and Pontificem nostru^ N.
omnes Prelatos and cunctu^ populum Christianum, ab omni abuersitate custodi,
and benedictio tua sit super nos semper. Per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen

AN EPISTLE CONSOLATORY: OF AN ANCIENT POPE.

To the Catholics of ALBANIA sore aggreeued with the Persecution of the
Heretics of those days.

Newly translated into English.

IHS



To OUR Well-beloved Children the Catholics of Albania, which now are in the
Kingdom of Albania.
CLEMENS PAPA.
WELBELOVED children, we send you greeting, and our Apostolical Benediction:
Yet be in very deed a long distance of land and sea disioined from us: O
Children of Albania: But in the unity of faith and in the bond of the charity
of Christ, ye be so conioined with us, and so near unto us; that we do no
less then behold and always look upon you, as though you were here present
with us, and do continually in our minds think upon you, yea we be so moved
with every event of your affairs, that with you and in you we do rejoice, and
to gither also with you, we bear your crosses. for in our heart we hold you,
and in the Bowelles of Jesus Christ we be singularly reioiced and our very
spirit does take comfort in our Lord, when as we do hear of your consta^cy
in the Catholic faith, of your patience, of the fortitude of your christian
courage, and of your gloriouse confession of the name of Christ. For you being
by the singular goodness of God, strengthened with the grace and virtue of the
holy Ghost have with most especial diligence and as it were a precious
treasure (as it is indeed) safely and inuiolably preserved, that sacred
Depositum of the Catholic faith, which your Ancestors have from this holy
Roman Church the mother and mistres of all the faithful, received, and as a
matter of inheritance unto you delivered, and have not suffered your selves by
any inco^ueniences or miseries, nor yet by any of Satan his deceiptes or
intisementes, and vain hope of worldly things, to be removed aside from that
rock of faith, whereupon Christ our Lord has found his Church, which is one,
Catholic, Apostolic, Roman, out of which there neither is nor can be any
salvation, whose union you do as members of the body of Christ conioyne unto
the head with great praise and fruit of spiritual life retain and hold in
continuance. These be the things that do fill our heart with joy and gladness:
This is that which does edify the Church of GOD, and which does cause all
Catholics to turn and fix their eyes upon you: who beholding your zeal and
good works, do glorify the Father of mercies who is in Heaven. But like as in
these things, which ye do so godly religiously and constantly perform for
the glory of God and behoof of your own souls: we do together with you and
with all good men rejoice and co^gratulate, so do we on the contrary part
suffer together with you in your greefes, and in the tribulations which have
come too too much upon you. For it has been brought unto our understanding,
that you are for the confession of the Catholic faith most grievously vexed
at the hands of your own Brethren, who have forsake the God of their
forefa-fathers, and have betaken themselves to the following of strange Godds,
that is the profane novelties of errors and heresies: and not considering
their own miserable estate do not only lie them selves in darkness, and in the
shadow of death, but do also most cruelly assault and persecute such as be the
children of light, their own brethren, who do firmly retain the ancient
religion, which they have so many ages since bin taught by the holy ROMAN
Church; And do further, upon the instigatio^ and exagitation of a certain
fury never heard of be fore, use cruelty toward their own flesh, and
butcher and tear asonder their own bowels. We have compassion of your (dear
children) and with all affection of charity we do sorrow together with you for
your calamities. But we: also rejoice with you and for you, in that ye be now
the disciples of Christ, with him fastened upon the Cross, neither do we
doubt, but that he who is present with his servants in tribulation, and
descends with them into the ugly dongeons, and forsakes them not in their
bonds and fetters; even he, so rich and abundant in mercy does visit you,
does recreate you, does merueilously comfort you, that even as the passions of
Christ do abound in you: so also by Christ your co^fortes may abound. And we
also, who though without our own desert, and unworthy, do hold the place of
Christ our Lord upon earth, when as we did hear that you were in this manner
afflicted, resolved by our letters to comfort you, as our children singulerlye
well beloved, of whose welfare and glory in our Lord we be especially careful.
Be ye therefore of good courage, and as you have hitherto done, so stand ye in
our Lord my dearest: steadfast and strong in faith, and rooted and founded in
charity, and careful to preserve the unity of spirit in the bond of peace.
This peace of CHRIST which surpasses all understanding keep you (my children)
that ye may be one heart and one spirit Your concord, your union, your
conjunction of minds Satan tre^bleth at: That does he and his ministers seek
to overthrow. But all the driftes of enemies will fall to nothing, if ye
persist and remain all of one mind with all humility and meeknes, with
patience supporting one an other in charity. And God is faithful, who will
not permit you to be tempted above that which you are able: But will make
with temptation issue, that ye may be able to sustain. Let your hearts
therefore be comforted and be constant, and expect our Lord. For coming he will
come, and will not linger, and his reward is with him, and he will comfort his
servants, so that what ye have sown in tears, the same ye shall in joy and
exultattion reap again. Be ye not therefore wearied fainting in your hearts,
but laying away all weight and sin, that compasses you, by patience run to
the fight proposed unto you, looking on the author of faith and the consummator
Jesus: who will give you good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and
running over, in the day of eternity. He govern and keep you, and replenish
you with the grace of the holy Ghost, and crown you upon the accomplishme^t of
your lawful co^bate. Pray for us (dear children:) for many are the pastoral
cares, which by night and day do vex and trouble us. Do ye also pray for the
Catholic Church, that all contradictions and errors being destroyed, she may
serve him with secure liberty. And we with all affection of fatherly charity
do impart unto you our Apostolical Benediction.

Given at Rome at Saint Marks, under the fishers Ring, the 18. of September,
the Sixth year of our Popedom.
DILECTIS FILIIS CAtholicis Albanensibus qui in Albaniae regno sunt
Clemens Papa.
DILECTI filij, salute^ and Apostolicam benedictione^. Longo quidem terrarum
marisque internallo a nobis disiuncti estis, O filij, Albaniae: sed in vnitate
fidei, and in vinculo charitatis Christi, ita nobiscum co^iuncti estis, ita
propinqui; vt vos tanquam presents intueamur: and de vobis assidue cogitemus.
quin etiam quouis rerum vestraru^ euentu ita commouemur, vt vobiscum at que in
vobis gaudeamus, and vobiscum etiam patiamur. Habemus enim vos in cord nostro,
and in visceribus Jesus Christi. Gaudio autem singulari afficimur, and exult at
in Domino spiritus noster, quum audimus vestram in fide Catholica constantiam,
vestram patientiam, vestram Christiani pectoris fortitudinem, and gloriosam
confessionem nominis Christi. Vos enim singulari Deibenignitate Spiritus sancti
gratia and virtute roborati, sacrum illud fidei Catholicae depositu^, quod
Maiores vestri ab hac sancta Romana ECCLESIA omnium fidelium matre and magistra
acceperunt, and vobis haereditarium tradiderunt, summa diligentia, and veluti
pretiosum thesaurum (vt vere est) integrum and inuiolatum custodistis, neque
vllis inco^modis aut aeru^ nis, neque vllis Satanae dolis aut illecebris, and
vana verum terrenarum spe vos dimoueri passi estis, ab hac fidei petra, supra
qua^ Christus Dominus Ecclesiam suam fundauit; quae vna est, Catholica,
Apostolica, Romana; extra quam neque est, neque esse potest vlla salus; cuius
vnionem, vt membra corporis Christi suo capiti connexa, multa cu^ laud and
spiritalis vitae fructu retinetis et conseruatis. Haec sunt quae cor nostrum
laetitia complent, haec ecclesiam Dei edificant, and Catholicorum omnium oculos
in vos conuertunt, qui videntes zelum vestrum and opera vestra bona,
glorifica^t patre^ misericordiaru^ qui in coelis est. Sed que^admodu^ in his
quae propter Dei gloria^ and animaru^ vestrarum salutem, pie religiose and
constanter geritis; vobiscu^, and cum bonis omnibus congaudemus; ita vobiscu^
dolori vestro co^patimur, et tribulationibus quae inuenerunt vos nimis: Allatum
enim ad nos est, vos ob fidei Catholicae co^fessione^ grauissime vexari a
fratribus vestris, qui reliquerunt Deum patru^ suorum, and sequuti sunt Deos
alienos, prophanas errorum atque heresum nouitates: and miserabilem statum suu^
non agnoscentes, non solum iacent in tenebris, et vmbra mortis: sed filios
lucis, fratres suos, qui auitam religionem quam a Romana Ecclesia ante tot
secula sunt edocti, firmiter retinent, acerbissime oppugnant and persequuntur,
et inaudito quodam furore perciti atque agitati, in carne^ suam saeuiunt, et
viscera sua dilaniant atque discerpunt. Co^patimur filij et toto charitatis
affectu condolemus calamitatibus vestris. Sed gratulamur etiam vobis, quia nunc
Christi discipuli estis, cum eo cruci confixi: neque dubitamus quin ipse, qui
cum seruis suis est in tribulatione, et descendit cum illis in tetros carceres,
et in vinculis et compedibus non derelinquit eos: ipse, dives in misericordia
vos visitat, vos recreat, vos mirabiliter consolatur, vt sicut abundant
passiones Christi in vobis, ita and per Christum abundat consolatio vestra. Et
nos quoque, qui licet immeriti and indigni Christi Domini locum in terris
tenemus, cum vos adeo affligi audiremus; vos per literas nostras consolari
voluimus, vt filios nostros singulariter dilectos, de quorum salute and gloria
in Domino precipue soliciti sumus. Confortamini igitur, at que, vt hactenus
fecistis, sic state in Domino charissimi, firmi ac fortes in fide and in
charitate radicati and fundati, and soliciti seruare vnitate^ spiritus in
vinculo pacis: hanc Christi pacem, quae exuperat omnem sensum custodite, filij;
vt sitis cor vnum and anima vna. Vestram concordiam, vestram vnionem, vestram
animorum coniunctionem exhorret Satanas: hanc ille oppugnat, and ministri eius;
sed corruent omnes inimicorum machinationes, sivnanimes permanseritis, cum omni
humilitate and mansuetudine, cu^ patientia, supportantes inuicem in charitate.
Fidelis autem Deus qui non permittet vos tentari supra id quod potestis, sed
faciet cum tentatione prouentam vt possitis sustinere. Confortetur igitur cor
vestru^ and viriliter agite, and sustinete Dominum, quia veniens veniet et non
tardabit, and merces eius cum eo, and ipse consolabitur seruos suos vt quae in
lachrimis seminastis in exultatione and gaudio metatis. Itaque ne fatigemini,
animis vestris deficientes, sed deponentes omne pondus, and circumstans
peccatum, per patientiam currite ad propositum vobis certamen, aspicientes in
authorem fidei and consummatorem Iesum qui mensuram bonam, confertam,
coagitatam, and super effluentem dabit vobis in die aeternitatis. Ipse vos
regat, and custodiat, and gratia Spiritus sancti repleat, et legitime certantes
coronet. Orate autem pro nobis (filij) quia multae sunt pastorales curae
nostrae, quae nos dies noctesque angunt and solicitant. Orate and pro Ecclesia
sancta Catholica vt destructis aduersitatibus and erroribus vniuersis secura
illi seruiunt liberate; and nos Apostolicam benedictionem nostram toto
paternae charitatis affectu vobis impar timur.

Datum Romae apud sanctum Marcu^ sub annulo Piscatoris, die 18. Septe^.
Pontificatus nostri: Anno. 6.

