AN Admonishion to the Bishops of Winchester, London and others etc.

Ecclesia, v. Make no tariyng to turn unto the Lord and put not of from day
to day, for suddenly shall his wrath come, and in the time of vengeance he shall
destroy the. From Roane by Michaelwood, Anno. M.D.Liii. the first of October.

MAny great men and potentates of the world, when they have by their unlawful
and unrighteous attemtes, brought themselves into extreme miseries, have at
last much blamed their vnfortunable estate, for that they in due time lacked
coun^el to have withdrawn them from such enterprises. So it is said in the
common Proverb. That the rich and mighty have seldom good council, except
they get it of themselves. For riches and hye dignity causes them to be more
insolent, so that they can abide any thing better, then to be told of their
faults, and the reward of him that should franckely tell them the truth: may
sooner be a brokehead then otherwise. This prudent men perceiving, rather
wythdrawe them selves from them, the^ with wearying them selves in vain*
procure to them selves displeasure. And flatterers seeing a ready pray at their
hands, daily follow upon them, with vpholdyng their deeds and words good or
bad Al is excellently devised, prudentlye spoken, done like a good man. etc.
Thus with their own pride climbyng* and with flattery pricked forward, they
run headlo^g in their imaginatio^s, til they tomble down into the pyt of
destruction. And then they lay the blame from them selves to other. where indede
they would never hear other, but snch as served, yea rather deceived their
affections with flatteries. But against such headstro^g hastynes we are
admonished by the holy Ghost saying: Be not wise in thine own conceit. Fear
God, and depart from evil. This we wysh that al men would well consider in
their enterprises. First that there is a God, not a blind and deaf god, as the
godles Heithen painted Jupiter at Create, but an euerliuyng God that sees all
the ways of Adams children, that knows the oppress our and him that is
oppressed, that will call all things into judgment and to account and will
render to every one his just recompense upon his head. Him ought men to fear.
For whatsoever they attempt yet at last, that he determines must come to
pass, and his will in all things shall be accomplished. This I pray you to
consider now in dew time, least if you now forget it, it may hereafter chance
to you as it has done to other* that in their wealth little studied on these
matters. God has maruelously saved you from the hands of such as hated you,
and set you in hye dignity, more then ever you had in your life. And doutles
it is to do good* and not evil, to correct and amend things amiss, not to
destroy and break down things that are in good case and order. Your
procedinges begin strangelye, in that you at the first go about to deface the
holy word of God, to set aside Christ's institution, and to call all this realm
to blindness and error. For if you take away the light of Gods word from
the world: what ca^ men look for at your hands, but destruction and error?
David says: thy word (O Lord) is a candel for my feet* Psalm cxviii. John.
viii.
and a light for my steps. And Christ says: he that follows me, walks
not in darkness, but shall have the light of life. we know that you have in
times past nothing favored the Scriptures to be in English, but have ever
winsed and kycked against them, but our hope was that once you would amend,
considering how Gods goodness called you to repentance. You were wont to allege
you did nothing but as a common Cou^selour, yea you obtested by God, that when
men were burned for the truths sake, you nothing procured to it, but did all
that you might to the co^trari. we were glad to read this in your writi^gs, but
we beseech you let the same now appear in your deeds, so shall we the better
believe your writings. But if now you raise a new persecution for the words
sake, truly it shall be manifest to al me^, that ye were gilty of all the blod
that has been shed before time for the word of god. which blod (though it be
yet vnadueuged) yet it remains fresh and new in the sight of God, with Abels
blood crying unto God, ge. iii Ap. vi
and with the blood of the holy Martirs saying: How long tariest thou Lord
holy and true, to judge and to avenge our blood on them that dwell on the
earth? Doubt ye not but their cry is heard and not forgotten before God. For he
makes inquisition for their blood, Ps. ix.
and remembers them, and forgets not the complaint of the poor. i. Tim
iii. Ezech xx xiii
The office of a Bishop is not to be a Butcher, it is to preach Gods word, not
to put it down, to help such as be captives, not to cast into prison the
ryghteouse that are at liberty, to carry the poor lambs upon their shoulders,
not to seek al means possible to consume them with fire or halter. O miserable
lambs that shall have such Shepherdes, whose study is not to feed them, but
to keep them from the pasture of Gods word, and to poison them with dreams of
men's imaginations. O horrible judgment of God, that Christ and his Gospel
shall be called new learning and here sye. what can the Turcke do more then
rail against Christ and blaspheme his holy Testament? Yet must Christen men
be compelled to hear Antichrist, and to hold their peace, when the blood of the
new Testament is blasphemed. what is in your lattin Mass, to edify with the
church of England? i. Co. xiiii
S. Paul says: that al things read or done in the common congregation,
should be done in that tongue that the congregation understands, that the
unlearned may say Amen. And Boner has set up again in Paul's Salesburi latin
portace, whereof the lai men understands no word, and God knoeth no more do
the greater part of the portas patterers. we know that S, Paul had the spirit
of Christ, and what can we judge of Boner doing contrary to Saint Paul's
doctrine? If the most godly and perfect book of service (which even you your
self have both in preaching and writing commended) please not him, why does
he not set out his church service in English? But he knows well enough that
there is such monstruouse things in it, that if it were in English, English
boys would laughe it scorn. Such lies ar in the sai^tes legendes, such
manifest errors, that no coullour ca^ defend them Yet must these occupye the
place, and that in lattin to make simple and plain people believe, that there is
in the lattin tongue* some privy holy mystery Truth needs no corners or clokes
to hide it self, nor to be in a strange hid tongue, as errors ever seek the
^^^tes of darkness to be their shield and defense Every one that does evil (as
Christ says) hates the light, Iho iii
and comes not to the light, that his deeds should not be reproved, but he
that does the truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be known, for
they are done in god* Christ ordained the holy communion that christen men
should together eat the holy bread, and drink the holy cup in the
remembrance of his body broken, and his blood shed. And S. Paul delivered to
us the same that he received of the Lord, commaundynge us saying: as often as ye
shall eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, ye shall show the Lords
death until he come. I prai you, how is this observed in your private masses,
where your shaue^ prestes (for the more part) can as well build Poules steple,
as fulfill Poules commandment. you have not one word of scripture to maintain
this profanation of christ's institution. And it is an horrible and fearful
thing that ever man mortal should presume such great impiety against the
immortal and euerliui^g god. you rage sore against married priests which have
for them gods word. i. cori. vii.
but you forget the unchaste and detestable Sodomies, incestes, aduoutries,
fornications, murdring of infants, that has been found in the unmarried sort of
shave linges, which have no word of god but this: for such things sake,
comes the wrath of god upon the children of unbelief, Ephesians. v. i. cori. vi.
and. vii
and whore mongers and aduouterers shall not inherit the kingdom of Christ.
You bishops should lay no snares to dampne men's souls, but rather help them
out that be in such dampnable estate, and that which gods word leaves at
liberty, you ought not to bring into bondage. That you deprive the married
prestes of their offices and liuinges, it is very strange, and no word of god
have ye so to do. And we nothing doubt it, but though god at this present
exercises the patience of his servants, yet he will at last remember his
promise. For the rroubles sake of the oppressed, and because of the complaint
of the poor, I will up (says the Lord) I will help them, Psalm. xi.
and set them at rest. And in Esai the lord says: woe be to the thou robber,
shalt not thou be robbed also? es. xxxiii.
and thou that despisest other, shall not thou also be despised? The lord will
doutles hear the sorrowful wepings of the poor widows and fatherles children
which by this robbery are driven to beggerie. The lord hears the prayer of
the oppressed (says Sirach, eccl. xxxv
) He will not despise the prayer of the fatherles, nor the widdowe lamentably
complainyng to him. Does not god see the tears of the widow, and hear her
exclamation against such as cause her to weep? from her cheke they ascend into
heaven, and the lord that fauourablye hears her, will have no pleasure in
them. For gods honor therefore, and for fear of his judgment, call these things
to your mind, and somewhat mitigate these hasty and rash doings, which are
against god and his word. Eccl. xv. psalm. v.
For though the lord has called you to be a scourge to other, yet remember he
co^manudeth you to do nothing vnrighteouselye, for he is a god that wills
none vnrighteousenes: their may no ungodly person dwell with him, such as be
cruel, may not stand in his sight. He is enemy unto al wicked doers. he
destroieth the liars and abhorieth the blood thirstye and deceiteful. And as
you now are raised to scourge others: so if you vex the innocent, doutles the
lord will throw you down, and raise up them that shall scourge you again,
and fulfill Christ's word: Mat. vii. Luke vi.
with what measure ye meat to other, the same shall be measured to you again.
Remember we beseech you, that as glory grows, so envy against you grows,
not of good, but of evil men, who though they now like Echo rebound ever
with pleasant sound of your own voice, yet will they (if god a little
withdraw his hand from you) be the first that shall rejoice at your fall. God
will withdraw his hand from you, if you repugne against his word, if you seek
to deface his truth, to cast aside Christ's supper, to condemn marriage, to
set up again idolatry, superstition and error, to bring in again that
sodomitical fained chastetie, that drew infinite unto eternal dampnation. we
need not recite unto you examples what god has done with princes and
potentates, that have enterprised to resist his truth, or else to abuse it to
their own private lusts, seeing you have not only read, but seen before your
eyes. Only we pray god you may remember what was said to S. Paul. Saul
Saul why persecutest thou me? He said: Lord who art thou? The lord said: I
am Jesus whom thou persecutest, Act. ix.
it shall be hard for the to kick against the prick. It is the lord Jesus that
in his members suffers, it is his word that is hated and persecuted, it is
he that mercifullye calls you to repentance, and he is able inoughe to
repress all violence done against him, but as he came from heaven to save
sinners, so would he rather call Saul to repentance, then cast Nero into
destruction. But when al things shall declar you impenitent, and manifest
rebellour against gods word, then without doubt the lord will no more spare
you, the^ he has before time spared other. For gods sake therefore beware in
dew time and take example at others, least other here after take example at
you. acts. i.
Judas betraying the truth, purchased the blody feld, for he hong himself, and
all his guts burst forth. Pharao persecuting the people of god, exo. xiiii.
ii. Tim. iii
got gods vengeance and manifold plages upon Egypt, and he that thirsted
blood, was drowned in the red sea. Iamnes and Iambres his prophets were at
last compelled magre their hertes to acknowledge the finger of god. How well
sped Hieroboam for erecting his golden calves at Bethell and berseba? iii. re.
xiiii
Look for no better reward for erectiug your satisfactory sacrifice. But how
craftily do you cloine in this. you will command no man, but they shall say
you, gratify the queen. God grant the queen's grace plainly to se your
falshoode, we are afraid you will bring the wrath of god upon her and all this
realm of England, as the p^stes and prophets of Dan and bethel brought it upon
the kings of Israel and Judah. you tell the queen the people is desirous of
Masses, and that they never favored the scriptures, and you tell the people,
the quencs pleasure is that they receive again the mass and popery. Thus you
cause no small number of hearts to be withdrawn from that hearty love and
affection that they ought to bear to the queen's highness, and as mutch as in
you is sow the sede of discention, which the lord of heaven keep from among
us, and grant you to take wiser wares. The people doubtless was fully stayed in
conscience, and quieted in the right way of gods word, and would have continued
in the same, if you and others had not with your dampnable persuasions, crafty
surrelties, cruel ha^dlings. etc. gone about to pervert the^. And every man
may se, that some for hope of lucre and promotion, some for fear of
punishment and loss, are ready to return as dogs to their vomit, and swyne to
their former puddell. As for such as all this time have dissembled, and now
openly declare their cankred stomachs, as redye to turn with every wind:
as any weathercock. No marueil of their inco^stantie in religion, for their
ground is not the sure foundation of gods word, but the slipperie sand of
pleasing me^. Ye shall do doutles a goodly act to serve such men's affections,
and to rebel against gods truth. Dout not but at last ye shall have some
cardinals hat for your labor. iii. Regu. xvi. xvii. xviii. xxi. iiii. Re. ix
and. x.
Achab with his baall and ^emurius, got to himself three years without
taine, and where the dogs licked Nabothes blood, there was Achabs blod licked of
dogs also. And he that spoiled the poor of his vineyarde, by gods just
judgment lost his kingdom with the destruction of all his children. iiii.
Regu xxi.
Think not but god can raise a Hiehue when his pleasure is, and will do it
when Achab least looks for it. Though poor Esaias must be counted an
heriticke, yet god will avenge his blod, and the blood of al his servants the
prophets that Manasses has shed.

We would ye would read Helias letter sent to Ioram, ii. Pa. xxi
and consider that ye walking in Iorams ways, may (except ye repent) have
Iorams reward. ii. Para. xxiii.
Mathan the high bishop of Baall for his great pains taken in Baals service,
was at last offered upon Baals alter. But per chance ye will right swetely
deride this letter, ii. pa. xxv
and say as Amasias said to the Prophet rebuking him for his Idolatry, and
saying: whi worshippest thou the Gods that delivered not their people out of
thy hand? he answered: Art thou one of the kings council? Hold thy peace
that Isse the not. So you will say: Hold thy peace thou heretic, or come fourth
to dispute thy matters. If ye will dispute by the holy Scriptures, by the
Doctors of the primative church, it is alredi profred unto you, but ye know ye
can have none advantage that wai, for your own consience accuses you. that ye
are not able to stand, either with Scriptures or ancient Doctors to prevail
against the truth. As little honor will come thereof to you in disputyng: as
is already won in writynge, therefore your old arguments (which your
preachers now at Poules cross, most earnestly beat into the peoples heads)
are suresby. fire and faggot dispatcheth at once, but happy were ye, that such
arguments were not made against you, well then, mark what the Prophet
answered Amasias at his departing, and know certainly it will come to pass. The
hand of the Lord is not shortened. Thongh our iniquities at this present have
justly provoked his anger over us, he will at last pity us for his son
Christ our lords sake. And we nothing doubt, but as he his al mighty and can
deliver: so he his al full of goodness and will save all that trust in his mercy
and call upon him day and night. Luke xviii
And thanks to God the people has other eyes, then they have had in times
past. The holy word of god has not been all so baren, as you would it had
been. Men have some knowledge beetwene a latin satisfactori popishmasse and
Christ's Communion truly ministered according to the ghospel. Though you bost
chastity of pristes, men know a difference between a single life, and a chaste
life. It is not.Vii. years since some of your unmarried pristes, yea as it said
one of your great doctors, were complained on for their hot chastity that
bournt a woman. Men remember yet since some pristes were indicted for getting
women with child, and murdering the children when they were borne. Oh horrible
chastity to be suffered among Christians* God doubtless will viset these
things in due time, as he visited the sins of the wicked before time. acts.
xii. ^i. Mac. ix
Mark how He rod was eaten with worms Nero slew himself. Iulianus confessed
Christ in death against his will. Antiochus stanke above the earth. But to come
nerer our days. More and Fisher with friar Forest and other, desperately died
in the contempt of the gospel. Dudleia disceitful tirant deceived with hope of
pardon, blasphemed the gospel at the hour of death, of whom ye make a pillar to
stay up your Church. Mar. iii.
Beware of the si^ne against the holy ghost, which shall not be forgeuen in this
world, not in the world to come. Those that despise Moses, die without
redemption, under two or.iii. witnesses: but how sorer punnishment remains
Hebr c. x.
for the^, that tread under foot the blood of the new testament, and rail
upon the spirit of grace. Once again we beseech you, for Jesus Christ's sake,
and for the hope of the life to come, and for the judgment that we all must
come before: remember these things, and think that he that wrote this for your
admonishion looks for no preferment at your hand but writes it, if perchance
ye be not altogether a damnable desperate, ye may convert to God, reverence his
holy word give place to his truth, and be saved from the wrath of god that is
to come. God grant us al mercy and grace to turn to him, that we may be able
to stand before the lord at his coming, when he shall arise to judge the
earth. Read the second Psalm, and se what shall happen to the rebels against
the Lord and Christ his son. Therefore fear the lord, do homage unto his
son, serve him with tre^bling and feat, receiu his doctrine, least he be angry
with you, and so you perish from the right wai, for when his wrath shall be
kindled like fire (which shall be shortelie) blessed shall al those be that trust
in him.

Amen.

