THE COGNIZANCE OF A TRVE CHRISTIAN, or the outward marks whereby he may be
the better known:

Consisting especially in these two duties: Fasting and giving of Alms: very
needful for these difficult times.

Divided into two several Treatises.

Published by Samuel Gardener, Batcheler of Divinity:

James 1.27. Pure religion and undefiled before God, even the father is this,
to visit the fatherless and widows in their adversity, and to keep himself
unspotted of the world.

Aug. in Psalm. 43. VVilt thou have thy prayers fly up unto God, give it two
wings, Fasting and Alms.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, and are to be sold by Nicholas Ling. 1597.

To the most Reverend Fathers, and right worthy Prelates: John, by Gods
providence, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and
Metrapolitan: William, Lord Bishop of Norwich, his very good Lord and Master:
Samuel Gardener wishes long life, continual honor, and everlasting happiness.
WHereas there were late orders given us in charge by public authority,
seriously commanding the strict observation of these two religious and
Christian duties, Fasting, and giving of Alms, very fit for all times, but
most necessary for these difficult seasons and late years of scarcity: I
judge it not amiss in some large discourse to dilate upon them, and that they
might more zealously be performed, to urge by all the plausible arguments that I
could, the necessity of the^. For there be too many defective in these
points, who walking after their own ungodly lusts, do nothing else but sweat
over their tre^chers, in all Epicurisme, without consideration of the affliction
of Joseph, wallowing themselves, like the sensual and carnal Iouinianistes
who^ Augustine reproves, Aug. de haeresibus and Quod vult deum. Ambr. Tom. 3
Sermon. 37 1 Cor. 15
who utterly did reject and condemn all Fasting: and not unlike Sarmotian, and
Barbatian gluttonous lubbers, whom Ambrose remembers: and finally like the
beasts whom Paul fought withal in the manner of men at Ephesus, who said among
themselves: Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. The school of
these is great, and the mischief which they do, is insufferable. This kind of
people most pestilently troubled the Church in the Apostles time. Paul could
not refrain weeping, when he mentioned these unto the Church of Philippos:
whose God was their belly, philip. 2 Iud. 8.
who were carnally minded. Holy Jude was also much infested with this crew, Who
despised government, and did speak evil of those who were in authority,
fleshly, and not having the spirit. This our happy Commonwealth is not a
little troubled with refractory rabblements of profane gospellers, who live
loosely and lewdly, turning fasting into feasting, and charity into cruelty.
They are so far from fasting, and feeding of the poor, as they do nothing else
but surfeit themselves, and fleece the poor. They ravish them (as David says)
when they get the^ in their nets. Basil.
The reverend father Basil speaks of such ungodly fellows who abounded in
his time, who for all their supercilious looks and grave gestures, and
counterfeit and constrained holiness, were so wretchedly minded, as they would
not contribute the least piece of money toward the relief of the poor, or
any godly use: they would first torment a beggar with a hundretd questions,
before they would sustain him with the smallest devotion. But these times (I am
persuaded) do exceed all the times that have gone before us, and do seem to
have come now to their extremity. There cannot be a more effectual sign of a
consuming and dying body, then the coldness of the body, and therefore it
was said of David, 1. Reg. 1.
that when he was ready to die, that they covered him with clothes, but no
heat came unto him: it is a token of a dead soul, when as it is cold in
duties of devotion, and cannot be warmed by the pitiful and patheticall out
cries of the poor. When the sick man with greediness lays hold upon his
bed, and violently would draw the couerlets, sheets, and whatsoever he can
claspe, unto himself, we say that man will die. The world now with all the Art
they can, seek to draw into their possessions the revenues of the Bishoprikes,
and the zealous co^tributions of our godly ancestors unto the Church, it is to
be concluded therefore, Mar. 12 Matt. 25 Matt. 7^
ye the world shall shortly die. We were never greater professors, and less
practisers. The fig tree had leaves, but no fruit: the foolish Virgins had
oil, but no lamps: we go in sheep clothing, but inwardly are ravenous
wolves. When as Iehu King of Israel went to kill the sons of Achab, and
destroy Baals priests: he met a soldier by the way, and said to him: Is thy
heart right toward me, Who answered, yea: 2. Reg. 10
Iehu replied, then give me thy hand: So Christ the true King of Israel, who
came into this world to destroy Idolatry, asks of us that make our selves
professors of his name the same question, whether our hearts be right toward
him: if we say, yea: he asks our hands that are the instruments of good
works. In the old law, God commanded that the skin of every beast which
should be for a sacrifice, should be drawn off. The skin is the outward
covering: so our outward covering and dissimulation must be pulled off, and we
must expres our religion in our deeds. But it is far otherwise: for how little
fasting, and how great feasting, and that upon days and nights inhibited by
godly authority, is now to be seen? Whereas there should be no beggars in
Israel: by our insatiable and extreme covetousness, beggars do increase and
swarm in every place. It appears that we bear but little love unto her
Majesty, by whom we live, who thus unconscionably do prefer our own
ungodly lusts before her godly laws, thinking that lawful which is lustful
unto us, shifting off these her godly la^wes to glut our affections, like the
gross and beastly Atheists, and Epicures, who^ Ambrose thus describes. Multi
sunt quibus cum ieiunium indicitur de intemperie se tempor is semper excusant.
Dicunt enim aestiuis mensibus: Dies long a est, and fortior sol est, and
torrentior sitim far non possumus: poculis nos refrigerare debemus, hyemis
tempore algorem tolerare nequimus escis calefieri nos oportet. It a hominis
quorum animus semper est in prandio, prandendi sibi causas inquirunt: and dum
se a ieiuntis excusant tempora Creatoris accusant. There are many (says
Ambrose) who when as they are commanded to fast, do excuse themselves by the
wickedness of the time. For they say, in So^mer season the day is too long, the
Sun is hotter: we are nor able to endure thirst, let us cool our selves with
cups. In Winter they reply, we cannot abide the chillness of the weather, we
must warm our selves with meat. Thus these men whose minds are wholly set
upon their meat, do always make occasion to dine, and whiles they do
excuse themselves from fasting, they lewdly do accuse the times of their
Creator. If these men will suffer themselves to be reformed, and not remain
incorrigible, I doubt not but if they will peruse these treatises, but they
will be persuaded to fulfill these duties. Wherein I have endeavored by
pregnant proofs of Sciptures, authorities of Fathers, and many perswasorie
and effectual similitudes gathered from the Fathers, to enforce the same. And
these I am bold to dedicate to your Grace, and to you Honorable and my good
Lord of Norwich, for very good causes, both public and private.

1 First, I take my self as a poor Minister of the Church, to owe a
Canonical duty to your Grace, as to one to whom the government of our Church,
under the sacred Majesty of our blessed Queen, is principally committed, and
to you (reverend father) being our prudent, godly, and vigilant Diocesan.

2 Secondly, both your loves to my deceased father, might have encouraged me,
if there were nothing else.

3 But principally I presume herein to give you this book, because your Graces
godly sanctions, and your (my Lord) industrious publication of these sanctions
to us your Clergy, through the confines of your liberty, are the subject
matter, and occasion of my Book.

3 Also the love your Grace, and your honor, do bear to all godly endeavors,
and the countenance that you give unto painful ministers, has ministered unto
me no small cheerfulness in this matter.

5 Last of all, in that I have devoted my self in all solemn obsequies, unto
your good Lordship, and it has pleased your honor, as well to ascribe me in
the number of your Chaplains, as to encourage me in my labor, and studies, as
my bounden duty wills me, I consecrate unto your Lordships, the fruits of
these my labors. GOD, even the most mighty God, enrich your zealous hearts
with the abundant graces of his spirit, and make your names famous unto the
ends of the world: give you long life, with all worldly prosperity, that by
both your god lie wisdoms, we may still be led as sheep, as by the hands of
Moses and Aaron. London the 8. of October, in the year of our salvation. 1597.

Your Graces and Lordships, in all obsequie to be commanded. Samuel Gardener.

To the Reader.
GOdly Reader, if ever these two Christian and Religious duties of Fasting and
Alms have bin judged needful, it is now high time ^ey should be well thought
upon, and di^gently put in practice. For through the ^nkindnesse of former
years (the just punishment of our sins) and more through the insufficed
wretchedness of cruel men, commorants, maultwormes, badgers, and ^egraters,
and of the like title (the rods of Gods fury, and the very imps and lims of
the devil) the poor have been brought unto all extremity, and are now almost
constrained to eat the flesh of their own arms. The Lord in mercy has now
visited us, and has done his part, and has turned our former scarcity into
present plenty: the earth has brought forth her increase, and God even our
own God has given us his blessing. But we regard not to visit the poor, and
to do our duty: but albeit we find him a gracious father, we remain still
graceless children. For the plenty which God has sent to refresh the poor,
is without cause kept in, and not acknowledged, to the undoing of the poor.
But take we heed that we tempt not God, and presumptuously provoke the holy one
of Israel unto anger, in extenuating and abazing his rich mercies and making
him a niggard, when as he has opened the windows of heaven, and given us
plentiously of his blessings to drink as out of a river. If for his bountiful
nesse, weeshall reward him with unthankfulness, and our eyes shall be evil
because h^ is good: he has very sharp arrows to draw out of his quiver, and
instruments of death (...) grind our hairie scalpes. For doubtlesseth poor
shall not always be forgotten, the patient abiding of the meek shall not
peris^ for ever. Let us therefore hear their cri^ and sustain them with
relief. This we she be very able to perform, and thereby pr^uent a future
danger, if we shall give out our riotous feasting, and deuote our selves
sometimes to a religious fasting. If this seems too grievous and over
burdensome to us: content we our selves with a moderate diet, and let our
superfluities be bestowed to succor their necessities. As God has liberally
lent to us, so let us largely lend to him again. By giving to the poor thou
do lend to him, and he promises to set it upon his own accounts, in
theresurrection of the righteous. Consider we the difficult estate of these
times, the huge heaps of poor people, their extreme misery. I have used all
diligence as God has guided me with his holy spirit, to stir you up to
these religious duties, urging and pressing these two propositions, with as
effectual and plausible persuasions as I could. I hope I have not languished in
any part of my work, but in every place without any impertinent and idle
digressions to make the paper swell, have by solid arguments, illustrated and
confirmed such needful circumstances as belong to my assertions. I heartily
desire thee not superficially and slenderly to consider it, but deliberately to
reuolue it in thy mind. And albeit there be others who have written of this
argument more sufficiently then I, yet seeing I cannot bring gold and silver
with others, I see no reason but that I may bring such as I have, even goats
hair, and badgers skins, unto the Lords Tabernacle. The widows mite was as
pleasing unto God, as the plentiful and sumptuous contributions of the rich.
Though I have but one talent, I cannot in duty bind it up in anapkin, or bury
it in the earth. The honor of Christ Jesus whose unworthy servant I am, my
duty to my dear sovereign, whose loyal subject I am, the love of my
country whose unfeigned friend I am, has animated me to this labor, which I
commend to God, and to thy indifferent judgment. Fare well London, this eight
of October, 1597.

Thine in the Lord, Samuel Gardener.

The Cognizaunce of a true Christian, or the outward marks whereby he may be
known.
The first Chapter. Of diverse kinds of fasts.
BEcause there are so many sundry kinds of fast, and few there be who fast
in that order as they ought: it is very needful, that first we should
distinguish it, before we do define it, that we deceive not our selves in a
zeal without knowledge, 2. Tim 3 5.
Having a show of godliness, but indeed do deny the power of it.

There is a fast which may be called Natural: A natural fast.
because the law of Nature does prescribe it: and that is but an abstinencie
only for the time, or a spare diet, which is only used as a preservative of
our health, that both body and mind might be more pliable unto their proper
functions, forasmuch as by a large and plentiful repast, the mind waxes
dull, and the body disable unto his outward actions. But for your further
knowledge, and direction in this point, I send you to the schole of
Philosophers to be taught: whose precepts of Temperance, Sobriety, and
Abstmence, must be your instructions. Socrates, Diogenes, and Crates the
Theban, in the strict observation of these rules, do exceed us Christians. And
I leave you to Physicians, to tell you more of this, who according to the
times, places, and persons, will acquaint you with that fast, and course of
diet, which most fitly does agree with the states of your bodies. It is not
the fast that I mind to meddle with.

There is a fast which may be said to be civil, A civil fast.
because it is imploide about civil actions: in which we are so earnest and
devout, as we will not eat or drink before we have accomplished them. Such
a fast was Saules, 1. Sam. 14.24
when he was in chase pursuing of the Philistines, he gave commandment
throughout his host, that none should be so hardy, as to eat or drink,
until he had avenged himself of his enemies. And this was the fast of
certain Jews, which were confederate against Paul, who vowed with themselves,
that they would not eat, Acts 13.12
or drink, until they had killed Paul.

An other kind of fast which is too rife, A riotous fast.
is that which is used as a preparatiue to a feast. As when they keep their
stomachs for a sumptuous supper, that they might feed more notouslie. This is
an incontinent continency. A fast of not fasting, as Lucus is called, a non
lucendo: Parcae, a non parcendo: and Mons, a non mouendo, Augustine calls
this, a superfluity rather then a fast. Thus dilating of it, Aug. in Psa. 43
Non laudatur in illo seiunium, qui adluxuries sam coenam seruat ventrem suum.
Inuitantur enim aliquando homines ad coenam magnam, and cum ad eam velint auidi
venire, tetunant hoc ieiunium non continentiae sed potius luxuriae deputandum
est. We do not commend this fast in that man, who reserueth his stomach for a
large supper. For many being bidden unto great feasts, do fast before, to eat
when they come with greater greediness. This is not a fast of sobriety, but
rather of incontinencie. The hurtful effects whereof are touched by the same
father, excellently, in these words. Aug. ser. 56 de tempore
Nihil prodest toto die, longum duxisse ieiunium: si posteaciborum suauitate,
vel nimietate, anima obruatur: Illico enim men's repleta torpescit, and irrigata
corporis nostri terra, spmas libidinum germinabit. It avails nothing (says
he) to have fasted all the long day, if afterward the mind be ouerladen,
either with daintiness or fullness of meat. For the mind being surcharged,
it waxes blunt and heavy, and the earthly furrows of our body being
watered, it brings forth the briers and thorns of insatiable lust. This fast
is too usual. And a common trick, this is, amongst carnal Gospellers, and
fleshly Epicures in these sinful days.

Let our fourth kind of fast be that which is constrained, A constrained fast.
which cannot be avoided, because it is the yoke which God has laid upon us.
That is, When the Bridgroome is taken from us. Math. 9, 15
As when we fast for mere poverty, having nothing to eat: when the Lord
does punish a land with famine, or brings in the enemy, who co^sumeth and
destroys the fruits of the earth, and the labor of the husbandman. For this
scarcity and want, for very good causes the Lord in his secret and
unsearchable providence, does bring very often upon his dear servants. As
upon Abraham who for the famine that was in his land was constrained for his
necessary succor and relief to fly into Egypt. Genesis 10, 10
And to Isaak after him, who for the same cause went unto Gerar, unto
Abimelech, Genesis 26, 1
king of the Philistines: and to the old Israelites iourneying through the
desert, Number. 27, 8 2. Kin. 17, 25
and wast wilderness: and upon Elias the Thesbite, in that time of horrible
dearth which was in Samaria: and upon his own disciples, Mat. 12, 1
when as traveling too and fro to preach the Gospel, they were constrained to
slake their hunger, to pluck the ears of corn upon the Sabbath day. And upon
Paul, 2. Cot. 11, 27
of which he boasts in his second letter which he writes unto the
Corinthians: And upon diverse poor people in this land, at this time, who for
extreme beggerie are enforced to fast, until they be brought unto deaths
door. This fast because it is of necessity, and cannot be shunned, we must
not fret our selves, and murmr against God, but we must endure it with all
patience, and long suffering: as Eliah did, remaining by the river Cherith over
Jordan, 1. Kin. 17, 5
until the Ravens brought him bread and flesh both morning and evening. 2.
Cor. 6, 4
And as Paul did (saying) We approve our selves as the Ministers of God, in
much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, and distresses, in prisons, tu^
mults, labors, by watchings, by fastings. The God of patience grant, that we
be like minded, now that his hand is heavy upon us, and he has brought
leanness and scarcity upon our souls, by taking away the staff of bread, and
making our fruitful land barre^, for the wickedness of the people that dwell
therein. If we will rest contented, with his providence, and stay his leisure,
he will bless our vittails with increase, and satisfy the poor with bread;
he will crown our patience with plenteousnesse to come, that our garners shall
be full, and plenty of all manner of store: our sheep shall bring forth
thousands, and ten thousands in our streets: for his arms (as the Prophet
says) are not so short, but he can save, and his ears are not so stopped, but
he will hear us: nay he has already heard us, and the earth has given her
increase, and God even our own God, has given us his blessing. For we say not
now as Christ said: Lift up your eyes, and look on the regions, for they are
white unto harvest, John 4, 35
but lift up your eyes, and look into the Barnes how miraculously they are
stored with a strange increase.

CHAP. II. Of the late fast commanded by public authority.
THere is another kind of fast not much disagreeing with that which was the
first, By a moderate diet.
but that it is not used for the same end: which ought to be more usual with
Christians then it is, and that is an orderly and moderate carriage of our
selves, in the course of our diet, that thereby we may the better relieve and
help the poor: and this requires, that we refrain our selves from al
gluttony and excess, which is often the cause of the former famine, into
which very many are often driven, by their excessive misgouernment. This we
shall perform, if we shall not give out selves to often and much feeding.
Herein we do abuse our Christian liberty too much, that having no respect of
these difficult times, we give our selves to all riot and excess. And in the
mean time, suffer the poor people, Gods dear Saints, to continue in
scarcity, while that which would relieve them, is wastfully concocted, and
wantonly consumed upon our insatiable lusts. We make no end of feasting and
banqueting, as if we were fruges consumere nati: Cicero.
borne to no other end then to consume the good creatures of the earth. I may
cry out of our times as the Orator did of his, August. de Tempore, Sermon. 131.
and say, O tempora, O mores, O times, O manners. And as Augustine did of his:
Prandia ducuntur vsque ad noctem, and caenas Lucifer videt: frequenter vsque
advomit um ingurgitare se non erubescu^t, and admensuras sine mensura bibunt:
multi inueniuntur qui cbriosos, and luxuriosos amplius quam oportet cogunt
bibere. Our dinners are lengthened out until night, and our suppers continue
until the day star arise. They are not ashamed to eat til they vomit, and
they drink by measures, without measure. There are many constrain those which
have taken too much before, still to take more then they are able to bear. The
multiplicitie of dishes, and variety of dainties, that were often to be seen
at one time, upon mean men's tables, these last dear years, was intolerable
to behold, Iuuenal the Satiricall and profane Poet, arguing the Romans of
their excessive diet, Inuenalis Sat. 1.
censureth them thus. Quis fercula septem secreto caenauit auus? Who of the
ancient Romans had ever seven mess of meat at one feast? But if Iuuenal might
be suffered to come out of hell, to take a view and sight of our feastings,
he should find very many very forward Christians in outward profession,
hugely to exceed in this carnal condition, not only the Romans, but
Sardanapalus, and Philoxenus the Epicure, ad the whole confused rout of
Atheists and Epicures, in the ages before us. But it shall not need that he
come out of hell, to reprove our misgouernment: if we take not better order,
we shall go to hell to him, if our belly be our God, damnation is our end:
for the mouth of the Lord has spoke it. Phil. 3, 19
But of this matter hereafter, I shall have more fit occasion to entreat. For
the more orderly carriage of our selves, in our repast and diet, which as it
may be used, comes very near to the nature of a true fast (although we
grant a difference between Temperance and fasting, and do not confound them,
as our adversaries would suggest and object against us) it is behouefull that
we take the counsel of Saint Augustine in this case, Aug. co^ ese lib. 10, ea 31
directing us thus. Hoc me docuisti vt quemadmodum, medic amenta, sic alimenta
sumpturus accedam. That we receive our meat, as we would receive physic. A
purgation is not taken for pleasure of the body, but for necessity sake: so
must we eat not for pleasure, but for necessity sake. Romans 13.14
And take no thought for the flesh to fulfill the lust of it. This is that fast
which our gracious Queen (in a tender compassion which she has of her poor
distressed people, pinched and oppressed, and almost consumed with this long
continued dearth) to us her loyal and dutiful subjects, has commended and
commanded exactly to be kept. Which if it may be as diligently performed, as it
is prouidently enjoined, it will rescue infinite of her poor people, from the
pit of destruction: it will do much honor to almighty God, profit to our
selves, and acceptable service to our Commonwealth. The effect of her zealous
and godly charge, agrees with that Christian and perfect fast, Ambr. Tom 3.
Sermon. 3^.
of which Saint Ambros speaks. Illud ad perfectione^ Ieiunii tacendum non
est, vt qui abstinemus and minime prandemus, hoc tempore prandia nostra
pauperibus crogemus. Qui sic abstinet vt nihil pauperibus de suis epulis
largiatur, videtur quaestum sibi, suum fecisse ieiunium, and negotiationem
parcendo, atque ideo bonum est ieiunium cum ca leemosyna. That is, it is
necessary that our fast be a perfect fast, that we who at any time do
abstain from any meal, do bestow that meal upon the relief of the poor:
for he that otherwise fasteth, and gives not that which is saved thereby to
the help of the poor, he seems to make a gainefull trade and occupation of
his fasting: and therefore fasting is good with giving of alms. Unto this
agrees the speech of Augustine: Ita ieiunae vt paupere manduca^te prandisse te
gaudeas. Aug. in Psalm. 42
So fast as thou may be glad that thou have dined, in causing the poor to
dine. It is truly said of him in the same place: Quam multos pauperes saginare
potest, intermissum hodie prandium nostrum. Aug. ibid.
How many poor people may be fed by one dinner that is forborne this day?
This our royal? Queen in her wisdom sees well, and therefore that we should
make this use of it, let us be conformable to her godly orders, in this case
provided: not for sordid gain sake, to increase our wealth, but for conscience
sake, our obedience herein being nothing profitable unto her, but available
unto us, as making for our benefitte very much every way, but among others,
for our common tranquillity and quietness, which might otherwise by the
intolerable vexation of famine which must come upon many, which is called
Malesuada, a very bad counselor in all kind of actions, be unhappily
disturbed, especially being so seriously exhorted unto this fast, in many
places of the holy scriptures, as by Christ, Luke 21, 14
when he says: Take heed unto your selves, least at any time your hearts be
oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, As by Peter when he says: 1: Pet:
5, 8
Be sober and watchful, for your adnersarie the devil as a roaring Lion
walks about seeking whom he may devour. As by Paul his own example who
did beat down his body, and bring it into subjection, least by any means
after he had, preached unto others, he himself should be reproved.

CHAP III. Of the myraculous fast, of Moses, Elias, and Christ: how
disproportionable this heir fast is unto the papisticall fast of Lent, which is
drawn from thence.
BEsides the other particular kinds of fast specified before, A miraculous fast.
there is a nothet supernatural fast, which is not in our strenth and power to
perform, which is strange, and miraculous, yet by Gods grace, granted
peculiarly to some few, as to Moses, Elias, and to our Savior Christ, thereby
the better to confirm that doctrine, which was taught by them, and to get them
applause and authority among men. And this fast was a general abstinencie,
and forbearing of all nourishment, for forty days and forty nights together,
without intermission. Exodus 24, 28 1, Kin: 19, 8. Math: 4.2
Thus Moises the Lawgiver fasted upon mount Sinas, and Elias the Propet upon
the mount of God Horeb, and Christ the son of God who came to fulfill the law
and the Prophets, thus fasted in the wilderness. This fast is miserably abused
by the Papists, whilst they would in an Apish imitation hereof, make their
superstitious and conceited fast of Lent to allude thereunto. And impose upon
the Church the necessity of this practice under pain of damnation. And thus
being strong by a fleshly arm, they constrain simple souls, laden with sin,
unto the obedience of their lusts. The arguments they bring in for the
maintenance of their cause, are frivolous and absurd. Velut aegri somnia vana:
hanging together like a sick man's dream. One of their school reasons in
this sort. The tenth part of the year as a kind of Tithe is due unto God; but
the time of Lent is the tenth part of the year; thefore by consecrating it
unto fasting, we must give it unto God. This is a dissolute and beggrely
reason. Tempora mutantur and nos mutamur in illis: The times are changed, and
we are changed in the times: we are now no more under the law, but under
grace. Gal. 4, 9
How can we (as the Apostle says) seeing we know God, yea, rather are
known of God, turns again unto impotent and beggarly rudiments: whereunto as
from the beginning we will be in bondage again, observing days and months,
and times, and years. Thus ye see, if we should grant them the Mayor of this
Argument, that the tenth part of the year is proper unto God, more then the
other parts of the year besides, by the ceremonies of the law, how they should
gain nothing by it: but we deny that this part is more due unto him, then the
other parts are, and all the brood of Papists, shall first be bursten, before
by any suffrage, or authority of Scripture, they shall be able to prove it.
For if it were, why did not then the Jews who were Gods chosen people, unto
whom were committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3, 2
perform this fast, and pay this tenth unto the Lord? Is there a greater
virtue in the forty days before Easter, then in other days, that we must
upon necessity be restrained unto that time? Ought not every time to be as
penetentiall, and to be employed upon the service of God? Must not he that is
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, have the beginning and ending of
all times, and of our whole life? Does not Zachary teach us, that this is the
condition of our redemption, That we being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies, Luke 2
should serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness, before him
all the days of our life? By this set time of Lent, there is a way laid open
to all loosnesse, and liberty: for after the date of it is expired, in ^ which
they lived straightly, they think themselves free all the year after to live
as they list. An other of their Arguments which is as idles as the former (and
yet it is the best and substantiallest which they have) is thus formed and
disposed. Every actio^ of Christ must be our instruction: but Christ did fast
forty days and forty nights together: therefore this fast must be our
instruction. We willingly grant all this Argument, without any detriment or
hurt to our cause, for all the acts of Christ do fitly serve to direct us in
the faith and order of our life, and are perfect school masters to bring us up
in knowledge. But it follows not hereupon, as they would or should infer,
if they would conclude any thing that make for their purpose, that every of
his actions, and so consequently this should be our imitation. If they would
dispute thus. Every action of Christ must be our imitation, and upon this
conclude, that in this miraculous fast of Christ we must also imitate him, we
would deny the proposition, and distinguish of Christ's actions. For as they
are sundry, and of diverse natures, so were they likewise done for diverse and
sundry ends. Some there were that were done for our example, Christ his
motall actions.
and those must we imitate. Of this kind are all his actions, which are called
moral, appertaining unto manners, which must be the rule and line of our life,
and the engraue^ and lively pattern of a Christian conversation, as his
obedience unto his father in all things, Phil. 2, 8
unto the death, the death of the cross. His innocence, which was so absolute
and entire. As he did no wickedness, Esaias 53, 9
neither was there any guile found in his mouth. His humility was such, Psalm.
110, 7 Phil. 12, 7^
As be drunk of the brook in the way. And made himself of no reputation, and
took on him the form of a servant, John 13:5.
and was made like unto men. Stouping also unto his disciples, and washing
their feet, his love and charity was such, Romans 5:10.
that he died for his cruel enemies. All these and such like his moral
actions, must be our examples, according to this precept which he himself
gives us saying. Learn of me that I am meek and lowly in heart. Mat. 11, 29
And to that which elsewhere he prescribes, I have given you an example, that
ye should do even as I have done to you: John 13:15
unto which charge agrees this heavenly Canon of Saint Paul: 1. Cor. 11:1,
Be ye followers of me, even as I am of Christ. But there are other his actions
which are peculiar unto himself alone, Christ his peculiar actions.
and not fit for any other beside, as simply belonging to the mystery of our
redemption, and work of our salvation: as his conception by the Spirit: his
nativity by the virgin: his bitter death upon the cross for our sins: his
tryumphant resurrection for our justification: his Glorious ascension up into
heaven, to prepare us a place, and to make intercession for us. There is no man
that has so little wit, as to think that these his actions must be our
imitation. Last of all, there is another degree of his actions, which are his
miracles, Christ his miraculous actions.
which go beyond our reach and power to imitate, as his healing the sick, in
giving fight unto the blind, his making the Lame to skippe like a Heart, his
raising the dead unto life again, his walking upon the Sea, his authority
our Winds, unclean Spirits: his fast in the Wilderness for forty days. And
we may as well bring the former to pass, as effect this in due form and
order after Christ his example. Those therefore that refer their supposed
fasting unto the fast of Christ, do intollerably pervert his holy action, and
dally too much with a matter of such moment. For what discrepancie and
contrariety is between them, The disagreemens between Christ's fast and the
fast of Lent.
may appear by these circumstances. First, Christ when he fasted, did eat
nothing at all. And thus much Luke witnesses. Luke 4.2.
flesh, and alwhit emeates, made of milk, cramming themselves with all
delightful fish, drinking all strong Wines out of capable bowls, and
tempering and seasoning their platters and their cups with the intising
spices and confections of the Appothecarie, very maine inforcements unto all
lascivious lust. And this is their fast, like unto the fast of the gluttonous
priests in Saint Iheroms time, which he remembers in a letter unto Nepotian.
Hiero n. ad Nepo tian.
Quid prodest olco non vesci and molestias quasdam difficultatesque ciborum
quarere caricas, piper, nuces, palmarumque fructus, similam, mel, pistacia?
tota hortorum cultura vexatur vt cibario non vescamur pane, and dum delitias
sectamur, a regno caelorum retrahimur. To what use is it not to eat oil, and
to hunt after meat which is not to be gotten without labor and difficulty,
as figs, pepper, nuts, dates, cimnalles, honey, and pistack nuts, which are to
be sold by the Appothecarie? every orchyard and garden is raked and searched,
that they might not eat household and ordinary bread: and thus while we
please our dainty tooth, and follow our appetites, we are withdrawn from the
kingdom of heaven. Is not this the wonted guise of the popish fast? of the
lecherous Locusts and insatiable belly panches, of the Roman sinagog? who
disquiet al ponds, rivers, and seas, to glut their gorges: who under an
hypocritical and deceitful profession, which they do make of fasting, Curios
simulant and bacchanalia viuunt? While they therefore live thus, how come they
near in any right imitation, this example of Christ's fast.

Secondly,

Thirdly, 1: Tim: 4. and 4:
For every Creature of God is good, and nothing is to be refused, so it be
received with thanksgiving. For that which enters in at the mouth defiles
not the man. Mat. 15:18:
And it is not meat that makes us acceptable unto god, for neither if we
eat, have we the mere: neither if we eat not, 1: Cor: 1:8, Col: 2:16.
have we the less. Let no man therefore condemn us, in meat or drink.
Spiridion Bishop of Cyprus.
It is a famous and memorable example that we read of Spiridion, Bishop of
Cyprus, when as he did set flesh in the time of Lent, before a stranger that
came into his house, and he refused to taste of it because it was lent, giving
this reason, because he was a Christian: gravely and wisely replied in this
sort: therefore thou should eat of it, because thou art a Christian, for
all things are clean to those that are clean.

Last of all, this is no less an error then the former, that they limit and
tie this their solemn fast unto a certain time, contrary to the use and
custom of the Church: there being as we read, a great difference between
diverse Churches, about the constitution of the time, Hist. tripartit. lib. 9.
cap, 38:
whilst the Romans would have but three weeks before Easter, the Church of
Alexandria six, others seven, for their fast of Lent. The scriptures moreover
not commanding an appointed time, but enjoining our public fast to be used
for public causes, which they have expressed. Of which more shall be spoken
GOD willing afterward. By these and many other the like circumstances, which
might easily be gathered out of the confused Chaos, and rabble of their
ceremonies appertaining to their fastings, it is manifest enough, that
howsoever the observation of the time of Lent crept first into the Church, It
has no fit allusion and relation unto Christ's fast, but it came in merely by
a preposterous and perverse imitation of Christ: we make not therefore any
reckoning of this time, as if our exact and austere keeping of this, Tho. Aqin.
Ambros.
were any way meritorious, as the Papists would have it, or as if it were of
necessity to be imposed, as Ambros affirms. But we judge it simply
considered in his nature, to be free for all christians, and that it binds
not the conscience to commit it, or omit it.

CHAP. IIII. Of the lawful and necessary use of Lent: and of other set and
appointed days of fast, ordained and kept by the Church of England.
But least either the superstitious Papists, or new fangled Annabaptists,
should from hence be animated, and take occasion licenciously and
presumptuously to censure our Church, for retaining still this time, while (not
understanding the end for which we keep it) they might either think that we
might better break it, or else with the Orator, judge it a strange course, Vt
aequum fit in Naeuio quod iniquum est in Quinctio. Cic. orat. pro Q^nic^.
That it should be commended in the Protestants, which is condemned in the
Papists. It is most convenient (that we should not be mistaken and misconstrued
in the premises) immediately to insert the causes and use of this time of Lent,
as of all other times which her highness laws has decreed to be observed.
We would be therefore thus understood, that we do not simply gainesay this
time. But this is that we only sland upon, that it is no imitation of Christ
his fast, and that no merit is to be reposed in the same. But we hold it, that
it is needful that there should be times prefixed, for religious duties, and
among others, for the exercise of fasting. We suppose the Lent and other set
seasons straightly to be kept, for two especial ends. The first godly. The
second pollitike. Two ends for which we keep the Lent and other days of fast
The godly end is this, that our bodies being not aggrauated or surcharged as
at other times, our minds may be apter to contemplation, and holy meditation.
For as the ship that is ouerburthened will soon sink, Godly.
and the Gunne that is over charged will quickly fly a pieces, Pollitike.
Sim^rudes.
and the Hawke that is full gorged will not come to the hand, so when we are
ouerdieted, we do easily sink, our minds are crazed, and we list not to come
to our masters hand, who all the day long, stretches out his hand to us a
wicked and gainsaying people. There is further, this religious and godly end
and effect of these fastings. The charitable and necessary relief of the
poor, whom God has so peremptorily commended to our care. It were impossible
that the poor should so want, if we had not too much. It is very meet
therefore that we should take the less, that they might have the more.
Moreover, this sanction has politic respects, convenient, and behouefull to
the Commonwealth. For the increase of cattle thereby is maintained. The brood
of the land, thereby being preserved, for the which the Le^ten-time most
seasonably is appointed. And nauigatio^ thereby is better continued, for the
bringing in and spending Gods blessings by the Sea. For which all the Annual
appointed fasts do most conveniently serve. It has also this both godly and
politic regard. That is, our obedience unto her sacred Majesty, and the
preservation of the unity of the church of God. Eusebius: lib: 5 cap: 24
And this use did Eusebius make of it. And so did Irenaeus, who when as Victor
the Bishop of Rome would have excommucated the East Church, because in the
orderly observation of Lent, it did not agree with the Church of Rome: he
reasons with him thus. What (says he) cannot we live in love and unity
together, albeit they live according to their rites, and we conform our
selves unto out own customs? Saint Augustine sets down an excellent
course in this case to be taken, which he had learned of his master Ambrose,
the godly and reverend Bishop of Mediclanum, and it is worthy of due regard,
Aug; casulano presbyteto, epi: 86. in fine:
and it is this. Indicabo libi, quid mihi de ieiunio quaerenti, responderit
venerandus Ambrnsius, Episcopus Mediolanensis, nam cu^ in eadem Ciuitate matter
mea mecum esset, and illa sollicitudinem gereret vtrum secundum morem nostrae
Ciuitatis sibi esset sabbato ieius nandum, an ecclesiae, Mediolanensis more
prans dendum, vt hac eam cunctatione liberarem, interrogaui hoc supradictum
hominem dei. At ille quid possum inquit hinc docere amplius, quam ipse sacio
quando hic sum, non ieiuno sabbato, quando Romae sum ieiuno sabbato, and ad
quamcunque Ecclaesia^ veneritis inquit eius morem sernate si pati scandalum non
vultis aut faeere. That is, I will tell thee what answer the reverend father
Ambrose Bishop of Mediolanum, made unto a question which I propounded unto him
of fasting, when my mother was with me in the same City: and sh^e took care
whether she should fast, according to the order of our City upon the Sabbath
day, or take her dinner after the custom of the Church of Millan: that I might
resolve her herein, I asked the fore say de man of God this question, who
replied, saying: herein what can I prescribe thee else, but that which I do my
self, when I am here, I fast not upon the Sabbath, but when I am at Rome I
fast upon the Sabbath: and to what Church soever you do repair, keep the
order and practice of that Church, if you will take no offense, nor give no
offense. Wherefore since our Church has received Lent, and other days of
fast, let us for godly order sake, that we be not offensive according to the
godly counsel of this father, diligently keep them.

CHAP. V. Ofthe definition of a true fast, and of that fast which is spiritual.
Having thus distinguished of fasting, and ripped up these former kinds which
are not propper to that fast, I would entreat of, which is the true and
special fast. It is now necessary, that we describe and define, the nature
and properties of this true fast, and discourse of the special adjuncts, and
duties thereunto belonging. This fast, is an abstinencie, The definition of a
true fast.
from all meat and drink, and from all other things, which might refresh and
recreate the body with a godly sorrow, and humility of mind, craving the
mercy and favor of God, to be extended upon us.

The several parts of this definition, shall be orderly illustrated, in their
due course. We must first, examine the Genus of it, which is here said to be
an abstinencie: and here again, we have occasion of distinguishing: because
this abstinency stretches very far, and is of two sorts. There is
abstinentia vitiorum, and abstinentia ciborum. There is an abstinence from
sin, A double fast.
and an abstmence from meat: Spiritual,
The one spiritual, which is a fast from sin: corporal:
which is a fast from meat. The last, is for the first: for without the first,
the last is nothing worth. Of this double fast, the Prophet Esaias in the person
of God very expressly and plainly makes mention, and shows that the one
without the Other is superfluous. Esaias, 58, 5, 6 7, 8, 9.
Is it (says he) such a fast that I have chosen, that a man should afflict his
soul for a day, and to bow down his head as a Bulrush, and to lie down in
sackcloath and ashes? Will thou call this a fasting, or an acceptable day to
the Lord? Is not this the fasting that I have chosen, to loose the bands of
wickedness, to take off the heavy burden, and to let the oppressed go free,
and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and
that thou bring the poor that wander unto thine house? When thou feast the
naked that thou cover him, and hide not thy self from thine own flesh? Then
shall thy light break forth as the morning, thy righteousness shall go before
thee, and the glory of the Lord shall embrace thee. Then shall thou call, and
the Lord shall answer, thou shall cry, and he shall say here I am. This is the
perfect Christian fast, which is restrained to no time, place, nor choice of
diet, but is to be observed in the midst of any feast. Cicero,
Omnibus in rebus sieve forensibus, sieve domesticis, sieve tecum agas quid, five
cum altero contrahas, peregrinatur nobis^ cum, rusticatur, nollo loco
excluditur, nunquam intempestiuum, nunquam molestum est. In all affairs either
domestical, or foreign, whether thou do any thing priuatlie, or bargainest
with another: whether thou sit still, or trauailest, it is no where
excluded: it is never untimely or troublesome unto us. Non quaero a quo cibo
abstineas, Aug: Tom, 9 de vtilit Iciunii,
sed quem cibum diligas, dilig is Iustitiam? appareat ergo Iustitia tua. I do
not ask from what meat thou do abstain, but what meat thou do love,
do thou love righteousness? Therefore let thy righteousness appear. Fast
from all things whereby thou may est do wrong: whereby thy Christian brother
may be oppressed, or injured: for the bonds of wickedness, before named by
the Prophet, are cunning bargains, and deceytfull shifts, whereby we get our
neighbors into bonds: either for corn, which is the trade of diverse
catchpolles, whereby many a poor man is so bound, as he never can get loose
again: or else by wares sold at a huge rate, for a little time that they give,
and so they sell their wares, and time too, which is none of theirs to sell: or
else foysting in with a piece of money, such wares as are unprofitable, and
nothing fit for our purpose, which is now the common trick of Usurers and
Brokers, which are the Devils right hand. To these we may ad^oyne false
waights, and measures, which are an abomination unto the Lord. And if it were
needful, I could rippe up many more such, and lead you along with a large
discourse, and still say with the Prophet, and yet behold more abominations
then these. Saint Ambrose in his Gloss, Amb. tom. 3 Sermon 24
and explanation of this fast remembered by Esaias, descanteth upon the particular
words there used by the Prophet, thus. Quid tibi vis cum charta, libro, and
signaculo, and conscriptione, and vinculo iuris? nonne audisti solue omnem,
colligationem? Tu mibi tabulas affers, ego tibi recito Deilegem: tu atramento
scribls, ego spiritu Dei in scriptae repeto oracula Prophetarum: testimonia
falsa componis, ego testimonium conscientiae tuae posco: quia iudicem tuum
fugere and declinare non poteries, cuius testimonium non poteris recusare, in
die quo reuelabu domia nus occulta hominum. What do thou mean by thy debt
Book, paper, and seal, with the handwriting, and obligation of the law? Have
thou not heard, that thou must loose the bands of wickedness? Thou bring to
me thy writing Tables, but I rehearse to thee the law of God, written in
tables. Thou writest with ynke: but I repeare to thee the Oracles of the
Prophets, written by Gods spirit. Thou producest false witnesses: but I do
appeal unto thy conscience for a witness, because thou can not avoid the
Judge, whose witness thou must stand unto, in the day that he shall unfold
the secrets of all hearts. These simster therefore, and ungodly practices,
must be far from us, otherwise our fast shall be like the smoke which
mounteth up to heauen-ward, but is repelled back again, and comes not to
heaven. As he elsewhere says, That he will have mercy, and not sacrifice.
Hos. 6
So generally he refuses all outward duties, and exercises of Religion, not
grounded upon love, faith, and repentance of our former sins. Ieiunium magnum
and generale est abstinere ab iniquitatibus, and illi citis voluptatibus,
August. tract. 17. in Johan. cap. 5.
quod est perfectum ieiunium: vt abnegantes impietatem and saeculares
cupiditates, temperanter, and just, and pie viuamus in hoc saeculo. This is
(says Augustine) the great and general fast, to abstain from sin, and all
ungodly lusts, which is a perfect fast that we denying all ungodliness and
worldly pleasures, may live soberly uprightly, and religiously in this world.
The other fast is but a counterfeit unto this, Acts 5,
and who so brings that without this unto God, dodgeth with him, and like to
Ananias and S^phira his wife, leaves part behind. As the natural mother
which pleaded before Solomon, would not suffer the child to be divided, but
would have all, or none at all: so God, our gracious and merciful father, will
not have us to mince our duties which we owe unto him, but he will have all, or
none at all at our hands. And because he is a spirit, John 4
he will be worshipped in spirit and truth. The flesh profits nothing, it is
the spirit that quickneth: as all the outward sacrifice of the Jews, because
their hearts and minds were sinful, were execrable unto God: so shall all our
external actions, fastings, alms, prayers, and such like be odious unto him,
we still continuing, and remaining in our sins. Ieiunia Christianorum,
spiritualiter potius, Aug. feria. 3 in fouationibus.
quam carualiter obseruanda sunt: vnde a peccatis, principaliter ieiunenaus, ne
ieiunia nostra sicut ludaeorum ieiunia a Domino respuantur. Quale enim est
vitae cibis, quos Dominus creauit, mescio quis impostor abstineat, and
peccatorum sagina pingue scat? Christian fasts, are rather spirituallie then
carnally to be kept: whereupon let us chieslie fast from our sins, least
our fastes (as the fastes of the Iowes) be rejected of the Lord: For what
fast is that, to abstain from such meats, which GOD has created for the
maintenance of our life: and like a dissembler, to maste and fat up
himself with superfluity of sin? Therefore as Daniel destroyed the Idol
Bell, Dan. 14
and afterward slew the Dragon: So let us first of all subdue this I doll of
our flesh, which with overmuch dieting, and pampering of it, we make as it
were a God: and their let us subdue therewith also, our vilde and monstrous
sins, which the Devil the old Dragon, has made us to commit. Aulus
Fuluius, when he took his own son in Catilines camp, in the host of his
enemies, would have put him to the sword, saying unto him: I have not
begotten thee for Catiline, but for thy Country: So are not we borne of God,
to be borne of sin, but that we should be holy, as he is holy, not
only outward ie, but inward lie before him. If we would know yet more
plainly, how we should fast from this sin, that so our fasting may be
pleasing unto him, we must do as Paul counsaileth, as we have heretofore
given our members, as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin: so we must give our
members as weapons of righteousness unto god. Greg. hom. 3. in Euan.
And as Greg. says of Marie Magdalen: Quot in se habuit oblecta menta, tot de
si inueuit holocasta: vt totum seruiret Deo in poenitentia, quicquid ex se,
deum contempserat in culpa. That how many motives we find in our selves to
entice us unto sin, so many sacrifices, we should take from our selves, as
Oblations for our sins. That every thing might be serviceable unto God, in
our conversion: which before did contemn God by wilful presumption. Saint
Bernard largely discourses of this point, by deducting, and drawing out the
particular parts, perfectly explaining, the true order of this fast, thus
writing of it. Ieiunet oculus a curiosis aspectibus; Ber. Sermon 3 quadrages.
leiunet auris ne^ quiter pruriens a fabulis and rumoribus: ieiunet lingua a
detractationibus and verbis scurrilibus. Ieiunet manus a non imperatis
operibus. etc. Let thine eye fast from beholding vanity: Let thine ear fast,
it ching after lies and false tales: let thy tongue fast from slanderous and
scoffing speeches, and let thy hand fast from works that are not commanded.
As the Israelites, Number. 22
being stung of Serpents, were healed by looking upon the brazen Serpent. 1.
Sam. 5 end 6
As the Philistines, when they were punished with Emerodes in their bodies, and
with Mice in their land, offered unto God Emerodes and golden Mice, to appease
Gods displeasure. As the people of Israel, Exodus 32 Exodus 55
offered the Gold of Earerings, and Bracelets afterward to the service of
GOD, to set up a Tabernacle, which before was given, to the erecting up of a
Calfe, consecrating that unto GOD, which before was devoted to the Devil. So
let us in like manner, as we have given our body; and souls unto the world,
to the flesh, to the Devil: so let us now (as the Apostle wills us) give
our bodies and our souls, a living, holy, and acceptable sacrifice unto God,
which is our reasonable serving of God. There is as great a difference between
this fast, and the sower fast of hypocrites, as there is between bleare-eied
Leah, and beautiful Rachell, between silver and dross, chafe and wear. The
bodily fast being used as it ought, being a fit meditation of the spiritual
fast. And this use does the ancient Saint Augustine make of it in these words.
Dum enim a licitis abstinemus, Aug. de tempore, Sermon. 63.
magis ac magis admonemur, illicita vitare: qui enim abstinemus a carnibus,
quibus aliis diebus vti licet: qui abstinemus a vino quo moderate vti licet:
qui ergo ista vitamus quae aliqua^do licent: imprimis peccata fugiamus, quae
omnino nunquam licent. Itaque si volumus been ieiunare a cibis, ante omnia
ieiunemus a vitiis: quid enim prodest vacuare corpus abescis and animam replere
peccatis? Quid prodest pallidum esse itiuniis, si odio and inuidia liuescas?
quid prodest vinum non bibere, and tracundiae veneno inebriari? Quid prodest
abstinere a carnibus ad ^dendum creatis, and malignis obtrectationthus fratrum
membra lacrare. Whilst we (says Augustine) do abstain from things that are
lawful, we are admonished the rather, to abstain from things unlawful. For we,
who abstain from flesh, which at sometime, is lawful, and from wine which
moderately taken is lawful: we that refrain from things that are lawful,
must especially anoyd sin, which at no time is lawful. Therefore if we truly do
fast from meat, let us before all other things, fast from sin. To what use is
it to keep our bodies empty from meat, and to have our minds fulfilled with
sin? To be pale with fastings and black and blewe through envy? To drink
no wine, and with the poison of anger to be drunken? to abstain from meats
ordained to be eaten, and with cursed speeches to tear asunder the joints of
our brethren: To the like effect Saint Ambrose thus writes. Am. Tom, ^ Sermon 33
Quid prodest castigare corpus, inedin and mentem exercere nequitia? inutile,
and inane est tale ieiunium quod inedia membra debilitat, and anima^ a
perditione no^ liberat. Qui propterea ieiunat no^ vt deo and or ationibus
vacet, sed vt toto die otiosus and liber proprias exerceat voluptates: etsi
vespere ad domu^ redeat and declinante sole manducat: potest videritardius
seipsum refecisse, non tamen domino ieiunasse. Haecest enim volunt as domini,
vt ieiunemus a cibis. pariter and peccatis; hoc est ergo salutare ieiunium, vt
sicut ieiunet corpus ab epulis ita and anima refraenetur a peccatis. What
avails it to chasten the body with hunger, and to exercise the mind to
wickedness? It is a vain fast which weakneth the body with famine, and keeps
not the soul from destruction. He that fasteth not to give himself to prayer,
but that he might idly and freely dispatch his private business, albeit he
returns home in the evening, and takes his refection, when the Sun is going
down, it may be thought very late before he is refreshed, but he cannot be
said to have fasted unto God. For this is Gods will that we fast from meat, and
from sin together. This is a healthful fast, that as the body is restrained
from meat, so the mind be retained from sin. Who so fasteth thus, and goes
out mourning, doubtless, as the Psalmist says, shall return home with joy,
and bring his sheaues with him. 1, Tim: 4
For as godliness is profitable for all things, and has the promise of this
life, and of the life to come, so this godly fast shall not return empty, but
it carries his blessing and reward with it. Wherefore the PRophet Esaias after
he had commended this fast unto us, infers this reward, as a necessary
consequence and effect hereof. Esaias 58, 8
Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thy health shall grow
speedily, thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lord
shall embrace thee: then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer: thou
shall cry, and he shall say, here I am. Wherefore as we would seem holy in
our outward profession, so let us be holy in our inward affections: least
we be as painted tombs outwardly beautiful, but are inwardly deformed, and
full of corruption. The kings daughter as the Prophet says, is all glorious
within: so let us make our inward parts pure, and we shall be glorious, and
the king of glory shall enterin. This the God of all glory and grace, grant
unto us for his Christ's sake.

CHAP. VI. Of the external fast, that it is an abstinencie from all meat, and
drinbe, and all other things which do make the body lascivious and wanton, or
unfit to serve God.
THe second kind of abstinence, which is external, and corporal, now
follows to be discussed: which fitly may be said to be a discipline, whereby
we subdue and keep down our bodies, by taking from them such things, whereby
they any ways may bestirred up unto sinful affections as hie and dainty
fare, rich and proud garments, and the use sometime of the marriage bed
according to Paul's counsel, who exhorts married folks for a time with
consent, to sunder themselves, that thereby they inight be fitter for fasting
and prayer. Qui enimse a nullis refraenat licit is, vicinus est illicitis,
Au^tom 9 de ^tilitate reiun^^.
licitum est coniugium illicitum adulterium, and tamen temperantes viri, vt
long sint ab illicito adulterio refraenant se aliqnantum, a licito coniugio:
licita est satietas, illicita eb^ iosit as, tamen modesti homines, vt long se
faciant a turpitudine ebrietatis, castigant se aliquantu^ and a liberate
satietatis. Temperemus ergo, and quod facimus, sciamus quare faciamus, cessando
a laetitia carnis, acquiriter laetitia mentis. For he that does not sometimes
refrain from things lawful, is very much subject to things that are
unlawful. Marriage is lawful, and adultery is vnlawfuley cyet sober and
discreet men, that they might be far from unlawful adultery, do sometime
contain themselves from the use of lawful matrimony. It is lawful to eat
unto sacietie, until we have mough: but drunkenness is unlawfully: yet modest
people, to avoid drunkenness, do a little bridle their lawful liberty of this
sacietie and fullness. A Similitude.
Wherefore as wise men careful of their body, do willingly abstain from all
meats and drinks, that are hurtful for it: and as men provident for the
world, will take that course which is fittest for them, and leave that which
will any way hinder them: so let us not as unwise, but wi^e, careful of our
souls, fast from such things, which may endanger the soul, and as circumspect,
and laying for the world that is to come, take the ordinary and most
compendious way, that directs us to it: August: Sermon. 63. de tempore 4.
Tunc praecipue ad impetrandum voluntatem domini accendemur, quando maxim per
abstinentiam, voluptas carnis extinguitur, tunc enim ad dominum and eius
promissa, tota men's pronior, facienda festinat, cum nulla crapula, nulla cibi,
ac potus satietate crassatur. Then are we kindled with a zeal unto Gods will,
when as most offal by abstinence our fleshly pleasure is extinguished. For then
the mind makes more haste unto God, and is more proane to accomplish his
promises, when as with no surfit or fullness of any diet, either of meat or
drink, it is burdened or ouercharged. And albeit a moderate and spare diet
be very commendable, and necessary to be used oftener then it is, that we
might the better be prepared unto godliness: yet must not that go under a
fast, which is a general abstaining from all kind of nourishment, which was
the usual fast of the godly, mentioned in the Scriptures. ^. Sam 7.6.


Thus the Israelites fasted in Mizpeh. This fast did Ester and her maids,
Hester 416
Mordecay and the Jews, perform unto God. They did not eat or drink three
days and three nights. 1, Sam: 14, 24
Saul that he might prosper in his war against the Philistines, Deuteronomy. 9, 18
1 King: 19, 8 Mat: 4, 2 Dan, 10, 3
charged the people with anoath, saying: Cursed be he that eats food
until night. Thus fasted Moses upon mount Synaie. So did Elias in Horeb, and
Christ in the wilderness. So did Daniel, who to make himself the fitter to
understand a vision and oracle of God, he did eat no pleasant bread, neither
came flesh nor wine into his mouth, till three weeks of days were fulfilled.
Thus did the people of Niniue fast, Jonas ^, 7
at the preaching of the Prophet Jonas. Neither man, nor beast, bullock, nor
sheep, did taste any thing, neither feed nor drink water. This was the fast of
John the Baptist, who came neither eating nor drinking. Finally, we shall not
read of any, that in the time of fast did relieve themselves with any kind of
succor. The Gentiles also, who were without god in this world, used this
general abstinencie, Cic, lib: 7 Epist: 27
from almeates in their solemn fast, Cicero the Orator writing unto Gallus,
mentions his fast, and thus speaks of himself: In Tusculano biduum ita
iciunus sui vt ne aquam gustarem. I so fasted in Tusrulanum two days together,
as I did not so much as taste of any meat. Amphiraus a heathenish and profane
priest, gave charge unto the priests, that such as would receive any Oracle or
counsel from their gods, should abstain from all meat, for a whose day, and
from wine, three days together. The frivolous fast of the papists, is a mere
toy and mockene, where by they deceme the people, and themselves too, who under
an outward profession of austeritie, do maintain carnal liberty. If a true
fast (as we have proved) bea fast, from albodily nourishment, how can their
giuetoning and filling themselves withfish and all wines, be termed a fast. It
is contrary to the Scripture, to the Canons of the doctors, and the practice
of the better Churches. This kind of fast was first brought in by Pagans and
Infidels, and is now only supported, by Papists and merit-mongers.
Pithagoras, and Appollonius, Thianeus, when they fasted, only abstained from
flesh meats. Porphirie the Philosopher, published a book, wherein he
inhibited the killing of beasts, to serve for meat. Numa Pompilius, being to
do sacrifice, refrained only from lechery, and from eating of flesh.
Justinian when he fasted, contented himself with poor and slender fare, as
^ot-hearbs and pease. Porphirie commends the Sirians and the Essens, because
they refused certain kinds of flesh. By these and such like practices, did the
popish superstitious fast, which bears only the bare name, but has nothing
at all of the nature of a fast, creep into the Church. Their fast is only but
an exchange of diet, it is no abatement of their carnal pleasures. Fasting is
a subduing and afflicting of the body, and an affliction in it self, as in
the next Chapter plainly shall appear. But while they do cramme in all kind
of fish, and drink wine out of main measures, they do rather puff up, then
keep under the body. We should rather in our fasting, fast from wine, then
from flesh: for wine (says Solomon) is a mocker, and strong drink is raging,
and whosoever is deceived thereby, Prou. 20.1.
is not wise. We should rather abstain from fish cheefely such as are most
dilicious: for there are them that are no less delightful to the taste, and
as mighty procurers of lust, as any kind of flesh, and some amongst sundry
sorts of flesh, are used as a service. Augustine in his book De moribus
Ecclesia and Manichaeorum, August.
makes a comparison between the fast of a Christian and a Maniche: he says,
the Maniche did eat no flesh, yet did care of many banqueting dishes, and
delightful sauces: he did drink no wine, yet took such drinks as were
strained and wringed out of diverse fruits, which in strength and sweetness,
did excel any wine, and drunk of them lustily. On the other side, the
christian remained fasting until the evening, then he took a mess of
portage made with herbs, sodde with Bacon, adding thereto a little poudred
meat, and drunk therewithal three or four Cups of wine. Augustine asks
the question, which of these men did best fast, his judgment is, that the
Christian came nearest the true and proper fast. This is that which Tertullian
does greatly reprove in Martian the heretic, that he attributed more
holiness and devotion to flesh, then to any other nourishment. Let such
therefore, whom superstition has blinded, and rash zeal has carried amiss,
dote as long as they list upon their imaginary and phanrasticall fast,
consisting only in a choice kind of diet: we that are otherwise taught by
scriptures, do account that a true fast, which is an abstaining from all
bodily pleasures, which is contrary and opposite to all saturitie and fullness.

CHAP. VII. That the end of this fast is to afflict and humble ourselves, that
thereby we might be fitter unto prayer.
BEcause the flesh is stubburn and rebellious, and fights against the spirit,
and resembles Heuah, alluring and enticing unto the sorbidden fruit, Genesis 3.
Genesis 3. Genesis 39
and is like the wife of the Egyptian Putiphar, soliciting innocent ad upright
Joseph unto al filthiness: and may very fitly be compared unto Iabel, Judge, 4
who deceived and flew Sosera, under show of love. Or unto Dalila, who
delivered her husband Samson, when he slept in her lap, Marc. 6
into the hands ofye Phylistines. Or to Heroaias daughter, who in her pastime
and dance, Mat, 26,
asked the head of John the Baptist. Or that damsel or minion, as whose voice
with Peter, we deny Christ. It is very necessary that we do rame and afflict
this flesh, that it might be subject to the spirit a godly fast, and this is
the cheifest use and end of fasting. That it might be a testim^nie of our
true contrition and repentance of our sins. Aegrotauimus per peccatum, Aug.
cont. Julian. Pe^ag. refert verba Basilit.
sunemur per paenitentiam: poenitentia vero sine Ieiunio vana est. We have bin
sick by reason of our sins, let us be made whole by repentance for our siones.
A true tepentance is not without fasting, because for the most part when we
give our selves to prayer, our zeal is soon cold, being called away with
sundry by-thoughts and motions of the flesh. The Saints of God have given
themselves unto fasting, that thereby they might the better be prepared unto
prayer: for fasting is an affliction of the body if it be rightly used. Paul
reckons his fasting among his afflictions. 2. cor, 6, 11 Psalm. 34 Dan. 9.
Jonae, 3
And David says that he humbled himself with fasting. Daniel when he fasted,
clothed himself with sackcloath, and was covered with ashes, to express his
contrition. So did the King and all the people of Nineue, in their public
fast. Of this fasting the Prophet Joel speaks, when he says: Turn unto me
with all your heart, with fasting, weeping, and mourning, and rent your hearts,
and not your clothes, and turn unto the Lord your God. And because that a
true fast cannot be without mourning. Our Sauiou Christ appoints such times,
which give unto us occasion of mourning, namely when the bridegroom is taken
from us, both for our public and private fasting. This is a very healthful
and fruitful affliction, for it casts down the mind into a dutiful
modesty, and into a necessary contempt of it self: which is very requisite,
when we offer up our prayers and suits unto God. For suitors must be humble,
and beggars that ask and crave alms, must not show their bracelets, and Gold
rings. They must not cast out words of pride, nor boast presumptuouslie with
the Pharisee of their works. But they must humble themselves like weaned
children, before the Lord, Luke 18
for God rejects the proud, and gives grace unto the humble. Therefore
because we must be hunible, to be fit for prayer, and fasting is a means very
forcible to humble us, for this cause is fasting by the Lord commanded us.
That fasting does remove such impediments and lets, as does disable us unto
prayer, and notably prepares us unto this, and any other godly duty besides,
both common experience, and the ancient fathers teach us. Saint Augustine
attributes unto it these properties. Aug. Sermon. 220 de tempore
Ieiunium purgat mentem subleuat sensum, carnem spiritui subiicit,
concupiscentiae nebulas dispergit, libidinum ardores extinguit, castitatis
verum lumen accendit, inertiamtollit de anima, impedimenta carnalia aufert.
Fasting does purge the mind, help the sense, subdue the flesh unto the
spirit, disperseth the m^st and sog of conscupicence, extinguisheth the heat
of lust, kindles the true light of chastity, takes away sluggishnesse from
the soul. Saint Ambrose likewise witnesses, that this exercise of fasting is
a special furtheraunce of us unto prayer, and all godly actions. Amb. tom. 3
Sermon. 2^.
Ieiunia nostra sunt sicut castra and mansiones Israelitarum, a quibus si quis
abertauerit a spirituali Pharaone inuaditur, aut peccatorum solitudine
deuoratur: murus est Christiano ieiunium in expugnabilis tunc est fortis
infirmitas (Paulus enimait cum infirmior tunc fortior sum) quando, carotabescit
ieiuniis anima puritate pinguescit. Quamtu^ enimilli succus de trahitur ciboru^
tantum huic virtus iustitiae augetur tunc igitur ^omo imbecillis est ad
secularia sedfortis ^st ad diuina opera. Our fasting (says Ambrose) are like
the Tents and Mansi^ns of the Israelites, from whence if any warue, he is
assaulted by the spiritual ^haraoh, or else in the wirdernesse of his ^nnes
destroyed. A Christian fast, is to ^m a strong tower of defense, which is ^f
the devil himself invincible, for then our Weakness strong (For Paul says,
When I am weak, then I am strong) when ^ur bodies wax lean with fasting, and
^ur souls with purity do grow fat, for owe much the more meat you shall
take ^om that so much the more righteousness ^ou shall add to this: for then
is a man ^ost weak to worldly matters, but strong (...) heavenly exercises.

Again, the same father to the like effect, thus speaken in another Sermon. Vt
^rra aratris scinditur, Amb, tom. 3 Sermon. 37
vt mundanis sit ^ngrua frugibus: Itaterra nostraieiuniis ^xaretur, vt
caelestibus sit apta semini^us, sicut enim redditum vberio^m capit, qui
frequentius vexando exercet campum: Ita maiorem gracian percipit, qui exercet
corporis sui campu^ saepius ieiunando producit enim iemnand^ libido castitatem
superbia hurnilitatem ebrietas parcitatem: hi enim suxt flore vitae nostrae,
qui suaue Christo redolem qui odorem bonum Deo spirant. As the earth is cut
with the Plowshare, An excel. lent simie latude.
that i^ might be fit for worldly grain, so let ou^ earth be plowed with
fastings, that it may be ready for heavenly seed. For as he recei^ueth a
greater increase, who oftnest troubles the earth, so does he obtain great
grace, which turmoyleth and afflicts hi^ earthly body with accustomed
fastings. For by fasting, lust breeds chastity: pride humility: and
ebrietie, frugalitie. These are the flowers of our life, which are p'ea^ sant
unto Christ, and do yield a fragran^ and redolent smell unto the nostrils of
ou^ GOD. Wherefore since fasting remooueth such lets, which riotousnesse and
feasting, does lay in our way, to hinder us i^ our duties and service of God,
let us whe^^ we pay our vows unto the Lord, mace rate our flesh, and subdue
our bodies wit^ Christian fastings, that we may say wit^ David, My soul is
prepared, Psalm A fit similitude.
my soul is prepared, I will sing and give praise. For if thou see a man who
labors to climb up to the top of a large and steep hie hill, and this man
who did bear upon his shoulders before a very great burden, takes yet another
greater weight and load, when he is climbing up, thou would doubtless
(thus seeing him) say to thy self, assuredly, this man can never get up. Now
this life of ours, is this valley of misery, and the life that is to come, is
the Lords holy mountain, which is exceeding hie and trouble some to get up
This our earthly burden, is a very great weight, too heavy already to bear:
but by replenishing it, and cra^ming it with eating, and drinking, we do
ouercharge it, and ouerburthen our selves, and do bring a greater weight then
we had before. It will be therefore very hard for us to ascend up unto the
same, unless we shake off this yoke, and disburthen our selves. A worthy
simlitude.
Which of you having a horse, that is too lusty, casting you off when you
would sit upon his back, would not tame him, by abating him of his accustomed
prouender, that so you might sit surely upon him, and ride him whither you
list, and would not rule him with hunger, when you cannot with a bridle? Take
this course with thy body. Aug Tom. 4 de vtilit. Ieiunri.
Caromea (says Augustine) iumentum meum est: iter ago in Hierosolymam,
plerumque me rapit, and de via conatur me excludere, via autem men Christus est
ita exultante^ non cob. bebo ieiunio? My flesh is my beast, I am iourneying
toward Jerusalem: oftentimes he flingeth me, and labors to cast me out of
my way. My way is Christ, shall I not therefore, when he is thus lusty,
humble him with fasting? If a base or rude peasant, should be so saucy, as to
court a fair Lady, or entice a woman of great birth, A good simlitude.
unto his wicked lust, she would not only not consent to love him, but also
in that he is so vilde, and abject a creature, she would give commandment to
scourge him, or to cudgel him. Therefore if our vilde body shall be so
presumptuous as to assault the mind, which as it is capable of reason and
understanding, is like a great Princess, and shall allure it unto any
wickedness, reason will be so far from yielding unto it, as it will give
charge, that the body should be subdued and aflicted with fasting. A
similitude.
When as two men that are of equal strength, go together into the field to
strive masteries, it is hard to set down whose is the victory: but if there
shall come a third man, who shall aid one of these parties, then it is soon
known who shall get the field, even he that is thus friended. So when the body
and spirit fights together as they do, as Saint Paul says. Gal. 5
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. This
Du llum and conflict is doubtful, but let the body find a friend that will
support it, with meat, drink, sleep, and all delights, the flesh will easily
subdue the spirit: But savor thou the spirit with fasting, and prayer, and
other godly exercises, and it will have pre-eminence, and overrule the flesh.
Dan. 3
When as Nabucho donosor, would have the people to cast down themselves before
the golden Image which he had set up, he first of all procured many musical
instruments to be sounded, and then charged the crier to make his Oyes and
proclamation. Be at known O people, Natitions, and languages, that when you
hear the sound of the Cornet, trumpet, harp, sagbut, psalterie, dulcymer, and
all instruments of Music, ye shall fall down and worship the golden image
which Nabuchodonosor the king has set up. The king had this policy and drift
in this thing, that the delight of Music, tickling the ears, and delighting
the souls, the peoples minds ravished, and distracted with this conceited
pleasure, should be carried away from the chiefest pleasure which they should
have in godliness, and incline unto Idolatry. This was a subtle stratagem,
and practice of the devil, procuring our destruction with a pleasant sin,
as the fish is procured to the hook with a pleasant bait. This was Labans
fetch and subtlety, Gen, 31.27
which he used when as he followed his nephew Jacob to mount Giliad, and would
have enticed him to retire, and go home again with him, speaking thus unto
him. Wherefore did thou she so secretly, and steal away from me, and did
not tell me, that I might have sent thee forth with mirth and songs, with
timbrell, and with harp. This slight used he to retain him still with him,
and detain him from his country. And this is the course and fashion of the
world, it possesses us with pleasure, and with vain delights: it does keep
us in a sordide and slavish obsequie, enthralling us with the inticements of
pleasant meats and drinks, and transitory vanities, that we should not
journey toward our oone Country. As the Israelites, who longing after the
fleshpots of Egypt, perished in the wilderness, and could not enter into the
land of promise. So, as long as we are miscarried with an insatiable pleasure
of eating and drinking, we die in our sins, and cannot come into the
spiritual Canaan, which fl^weth with milk and honey, and abounds with all
eternal felicity. That we should not see our sins, but worship this Idol
and earthly image of our bodies, we are led on with a delight of surfeiting and
drunkenness, and chearing, and feasting, as Nabitcadnezz^^ would lead away his
people, A Similitude.
with his instruments of music. Wherefore as Phisitias do prepare us before
they would heal us, that their physic might be medicinable, so let us prepare
our selves before we pray, that our prayer may be acceptable. And this must be
by chastisting the body, and keeping in under, least the body insulting and
crowing over the spirit, it disableth the spirit, making it unfit unto any good
work. For as the Hawke that is full gorged, A^^^tude.
will not come unto the lure, so will we hardly when our bodies be full, be
obedient to Gods call. As hunger and famine brought home the lost son to his
Fathers house, so fasting and abstinence from worldly pleasures, will bring us
that are lost, unto our Father again, making us to sing his doleful dittie in
a godly sorrow, which is unto salvation. Futher I have sinned against heaven,
and against thee, I am no more worthy to be called thy son.

CHAP. VIII. That prayer is to be joined with our fasting.
Having thus by a godly fast, made our bodies obedient unto us, it immediately
follows, that we make our minds obedient unto God: Aug. Tom. 9 de vtilitate
ieiunii.
Stenim caro tua obediat tibi, and tu non obedis, domino tuo, nonne ab ipsa
damnaris? If thy flesh be subject unto thee, and thou will not be subject
unto God, shall thou not be condemned of thy flesh? Ibid.
Agnesce ergo superiorem, vt tibi recte cedat inferior. Acknowledge thou
therefore thy superior ye thou may have thy duty of thy inferior. Ieiunium
autem quaerit deum per frequentes orationes. Aug. Sermon. 2 o^de tempore: ibid.
But fasting seeks God by continual prayers. Oration est refectio ieiuniorum,
and ieiunium dulcificat: sicut enim sine potuno^ est plenaria refectio, sic and
teiunium sine oratione non potest anima^ perfect nutrire. Prayer is the
refreshing of fasting, A Similitude.
for as there is no sufficient repast without drink, so fasting without prayer,
cannot perfectly nourish the sou^e. Fasting does take away all dullness from
the mind, and prepares it to God: and prayer does eleuate and carry up the
mind and join it unto God. If thou laist an Egg into the fire, An apt
S^militude.
without cracking it in the end, the force of the fire working against it,
bursteth it a sunder: but if before it receives the heat, thou do break it
a little, it will remain sound, and will break no further. So in like sort,
when thou shall come to Christ, if thou shall come whole, fat, full, and
shall not crack and bruise thy self a little, by fasting and prayer, thou will languish and grow faint in prayer and meditation. But if thou shall humble
thy self by these me^nes, thou shall not give over, but readily with pleasure
continue in prayer. An experience of this we have in the young men of Babylon,
Daniels companions, Dan. 1.
who fasting and abstaining from the Kings meat, and dieting themselves with
water and pulse, not only thriued well therewith, and looked in their Faces
more beautiful then those who glutted themselves with iunckets of the Court,
but being cast into the fire and hot furnace of of the King, like an egg or a
chestnut, did not break a sunder with the violence of the heat, and surie of
the flame: but it put a new song into their mouths, cue^ a thanksgiving unto
their God, praying unto God, and saying: (...) 3.
O all ye works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord, and magnify him for ever. It
is usual with the saints and holy men of God, as we may see in the Scriptures,
either in their private or public fasts, to give themselves to prayer. Chr. 20
So did Iehosophat when as he was to fight against the Moabites, and the
Ammonites, he gathered all Judah together before the Lord, and fasted and
prayed. When as the Prophet Joel called upon the people to sanctify a fast, l 2
he willed all the people to be gathered together, and conuented the Priests
and Ministers of the Lord, causing them to stand between the Poreh and the
Alter, prescribing unto them a solemn form of prayer. When the king and
Nobles, and people of Nineue were converted by the preaching of Jonas, they not
only fasted, but also prayed and cried mightily unto God. Anna the daughter of
Phanuel, went not out of the temple, but served God with fastings and praiersal
the day and night. Cornelius being not yet converted, was in his fastings and
prayers at the ninth hour of the day. Acts 10.
Fasting and prayer like Hipocrates two twins, must go hand in hand
together, and so shall you commonly find them consorted and combined in the
scriptures. Christ puts them together teaching his disciples, with what
weapons they must resist the devil, saying: Mat. 17
This kind no otherwise goes out but by fasting and prayer. So does Paul, 1,
Cot: 7
willing those that are married to separate themselves with consent for a time,
that they may give themselves to fasting and prayer. Elsewhere he conioyneth
them, discribing unto us the adjuncts and properties of a widow indeed, 1 Timothy, 3
which are to trust in God, and to continue in supplications and fastings,
night and day: Wherefore those things that god has joined together, let no man
put asunder. Mar. 10
Let our temporal fasting therefore be for a spiritual end, that our bodies
being humbled, our minds may be humbled unto the Lord. To this effect Saint
Austine speaks sweetly: Aug. de tempore Sermon. 5^
Sicut caro per famem and inopiam tenuis, and sicca velut quoddam simulachrum
efficitur ita and anima si verbi del cibo non pascitur, arida and inutilis and
ad nullum opus bonu^ congrua inuenitur. Si horrea and cellaria singulis annis
replemus, vnde vno anno cibum habeat caro nostra: quantum putas debemus
recondere vnde in aeternum sustentetur animae nostra? ergo carnis gaudium
minuatur vt animae lucra spiritualia praeparentur. Set ergo temperatus cibus,
and nunquam nimium venture impletus, and plus semper de cibo cordis, quam de
cibo corporis cogitemus: qui enim de sola carne cogitant bestiis and pecudibus
similes sunt. Caro ergo velut ancilla gubernetur, and anima tanquam domina
legitima reficiatur nam si sola caro, reficitur, and anima dei verbo non
pascitur, ancilla satiatur and Domina fame torquetur. As the body through
hunger and famine waxes thin and dry, Similitude.
and is like unto an Image: so the soul if it be not fed with Gods word, is
dry and unprofitable, and not found sit unto any good work. Similitude.
If every year we fill our barnes and garners, whereby we may re leeue our
flesh but for a year, how much think thou ought we to provide and lay up in
store, to be sufficient to replenish our souls, and satisfy them for ever?
Wherefore let our bodily meat be diminished, that spiritual food for the
soul may be prepared. Let our diet therefore be moderate, and our bellies
never too much crammed: and let us always be more careful for the meat of
the soul, then for the me^te of the body: for they who are only careful for
the flesh, are like unto beasts and brutish creatures. Wherefore let thy flesh
be kept in awe like a sernant, A Similitude.
and let thy soul be served as a mistress. For if the flesh be pampered, and
the soul with the word of God not refreshed, the handmaide shall be glutted,
and the mistress shall be starued. This must be the end of our fasting, if that
we will fast unto any good end. All our actions and godly endeavors are
measured by the end for which we do them. We must not therefore so much stand
upon the thing that we do, as examine our selves to what intent and
principal end we endeavor to do it.

CHAP. IX. That no set time is to be appointed for to fast, but that it is to
be used in all times of trouble: and in matters of great moment.
THe right use and end which were are to make of fasting being examined, it is
needful that the times and just occasions of it be in the next place
considered. As concerning the times, they are not certain: for as the wise man
says. As there is a time for all things under heaven, Eccl. 3
a time to mourn, and a time to rejoice: So fasting justly appertaining unto
mourning, it must not be used at all times alike, but only where there is
cause of lamentation and mourning. There have bin bitter contentions, and
miserable garboyles stirred in the Church, whilst one have varied, and
discented from another, about the times that are meet for fasting: and whilst
every one thought his own conceit best, there has been no end of their
difference and quarrelles. Calixtus 1
Calixtus the first, instituted and ordained a quarterly fast, restraining and
limitting it to four seasons of the year. Pope Innocent the first, Innocent.
gave commandment, that the Sabbath should be fasted, Gregotius
The fast of Lent was founded by Gregory the first of that name, as Gratian
bears witness. Some appointed certain weeks, especially to be fasted. One
would have the time called Septuagesima: another Sexagesima: another
Quinquagesima: another Quadragesima: another the Rogation days: another the
Vigtls of the Apostles, to be consecrated unto fasting. There are some devoted
to a peculiar day, as to Friday, some to Wednesday, some to Sunday.

Augustine in a Letter which he wrote to Cassulanus gives this reason of the
Wednesdayes fast, Aug. de Cassulants.
because Christ was betrayed and sold as that day: and that Friday should be
fasted, because Christ was crucified that day. But whether the Sabbath should
be fasted, it remains doubtful. The Mediolanenses, and the East Churches,
peremptorily concluded, that they were not to fast then, because Christ was
then free of his trouble, and rested quietly the Sabbath day in his Sepulcher.
But the Roman Church, and the church of Africa, and other Churches, affirmed
it to be meet, that the time wherein Christ was humbled, and not without
ignominy, shut up in the grave, should be assigned unto fasting.

Epiphanius
Epiphanius is led by another reason then that which has been premised, why
the Wednesday should be given to fasting, namely, because Christ upon a
Wednesday ascended up into heaven, Which reason of his, if we should gain
say, and stand upon it, that he ascended upon the Thursday, which is more
probable we could not be convicted. This his reason grounded upon Christ's
ascension is very much applauded, because that Christ himself did then
appoint us for to fast, when the Bridegroom should be taken from us. Mat. 9.
But the sequel of this Chapter, will very well show, the weakness and
absurdity of this allegation. Last of all, Pope Innocent infers this reason
to persuade us to fast upon Wednesday, and the Sabbath, which is our
Saturday, because both those days the Apostles did mourn and were in trouble
for Christ. There might more of their frivolous contentions, De lana caprina,
of needless matters, and of this Circumstaunce of the special time, that is
due to fasting, be ripped up in this place: but partly because there is no use
of it, and partly for so much as such traditions which have crept in from six
hundredth years after Christ, do rather of right appertain to the latter and
declining age of the world, then to the custom and practice of the ancient
Church: I do willingly pass over them. This is very apparent and manifest,
both by manifold and pregnant proofs and allegations of holy scriptures, and
also by the authorities and the suffrages of the ancient Fathers, that only
such times and seasons as are most mere for mourning, when any cross, or
judgment, or grievous calamity, is brought upon us, are fit for fasting: that
only when we accomplish matters of much weight, and would obtain them at Gods
hand, by our zealous prayer, that our prayers might be more full of spirit
and life, and gracious in his eyes, we are to help them, and quicken them, and
further them by fasting. If we take a short survey either of the private
fastings of the godly, or of the public fastings of the holy Saints of GOD,
we shall find them always used in great and weighty matters, and in their
great troubles, Job. 2, 12
when the heavy hand of god was grievous upon Job. The friends and kindred of
Job, seeing him thus vexed and tormented with plagues, they laid groueling
with him upon the ground, fasting, and mourning, and praying to GOD for him,
seven days together: that thereby the fury of his misery might be
mittigated. When Ioab had murdered the innocent Abner, and David had followed
him, 2. Sam 3, 32
to his burial in Hebron, he vowed with an oath, not to taste bread, nor
any thing else, until the Sun was down. When David was reproved of
Nathan, for his sin, and would entreat GOD for the life of his child, 2.
Sa^ 12, 16
which was conceived in Adultery, he fasted and went in, and laid all night
upon the earth. When Nebemias had heard of the afflictions of the Hebrews,
which remained in Jerusalem, he afflicted himself with fasting, and called
upon the Lord. Nehem. 1, 4
When as Daniel had perused Ieremias Book, Dan. 9, 2
of the seventy years captivity, which the people should endure, he
confessed his, and the peoples sins, and he mourned, and fasted. When
Christ began his office of preaching, Mat. 4, 2
he went into the Wilderness, and fasted forty days. This was a matter, and
work of importance. For this cause Cornelius, Acts 10, 3
because he had not as yet learned Christ, trusted in the Lord, and perplexed
in mind, gave himself at the ninth hour of the day, to fasting and prayer.
The Primative Chuch being admonished by an Oracle, that Paul and Barnabas
should be chosen, and deputed to visit the Cities and several Towns, where
the Gospel had been preached, because it was a very great charge, there was
first of all a fast agreed upon, and solemnized. Acts 13, 2
And when as this business was ouerpast, and they returned homewarde by
Iconium, Lystra, and Antiochia, they made a solemn publication of a fast, they
ordained and constituted Ministers, and Deacons, Acts 14, 23
through out the several Cities and places of their circuit. When as Peter was
to buckle with that perverse and profane wretch Simon Magus, at Rome, upon the
Lords day, the Church of Rome decreed, that the Sabbath day should be fasted:
which practice and course afterward continued. Aug. Epist. ad Ca^^ul.
Hierome says, that John being entreated of the Churches, to write and
publish his Gospel against the heritikes, Ebion and Cerinthus, who denied the
divine nature of Christ, answered that he would so do, if first of all the whole
Church would e publicly fast. Because the casting out of a Diuill is a very
great work, and a notable my racle, when we will effect such a work, it
becomes us to fast: for Christ tells us in the person of his Disciples, Mat
17
That this kind no otherwise go throut, but by prayer and fasting. When as a
wido we is bereaved of her husband, she is desolate, and in misery, and in
much danger, therefore it becomes her chiefsie then to be devout in fasting,
Luke 2, 36
wherefore Anns the daughter of Phanuell, when she was a Widdowe, was very
zealous and religious in fasting, and spent her life continually in the
temple. And Paul says that she that is a Widow indeed, will trust in God,
and exercise her self both day and night in fasting, 1. Tim. 5.5
and prayer. When there is war in the Gates, then is it a very fit time to
fast. So did Iehosaphat, when he was to wage war against his enemies, the
Moabites, Ammonites, and Syrians. 2. Chron. 20
Upon the like occasion and Joel command the people of his time, Joel 2
to sanctisie a fast. For the Assyrians under their Captain Sennacarib warred
against them, and threatened not only the overthrow of their kingdom, but
the ruin of the Temple, and the spoil of Religion. So the Israelites did
fast, Iuds. 20
when they did fight unhappily agavnst the Gibbionites, and had evil
success. So did the labytes, 2. Sam 31
and Gilyadites, when as Saul, and his sons, and his Armor-bearer, were
slain in Gilboa, and the whole host of Israel was discomfited by the
Philistines. So did the Inhabitaunts of the great City of Niueue, Jonas 3
when the Prophet denounced from Gods own mouth, the subversion and utter
destruction of that City, within forty days immediately to ensue, and come
upon them. So did that devout and godly Queen Hester, and her retinue, Hest:
4:22
and her good Uncle Mardocheus and his servants: when they with the people and
whole nation of the Jews, were in no small danger, by reason of the
blood-thirstie designment, and platform of Hammon, their extreme enemy.
Liberius, who lived in the time of Constantine, when as either the seasons were
unnatural, or any famine, pestilence, or war, did oppress the land, adjudged
it most necessary that a fast should be proclaimed, August.
whereby ye anger of God might be assuaged. Augustine when he saw that his
city was assaulted, and besieged by the enemies, the Vandales, he humbled
himself with fasting and prayer: in which siege he died, as Possidonius does
record. So at all times when we are to perform any serious matter, or would
prevent an imminent judgment, or otherwise would entreat a deliverance from a
plague, which is already come upon us, we are to fast. Fasting is a thing that
is in our freedom: for by the outward law he cannot be condemned that refuses
to fast. But when as our fasting may promote Gods glory, it is not then free,
we ought necessarily to fast: we prescribe no time for it, because it is not
prescribed by the Scriptures. August. ad Caff. praesbyt. Epist: 68
For well faith S. Augustine, Ego in euangelicis, and Apostolicis literis,
torog, instrumento, quod appellatur test amentum nouum ansmo id reuoluens,
video praeceptu^esse set iunissm: quibus autem dieb us non oporteat ieiunare,
and quibus oporteat, praecepto Domini, and Apostelorum non inuenio definitum. I
find both in the Apostolical, and Euangegelicall wrightings, and in the whole
instrument which is called the New Testament, considering it well in my mind,
that fasting is commanded: but upon what days we ought or ought not to fast, I
find it not determined. In the time of war, famine, or pestilence, or in any
affliction, the Scriprures (as before have been abundantly proved) do will
us to fast. Her majesty therefore both in zeal toward God, and love toward
her subjects, has to very good purpose commanded, although not an absolute
fast, which is an abstine^ce from all nourishment, which some for age and
weakness of nature, are not able to bear: yet a moderate diet, commanding an
abatement of our superfluity, for the better releeuing of those which are in
wants, which we cannot without wilful and most unnatural disobedience, refuse
to perform. Dicinonpotest quot vnum intermissum hodie prandium nostrum
saginare potest. It cannot be set down (says Augustine) how many poor people
may be relieved by the forbearing of one meal: Aug.
which thing how easy is it for us to do: and if we shall do it, both God
thereby shall be served, our good Queen obeyed, her dear subjects, and our
fellow members in Christ Jesus succored, our wealth nothing thereby impaired,
and our bodily health not a little furthered: wherefore if there be in us any
comfort of the spirit, any consolation in Christ Jesus, any fellowship, any
mutual love, or tender compassion one toward another, fulfill this order and
obey this precept, that peace may still be in our walls, and plenteousnesse
within our palaces.

CHAP. X. That the Prince, or Bishop, or civil magistrate under the Prince,
and no private person, is to preseribe a certain time for any public or
general fast: and that the Prince next under God is chief head of the Church.
AS a public fast is only to be commanmanded for public causes, so none but
public persons may enjoyne the same. The frantike Anabaptist arrogantly in
this thing, as in diverse other Church matters, intrudeth himself into the
magistrates office, and at his pleasure when the toy is in his head assembleth
his factious consorts, and companions, and proclaims a fast. The lewd Papist
who excludes the Prince from all Church government, and ordains the Pope to
be the head of the church, would not have the Prince to meddle with this
office, and prescribe this duty. Thus as Iannes and Iambres resisted Moset, so
these two scismaticall and heretical sects, do resist their Prince. But the
light of Gods word will scatter their darkness, the truth of the Scriptures
will discover their falsehood, they will fall down both like Dagon before the
Ark of God: and the pregnant instances of the word of God, shall swallow up
these fancies of these charming spirits: as Moses and Aarons rods devoured
the rods of the Egyptian Sorcerers. If we look into the Scriptures, and
into the public fasting of all times that are there remembered, it will soon
appear, that either the Prince, Bishop, or Magistrate, had the appointment
of this godly duty. When as the Philistines grievously afflicted and spoiled
the Israelites, 2. Sam. 7.4.
the whole people generally were assembled and conuented to Mizpah, where they
both wept and fasted for this miserable calamity. But it was by the counsel
and designement of Samuel their Bishop and their Magistrate. A gain when their
was war between these two people, 1 Samuel 14
it was Saul their King that gave commandment to the host, that they should
fast until the evening. When the Philistines had slain Saul in mount Gilboa,
and put to flight the armies of ye Israelites, 1 Samuel 1, 12
David who reigned in Saul's steed, 2 Par. 20
moved the people unto a general fast. King Iehosophat likewise in a trouble
some time, Hester 4.16
Gave order for a fast. So did Queen Hester, when as her liege people by the
treachery of Hamon, 2 King. 25, 8
did stand in ieopardy. When a fast was proclaimed for Naboaths destruction, it
was decreed and commanded by the authority of Iezabell. Joel 1, 16
When the trumpet was blown vpin Sion, and a convocation of the people had,
and a fast denounced, it was by the aduisement of the Prophet Joel. Esdras who
was learned in the law of the God of heaven, Esdras 8, 21
and the Lords minister, prescribed a general fast unto the people. Acts 13, 2
So did the Primative Church, when Paul and Barnakas went their visitation, and
travailed to those Cities where the Gospel was not preached. Infinite other
such like testimonies might be produced, but that they are needless in a cause
so manifest. It is not inhibited unto any, to mortify his flesh, and subdue
his affections, and by a godly fast to make himself fitter for godly duties,
whenever he shall be disposed thereunto. If a man be afflicted in himself,
or in his family, he is permitted to humble himself and his soul with
fasting, and to use any means to turn away Gods anger, or prevent a judgment
to come. But for a private person to call a congregation, to summon a fast, as
it may be the cause of much public mischief (as much hurt has grown to the
Realm by housed conuenticles and encamped factions) so we cannot find it
tolerable by the word of God. This is an office appertaining to civil and
ecclesiastical governors: what private man therefore shall put in his sickle
into this harvest: as he runs into Dathan and Abiron his sedition, so he
may condignely incur their punishment. Wherefore let the most unlearnedly
learned Elders of the Anabaptisticall crew, and the whole rabble of that
ungodly, disloyal, and scismatical sect know, that they ought not, as they do,
most malepertly, and profanely, upon every idle motion of their brain,
assemble a people, and celebrate a fast. Let the Pope likewise keep himself
in his own bounds, and meddle with those that are under his government, and
preseribe laws and Christian duties to his own people. We are under the
government of gracious Queen Elizabeth, whom God has set as Queen over the
holy hill of Sion: it is she that may command general fasts, public prayers,
and all other exercises of a Christian man. This the Pope and popelings cannot
abide, but the truth of it is as clear as the Sun and Scriptures and examples
do abundantly prove it. When the Ark of God was restored, did not David the
King play the first part: David being king, made Psalms and ditties: David
being King, danced before the Arc, and being king numbered all the Priests and
Leuits, and disposed them into four and twenty courses: appoynting them
continually to serve in the ministry every one in his turn. Moses the
magistrate, rebuked Aaron the high Priest, for crecting a Golden calfe. King
Solomon displaced Abiathar the high Priest, 1 King: 2
by his kingly power, 1 King, 8
and placed Sadoch in his steed. Also dedicating the Temple of the Lord, with
all his people, blessed the whole congregation of Israel. Also good Ezechias
did put forth his hand unto the Lords plough, 2 King. 8.
and restored true religion, of whom it is written: He did that was right in
the fight of the Lord, according to all things that his father David had done
before: he took away the groaues and brake down Images. Judas Machabeus did
purge the Temple, which the Idolatrous Gentiles had before profaned. 2. King,
23, 25
Josias restored Religion, and reformed the temple, and it was written of him,
That there was no king like unto him: before nor after him arose there any like
him. When as Artaxerxes the King, gave his regal authority and high
commission to Esra the Priest, to censure and punish Church abuses, the priest
allowed the Kings doing, and commended him for it, saying: Ezra. 6.
Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers, who has put into the Kings mind to
beautify the Lords house, which is in Jerusalem. By these and such like
evidences, it appears, that Kings and princes in the old time, had the
dealing in Ecclesiastical matters, as in calling the people to Gods service:
in cutting down groaues: in destroying of Images: in gathering tithes into the
Lords house: in dedicating the temple: in blessing the people: in casting down
the brazen Serpent, in correcting and deposing priests, in commanding such
things as pertain to the service and worship of God, and in due pnnishing
the contrary. Christ wills tribute to be given unto Caesar, Mat. 2.
and denies not power to be given to Pilate from above: John. 19
therefore they do not well that mangle Commonwealths, and divide them into
two, and devise two heads, the one for the spirituality, the other for the
laity. For the Prince is the keeper of the law of God, and that of both
tables, as well of the first, that appertains unto religion, as of the second
that tends to good order. He is the head of all the cominalty, and laity,
and also of the ministers and clergy. Romans 13, 1
Saint Paul ratifieth and confirms the same, saying: Let every soul be
subject to the higher power: whether he be Pope, Bishop, or whatsoever he be,
all are under subjection to the Prince. Of the superiority and commanding
power of the prince, Tertullian speaks thus: Tertull ad feapulam.
Colimus imperatos rem, vt hommem a deo secundum solo deo mis norem: We worship
the Emperor as a man next unto God, and inferior to none but God. A large and
just treatise might be written of this matter, but let this suffice which is
noted by the way, and let none presume without designement, and Commission of
his Prince, either by his public office, and authority, or otherwise by
express commandment from her mouth, to solemnize a general and universal
fast. Forasmuch as a fast is a Religious duty, and the Prince is to set down
orders for Religion.

CHAP. XI. An exhortation unto fasting.
Having thus prescribed both the spiritual and external fast, I would exhort
thee dear Christian, carefully, and diligently, when it is commanded to
perform the same: If it seem hard and grievous to perform, show wherein,
and it will soon be answered. For indeed if we be willing unto it, the
yoke is easy, and the burden is light. Ambrose does propounde to such
conceited people. Amb: lib, Elia and iciunio;
Qui grave die eunt terunium esse, respondeat quis ietunie defecerit? Multi in
prundto, plerig dum epulum vomunt fudere animam. Quod animal leiunium sibi
causam fuisse mortis ingemuit, per escam laque us non cauetur, in esca hamu
later, and crbus du^^t in retia, cibus visco etia^ aues illigat. They who
suppose fusting to be burdensome and grievous, let the^ name us any, who have
fainted through fasting a many at their dinuers, and diverse in their vomis
thins, have lest their lives. What living creature harb eyer complained that
he has dyed by abstinence, by reason of the barte the snare is not avoided:
The hook is covered with the bait, the bait tolleth and draws into the
net, and by it the bird with lime is soon entangled. 2 objection.
But thou will reply, Dulcis volupt as videtur, amarum ieiunium. The pleasure
of meat and drink is sweet, but fasting is sower. But I answer heereunto,
that there is more virtue in the sower then in the sweet. Amb ibi. cap. 11.
Amara solent plus prodesse corportbus: sicut enim cum in intimis puerorum
visceribus, vera mes qui ex cibi indigestone nasountur exting ui non queant
uisi cum amartor potus insunditur aut medicamentorum vis molescat a speris or
quorum odore moriantur ita etc. Sower things are more profitable to the body. A
similitud.
For as worms that do breed in the bowels of young children, by reason of
the rawnesse of the Stomach, not able to digest and concoct his meat, cannot
be destroyed, but by powing into the stomach a bitter potion, or before a
strong and forcible savor, that comes from the Medicine, does overcome
them and cause them to die: so hurtful humors that redounde in the body, and
unwholesome affections that reign in the souls, are purged and mortified, by
no better means, then by a spiritual and bodily fast, and by a moderate and
sober carriage of our selves, A similitude
in the order of out diet. It is usually with a fast, as with a purgation,
vnsauoune and bitter for an hour, or a small tie after, but wholesome and
profitable for a long time after: whereas contrariwise, excessive, mordinate
and notous diet, is delightful a little time, but afterward deadly, or a
long time cumbersome and hurtful unto us. As the red pottage was pleasant to
Esau a while, Genesis 25
because of his hunger: but afterward much sower, when as he could not by any
means no not with all faltish and brinish tears make a purchase and redeem
again his birthright, 3. Oblectio^
But thou will moreover say, That fasting is a violence offered unto the body
and there is no man (says Saint Paul) that bateth his own flesh, but
nourishes and cherishes it Let such esteem their flesh as it ought to be
esteemed, and this objection will soon be done away. Aug. de vtilitace^e^.
mi.
Compedem puta caernem tuam, quis amat compedem suam? carcerem puta carnem
tuam, Quis amat carcerem suam? quls non oderit vinculum suum? quis non oderit
paenam suam? Think thy flesh to be thy fetter, what prisoner does love
fetter? think thy body to be thy prison, what man is in love with his prison?
who does not hate his manacle? who does not hate his punishment? We answer
yet further with the same Reverend Austine, that in subduing and humbling the
body with fasting, to make it the more obedient to the spirit, we show no
hatred at all unto the body. Non odis mus quam nobis eupimus obedire: filium
tuum domas vt tibi obediat, numquid odists? serunm tuum dilegis and castig as,
and in castigando obedientem facis. We do not hate that which we would
have to obey us. Thou will tame thy son that he may obey thee, do thou
therefore hate him? Thou love thy servant, yet correctest thy servant, and
in correcting him, thou make him conformable unto thee. Habet caro ex
co^ditione mortalt, quasi quosdam ternenos appetitus suos, in hos tibiius
fraeni con^ cessum est. Infra te est ca^o tua, supra te est Deus tuus. Attendis
quod sub te est, attend and quod supra te est, leges in inferiorem non habes
nisi a superiore. Cum vis vt seruiat tibi caro tua admoneris quomodo to
oporteat seruire Deo tuo? The flesh of his natural and mortal condition, h^th
certain earthly affections: over these we have authority, and there is
Bridle given unto us, that they be not lascivious, and extrauagant to curble
them, and restrain them, and to keep them in. Beneath thee is thy flesh,
above thee is thy God: thou look to that which is under thee, look to that
which is above thee. Thou have no law over thy inferior, but that which was
given thee by thy superior. When thou would have thy flesh to be obedient
unto thee, thou art then admonished, how thou ought to be obedient unto
thy God.

An other Objection there is, 4, Objection
not unlike unto the former, which the evil spirit does suggest unto us, to
bring us into neglect, and contempt of this duty. For thus says the Tempter.
In fasting thou do defraude thy self, Aug. ibid.
and art a thief unto thy belly. In not giving unto the stomach that which
it delights, thou punishest thy self, and art thy own tormentor: Does God
take pleasure in this thy excruciating and vexing of thy self? If he does, he
is cruel that is delighted in thy sorrow. Responde huiusmodr tentatori,
excructo me plane vt ille parcat, do de me poenas vtille subueniat, and vt
placeam oculis etus, nam and victima excruciatur vt in aram imponatur: Answer
this tempter in this wise: I do indeed punish and torment my self, that God
might spare me: I my self take punishment of my self, that God might he^^e
me, and that I might be gracious in his eyes: for the sacrifice is tortured,
and mangled, that I might be offied upon the Lords alter. I know that these
are the greatest rubbes and blocks, that do from our way, and do keep us
from fasting. These are the principal and manifest objections urged against
this matter, which do most forcible strive against our Nature, and do
prevail with it. All which, the learned Fathers, (as you have heard) have
very wittily, and approouedlie answered, and taken away whatsoever else may
be imagined, and urged, is nothing (I am sure) in respect of the premises,
but they will be as soon dissoluted, as they shall be propounded. Therefore
there being noreasons why we should not fast, let us see what reasons may
move us to fasting. I must briefly rippe them up, Et quasi digitum ad fontes
intendere: And but point with my finger at the several heads, because their
are so many. Fasting is very commendable for very good causes. 1 Cause why
we should fast.
First, because of the founder and author thereof. The greater the persons
are, who do make a law, the greater authority must be given unto that law.
If the laws of men, and of an earthly Prince, do stand in force: then this
law and ordinance, of fasting must have his vigor, and be like the Median,
and the Persian laws, which cannot be altered, because it was not instituted
by man, or by an Angel from Heaven: Ambrose lib. de Heliae and ieiunio.
but by GOD himself. Abstinentie lex a Do^ mino, praeuaricatio legis a
Diabolo. Serpens gulaepersuadet dominus, Gen 3
ieiumare decreuit. The law of abstinencie was made by God: the breach of this
law was motioned by the devil. It was ye Serpent that counseled to eat. and it
was the Lord that commanded man to fast. 2. Cause
There are many things commendable for their antiquity: but there is no
institution so ancient as fasting: being in the beginning ordained in
Paradise, in the time of man's innocence. So says Saint Augustine. August.
co^t. Julian Pelag: lib: 1: refert verba Rasilii quae transtulit verbum e verbo
de Graeco.
Ieiunium in Pardiso lege constitutum est, primum enim madatum accepit Adam a
ligno sciendi bon^m and malum, non manducabis: non manducabis autem ieiunium
est, and legis constitutionis initium. Si ieiun asset a ligno Eua, non isto
indige emus ieinnio. Non enim opus habent valentes medico, sed male habentes.
Aegrotauimus per peccatum sanemur per poenitentiam, poenitentia vero sine
ieiunio vacua est. Fasting was commanded by a law in Paradise: for the first
commandment that was given to Adam, was of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil: thou shall not eat of it: not to eat, is to fast: and is the beginning
of this law established. If Euah had fasted as it was commanded, we had not now
had need of any other fast: for those who are whole, need no phisi^^an, but
those who are sick: we have been sick through sin, let us be made whole by
repentance: repentance without fast is not aunleable. Ambrose likewise
subscribeth to Augustine in this assertion. Primus vsus mundi a ieiunto caepit
sexto, die bestiae sunt creatae, and cum bestiis or ta edendi potestas est, and
vsus escarum, Ambrose lib: de nelia and ieiunio.
vbicibus caepit ibt finis factus est mundi. The first use of the world began
with fasting: beasts were created the six^ day, and with them came in the
liberty of eating, and the use of meats: as soon as meat began, the
creation of the world did end. It was well with mankind, when Adam fasted, 3.
Cause.
but when he did eat, he did subject himself and his whole posterity unto an
eternal curse. Quamdiu interdictis abstinuere, nesciebant esse se nudos: post
quam manduc auerunt de interdicta arbore, nudatos esse sese cognonerunt: Culpa
cum cibo, latebra post cibum. Whilst Adam and Euah did abstain from fruit
forbidden, they knew not that they were naked: but after they did taste of the
Tree inhibited, they knew that they were naked. The transgression came in with
their eating and their sliding from Gods presence after their eating. To this
purpose, says Saint Augustine: Quia non tecunauirnus, Aug e^nt. Iulianum Pelag
lib. 1
decidimus de paradiso: Ierunemus ergo vt ad eum redeamus: because we did not
fast we were drinen out of Paradise, let us therefore fast, that we may return
into Paradse. Wherefore, since fasting serve for a good remembrance of man's
innocence, and the contrary for a memorial of his sin, whosoever reioy ceth of
his eating and drinking, and like an Epicure does d^^ light therein, is a
frantike fellow distracted of his wits, A Similitude.
and resembles the thief, who being saved from the gallows, is commanded
always to wear a rope, as a token of his lewdness, should wax insolent or
proud of his halter: or the beggar who takes pleasure to show his wounds,
botches, and carbuncles, A Similitude.
and putrefying sores.

The life of Christ should be our imitation, 4 Cause, Ephesians 5
so Saint Paul counsaileth: Be ye followers of me, eue^ as I am of Christ
Jesus. It is a shame for us to live in feasting, 1 Samuel 11
when our grand captain Ioab did give himself to fasting. There is no good
sou dier, but when he sees his captain to be hardy, and to give the onset,
but will be venturous and put himself forward to do as he does. But if our
life were compared to his, and our works laid unto his, it would appear what
bad workmen we are: not like unto workmen working by the rule, but contrary to
the level and square which he prescribes, Christ that knew no sin, neither
was there any guile found in his mouth, fasted for our sin, and we that are
full of sin, and sin it self, can find no time to fast for our own sins.
Our good master fasted for us bad sernants, but we most unthankful, will do
nothing for him again. It is the use of this world, to give a great dinner
first, and a less supper after, and to set the best wine on the table first,
and the worser last: as the governor of the feast did at the marriage in Cana,
a town in Galilee. John. 2
But Christ gives us the less here, that we might have more elsewhere: he
wills us to fast now, that in heaven we may feast, and sit with him at
talbe in the resurrection of the just. But we walk contrary to his rule, like
unto the Libertines and profane professors in Paul's time, whom with grief and
heaviness he speaks of saying: Phil. 3
There are many that walk, of whom I have spoken often, and now again do
speak of weeping; who are enemies to the cross of Christ, whose God is their
belly, and whose end is damnation.

If the president of Christ, and the examples of good men, ^. Cause.
who have given themselves to fasting (as heretofore has been proved)
cannot stir our affections: let the practice of the wicked, whom we
willingly follow in evil things, move us to this duty. Albeit we should line
rather by precepts, then examples: yet so it is, that as a Child writes by his
example, so we do all things according to example, both in good and evil. The
b^ddest sort of people have acknowledged a fast, and as occasions have been
offered, have given themselves unto it. 1 Samuel 14.
Saul a reprobate and outcast of Israel, warring against the Philistines,
commanded a fast. Iezabell an odious and detestable woman, 2 King 25.
conuented Naboath before the people, by publicatio^ of a fast. At the
preaching of Jonas, Ionae. 2.
the king of Nineue, a heathenish King, throughout all the borders and
precincts of his kingdom, proclaimed a most solemn and absolute fast. Luc. 18.
The lewd Pharisee was not wanting in this duty, for he fasted twice in a
week. Aug, de Ciuit. d^i.
Augnstine says, that Porphirius did teach the people to abstain from flesh,
and gross meats: affirming that it did purify and cleanse the mind, and
made them readier unto heavenly matters, and to private familiar^ie and
conference with the diuelles. Plutarch. lib. de Iside and Onride.
Plutarch affirms, that the Priests were wont to restaine from such meats as
do provoke lust: and that they never did bring wine into the temple of their
God. And they did very peremptorily conclude it, to be a very heinous thing
to drink wine in the day time, their God beholding them. The same Plutarch in
another treatise faith, Plutarch. lib. de cohibend. iracundia. Liuie.
that there were certain sacrifices which were performed with water, without
wine. Liuie witnesses, that when as there happened diverse prodigious, and
strange sights at Rome most fearful to behold, which did presage and foretell
some great judgment to ensue, and ten Ambassadors were sent to receive an
answer from Sibyllaes Oracles, of the cause thereof, and what they threatened:
that answer was returned, that first a public fast should be denounced, for
the honor of Ceres, which was to be continued every fist year: and that by
that means the anger of God might be mittigated and appeased. How justly
therefore may Christians be ashamed, who cast off that which the very heathens
and infidels do embrace.

It is a base and abject thing, 6. Cause.
to give our selves to feasting, albeit we think so highly of it, A
Similitude.
and esteem it as the cheifest. If the Queen should set^e one of her cheifest
servant who is most gracious in her eyes; and of her inward Counsel, to the
meanest drudgerie, to rub horse heels, to dress them, and to keep them, it
is certain that he should be ex reamely debased, and should be exposed unto
great reproach: It is so with us, when we leave godly duties, as prayer and
fasting, and feed and pamper our gross senses with superfluity of diet:
Seneca.
for what are our senses but carnal and beastly, given and devoted to gross
desires? Seneca being a Gentile says: Mayor sum, and ad maiora natus quam vt
corporis mei manciptum fiam. I am a greater man, and borne to greater things,
then to be a bondslaue to my body. Homely and slender fare do as well relieve
the poor, as a high and sumptuous diet does the rich. Daniel thriued as well
with Water and Pulse, as others did with the Kings iunkets. August.
Nonne si specularia in ventre haberemus de omnibus cibis pretiosis
erubesceremus, quibus saturati sumus: If there were windows in our stomachs,
that we might see into them would we not blush at the sight of al our dainty
and delicate meats, when we see them crowded altogether in a heap, and to lie
like a dunghill?

Much hurt has ensued by our eating, 7 Cause A Similitude.
therefore there is much good in fasting. The ship that is ouerladen is ready
to sincke: so when we are ouerburdened with earthly creatures, we are ready to
perish. Gen 3.
The devil by meat slew our first parents, Job. 1.
and assaulted Job when he was banqueting with his sons, Set them both together
and you shall soon see the good that the one, and the hurt that the other does.
Lot by fasting kept himself safe, when Sodom was destroyed. Genesis 19. Genesis 1.
Adam when he fasted was in Paradise: but when he had eaten, he was driven
out. Moses when he fasted, received the Law: the people when they feasted
transgressed the Law: they did eat and drink (says the Scripture, but what
followed thereupon: they arose up to play, they erected a Calfe. Judith 33. 1
King. 13. Dan. 15.
When Holophernes was ouerladen with wine, he was slain of Judith. Ammon the
son of Daiud overcome with meat and Wine, perished. King Baltasar of
Babylon, Dan: 15
when he was quaffing out of great bowls; saw the handwriting on the wall,
which was his doom, and his fatal judgment, that he should loose his
kingdom, Vasty, Hester 1
after a banquet lost her authority, and was debased, and deposed from all
regiment. As the devil began with meat, so did Christ with fast. Cen: 1 Mat. 3
That we might take this for a tried conclusion, that contrary things are
cured by the contrary. Samson with the law bone of an Ass, Judge: 13
slew a thousand of his enemies: be thou but master of this law bone, and thou
shall subdue many enemies. A similitude.
Those who accustom themselves to eat and drink largely, are like unto those
who are so fat and thick in the arm, as a vain cannot be found, that they
might be let blood, by means whereof they die: So those who feed grosely, and
mast themselves, are but preserved till the day of slaughter: they grow
incurable, and for the most part die without repentance. Wherefore since there
is so much good in fasting, and hurt in the contrary, avoid the one and
follow the other: A good saying.
or else thou do not wisely. If thou should take a way which is very
dangerous, and thou should be forewarned that thieves and robbers do keep
that way, would thou not shun it? would thou not take a contrary path?
I am sure thou would: then much more, avoid this way that is commonly taken
of eating and drinking: for strong poison is mixed with sauorie meats, and
with honey cups, here are many thieves and robbers, that would rob us of our
bodily health, and spoil our soul.

A man when he is burdened with meats is dull and unapt, to any godly duty.
8. Cause A similitude
Those birds that feed grosely do never fly hie: so those who live carnally,
will not live in any good motion: they do soon quench the spirit, and like
unto a grasse-hopper, though he often skippeth up, A similitude
yet falls he presently unto the earth again. Wherefore Paul a vessel of
mercy, many times afflicted, and humbled his body, Acts 9 1 Cor 9 Dan. 10
that whilst he taught others, he himself might not be a reprobate. Daniel to
be fitter to receive Gods Oracles, gave himself to a long continued fasting.
What man is there, who having two servants, the one wise, A sit similitude.
and the other foolish, will compel the wise man, to be ruled by the foolish?
But this do thou when thou would have thy slesh ouerrule thy spirit, and
by cockring of the flesh, do utterly extinguish the good motions of the
spirit. Wherefore as Jacob took Esau by the foot so take thou this vice b^
the foot, Genesis 25.
and give him a fall: and let him not be to thee an occasion of thy fall.

To what purpose do we cramme our selves with excessive diet and bumbaste and
quilt our selves without continual gluttony. Cause.
When as our life is short, but a span long, like unto a vapor, a morning
cloud, and a bubble in the water we do heere^n like those, A similiude.
who purposing to make a sumptuous banquet, do cramme Capons, and diverse other
creatures, both beasts, and fowls: purposely to kill them against that time:
So we do fat and puff up our bodies against a set time, which God has
appointed. That so the worms when we are in our graves may have a larger, and
more sumptuous banquet out of our carcases: This is a very preposterous course.
A similitude.
There is none that will bestow coast upon that house, that is so ruinous,
that it is ready to fall, by patching and peesing it, and curiously adorning
the walls of it. Our bodies are ruynous and patched houses, not worthy the
coaste that we bestow of them, howsoever we think that we can never bestow
coaste enough upon them.

It is to no purpose to inuit him to a costly feast, to day, A Similitude.
that must be hanged to morrow: or to make him fat or lusty of body, that
must immediately after die: Wherefore since we must all die, and no man has
any warrant of life for an honre, why do we so frantickly delight in feasting
and ry^tous feeding?

The Sp^der with long labor spinneth a web, A Similitude.
and weaueth a net to entangle the Fly, and a little puff of wind comes,
and destroys them both. We take great care what we shall eat, and what we
shall drink, and a little breath that goes out of our body, does rid us of
this care, and make all our thoughts to perish.

Last of all, 10 Cause. Aug. in P^^l 42.
this fast is expedient for the better relief and maintenance of the poor.
Quot enim pauperes saginare potest, intermssum hodie prandium nostrum. For what
a multitude of poor people might be sufficed with the intermission and
forbearing but of one meal. ^ta ergo ietuna vt paupere manducante prandisse te
gaudeas. Aug. by.


Wherefore so fast, as thou may rejoice, that thou have well dined, by
making the poor to dine. It has pleased God to make a fruitful land barraine,
for the wickedness of men that are therein: To take from us the staff of
bread, and to send a dearth and scarcity amongst us. It behooves us
therefore sparingly, and moderately to receive Gods creatures, for the
necessary sustenance and relief of our bodies: and that we waste not them
upon our own gluttenous and inordinate lusts, least Judas does expostulate
the case with us, as he did with his master in a charitable action saying:
What needs this waste, it had been better it had been sold, and given unto
the poor. For this cause, order has been taken, by our renowned Queen, our
tender and nourcing mother, and by her provident and careful Magistrates, that
an abstinence, and moderate diet shoud be used for the poores sake, which
sanction and iniunction, is not only most necessary, both for the peace and
plenty of the land, and good of our bodies (as in the premises has been
showed) but serviceable unto God, peaceable unto our consciences, and for the
eternal good of our souls, being used aright, as in the sequel shall be
proved. Many other reasons might have been rehearsed, for the further urging
of this proposition: but because my leisure is but small, and these may seem
sufficient, I willingly pretermit them, and deal with them as Salomom did with
the brass in Temple, which because it was so much, he would not weigh it.

FINIS.
The second Book which is a treatise of Alms, very needful for this time of
scarcity.
The first Chapter. What alms is, and how fasting and giving of alms are to
be conjoined.
THe ancient and accustomed word which is used of the schoolmen, which
signifies alms, is Eleemesyna: and it is a word of a wide and large
signification, and it is to be extended as far as the Latin word Misericordia,
Every work of mercy is an alms.
which we call in English Mercy. Whatsoever benefit we do bestow upon any in a
mere co^misera^ion of his distressed estate, and in the tender bowels of
compassion, and mercy, be the gift of what nature and condition soever, it is
naturally and properly an alms. If thou feedest the hungry, give drink unto
the thirsty, and clothest him that is cold, and naked, harborest the stranger:
healest the sick or otherwise sustainest him with thy charitable devotion: or
finally, if thou aidest him that is oppressed with injury, with thy authority
and counsel: if thou do hearten the afflicted soul with godly comfort: if
thou ransomest the prisoner, or friendly do support any that is in miserable
and dangerous estate, thou have done an acceptable and gracious alms Wherefore
the Lord does not bind thee, when he wills thee to give alms to any set
duty, to give money, to bestow clothes, or to give thy me^te, but to show
mercy, because that none should plead their poverty, or exempt themselves
from performance of this service, under pretense and color of their want. For
though they be in want of money, or any other thing, yet here is none but may
show mercy, in some sort or other. And this is true alms, which the Scriptures
do prove, Aug in Lucam, ser. 30
and S. Augustine does acknowledge, saying. Quid est facere Eleemosynam?
Facere scilicet misericors diam. What is it to give alms, but to show mercy?
The^e is none therefore that any go under protection to live as he list, but
every one must bring his merciful alms into the Lords treasure-house. For
every one is enjoined to show mercy, and this is the general commandment of
the law, that we love our neighbors as our selves.

Wherefore since every merciful affection may be fitly called an alms, A
double Alms. 1. The one true. 2. Theother false.
whatsoever is not given in this affection, but proceeds from other strange
by-thoughts, and purposes, is merely counterfeit, hypoctiticall, and false, and
is to be retected as the gold which wants weight, and as the corn which
wants measure. That thine alms may be current, it is not material, whether
the person be honest, or lewd, upon whom thou bestowest it, or how much or
little it is that thou bestowest. But this is the maine matter, principally to
be regarded, with what mind and spirit we do bestow it. A true alms
therefore is not outwardly to be considered, but inwardly to be pondered: not
without us, but in our selves who give it. It may be that he to who^ thou
give thy alms, be both honest and distressed: and yet thy alms may be no
true alms, because thy heart is not touched with that mercy which is required.
So contrariwise, it often fallen out, yt the alms is good, which is bestowed
upon a man that is bad, because simply in a merciful inclination, it has been
given unto him. Moreover, so it is that much is given by him that has much,
and but little of him that has but little: and yet that much is altogether a
feigned, and this little the most perfect Alms. For it is the diversity of
the minds of the giuers, and not of the gifts, that thus distinguishes of the
Alms. Luke. 21.
The widow woman that was poor did cast in but two mites, but the rich men did
offer largely: but the widows pittance was preferred before the abundant
contributions of the wealthy.

The abler sort therefore, have from hence just occasion to bethink themselves
of their uncharitable affections, who when they should stretch out their arms
unto the poor, to give them Alms, they examine them of their lives, and take
account of their doings. As if so be the only thing to be stood upon, were
the goodness of the man, not knowing that this is only to be regarded, that we
our selves be good. If their eye be evil because our is good, the judgment
shall be theirs: but judgment merciless, shall be showed upon us, if we show
no mercy, and mercy rejoices against condemnation.

Further, because that alms is a mere mercy, whatsoever we give
discontentedly and giudgingly, it is no good alms. For it is given as a crust
of bread is given to a dog, because he so barketh. Mul^^ dant, says Aus
gustene, vt careantteadio interpellantis, non vt reficerent viscera indigentis.
Aug. in Psalm, 4^.
There are many that give to be free from their tedious and i^ksome begging,
and not to refresh the bowels of the needy. This is not to be accounted the
good alms.

Last of all, ^f alms be preposterously bestowed to a perverse end, either
for vain glory and applause of men, or for hope sake of a better wor^dly
profit or for to merit or expecta reward in be^^^n for ^^ (for which cause the
^apists are so libera ^^n their alms or to stay amutmous and rebelious people
that are read to make garboyles, to avoid the extremity they endure by famine
or for any other public and political or p^iuate and beneficial cause: All
which things hereafter shall be more largely handled: If it be given to any of
these ends, or to any other end, then to this end, for to show mercy, it is to
no end before almighty God nor it is no true alms.

I have adioined this treatise to the former, That fastine and giving of alms
are to go together. Esaias 58.
because that they are conjoined in the Scriptures, and go both together. For
God says by the mouth of his Prophet. Is it such a fast that I have chosen,
that a man should afflict his soul for a day, and to bow down his his head
as a Bulrish, and to lie down in sacks cloth and ashes? VVilt thou call this a
fasting, or an acceptable day to the Lord? Is not this the fasting that I have
chosen, to loose the bonds of wickedness: to take off the beauy burdens? to
let the oppressed go free? and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy
bread to the hungry? and that thou bring the poor that wander into thine
house? when thou see the naked that thou cover him, and hide not thy self
from thine own flesh? Wherefore that which God has joined together, let no man
put asunder. Augustine gives a reason why fasting and Alms should be combined
and linked together. Noli^eiunium putare sufficere. Ie^umu^ te castis gat no^
alterum reficit. Aug. in Psalm. 42.
Do not thou think yt fasting is sufficient. Fasting does afflct thee: it
helps not another. Ambrose accou^teth fasting without alms a mere
marcha^dize, and trade of gain. Amb tom. 3 S. ^m 33.
Qui sic abstinet vt nihil pauperibus de suis epulis largiatur: videtur
quaestu^ sibi suum fecisse ieiunium, and negotiationem parcando, atque ideo
bona elecmosyna cum ieiunio. They who do so abstain from meat, as they give
nothing of that which they spare unto the poor, he seems to make his fast
gainefull unto him, and to make an occupation of sparing, and therefore he
concludes that alms with fasting is good and commendable. Aug. in Psalm. 43.
To this purpose says Augustine: Vis orationem tuam volare ad deum fac illi
duas alas ieiunium and elecmosynam. Will thou have thy prayer fly up unto
God? give it two wings, fasting and alms. Let these two therefore as
Hipocrates two twins, Isai. 58.
go hand in hand together. Then shall thy light break forth as the morning,
and thine health shall grow speedily: thy righteousness shall go before thee,
and thee glory of the Lord shall embrace thee: then shall thou call, and the
Lord shall answer: thou shall cry, and he shall say here I am. Join thou
therefore thine alms with thy fasting, it is no fase and inferior duty, but
it is an honorable and right noble action, and condignely to be matched with
it. There has been no man, no not of the highest dignity, but have stouped
unto this, and have bin desirous to seem bountiful, liberal, and gracious,
and to do good to others. Titus Vespasian at night time, succouring and helping
the afflicted people, Tit. Vespatianus.
wept that he had not been beneficial unto any all the day time, complaining
and saying: Amici diem perdidimus: My friends we have lost this day. Christ
himself says, that the Lordly Gentiles stood much upon this point, and loved
to be credited with this report. The Kings of ye Gentiles reign over them, and
they that bear rule over them, are called gracious bountiful and liberal
Lords. Luke 22.25
The Ethnic people acknowledged such to be acceptable unto God, and therefore
they worshipped Iouem bospitalem, of whom Virgil thus records.

Iuppiter hospitibus nam te dare iura loquuntur.

Natural affection stirs every man that is not of a stony and flintie
heart, to a pitiful regard and commiseration of the poor.

CHAP. II. That God is the author and commander of Alms, and what principal
reasons moved him unto it.
IT is manifest that to give alms is both a necessary and excellent duty,
because the author of it is most excellent, who is God hunselfe, who
commands no triuiall or needless matters, but only such things as serve to
greatest use, and are most behoouefull for us. We are by nature lovers of our
selves, but God who is rich in grace, and full of all mercy yea, is mercy it
self, does touch our hearts with the finger of mercy, and has ingrafted and
ingenerated in us bowels of compassion to be extended toward others. And
therefore that we should put to our helping hand, to raise the poor out of the
mire, and pit off destruction, into which there be many that fall by reason of
their want: he is not only diligent to exhort us thereunto, but very often in
the scriptures very pere^torily does command us. He commands the Israelites
not to vex any stranger, Exodus 22.21
or be grievous unto them, but to entreat them ciuily, and to entertat^e them
courteously: insomuch as here to fore they themselves had been straingers in
the land of Egypt. By calling into them ^^mdes their condition that went before
he gine us a very needful lesson, by recounting with our selves the times
that are past, to think of times to come: Temp^^ pateraum, est metus futuri.
The time past, put us in fear of time that may come: for there is nothing
betiding us before, but may befall us again: and there is no calamity
incident unto others, but may light upon our selves. We sing now the Lords
song in our own land, and the Lord has graciously turned our former
captivity in the days of Queen Mary, as the ryuers of the South: He has put
off our sackcloath, and gi^ded us which Gladness. We are now well, but we have
no assurance that we shall always so continue. We may again sit by the
waters of Babylon, weeping and howling for the remembrance of Ston: Deuteronomy. 15.
we may be driven from our houses, and put to beg our bread in desolate
p^aces. Wherefore let us now have a feeling of others that are brought into
this misery, as we would have others have respect of us, when we are in
extremity. In the law he earnestly charge, that they who will be his
people, do so order and dispse their public and private goods, as they may
provide that there be not a beggar amongst them in Israel, to run from door to
door to beg his bread and like a runnagate to continue in scarcity. And
that this prouiso may better be had, he himself prescribes the only course
herein to be followed, to prevent this extremity, that Gods dear servants
might not be exposed to the wide world, as spectacles, and gazing-stocks, and
examples of contempt, in respect of want. To this end do serve these several
constitutio^s. Deuteronomy. 14.
First of tithes to be gathered at the end of the third year, that part of
them might remain for the poor. Deuteronomy 1.2
Of debts to be forgiven every seventh year. Of the year of Iubile, Leuit.
25.
in the which every man that had sold his possessions might return to them
again. Deuteronomy. 14.
Of solemn feast-dayes, consisting upon gratulatorie oblations, that whilst
they fed largely, Leuit. 23.
and were merry before the Lord, they should be mindful of them who were
poor and succourlesse, Leuit. 25.
that they might have part, and rejoice also with them. Of reaping of the
harvest of the land, that they should not rap every corner of their field,
neither gather the gleanings or leauings of yt harvest: And if that a sheafe
were forgotten in the field, that they should not go again to fetch it, but
that it should be for the stranger, for the father less, and for the widow.
And when they did beat their Olive trees, yt they should not go over the boughs
again, neither that they should gather their Grapes clean, but leave them for
the stranger, fatherles, and widow. And this which was thus enoined in the law,
was afterward diligently looked unto by the Prophets: and so much esteemed, as
the legal sacrifices, and all other outward exercises of religion were
commanded to give place to the works of mercy. And therefore by Hoseas, Hose.
6.
he tells such as looked by their sacrifices for the for^ forgiveness of
their sins, and such which were committed to the great vexation and oppression
of the poor, that this pleasure is in mercy, and not in sacrifice. Esaias. ^8.
In likesort to those who boasted of their fastings in Esaias his time, he
replieth thus. Is not this the fast that I have chosen, to loose the bands of
wickedness, to let the oppressed go free? to undo every yoke? to break thy
bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that wander into thy house?
If thon s^est the naked, that thou cloth him, and hide not thy self from
thine own fiesh? It would be too long to stand upon every particular
commandement^n the Psalms. and the Prophets, inserted for this matter. Genesis 3.
He disdained not with his own hand^ to cloth our first parents when as they
were naked, to signify that he is a helper of the poor and destitute, but as
for the way of the ungodly, be turns it up side down In the new Testament
this commandment is no less diligently and strughtly enforced let a few places
stand in stead of many. Sell (says Christ) that which thou bast, Luke 12. Luke 3
and give it unto the p^ore. He that has two coats, let him give one to him
that has none. Luke 6
Beye merciful as your beauenly father is merciful: And give, and it shall
be given to you again. Luke 10
In the Parable of him that descended from Jerusalem to Jericho, he is
commended that showed mercy. The lord being moved with mercy and compassion,
relieved and sustained a hungry multitude with five loves, Luke 9
and a few fishes. And he him elfe wills us, that we make our selves
friends, of the unrighteous Mammon. Luke 16
To the young man that asked the way to heaven, Mark 10.
he answered, that if he purposed to comethither, he must here sell all that he
has, Luke 19
and give it to the poor. Zacheus for giving half his goods unto the poor,
was pronounced by Christ to be one of Abraham's children. Luke 12
The covetous earl that said he had not roumth to receive his corn, when as
there was poor enough ready to reciue it, was judged a fool, and had that
night his soul taken from him. To him who shall give but a cup o^f cold water
to a Prophet, in the name of a Prophet, Mat. 12
he promises yt reward of a Prophet. Mat. 25.
And whatsoever is given to the poor is but lent unto God, for he is their
sure^ie. and notes it in his books: and records it amongst his own
accounts, saying: Whatsoever ye have done unto one of these little ones, ye
have done to me. enter into my fathers joy. Whom would not such gracious, and
comfortable promises intise and allure? who will stand against such an army
and host of Scriptures, but such proud ungodly people, of whom David
speaks, Psai. 10.
The ungodly is so proud as he cares not for God, neither is god in all his
thoughts? only Nabal and David's fool will disobey this exhortation, who says
in his heart there is no god, Psalm. ^4
and who is David, and who is ye son of Ishai? that I should give my meat
appointed for my haruest-men unto him? But good Abigael will come forth with
presents, with cakes, raisins, and wine, whereby she not only prevented a
mischief, but received a benefit: for she was thereby married unto David. 1.
Sam. 25.
So good people will offer such necessaries as the poor do want, whereby they
shall escape the Lords vengeance, and be partakers of a blessing, and be
espoused and wedded unto Christ. Wherefore, have a special regard of this
duty, for his sake that is so earnest to obtain it at your hands. We cannot
contemn it, or carelessly remit it, without notable contempt showed unto him,
who has so seriously and effectually co^m^eded it.

Now if we should further debate the matter, Why God did command the giving of
alms, and why he made some rich, and some poor
and reason the case, and ask why God has ordained this duty, who could if it
had liked him, created us all of like condition, that each ma might have lived
by himself, and not have stood in need of another help? We answer with S.
Paul, Who art thou that disputest with God? and wilt pry into his coun^sels?
and take of him a rekconing of his doings? If this answer suffices thee not,
yt thou may be fully satisfied, I give thee these reasons, whereof every one
if they might be followed aptly might be proved by the word of god, being
warranted thereby. First because the rich and the poor are both necessary:
the one for the other. Duo sibi sunt contraria, Aug. in Lue. Sermon. 23.
sed duo sunt sibi necessaria nullus indigeret, si inuice^ se support arent:
and nemo laboraret, si se ambo inuarent. Dives propter pauperem factus est, and
pauper propter diuitem factus est. Pauperis est orare, and diuitis erogare, and
Dei est proparuis magna pensire. They are both contrary, but they are both
necessary, none should stand in need of another, if every man could uphold
himself: and none would labor, if so be they were able to live of the^seleus:
the rich is made for the poor, and the poor for the rich it is the poor man's
duty to pray, and the rich man's to give: and the property of God to recompense
small things, with a great reward. Wherefore, that one should supply an others
want, he would not so provide for mankind, as he did for the birds of the air,
and the beasts of the field, who are fed and clothed by the providence of God,
without the industry and labor of another: but he has so disposed of our
condition as there is none so nobly borne, so rich, so honorable, so learned,
wise, and strong, as he is able of himself to supply all wants, without the
assistance, and supportation of any other. Therefore our common estate is such,
which needs a helper: but besides, there are such infinite chances, and
chaunges, unto which we are subject, and object daily, by which from weith we
fall into poverty: from plenty, into scarcity: from prosperity, into misery:
as unless there were differences, and inequalities of degrees, whereby we may
supply that which an other wants: it should not be possible that any should
long continue. Some are impouerished by long continued sickness, whereby, whilst
they are unable to do any work, they consume that they have, upon needful
expenses, and come into beggary. Some by war, and invasion of the enemy, are
spoiled of their goods, and chased and drive out or their country, and
inheritance of their ancestors, and are put to all extremity. Others by some
secret judgment of God: as by casualtie of fire, by violence of wind and
weather, suffer shipwreck, and are undone. And some bring prouertie upon
themselves, Whilst they are secure, and careless of their estate: riotously
wasting their goods, and making hauock of their substance. Pro. 14.17.
Yet none of these do happen by chance and fortune, and evil luck, but by the
determinate counsel of God, Who (as Solomon says) is creator both of rich and
poor: and has his certain and necessary purposes: for a manifold use and
profit does arise, from this his wise providence. First hereby is just occasion
given, of preserving and increasing mutual love and good will amongst men,
which would either lightly be esteemed, or peradventure would seem strange,
becaue it would not be known, whilst every one should attend unto his prtuate
good, and not have any use and dealing with an other. Again, it not only
occasioneth love, but it is as it were a spur unto our natural dulnesle,
quickening, and giving life unto the mind, to be condiutors unto others,
considering what necessities may light upon our selves. It thirdly gives
matter for us to work upon, that we should not be idle: the poor have matter
to exercise their patience, and the rich to show their Thankfulness. He has
given to some abundantly, that men should know, that god has power over earthly
things: that all the beasts of the forest are his: and all the cattle over a
thousand hills: but he has given more sparingly unto others, because he saw
it was fittest for them. If God should grant every one his hearts desire, and
not disappoint him of his own lust, many would worship him for their private
lucre, and not for love sake. Therefore that he might be sincerely served,
with due devotion, and not fainedly, through ambition, he has ordered that
some should be poor. He has sent poverty, for the good of the poor, and
riches, for the good of the rich. Want to the poor is oftentimes as good, as
hunger to the sick. This kills the disease of the body, and the other of the
soul. Trees are lopped that they may thrive the better, and diverse are
impouerished, similitudes.
that they may live the better. Superfluous and luxurious shrubs, do often
hang over very toward branches, and do hinder their growth, and there
climbing up, and therefore it is needful that they should be pruned: So
riches ouer-shadowe and keep down the mind, and do hinder the growth of of
our forward affections: not suffering them to climb up to heaven. It is
therefore expedient, that they should be cut off, a similitud.
that they might not trouble us. Therefore as we use to clippe birds wings
that they should not fly from us: so God does often cut from us our wealth
that we should not sly from him. Riches is also good for the rich, for it is a
more blessed thing to give then to receive: for by giving and showing mercy,
we show our selves children of our heavenly father, who is merciful unto us.
For this cause Christ for Martha her good, graciously diuerteth into Marthaes
house, to sup with her, when he had other houses to turn into besides, and
might have commanded if it had pleased him a legio^ of Angels to minister unto
him. But because he might enter into her soul, Luk 10.
he entered into her house. Her riches therefore, whereby she was able to
entertain so good a guest, were profitable to her, and tended unto her good.
So was it for the good of the widow of Sarepta, 1 Reg. 17
to give alms unto the Prophet, as it was to the benefit of Abigaell the
Shunamite, to bring presents unto David. 1 Samuel 25.
Therefore since both estates are ordained of God, and he made nothing but he
saw that it was good: Genesis 1
yea in wisdom has he made us all (says the Prophet David, and the earth is
full of the goodness of the Lord: let all of us, both rich, and poor, direct
both our estates unto that which is good: neither waxing proud, in respect of
prosperity, nor suffering our selves to be swallowed up of sorrow, because
of adversity. Though our souls here be filled with the scornful reproves
of the wealthy, and d^sd infulnessE of the proud: yet the poor shall not
always be forgotten. But there shall come a change of times, Luc. 2.
when he shall raise the poor out of the dust and set them amongst the
Princes, even the Princes of the people when he shall throw the mighty from
their seat, and shall exalt the humble, and the meek. When as Jacob was to
b^esse the the two sons of Joseph, Joseph placed Ephraim, Genesis 38.
which was the elder by birth, at the right hand of Jacob, and Manasses the
younger, at the left: but Jacob altered and transposed his hands, and laid his
right hand upon Manasses, and his left hand upon Ephraim so in this world, the
leder brethren have the upper hand, and the poor are born against the wall:
but in the world that is to come, God will make an other reckoning and account:
and displace those, who think themselves best, and give his blessings unto his
little ones, and place them at his right hand in his kingdom. A Similitude.
It is with the wealthy, whilst they are in their roomthes, as with the teeth
whilst they are in the head: for so long as they are sound, we chearish and
preserve them, and keep them carefully, but when they wax wormeaten,
putrified, and corrupted, we pull them out, and cast them away from us: but
con^rariwise, we do with our legs, which be the inferior and nether parts,
bearing up the weight and burden of our bodies: which solon gas they are whole
and sound, we exercise with con^nuall labor and going, making no respect or
difference of places, accustoming them to all base and serviceable duties. If
they shall wax lame, and be disabled by any misfortune, to execute their
business, we do not curte them off, or entreat them roughly, but we tend
them daintily, and take great heed to them, refreshing and helping them, as if
so be they had not been made for sorrow, but given us as a Iewed that is to be
nicely and tenderly laid up. The rich men in this world do resemble the teeth,
for they occupy the head, which is ye cheifest room: if they shall corrupt
and loose their favor, and by any accident be vnseated, and deposed from their
high places of digmtie, they run into a general contempt of al men, and are
basely reputed of: but if they die, unless that God does give the greater
grace, they die without compunction and remorse of conscience, and so without
repentance, whose damnation sleeps not. But it is not so with the poor and
contrite heart, which here as feet and inferior joints, do undergo al
sorrow, and bear the heat and burden of the day. If they be distressed, the
Lord is their comfort, he does strengthen their weak joints, and if they
fall, he raises them up. They are distressed, but they are not forsaken: they
faint, but they perish not: they bear about them the death of our Lord Jesus,
that the life of the Lord Jesus might be manifest in them. And when they die,
their heaviness is turned into joy, their travail into rest, their misery into
all felieitie, their souls by the Angels being carried into Abraham's bosom.
We conclude therefore this chapter as the Apostle Paul, who after a long
discourse of Gods providence, and of his hidden mysteries, breaks out into
this patheticall exclamation: O the deepenesse of the riches, Romans 11.33
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out? for who has known the mind of the
Lord, or who was his Counselor.

CHAP. III. That Gods commandment to give alms is general, appertainig unto
all, and that none is exempted from this duty.
THey do grossly err, who think themselves free, imposing and laying this
burden upon other, but not meaning to lift up the same themselves, with one of
their fingers. Alms is a work and duty of charity, but the rule of charity
is prescribed unto all, and there is none that has a privilege that he should
not be charitable. Yet this must be considered, that as al alms are not of the
same nature, but are distinct, and of two kinds, public, and private: so al
men confusedly, are not to give them, but according to their callings, which
are likewise either public or private. Public Alms. Act. 2.4.5.6.
The public alms, is that which comes from the stock and goods of the
Church, and from a common purse: the dispensation and distribution whereof, was
in the beginning committed unto the Apostles, who afterward feeling it too
burden some unto them, in regard of the charge of many churches which did lie
upon their shoulders, and thinking it not meet to leave the word of God, to
serve tables, they did put it away from the^, and surrogated Deacons in their
rouines, to perform this office. But now in this Realm, the charge in some
sort is translated from them, and committed to others, as Churchwardens and
Collectors for the poor, being lay persons. And this order is good and
convenient enough, if so be they be faithful, and defraud not the poor, by
appropriating to themselves, that which was given unto a public use. For the
provident regard of provision for the poor, principally does belong unto the
charge of the Ministers and Deacons, who by exhortations and admonitions, are
diligently to further it: and to the civil Magistrate more especially to
effect and order it, who are over their people, as the head and mind is over
the body to guide and direct them. And therefore as the head and the mind is
very provident for the good of the body, and neglects not any inferior
member, but does aydeit and support it, seeing, hearing, and understanding
what is good for it. quickening, and heartening the whole body: So is it the
part of a good Magistrate, circumspectly to provide and foresee the welfare of
all, of what degree and calling so ever they be, and not to grow remiss and
slack in their office, when the needy state and calamity of the poor, does
cry for their furtherance, as now it does most pitifully, in the heart, and
bowels, and elbowes of the Realm. Our most gracious Queen has often enough
charged the Magistrates under her, to have a care of this matter, and to see ye
poor to be provided for in this time of scarcity. But her commandments is
nothing industriou fly and carefully executed: Maultwormes and badgers.
merciless maultwormes and badgers do more and more abound, who engrosse the
markets, and buy up all the provision of corn that should serve the poor,
and enhaunce and raise up the price of it mightily. And what care these though
the poor eat the flesh o^ their own arms, though their bodies be like the
drought of summer, though they languish and come to a miserable end, while they
cry for bread and no man will give the mit, while they cry till their hearts
ache, and there is none that will hear them. What a rabble of beggars and
hunger-starued people run up and down the Cities, Countries, and Villages
round about, gasping for comfort, as a thirsty land? The more they are, the
more shame it is to the inhabitants where they dwell, that do not maintain
them according to the godly laws of the Real ^e, in that case provided. But for
the magistrates to see them, and not to take order for them, as if this
business belonged not unto them, it is most intolerable. And so did the
Athenians in ancient time think, as Isocrates the Philosopher, in Ariopagita,
A similitude.
does witness. It is turned to the father and masters great reproach, to
suffer their sons or hired servants to range about, rattered and torn, half
naked and hunger-starued, and to be troublesome to every house and neighbor
to whom they come. It is no less discredit to a public governor, to permit
his people committed to his charge, to rogue about the Country, not without
great scare and detriment that they do, wheresoever they become, if they be
not well looked unto. Moreover, the perverse and impatient minds of a number
of sturdie beggars, which very extremity of need inforceth, are oftentimes
dangerous unto a public state, whilst beholding others that have bread enough,
and themselves ready to die for hunger, they fret, and fume, and gnash with
their teeth, and hurl out mutinous and seditious words, as mad men do stones,
wanting but opportunity of time, and place, to work further mischief.
Besides, from hence many other very hurtful inco^ueniences, do commonly ensue.
Many steal and filch, and carry away. Many maids publicly prostitute
themselves unto sale, and all kind of whordome, and old women play the bawds,
making all sin and wickedness to be the porters to bring in their livings,
not otherwise being able to supply their wantes, and provide for their
necessities. The best of them, while they make a trade and occupation of
begging, by little and little, grow very disorder lie, shaking off the yoke of
discipline from their shoulders, and grow senseless in Religion, and without
feeling of God, and godliness. It was not therefore without urgent cause, that
God provided, by a special Law, that that there should not be a beggar in
Israel, Which caveat and prouiso amongst the grauest, and wisest of the
Gentiles, was holden most necessary, by a common experience, perceiving right
well, that this unseemly begging was not only hurtful unto good conditions, but
the very seminary of all looseness of life, the mother of all evil, and the
spawne of all sin. Among the ancient Romans, it was enacted, and ordained,
that none should go about begging, and by the law of the twelve Tables, this
lewd course of life was utterly inhibited. The Athenians likewise, took order
for the same, Now because in such cases, there is great need of public
authority, the Magistrate whom God as a noursing father, Isai. 49.
has set over his Church, must see this thing performed, and kill this
Serpent, while it is an egg, and the fruit of this evil whilst it is in the
budde, and not to suffer it to blossom. Wherefore let them set rulers and
officers, to ouersee this business, that pilfering varlettes may be punished,
and poor impotent people in necessity relieved. And those that are appointed
Collectors and Stewards for the poor people, must remember the charge which
the Apostle gives them, 1. Cor. 4.
that it is flat sacrilege to convert any thing bequeathed to the poor, and
to the Church bank, for the poor, to their privy filthy lucre, or unto any
other end whatsoever, then for which it was given. In the old law, under
pain of a curse, Deuteronomy. 7.
God peremptorily did forbid, that no man should bring any silver or gold,
which had before been consecrated unto Idolles, unto his house. What shall
therefore become of them? Who dare feloniously carry away that, Church robbers.
which harh been offered unto God, and given for the relief and succor of
the poor? Achan for stealing a wedge of gold, Iosu. 7^
and Babilonish garment, from the spoil of Hiericho, which God had decreed
should be burnt with fire, brought first a slaughter upon the host of Israel,
and afterward a fearful destruction upon himself. What favor then can they
look for, A warning for beggars of conecaled Church lands, and such as look
for the downfall of Bishops. to pray upon their possessions.
who do swallow up whole Churches, and make a strippe and waste of such goods,
as have been by the zealous liberallitie of their ancestors, consecrated unto
the godly use of the Church, and securely do wink at this vilainous, and most
barbarous sacrilege? I may say of many idle and profane professors, which
bear a show of godliness, but indeed have denied ye power of it, and are unto
every good work abominable, as the kingly Prophet did say of the Heathenish
people of his time, O God, the Heathen are entered into thine inheritance, thy
holy temple have they defiled, and have made Jerusalem a heap of stones: they
have broken down the carved works, with axes and hammers. A strange and
fearful judgment of God, was sent upon Anantas, Acts 5.
and Saphira his wife, for keeping from the Church, that which was their own
they died suddenly. Let the Clerophagi of our times, and beggars of
concealements, and goods of the Church, look unto themselves, and in time be
warned by this dreadful example, they are Judas whelps, and like a litter of
rank hell hounds appointed, unless they do speedily repent, and make
restitution unto certain damnation: and so much of public alms, and of the
Magistrates duty herein.

Alms is private: Private alms.
and every private man stands charged with this duty, every man must put to
his helping hand, to the relief of the poor, as ability does suffer him.
God has so disposed, and distributed his goods, as there is none so needy, and
miserable, but he may be a helper at sometime or other, and be able to do good
in his kind unto an other. That which the fabulous writers do record, of the
Lion, that was catched and taken in the snare, and delivered by the Mouse, is
oftentimes verified by open experience, when as Kings and great men in extreme
times, by the service and ministry of the basest vassels, are rescued from
imminent and very great danger. King Xerxes, though he were a renowrned and
puissant Prince, and of that power, that he had covered the whole face, and
breadth of the sea, with ships, as with a bridge, yet was he glad to betake
himself to a poor fisher-mans boat, whereby by striking over into Asia, his
life was preserved. The widow of Sarepta, albeit the remainder of her
provision, was but small, and almost quite done, yet did it stand Eliah in
great stead, when the famine was so great. There is none so poor, but he is
worth a cup of cold water, when as any shall need it. God respects the giver,
rather then the gift and his willing mind is far more acceptable, then all
the presents themselves, that we can give him. Show therefore thy good will and
thou have given thine Alms. But of this more is to be set down afterward
under another title, and therefore here I will the rather pass it over.

CHAP. IIII. To whom we must give our alms,
THe nature of the word Alms, Alms to be given to the poor only.
does point out the persons, to whom they must be given. Eleemosyna, and
Misericordia, which signifies alms, and mercy, being two words (as before
has bin declared) of one signification, and to be confounded: so as all those
who^ the law of charity, orco^mon sense itself wills us to tender: are the
persons and subjects, unto who^ our devotions and alms must be extended. Thus
much the Philosophers of the Ge^tils did acknowledge, among who^ their prince,
and great man Aristotle, to this purpose speaks famously: who being taxed and
censured by his friends for giving money unto a lewd and unworthy man, yet an
extreme beggar, thus gravely answered them: I took not compassion of his
wickedness, but of his want. This distinction is allowed of by S. Aug. and and
he himself uses it, August in. Psalm. 102.
saying. Homo peccator duo sunt nomina: aliud quod homo aliud quod peccator,
quod homo opus est dei, quod peccator opus est hominis. Da operi dei, no^ operi
hominis. Man and sinner are two names: it is one thing to be a man, and another
to be a finner. That he is a man it is the work of God. That he is a finner, it
is ye work of man. The scripture moving us to liberality, and bountifulnes, do
will us that we show it not to the rich, but to the poor. Give meat to him that
has none (says our Savior Christ) and when thou make a fest, call the
poor, Luke 3 Luke 24
the blind and the lame. And he that has two coats, let him give to him that
has none. Luke 3 Luke 10
The Samaritan is commended, because he extended his compassion to an unknown
man, in an unknown place, upon his great necessity. Luke 16
And the rich man was damned, who would have no feeling of the poor man's
necessity. When Zacheus was converted, and would deal out his devotion, Luke 19
he singleth out the poor, upon whom he will bestow it. Behold Lord (says he)
half of my goods do I give unto the poor. This is the charg, Tob. 4
and commandment of Tobias: That we should not turn our face from any that is
poor. The object of mercy is misery: we cannot take pity of him, who is in
no misery. He speaks absurdly, who says he takes mercy of the heavenly
angels, who are in all felicity, whose condition is happily to be wished, and
caunot possibly properly be pitied, So we cannot be compassionate of the rich
man's estate, who comes into no misfortune like to other men: but only of the
poor that are trodden down like worms, afflicted and persecuted, and oppressed
of every man. Who are afflicted, hungry, and naked, cold and in misery, if
they be not? Poverty is naturally subject unto many wrongs: therefore it is
not only convenient, but altogether necessary, that we be mercifully
inclined toward the poor, and that with our alms we be liberal and
plentiful unto them. There are many that have too much, let the^ give to them
ye have too little. We feast those superfluously that have no need: but we
relieve them sparingly that have the greatest need. It is not unlawful for
thee to be bountiful, and liberal at thy Table. Conceditur tibi, vtere
superfluis, da pauperibus necessaria, August. in Mat. sermon. 5 A heavenly saing
of S. Augustine.
vtere preciosis, da pauperibus vilia: expectat a te, expectas a deo, expectat
ille manum, quae facta est secum, expectas it is manum, quae fecit te sed non
solum te fecit, sed pauperem tecum. Ille nihil portat, tu nimium oneratus es.
Oneratus es? da illi, de eo quod habes, and illum pascis and onus minuis. It is
granted thee: use thy superfluities, but to the poor give their necessaries,
use thou the richest give the poor, the meanest. He looks to receive from
thee, thou look to receive from God: he looks upon the hand that was
made with him, and thou look upon the hand that made thee, which did not
only make thee, but ye poor man with thee: he bear eth nothing, but thou art
too much laden. Art thou too much laden? give to him of that that have, and
thou easest him, and easest thy self of thy burden: A similitude
we are to put our liquour into empty vessels, and not into those who are
already full and can hold no more. 2. Reg. 4.
Elizeus poured oil into the empty cruse of the widow of Sarepta, so thou
should pour the oil of thy mercy upon the hungry and empty souls,
destitute and void of all manner of comfort, and not bestow thy wealth upon
the wealthy, for that is to carry sticks into the wood, and water into the
river, which is to no use. Put therefore a penny into an empty purse, and a
loaf of bread into an empty stomach, and a garment upon a naked back, succor
thou him that is succorlesse. But the contrary course, is now commonly
practiced, and that saying of the Poet fulfilled. Pauper eris semper sipauper
es Aenciliane:
Dantur opes nullis, nunc nisi diuitibus.


Nothing now is given, but to him that has already, A preposterous course.
we usually send a couple of Capons, or a fat Wether, or a Bullock unto him
that is abundantly provided of al manner of store, whose larder houses are
reple^ished with variety of al things. Those whose bellies are already crammed
so full, as abstinence and hunger is more needful for them, to help
digestion, then a fresh repast further to surcharge them, are followed and
glutted with continual rewards. But the languishing, pined, and consumed
soul, miserably griped and tormented with famine, roaring for very
disquietnesse of heart, crying and begging with grief, and tears not to be
expressed, is not regarded, but sent empty away. We give unto ye rich, that may
better reward us: to great men in Court, to further our suits: and make
requests for us: to men in office and public authority, to purchase their
favor and good will toward us. But because we think the poor unable for to
pleasure us, we think not of them, but despise and contemn them. A similitude
This is a perverse and prepostrous course. For ye earth that is dry, is to
be watered, and not that which with dewes and shewres, have been largely
batteled. The poor that is like unto a droughtie ground, is to be refreshed,
and not the rich, whose eyes swell with fatness and are lusty and strong.
Those that are so wastful when there is no need, and so straight handed when
just occasion is given to be liberal, resemble ye rivers, A similitude
which give waters to the sea, where there is too much, but supple and refresh
not the thirsty lands, whose furrows do gape wide, and have no moisture in
them. And are like the hare, whose former feet upon which does lie the cheifest
weight and burden of their bodies, are shortest, A similitude
and have their hinder legs longest, upon which almost no part does lie to be
spported by them. Or they may not unfitly be compared to the Israelites, who
could offer their chains, jewels, and chief ornaments, A camparison.
and would spare no cost to erecta Calfe, and commit wickedness: so there are
too many that care not what they spend upon whores, and hounds, and vain and
idle pleasures, but will be as niggardly and pinching as any, when
contributions are to be required unto godly uses, to schools of learning, to
the repayring of high ways, to the maintaining of necessary war against the
Spanish and Popish enemies, or to hospitalles, or houses for the poor, or to
the travailing impotent beggars, when they sit howling at their doors. Ambrose
complains of such doings, which were usual in his times, Ambros. Tom. 3.
Sermon. 33.
as in these. Vides in nounullorum domibus, nitidos, and crassos canes discurs
rere, homines autem titubantics, and pallentes inceders. We see in many houses,
the dogs running to and fro, smooth and broad: but men stumbling for
feebleness as they go, Amos 6.
and to look ghastly with pale and wanne looks: we are right like unto ye old
Jewish people, who drink wine out of large bowls, August A similitude
and make our selves glad, nothing respecting the affliction of Joseph. If the
hairs of our head be not cut even, we run unto the Harbor, and we are angry
with him, if it be not done accordingly: and thus we curiously stand upon a
decency, in the vilest and basest things, which are no members, but the
excrements of the body: but we take no order for matters of more moment, for
the releeuing and helping the poor, the true joints and members of Christ his
mystical body. If any of our fingers be a little distorted, A similitude
we presently require the help of a Physician, that it might be better. Thou
art of a distorted and crooked nature, and merciless to the poor: be thou
reformed of thy heavenly Physician, that thou may be brought to a charitable
inclination, and to the right course of nature, which is, to be tenderly
affected toward those that are in extremity. The ancient Christians were so
devoted unto charitable affections, and duties of mercy, as they contented not
themselves with ministering to the wants of poor afflicted Christians of their
own Religion, but further, they assisted the idolatrous Gentiles and Jews,
who were their enemies, with their liberal devotions, supplying their
necessities. Of this we have a memorable example in Eusebius, in the time of
famine, pestilence, Eusebius. lib. 9. cap. 8.
and murren, which raged horribly under Maximinus, at what time great number of
Pagan people, through the tender commiseration of the Christians, were saved
from destruction, who otherwise most miserably and rufully must have perished:
whereby it came to pass, that those which before did prosecute the Christians
with open hostility, became their friends, and entreated their good will, and
publicly did avouch, that only compassion was showed by the Christians, and
therefore that the Christians profession, was only the true religion, which
traded and instructed the followers thereof, in duties of godliness. Which
Julian the Apostata, Mark this well.
marking, and considering, lest for their munificence they should be honored,
and carry the applause, and love of the people: he commanded certain
Hospitals to be erected, endowing them with land, Sozom. li. 5. cap. 16.
and yearly revenues, by which the poor might be succored and sustained:
inserting in a letter written to Arsacius, an idolatrous priest, this reason,
which was the occasion of his purpose: That it was a foul shame, for the
worshippers of their gods, not to be ayding to the needful estate of their own
people, with their charitable contributions, when as the wicked Galileans (for
so this cursed wretch termed the Christians) were not only good to their
co^sorts and fellow professors, but also to the utter and spightfull enemies to
them, and their religion, not permitting any of their own company, to be
troublesome unto any, by begging of relief. I would this saying could now be
made good, to the glory of him, and our credit, whose names we do bear, and
whose doctrine we seem to hold. But it is far otherwise: we are but painted
tombs, outwardly glorious, but inwardly we are full of corruption. We will vex
a poor man, with a hundred questions, as from whence he came? whether the
place where he has bin brought up, is not able to relieve him? whither he will
go? why he do not work? whether he has a license and protection to beg? with
many such like speeches, before we will give him any thing: and when we do
give him with much ado, what is that we give him? but a dry crust which we
commonly cast unto a dog. We do therefore dissemble with our lips, and flatter
with our double tongs, our zealous speeches, are but to deceive the hearts of
the simple, and to bleare the eyes of the world: Resembling the Gibeonytes, in
crafty wiliness, who made Joshua, and his soldiers believe, Joshua. 9.
that they were men, that came from a far country, and would make a league and
friendship between them: and to induce them to the better crediting of them,
brought old shoes and bottles for wine, old sackes, and old bread, that was
dried, and mouldie. But as the outward Cowle, makes not a Munk, so a theorical
and outward profession, makes not a Christian. The kings daughter is glorious
within. Christians must be inwardly and outwardly glorious. Wherefore let us
bring forth the fruits of Christians: For as the tree (...) alms an order is
to be kept and discretion to be had, and a respect of persons to be regarded.
Charity has his limits and bounds, yet it is not to be straited, but to have
passage enough.

In distribution of alms, We must first help our kindred. 1. Our spiritual
kindred
Exhibition and benevolence unto needful persons, we must first begin with
those that are near unto us in consanguinitie, and alhaunce, both spiritual,
and carnal. Heerevpon says Saint Paul, Gal.
Whilst we have time let us do good unto all, but chiefly unto those, that
are of the household of faith. Under the household of faith, comprehending all
those, which by faith in Christ Jesus, 1. Tim. 5. 2. Our kindred by the flesh.
Esaias 58
are members of the Church, which is the house of the living God. Secondly,
our brethren according to the flesh, are to be considered, whom the Scriptures
do call our own flesh. Of which Esaias speaks, saying: Turn not away thine
eyes from thine own flesh. How much we owe of duty unto them the Apostle
shows us, when he absolutely does affirm, that he that does not provide fot
his house and family, 1. Tim. 5.
has denied the faith, and is worse then an infidel. And that we should not
think our selves to be only tied to these, and that the debt is paid, if we
have relieved these, we must not here pause, and set down our rest, for we are
debtors to other poor beside, and the springs and rivers of our liberality,
must stream and issue further, Secondly we must help our neighbor.
refreshing and making glad all that be in the way, whose estates do stand in
need. And here must persons also be respected, they must not without
distinction be confounded. And amongst these, those that are our neighbors must
be first considered. Under our neighbors, we do understand those, Who are
our neighbor.
who not only by kindred, country, and dwelling are near unto us: but those
whom God does join unto us upon any occasion, Our countrymen travelers by
the way whom we mere. Luke 10.36
or by lighting into their company in our travel and journey. Such a one was
that traveler, who as he was iournying form Jerusalem to Jericho, fell among
theenes, and was miserably wounded, and left half dead, he being by country, a
man of Jerusalem, and the other a Samaritan, both of a contrary profession,
and kingdom, was called by Christ, the neighbor of this man. He was his
neighbor, because God had appointed him, that as a neighbor he should meet
him, relieve and comfort him, as one neighbor should another. 1. Reg. 17.11
Such neighbors were the Prophet Eliat, and the Sidonian widow of Sarepta.
She when Elias requested Alms, stood much upon her self, and her own child,
fearing their need, taking it to be meet according to our former rule, to
serve her own first. But by the motion of Gods spirit, 1. Kin. 17.9.
her bowelles waxed warm, and tender toward him, and this God had purposed
before, saying unto Elias: I will charge the widow for to feed thee. John 3.16
We are willed, 1. The weak 2. Old men 3. Children.
and minister unto their external and worldly wants. We must secondly respect
infirmity of age, and weakness of nature: as infants and young children, whose
joints as yet being loose and tender, are not able to do any work, to bring
in their living: or wearied old men, drawn dry and enfeebled for very pure
age, disable every way for to help themselves. Finally, these are not to be
neglected upon whom the world and fortune which is often an inconstant
Stepmother, 4. Of poor parentage. 5. That have suffered loss by casualtie.
has lowred and frowned. Who either by descent and baseness of birth, are
exceeding poor: or those who from great wealth, have been brought to low
ebb, not by their evil life, or misdemeanour any wise, but by Gods secret
providence, as Merchant venturers, or such who by their liberality, and
bountiful good natures, and good works which they have done, have
impouerished, and utterly undone themselves. Unto these bonds is Charity to
be restrained, and these be the persons that must be succored with our
helping devotions. We have not straightened the bonds of it: for this is so
large a field for it to walk in, as whither so ever we shall turn our
selves, we shall find one or other of these suitors, ready to make request
unto us. Now least our readiness in giving of Alms should make a greater
crowde and swarm of beggars, Rogues and sturdy beggars are to be repressed by
the magistrates
who are reeadie to come flocking unto every doale, and embolden them too
much, whereby they might be soon both wearisome unto us, and intollerablie
surchargeable unto the Commonwealth: It is meet, that for the stay and remedy
thereof, the Prince and Justices should interpose their authority, to punish all
such, who make a gain and occupation of begging, and under the cloak and
pretense of poverty, like Rogues and vagabonds, do live in all idle and
insufferable liberty. The ancient Romans had their officers, who were called
Censores, Censores.
whose office and duty it was, to look into every ones life, and what they
did, and they had authority given them from the Senate, severely to correct
all idle delinquents, after their discretion. The Ariopagitae took the said
course at Athens, Ariopagitae.
taking account of each man's estate, and by what means they did maintain
themselves and their family. By Solon his decree, Solon.
amulct and penalty was laid upon him, who spent one day licentiously or
idly. Draco.
Draco that rigorous Athenian lawgiver, enacted that idle and shifting persons
should be put to death.

Those who get not their living by their labor, are nothing but thieves, and
therefore they are to be punished as thieves. This much did Paul insinuate, 2.
These. 3.
opposing stealing and laboring, as things directly contrary the one unto the
other, saying: Let him that has stolen, steal no more, but rather let him
get his living with the labor of his hands. When as God placed our first
parents in Paradise, Genesis 2.
he did not set them there to loyter, and to live by idle speculation, but to
keep and dress the Garden, which required a great work. And after his fall,
he was enjoined to a greater task: namely, Gen 3
in the sweat of his brows, and hard labor, to get his living all the days
of his life. The Apostle says, The labourer is worthy his hyre, 1. Tim. 5.18
but not the loyterer. So he says out of the law, That we must not musle
the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn: 1. Cor. 9.9
But we must musle the mouth of the sluggish Ass, and seal up his jaws, who
is the cumbersome burden of the earth, and good for nothing, but to consume
the corn. 2. These. 3
For he that will not labor let him not eat, says the same apostle. Solomon
sends the idle belly, Prou. 6
unto the vildest creature that is upon earth, to go to school, and learn of
the laboring Ant, who by his labor in the summer, storeth himself of
provision against the winter. Though we send not now such persons to the Ant,
yet Contrudite hos Dauos in pistrinam: Let such as have authority shut them up
in Bridewel, and drive them to their work. There was once a parley, A pleasant
fable.
and pleasant dialogue between a Grasshopper and the Ant, about their several
trades of life. The Grasshopper had spent the youthful time of Summer, in great
disport and dalliance, chirping and tuning her pypes under every green leaf,
foolishly supposing, that it would be always Summer, whereby she grew
careless, making no regard of aftertimes: but the winter drawing on, pinched
her thin sides and made her loins to quake, and her voice to wax hoarse,
and to leave her Music, and to repair unto the Ant, and to crave of her his
bodily relief, to preserve him from staruing, who by his former labor, had
gathered enough for time that was to come. But the Ant disputes with him,
asking him how he spent the Summer past, that he had nothing to help
himself in VVinter? The Grasshopper annswered, that he never thinking upon
such exchange of seasons, singed all the Summer. The Ant answered, repelling
him with a floute, that he should dance all the Winter, having singed all the
Summer. For her discretion would not serve her, that her labor, should
maintain his idleness. Although this be fabulous, and so may seem
ridiculous, yet a good morrall use, may be made of it. That we may learn
from hence, so to thrive in youth, that we may live in age, so to work in
health, that we may not want in sickness. This many do not confider, as idle
young knaves, and wanton maids, who bestow all their earnings upon their backs,
and waste them in riotous eating and drinking. They think not of sickness that
may come upon them, 1. Sam. 30.13.
and that few masters will keep sick servants, but turn them out of doors,
dealing with them as the Amale-chite did with the Egyptian, who when as David
asked him what man he was, made him this answer: I am a young man of Egypt, and
servant unto an Amalechite, and my master left me three days ago, because I
was sick. The common proverb is, Nihil agendo, discimus male agere, in doing
nothing, we learn to do evil. This Paul does ratify by an elegant and
significant paranomasia, expressing thus much, speaking of loyterers and
inordinate livers, calling them (...). Nihiloperantes, sed curiose agentes,
Working nothing, but working busily, which they should not, fulfilling that
which the Poet says. Excussis propriis, aliena negotia curant.

Casting aside their own business, they curiously pry into other men's
affairs. This idleness spoyleth all things, and is the root of all evil,
and the pawn of all sin, therefore it is very straightly to be looked
unto. The rust fretteth and gnaweth the hard Iron with continuance, if it be
not used: the Water does putrify, and the air does corrupt, without his
motion. The fire unless it be stirred and blown, decays and goes out. So
does man decay, both in body and mind, if he has not all natural and due
labor. In the body, the heart, the liver, the veins, the arteries, do
rejoice, as a bridegroom to finish their course, and do perish and languish,
if they have not their motions. The mind is more nimble and appliable, and apt
unto any business, by accustomed exercises, but being idle and not set
aworke, it grows dull and heavy, and utterly unfit unto any good duty.
Rightly says Boethius. Eneruare solent securas otia mentes.

Idleness does weaken, and greatly infeeble, secure and careless minds.
Finally, there is nothing that is worser then idleness, Idle persons, the devils
boulsters. Mat. 12. Mat. 13. (...) similitude
and therefore none more insufferable then idle persons, being termed of our
auncicestors, puluinar Satanae the devils boulsters. For the devil enters
into his house that is empty, swept, and garnished. And while the Disciples
slept and were idle, the enemy did sow tares. As we shoot at birds, not
when they fly about, but when they do sit still: So the Devil shoots his
fiery darts at us, not when we labor faithfully in our calling, but when we
do sit still. As he did at David, when he was idle in his Palace, and at
Solomon, when his buildings were ended: and as the sons of Dan did at the
City of Lachish, Judge. 16.18
who destroyed the people of it, because they were given to slothfulness.
Wherefore, let idleness generally be avoided, dulce malum, a sweet and
enticing evil. What a swarm of vagabonds have a long time pestred the whole
realm? who not only lay loytering under hedges, but come sturdily into our
Towns, and beg boldly at our doors, leaving labor which they like not, and
following idleness, which they should not: work is undone at home, and
loyterers do linger in the streets, lurk in Alehouses, and range in high
ways: whose staff if it be once warm in their hand, or sluggishnesse bred in
their bosom, they will never be brought to labor again, contenting
themselves better with idle beggerie, then with profitable industry. And what
more detestable beasts then these, be in a Commonwealth? Drones in hiues suck
out the honey, but they are prevented by good husbands: Caterpillars do eat
up the fruit of the ground, but it is remedied by good looking to: vermin
consume Corn, and destroy pulleine, but snares are made for them, and they are
to be catched. These harpies and vultures, and extreme reuenours are loytering
and lazy lubbers, and able stout Beggars, who do every where abound. These
are by Laws provided for them, to be censured and kept under, and not to be
relieved with our alms and contributions, for they are only due unto disable
poor persons, and to such people specified before.

CHAP. VI. Of the manner how we should give our alms, namely that we should
give them willingly, and not grudgingly.
BEcause that by our alms which we give unto the poor, we respect not only
their good, but the good will of God likewise, who will make our righteousness
to shine like the sun, and our good dealing like the noone day, and liberally
rewards the well dooer: It is not only necessary that we do give, but also
that we so give as he has commanded us, that our presents may be as the
incense, and our oblations as a sweet smelling savor unto him. Wherefore,
unto the right manner of giving, certain peculiar circumstances and properties
do belong. Amongst others, this is one, that whatsoever we give, we give
freely, like a gift, without either the importunity of him that beggeth it, or
the constraint or compulsio^ of the law, that necessarily inforceth it. Aug.
in Psalm. 42.
Multi dant vt cadeant ^edio interpellantis, non vt reficiant viscera
in^igentis. There are many that give, because they are tired with their
incessaunt complaint: not otherwise affectionated toward their pitiful
estates: He that gives willingly, will give readily. He will not put him off, as
Festus did Paul, unto an other time. It is manifest, that they do give very
unwillingly, who will weary a beggar with infinite demaundes, and opprobriously
load him with all reproachful terms, calling him a Rogue, Vagabound, and
Rascal, and pouring upon him all the bitter poison of his mind, before he
will give him a single halfe-penny, or a dry crust of bread, or any other
trifeling thing: whose mouths unnaturally, are bigger then their hands, for
they word it much, but they work but little. Their words be many, but their
gifts but few. If thou be unwilling to relieve the poor, grieve him, and
gall him not, with injurious speeches. It is misery enough, that he has
already: that he is hungry, naked, pinched with cold, and has no harbor, to
shield him from the inclemencie, and violence of the winter. Put thou no more
misery and affliction upon him, as the raging Jews, who added afflictions
unto Paul^ bonds. If his idle kind of life be offensive to thee, and thou
can not bear it, why art thou not angry and displeased with the richer
sort? who stretch themselves upon their Yuorie beds, tumbling and wallowing
upon pillowes of soft down, feeding liberally and daintily, clothing
themselves richly, and sumptuously: yet do nothing, but spend the day
wastfully, in ietting and iaunting, and stalking about, not setting themselves
unto any good work: from all which Epicurious, and most sluggish fashions, the
estate and condition of the poor man, is most far: for he sleeps upon the
hardest and vncomfortablest bolsters and beds, the bancksides, and the cold
ground, he beggeth vehemently from door to door, for thy offalls, fragments,
and relics of thy table, and yet oftentimes cannot get them. Why therefore
do thou so much grudge against the poor, and speak not a word against
the proud lordly people, who live in all security: whose eyes do swel with
fatness: whose hearts are as fat as brawne: and who do what theylist? The
rich man, because he has a Rapier by his side, and is clothed in gorgeous and
costly garments, shall be winked at, and soothed in his idle fleshly living:
but the beggar, who has nothing but a hedge staff, to bear up his lanke, and
almost starued body, whose robes are but rags, shall be taunted and
mistearmed, and most shamefully entreated. Will God (think thou) for all his
rich and infinite patience, patiently abide, that thou should come forth to
take the air, and to walk easily to help digestion, being crammed and
stuffed up unto the throat with the choysest meats, and that thou should
with thy villainous tongue, loudly and lewly rail upon those, who are in all
pitiful and woeful want, asking but ye meanest relief that thou can give,
O mark this.
a piece of bread, and that in the greatest name under heaven, the sweet name
of Insus, whereby we must be saved? No no, God has no mercy in store for
such unconscionable, Chrisost. A covetous wretch worse then a thousand devils.
unnatural, and merciless wretches. Chrysostom says well, that he had
rather dwell with a thousand devils, then with a covetous carle. For the devils
can but rende and tear his garments and his body, and they can but rage
against him: the hurt redouneth not unto any other: but griple godless
wretches, are hurtful unto others, they make a huge spoil and havoc of
others. Think not, because thou art richer, and nobler then the poor, that
thou art made of a better moulde, and substance then the poor. Thou art not
made of silver, and gold, though thou have never so much. Thou art called,
Homo, ab humo, and Terra quae teritur pedibus, Of earth thou art made, and unto
earth thou shall return. Psalm 5.
Sons of men (says the Prophet David) how long will ye look unto vanity,
and seek after leasing? He calls us the sons of men, not Tigers and
Wolves whelps, not litters of Lions, and the brood of brute beasts, wherefore
let us be merciful, as men: and not tyrannical as Tigers, that it may not be
said of us, as the Poet said in times past of Aeneas. Virg. 4 Aeneid.
Non tibi diua parens generis, nec Dardanus author,
Perfide: sed duris genuit te cantibus horrens,
Caucasus, Hyrcanaeque admorunt vbera Tygres


Wherefore let us give our alms willingly, and the better to manifest our
willingness, let us prevent a poor man's request, and be ready to help him
before he does require it, Perfecta est misericordia, vt ante occurratur
esurientibus quam roget mendicus. Aug. Tom. 10. Hom 1.9.
Non est enim perfecta misericordia, quae precibus extorquetur. Lassis and
Elisis festina pietate succurrere. Imitare Deum qui solemn suum oriri facit,
super bonos and malos: and pluit super iustos and iniustos. Et ecce veniet tibi
plunia antequam roges descendet vbertas nocte, dum stertis, dum adhuc in lecto
es, ex praecepto vigilat dies, excubant elementa, frnctus te nesciente
effunduntur. Iactat coelum, and parturit terra, tot cellaria messium dum
noscimus sic accipimus, and tantas opes comedimus antequam rogamus, and tu hom^
modicum panem precibus vendis? It is entire mercy to relieve the hungry,
before as a beggar he craves it at thy hands: it is no perfect charity, which
with importunity is obtained. But if the beggar holds his peace, We must be
ready to relieve the poor.
and his pale and wanne looks do speak unto thee, being weary, faint, and
oppressed, make haste to help and succor him with thy kindness. Imitate thou
God, who makes his Sun to shine upon the good, and upon the bad. And behold
thou shall have rain before thou call for it. Plenty shall come down upon
thee in the night season, while thou sleep, whilst thou art yet in thy bed,
the day and clements watch, and when thou know not of it, shall yield their
increase: the heavens shall cast forth, and the earth shall bring forth. We
receive so many barnes full of corn, whilst we think not of it, and eat
such plenty, before we do request it, and yet will thou O man, sell unto the
poor, a morsel of bread, at so dear a rate for so many importunate
supplications? The four thousand people who were fed in the wilderness, with
seven loaves, and a few fishes, begged not their relief at our Savior
Christ's hands: but his mind was so willing, and therefore so ready to do them
good, as before they could crave it, he did freely offer it. Gather up (said
he) the fragments that are left, that nothing may be lost. Genesis 18.
Abraham was so zealous in charitable affections, and of so liberal and
cheerful a nature, as he went abroad to meet with strangers, Genesis 16. Tob. 1.
and accustomably did fit by the hie ways side, to solicit and urge such
persons as he saw passengers, to divert into his house. The like did just Lot,
and the good man Tobias. The two disciples that went unto Emaus, unto whom
Christ did join himself, and co^ferred with by the way, Luke. 14.
were likewise thus affected, in all humanity and importunity, causing him to
go in to their house, Lukt 16
and to take such intertainment, as they had there for him. The unjust steward
is commended in the Gospel, for showing his mercy unto his masters debtors,
and voluntarily calling them, and wiping out of their score a great part of
their debt, Romans 12
to their great help and comfort. Therefore Paul admonishes the Romans, that
when they do distribute, they do it heartily. And in another place he
wills, that we do it not sadly, 2. Cor. 9.
but cheerfully: for the lord loves a cheerful giver.

Moreover, to give willingly, we must give as largely, To give willingly, is
to give largely.
and as liberally as we may. A willing mind will not nigge it, it is the
Churl that paltreth, and gives out his bread by bytlings. The miserable man
thinks, that which is given to be utterly lost, and therefore his alms and
benevolence is thereafter. A mouldie cantel of bread, unsavory and stinking
morsels of meat, which no dog will cate, good for nothing, but to be cast out,
and thrown upon the dunghill, are given unto the poor. It is otherwise with
the godly and charitable giver, for he will give enough to suffice the needy.
Ruth. 3
So did Booz, who espying poor Ruth gleaning he ears of corn upon the land,
which his reapers had left, said unto his haruest-men: Cast out something out
of your sheaues, and your shock come of purpose, and let them be left still,
that she may gather without controlment, and no man may restrain her. In the
primitive Church, so great liberality was extended toward the poor, as it
seemed not enough for a Christian, to part with that which he could easily
spare, unless also he took somewhat of his necessary goods, for their better
maintenance. And for this cause the people of Macedonia, and Achaia, It is now
contrary.
are commended by S. Paul, who being but of bare and needy estate, yet beyond
their abilities, provided for the necessities of the poor, laying upon the A
postles, with all prayers and tears, to accept of their collections, and at
their discretions, as every one shoul have need, to dispose the^ for the^.
Wherefore I cannot see but that God will allow of it, if through entire love, It
is not amiss to give more then we can wellspare.
and devotion, we shall constrain our faculties, to ^uccor such people, who
through miserable want endure great violence, and suffer all ex^remitie. For
the case of the Macedonians was the like which Paul approves: we can ^ot spend
our necessary goods better then upon God, who gave them. It is better that we
be blamed for too much pity, then for too much cruelty. 1 King. 4.
The devotion of Abdias the Prophet was so great, as he ran himself mainely
into deep debt to sucour the Prophets in the time of great scarcity. The
Sidonian widow, gave unto Elias out of her own cruse, wherein was all the
remainder and portion of food, that was then left unto her, for her self and
her child. Let us be taught by such examples, and moved to give frankely and
lustily unto the poor, now we see them by reason of three years scarcity,
For Gods sake regard it.
utterly undone, and not able longer without our better devotions to shift for
themselves. If our consciences be not seared with hot irons, and are past
feeling, our bowels will be pierced with the noise of their strong and
forceable cries, which they make daily unto us. If we give but a little, we
shall receive but a little again, for look how we sow, we shall reap: if
thou sowest sparingly, thou shall reap sparingly, and he that sows
liberally, shall reap also liberally. 2 Cor. 9. Psalm. 37.
He has divided and given unto the poor (says David) and what shall follow
it? his righteousness shall endure for ever. This is no discouragement a^ all,
to those that are of meaner and poore^ estate, who are not able to give much,
although they give all that they have. For they shall receive much, albeit they
give but little, because that little is much unto them, and the Lord more
respects the mind of the giver, then the value of the gift. Genesis 4.
For he accepted of the sacrifice of Abel, when as he refused the oblation of
Cain: and more regarded the widows two mites, then ye abundant wealth, Luke 21.
which the rich me^ did cast into their treasury. Wherefore bring thy gift
unto the Lords altar, and with a willing mind, that which thou can give, and
the Lord willingly will receive it at thy hands, and it shall be a more
acceptable sacrifice to him, then any other sacrifice that has horns and hoofs.

CHAP. VII. That our alms must be given for conscience sake, and for the love
of God, and not for vainglorie, and popular applause of the world.
ANother circumstance belonging to the right giving of alms is this, that we
give the^ not in a vanity, nor in an outward show of holiness, but in an
hearty sincerity, we have to righteousness. There be two manner of hipocrites
in the world, who are had in admiration of the simple people, for their
holiness: whose words and works are nothing else but flourishes before the
field, vain and idle bragges of a conceited kind of holiness: who as in all
other their outward works of Charity, so in their Alms giving chiefly, Mat.
6.
they rightly resemble the accursed Pharisees: For as they did give their Alms
before men, and made an Alarm and outcry of them, by the sound of a Trumpet,
and dealt their doles openly, in the Synagogues and streets of their Cities:
So many Pharisaicall Iusticiaries and merit-mongers, do not only distribute
their Alms in the open view and face of the people, but they have also their
appointed and certain hours, to gather themselves together at their gates,
such as are poor, Alms done for vanity and praise of men.
so as the whole street then disturbed with the noise of such a troublesome
rout, do come forth and gaze upon them, as upon a strange spectacle, and so
their liberalliis famous to the world, which is their principal end in this
action, the scope which they do aim at, and the mark which they do shoot
at. This Christ reproved and condemned in the Pharisees: and so he does in
Christians. We must only in our Almes-giuing look upon God, and give them for
his sake, or otherwise they are not pleasing and acceptable unto him. That
money which is made of some base metal, as Copper, A Similit^^e.
or Brass, or has otherwise any vnpure commixtion, or is any way not current,
must not be cast into the treasury, but it is to be rejected: So Alms which
go not for lawful and good alms, as being counterfeyt done for the praise of
men, and not for the praise of God, are of no account, but as dross and gross
metal, are utterly despised. A Similitude.
Thou may often buy many counterfeyt pieces of money, for a trifeling value,
but thou can not so buy a horse, silk, cloth, or any other thing of worth:
So with thy Alms, thou may purchase at all times, the vain commendations
and praises of men, howsoever thou do give them: but the grace of God, or
any benefit and effect thereof cannot be obtained, unless we give our Alms,
uprightly and conscionably, as God himself has commanded us. Abraham because
he would not be enriched of the king of the Sodomites, Gen 14. Genesis 15.
was enriched by God. For God said unto him, Fear not Ahraham, I am thy great
reward: So if we regard not the vainglory of the world, Acts. 10.
but the glory of God, only in our several actions, our alms deeds as the
deeds of Cornelius, shall ascend up into heaven: our prayers shall be as the
incense: and all other our religious devotions, as a sweet evening sacrifice
unto the Lord. (...) similitude.
If there were a man whose hands were of that excellent virtue, as all things
that were received of them, or touched by them, should immediately be blessed
and increased, were it not great folly not to cleave to him, and to desire his
gracious acceptance of all our endeavors? and beningly to take them into his
merciful hands? such be the hands of our heavenly father, who as if he but
turn away his hand we are troubled: so if he turn it lovingly unto us, Cantie.
5.14
we are lightened again. For his hands are as the rings of gold set within the
Crisolite: Math. 6.
wherefore as Christ wills us to take heed that we do not our works before
men: So let us take heed that we give not our alms which is of it self a very
christian work, in the sight of men. There were two Cherubins protraied with
wings, over the place where ye Israelites did pray, which covered the mercy
seat: Exodus 25.
signifying, that as God when he shows mercy, covers himself that he might
not be seen, so that we likewise, when we should show mercy and do deeds of
Charity, we should do them covertly and not to be seen. Christ in all his
actions looks toward heaven, to teach us Christians that in all our
endeavors, we do look up to heaven, and not to the vanity of this wicked
world. A similitude
The Mathematitians say, that therefore the Circle is the perfectest figure,
because the end and beginning of it, do meet together. Now since God is Alpha
and Omega, the beginning and the end: It is manifest that all our works be
absolute, being wholly directed unto him. A similitude


The Carpenter, or Smyth, frames his timber, and works his iron to the use
and purpose, which he has commanded that has set him on work. We are Gods
workmen, Whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever else we do, we must do all
unto the glory of God. 1 Cor. 10
For in him, of him, and by him, are all things. Wherefore as the four and
twenty Elders, Romans 11 Apoc. 14
did take their Crowns from their own heads, and laid them at the foot of
the Lamb: so let every one humble himself, and throw down his works, at
the feet of Christ, Psalm. 113
taking up this Psalm and spiritual Himne, singing and making a most
cheerful melody in his heart, and saying: Not unto us O Lord, not unto us,
but unto thy name give the praise. Saying likewise with the Prophet Esaias: All
our works O Lord, Esai. 25.
thou have wrought in us. Nabucodonosor forgetting this, and glorying in
himself, Dan. 4.
saying: Is not this great Babell which I have builded, with my magnificence
and mighty power: Imediately heard this heavenly voice ringing in his ears:
The kingdom shall pass from thee, and be given to thine enemies. Samson
boasting of his valiant acts and good success which God gave him against his
enemies the Philistines, Iudic. 15.
triumphing in this wise: With the law bone of an ass have I slain a
thousand men, was forthwith so humbled and brought low, as he had almost
perished through thirst. Moses thinking his hand to be whole, and sound, did
put it but into his bosom, and he drew it out a deformed and leprous hand. In
like sort thou think highly of thine Alms, and of thy charitable deeds, but
put thy hand into thy bosom, and lay it upon thy heart, weying and considering
the several circumstances which are required to the just performance of them,
and thou shall find them polluted and affected with pride and vainglory,
and all kind of vanity, the spiritual leprosy which will utterly destroy
them. Fly from pomp and outward estimation, as from a most hurtful serpent
and cocatrice: for what work soever is done to this end, is done to no end,
2 King. 20.
for it is already lost. For as Ezechias when he showed his treasure unto the
Ambassadors of the King of Babylon, was reproved for it, so let us do our
outward devotion in the sight of the world, and the Lord will surely reprove us
for it, saying to us, as he said to the Pharisee, in the like case: Mat 6.
verily I say unto you; ye have your reward. Let us not therefore as the men of
Babylon, Dan. 3.
who hearing the musical instruments sound, worshipped the Idol: hearing our
praises of men for our good works, worship this praise as we do an Idol.
But rather Let us worship the Lord our God, Deuteronomy. 6.
and him only see that we serve. Remembering this wholesome counsel of Christ:
Let your light so shine before men, Mat. 5.
that they might see your good works, and glorify your father which is in
heaven. The Apostle Saint Paul when he manifested his manifold afflictions
which he endured for his office sake, that he might not seem to be proud
in them, he infers this clause, to curble all presumption: Not I, 1. Cor.
15.
but the glory of God in me. So let us attribute nothing to our selves, in any
thing that we do, Ma. 6
for what have we that we have not received? His is the Kingdom, his is the
power, his is the glory. When God commanded that the stones wherewith the
Alters should be built, Exodus 20
should not be carved, graven, and pollished, but should be rude and plain
without workmanshippe, what would he else insinuate from hence, but that our
works should not curiously be set out, that thereby we might reap the praise
and applause of men. Psalm. 16
Wherefore, as David in all his doings said, that he always set God before
his eyes, so is it most expedient that we should do the like, that we might
not be removed. Aug. in ser. dom. in most
Excellently counsels us heavenly Saint Augustine, saying: Laus humana nou
appeti a recte faciente sed subse qui debet recte facientem. That is the praise
of men, Aug. in Psalm. 43
must not be affected of the good doer, but it must follow the good doer. Intus
amat, qui intus videt: intus am at, vt intus ametur. He that sees inward,
loves that which is inward: he loves inward, that he might be inwardly
loved. I beseech you therefore brethren so to walk, as God has commanded you,
and that you so distribute unto the poor, as God has appointed you, that he
may say unto you: O thou faithful and good servant, thou have been faithful
over little, I will now make thee Ruler over much, enter into my joy. Give
here, that thou may receive else where, for corrupt silver, an incorruptible
Crown of glory, which God has prepared, and his Christ has purchased, with
his red and precious blood.

CHAP. VIII. The Objections that are usually made against giving of Alms,
prepounded and answered.
Having hitherto discoursed of sondrie material and effectual points,
belonging to the right distribution of alms, it is consequently needful that
we do examine the principal lets and impediments thereof, and do away such
doubts which usually do harbor in the griple minded me^, to shift off this
duty. It is strange to consider what a self love is seated in our minds, and
what little love we bear unto another, how our consciences are seared as it
were with hot irons, being past the feeling of the most indigent and helpless
condition of the poor. How many policies, wiles, and euasions can we frame
for our selves, to avoid and put off this necessary charity, by God so
diligently and absolutely commanded?

in formapauperum, and allege their poverty, Their poverty.
when their estate is sufficient enough. These men do suppose, that because
but a little will be but little regarded, and their ability is not able to
depart with much: that it is as good to give nothing at all, as by presenting a
mite of no moment, and a present of no price unto God, to be offensive and
displeasing unto him: but this is but a slender and idle shift, and will not
serve the turn. Marc. 12. Marc. 10.
that it is not the quantity, but quality of the gift, which the Lord
esteems: He respects not how much a man does give, but with what mind a man
does give. The widows mite and ^pittance was more gracious then the greater
contributions of the richer sort. Peter his forsaking all that he had, though
to estimate it by the price, it seemed nothing at all, being but a
fisher-boate, and a couple of worn nets, was encouraged by Christ, with this
munificent reward and promise, that he should have an hundred fold in this
life, and everlasting life in the world to come. Wherefore disable not thy self
any way, give as thou art able, and thou have abundantly discharged this
office, and have given a good alms.

The multitude of poor.
who come in flocks and swarms like sheep and bees, whereby they are not able
to suffice so great a number, thinking it better seeing they cannot serve all,
to serve none at all: for in releeuing but of some, it may so be, that the
worser sort may be comforted, and the better sott neglected. Mar. 10. 2. Cor 8.
and give it unto the poor. The Apostle says, That it is not now required
that other men should be eased, and we our selves grieved, but that our
abundance may supply their lack. And this memorable speech of Peter, to
Ananias, clears this case, and puts it out of doubt, whiles it remained
appertained it not to thee? and after it was soulde was it not in thine own
power? it is meet that we should see what our selves may want, and such whom
God has commended to our charge, before we lavish out our alms unto others,
for we ought not to relieve the poor, and help other beggars to impouerish
our selves and make our own children beggars. For as much as he that provides
not for his own wife and family, has denied the faith, and is worse then an
infidel. 1 Timothy 5 3 Object: the idle life of the pore their ingratitude: and
indignity.


Some take exceptions against the persons of the poor taxing their idle and
sluggish trade of life, thinking it not meet, that the fruits of their labor
should relieve their idleness, urging likewise their former prodigality, the
procurer of this misery: their evil dispositions, their the euish affections,
and their most subtle licentiousness, from whence arise these, and such like
expostulatorie disco^tentments. Why should my pains maintain their ease? my
industry, their security? my thrift, their waste? my charity, their
unthankfulness? my wisdom their folly? Shall we get by law to spend upon
lust? shall we give to him that has neither wealth to require 1? will to
remember it? nor honesty to be thankful for it? Shall I give to such a vilde
person, so given over unto all sin and wickedness? to foster and cherish him
in this his so extreme, and outrageous misdemeanor? S. August. August. in psalm.
102.
Ne pig rescant in hoc viscera miseri cordiae, quia tibi bomo peccator
occurrit. Homo peccator, duo sunt nomind: aliud quod homo, aliud quod peccator.
Quod homo opus est dei, quod peccator opus est hominis da operi dei, noli operi
hominis. Let not thy bowels of mercy faint, because thou meetest with a man ye
is a sinner. Man and sinner are two names. It is one thing to be a man, and
another thing to be a sinner. That he is a man, it is the work of God, that he
is a sinner, it is the work of man: give to the work of God, but not to the
work of man. We should moreover when we vpbraid others with their sins,
look into our own, and not cast them as we do into the wallet behind our
backs, that we might not see them. The sins, which we argue and reprove in
others, are common to our selves. It were hard with us, if god should reject us
because of our sins, Mat. 5.
when we come as suitors and beggars unto him. Wherefore as we would God should
do to us, do we to others: but he makes his Sun, to arise on the evil and
the good, and sends rain on the unjust, and the just. Wherefore as he gives
unto every one, and hitteth no man in the teeth, so let us give as we are
able, unto our needy brethren, without vpbrayding, or reproaching them. Luc.
7. Luc. 19. Mat. 9.
He courteously enterteined sinful Mary Magdalen: he friendly diuerted into
the house of the wicked extortioner Zacheus. He graciously called Matthew the
Publicane from his ungodly seat of custom. Show thou the like merciful
affections unto sinners, as he did unto sinners, and speak lovingly vuto them:
that rather with thy humanity, thou may mittigate; their misery: them
otherwise with thy cruelty, aggrauate their extremity: rather pitying them
with remorse, then further plaguing them with spiteful reproach: thereby to
add further affliction to their bands. Mat. 9.
When as the sinner diseased with the palsy, requested Christ's friendship, he
did not churlishly and roughly exasperate him, but with all friendly and sweet
speeches comfort him, entreating him as a father does entreat his son,
saying unto him: Son, thy sins be forgiven thee: Is it possible to devise a
more amiable speech, the^ that which he uses to the thief upon the Cross?
when he said unto him: Luc. 33.
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise? Let our lips be thus full of
grace to those that request and implore our grace, and let us with civil and
charitable words, answer their requests. It is expedient also that thy gesture
and behauior should show thy affections and love toward them, and in them
also to follow the foot-steppes of our heavenly father: Luc. 15.
who embraced his prodigal and ryotous son, with the arms of his mercy,
fell upon his neck, kissed him, and showed all mercy toward him. O that this
love and nature were in us toward the poor, when as they come begging and
howling for relief, gasping for our comfort as a thirsty land. We have lost
our right ear with Malchus, and our right hand with the man in the Gospel, is
dried up, and withered. Our hearts are flintie, and will not be pierced: and
the whole man is blockish, and stockish, without remorse and feeling: any light
occasion may move us to revile them, but it is a hard matter that may persuade
us to relieve them.

The fear of want.
and carry a straighter hand against the poor, because they are in fear of
wanting themselves, and to become poor, by releeuing and succouring of the
poor. This reason proceeds from the want of faith, and argues our gross
and carnal affections, if we had any trust and confidence in God, we would
not so easily upon every fond thought and vain crotchet of our idle head,
shift off this duty. have enough. In dispairing of his providence, thou
offerest great wrong and injury unto him. For he opens his hand, Psalm. 104
and fills all living things with his blessing. Exodus 16 Exodus 17
He fedd the Israelites forty years together, in the waste wilderness, where
no food was. He smote the stony rock also, and the waters gushed our
exceedingly, and gave them plentiousnesse of water to drink, as out of a
ruier. At his desire also he sent Quails, Number. 11
and feathered fowls as thick as the sand of the sea. Genesis 12
Abraham gave over his native soil, and his whole inheritance, to do as God
appointed him: he lost nothing by it, but the Lord mightily emiched his
estate, and made his name, like unto the name of the great men that are upon
earth. Jacob when he iourneyed over Jordan, Genesis 18
had nothing but a beggars staff in his hand: but because he relied upon God
his staff, his shilde, and his buckeler, he returned back with two troops,
with great store and abundaunce of wealth. Exodus 2 Genesis 32 Genesis 40
Moses was fed in Egypt by strangers, and Joseph being sold into a strange
land, succored his father, and fathers house, in their great misery. The
Ravens in the air, 1. Kin. 17
and Angels in heaven, did feed Elias the servant of God, in the caves and
bowels of the earth, Dan. 14.
Daniel among the Lions, Marc. 30
the Disciples in the Desert, were not permitted or suffered to want. And as the
Lord generally provides for such, who depend upon him, and walk in their
vocation: so these who shall for his sake, be merciful unto the poor, shall
be sure to be satisfied, and always have enough, He that gives to the poor
(says Solomon) shall not want: Prouer. 27.
but he that despises them shall endure penury. There was never any that by
giving of alms might more have feared want, 1. King. 17.
then the Sidonian widow of Sarepta: For she had but a slender pittance, in a
cruise, which could but serve for the next repast, and yet she stood not upon
this conceit, but distributed it, and gave unto the Prophet and this her
devotion, received a blessing, her oil increased soon. The good servant in
the Gospel, was of a merciful disposition, Mark 25
he did deal out that which was committed unto him, and was faithful, over a
little: The Lord encouraged him for so doing? calling him good servant, and
withal making him ruler over more. Wherefore let not the fear of any want,
be any rub in our way, to hinder us from a merciful compassion of the
poor. For it is far otherwise, and the contrary is most true, we cannot
make a greater gain, then by dividing our substance to the poor, as more
largely shall be showed in the next Chapter.

The care of our posterity. Aug. de december. chordis. Tom. 9.
choketh many of us, causing us either negligently to remit, or altogether
carelessy to omit this duty. This doubt Saint Augustine propounds and
dissolueth in this manner. Filiis meis seruo magna excusatio: seruat tibi,
pater tuus, seruas tu filiis tuis, filii tui filiis suis, and sic per omnes,
and nullus factarus est preceptum domini. Quare non illi potius impendis omnia,
qui te fecit ex nihilo? qui te fecit^ ipse to pascet. Palliare se volunt and
defendere homines, nomine pietatis, vt quasi propter filios videantur seruare
homines, quod propter auaritiam servant. Conting it vt amittat vnum: si propter
filium seruabat, mittat post alum partem suam, quare illam tenet in sacculo,
and illum relinquit in animo? read illi quod suum est, quod illi seruabas:
mortuus est inquit, sed praecessit ad deum, pars ipsius debetur pauperibus,
Illi debetur ad quem perexit Dicis seruo fratribus eius si viueret ille non
erat cum suis fratribus diuisurus. O fides mortua, mortuus est filius: si
Christus pro illo mortuus non est mortuus est ipse si autem in te est fides,
viuit filius tuus: viuit non decessit sed praecessit. Qua front venturus es,
ad filium tum qui prcaeessit cui praecedenis, non mittis partem suam, in
coelum. This common speech, A sweet saying of Augustine.
I keep that which I have for my children, is a great excuse: thy father kept
for thee, thou keep for thy children, thy children for their children, and
so it runs through all, and none regard the commandment of the Lord: why
do thou not rather keep for him all, who made thee, of nothing at all? He
that made thee will maintain thee. Men would cloak and color themselves with
the painted show of holiness, that they might seem for their children to do it
in naturalnes, which is done in covetousness: it falls so out that he loses
one son, let him send his portion after him, wherefore does he keep this still
in his purse, when he has left the other in his mind? Deliver up to him that
which is his own, that which thou keep for him. But thou answerest he is
dead, but he is gone before to God, his part therefore is due to the poor, it
is proper unto him unto whom he is gone. Thou reply further ye thou keep
it for his brethren. But if he had lived, he would never have divided it
amongst his brethren. My son is dead, O dead faith: if so be that Christ died
not for him, indeed he is dead, but if there be any faith in thee, thy son is
a live, he lives, he is not clean gone, but gone before. With what face wilt
thon come to thy son that is gone before thee? to whom thou will not send his
portion into heaven? Aug. ibidem
An non potestimitti in caelum? audi dominum: Thesaurizate vobis thesauros in
caelo, tenebitur hic vbi potest perire, Math. 6.
and non mittetur illuc, vbi Christus est custos? Actoribus tuis commendas
illius partem qui praecessit, and Christo non commendas ad quen^ praecessit? an
idoneus est tibi procurator tuns and minus idoneus est Christus? mendacium est
ergo quod dicunt filiis meis seruo, audi sunt homines, vel sic certe coguntur,
confiteri quod nolunt, cum erubescant tacere quod sunt. Cannot his part be sent
up to heanen? hear what the Lord says: lay up for your selves treasure in
heaven. Shall it be kept here where it may be lost? and shall it not be sent
thither where Christ is keeper of it? Shall we credit the Brokers with his
part that is gone before? and shall we not commit it unto Christ, to whom
he is gone before? is our Merchant factour of sufficient trust, and Christ of
little credit? It is therefore a lie which they say, we keep it for our
sons. Men are covetous, or they are so constrained to confess that which
they would not, when they blush to conceal that which they are. How altogether
vain and foolish a thing it is for the better providing for our posterity, to
neglect this needful point of Charity, by this especial argument amongst
infinite others which might easily be ripped up, may be concluded: because we
know not, either how they will prove that shall be our heirs, or who they are
that shall inherit our goods. For man (as the heavenly Psalmist says) walks
in a vain shade, Psalm. 39.
deceiving himself, gathering up riches, and not knowing who shall have them,
like the Be that makes honey, and the sheep that bears wool, and the ox
that draws the plough, laboring for others, whom they do not know. This wise
Solomon observing very well, Eocliast. 2.
grew weary of gathering up riches for his heirs, lothing it, and speaking
thus of it to himself: I hate all my labor which I have endured, which I am
to leave to an other, that shall be after me: and who knows whether he shall
be wise, or foolish, yet shall he have rule over all my labor wherein I have
travailed. Neither did his judgment deceive him, for he left the Crown to
his son Rehoboam, a very foolish, and ungoverned young man, who by his
outrageous and inordinate doings, immediately lost the greatest part of that
his father left him. Amongst private men, this is often seen, that the
inheritance bequeathed to their Children, is deteyned and kept back, by
unconscionable Executours: who eythet spend it before they come to age, to
whom it is due, or else by some quidditie and quirke in law, do pretend a
title and a right unto it, and so by forged cauillation and wrong, do deprive
them of it.

Add moreover heereunto, that riches are for the most part, the fruits of
sins, and Children are made rich by the iniquities of their parents: nothing
at all respecting either right or wrong, so they may attain to wealth at their
desire, and may leave their substance to their babes. Whereupon by a just
judgment, it often so happens, that that which was so lewdely and
injuriously gathered, is as lasciuiously and ryotously scattered. It is good
counsel therefore that has been given by some, that to the heir either good
or bad, there should not be left much: for the bad would waste it prodigally,
and the good would provide for himself industriously.

That their goods are their own, and therefore that they may dispose of them
as they list.
there are some, who churlishly do say, that whatsoever they have is their
own: and therefore that it is at their pleasure to order it, either to reserve
it, or keep it by themselves, or otherwise to convert it as they shall think
it good. But this people are as grossly ignorant, as they are wickedly
confident, thinking that lawful, which is lustful unto them. For what have
thou (says the Apostle Paul) which thou have not received? Is thy health, thy
wealth, thy wit, thy eloquence, thy wisdom, thy strength, or thy life, or
any other thing which thou do enjoy, in thine own power to order, and
govern it, as to thee beseems best? There is none that has but a dram of
wit, that will be so conceited, for he is as soon convinced as he can think
it: by either loosing his Children, which he would keep, if it did lie in his
power, or leaving behind him sottish, weak, deformed Children, without any
gift of nature, or of grace. The like may be said of such the necessary
creatures of God, which before man's use, and maintenance of this life. Who
created herbs, plants, corn, cattle, fish, birds, which either serve to
feed us or to cloth us or to help our necessities: who made the tall
ceaders, the stone, the metal, wherewith our houles and stately dwellings are
builded? who opened first the veins and bowels of the earth, where gold or
silver and such precious things do grow? has not the Lord in wisdom made
them all, for the use of man? and that in such sort, as every one may have
access unto them. no man being bolted and barred from them, by boltes, by
bars, by locks, Mark this well.
by walls, or any other particion? It is man that hoardeth up the good
blessings of God and hides them in his hutch, which the Lord would have
common and distributed abroad: I speak not this to infringe the propriety,
and just title that every man has to the goods, which God has lent him, and
to bring in Platoes Commonwealth, and the Annabaptisticall Communion of all
things, I know that God has ordained families and founded Commonwealths,
which without distinct degrees of persons, and estates cannot possibly
consist. But whosoever he be that turns the riches of Gods mercy toward
him, to the maintenance of his insatiable covetousness, not caring who sterue,
so he may glut himself, loath to cast a mite into the Lords treasure, having
abundaunce and superfluity of wealth, the love of God dwells not in him, but
he is a bad steward, a thief, and a robber, who one day shall give a dreadful
account of this his cruel and unnatural disposition. Wherefore let these
words, Meum and Tuum mine, and thine, when as we should charitably help the
needle, be no more heard, or named amongst us. Let us account nothing our own,
but that which is meet for our needful uses, whatsoever is overplus, let us
consecrate it to godly uses, especially to the aiding and supporting of such,
whose dolorous condition pitifully imploreth our tender compassion. So shall
still the right that we have to our goods, remain in our selves, and as Luke
writes of the primitive Church: Acts 4
No man shall say that which he possesses is his own.

Thus have I p^^pounded the principal objections which are commonly urged, and
made answer to them. There are no doubt diverse others beside, but the subtle
mind of man is so nimble and practicke to put of this duty, with so many
shifts and cunning devises, as it passes my capacity to conceive them, and
therefore it is not for me to answer them.

CHAP. IX. Of the exceeding great benifit which redoune death unto us by giving
of alms.
IF the pitiful complaints and outcries of the poor, which pierce the very
clouds pearce not our hearts, nor enter into our cares, yet the certain
reward which God has promised in their behalf, should not a little animate
us, and encourage us in this duty, it is thy duty to relieve the poor, and
to assist him with thy help, and herein when thou have done whatsoever thou
can thou marst say with the poet, vitaui denique culpam, non laudem merui.
Thou have avoided blame, Horac. in Art poet.
thou have merrited nothing at the Lords hands: Yet so good a God have we,
delighting in our well-dooing, as he gives us his word of recompense and
requital of any thing that we shall in his name bestow upon his servants, in
their several necessities. Isai 38.
The Lords healp is at hand for such who shall healpe the poor: for break thy
bread unto the hungry, and let the oppressed go free: and these effects and
fruits will follow thereupon: Thy light shall break forth as the morning, and
thine health shall grow speedily: thy righteousness shall go before thee, and
the glory of the Lord shall embrace thee. If thou power out thy soul to the
hungry, and refresh the troubled soul then shall thy light spring out in ye
darkness, and thy darkness shall be as the noonday, and the lord shall guide
thee continually, and satiffie thy soul in drought, and make fat thy boanes,
and thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of waters, whose
waters fail not. The prophet David speaks of manifold blessings yt shall be
heaped upon the merciful man that is liberal to the pore. Psalm. 41
Blessed (says he) is he yt considers the pore and needy: the lord shall
deliver him in the time of trouble: the lord shall preserve him and keep him
alive, that he may be blessed upon earth, and shall not deliver him into ye
hands of his enemies: the lord shall comfort him when he lies sick upon his
bed, he shall make his bed in his sickness. The lord does absolutely refuse to
hear such who will not hear the pore. Pro 11
He that shuts his ear (says Solomon) at the crying of the pore shall cry
himself and not be heard. Luke 16
The rich man in the Gospel, is unto us a fearful example, showing thus much:
who refusing to show mercy upon poor Lazarus when he was in such misery,
could not himself obtain the least mercy when he was in all extremity:
August.
non inuenit micam, qui non dedit guttam. He could not get a drop, who would
not give a crum. And the experience hereof the merciless misers of these
times, to their endless woe, shall feel in themselves, when as they shall stand
before his tribunal seat, and render an account of those outrages and
extremities, which they have showed to ye pore, selling them for shoes (as the
heavenly prophet says) and eating the^ up as one would eat up bread. God has
crowned our charitable alms with the gracious assurance of eternal life. For
come (says he) ye blessed of my father, possess the kingdom of god, prepared
for you from the beginning of the world. For I was hungry and ye fed me, etc.
Mat. 25
If this reward will not move us, I know not what will mollify our stony hearts.
Last of all that nothing should be wanting, which might hearten us to this duty,
the Lord has given to this, not only the promise of the life that is to
come, but also of the riches and plentiousnesse of this life. Prou. 3
Honor the Lord with thy riches, and with the first fruits of all thy increase:
so shall thy bearnes be filled with a boundance, and thy presses shall burst
with new wine. If thou fear to relieve the pore for fear to want thy self,
thou fear where no feareis, the Lord does assoile thee and ease thee of
this fear, by Solomon directly and plainly affirming, that he that lends to
the poor shall never want. Prou. 23.
And Christ our savior ratifieth this promise, by speaking in this wise. Give
and it shall be given unto you, a good increase, pressed down, shaken together,
and running over, Luke 6
shall men give into your bosom. For with what measure ye meat, with the same
shall men meat to you again. The widow of Sarcpta, is an example of this, who
of all others might have feared want, as being almost at all times in the
greatest want, her portion of oil being very nigh consumed, a pittance for one
thin and slender repast being only remaining. But the Lord plentifully
rewarded her devotion, who for succouring of his prophet would not leave het
destitute, but mightily blessed her vittailes with increase, and in the time of
scarcetie giving her enough. The Lord most graciously and bountifully does
respect, even the least benevolence, and good will, which we give unto the
poor: what can be of less value, then cold water, which we commonly give unto
our beasts? who would think that any body should have any reward for that,
being simply considered in it self, not worthy of thanks? yet God to set
forth the exceeding riches of his mercy toward us, that we should the more
be merciful unto others, has mercifully promised, Math. 10
that whosoever shall give to one of his little ones to drink a cup of cold
water only in the name of a disciple, he shall not loose his reward. Wherefore
since this duty, as all godliness, has the promise both of this life, 1 Timothy
10
and of the life that is to come: let us herein for our own sake, follow the
practice of the merchants of this world, who being to travel from hence to
Spain, A similitude.
and having a great charge of money to carry, that they might travel in
security, without danger of loosing it, they will deliver it to some merchant
here, and take his bill for the re^eit of it, of his Factor there: so if thou
would so lend thy money whilst thou ^rt upon the earth, as thou may be
sure ^o receive it again, when thou come to heaven, thou have no better
course to take, then to lend it the poor, who shall give thee their
handwriting again, and the Lord that sees it, will faithfully repay thee
with interest, and advantage. There is further a great difference between
thine, and the merchant his profit in this action: For the merchant cannot put
over his charge unto an other upon the former condition, without some loss,
and abatement of the principal: but in our exchange, there can be no loss,
but an assured and certain increase. A great usury and over plus does arise
out of it. God always with full hand does come unto him, that does any thing
for him. What perverseness therefore, and madness is this, to seek to heap
treasure up here, where we cannot enjoy it, being to depart from hence, and not
send it up into heaven, where we shall have it again, A similitude
and evermore possess it? Every trade-man will send his wares thither, where
that he supposes they may be best sold. They cannot be better sold then to the
poor, for thereby we shall find great treasure in heaven again. A similitude
Those that mean to leave their native soil, and to live in some foreign
Country, will send over their Goods into that country where they are to
continue: So seeing that we are to leave this dwelling place, and to dwell in a
foreign country, in a tabernacle not made with hands, but eternal in the
heavens: Let us send our goods, and good works to heaven, and lay up for our
selves a sure foundation, 1 Timothy 6
for the obtaining of everlasting life in the world to come. If thou should
see a pilgrim, and a trauailor who taking up his Chamber in an Inn for a
night, A similitude.
being to go the next morning away that should curiously adorn, and deck his
Chamber, setting it out with ornaments, Carpets, and laces of Egypt, would
thou not think him an absurd fellow, and argue him of folly? So this life of
ours being but our Inn, to rest in, not to dwell in, we deal madly in
purueying for the pelf, and filthy lucre of this world, not providing by
faith and our good works for the world to come. Marc. 10
The young iollie gentleman that presumed so much upon the wotkes of the law,
which he had fulsilled, and would needs have a greater task enjoined him, when
he was willed to sell his goods and to give them to the poor, was touched to
the quick, and stroke^ to the heart, and went away sad, and as a man that
was dead at that saying. This young man, is now an old man, and has bin the
father of many children, like unto himself, that will do any thing so it touch
not the purse. They will fast and pray, but they will not give any thing to the
poor. But if they did with the eye of faith, look into the munificent and
honorable reward, that they shall have for it, they would be rich, and
plentious in good works? and not be so hard hearted and close handed as they
are unto the poor Saints. The Lord grant, that for the reward that is set
before the^, that they may take this good course: that they may purchase the
golden goal, of his eternal kingdom, which he has promised to all those,
who shall pity the poor, succor his Saints, and healpe the healplesse with
their favor and loving kindness.

CHAP. X. An exhortation unto giving of Alms.
NOw these things considered, which have been premised, it stands us much
upon to have compassion of the poor destitute by aiding them, and supporting
the^ with our uttermost help. We cannot by any better argument approve our
selves the children of God, We are Gods children, if we show mercy A
similitude
then by this work of mercy. For this is the Caracter and image of his person,
and the engraven and lively representatio^ of his substance. And as the wax
does take the express stamp and impression of the seal: So gods dear
children, whose hearts are soft, and mollified like wax, do take the signature
of love, and mercy, from their merciful father, as from a seal: Luke 6.
Be you merciful (says our savior Christ) as your heavenly father is
merciful. God would not have us to imitate him in his power and works of
Majesty: but in such things which are effects of his mercy. For that is high
presumption which God will punish, as he did Lucifer, casting him down from
heaven into the earth, saying, Apoc. 12. Esaias. 14
in the intolerable pride of his heart, I will ascend up into the heaven, and
I will be like the most high. He would not have us to be like him in
knowledge. For this is that which the Serpent would have, beguiling the woman
with this persuasion: Genesis 3.
Ye shall be as God, knowing good and evil. By means whereof she did make
her self subject, and her posterity after her, unto eternal damnation.
Neither is it his pleasure, that we stuld follow him in his miraculons acts, in
the signs, and wonders which he did, either in creation, or preservation of
the world, but he would only that we should learn from him, his tender mercy
and compassion. For mercy is more acceptable unto him then any sacrifice that
has horns and hoofes. Osee. 6.
By this we shall be as like our heavenly father, as any child now is like
his earthly father. A man may be said to be like a man, not in hands, or his
legs, but when in face and countenance, which is the certainest part of a
man, he does favor and resemble him. God his mercy, is his favorable and
loving countenance, which goes beyond all his other parts. For his mercy (as
Jacob says) is above all his works: and his mercy does go beyond his
judgment. Wherefore, if thou would that God should show mercy unto thee,
be thou like unto God, in showing mercy unto others. If thou will be cruel
and unmerciful unto thy brother, the Lord wi have no mercy and compassion
upon thee. The dreadful example of the evil servant, Mat. 18.
plainly and manifestly teaches thee thus much: who being released upon his
humble petition, by his gracious master, of a grand debt, and very great
arrerages into which he was run: Yet would not absolve his fellow servant,
and acquit him of a slender debt and demand, which did grow unto him: His
master called him unto a strait account again, and to make satisfaction for all
that he did owe, condignly censuring him, and adiudging him thus: Evil
servant, I forgave thee al ye debt, because thou prayedst me, ought thou not
also to have had pity on thy fellow, even as I had pity on thee? so the
master was wroth, and delivered him to the Ia^lor, till he should pay all that
was due unto him. Eue^ so our heavenly father shall do with us, except we
forgive and give unto others, in their extreme necessities.

Furthermore, let us not only as gods dear children love to be merciful, but
as it is also his nature and property. We are to give alms willingly and
speedily. Genesis 18.
Let us be fervent and diligent in this duty, and as occasion gives,
pereforme it readily. So did Abraham and his whole household, when he
entertained and harbored the strangers: he himself went out to meet them,
and went with speed into the tent of Sara, and ran to the beasts, and took
from thence a Calfe, and Sara speedily did make ready three measures of fine
meal, kneading it, and making Cakes upon the harth. The servant likewise
roasted the Calfe, and made it ready, and took butter, milk, and the Calfe,
Exodus 25.
and did set before them. There were two Cherubines that were portraied with
wings, over the place where the people of Israel did pray. God especially
delighted in Cherubins, because they were of so great swiftness, to insinuate
how greatly he likes them that speedily and swiftly perform such duties as
God enioyneth them. A similitude
As every Master loves a ready servant, diligent and pliable to do his
Masters business, more then the sluggish and slothful, which remissely and
flackly does his office: so such as give alms cheerfully and readily, are
those good servants whom our heavenly Master likes, and not those who
grudgingly, tauntingly, and wretchedly do their devotions. Our obedience must
be willingly, or else it nothing differs from the Diuelles, Luke 41
who obeyed when he was commanded to go out of the heard of swine, but it was
constrainedly, sore against his will. As Paul when he was Saul, as soon as
he heard the heavenly voice sounding in his ears, Act. 9.10.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? answered forthwith: Lord what will thou
have me do? Genesis 37.
And as Abraham performed the duty of circumcision, as soon as it was
enjoined him, and as Joseph when as his father Jacob said unto him, Come I
will send thee to thy brethren: cheerfully answered him, I am ready: and
as his disciples, Math. 4.
when Christ said unto them: Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men,
did immediately leave their nets, and went after him. And as upright Joseph the
mirror of obedience, having received by a vision in the night, Math. 2.
a commandment from an Angel to go into Egypt, stayed not the dawning of the
day, till the day star should arise, but as son as he did awake out of his
sleep, did without delay as the Angel had commanded him. So let us the Lords
servants, be like unto these his servants in our dutiful devotions, and
heavenly commandments that are given unto us. Never had we more need then at
this present to be stirred up unto this duty, the Lord having punished us with
a great scarcity, whereby as the number of every thing is less; so the price
of every thing must be-greater. Albeit by this insufferable cruelty of
malsters and Corne-mongers that abound and swarm in cities and incorporate
towns, and lurk in villages and obscure places, who by buying of grain
aforehand, do keep up the price, it is made far greater then otherwise it
would be. And in this common want, who do feel most want, but only the poor:
for the middle sort of people have enough, and the rich have too much. The
poor that lives by their hard labor, cannot buy themselves bread, they
hunger and starve, and few there be that pity them. Let us therefore with
christian pity, have respect of them, there being no time wherein we should
neglect them. Aug. Tom. 10. dominic 15. post Trintt.
Ne despiciamus pauperes, ne ille nos despitiat, qui propter nos pauper factus
est cu^ esset dives: ab deus, initio nullum pauperem dispicere voluit, non enim
elegit eloquentes rhetores, Consules, diuites, potentes, quibus verbi sui
secreta committeret: sed dut opiliones sicut Patriarchas, and beatum David, aut
piscatores sicut Petrum, and reliquos Apostolos: vt per infirma destrueret
fortia and per humilia excelsa, and superba deiiceret. Amemus ergo pauperes, vt
cum illo partem habere possimus qui dixit discite a me quia mitis sum, and
humilis cord. Let us not despise the poor, least he despise us, who when he
was rich became poor for us. God from the beginning has rejected none for
their poor condition, for he did not choose the eloquent, the learned, the
rich, the honorable, to whom he did impart the Mysteries of his word, but
either sheapheards, as the Patriarchs and blessed David, or else Fishermen, as
Peter and the other Apostles, that by the weak he might confound the strong:
and by the humble overthrow the high and proud things. Let us therefore love
the poor, that we may have a portion with him who says, Learn of me,
because I am humble and meek in heart. If GOD has plentifully blessed thine
estate, and given thee much riches, persuade thy self as it is indeed, that
he has done it for good purposes: that thou should convert them to godly
uses, and amongst other, to the relief and maintenance of the poor. For the
rich are appointed to be nursing fathers, unto indigent and helpless people. A
similitude
For as the best meat is given unto a nurse, which may turn to the best
nourishment: that the infant being batled with wholesome milk, might be in
better liking: so God has given thee foison of the earth, the fat of the
soil, that thou should nourse, and bring up thy poor neighbors, and supply
their necessities with thy superfluities. Thou do therefore greatly abuse thy
wealth, when thou make it to glut thy lusts, and not to serve ye poor: making
it the subject of cruelty, which is ministered as matter to exercise thy
charity. A great number of the rich men of our time, do so scorn and disdain
the poor, as if they were not worthy to live by them. It is so come to pass,
that in this world the poor man, as a worm is trodden under foot, no man
regarding him: and the rich man only had in reputation, every man applauding
him. But there will be an inuersion of these times. For albeit Joseph, when as
Jacob should bless his two sons Ephraim, and Manasses, placed Ephraim as the
elder brother, at the right hand of Jacob, and Manasses the younger at the left.
Genesis 48
Yet Israel otherwise transposed his hands, stretching out his right hand upon
Ephraims head the younger, and of purpose directing the left toward Manasse the
elder brother. Men shall not in heaven keep their high roumths, which they
have here in earth, and the poor shall not always be forlorn But the time will
come, Psalm. 98
when he shall with righteousness judge the world, and the people with equity.
When he shall cast down the mighty from their seat, Luke (...)
and shall exalt the humble and meek. Da ergo petenti, vt possis ipse
accipere. Da in terra christo, Aug. Ser. 25 in Lucam.
quod tibi reddat in caelo: obliuiscere quod es, and attend quod eris ^siante
nos aliqud mitteremus, non ad mane hospitium veniremus: quod autem rapimus, hic
totum dimittimus. Give therefore to the poor that does ask, that thou thy
self may receive when thou do ask: give to Christ here upon earth,
that he may restore it thee again in heaven. Forget what thou art, and
consider what thou shall be: if we would send any thing before us, we should
not come to an empty house. For that which we give unto the poor is but sent
before us: but that which we take from them, is all lost here. Augustine puts
us in mind of many circumstances, very meet to be thought upon, when as any
poor man craves our devotion. Aug in eua^. Mat. Ser: 5.
Cogitemus quando petitur a nobis, qui petunt a quio bus petunt? quid petunt?
Qui petunt? homines a quibus petunt? ab hominibus: qui petunt? mortales, a
quibus petunt? a mort alibus: qui petunt? fragiles: a quibus petunt, a
fragilsbus: qui petunt? miseri: a quibus petunt? a miseris, excepta substantia
facultatum, tales sunt qui petunt qualessunt a quibus petunt. Quam frontem
habes petendo ad dominum tuum, qui non agnoscis parem tuum? non sum (inquis)
talis, absit vt talissim obsericatus ista loquitur de pannoso Sed no^ interrogo
in vestibus quales sitis, sed quales nati fueritis. Dic quid attuleris aut si
dicere erubescas Apostolum audi: nihil intulimus in hunc mundum. Let us
consider when any thing is begged of us, who they are ye beg? of whom they do
beg? and what they do beg? who do beg? men of who^ they do beg? of men. Who do
beg? Such as are mortal. Of who^ do they beg? of such as are mortal. Who do
beg? weak. Of who^ do they beg? of the^ that are weak. Who do beg? the
miserable. Of who^ do they beg? of ye miserable. Lay aside their goods and
worldly weith, they are ye same that beg, that they are of who^ they beg.
Therefore what forehead have thou in begging of God, that regardest not thine
equal who beggeth of thee? but thou say I am not such a one as he, God
forbid I should be such a one. This he that is in silk, speaks of him that is
in vilde raime^t. But I do not ask thee what thou art in thy bravery, in thy
gay garments, but what you were when you were both borne. Tell me what thou
did bring with thee? or if thou do blush to tell it, hear what ye Apostle
tells thee. Thou broughtest nothing into this world. Ergo si habes aurum,
habes non vnde sis bonus, 1. Tim. 6. Aug. ibid.
sed vnde facias bonum, habes pecuniam? eroga: erogando pecuniam, auges
iustitiam. Vide quid minuatur, and quid augeatur. Minuitur pecunia, augetur
iustitia. Illud minuitur quod eras relieturus, illud augetur, quod in aeternum
es possessurus. Consilium do lucrorum, disce mercari, laudas mercatorem qui
vendit plumbum, and acquirit auru^, and non laudas mercatore^ qui erogat
pecuniam and acquirit iustitiam? Therefore if thou have gold, thou have not
wherewith thou may be good, but whereby thou art enabled to do good. Have
thou money: Distribute it amongst the poor, by giving unto the^, thou
increasest thy righteousness He has divided and given to the poor, his
righteousness indureth for ever. See therefore what it is that is diminished,
and what it is that is enlarged. Thy money is diminished, but thy
righteousness is increased: that is made less which thou were to leave: and
that is made more which thou art ever to possess. I give thee therefore my
counsel to gain, learn therefore the trade. Thou commendest the Merchant, A
similitude.
who sells lead, and gets Gold: and will thou not praise that Merchant,
who gives his money, and obtains righteousness? Caetera perditis, hoc solum
non perditis (says the same father: yet loose all other things, but this thing
only we cannot loose, that reward of good works, even the salvation of our
souls. Let us therefore with joy, in hope of greater joy which we shall have
for it, give liberally and readily to the poor. It shall not be given, but
lent for a time, to him that will pay thee seven fold in thy bosom. Those
that are such obstinate and hard hearted people, as are past feeling, and have
no conscience nor commiseratio^ of the poor distressed people, wandering up
and down hungry and thirsty, their souls gasping for your comfort, as a
thirsty land: let them in time take heed, and by a speedy remorse, labor to
prevent the judgment to come: let them redeem the time which they have lost,
and now in this acceptable time for the^ to be relieved, which is this time of
scarcity: let them be rich and bountiful in their alms, if they do it not in
this life, there will be no use of it after this life. Nemo dicturus in
resurrectione mortuorum frange esurienti pane^, quia nou inuenies esurientem:
nec vesti nudum, vbi omnium tunica, immortalitas erit: nec suo scipe peregrinu^
vbi omnes in patria sua viuent: nec visita aegrum, vbi est sanitas sempiterna:
nec sepeli mortuum, vbi mors morietur. No man shall say in the resurrection of
the dead, break thy bread unto the hungry, because thou shall not find any who
does hunger: neither cloth the naked, because with immortality we shall be all
clothed: neither enterteine the stranger, for there we shall al live in our
country: neither visit the sick, where health is ever lasting: neither bury yt
dead, where death it self shall die. And I conclude this exhortation, and the
whole treatise with the words of exhortation which S. Augustine uses, to the
rich of his time, which I heartily wish may be borne in mind of the rich of
this time. Diuitis purpurati fuge exemplum: pauper beatitudinem emit
mendicitate, August. Tom. 16 dominic. 51 post Trinit.
and dives supplitium facultate: desiderat guttam, qui negauerat micam. Dives
fuit ille de quo nunc loquimur, and nunc sunt diuites de quibus loquimur. Vnius
sunt nominis, caueant ne sint vnius conditionis. Inter diuitem purpuratum, and
Lazarum vlcerosum, mutatae sunt vices. Dives perdidit quod habebat, pauper
caepit esse quod non erat. Dives ille in saeculo apothecas plenas reliquerat,
and in inferno guttam ardens petebat and impetrare non poterat. Attendite
fratres, totum diutis corpus flammis gehennae consumitur, and sola lingua
amplius cruciatur, ideo sine dubio in lingua maiorem sentit ardorem, quia per
eam superbe loquendo, contempserat pauperem. Avoid the example of the rich man,
clothed in purple. The poor man obtained heavenly blessings by his beggary,
and the rich man extreme torments in hell, with his wealthy faculty. He was
rich of whom we now speak, and there are rich men to whom we now speak: they
are of one name, let the^ take heed they be not of one condition. The case is
now altered, which was then between the purple rich man, and between Lazarus,
who was full of sores. The rich man lost that which he had, and the poor man
began to be that which he was not. That rich man in the world had his garners
full of all manner of store, and burning in hell, he desires a drop and could
not obtain it. Give ear to this, the rich man's whole body is in afire in
hell, and only his tongue is tormented above all: therefore without doubt he
feels a greater fire in his tongue, because he speaking disdainfully with his
tongue, did contemn God, and denied alms.

The God of mercy grant, that we may be more mercifully minded to his Saints
which are now, or shall hereafter be in adversity: that we that follow this
man's steps may tremble at his judgment and leave these steps, if that we
will not taste of his stripes. As the servant of Abraham could not perceive a
more evident sign, that Rebecca was worthy to be daughter in law unto
Abraham, then her francke nature, and liberal inclination, which she showed
in drawing water to quench his thirst, and tolling him into her mothers house:
so we cannot express, a more manifest token, that we are children of Abraham,
then by giving drink to the thirsty, breaking bread to the hungry, clothing
the naked, harboting the stranger, visiting the prisoner, and succoring every
one, that has need of our help: which merciful disposition, the God of all
mercy grant unto us, for his mercy, and his Christ's sake.

FINIS

