A BOOK OF ANGLING, OR FISHING.

Wherein is showed, by conference with Scriptures, the agreement between the
FISHERMEN, FISHES, FISHING of both natures, Temporal, and Spiritual.

By SAMVEL GARDENER Doctor of Divinity.

Matthew 4.19. I will make you fishers of men.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Purfoot. 1606.

To Sir Henry Gaudie, sir Miles Corbet, sir Hammond Le-Strang, sir Henry
Spelman Knights, my very kind friends.
A Hiah the Prophet, 1. King. 11.30.
taking hold of Ieroboams new garment, and tearing it out into 12. pieces,
took occasion thereupon to prohecie: 1. king. 17, 14.
Elias sermoned on the little meal vessel, and cruise of oil of his
Hostess, the widow of Zarephath: and his scholar Elizeus did the like, 2.
King. 4.7
preaching upon the pitcher of oil, of the Preachers widow. By the line of
such examples, I am led to give the Church such spiritual Meditations, as in
time I have deducted from mine angling recreation. The comparisons that lay
between the fishers, and fishes of both kinds, without ransacking further
reading, are my only store, and will serve sufficiently for the common both
instruction and comfort. I put these labors forth under your names, as a
seal of my zeal and love toward you, for that love which in some of you has
been ancient, and in all of you, very good to me. I commend them unto you, and
you unto God, who more and more enlarge his holy spirit in you, to his glory,
and your felicity.

Yours in all love in the Lord, Samuel Gardener.

To the Reader.
I Apply it unto providence (God marking me out so contrary to my thoughts, to
that calling I am in, to fish for souls) that I have so delighted in fishing
in my time, it being an exercise at which the very Cinicks and Stoics will not
lowre, or show frowning brows, and holding so in comparison with our
ministerial function, in so perfect a proportion. How typically the Angelical
use of Angling, shaddoweth and sets forth the duties of both parts. 1.
Preacher. 2. Hearer, Luke. 3.
and answers like the Baptist, to the question of the Soldiers, Publicans,
all comers, what shall we do? I put it to thy judgment, after thou have but
cursorily trauised this Treatise. I trust God shall so bless both it and thee,
as thou shall be caught, and brought thereby as fishes from the bottom, to the
shore: from the bottomless pit of perdition, to the land of the living, and to
the top of beauenly glory. So fare thou well.

Thine in prayer to God, for thy good, SAMVEL GARDENER.

The Contents of this Book.
The sum of this following Treatise is abridged in these two Verses:
Ecclcsiam pro naue rego: mihi climata mundi
sunt mare: scripturae retia: piscis homo.


Which I deliver in English thus: The Church I govern as a ship,
We, seas with world compare,
The scritures are the enclosing nets,
And men the fishes are.


We will follow this division, and contain our selves within these limmited
bounds.

THE FIRST CHAPTER. Of the Fishermans Ship or Boat.
HE that gives himself to Fishing, The Fishermans provision, for his fishing.
and minds to follow it to the best proof, with the true and necessary
furniture of that trade, he provides himself a ship, keele, or cocke-boat,
out of which he may lay out and take in his nets, and be in the vain and way
where the best doing is. But we have a sure and tight one indeed, if we be of
the Church: The Church compared to a Ship. Genesis 6.14.18. and 7.6.7 11. Math.
13.2.3. Mar. 4.1.2 and Luke 5.3 Math. 7.25
For the Church in Scriptures is compared to a Ship. Noah his Ship and
Pinnesse did expressly prefigure it, and the Ship out of which Christ preached,
did not obscurely shadow it. It may well hold comparison with a Ship, it is so
like it in every degree.

I. Every Ship has need of a skillful and watchful Pilote and Governor: so
has the Church, whereof it is fitted with the best, the eternal Son of God
our Lord Jesus Christ sitting always at the stern of it, Mat. 7.25.
and carefully keeping it. So that we need not fear though the Seas roar and
beat with their proud waves against it: for he rules it with such a steady
hand, as it cannot be shaken, and be that keeps it, Psa. 121.4.
does neither slumber nor sleep. Of this we have a sure word of prophecy for
our indemnitie; Isay. 43.1.
Fear not, for I have redeemed thee. I have called thee by thy name, thou art
mine. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through
the floods, that they do not ouerflow thee. And that we might build upon it,
his promise to the same effect is thus in another part of Scripture repeated;
Zach. 2.5.
I, (says the Lord) will be a wall of fire round about. Novisible headin the
Church, as in a ship, sithence Christ is never absent; but guides it, etc.
The Church has no need of a visible head, as a Ship has, as Popery
delivers. For sithence Christ is never absent, what need have we of any
outward head to be present? But that Christ is always incu^bent on his Church,
and is present with his ship, his promise to the Church proves, I will be
with you to the end of the world. Mat. 28.10 Genesis 7.1.20. and 8.16. Christ
watches ever. John. 6.17.18.20.21. Mark. 6.47 48.51. Mat. 14.22 24.30.32.33.
Mark. 4.35.36.37.38.39.40.41. Mat. 8.24.26. Luke. 8.23.24.25.
Thus was he with Noah whilst his Arc and Bark floated and houered on the
surface of the waters, during all the raging time of the flood. Our Pilot may
seem to us to slumber, when the Ship and Church is in danger: but as in the
deluge, so in the deuillish devises of men, he takes charge of it. So that we
may fasten these verses unto it translated out of a Greek verse, of which
Sybilla is said to be the author.

Mergitur interdum, sed non submergitur vnquam:
Saluificum Christi seruans ecclesia verbum.
The Church though sometimes drencht, is never drowned:
Because it is upon Christ's saving Gospel founded. Sybillas verses.

II. Every Ship must have a Rudder to rule it. The rudder of the ship. James.
3.4.
The Rudder wherewith the Arc of Gods Church is guided, is the word of God, the
rule and direction of every man's life. Of the word of God, a rule for us, etc.
Psa. 119.9
For if we put the question of every man's (as David does of the young man,
saying: Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his ways) and say, wherewithal
shall young and old, rich and poor, one with another rule his way? the answer
is the same taken from the mouth of Gods spirit; Even by ruling himself
according to thy word. For this is not only a word of authority to bind the
conscience: or of wisdom only to advise it: or of power only to convert it:
or of grace only to comfort it: but it is a word of eternal life, absolutely
to bless us, Ioh. 6.27.68, 69.
and guide this Ship unto the key and haven of all heavenly happiness: Whether
else shall we go, (says Peter to Christ) Thou have the words of eternal
life. By this he governs and vpholdeth all according to the words of the
Apostle, He bears up all things by his mighty word. Heb. 1.3.


III. The maine Mast of the Ship.
The maine Mast of this Ship fastened in the midst of it, to which the sail
hangs, is his gracious promise of his being with the Church unto the end of
the world, Math. 28.20. Of the gracious promise of Christ to his Church.
given in writing in this wise; Lo, I am with you unto the end of the world.
Of which there is the like enrolment in this Magna charta and great Charter
between God and his church, as in this piece of evidence: The mountains shall
remove, Isai. 54.10
and the hills shall fall down: but my mercy shall not depart from thee,
neither shall the covenant of my peace fallaway, (says the Lord) that has
compassion on thee. As also in this, I will see you again, and your hearts
shall rejoice, Ioh. 16.22
and your joy shall no man take from you.

IIII. The Sails of the ship. Math 16.16. Ioh. 6.68.69. Of faith taking hold
of Christ's me^^^full promises.
The sail that makes this Ship ride merrily amidst the lofty surges of the
Sea of this world, is our manifest professed faith, which takes fast hold of
the middle Mast his forenamed kind promises, nestling it self in them as
Doves in the holes of Rocks which hoyst up the hearts of the godly above all
earthly things, and give them a safe thoroughfare, and free-passage through
all the storms and tempests of the world. The Apostle lays on load of
examples of such, who by these sails of faith, Heb. 11.4.5.7.8. etc.
which they have heaued up, have passed the pikes of this dangerous Navigations,
and have happily arrived at the heavenly Haven. I will deal with them as
Solomon did with the brass in the temple, 1. Ki. 7.47
who (because it was so massy and so much) would not stand to weigh it:
because there are such a number of them, I list not to number them: he spends
the whole Chapter in rehearsal of them.

V. The anchor of the Ship of Hope.
The Anchor of this our Ship, is Hope. It is the Apostles allegory, and not of
our own making: which have our refuge to hold fast the hope that is set before
us, Heb. 6.19.
which we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast.

VI. The great cable rope belonging to this shipp.
The great Cable-rope to the which this our anchor is sure bound, that it
cannot be lost, is our Patience, wherewith we possess our souls, which the
Apostle thus earnestly commends unto us. For ye have need of Patience, that
after ye have done the will of God, Of patience Heb. 10.36
ye might receive the promise. The patient abiding of the Church is great, for
the reward sake that is set before them in Christ their mediator.

VII. The groundidge.
The groundidge and fast hold of this anchor, is our corner stone Christ Jesus
an attribute given him by Isay, Our corner stone Christ Jesus. Isay. 28.16 1
Pet. 2.6.
and Peter. Behold, I will lay in Sion a stone, a tryedstone, a precious
cornerstone, a sure foundation, and he that believes therein, stall not be
ashamed.

VIII. Pirates.
Now because there are so many Pirates and Rouers on the Sea, that lay at all
advantages against the Bark of his blessed Church; The church furnished like a
shipp of war.
it is furnished like a Ship of war with shot and weapons of warfare well
enough, which shall make all Hell hounds either to hold in their heads, or take
them to their heels. 1 The. 5.8. Isay. 54 17. Colos. 4.2. Psa. 127.5.
The shield of Faith, the pistol of Prayer, the arming sword of the Spirit,
the eternal word of Truth are in stead of all; so as accomplished with them,
we need not fear the enemy when we meet him on the face, which this
distichon thus delivers. Sitque fides clipeus: sit firmum oration telum.
Et gladius verbum; coetera Christus agat.


Which as we may, we do into English thus. Let faith thy buckler be, thy
Gunshot thy devotion,
Thy sword the word; the rest commit thou unto Christ's provision.


If thou would be in thy complete armor laid out for thee out of Gods
armorie, by his servant Paul, Complete armor.
take them as they are in his Epistle unto the Ephesians, parcelled out unto
thee: Put on the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6.11.14.
that ye may be able to stand against the assaults of the Devil. For we wrestle
not against flesh and blood; stand therefore, and your loins gird about with
verity, and having on the breast plate of righteousness, and your feet shod
with the preparation of the Gospel of peace: above all, take the shield of
faith, The Rock of sin. Psa. 34.15.16.
wherewith ye may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, and take the
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God.

IX. The shrewdest danger of this Ship is sin. Waves and weather cannot wrack
or wrong it; For, by setting up sails against the wind, or by casting anchor,
and by being sure beforehand that the anchor rope will hold, and not slack,
it will do well enough when the winds have blown, and the waves have wrought
their worst: Luke 6.47.48.49. Math. 7.24 25.26.27. The sure Rock to trust
unto, is Christ Jesus. Jonah. 1.4.5.13. Luke 5.8.
The Devil and deuilish men, can never sink our ship with all their
subtilties, so long as we cast our faith and hope upon our rock Christ Jesus.
But if it dasheth against the rock of sin, it is in great ieopardie. Jonas
his sin had well nigh sinked the Ship that Jonas went in: Peter thought it
of force, to overthrow more ships then one, when he said thus to Christ upon
the wonderful draught of fish, which so filled two Ships, as they were ready
to sink, Lord go from me, for I am a sinful man. Epiphanius.
Omnem inscenso rem vehere potest nauis praeter fugitiuum, (says Epiphanius)
that is; A Ship may more safely carry any Passenger, than a fugitive, which
cannot be better interpreted, than of a vagrant and runaway from God. So long
therefore as this rock is in our way, we can make no way, there is neither
safe fishing or travailing; Ion. 1.15. Psa. 51.7.16.17.
wherefore cast we our sins into the sea, as Jonas was. For with this
sacrifice the Sea is well pleased.

X. The Freight of this Ship, The freight of this ship. Of remission of sins,
justification, etc.
and the worthy fishing it brings to the Key-side is, remission of sins,
the inspiration of the good spirit, Justification, free grace, inheritance
among them that are justified by faith, eternal life, and all the blessings of
heaven accompanying it.

XI. The Port to which we drive this Ship. 1. Cor. 15.20.26.51. etc. Of death.
The Port to which we drive this Ship, is death. For such as by death pass
from this life, land at deaths stairs, where the body abides the time of the
restitution of all things, that with their coheires they may enter into the
land of promise. Happy they are that die in the Lord, Revel. 14.13.
for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them, they enjoy that
which their faith has so long fished for. Wherefore we say with Cyprian, Sermon
4. De mortalitate.
Non sunt fratres lugendt, accersione dominica de soeuito liberati, cum sciamus
non eos amitti, sed praemitti, nec accipiendas hic atras vestes, quando illi
ibi indumeta alba iam sumpserint; which is to say, We are not so much to wayle
for our brethren whom God by his messenger Death has sent for, seeing that
they are not lost, but gone before us. Again he says thus very sweetly: Quis
non peregre constitutus properet in patriam regredi? Quis non ad suos nauigare
festinans, ventum prosperum cupide optaret, vt velociter charos liceret
amplecti? Who being a trauailer in foreign parts, does not have to his own
home? who would not willingly sail to his friends, and desire a lusty gale of
wind to speed him, The time of the general meeting of fishers, and Seafaring
men, where?
that he might the sooner see the faces of his dearest kindred?

XII. The time of our general meeeing of us fellow-fishers and Seafaring men,
is the Judgment day, of which day S. John speaks thus, I saw the dead both
great and small stand before God. Of the last judgment, and life eternal.
Revel. 20.12. Revel. 21.3.24.10.11.12.13.14. The fishermens meeting place,
where? Casting out of netts and angles out of this sh p. Genesis 6.3.18. and
7.1.20. and 1 Pet. 3.20. Luke. 17.27. Math. 24.38. Genesis 6.14.15. etc. The
church is a steadie angling boat, out of which there is no safety. Psa. 125.1.
Our pri^e care.


XIII. Our meeting place is our heavenly Jerusalem, a City whose builder and
maker is God; of which read the whole 21. Chapter of S. John's Revelation which
has much of this matter. Thus in this Ship which is the Church of the
everliving God, we have very fit standing for the casting out of our nets, and
angles, and for our spiritual fishing, without which there is no good to be
done. For as none were saved that were not in Noah's Arc; so out of the Church
there is no salvation. As that was so pitched within and without, as no water
could sue thorough any seame thereof: so the state of the Church is such, as no
detriment can be imported unto it. For when tyrants have showed the extent of
their malice, the Church abides firm as mount Sion, not to be removed. Let
our prime care therefore be to be in this Ship, mindful of that which Saint
Austine truly says; Non habet Deum patrem, qui non habet ecclesiam matrem: He
has not God to be his Father, who has not the Church to be his mother.

These have been my meditations on this Boat, when I have been in mine
angling-Boat.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. Of the waters that are for this fishing.
THe rivers of waters over which we are to cast our nets and to lay our Angles,
Mar. 16.15 The waters for this fishing, are the world. Math. 13.47.48. A
comparison between the world and the Sea.
are the wide world. The Sea, into which the drag-net of the Gospel was cast
in that parable, clearly signifies the world. The world has all the
conditions of the Sea; therefore it may well go hand in hand with it.
Augustine matcheth it with the Sea thus. Hoc sanctum mare est, Aug. Tom. 2. in
Psa. 39.
habet amaritudinem noxam, habet fluctus tribulationum, tempestates
tentationum. Habet homines velut pisces de suo malo gaudentes, and tanquam se
inuicem deuorantes. This world is a sea, which has a hurtful bitterness, which
has waves of tribulation, tempests of tentations. It has men like fishes
floating in it, rejoicing in that which is hurtful unto them in their bait,
which is their bane: and devouring up one another. The world is a Sea swelling
with pride, bluish with envy, vain glory is the wind which makes it to
rock and reele upon the waters, foaming with anger, very deep and profound in
covetousness, no plummet beeinge able to sound the bottom of it, castinge out
all that comes in the way thorough excessive miscarriage, having a
merciless maw to swallowe up all that it can get with insatiable oppression:
very dangerous to sail in, by reason of the pernicious rocks thereof of
desperation and presumption covered with those waters: lofty thorough the
reciprocal waves of their passions: ebbing and flowing in the inconstancy of
it, terrible salt thorough sin: finally, Mare amarum, very brinish are the
waters of it, and not to be brooked. Job. 40.20 The great Leuiathan, and all
sort of fishes in the Sea: So in the world men of all natures, and affections
etc.
As in the Sea are all sorts of fishes, and there is the great Leuiathan that
has his pastime in the waters: so there be in this world men of all natures
and affections, we can name no creature of inclination never so cruel,
filthy, abominable: but we will find a Copes-mate for him of like quality,
among the crowd and company of men. Therefore here comes in an old
proverb in place, The diligence that ought to be in preachers of the word. etc.
There is no fishing to the Sea. For as the Fisherman delights there to fish
most where most store of fish are; so should the spiritual Fisherman of men,
desire to be there more where his auditors are more. The Apostles, when the
dispensation of preaching the Gospel was committed unto them, took a large
circuit and wide perambulation through the world, and their commission served
them thereunto, Math. 28.19.
being after this form; Go into all the world and preach the Gospel unto
all creatures. No Angler or Fisherman will be always plodding in one place,
Fishers.
but will follow the fish whither soever they go. He often finds in a
blind vain and spot, very gainful and delightful doings; and therefore he
searches and ransacketh every place. It is meet the Minister should do the
like, and so he must if he will be a workman of such things, such a workman
as the Apostle describes, 2 Timothy 2.15.
and the Lord expects, a workman that needs not be ashamed. Christ not
only fished for the Crocodile in the water, but for the Menowe in like manner:
and therefore as he went thorough every Math. 9.35.
City and popular town: so in his progress, he fetched in also hamlets and
villages, and enclosed them in his net, Luke. 8.1.
He went thorough every City and Town, preaching and publishing the Kingdom
of God. They do not therefore the half part of their duty (if they do any
duty at all) those politic Preachers of our times, who spend the greatest
part of their idleness in Princes Courts, and fancy not to preach but in
great places, and cannot savor of a simple audience: as though preaching
served only for show of wit, and to bring in a living, and to live
licentiously. For there are the best places to speak their declamations, and
filed orations, to drink the wine in bolles, to attain to the greatest
preferme^ts of fat Prebendships, Parsonages, Deanries, Bishoprics. David's
Aphorism is very fitting for them, They are hungry like dogs, Psa.
59.6.14.15.
and go up and down the City. They are hungry of their own profit, and not
of the peoples: they are dogs that lick the sores of sinners, cunningly
seeking how to currie favor with Courtiers, never thinking of correcting their
manners. They go up and down the City pompously, and proudly, in the mean
while their sheep at home are committed to the ouer-sight of a simple
mercenarie. When a ban-dogge, or shepherds curre is set to keep sheep, and
leaves the flock, and trudgeth home for victuals; the servants of the house
suffer him not, but they chide him, and cudgel him to his sheep: It were well
that beneficed men might be so served, and might no longer than there is very
needful cause, couch in the Court to crouch for every crust that falls, the
gretest gob that is, being too little for their mouths. It is lamentable to
consider, (and my heart bleedeth to think of it) how poor Contrymen are
neglected, and very little, or not at all instructed: when as by office we
are in arrerages to all, because God made all, and are indebted (as the Apostle
professes of himself) to the wise and unwise in as much as Christ has given
his blood in purchase for the poor, Romans 1.14
as for the potentate, and God is no accepter of persons. It were well then,
that they would have that memento the Apostle gives the^; Act. 10.34 35.
brethren, consider your calling, Their calling is to a spiritual fishing:
therefore as Fishers neglect no waters wherein any good is to be done: so should
preachers despise no people, upon whom any good may be done. The sea is most
inconstant and disquiet by nature: from whence the world very lively has his
nature. Some write of a certain flood and river called Furipus adjacent to the
sea, how it has a seuen-fold reciprocation and return, that it ebbeth and
flows seven times in every four and twenty hours. But no Euripus is so
mutable and variable as the world, constant in nothing but in inconstancy. The
moon changes every day. The Chameleon a four footed beast in India, often
turns color, but not so often as the world turns coppie. For no Proteus is
so often transformed, as that. Laban changes Jacobs wages ten times: Genesis
31.41. and 29.23. 1. Sam. 18.17.19.11. Judge. 4.17.
If Laban promise Rachel, he will give Leah unto Jacob: If Saul promised Merab
to David, he must be pleased with Michal: though a peace was concluded
between Iabin the king of Hazor, and between the house of Heber (Iaels
husband) the Kenite; yet when Sisara trusted to this peace, it was his
perdition, For Iael took him napping with a nail, and made sure work of him:
Jacob called Amasa but to kill him: 1. Kings 25. and 2. Sam. 3.27. and 20.9.10.
Genesis 4.8. Mat. 26.48.49. Job. 14.2.
Cain spoke so friendly to Abel only to murder him: Judas kissed his master
only to betray him. The world is a false merchant, that by very good words
does off his bad wares. Job touching the ficklenes of the world, speaks thus
of it; There is nothing that keeps one state. Thou art now sound, and by and
by sick: thou art now strong, and immediately weak: thou art now merry, and
presently mourning; thou art now ventrous; and in a moment timorous: thou art
now quiet, and out of hand angry: thou will, thou will not: thou do, thou
vndoest: thou art always ebbing and flowing with the sea. The sea is of such
troublesome disposition of it self, as it is never quiet, but it has his
boiling and surging commotions, though it be not angered with winds, or
storms, or accidental perturbations. For one wave so successively follows
another, and takes it by the heel, as by the impetuous violence thereof, they
break one another. These waters are the wicked ones, who are not without their
inward conuulsions, the waves of their wiced doings, incessantly beating
against their guilty consciences, which worse than any ragged hangman
extremely, but chereth them. The furious furies are always hanging on them,
(not such as fables fancy tedis ardentibus searing them with burning torches)
but with the remembrance of their forepassed evils, tearing and tormenting
them. Sua quenque fraus (says the Orator) et suus terror maxim vexat: suum
quenque scelus agitat, Cic. oratia.
amentiaque afficit, suae malae cogitationes conscientiaeque animi terrent.
These perturbations they are no more able to lay down of themselves, no more
than the sea can lay down the collision of his waves of it self: we find the
wicked world in these respects, thus compared by the Prophet Isaiah, to the
sea. The wicked are like the raging sea that cannot rest. Isay. 5 7.20
It is no good fishing in a troublesome stream. A troublesome fellow is
commonly incorrigible, he is wilier than to be taken with the net and hook of
Gods word. It is with him as Solomon says, Pro. 9.7.
He that reproneth a scorner, purchases to himself shame: and he that
rebukes the wicked, gets himself a blot. To admonish a contumacious
companion, is as if we should iobbe and goade a mad man, and feed a fire
with oil. For they are not only incapable of reproof, but they meditate all
the mischief they canagainst their monitors. They are of a dogged disposition
up and down. For as dogs do prefer filth before perfume; a contagious
carrion, before any good confection: so this currish kind delight too much in
their filthiness, than by hearing wholesome admonition to be won to
godliness. Dogs fly upon such as endeavor to put them from their carrion
they have seized upon: so such hell-houndes will violently rise up against
such, as shall go about to withdraw them from their filthiness. Mar. 3.22.
Mat 9.34. and 12.24. and. Luke 11.15. Matthew 11.21.23. John 16.22.29. Math. 7.6.
Doctrine of admonition does so little with them, as miracles do not move
them. For how many strange wonders did Christ among such, who were never the
better for them? wherefore, that we should not loose our labors among such,
let us hear what warning is given us of such; Give ye not that which is holy
unto dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, least they tread them
under their feet, and turning again al to rent you. But yet as wise fishermen,
we must discreetly distinguish of sinners, and way well their affections, and
if there be any hope of hooking them, or tolling them to our nets, we are to
lay for them, we must try before we do distrust, and prove what may be
done, and though the water be somewhat rough, yet there may be some doings; we
are to do our best, though we fear the worst, and we are to deal as we may
with him, before we finally despair of any; what thou should do with such,
faith and charity will tell thee better than any. Augustine in his Confessio^s
writes of Alypius that was wholly dedicated to theatrical pastimes, and vain
games, and was reclamed from them by Augustine his biting inuectiue against
them, at which he grew into an anger with himself, Of the best and worst
places to fish in.
and ever after very fervently fancied him. But the deeper, cleerer, and
stiller waters are, the best for fishers: shallow muddie rivers give no sport,
for there is no room for a flote of an angle to sinck, or for a net to be
laid out: besides that, the fishes there mudding themselves, they cannot be got
out. Such as are not of deep devotion, but of shallow understanding in
heavenly things, such as plodde wholly in the mudde and mire of the world,
will never rise up to the sword of the water, that the net might go under
them. For as beasts that feed grossly, do never fly high, so gross minded
men have never high thoughts in heavenly things. Also the mudde of this place
does pollute the net, snar^e it, and hurt it: the glorious gospel of the
son of God is defiled, contradicted, rent by the puddle of covetous minded men,
drunkards, swinish Epicures, heretics, schismatiques, and the flocks of
their companions, of which the Church has had too woeful experience. I will
urge this allegory no further, nor suffer it to go further with me, than the
hand of the scripture guides it; therefore let this be sufficient that has
been said, of the sorts of waters that are best for our angling occupation,
and spiritual fishing.

THE THIRD CHAPTER. Of the nets, and angle-rod that are for this fishing.
THe instrument of out angelical angling and fishing, is the word of God
preached, which by Christ in the Gospel is compared to a net, Mat. 13.47
which is of that making, as it sweepeth as it goes, and therefore the Latins
call it verriculum, because as a beesome (through what so is in the way) it
makes clean work. It may as well be likened to the angling pole, or to any
other invention, for the catching of fish. Luke 5.6.
The use of the fishers man's nette-chiefly serves, to restrain the exorbitant
passage of fishes uncertainly skudding up and down without any order, hemming
them in, and keeping them at a bay within the compass of it. The power and the
working of the preached word; and the great hope that is to be had of such as
wi^^ be^e. Acter 9.2. 4.6.17.19.20.
Of this effect and working is the preached word, as intercepting our
extrauagant affections, wandering wide out of the way, without governance of
the spirit, and streightning our liberty, keeping us by the obedience of
faith within the limmits of Gods law. Let us take our vagaries never so much as
fishes in their element, if ever we come to the nets way, we may be stayed in
our way. So was Paul, when he was a Saul posting to Damascus with high
commission to trouble those that were of the religion, in the midde way, being
stayed in his course, the word of God countermaunding him, and he obeying it,
resting upon the direction of it, Jude 11. Number. 22.23.32. 2. Pet. 2.15.16.
saying; Lord, what will thou have me do? Though Balaam the son of Bosor
loved the wages of unrighteousness, and loved the gold of Moab as his life,
yet he durst not for his life do otherwise than he was warranted by God, and
so he answered the Lords that stayed upon him, Number. 22.18 and 24.13.
saying: If Balaak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot
go beyond the word of my Lord God, to do less or more. Gods word to him was
a hook to his nose, and a net to stop his progress. Achab looked that
Micheah should have spoken leasings 1. King. 22. 15.17.19.25.
and pleasings unto him; but the word of God had such sure hold of him, as he
might have sooner his head, than his help. Number. 9.15.17.18. etc.
The children of Israel in all their wide and wearisome travails went on by
degrees, as the word of God directed them. I despair not of any man's calling,
if he will but come within the reach of the net of Gods word, howsoever he
has no meaning to be taken in it, for he may be caught, and brought up to
heavenly shore whether he will or no. Ieh. 7.32.45.46. The good that may be
had, by coming to Sermons.
I have read of as great an act as this, done at Jerusalem upon the high
Priests servants sent out by their master for the attachment of Christ; who
finding him in his pulpit, and hearing his preaching, their hearts melted away
as drops of water, and they had no power over him, but returned as they came,
thus answering their masters, 1. Sam. 19.12.20.21.22.23.
Never any man spoke as that man. Thus was Saul and his servants served; Saul
sent servants to apprehend David, who finding him among the Prophets, they were
immediately in the vain of prophecy. And when Saul came himself, he sermoned
in such sort. Laban never searched so narrowly Jacobs houshould-stuffe, Genesis
31.33.34.
as the word of God searches our inner parts, reforming the^, and conforming
them thereunto. Heb. 4.12.
As Simeon abiding in the temple, Luke 2.27.28.29. Romans 1.16. 1. Cor. 1.18.
found Christ; so many but by coming to the church, have found salvation. There
is a hidden unspeakable power in the word preached, to draw Disciples after it,
and to gain souls to God. Luke 3.10.12.14.
John Baptist had but one night laid out his net, and he found innumerable
souls taken in it, of al sorts. 1. The me^nowes and meaner sort, the croude of
common people. 2. Publicans and sinners, very slipperie eales, that had long
lien in the mudde of their misdoings. 3. Sanguinarie soldiers, the Pike, and
water-wolues of the Ocean of this world, a people naturally diseased with the
bloody issue. Al these came traveling into the net at once, and he no sooner
angled for them, but had them. It was not the contention of his spirits, or
the invention of his wits, or the intention of his good will, that won them, but
it was God that had a net for the nones for them, and a hook that entered
through them and held them. Acts 2.37.40.41.47.
Peter got a worthy dish of fish at one time, in the fishponds at Jerusalem,
when as no sooner he pricked them with the hook, but they were pricked in
their hearts, and said unto Peter and the other Apostles, Men and brethren,
what shall we do? and the same day, there were added to the Church three
thousand souls. There resorted to the lectures of Jeremy very headstrong
fellows, such, as his nets, and angels, Ierem. 38. and 41.
for a time could not hold; but when they had tired themselves in their
wa^dring ways, they retired to his net, and striued no more with it: the
king the great Leuiathan, the nobles, the dragons in the waters, and the other
kinds of fishes, all sorts of people gathered to him, and he drew them to him
easier, than he could have conceived. Ezechicl in the person of God, Eze. 33.31
thus deciphereth the manner of men of his time, that were formal hearers of
the word; They come unto thee, as the people uses to come: and my people set
before thee and hear thy words, but they will not doc them. But were not the
word of God such a capable net as it is, it should not thus have encloased
them as it did, and had their companies. Luke 4.16.17.22.
The Nazarites against their wills were in compass of this spread net at
Christ his preaching among them, and they were so incircled past their winding
out as they admired the deliverance of such doctrine, and bare witness to the
grace of the Gospel, Mar. 6.20. Matthew. 14.2 Acts 13.8.11. Acts 5.1.5.10. Genesis
4.9.
mauger their beardes. This net so entangled, and snarled Herod, as he feared
the Baptist both alive and dead. The hook of Paul's angle-line struck Elim, as
through the eyes, and blinded him, with such a one did Peter take Ananias, and
Saphira, and it cost them their lives. Cain when the hook first pricked him,
by striving with it like a fish that strives with a hook, more wounded
himself, till at last he yielded, leaving his wrangling, and trembled before
God. So often as thou come unto a sermon, consider how God by his Preachers
trowleth for thee. Say not for Gods sake, I will not hear the preacher, I am
not friends with him, I will not come to Church, while I am at odds with him:
Or I am book learned enough, I know as much as he can tell me. For thou
know not what this drag-nette, and angle will do, for all thy great
learning. Be thou a man of metaphysicall wisdom, I trust thou will not
compare with David, a man fulfilled with the spirit of God, with whom God
talked as familiarly, as the Father with the child, Dan. 5.10.11.12.
of whom we may say as Belshazzars Queen said of Daniel. In whom is the
spirit of the holy Gods, light, and understanding, and wisdom, like the
wisdom of the Gods, was found in him. Yet for all his privilege of
prophecy, and other royal induments, and prerogatives of grace, he was cast
into a bed of sin (as Iezabel into a bed of fornication) whereon he had
slept Endimions sleep, 2. Sam. 11.4.6.13.14.15. Chap. 12.1.7.13
if Nathan the preacher had not rowsed him, and by a parable, whereof he was
the subject, and answer, shaked him by the shoulders, and set him on his
feet; at whose preaching voice he awaking, devised that dainty antheme and
dittie, the ode and song of mercy, the neck verse-that save offenders from
death, and it being seriously song, or said, shall save us all sinners from
the second death, the 15. Psalm. Psalm. 51. Dan. 4.2.29.
Nabuchodonoser had before his eyes in a vision, a large extended tree, which
was the interpretation of his imperial kingkingdome: but he was never the
wiser for the vision, though all his wisards had bin with their books for him,
until he heard the preacher Daniels prelection. Paul was a man of very worthy
parts, and he had bringing up with the best, Act. 22.3.6.12.13. etc. Phil.
3.5. 2 Co. 11.22. Acts. 23.6.
he was a Jew borne, which was a gainful an advantage, then as it was of old
to have been an Athenian borne, rather than a Barbarian. Tharsus in Cilicia
was his foster place. He was trained up in learning in the mother city
Jerusalem, under a schoole-maister of renowned memory. Gamaliel doctor of
the laws; his institution and profession was according to the straight rules
of Pharasaisme without any deflexion. His zeal and devotion, had it not been
blinded with superstition, had admitted no comparison, he had the mark of the
true religion, which was circumcision, which he received not in process of
time, (as many prosilites in their nature or older age) but at the due time,
with the first and best, the eight day: His descent was from Israel, not Esaias,
who morgaged and made a sale of his inheritance, his tribe was Ben^amin, that
had never relapsed to Idolatry. His antiquity in that line was famous, as
being an Hebrew of the Hebrews. Thus ye perceive what excellent things are
spoken of him: yet all these rather hindered him, than helped him, till God by a
sermon from heaven, did help him, and sent him to Ananias a preacher, Acts
22.6.7.12.13. etc. Acts 9.10.18. etc.
to practice upon him, and of a persecutour to make him a professor: who had
him not in hand long, before the scales of his former blindness fell from his
eyes, distasting wholly his former profession, sauouring, and favoring a
contrary conversation, and so loathing the one, in the love of the other, as
he esteemed it no better tha^ dong, compared with the excellent knowledge of
Christ. Phil. 3.8.
Also this similitude that we have in hand, holds sitly by comparison with
our purpose. Matthew. 13.47.48.
For as the fishermans draw-net brings to shore al sorts of fish, good and
bad together, and with them the filth and pelse of the water, as empty shells,
weeds, bushie stalks, and trashe: so when the word is preached, the good and
badde, the elect and outcasts hear it together, and in outward appearance,
the worste give often good countenance unto it, and formally do profess it,
although their minds with the prodigal son, are in a fair country, very
wide of it. Luke 15.13
This is the cause that there are so many hypocrites, and counterfeit Christians
in our holy assemblies, that have so many fallacies between the porch and the
altar, that they might not be found out what they are; as Ieroboams wife had a
disguised mantell that Ahiah the Prophet might not know who she was, 1. Kings
14.1.2.4.
as the lifting up of their eyes and hands, the bowing of their knees, the
smiting of their breasts and thighs, their demure looks, their loud
sighings, the labor of their lips, their hanging down of heads, their
shedding of tears, toys that beguile the believing people, that can never
bleare the fiery eyes of the al-knowledge of the only wise God. These
hypocrites are but as counterfeit money outwardly ouerlayd with silver, the
basis and substance thereof being but copper. As the Estrich has the wings of
a hawke, but not the flight of a hawke; so such deep dissemblers and double
dealers, have but the color and countenance of christians; they have not the
condition of Christians to fly high, by the wings of zealous religion. Mat.
27.14. Genesis 25.27. and 27.1. etc.
They wash but their hands with Pilat, and not their consciences. They seek
with Esau that which is without, outward estimation: but the other with Jacob
abide within, they are inwardly holy, and obtain the benediction. But when
there shall be a separation made of them, 1. Co. 1.18.23.24.
we shall show hereafter in his proper place. In the mean while we are to
consider how none can possibly escape this net, but that it takes only one,
one way or other, which way soever he turns him, either to life or death.
Job. 40.21.
Though no fisherman has a net or angle for the Leuiathan, and as Job says,
Who can put a hook in his nose, or pierce his jaws with an angle, yet the
Lord (as says Isaiah) will set for the great Dragon, and draw up the Crocodile
in the water with his hook. The great mountain before Zorobabell shall be
leuelled, and made plain. Isa. 30.33. Iosu. 7.1. Isai. 22.18.
Tophet is prepared even for the King. Thieves shall be taken in his net as
Achan was. Corrupt officers shall be cut off, as Shebua was. Zach. 11.8.
Idle ministers, and desidious shepheardes come into this net, and they shall
die the death, as those three, whom the net of Gods judgment snatched away in
one month. Leuit. 24.10.
The blasphemer shall be caught with the rest, as the Egyptian was that was
stoned to death. It increases false witnesses, as it did the promooters and
informers against Daniel. Dan. 6.24.
It draws heretics and idolaters, whose parents by decree must do the^ to
death. Zach. 13.3.
Shall schismatiks escape, and wind themselves in the weeds? Number. 16.1.31.
There is no such matter, and that the judgment done upon Corah and his
accomplices, evidently enough shows. And Hypocrites shall be hemmed in with the
confused crowde, Acts 5.1.5.10.
as the story of Ananias and Saphi^a manifests. The clefts of rocks shall
not hide them, Zeph. 1.12.
the bushes and segge in the river shall not shroud them, for all of them shall
be put out, and the Lord with lanterns and torchlight shall search for them.
But if our nets be not sound and whole, we mar all together, and we have
but our labor for our pains. If our teaching be not good, grounded upon the
word, we can do no good. Aug. Tom. 4. de fide et open. cap. 17.
Retibus bonis, capi possunt pisces and boni et mali; retibus autem malis, capi
non possunt pisces boni. Quia in doctriua bona, et bonus potest esse qui audit
et facit, and malus qui audit, et non facit. In doctrina vero mala, et quieam
veram put ^t, qua^uis ei non obte^perat malus est, et qui obte^perat peior est.
That is to say; In good nets, fishes both good and badde may be taken; but
by naughty nets, good fishes will not be gotten. Because by that doctrine
which is good, he that hears it and does it, is good; and he that hears
it and does it not, is evil. But in evil doctrine, he that conceiueth it to
be true though he follows it not, is badde; and he that obeys it is worst
of all. But this net of the gospel has been miserably torn from time to
time by erroneous spirits, heretics, and scismatiques, deceiuable teachers,
barterers of the bible, and purloyners of sacred mysteries. Arrius was such a
one, who because he might not speed in his suit to be bishop of Alexandria,
kept revel rout with this net, and mangled it without mercy. Donatus was
another, who by a saucy insufferable singularity, made such garbocles and
tossed and turmoyled this net in that wise, as the rupture thereof was long
in making up, he divided the net, and the garment of Christ without seame,
Mat. 27.35. Ioh. 19.23.24.33.
and more savage tha^ the soldier brake the knees of Christ: Of this
brotherhood are our Popelinges, who harm this net as much as they can, and
hinder those that would mend their breaches according to the purity of the
primitive Church. This has been always the condition of the Church to be
pestred with such. Epyphanius scoreth up fourscore several heresies of his
time; and Augustine reckneth more, which came up with the Gospel. All these
stand upon the sufficiency of their tewe, and object, Augustide bapt contra
Donat.
that they lay out as good nets as we. But bragges are no proofs. The
Donatists in Africa stood upon their slippers, suggesting that the Orthodoxall
fathers of the Church, made merchandise of the word, and that they themselves
were maintainers of it. But Augustine tells them that they were but conficti,
non conuicti traditores, the parties they accused, were only but by
confiction, and not any due conviction, deprauers of the scriptures. Cypr^
epist: ad Iulianum 37.
Dioscorus an arch-heretique openly at the counsel board at Chalerdon braued
it thus: Ego defendo dogmata sanctorum patrum: I defend the doctrine of the
ancient fathers. An Ape cladde in purple is but an ape; no more is Nouatius
arrogating to himself the authority of the Church. Ebion though he was a
Samaritan up and down, yet (as Epiphanius says) he would go for a Christian.
The Marcionites are as stiff as any, that they are the true Church, of whom
says Tertullian, Faciunt fauos et vespae faciunt ecclesias et Marcionite;
waspes make honey combs, and Martionetes Churches. Mat. 24.15 and 3.9. Iere. 7.4.
Desolation stands in the holy place, a pirat will lurk privily in the arc
of Noah. a Pharisee will speak biglie. The temple of the Lord, the temple of
the Lord, and they boast themselves to be the seed of Abraham. John
8.33.39.44.53. Reave. 2.9.
But they are of their father the devil, as Christ answers them, and they
are the synagog of Satan, as the Angel in the Revelation terms them. Thus
are all gatherings drawn in by this net according to that which Christ says
of it, It gathers of all kind of things. For God as he is impartial, and
without respect of persons, debarreth none. Mat. 13.47
Some like flimy and slipperie eeles, no sooner find themselves entangled in
the net, but they seek to wind and strain out themselves, seeking
occasions, and starting holes, and frivolous excuses. Some not only stippe
out, but break the shales of the net with their struggling, wringing, and
wronging the scriptures miserably with their contrary constructions; making
them no more like themselves by that time they have trimmed them, than the
counterfeit that Michol placed upon the pileow, was like unto David. 1. Sam.
19.13.16.
These make such an opening in the net and thorough passage, as others take
the advantage of escaping out of it. Others there are so ouerlaiden in
themselves in their earthly affections, as they not only way down the net,
but they draw it to their own affections, and if any scripture goes but a
mile with them, they will make it go twain. Finally there are a sort of such
that this net shackleth, that seem in outward sight to make a propper dish of
fish, Reave. 3.17.
they seem so sanctified and holy, but they have but a name that they line,
but they are twice dead, unserviceable for God, and in the sight of the world
abominable, Ma. 13.47.48.
good for nothing but to be cast ouerbord. In that the capacity of the net is
such, as it contains all kinds, it shows the illimmited largenes of the
church, how it is not confined circu^scribed, or to any peculiar place tied,
(as the church of Rome would have it, hemming it in within the precincts of
their dominatio^) but that it spreads it self over the whole world. His
dominion (says the Psalmograph) shall be from sea to sea, Psalm. 72.8.9.10.11.
and from the rivers unto the ends of the land: They that dwell in the
wilderness shall kneel before him, and his enemies shallicke the dust. The
kings of Tarshish and of theyles shall bring presents: the kings of (...) and
Seba shall bring gifts: yea all kings shall worship him, all nations shall
serve him. The two ends of these neetes are fastened to the utmost ends of this
world, to the East, and to the West, wherefore Christ says; Mat. 8.11.
Many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. It must needs be of unmeasurable
measure: forasmuch as such a member without number is concluded in it: Reave.
7.9.
For while John would take tale of them and score them up by their twelve
thousands together, he comes in at last with a reckoning without reckning,
saying, I beheld and to a great multitude which no man could number, of all
nations and kindreds, and people and tongues stood before the throne, and
before the Lamb, clothed with long white robes, and palms in their hands.
The difference betwixt the spiritual, and the worldly net.
Herein therefore the spiritual differs from the worldly net, that the one
may be spanned and measured, and is bounded: but no line may take the length
and compass of the other, and it may not be appointed his bounds and
borders. The circuit (...) the Persian and Median Empire stretched it self
far and wide, The Persian and Median Empire. The Grecians, Romans, etc.
having 120. ^es in it, yet it reached not through (...) world. The Grecians,
Romans, Babilonians, were very mighty monarckes, yet by their mappes we may
soon measure the borders of their kingdoms. The Turk.
The Turk at this day, who is the hammer of the nations, who can sing and say
with David, Psalm. 60.6.7.8.
Gilead is mine, and Manasses is mine, over Edom will I cast out my shoe: Asia
is mine, Africa is mine, over Europe will I cast out my shoe: has as we know,
but his distinct dominions, there being many kingdoms beside wherein he has
nothing to do, only the king God has set over his holy hill of Sion, Psalm.
2.6.8.
rules over all, to whom he has given the heathen for his inheritance, and
the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession. The agreement betwixt the
spiritual, and the worldly net
But herein the net of the word has very sutably agreement with an ordinary
worldly net, in that it is often removed as the other. As fishermen carry
their nets from place to place, as they please themselves, according to the
nature and condition of the places, fishing there most where the skulls of
fishes are: so Christ as it best pleases him, draggeth his nets from stream
to stream, from one kingdom, to another people, where the best vain is,
where there is a people prepared unto God. The Church was first planted in
Paradise, then it abode with Abel, next it floted upon the waters in Noas
arc: Genesis 1.26. etc. Genesis 2.15. Genesis 4.4. Genesis 6.18. Genesis 12.1. Act. 2. Act.
7.2. Act. 12. God has his netts. Satan and the world have their netts.
then it removed to Mesopotamia with Abraham, and flitted with him to Canan,
Egypt, Canaan. Afterward it was with Isac, then with Jacob, then with Joseph,
with Ezechiah, Josiah, with Christ, with his Apostles. Sometimes it was in
Jury, at another time in Galile, sometimes in the asse^blie of the apostles,
sometimes in the house of John, Mark, of late times in Germany, France, and
now in the kingdoms of England, Scotland, Ireland. But as God has his nets:
so the devil and the world have their netts which draw simple souls layden
with sins, and allured with pleasurable, objects into all infelicitie, of
which the Prophet Abacuc speaks thus: Abac. 1.15.16.17. etc.
They take up all with the angel, they catch it in their net, Ahac.
1.15.16.17. etc. Job. 1.7. 1. Pet. 5.8.
and gather it in their yarne, whereof they rejoice and are glad. The deuili is
Peripateticus semper ambulans, always walking, going about, seeking whom he
may ensnare, and all is fish that come into his net; and he knows as well
when we are taken, as any angler does know when a fish is taken. How the
angler knows when a fish is taken.
For an angler though he see not the fish, yet when the flote, quill, or
cork sincketh, he is sure that the fish is hooked, whereupon he strikes
him, and brings him into the boat: So our hearts being deep rivers, How
Satan knows when be has sped. Satan's baits: for several kinds of people.
and the devil being no more able to descrie the thoughts thereof, than the
angler can descrie what fishes are in the waters, (for the secrets of hearts
are only known to God) he baiteth a hook for us, and by the going down of
the line, he knows we are sped. If he sees we are couetously given, he
sets riches before us, and we bite by and by at them: if we be ambitious he
offers titles and degrees of dignity, and we lay hold of them presently: if
we be envious and malicious, he ministers matter for this madness to work
upon: he has manifold netts of temptations, sometimes besetting us with vain
pleasures: and sometimes encircling us with sorrows: sometimes fetching us in
with fear, and sometimes again pricking us with pride and presumption: as he
finds us qualified, so he siteth himself for us, and by our ready and greedy
apprehension of his temptations, he works our destruction. How to a uoid the
nets of Satan, and escape his bates. Being entangled, how to get out of
Satan's nets, and to break of from his hooks. Of repentance, etc.
Therefore every bait that he lays for us being our bane, let us not come
within the length of his line, or within the liberty of his nets. If we
do, labor and strive we all that we may to get our feet out of these netts,
by our hearty timely repentance, by running into the waters of saludtion, and
by suffering our selves to be drawn from the pit of perdition of our sinful
lives, to the open wholesome air which breaths eternal life into us; that
we may be drawn out of darkness by the draw-nets of Gods word into light,
from the horrible pit of mire and clay, to all purity of conversation: from
our wandering thoughts, to a settled steadfast holiness. This will the word of God
work with us, wherefore Auguctine likeneth it to the a^glers hook, verbu^
hamus est, qui du^ capitur, capit: the word is a hook which being taken of us,
takes us, and happy man is he that is taken of it, for he is taken, non ad
caedem, sed ad salutem; not to the slaughter, but to salvation. Thus we know
what furniture we ought to provide for this our fishing profession, and the
Lord give us understanding in all things.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER. Of the fishermen that princiyally are appointed for this
office.
ANgles, hooks, lines, nets, and whatsoever implements of that trade wait upon
the labors and faithfulness of the fishermen, and they are they that give use
and virtue unto them, and must set them a working. For unless they lay them
in, and draw them out of the waters, they are to no purpose. The angle, and net
of the gospel of Christ, must by those who have the dispensation thereof given
them by God, be used accordingly, not hanged upon hedge, or hidden under the
roofes of their houses. For fishes are creatures as hie and strange of men, as
any are, and love no other element then their own; nor other company then
their own, worldly men are so affected, out of the earth which is their
element they would not go; and as fishes of each kind skull together, and
birds of a feather fly together: so men of like minds will converse
together, and they are loath to have fellowshippe with any that are not like
themselves. Wherefore to draw fishes to us whether they will or no, do our
fishing tew serve, and there are such who continually lay for them. So God has
given us furniture good store for our spiritual fishing, and has appointed
officers for the purpose to see to this business qualifying them accordingly,
giving some to be Apostles, Ephesians. 4.7.11.12.
some to be doctors, some teachers, all of them for this ministry of fishing,
and catching souls for God. For this cause the people before the law, had the
Patriarchs: those under the law, the Prophets: they in the time of grace
revealed under the gospel, had Christ: the Apostles, and the succeeding
ministers of all times to be their fishers. Acts ^0.34.44. Acts. 8.35.37. Acts
16. and 9.17. etc.
He trowled and angled for the Centurion by Peter: Philip the Apostle fished
for the Eunuch: Paul laid out his hook for Lidia, and caught her. It was
Ananias and not an angel that angled for Paul, Luke 16.29.31.
and made him sure. For if Moses and the Prophets whom we have among us cannot
take us, not any dowtie doctor, though sent from the dead (as Abraham told
Diue) shall be able to do it. In vain do we fish for souls, but by such that
are of the occupation. It is preaching that ingendreth and increases faith The
Apostle has a goodly gradation to show so much. Room. 10.13.14^.5.
Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. But how shall
they call on him, in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe
in him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a
preacher? Thus by these degrees as by the staves of a ladder, are we to climb
to the height of perfection, and to be drawn from the bottom of misery, to
the top of felicity. These hang together like the linckes of a chain and
may not be sundred. 1. Preaching, 2. Hearing. 3. Believing. 4. Innocation. 5.
Salvation. Peter has left his boat, nets, and all his fishing furniture for
preachers to employ. I name them fishermen, because of right that name is due
unto them, and it has been given them of old. Iere. 16.16
As when Jeremy says; Behold says the Lord) I will send out many fishers, and
they shall fish them. Luke 5.10. Mat. 4.19. Mark 1.16.17.
As when Christ says in the persons of Peter and Andrew. James and John, I
will make you fishers of men. If we lay the propherties of them both
together, we shall see how fitly such as are preachers are compared unto
fishers. 1. Fishermen must be furnished with all vtensils necessary to their
trade.
A fig for such fishermen as have not at hand all vtensils necessary
appertaining to their trade: the spiritual fishers for men, must be grounded
in the knowledge of God, mighty in the scriptures, of such wisdom as they
may be able to assoile any intricate question, convince all contradiction, and
to render a reason of whatsoever assertion. Acts 20.17.1^.2^.
The able fisherman indeed has a storehouse of implements and wants nothing
that may serve his turn, he has two, new and old, and has in a readiness to
stead all his needs. If hooks, lines, plummets, corkes, netts, baits, or such
like trinkets be not with them when they are on the waters, men check them by
their trade and say unto them, are your anglers and fishermen, The spiritual
fisherman, his storehouse.
and have not these things? The preachers heart is the storehouse wherein he
is to lay up all the furniture of his fishing occupation, which is to be
fraught with variety of learning, out of which, as out of a treasure (that he
may be the man he is taken to be, Matthew. 13.52.
and Christ in the gospel would have it to be) he may bring things both new
and old: for otherwise if he be wanting to himself, he is subject to the
reproof that Christ gave Nicodemus. Ioh. 3.10.
Art thou a master in Israel and and know not these things? and the
prophets complaint will light upon him, who is blind but my servant? Isai.
42.19.
Sundry and many are the trinkets that belong to fishing: so many kinds of
learning belong to our spiritual fishing. One net is for one use, an other for
another, and there is use in time and place for every parcel of his whole
provision. Heb. 5.11.12. etc. 1. Cor: 9.19.20.21.22. 1. Cor. 3.2. Soages of
mercy. Ditties of judgment.
One and the self same doctrine agrees not with all times, and persons: but
preachers are to fit themselves to the nature of the hearers, sometimes to
form songs of mercy to comfort them, and sometimes to deliver ditties of
judgments which may be a corsiue unto them: some times to pipe unto them that
they may dance, and sometimes to mourn, to make them lament: Mat. 11.17 Cor.
4.21.
sometimes with the Apostle Paul to come in love, and sometimes with a rod,
of which more shall be said in the following discourse. There is no kind of
learning holy or profane, but may pleasure us sometimes in our fishing
affairs. I forbear to censure such as are of contrary judgment, Of the use
of humane reading.
and would shredde and strip a divine of all humane reading: but because they
would stop my free passage of fishing, and hinder me in this course that is
delightsome and gainful unto me, I will plead my cause as well as I can, and
as I may deliver my opinion from their seuearer reprehe^sion: Gregory
Nazianze^.
yet Gregory Nazianzen casts their water, and gives this judgment of them,
in the cause we have in hand. Non vlla despicienda disciplinae cognitio, cum de
genere bonorum scientia si^ ^mnis: quin potius ipsam spernentes, et rusticos et
plane ignauos existimare debemus: qui cupiunt vt omnes sint ignorantes ne
ignorantia eorum inter communem perspiceretur, si philosophia non respiceretur,
ideo quia quidam per philosophiam errarunt: tunc nec Solet Luna quia nonnulli
ea pro dijs suis habuerunt. We are not to despise any disciplimatie knowledge,
for that al learning is in the rank of good things: rather the scorners
thereof are to be thought to be as ignorant as themselves, that their
ignorance might not appear in its proper likeness. If this be enough to put
down Philosophy because some have bin misled thereby, we may by like reason
urge that the sun should be taken from the firmament, and the moon should
be done away, inasmuch as some have worshipped them as Gods. But we list first
to conclude our judgment by suffrages of scriptures. The inhibition and
promise of the law for the not marrying of a capture woman, Deu. 21.11.12.
was void with these conditions, that her superfluities were done away, her
head was shaven, her nails pared, her garments burned. These rites being
performed, she and an Isralite might be co^tracted. The reddition, and
consequence hereof is made by Hierome in this wise: Hierome.
what marvel is it then (says he) If I wedde my self to the wisdom of the
world, for the beauty and comlines of speech that I find it has, and of a
captive woman make her fredenizen in Israel, cutting off whatsoever is in her
superstitious, voluptuous, erroneous, and begette children to the Lord of
hosts by her? Osea. 1.3.
For so did Oseas take to himself a wife of fornication, Gomer the daughter of
Diblaim by whom he had a son named Isreel, which is by interpretation the
seed of the Lord. Acts 7.22.
Moses was a man learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians: Daniel was a
great man in the learning of the Chaldea^s: Job was very well seen in
astronomy: Dan. 1.4.17 Job. 38.31.32.33.
Ieromie was studious in the statute laws of the realm: David could handle the
harp out of cry, and sing songs of Sion sweetly: Paul took great pleasure
in reading of poetry, 1. Sam. 16.16.18.23. Psa. 57.7.8 1. Cor. 15.32.33. Tit.
1 1.2.13. Act. 17.28.
and had all manner of learning both of Jews and Gentiles: and he brought
three Poems of Menander, Aretas, Epimenides into the body of holy scripture;
when the tabernacle was to be builded with the Arc of the testimony, mercy
seat, and their appurtenances. Exodus 31.2.3.4.6.
Bezaleel by name was called out from the rest, and qualified for that work,
filled with the spirit of God, in wisdom and in understanding, and in
knowledge, and in all workmanship, and as assistia^s unto him were Aholiab and
all that were wise hearted adjoined: wherefore how much more is it expedient,
that such as should build up his heavenly Jerusalem, should be furnished
and accomplished with all necessary induments. Exodus 12.35.36.
The Isralites were dispensed with to borrow of the Egyptians their ornaments
of gold, their costly Jewels and plate, Augustine.
and to use them as their own: from whence Augustine disputes it to be as
lawful for us to rob the Gentiles and heathens of the ornaments and rare
inventions of their wits, and serve our turns with them. Eloquence and
humane learning serves divines, as that part of the Carpenters wimble which
is wreathed round about, and by degrees draws in the iron. The wodden handle
enters not into the wood, but it helps in the pearser: so arts are helpers
to preachers in their studies. In which respect Socrates compares them to
midwiues, Socrates.
that are helpers to women in their travails: they serve notably for the ease
of such as travail in the spiritual profession. This is the use Augustine
makes of them, saying, Solo vomere terra profunditur, sed vt hoc fieripossit
etiam caetera aratri membra necessaria. De ciuit. Dei lib. 16. cap. 2.
The share only deuideth the ground, but to set it forward are the other
parts of the plough requisite. By making such use as worldly learning does
afford, we may thrust thorough the Pagan and Infidel with his own weapons. For
which cause does Lactantius so much desire to have this so great an advantage
over them: Lib. 3. Inst: cap. 1.
I would (says he) have the gift of eloquence, either because they might
sooner yield to the truth when it is thus garnished: or else because infidels
might the readier be slain by their own swords: What need we care from
whence we have the herb, or who did first set it, or bring it, if it be
medicinable and heals us? Let us be like the diligent Be which from a netle
can draw honey. A tree, though never so laden with fruit, is graced by her
leaves; though we be never so fruitful in divine knowledge, worldly learning,
that are as the leaves of this tree, will countenance it well enough. Fullers
before they will die a purple, will lay a ground color: Divinity is the
royal purple color: arts are but the grounds thereof. To learn to handle a
weapon skilfullie, men have their beginnings in the fence school: we are
trained up in common schools, where the arts are taught, to make us more apt
and ready for divinity. In the building of a house, though the master Mason
his service is the chiefest: yet are his inferior seruers needful. Such as
would get themselves authority by their ignorance of the arts, and boast
themselves to be followers of fishermen, are deceived in thinking, that the
Apostles were more holy, the more they were unlearned. Augustine.
Augustine wrote to his friend to advise Calphumius, not to malign such as
have teeth, because he had none himself. I will insist no longer in this
point, least I should seem too much to digress from the point, we come to the
former matter. As we hold them not worthy to be called fishers, that have not
their netts and needful provision, without which there is no good to be done:
So he that fisheth for the souls of men, if he has not parts of learning
proper to his profession, he shall be little profitable in that his vocation.
Exodus ca. 28. ve. 30.4.12.29.34.36. etc.
The vrim and Thummim, engraued upon the tablet the high priest customably ware
at his breast, prefigured the full knowledge of heavenly mysteries that ought to
be seated in every priests breast. Of a learned minisierie.
Also the golden bells that did hang to the verge of his garment, did
insinuate, that his tongue ought to sound like a bell in the Church of God. The
brestlet likewise that was the priests share, signified (as says Origin) that
the priest is be to a ma^of counsel, the breast being the seat and fountain of
counsel. Mal. 2.7.
All which accord with that which Malachie requires of him, saying: The
priests lips keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth. 2.
Tim. 2.15.25 and Tit. 1.9. and 2.6.7.8. Matthew. 13.52.
To which appertains that precept of the Apostle, enioyning the minister that
he be able to teach. Finally answerable to their saying, is Christ his saying;
Every scribe learned in the kingdom of heaven, brings out of his treasure
things both new and old. It was an old saying (though it is much out of use
now) The law shall not depart from the priest, nor counsel from the wise,
Hier. 18.18. Leuit. 6.15.16. and passim, aliis cap.
nor the word from the Prophet. The minister of the old testament was able to
judge what part every one ought to have in the sacrifice, what portion
belonged to the Lord, what was due to the people, and what accrued to the
priest: so should the spiritual snard in the Lords house, be of that
understanding, and discretion, as to distribute to every one his diuidence in
due season. Luke 12.42.43. Mat. 24.45.46. 2. Sa. 5.6.
But as Iebusites placed their lame, and blind, at the walls of Jerusalem,
despite of David: so such as are lame and unable for the ministry, and as
blind as beetles, keep near the gates of the spiritual Jerusalem, to the
great reproach of the gospel of Christ. 2. Sam. 2.12.
There are many very varlets in the holy ministry, as evil conditioned, as
the sons of Eli who are called the sons of Belial, and as ignorant as they
of whom it is said: They knew not the Lord. If no man will trust a great part
of them with money; in what case are souls committed to their trust? But let us
consider, how in other parts the minister holds comparison with the
fisherman. 2. The fisherman when he casts out his net or angle-rodde,
knows not how to speed, but sometimes he has good luck at the first, and
sometimes at the last, and sometimes none at all. It is so with the preacher of
Gods most holy word, who sometimes but with once preaching edifieth much, Ion.
35.6.
as Jonas by one sermon reclaimed both Prince and people of Nineveh: Acts.
8.5.6.7.8.12. Acts. 2.14.41. Acts. 16.14.
as Philip by one sermon in Samaria won the hearts of the Samaritanes: and as
Peter by one sermon at Hierusalems added to the Church three thousand souls:
as Paul by one sermon converted Lydia. Sometimes he is long ere he can do any
good: Luke. 5.5.6.7.9.
but at the last letting down his net in the name of Christ (as Peter did)
he encloseth a multitude of fish. Sometimes he says with Peter, master,
Luke. 5.5.
all the day long have I fished, and got nothing: and he is driven to take up
the Lords complaint in the mouth of the Prophet. Isay. 53.1.
Lord who has believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed. The fisherma^ fares as his hap is: Isay 6.6.7. etc: Iere 1.9. Ezekiel.
31.2.3.
so the preacher speedeth according as God blesses, who gives him the tongue
of the learned to utter words of grace in due time, who touches his lips
with a coal from his altar which inflameth the hearts of the people, who only
opens him a door of utterance whereby his words minister grace unto the
hearers. 3. Ephesians. 6.19.20. 1. Pet. 4.20
The fisherman does as the gardner and husbandman who pla^teth, and sows; but
God reserueth the increase to himself. The fisherman can promise nothing to
him self, he is not certain of one fish: he can but use the means when he
has done al he can. 1. Cor. 3.5.6.7.
The preacher can but minister the word and Sacraments, the outward means that
God has ordained him to fish for souls: but the effect and good speed hereof,
must be given to God, 1. Cor. 3.6.9.10. Matthew. 13.3.4. John 20.23 Matthew. 18.18:
he being but Gods agent in this business. The ministers of the Church are said
to build, sow, plant regenerate, wash away sins, forgive. But because these
are done by them by virtue of their office, we must look higher, namely unto
him who has put them in office, who in mere mercy works thus effectually
by them: 1. Cor. 3.5.6.7.9.10.
wherefore Paul thus says of Apollo, and himself; Who is Paul? and who is
Apollo? but the ministers by whom ye believed, and as the Lord gave to every
man? I have planted, Apollo watered, but God gave the increase. So then neither
is he that planteth any thing, neither he that watreth, but God that gives
the increase. Gods laborers: he takes up these titles, of Gods husbandry, and
Gods building: that all the good success of our labors whatsoever, The net of
preaching brings us to the heavenly shore etc. examples. Acts 9.10.18.11.
etc. Acts 10.4.5. Acts 8.37. Acts 16.14 Before the spiritual fisherman can
gaineany fish, God must first lead them into the net, and make them
tractable. 1. Cor. 15.10. Ephesians. 3.7.8.
should cleave to our hands. Ananias in deed, was thema^ that brought Paul to
this heavenly shore, by the net of his preaching: but Gods hand was first in
this work, who illuminated him by his heavenly light, and prepared him by his
spirit, making him capable of Ananias his instruction. The like we say of
Cornelius the Centurion: of the great Chamberlain to the Ethiopian Queen; of
Lydia the purple seller, who were all gained to God by the ministry of the
Apostles, Peter, Philip, Paul: but the hand of a better workman than they,
first ledd them into the nets, and made them tractable, and rulie. If we do
any good by our spiritual angling, if we have increased Gods kingdom, if we
have labored more than others: let us with Paul bless God for our labors,
and say; Not I, but the grace of God in me: and with the elders in the
Revelation, Revel. 4.10.11. Isa. 26.12.
lay down all the glory thereof at the foot of the Lamb, as they did lay
their crowns: and take up Isaiah his saying. All our works thou have wrought
for us o Lord: and that worthy peace of Anthony, Psa. 115.1.
with the melodious musician of Israel, Not unto us o Lord, not unto us, but
unto thy name be the praise for thy loving kindness, Isay 1.3.
and thy truth sake. Let us not be worse than the ox, who knows his owner;
and the Ass who knows his masters cribbe. Be we far from kissing our own
hands, and turning our backs to the sanctuary, or our face from the mercy
seat. Ezec. 8.16.
But let Zacharies Epiphonema go with such a blessing, Grace, Grace be unto
it. And let us say this grace over it, praise, Reave. 5.13.
honor, glory be to him that sits on the throne, and to the Lamb. As all
rivers run into the Ocean sea, from whence they came (so that if thou know
not the way to the sea, take a river, and that will show it thee:) so let this
blessing, among all other blessings, be attributed unto God, from whence it
first came. For what do we hold, that hold not in Capite? 1. Cor. 4.7.
And what have thou, says the blessed Apostle Paul, that thou have not
received? The fisherman annot discernce of what sorts his fish are, while his
net is in the water: so the spiritual angler, in the sea of this world cannot
judge of men's hearts etc.
4. The fisherman that has a great draught in his net, can not discern of
what sorts they are, which are good, which are bad, while the net is yet in
the water: so the preacher in the sea of this world cannot judge of the
affections of his hearers, or of the state wherein they stand, either for
salvation or damnation. For it is God alone that has a throne in the heart of
man, that possesses the reins, and searches the very secrets of his
thoughts, man can but judge by outward appearance: we must leave them to God,
for their inward inclinations. And he will diue into the depth of them. It is
no running behind the tree with Adam, Genesis 3.8. and 18.10. and 38.14.15. God
knows man's heart, and his affections. Augustine. Zach. 4.10.
nor hiding our selves under a tente with Sarah, nor covering our selves with a
veil with Thamar, nor cleanly wiping of our mouths with the harlot in the
Proverbs, or any halting or dissembling with God. For he is Totus oculus, as
Augustine says, altogether eye, and his seven eyes (as Zachary says) run
over the whole world. He that conceived to himself that God was purblind, and
that he might daze the eyes of Gods knowledge, argued his own folly, and has
this flout for his labor. Psalm. 94.8.9.10.11.
O you fool, when will you understand? He that made the eye, shall he not see?
The Lord knows the thoughts of me^ that they are but vain. It was as absurdly
said as might be, of the 2. old fornicators that assaulted Susanna: Dan. 13.20
Behold the Garden doors are shut, that no man can see us: For neither a
partition wall of stone, or any secret pauilion, or the darkness of the night,
can cover or keep our misdeedes from Gods knowledge, seeing it reaches to the
very intendments of the heart: Psalm. 44.21.
which David elegantly witnesses, saying; If we have forgotten the name of our
God, and holden up our hands to any strange God, shall not God search it out?
for he knows the very secrets of the heart. In an other place, as nothing
doubting of the omniscience of God, he lays down his thoughts at the feet of
God to undergo his trial. Psalm. 139.23.
Try me O God, and seek the ground of my heart: prove me, and examine my
thoughts. In the fourth part of that Psalm, Psalm. 139.2.
he speaks sweetly in this wise; Thou art about my path, and about my bed,
and spiest out all my ways. For lo, there is not a word in my tongue, but
thou Lord know it altogether: when the Apostles were to surrogate an Apostle
to make up the twelve, in the room of Judas that had made defection, and
wrought his own destruction, and they pricked and presented two, Barsabas and
Matthias, they called upon God, that they might make election of the best by
his direction, Acts. 1.22.23.24.
as the searcher of the hearts: Thou Lord which know the hearts of all
men, show whether of these two thou have chosen. As Job gives to God all
power: so he gives all knowledge unto him, even of the inner imagination of
man's mind: Job. 42.2.
I know that thou can do all things, and that there is no thought hid from
thee. So does Jeremy: Iere. 17.9.
The heart is dece^tfull, Reave. 1.14.
and wicked above all things, who can know it? I the Lord search the heart,
and try the reins. In this respect the spirit gives him fiery eyes, which
search thoroughly as they go. His eyes were as a flame of fire; wherefore they
serve to give him light in the night season, and to make day and night alike
unto him, according to that which David says: Psalm. 139.^.7.8.11.12.
If I say the darkness shall hide me, then shall my night be turned to day: yea
the darkness is no darkness with thee, but the night is as clear as the day,
the darkness and light to thee are both alike: wherefore no fisherman may sooner
be mistaken in his fish while they are in his net in the water: than we may
be and are of the conditions of men, while we have them but in the compass of
our nets in this present world. We should not measure the Church by the line
of our affections, by the plenty and prosperity of the times. Examples. Iere.
44.18.19. Genesis 39.20 1. Sam. 21. and 22. and 23. and 24. Acts of the Apostles,
and other Chuch stovies. Reave. 13.7
Some measure the Church by the line of their affections, by the plenty and
prosperity of the times: which was the dotage of the old Israelites in
Ieremies time prating thus unto him: since we left off to burn incense to the
Queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, we have had
scarceness of all things, and have been consumed by the sword, and by famine.
And when we burnt ince^se to the queen of heaven, and powredout drink offering,
unto her, did we make her cakes, to make her glad, and pour out drink
offerings unto her without our husbands? But was Joseph the worse because he
was imprisoned? or David the worse because he was banished? or the Church the
worse because it has been so long persecuted, and of barbarous tyrants so
cruelly entreated? It is the badge of the beast, that he shall give war to
the Saints, Judge. 20.25. Prosperity etc. no true mark of the Church.
and vanquish them. The Israelites, whom we doubted not were the Church of God,
had twice very unhappy speed in their wars waged with the Beniamites. Have
not the Turks often warred and prevailed against the Christians? wherefore we
are blind and see nothing, if we make this a mark of the Church, and we wish
such with the Careat successoribus opto,
Quisquis ab euentu facta notanda putat.
We wish that such have no success,
That by event of things do guess. Of unity, consent, and multitude.



THere be others as bold with God as the former, intruding themselves into his
liberty and peculier, to determine who are, and who are not of the Church,
making a seculer arm, and jurisdiction, and the consent of the greater number
and company, the mark of their knowledge, fancying the fondnes of the
Israelites, herein running with the Bias and stream of those times, drawing
this absurdity with cart-ropes of examples of their fathers, Iere. 44.17.
kings, princes in the cities of Judah, and the streets of Jerusalem, for this
is their logic which with such open mouth they lay out in Jeremy. But how
little pleasure their argument taken from the topic place of unity, in
matters of divinity, Matthew. 22.15.16.23.34. and 26.3.4.59. Luke.
23.7.10.11.12.18.24. Gal. 2.11.
does the Popelings I pray you consider? Did not the Pharisees, Sadduces,
Herod, Pilat, divided in opinions, and affections among themselves, combine and
conjure themselves against Christ, as a Jury in a general assise agrees
upon one verdict? Paul who dissented from Peter, and Barnabas who differed
from Paul, Acts. 15.39. 1. Cor. 1.12.13.
and the Church of Corinth which nourished in her bosom many bitter
diffentions, I trow were all members of the Catholic Church in the opinion of
our adversaries. If they were, their reason grounded upon unity has no great
stabilitie. Genesis 11.3.4.
Did not the balde builders of Babel, in one mind conclude to go on with their
work? Those Calves that worshipped their golden Calves, Exodus 32.1.3.6.
sang all one song. These are the Gods of Israel, that brought thee out of the
land of Egypt. The ten tribes were in a league together to uphold
superstition, and to set up Idols in Bethel. Psalm. 83.5.6.7. etc.
The Psalmograph numbreth ten nations of one associatio^ against the Church of
God. They were confederate together, the tabernacles of the Edomites and
Moabites. The Hagarens, the Philistims, with them that dwell at Tire, Gebon,
Ammon and Amalech: Assure also is joined with them, and have helped the children
of Loath. The Jews with one mouth called upon the Judge to condemn our
Savior, Crucify him, crucify him. Matthew. 27.22. The Mahometists.
The Mahometists are at a point with themselves, with one assent and consent to
main taine their blasphemies: now I trust there is not a Christian, that
holds, that they are of the Church. Genesis 13.7.8, and 37.8. etc. Difference
sometimes amongst the Saints of God on earth. Hier. 26.8.10.11. etc. Matthew.
20.24. Gala. 2.11.12. Act. 11.2.3. The ancient fathers dissenting, now and
then, one from another.
The members of the true Church, are sometimes at odds about outward matters;
Loath and his brethren differed for a time. The brethren jointly did hate and
intend much hurt unto Joseph. The priests and Princes of the people very often
severed themselves from Prophets. In the sacred society of Christ there were
emulations and distentions, a very hot garboile was among them for the
primacie. The other ten disdained that the two brethren James and John
should stand for it above others. Paul withstood Peter to the very head of
him. They of the circumcision came against Peter in open disputation. A great
contention among the primitive Christians did arise, concerning the annual
celebration of the feast of Easter. Between the Bishops of Africa and Rome was
great and long a do about the baptism of heretics. Hierome did absolutely
oppose himself against Ruffinus. So did Epiphanius against Chrysostom.
Between the East and the West Churches, there was little trouble about rites
and ceremonies. Therefore let our adversaries lay their hands upon their
mouths, and talk no more to us of unity and multitude, seeing it is laxate
and palsy shaking logic. Of Succession.
As that is also which is derived from long continued succession which they
hold as an infallible note of their church. For this their slavery we scatter
in this wife: If succession will serve the turn, 2. King. 20.21. and 21.3.16.
etc. Matthew. 26.57. etc.
^o conclude, those that have that of their side to be of the church, Manasses
and Caiphas may hold up their heads with the best of the bunch. For the one
succeeded David in the civil government, and the other Aaron in the priestly
regiment. Our Romanists that look so bigly upon us in their supposed
privilege of succession, Archidamus. Hercules.
succeed Peter as Archidamus the Lacedemonian did succeed Hercules. Nicostratus
told him that he could not come of Hercules, as he would have the world
think, because their doings were so contrary; the one killed those that were
badde; and the other killing the good: when they are at the best, they are but
a brood and litter of Pharisees, John 8.44. Of the true and false
whose tribe and cognation was hewed out of hell, and were of their father the
devil, howsoever they would seem to deduce their stock, Church, see Doctor
Rainold his 5. and 6. conclusion. 1. King. 3.17.22.24.25. etc. Mat. 13.48.
and lineage from Abraham. But we leave further scanning of this question: and
as the two women that came before Solomon, contending whose the living child
should be, whilst each of them claimed it to be hers, their strife was
stinted by the sentence of his wisdom: so the wisdom of God, who searches
all hearts, shall end our quarrel, and shall one day discover to the world who
are his, and none of his, who are the elect, and outcasts of Israel, as the
fisherman descrieth what fishes are in his net when he has it on the land,
and takes a full and perfect view of them. 5. Matthew. 13.47.48 49. The
fishermon, when he has ended his fishing, seuereth the goed from the bad; even
so when the world ends, a separation shall be until which time, etc.
The ordinary fisherman when his fishing is done, sundreth and seuereth the
good from the bad, until which time they are confusedly together in the net;
such men as are caught by the evangelical fishermen, by the dragge-net of the
holy word, must abide together in the Church of God with the refuse company,
until the end of the world which shall give an end to our fishing, at what
time the almighty whose ministers we are, shall sort his fishes, and
according to their kinds, separate them: while the world lasts, and so our
fishing lasts, Matthew. 13.24.25.26. and 25.1.32 1. Sam. 19.23.24. Matthew.
22.22.11.
there is no talking of this distinction. For cockle, darnell, tares,
successively sprouteth out with the better grain: weeds will ouer-awe the best
herbs that be: goats will be among the flocks of sheep, foolish virgins will
keep company with the wisest: Saul will come shuffeling in among the Prophets:
and a rude unmannerly guest without his wedding weeds, will put himself forward
with the best of the asse^bly, at the marriage of the lamb: and no better
condition may be looked for, no more than the externe fisherman may hope not
to have his nets polluted with filth in fishing affairs. Matthew. 13.47.
But stay we the end as fishermen do, and then an other course we shall see
taken herein. As the soil and reiectaments of the fishermans gatherings, are
then thrown away: so the wicked shall be done away, from the company of the
good. A brand then shall be seen upon Cain, whereby we shall know him, from
righteous Abel: Esau and Jacob shall be distinguished before us: So shall the
Apostle Jude, and Judas the Apostata easily be discerned: Simon Peter, and
Simon Magus may not then be together: Cephas and Caiphas may not keep
company: Jeremy and Pashur, Amos and Amazia: Elias and Baals Priests: Jesus
his servants, and servile Jesuits, The spiritual fishermans toil and labor is
as great, if not greater, as any way befalls the worldly fisherman. Of
fishermen, and shepherds pains: and of ministers. Mat. 4.19. Mar. 1.17.
Ezech. 33.2 Iere. 12.10. and 23.1.2. Eze. 34.2.3. Ezec. 3.17.
for ever shall be separated, one net shall no more be pestred with such pelf
that shall trouble true piety. 6. Lastly, beside the promised circumstances
that makes such a sympathy between these fishermen of both kinds: they that
are of the spiritual fishing profession, shall find if they travel in their
callings accordingly, that their pains are as great, if not greater, than
theirs. For which cause to express the labors cast upon that calling, the
minister has the name of a fisherman given him. As the name of shepherd is
commonly given to the civil magistrate, so the title of a fisherman is set
upon a minister, and they have not these their names for naught, but to shake
them by the shoulders, and set them on their feet, and to put them in mind of
the great burden that is laid upon them. Shepherds seldom sleep, or shift a
shirt, time not serving for it, their attendance upon their sheep being
little enough, Luke 2.8,
when they have done what they can. The fishermans toil likewise exceeds,
both by day and night, Luke 5.5.
in heat and cold, the case so requiring it very often, that he fish all
night long, and go into the water and wade to and froe in it. Of the toil and
labors that ministers ought to vndergo^.
This vigilancie, industry, fidelity, must be in him that has given up
himself unto the sacred ministry to fish for men's souls, which Jacob had
performed, when he made his accounts with Laban of his doings: I was in the
day time consumed with heat, Genesis 31.39.
and with frost in the night, and my sleep departed from mine eyes. Mat. 20.3.
The ministry is not ordained for a chair of ease to any: no man being called
thereunto, may stand idle in the market place, but he must be a labourer in the
vineyard. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. lib: 19. ca. 19.
A labourer, not a loyterer, Episcopi nomen est operis, non honoris: vt
intelligat se non esse episcopum, qui vult prior esse and non prodesse. The
ministers place is a place of labor, not of honor: that he may know that he
is unworthy of the place, that intends his own pomp, and not the peoples
profit: we minsters may take up this saying of the Poet.

Tendimus in Latium, seeds vbi fata quietis
Nulla dabunt.
We tend into that kind of soil
That gives no ease, but restles toil.
Wheresoever the scripture speaks of our office, they speak of the labors
incident to that office. The Apostle speaking of the carriage of himself in the
course of his ministry among the Galatians, tells them. Gal. 4.11.
I fear least I have bestowed upon you labor in vain. Directing an
exhortation unto the Church of Philippos, he says: Phil. 4.3.
Help those that labor in the Gospel. He deals with the Thessalonians, 1
These. 5.12 13.
that they take knowledge of such that labor among them in the Lord, and that
they give preferment unto them. In his letter to Timothy, 1. Tim. 5.17 18. 2 Timothy 1.6.13. and 2.2.14.15. 2 Timothy 4.1.2.5. etc.
he makes special remembrance of them that labor in the word and doctrine.
To which agrees his Canon unto Timothy in his latter Epistle superscribed
unto him. In all things labor, and do the work of an Evangelist. And he
calls the office it self of the ministry, an office of work, saying; He
that desires the office of a Bishop, 1 Timothy 3.1.2. etc.
desires a worthy work. The titles themselves given in scriptures to
ministers, do lay out their labors. Matthew. 13.3.4.45.47. Luke 12.42 43.
They are compared to Husbandmen, Shepherds, Builders, Houshoulders, mothers,
soldiers, fishers; all which are offices of exceeding encombrances. The toil
of husbandry is such, John. 21.15 16.17. 1. Cor. 9.7. Matthew. 4.19.
as there is no end of it. It was one of Cato his sayings in his books of
husbandry, and every husbandman will confirm it: Qui terram colit ne sedeat:
Cato. 1. Cor. 3.6.9.10. 1. Pet. 5.2.3.4. Eze. 34.2. Matthew. 9.36.37. and 12.49.
and 20.1.2. Mark 4.3. Luke 9.62. Mat. 13.3.4.5.6.7.8.
Est enim aliquid semper quo^ agat. The husbandman is never without work; what
with following, stirring, sowing, weeding, and following the plough, he is
always occupied. This is the ministers case, if he lists to consider it
aright, the Lords plough that he has in hand, calls for the attendance of
the whole man. The charge of the one answers notably the charge of the other.
For as the soil, so the soul unless it be always ploughed up, and has
seed from other places strowed upon it, gives no fruit acceptable to God
the owner thereof: neither suffices it, once to have sowed it, but it is to
be vigilantly attended daily, that neither the birds, which are our badde
affections, may devour it; or the thorns of our grievous sins, which sprout
up continually, may choke it; or otherwise, by disidiousnesse and
slouthfulnes, may be hindered. The Shepheardes life is as tedious as may be,
Aristotle. Pliny.
For the sheep (as Aristotle and Pliny observe) are a simple kind of cattle,
easily wronged, least able of any to relieve it self, taking the advantage of
every gappe to break out of the fold, commonly caught and entangled by
briars, often in danger of the dog, the wind and weather bringing much wrack
unto it, the very grass and water whereby it lives, many times infecting it,
the diseases being many to which they are subject: wherefore the welfare and
good health of them, is in the help and heed of the shepherds. If we look
well into our selves, in the sheep looking-glass we shall see our selves.
For we are simple as they of our selves, the natural man as the Apostle
teaches, being not capable of the things that are of God: what wro^gs do not
we lie open unto in this malignant world, 1. Ioh: 5.19.
set as the spirit says by John, upon wickedness? which we do away no otherwise
then by patience, there being no good to be done by resistance: do we not
take all starting holes to wind out our selves out of Christ's pinfold, Psalm.
78.57
and to start aside from his holy commandments as a broken bow? Do not the
briars of worldly cares take such hold of us, as we cannot get from them to
serve the living God? Are we not as the sheep in the danger of a dog fleshed
in the shambles, 1 Pet. 5.8.
that has a red mouth, (I mean the devil) that daily goes about seeking whom
he may devour? Psa. 23.1. Ioh. 10.11. 2. Pet. 5.2.
wherefore, what help have we but to call upon our shepherd Christ Jesus, and
to require the aid of his subordinate shepherds, the ministers of his word,
sent by him to succor us? Finally, is not the diet of our souls, the death of
our souls, even the word of God, while we swallow it up as it is corrupted
by false teachers, or otherwise seed upon it with corrupt affections? Wherefore
let the praise of God be in our mouths, and let us rejoice in our beds when
God vouchsafes that mercy toward us to set such shepheardes over us, as may
keep us within the fold and limmits of a good life, Psa. 23.23.
lead us out into the green pastures, and conduct us to the waters of
comfort, defend and keep us from all dangers, from the power of the Lion, Psalm.
7.2.
and the mouth of the dogs that would tear us in pieces, while there is none
to help. 1. Cor. 3.9.10.
Whereas we are compared unto builders, consider we hereby that are in the
ministry, how we are subject unto labors. For can a house be built without
care and pains taking, what with carriage, and recarriage, hewing, planing,
ha^mering, joining, sawing, coupling, and infinite other circumstances of
laboring? the labor thereof is great. Before sinners the confused lump and
substances of the devil, can be wrought and brought to be as lively stones, 1.
Pet. 2.4.5 6. etc. 1. Kin. 4.5.6.8.9.16.18.
to be joined to the corner stone Christ Jesus; before they can of long
misshapen timberlogs, be made to serve, as tall Cedars of Libanus, and be for
the courts of the house of our God; before they can be made temples for the
holy Ghost, that before were eages of every unclean bird, Revel. 18.2.
even of every filthy sin, and be more bewtifull then the gate of the
Temple, Acts. 3.2.
which was called bewtifull, The ministers, Gods masons, and workmen shall have
much ado with them. Stewards and such as have prefecture of great houses,
undergo much study, and watchfulness, being often put to it, to sit up
whole nights, to make their books perfect. But the care of the Lords house
does infinitely go beyond it. For that the stewards thereof, may deal out
their masters bread unto the household in due season, and show how he has
disbursed the talents left to his disposing and make straight all recknings,
Luke 19.13. Math. 24.45.46.47.48.49.
that he may be cast into the smallest arrarages. If he lays his hand upon
his heart, and weigh the matter well with singlenes of soul, I am well enough
assured that he shall have tow enough to his distaffe, and that a found charge
is laid upon his shouldiers, and that he acquiteth himself notably, that
discharges it as he should. Now, what successiue labors and sorrows mothers
do endure, in the womb in the world with the conception and education of
their children, I leave it to those that are mothers, to meditate upon. But be
they what they will, they may not be matched with the troubles of our office,
whom God has set as fathers over his Church, 1. Pet. 2.2. 1. Pet. 1.23 1.
Kin. 19.4 10.
by the immortal seed of his word to beget children unto him, being such as
made Elias weary of his life. For what a do Gods minister has to beget a
child to God, I show you by these oppositio^s against him. 1. The ingenerate
and inherent corruption of nature, strives much against it. 2. The world
disclaimeth it, as inchaunting our souls too much with the fashions of it, and
so withholding us from the obedience of faith, as we cannot be reclaymed. 3.
Satan the prince of the world withstandeth it, and busieth his brains all he
may, to impare Christ's kingdom, and the common salvation. 4. Moreover, it is
no small rebuke to ministers, and it dulleth not a little the edge of their
devotion, that their travels are so little respected; and that such become
their enemies, for whose salvation they have so much labored. But yet as a
mother forgets all her labors, for joy that a child is borne into the
world: so shall every faithful minister stand affected, for the sweet
comfort they have, that Gods kingdom by their travels is increased. Soldiers
may not sit out, but may be in the forefront with these fellows, but the
spiritual warfare much surpasses theirs. The life and state of a minister is
a warfare, (and so that old beaten soldier Paul says, that had borne many a
blow in his body from the battle, for his faithful service, having the scars
to show according to that which he himself says, Gala. 6.17.
I bear about me the marks of the Lord Jesus) and we strive not maisteries
with slesh and blood, Ephesians. 6.11 12.13.14.16.17. 1. These. 5.8.
but with principalities, powers, princes of the darkness of this world,
spiritual wickednesses that are in high places. Thus our enemies have might in
their hands, and malice in their hearts, besides other very gainful
privileges over us, as being spirits against flesh: secret and hidden against
us that are naked and lay open: Ephesians. 2.2. and 6.12.
and having the advantage of the higher ground, whereby they ouerlooke us, and
bear us down. Also in all persecutions that arise, the minister is the mark
of the archers, against whom most of their powder is spent, Math. 10.16.17.18.
etc.
persecuting tyrants directing their officers, principally to persecute the
preaching ministers. The king of Aram charged his archers to shoot their
arrows neither against small or great, 1. King. 22.31. etc.
but against Achab only: the raging enemies of the Gospel, prepare their
instruments of death almost only against godly ministers. Finally, for the
same reason they are called fishermen, as we have formerly showed, to signify
their labors and troubles in their calling.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER. The especial duties of the spiritual fisherman.
Ordinary Fishermen have many observations, having excellent correspondencie
with the Office of the ministry. 1. They observe the qualities of Fishes in
their kinds, and fit themselves to their several natures. Whether they floate
higher, or swim near the ground, or keep themselves in holes, or run into
the mud, they have means and ways to come by them. The spiritual Fisherman
learneth from this school, 1. Cor. 9.19 20, 21, 22. Jude 22.23
to frame himself to the capacity of his auditorie, and to use all the
policies he may, to with draw them from their errors or redundant manners. For
his people are divided into many minds; and therefore many ways are to be
taken with the^. Such as are worthy schoolemasters, do give themselves to their
scholars wits. Approved Physicians, do prescribe according to the maladies,
and nature of their Patients. 1. Cor. 3.1, 2. etc.
Thus must Ministers incline themselves as well to the wisdom, Hebr. 5.11, 12,
13, 14. and 6.1, 2.
as to the weakness of the hearers, and feed those that are children in
knowledge with the first rudiments and Catechism of Religion; and such as are
of more growth in understanding, to diet them with the stronger food of the
mysteries of Gods will. Though they somewhat stammer with Babes for their
better understanding, it is not amiss. Always foreseeing and taking heed,
that they do nothing to the prejudice of the truth, from which we are not to
start a hairs breadth, for any man's pleasure. From which spirit such are very
far, who caring for none but themselves, shun all society, and live wholly
by themselves, refusing conference with such as every way do not partake with
their opinions, Time-seruers.
in the mean while with their quils very fiercely shooting at such, as in the
common cause of religion have deserved very well, and censure the government of
the Churches, as they please, and are the occasion of very great confusion. 2.
Though fishers many times labor in vain and get not a Frog, yet continue they
their fishing course, Luke 5.5, 6
bearing patiently with the times, abiding to the end in hope of better speed.
It very well beseems fishers of men to be lessoned in this case by them, and
not hastily to resign up their standing, because of their peoples so ill, or
simple understanding. The laws and Canons of the Church are herein very
straight, inhibiting Bishops and Ministers of the word, to take their vagarie,
and to forsake their proper charges. And these Canons are ratified by decrees
of Counsels which are yet in force, howsoever the morer part who^ they
concern, force not of them. For if they did, they would not keep the courts of
princes so much as they do, and spend so much time in wordly matters, and so
little in their divine studies. Chrysostom Epiphanius.
Chystome taxed Epiphanius severely for leaving his own charge, and taking
other men's matters in hand. I marvel what Christ would say to his fishermen
if he were now among them, and saw them as we see them, some in the Court,
some in the Camp, some hunting, some whoring, so few intending their
spiritual fishing. The better sort that are discouraged in these labors
because they have so little success, are to be constant in their well begun
course, and to leave the event thereof to God, who shall bless it as it
seems him best. They that will do nothing but to purpose, and will be
certain of the end before they begin, shall stop many gainful occasions of
doing good, and shall answer to God for their departure, from the place he did
put the^ in, without his good leave: As Jonas did who crossed the seas to post
unto Tharsus when his enjoined journey was to Nineveh. Jonah 1.3.4.
God sent a Pursiuant in a whirle-winde against him and stayed his intendement.
1. King 19.4.10.14.15.18.19.
Elias also had given the slip, as right weary of his people in Israel, had
not God stayed him in the nicke. In such a taking was Paul, who was in the
mind to have relinquished his charge at Corinth, Acts 18.6.7.9.10.11.
and to go to the Gentiles, had not a countermaund from God in the mean time
stayed him. The Fishermans trade is an exercise of patience: so is our
Evangelical fishing function. 3. The Fisherman, so long as his nets orangles
are in the water, may expect a draught, and hope for good hap: so may the
Preacher while he is in his profession, and the spirit gives him utterance.
For it is as the Poet says, Quo minime credas gurgite, piscis erit.
A Fish will be in that same plot which thou think not.


Elias thought himself the only remainder of the Church of Israel, 1. King.
19.14.18.
that had escaped the sword of Achab and Iezabell: But God otherwise rounded
him in the ear, acertaining him of a number beside, that had never yet done
the least homage unto Baal. So Paul when he thought to put up his books, and
to leave the Church of Corinth, as a contumacious and incorrigible company:
God altered him, certifying him of many religious people (though unknown to
him) that were in those parts, saying: Acts 18.10
I have much people in this City. It is the part of the faithful minister to
despair of none, for the Lords hand is not so short, but he can save. 4.
Fishermen and such as are expert Anglers, consider many circumstances that make
for their better angling disport, as the wind, the water, the ebbing and
flowing of it, the time of the day, the temperature of the air, and many such
like tokens. The opportunity that is taken, is all in all in fishing affairs;
and in all other affairs, which who so neglects, fails of his fancy, 1.
Cor. 9.19 20, 21, 22, 2. Tim. 4.2. 1. Tim. 5.1.2. 1. Cor. 4.21. Job. 1.7. and
22 1. Pet. 5.8. The deceits of Satan and wicked men, in taking opportunities.
and shows his folly. Hereto must the spiritual fisher take most heed, and
epsy his times and seasons for his purpose. This the devil and his adherents
do apprehend in their deuilish devises: and therefore let us intend the same
earnestly in religious endeavors. The devil at his first onsetre of temptation
against Christ in the wilderness, took the occasion and advantage of his
hunger: for that is a forcible solicitor with man to any evil attempt, for
which cause the old saying was, Venture non habet aures, The bellye has no
ears, it will not be led by reason. And the wiser sort have called famine,
Maleuada, a very badde counselor in all kind of actions. Genesis 4.8.
Cain when he plotted the butcherie of his brother, espied opportunity of
time and place for it, when he had him in the field alone, and there was none
to witness his nefarious villainy. Genesis 39.11, 12.
Putaphars wife watched a fit season when Joseph was by himself, to give him a
temptation. Gen 34.25, 26, 27.
The sons of Jacob intending the massacre of the Sichemites, proiected before
for it, causing them to be circumcised, and falling upon them before they
could be recovered. Matthew. 26.16.
When Judas first conceived a treason, he was always hoouering over a time
convenient to bring it forth. Diabolus omnium discutit consuetudines, Bernard.
ventilat curas, scrutatur affectus and ibi quaerit causas nocendi, vbi nos
vidit magis occupari. The devil weyeth well our would wonts, the course of our
cares, the fashions of his affections, and out of the nature of our qualities,
works his malignities. Like a subtle Soldier trained up the in wars, that
lays seige to that place of the wall that is weakest, he observes our
weakness, and makes great matter of it. As a man when he would stricke fire
out of a flint, marketh what end of the flint is fittest for the blow of the
iron, that it may sparkle the sooner: So the vilde tempter observes the
affection that leans to sin, and that he strikes only with his iron of
temptation, that a spark of our consent thereunto being expressed, the flame
of sin which may consume the whole man, may thereby be kindled. Gregorius.
Prius complexionem vniuscuiusque aduersarius noster perspicit, and sic
tentationis laqueos opponit: alius laetis, alius tristibus, alius timidis,
alius elatis moribus existit. Satan sees every ones complexion, and so
spreads his nets of temptations: One man is given to solace, another to
sorrow, one to fear, another to pride. Let the good Fisherman in the wisdom
of his God that is in his heart, be as wise in working men's salvation: as the
envious man the Deuili is in the implacable malice of his mind, to bring us to
destruction. This is the wisdom of the Serpent, which the wisdom of Christ
in the persons of the Apostles commends to his servants, Matthew. 10.16.
saying: Be as wise as serpents. Mark the inclination of a man, whether he
refort to the preached word, if he does, have comfort in him, and doubt not
but by trowling and trameling for him, thou shall have him. For his outward
coming to the Word, gives great hope of the inward coming of the spirit,
and so of his happy coming into the net, according to that which Christ
says: They that are of God, John 8.47.
hear Gods word: Mark his conversation, and his company, for commonly as a
man is consorted, he is qualified. The Lacedaemonians.
The Lacedaemonians when they did put their sons from school, the better to
make judgment of their inclinations, they inquired diligently after their
companions. It is a certain saying of the Psalmist: With the holy thou shall
be holy, Psalm. 18.25 26.
and with the froward man thou shall learn frowardness. Another mark of the
better sort of men, does David in the fifteeneth Psalm give me, He makes
much of such as fear the Lord. Psalm. 15.4.


By this Rule I judge of a Papist, and an enemy to Religion, hearing him
blunder against Luther, Calvin, Beza, and such like renowned Saints and
Servants of God. I will insist in such circumstances no longer, a thousand such
specialties may be inserted, which I leave to every faithful Fisherman, to
find out in his own pastoral function, and to make wholesome and gainful use
thereof, in his best discretion; only I say this, that though I see not a Fish
in the water, yet when I perceive that my cork or floate is under the water, I
know well enough that a Fish has taken the bait: So, though we see not into
the secret mind of man, yet by outward effects, one may determine of inward
affects, and certainly conclude, that our godly admonitions (which are our
baytes we lay for souls) are taken. 5. It is the Anglers order, when he has
a great Fish hanging at his hook, to use him gently with an even line leading
him up and down, until he has wearied him, and then he lays his hand
upon him, and heaueth him up; for, if he shall snatch him up greedily at the
first, and deal rigorously with him, with the poize and wait of his body, he
will break line and Angle-rodde, and escape. So let Gods angelical Angler
Amplecti venientes, gently entertain such as are coming on, and have taken
down the hook they have laid for them, and by the coals of kindness heaped
upon their heads, Romans 12.20
work their full conversion, least by being too severe toward them, they
mar all they have made, and loose all together. Some fishes may be pulled up
sooner then other some, according to the proportion of them, and the hold we
have of them. Strangers are more favorably to be handled than our ordinary
hearers: Such as are but Catechumen and Neophites in the faith of the first
planting, are to be ordered more tenderly, than such as have made further
progress in the same. This will well appear if we veiwe the course of the
holy men of God, in the execution of their Ministry in old time. When as
Isaiah had to do but with his own people, Isai. 1.4.
he was hot at the beginning with them, with this declamatorie exclamation
making entry into his Sermon: Ah sinful nation, ah people laden with
iniquity: a seed of the wicked corrupt children. But when Jonas was sent out
of his own parish being preacher to the Jews, to denounce Gods Judgment
against the Ninevites, who were of the Gentiles, he insisted only in his text
of commination according to Iniunctio^, Ion. 3.4.
without any enlargement thereof by way of pathetical and severe reprehension.
Acts. 17.24. etc.
When Paul was brought to Areopage, a place out of his walk, and jurisdiction,
he maintained his Philosophy before them as they desired him, forbearing all
kind of crimination against them. 1. Cor. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. and 6.1. etc.
But when he was among his Congregation at Corinth, he ratled them roundly,
especially that incestuous companion against who^ he thundered his most
dreadful Excommunication. Acts 7.51.
Stephen when he perceived his Jewish people in a settled co^tumacie
withstanding the truth, he pointed his words like the point of a diamo^d, thus
roused them for it: Ye stiff-necked, and of uncircumcised hearts and ears,
ye have always resisted the holy Ghost. Also according to their continuance
in Gods School, and the time of their learning, the Apostles framed their
styles of inditing. Paul was ceremonial when he was to beget the younger sort
in faith and knowledge unto God: yet in the Galathians he will not endure them,
Acts 16.1.3. Gal. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. etc. Satan skillful in this angling
occupation: his tricks.
because they had otherwise a long time learned Christ. The devil I warrant
you as he is perfect in this angling occupation, so he knows how to handle
a fish that he has hooked, that he may not break from him. Among other
tricks that he has, he will give them line and liberty, but he will not
suffer him to walk further than he list, but he draws him in again when it
best pleases him. He plays with his Fish, as the child plays with his
bird, which he tyeth by the leg with a string, and suffers him to fly the
length of the thread only: when he had hooked Herod by incestuous temptation,
he drew him not up forthwith unto himself, Mark. 6.17, 18, 20.21.22, 23. etc.
but he suffered him to hear John Baptist willingly, and in many things to be
cou^selled by him, for the line of his insatiable lust was strong enough to
hold him. Luke 18 11, 12.
He was not displeased that the Pharisee should fast twice in the week, that
he should tithe rightly, and forbear common outrages of inordinate persons: as
long as their covetousness, oppression, and hypocrisy were hooks in their
noses making them cock-sure. I bring not in this in the behalf of conniuencie,
that I would should be showed in case of iniquity, that the Ministers should
tolerate some sins in their people, as the devil does tolerate some good
things in his followers; but to persuade Ministers to meekness, for their
better reclaiming of sinuers from offenses, and gayning them to goodness. They
shall handle them as the fisherman does his fish, if they shall touch their
sores with a soft hand as though they were their own, as Paul did when he
said, 2. Cor. 11, 29.
Who is weak, and I burn not? and shall have mercy in their lips and
hearts. Otherwise if they fasten their teeth upon them upon every occasion,
they are Non correptores, sedcorrosores, as Bernarde says: Bernard. Augustine.
Esaias 92.3. Matthew. 12.20.
Non correctores sed traditores: as Augustine says: They betray them, rather
than teach them: they gnawe and consume them, rather than correct them. And so
they break Christ's rule in the case, by breaking the bruised reed, and
quenching the smoking flax, and keeping him down that is fallen, Bernard:
sermon. 44. in Castic.
that he rise up no more. If we make a mixture of the oil of admonition and
the wine of compunction: the oil of charity, and the wine of zeal, it is the
best ingredience and prescript we can minister.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER. Of the Fisher-mans baytes.
EVery Fisherman has his proper baytes, agreeable to the nature of those
fishes that he trowleth or angleth for. For at a bare hook no Fish will bite.
The caseworme, the dewe-worme, the gentile, the fly, the small Roche, and such
like, are for their turns according to the nature of the waters, and the
times, and the kinds of fishes. Whosoever fisheth not with a right bayte, shall
never do good. We that are spiritual fishermen, have our several baits
suitable to the stomachs we angle for. If we observe not the natures of our
auditors, and fit our selves to them, we shall not do wisely. Hic lauacra
mollia, Cassidorus.
ille ferru^ quaerit ad vulnera. One ma^s sore has need to be bathed and
suppled with oil: and another man's wound would be searched and seared with a
hot, and hard iron. Vana poscit remedia diuersa qualitas passionu^. Gregorius.
Jude 22.23 1. Cor. 4.21 and 5.3.4.5.
The differing kinds of maladies, must have diverse kinds of remedies: what
preaching is there of mercy to the vilde and wicked man, whose heart is harder
than the nethermost millstone, a razor being sooner able to cut a whet-stone,
than any doctrine powerful to stir him to compunction? Sing woe, not
therefore songs of mercy, to such sinners. For if we do, we may put up our
pipes, we speak rather to the air, than their ears, and our words are but
wind; for what says Isaiah in this case? Let mercy be showed to the wicked,
Isai. 26.10.
yet he will not learn righteousness. The stomach of such a soul, no more
sauoureth such a bayre of the blessings of God laid up for those that love him;
than the appetite of any man rellisheth and tastes a Box of rotten and
stinking ointment. Ro^. 2.7, 10. 2. Tim. 4.8. Revel. 22.1 2, 14. Matthew. 5.8.
Hebr. 12.22 23. Revel. 7.13, 14, 15, 16.71. 1. cor. 2.9.14.
Tell such of honor, glory, peace, an incorruptible crown, of the fruits of
the tree of Life, of the fruition of the presence of God, of their society
with Angels, Saints, congregation of first borne, of new Names, white
garments, of abundance of pleasures at the right hand of God, and they will
scorn them, and set their faces against them, Dan. 5.17.
and say to. us as Daniel did to Belshazzar: Keep thy rewards to thy self, and
give thy gifts to an other. Wherefore bait thy hook for them, with the bitter
worm of Gods judgment, with the worm that dies not; Deuteronomy. 27.15 16, 17, 18
etc. Exodus 19.16, 18. Isaiah 3.24 25. etc.
rend not their garments but their hearts, by reading over them the curses
pronounced on mount Ebal, speak of the thundrings and fire flashes on mount
Sinai: give them lamentation for joy: ashes for beauty, a rent for a girdle:
the spirit of heaviness for the joy of gladness: and if all this avail not,
Matthew. 24.6.21.
publish wars, and rumors of wars, and such tribulation which was not from the
beginning of the world to this day. It may be, that feeding upon this bait
they may be caught, and converted unto God. Luke. 3.3.4 5, 7.8. Luke. 3.9.10,
12.14.
For the Baptist by such a bait did speed exceedingly. For by turning the axe
of Gods judgment toward the^, they came in all the sort of them. Now is the
axe laid to the root of the tree, that was his text: with the end of this
Sermon, began their conversion. Publicans, soldiors, commons co^muning with the
Preacher, how they might be saved Such an argument likewise served Jonas his
turn worthily. For no sooner Gods judgment was out of his mouth, Ion. 3.4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9.
but the Ninevites took up repentance in their hearts. 2. Sam. 14.30, 31, 32,
33. Jonah 1.2, 3, 4.4.15 and 2.1.2. and 3.3.4.
When Absalom could not make Ioab of his faction by gentle entreatie, by
extremity he gained him, burning his barley lands. When God by a still voice
could not win Jonas to do his duty, and to go to Nineveh, by lifting up
his voice like a Trumpet, and by speaking by a tempest unto him, he made him
buckle himself roundly to those businesses. So let such as will not be led by
love, be drawn by fear. 1. Cor. 4.21. Jude 22.23 2. Cor. 2.7, 11. and 1.
cor. 9.19, 20, etc.
But with some the spirit of meeknes will do most, and love rather then a
rod does more good: and we shall do indiscreetly, to deal roughly with such.
For as the water of a spacious and deep Lake, being still and quiet by nature,
by ruffling winds is moved and disquieted: so a people tractable by nature, by
the rough behavior of the Minister may be much turmoyled and altered from his
nature. The Barber that is to shave the hair of the beard or face, first
washes those parts, and then uses his razor; for if he should not do so, the
razor would cut and raize the skin. The unskillful minister, whose office it is
to shave off sin as it were with a razor, by not washing them and gently using
the^, but very fiercely handling them, they hurt them, and help them not.
Therefore we must have two strings to our bow, that if one will not serve,
another may; and fish for every one with the bait that is fittest for the^,
whether it be of law, or Gospel; of judgment, or mercy. Exodus 3.2, 7. and
13.21 and 19.16. and 24.16, 17. and 33.9 Ezech. 10.14.
So did God in fishing for the Jews: sometimes speaking to them by a burning
bush of fire: and sometimes again by a cloud of water, and again by a pillar
of fire: that is to say, he was a light to the godly to comfort them. The
Cherubims that were depicted in the temple, over the place where the people did
pray, were portraied with a double face, one of a man, another of a lion: to
signify the carriage of a minister in his place, either in humanity, or in a
lion like severity according to his auditors qualities. Aworthy minister
described. Matthew. 5.14.
The eyes that are the lantern of the body, are only seated in the head: to
show that the minister who is the head of his people, and is called by Christ,
the light of the world, ought to have his eyes about him, to see what every one
needs. He is in sagacitie and foresight to imitate Joseph who in plentiful
times, did prouidently provide against years of future scarsitie. Genesis 41.46,
47, 48.49. Leuit. 22.22.
It was provided by God by special decree, that no blind creature as an
oblation should be presented unto him: the Minister that gives not to every
one his due, is blind, and unworthy of his place. Cherubims that were
pictured, were full of eyes; and such were the supporters of Salomons temple:
1. Kin. 6.23
the ministers that are the bases and proppes of the spiritual building, must
have eyes of knowledge to guide all their actions. Those that are made watchmen
in the borders and skirts of the land, are such as dwell there. For to them are
best known the neighbor countries round about and they have in greatest hate
the adjoining enemy, from whom they have so often received the great scathe.
Eze. 33.2.6 7, 8, 9.10. etc.
The Minister is called the watchman of the Lord of hosts, and such a one
should fully be acquainted with the state and condition of the people that are
round about them; and he should be an enemy to Gods enemies, and should set
forth the truth with modesty and verity. A Minister therefore must sometimes
be grave, that he may not be contemned: and sometimes affable, that he may
not seem proud. He must as Salomons wise man, know his time and place, and
minister mercy and justice accordingly. Matthew. 9.18, 25. Luke 7.11, 12.14.
Ioh. 11.37.44, 45. Romans 14.1. and 15. Matthew. 18.15. etc. Tit. 1.9. and 2.2.
etc. 1. Tim. 1.20 and 5.1.2. 1. Cor. 5.5. Jude. 22.23 2. Cor. 6.14.15.
As the Rulers daughter was raised up to life in her fathers house: the
widows son of the city Naim, out of his mothers doors. Lazarus before a
general assembly of all sorts: so some are to be dealt withal privately,
othersome openly: othersome are to be handled as weaklings; and others as
wilful ones: we are to bear with some men, and other some are to be given up
to Satan: some are to be plucked out of the fire, and other some are to be
cast into the fire: some are to be kept in fear, and some are to be held up
by love: some are to be used as our own bowels, and some as rotten members are
to be divided and sundred from the body. But because there is no communion
between light and darkness, truth and falsehood, the table of the Lord, First
repentance, then mercy does follow. Hebr. 6.1.
and the table of devils: lay first the ground of repentance from dead works,
and heave up sinners by their shoulders and set them upon their feet, and then
thou shall have time and place according to his apprehension of the former, to
make profit of all Gods mercies. A vineyard before it can be planted, must
have all stones, stubs, obstacles first to be removed. No man can can build a
new house in the room of the old; unless he first does take down the old:
wherefore when Jeremy was authorized by God a preacher to the nations, Ierem.
1.10
the parts of his commission were to pluck up, and root out, and to destroy,
and throw down, Matthew. 3.2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 10, etc. 2. Tim. 4.2, 5.
to build, and to plant. The Evangelist, from God has received such a roll,
it being enjoined him, to prepare the way of the Lord. Which is performed in
these two points: First, Reprehension. Secondly, Instruction.

The Baptist the midle-man between the law and the Gospel: Luke 7.26, 27.
a Prophet, and more than a Prophet, had this double face of Ianus. For he
prepared the houses of their hearts for the entertaynment of Christ their
King, by casting down mountains, Isaiah. 40.4
and receiving up valleys, even the high and humble thoughts of men: and the
first part of his Sermon, wholly consisted in the reprehension of sin. Matthew.
3.7, 8, 9.
O generation of vipers, and the detection of their dissimulation; Say not that
ye have Abraham to your father. There is no man (says Chrst) that peeceth an
old garment with new cloth, Matthew. 10. Luke 5, 36, 37.
for the rottenness of the threades unable to bear the entry of the needle,
it wideneth the former rent. Neither did new wines agree with the old Leather
caskes of those times: the new tidings of the grace of the new Testament,
appertained to new men that had put of their old conversation. The singster
of Israel has taught us our Lesson, and given us the Notes we must always
treble upon, our song must always be of mercy and judgment that we sing
unto the Lord, Psalm. 101.1.
such as would draw men from vice to virtue, and use not the ordinary means
thereunto. Plutarch.
Plutarch compares them to such, who snuff a candle, but minister not oil to
preserve the candle. To preach mercy, and not judgment: grace, and not
repentance. It is as if so be a Physician should promise health to his
patient, when he goes not about to purge his hurtful humors. The fire of the
spirit not only gives light, but also burns: that is to say, it comfort
and consumes: the fire of our religion burns not, but only gives light if
we preach but the Gospel: and it burns only and gives not light if we
preach but the law. Wherefore in due time and place preach both: preach the law
to keep down presumption: and preach the Gospel to prevent desperation. This
was the Baptists course; He first showed them an axe that should cut them down
for sin. Luc. 3.9. John 1.36. Act. 3.14, 15, 17, 19, 20.
Now is the axe laid to the root of the tree. Then he pointed with his finger
to the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world. First Peter
wounded the hearts of the Jews, by laying down their horrible cruelty
against Christ: which done, he gave the^ medicine to heal their wounds,
persuading them to faith in Christ Jesus, for the remission of their sins.
Paul when he was a Saul, Act. 9.4.3.5, 6, 10, 11.
was first felled to the ground by a light from heaven; but immediately
therewithal he was erected and comforted by a voice from heaven, which gave
him certificate what he should do. These baytes being well confected and
applied, and put to the hook as they ought, we shall make a very gainful
fishing. For if they bite not at these, there is no stomach in them, or any
hope to be had of them, and so we relinquish them.

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER. Of the fishes that the spiritual Angler, or Fisherman
only fisheth for.
ALl the labor and times of spiritual fishermen is to be bestowed upon the
souls committed to their charge, for the drawing them up from the sincke of
their sin, and from the bottomless pit of their destruction, to the top
and height of their eternal heavenly happiness. For they have not their
places to purchase Manors, but men; they are not to fish for silver, but
souls. If any get a soul to God, Iam. 5.19.20. Dan. 12.3.
he has made a fair purchase, and he has got a goodly inheritance.
Wherefore when Christ called fishers out of their ship unto the
Apostleshippe, he told them not that he would make them fishers of money, but
of men, Matthew. 4.19.
saying unto them: Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men. This laying
out of the net and hook, for the preferments of the world (all being fish
that comes to their net, so that Naboth cannot keep his vineyard in quiet,
1. Kings. 21.4, 7, 8, 9, etc.
because it lays so to the backe-side of Achabs Orcharde) is naught in all
that are spiritual fishermen, and quite opposite unto their profession. Isay.
8.20.
Ad legem and testimonia: to the study of the Law and the Prophets are they
only called, for the instruction of men, which they divert to their own law
and profits, to the impouerishing of men. Are not too many Ministers now
adays, more troubled in themselves for a beast that they have lost, then for a
soul that they have lost? If they were not, they would not seek after the one
so much, Job. 21.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.22.
and the other so little. They are better taught of Job, if they would follow
him, whose outward passions put him not to passions for the loss of his
sheep, camels, cattle, did not move him, but at the news of the death of
his dear children, he rent his garments (as willing to have rent his heart)
for so maine a loss. O that this extremity were in us, for the downfall of
our spiritual children stricken dead, not by a wind of the wilderness, but by
their wilful wickedness. O that he that in name is a Dispensator, were not in
nature a Dissipator, and that the Speculator, were not become a Spiculator:
that the Prelate, were not a Pilate; the Pastor, an Imposter; the Doctor, a
Seducer. Oh that men were the main chance of these men, the mark and white
that they did aim at, and the only fish that they did angle for. Then we
should not have so many fat Priests, and lean people as we have: then
should the people be better fed, and less fleeced then they are: then would
not Sermons be so dainty as they are, which come from some strawberre-wise,
that is, once a year: then should not ignorance set up such a Monarchy, and
spread so universally. For ask the greater part of people in country towns,
whether they do believe in the holy Ghost: and they will answer you as the
Ephesians did Paul, we have not so much as heard whether there be an holy
Ghost. How many be there that set their faces against Religion, seeking the
spoil of it, by all hostile persecution, to whom if Christ should say as he
said to Paul before his conversion, Acts. 9.4, 5
Why persecutest thou me? their reply would be, Who art thou Lord? Many of
them may know that there is a God, Daniel 4.31 32.34. and Dan. 6.23, 24, 25.26,
27. Acts 7.3, 4, 5, 8, 9 etc. Jonah 2.3, 4, etc.
but the right God, the God of Sidrach, Misaach, and Abednago, which
Nabuchodnezzar professed when his understanding was restored him; or the good
Daniel, whom Darius did magnify and adore after that God had delivered Daniel
out of the Lions den, or the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to whom the
promises were made, or the Lord God of heaven which has made the sea, and the
dry land, whom Jonas in his distress openly witnessed, they know not. This is
to them a matter of deep understanding, such knowledge is too excellent for
them, they cannot attain to it, so rude are they and ignorant, Psalm. 73.16 22.
and as a beast before thee. And all this may be given to these false fishers
that have changed their copy fishing, rather for the commodities they may
reap from men, than any way for the commodity of the me^ themselves. And so
in this contrary sense, they fulfill the sentence of their calling, and are
fishers of men, by prying into all advantages they can fish for against men,
and by grinding the faces of men between the milstones of their horrible
oppression. But by this wringing the Scripture and causing it to bleed, Ezekiel
33.^, 8.
they shall bleed one day for it, and the blood of so many souls that run
into hell, shall be required at their hands. Paul otherwise fished for men
then so, when he said: Non quaere vestra, sed vos. I seek you, and not yours.
The other sort I know from what rock they are hewne, they come from the sons
of Eli, sons of Belial, who have this style after them, like the tail of a
blazing star: They were wicked men, 1. Sam. 2.12.
and knew not the Lord. And what was their use? truly to get all they could
into the net, fishing for flesh, bayting only for their belly, and troubling
the stream of every porridge pot, with their unconscionable flesh-hookes of
such rank beards, as did but touch and take. But let them fear their stripes,
that follow their steps. They are also of the generation of such as did much
hurt, Ezech. 34.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. Mal. 1.6, 7, 8, 10, 12, etc.
in the times of the old Prophets; against whom the Prophets pointed their
pens very sharply, who did eat the fat and cloth themselves with the wool,
and killed of the best, and were such wretched ones, as not one of them would
shut the Church door for Gods sake, or put fire under the Lords Altar,
unless first they had their fee for it. The mopish monkish short are all such,
who will wincke at any wickedness, so it touches no way their credit
commodity. But if it concerns their Freehold and questious affairs, the
whole crowde of them come together, Acts 19.24 25, 26, 28, 29. etc.
as Demetrius and all that appertained to the forge came against Paul, when in
the pulpit at Ephesus, he declaymed against that Image, for which that company
did make shrines. All humane flesh is fish, that is for our spiritual angling
or fishing: not one is more to be neglected, then another. For Christ without
restitution of persons, sealed a general grant to his Apostles to fish in all
streams, Matthew. 28:19.20.
and to cast their nets over all Nations, by the Preaching of the Gospel: He
willed them not to fish for the Jews only, or to lay a hook for a Pharisee,
Priest, or the vulgar sort peculiarly, but for all men generally, rich or
poor; wise or unwise: despitable or honorable; saying, Matthew. 4.19.
I will make you fishers of men. All mankind absolutely are under the charge of
the Evangelical Fishermen, to be drawn out of the tempestuous sea of this
world to the kingdom of grace. It is a manifest mark of a false fisherman; of
a barterer and purloyner of the word of God, Matthew. 17.27.
to run up and down ferreting the richer sort, and in a sordide obsequie, to
attend such only as may bring them to dignity. The Pharisees were such, and
such were the Pseudo-apostles of all times, whose resort was only to the the
rich, hanging at every Noblemans sleeue. Who so is a wise merchant will not
vnbundle his several wares to such, as he observes to be more curious in
viewing them, than willing to buy them. So the Preacher should more respect
such as will be benefited by his preaching, and are ready to buy such
commodities of him, as he shall be ready to expose unto them. It is good
angling for fishes, when they list to bite. For what comfort can an Angler
have, barely to behold fishes floating up and down, and compassing the hook
and putting their noses to it, and nibling upon the baits, and not fancying to
swallow it? I have ever had more comfort in my spiritual angling of the poorer
sort, who have swallowed down the blessed bayte of Gods word readily and
greedily, Math. 11.5
when as Knights and Gentlemen have but gaped upon it, and so passed away from
it as they came. When Jonas cast his preaching net over Niniuch, the common
assembly were his at the first, wherefore it is said; The word came unto the
King of Nineveh, Jonas. 3.6.
That is to say, it came from one to another until at last it came to the
King. It is the commendation Christ gives the poor to John's Ambassadors,
that they were the forwardest to receive the Gospel. The poor receive the
Gospel. Luc. 7.22.
That such are the first fruits of the Church of God, and the fittest to set
forward his work. The Apostle witnesses, when he says. God has chosen the
foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and the weak to confound the
mighty, etc. The nativity of Christ by Gods heavenly Herald, was first
published to the poor shepherds. The sick, 1. cor. 1.27. Luke 2.8, 9 10, 11,
12. 1. Sam. 30.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
faint, hunge-starued Amalechite, servant to an Egyptian, was the messenger
that brought good tidings unto David: so Christ the second David, has
instituted and ordained poor Apostles to bring to the world the glad tidings
of salvation: and most commonly such now are the poorer sort, and the poorer
sort most follows the^. As Gedeon, Iud 7.2.22, 23, etc.
but with a weak and mean retinue, surprised the whole united force of Median:
so Christ with a few despised fishermen, has won a great part in all parts
of the world. This has ever been the wont of this world, and the course almost
of all kings courts, and palaces of princes. They should be in the forward
in obedience to the word, according to that which is required of them. Be wise,
O ye kings, Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12.
be learned ye that are judges of the earth: serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice unto him with reverence. Kiss the son least he be angry, and so ye
perish from the right way. But as if Religion were no part of their profession;
they are in the rereward, and in hunting, hauking, feasting, building, bestow
their whole lives. And such have their A thists, Parasites, and Sycophants, to
enchaunt their souls with a supine security, and to stir them up into all
presumption: soothing them up in their evils already done, and giving them
liberty to do more. For which cause they will capitulate and indent with
preachers, and prescribe them a course of speaking, and inhibite the printing
of such books, and provide that such bills come not to the Kings hands, which
they have not first examined and allowed. Wherefore Princes are much to be
pitied and prayed for, that in such slipperie paths they may keep their
feet, and among so many Sirens wind themselves out of the bias of the world,
and come to the hook and net of Gods word. But of these men-fishes that we are
to bayt for, are many sundry sorts. I list not to divide them into their
several kinds by way of comparison, but I will divide the^ as they were of
old in the Jewish policy into these two natures. Luit. 11.9, 10, 11, 12.
1. Clean. 2. Unclean. Understanding hereby; First, the Regenerate. Secondly,
and the natural man. Absolutely, by the name of a Fish, the Egyptian
clergy understood whatsoever was profane and abominable; wherefore they did
so, we will show in his place. In this signification we may fitly put mankind
in general, grounding our comparison upon this part of Psalmodie. They are all
become abominable in their doings: there is not one that does good, Psalm.
14.13 and 53.1.3
no not one.

But yet there is that difference among men, as we have made before of fishes;
we distinguish of both kinds by these two marks of knowledge. 1. Their
sins, and scales. 2. Their defect of them. The clean have them both: the
unclean want them both. Their finnes (as it appears) serve as wings unto them
to raise them up on high, to the height of the water: which serve to shadow out
a sanctified man, whose conversation is in heaven: who secketh those things
that are above, and who lifts up his mind by heavenly contemplation, above
all earthly things. The scales betoken as Gregory Nazianzen insinuates, the
doing off the old man, and the putting on the new: or as the Latins would
have it, the doing away their stiffenesse and hardness of mind, and their
tractabilitie and conformity unto God. which are the two terms of a true
convert, called in the Schools; 1. Terminus a quo. 2. Terminus ad quem. An
auersion from sin, a conversion to God: the mortification of the old Adam,
and the vinification of the new man. Now such as have neither sin nor
scale; neither floate high, or abide in deepes: but keep wholely in Foordes,
and in shallowe waters, wrigling and wallowing always in the mudde as the
Eele, Lamprey, Turbot. Such are the worldly minded men that sink down into
the mire and pudle of sin, and are so overwhelmed and burdened with it, as
neither they can forsake their filthy affections: or raise themselves higher by
better cogitations. Such were the Philosophers of the Gentiles, Romans 1.22.
Ephesians, 4.17 18. Acts. 17.18
who insisting in the gross rudiments of nature, would be led only by the
line of her suggestions, giving the cause of every action to natural
operation: unable to consider of the author of nature, who rules and governs
it to the accomplishment of his pleasure. But we be to nature not accomplished
with grace: for it is a perrilous pit of puddle, to keep us down for ever.
When nature was solitary in Peter, as it was when he moved his Master not to
go to Jerusalem; Peter was Satan. Matthew: 16.16, 17, 21.22.23.
But when grace guided him, as it did when he made that fundamental
confession, That Jesus was the Son of the living God, he was not Satan, but
Cephas, and Simon, and a blessed man. Also those Lampreyes are those livers,
that strain the Law like skin of parchment upon the tortures of their wild
wits, for the enlargement of their lucre. They are slippery Eles indeed, of
whom there is no hold to be had, varying the sense and judgment of Law, as
often as they list: and being so slimily and sordidly given, as they may not be
handled. Of this rank and retinue likewise, are many of our Clergie-Masters,
who greedily swallow up every idle ceremony, urging the outward letter
thereof, neglecting the spiritual meaning thereof, the soul and life of it.
Let Orators, and Poets make up the mess, the quintessence of whose wits, are
nothing else but waves of wast words, a stream of sillabical slight invention,
a flood of frivolous fantastical fictions, and merely a mud and mire of
absurdities: the reformation of evil manners, and such cogitations as are of
heavenly nature, agreeing not with their nature. Now, though the sea (which is
the worlds looking-glass, and presents the image of men's manners unto us)
affords no fish worthy of Gods taste, (howsoever it pleases him to accept of
such as will come to the hook, or to the drawe-nette of his word) and we
approve the Apohorisme of Plato in Phoedone, Plato.
who says that the sea can engender nothing that is meet for Jupiter: yet the
premised manners of men, shadowed by the second sort of fishes that are
unclean, are that abominable profanation, which the Egyptians understood by
a fish, against which, ancient holiness did so oppose it self. For such have
no sc ales, which should be unto them as it were a habergeon to bear off the
fiery darts of the devil, unless they be the scales of ignorance (as the
scales of ignorance fell from Paul's eyes, Acts. 9.18.
when Ananias did convert him) neither have they finnes to raise themselves
beyond their worldly thoughts.

THE EIGHT CHAPTER. The Sympathy of natures, of the fishes of both natures.
I May say of the Earthfish, and Water-fish; of men-fish, and seafish, of the
nature of them both: That poene illa est, and poene illa non est: It is almost
like, and almost not alike, and that it is difficult to distinguish them.
Wherein they agree and join together in one, it shall be showed in this
Chapter: some differences that we do observe to be in them, we put to the
next. First, they are natured a like for their cruelty. Of cruelty.
Bears bear good will to their own kind, and live, and love together. Lions
rise not up in fight against Lions: nor serpents against Serpents, but fishes
feed one upon another, and live by the spoil of their own nature. Wherefore
some of them are called Lupifluuiales, Plinius.
and such are the Pike, Riuerwolues, as The Pike, and Perch. The Ecle.
and Perch especially; and the Ele may go with them, that live in the fresh
waters; for I meddle not with seafish, as meaning only to deliver such use,
as I have made of my angling recreation. The great Ocean doubtless has
infinite of that kind, thus cruel to their kind. In which respect cheefely the
Egyptian Priests could not abide the^, but as unclean and profane, inhibited
the service of fish to their table, because they did pray one upon another.
These water-wooules are the lively Idea of the woolues of this world, whose
doings the Prophet decyphereth in this wise: And they eat also the flesh of my
people, Mich. 3.3.
and fley of their skins, and they break their bones, and choppe them in
pieces as for the pot, as flesh within the chaldron. In initio non fuit sic.
In the beginning it was not so. For man was made for a help to man, and as a
god to man, as Moses was to Aaron. Exodus 4.16
Homo homini Deus, was then the sentence in every man's mouth. But sin subduing
nature, or rather grace; the case is altered, and this contrary proverb comes
in place; Homo homini Lupus: Man is a devouring wolf unto man; clothing
himself with cruelty, as it were a garment, and wearing it, as a chain about
his neck. The first reasonable creature that was given unto Adam, was the
woman, which was ordained for a helper: but the first of her brood which was
Cain, Genesis 4.8.
a merciless murderer; and with such seed, has the soil of the world been
furrowed ever since. The brother has been the brothers bain; the child has
risen up against the father, and the father against the child; kin against kin,
kind against kind. And this is now as kind unto them, as the skin wherewith
they are covered, their habit thereof turning unto another nature. We are not
content to wish our enemy dead, but it is a death to us that he lives. We
say not only within our selves When will he die, and his name perish? But we
will be (if we may have our choice) the very speculators, or spectators our
selves. I marvel not therefore one whit, that David made exception against
his own kind, and did put up this petition: Let us fall now into the hand of
the Lord: and let me not fall into the hand of man. For he felt what he spoke,
and spoke as he had felt. For he knew them both, as well as he knew one hand
from another: the mercy of the one, and the mischief of the other. For
comparing them together he does thus distinguish them, by the kindness and
cruelty of both natures. Wherefore, in the forenamed place, this as reason is
given of his petition, For his mercies are great. If you ask him how great, he
answers, that it is illimited in these words, the staff and burden of his
Ode: Psa. 136.
Thy mercy endures for ever. But he casts his own kind into contrary
colors, thus portraying it out unto us, that we might see our selves and be
ashamed. Their throat is an open Sepulcher: Psa. 140.3. Psa. 5.9. Psa. 10.7.
Romans 3.13. etc.
they have used their tongues to deceit: the poison of Aspes is under their
lips. Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness: their feet are swift
to shed blood. Destruction and calamity are in their ways, and the way of
peace they have not known. He contrary to all craftes-men of such things,
painteth out man unto us: so that Appelles compared with him, may put up his
pensill. For he and his Apprentises can take out but the out-warde proprotion
of the man; the face, breast, belly, thighs, legs, feet, and such like,
the heart and inward parts, they leave vnshadowed. But the hand of this cunning
worke-man vnbowelleth him, fifteth him thoroughly, discovers his hidden mind,
and the whole man unto us. And truly the Poet consulted with this copy
without question, when he gave this counterfeit, and did set him up in a table
to our view with a pale and wanne face without blood: with a lean and lanke
body without moisture: with bleared eyes: black teeth; with a heart made of
gall; with a tongue tipped with poison: never merry but when others mourn: never
sleeping because they are always imagining mischief. The truth hereof has
been practiced upon the master, by the servant of his own tabernacle: upon
the Sovereign, by the subject of his own Court: upon the father, by the son
of his own loins: upon the brother, by the brother that has laid in the same
bed of his mothers womb with him: upon the husband, by the wife, sleeping
securely (and as he nothing doubted) safely in her bosom.

If we think better of man than thus, we do beguile our selves, and so the
Gentile Christian Seneca, tells thee saying, Fallens si confidas ijs tibi
occurrentibus: Seneca.
facies habent hominum sed mentes feranum. Thou dotest, if hand over head thou
beleeuest all thou meetest with. For they have men's faces, but beasts
affections. Thus, in regard of their devouring condition, they may well be
copulated, and coedimated with fishes. But herein in this comparison they do
exceed them. That fishes eat but for hunger, and for a time are satisfied: but
men's minds are always set upon the pray, and they are never satified.
Caligula, surnamed for his bloody mind, Dirt soaked in blood, Examples of man's
cruelty. Caligula.
could not glutte his blood-thirstie appetite, and staunche his bloody issue,
without the destruction of the whole Roman nation: wherefore he wished all
their necks were but one, that he might vnioynt them at once, and one stroke
might make havoc of them altogether. It is Medea, her wish in the Tradegie,
Medea.
that with her dissolution, there mightensue an universal confusion. This is
her speech, Vnica foelicitas est videre emnia in ruinam tendere cum ego
discedam. It is the only felicity for me to see at my departure, all things
come to wrack. Such a companion was one of the Poets, who comes in with such
a spoke: (...), that is to say, when I am once dead, what care I, though the
world be on a light fire. Domitius Nero.
Domitius Nero, when he had set fire to the city of Rome, in twelve several
places, to shadow out the combustion of Troy, to the Romans; sung in the mean
time, when the city was in burning, Verses out of Homer, his heart being
hooped with all barbaritie, and being filled up to the eyes with all Scythian
cruelty. What shall I say of the Vice-consull Messola, that ruled in Asia,
Seneca.
who beheading three hundred people on one day; after this butcherie thus done,
he gave a plaudite unto it, breaking out into these words: O nobile factum,
Lucius Sylla.
O renowned act? Or of Lucius Silla, who by one condemnatorie sentence, did
cast away four thousand and seauen-hundred souls; and caused a Register to
be made of it, In perpetua^ rei memoriam: For the everlasting remembrance
thereof? Or of those that killed Christians by thousands, as Maximianus, who
burnt in one Temple twenty thousand met together to solemnize the Nativity of
Christ? Maximianus.
The Spaniards.
The Spaniards are without all example; no, no: Domitian, Commodus, Bassian,
Dyonisian, coming near them, and this their villainy among the West Indians
without mercy showed, apparently proves, who in one Island called Hispaniola,
of two hundred thousand people, scarce left one hundred and a half alive. Thus
they threshed with iron flayles those people, as the men of Damascus did
Gilead, Amos. 1.3.13.
and mangled in pieces women with child, as the old Amonites: and mingled
blood with their sacrifice of the Mass: as Pilate mingled the blood of the
slain, Luke 13.1.
together with the sacrifices: taking up this Aphorism and proverb of the
Prophet; That that dies, Zach. 11.9.
let it dye. How far were these men, from the practice of the precept of the
Law, which in seeking of birds neasts, Deuteronomy. 22.6.
inhibiteth the taking the damine with the young?

2. Let the second sympathy, between the Soyl-fish and the Seafish, be their
greedy covetousness. Wherein the one Be partaketh with the other. As if the
seafish had fathered them, and they were of their spawning, no sooner a vild
piece of worm is let down the water, but if they be in place, it is a wonder
to see what a sort do seek after it. There is no regard of degrees among
them: But Capiat qui capere potest, is the law of that Court. Yea, the frye,
and petty ones do so fill the place, as the greater cannot come in place. And
is not this the fashion of the world up and down? Is not every mean office
catched up (if not before) yet as soon as it can fall? Run not every one to
every commodity, as beggars to a doale? Are not many of best mark and
quality altogether unprovided for; the meaner sort having been before them,
and taken up their rooms? Every one strives to be first at the bait, though
their baine be under it: as it commonly falls out. For Titles, Offices,
wordly riches, are nothing else but angle-lynes, snares, nets, to catch us
unawares: Which so entangled Judas, as he could never get out of them, before
they had trussed him.

The hook or snare takes not the fish, unless the bait take him first. But
whilst he runs so hastily to the bait, and swalloweth it home: the net or
hook speedeth him. The bait of the devils hook is covetousness, which
kills and not comfort us. The fisherman baiteth not his hook that the
fish might only take it; but be taken of it. The devil could not make such a
fishing as he does, had we not such a delight to his baytes, little
considering what harm there is in them. But the poor fish feels it too
late, when he cannot fly from it: Nam dum capit capitur. For he is taken in
taking it. The bait of an hook is like the egg of an Aspe, which is very
white and goodly to behold, to the out-ward sight, but if we break it, we
shall find nothing but poison in it; and the poison that breaks out of it,
kills us. The red worm, caseworme, magget fly, small roche, or such like,
wherewith we cover our hook to beguile the fish, are glorious in out-ward
appearance to the fish, but they are the death and destruction of the fish. So
the riches, prioritie, authority of the world, are but pleasant bayts, laid
out for our destruction. The fishermans bayte is a deadly deceit: 2. Sam.
2.26. Luke. 17.27.
so are all the pleasures of the world. We may say of them, as Ioab said to
Abner: Know thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end? As all
the waters of the rivers run into the saltsea: so all worldly delights, in
the saltish sea of sorrows finish their course. The pleasures of the ungodly
world in Noah his time, in cheering, carowsing, and singing a Requiem to
themselves, of a sudden swoomme away with the flood. Genesis 7.4. etc.
The Iunckets and joys of the Statesmen of Palestina, came tumbling down
together, with the fall of the house upon their heads. Belshazzar, Dan 5.4.
in the midst of his cups, and Queanes, had such a blow given him by the
hand of a Scripture, as quailed his courage, and quenched all his comforts. The
peaceable days of the wicked, their immunitie from the rod, their dancing
to the instruments of music, have their present period, and in a moment they
go down to hell. Job. 21.12, 13, 18. Eccle. 11.7, 21. etc. Luke. 16.19, 23.
Let the lustie-guts, that is in the prime of his age, and pride of his rage,
be sure of a judgment.

The garmandizing Epicure, hollowed not so much whilst he was in the earth,
but he howled as much when he was in hell. It was but dumpish delight, that
Saul had in his mad melancholy in the sweet notes of David, 1. Sam, 16.16, 23.
and 18.10. etc.
sung upon the harp. Wherefore mistrust worldly benefits as baits, 2. Sam. 20
9.10.
and feed not so upon them in hu^gry wise. Their pleasings, are leasings: and
their frie^dships fallacies, as Ioabs kindness was to Amasa, 1. Kin. 21.10.13.
and 22.6, 8, 12, 28, etc.
killing him by kissing him. They are false witnesses against thy soul: such
as Iezabel picked out to kill innocent Naboth. They are but Parasites to
enchaunt the spirit, as Acabs Fanguests that egged him to battle, Revel. 17.4.
promising him victory, when it fell out quite contrary. They are but the
intoxication of the great whore, that gives us her poison out of a standing
cup of gold. Thou may serte the world for such wages long enough, Genesis 29 18,
27. and 31.7 etc.
from seven years to seven years, as Jacob did Laban, and loose both thy
wages and labor in the end, as he did. If thou seruest God for goods, John
12.6. Acts. 1.16.18.
and for greedines of worldly gain, as Judas did his Master: thou may be a
looser and gainer as he was, who lost his Apostleship, and gained a halter.
Wherefore, for our better security, use we riches a rayme^t, one that is fit,
being better for us, than one that is too long. But it so comes to pass,
that covetousness grows with riches, as the Iuie with the Oak. Exodus 10.2
Number. 11.4.
And as the Israelites murmured as much when they had store of Mannah, as they
did when they had none: so have we less or more, it is all one, we are never
contented. Our hutches may be filled, but not our hearts. But as fishes do
differ in biting, so do men. The Roche, Dace, Breame, Rowde do but pingle, to
the Pearche, and Pike; who have teethe like knives, and very maine mouths. If
I like the Pope and his Prelates, to such; I do them no wrong: for their doing
will make good my comparison. So he may be called, Caput Ecclesiae the head
of the Church. The word Caput, the head, or powle, being deduced from the
Verb Capio, which is to catch; he having been ever such an absolute
catch-powle. Whereunto an ancient Writer alluding, he pricketh these Verses
upon his holiness sleeue: the whole course of the Conjugation, from Capio,
capis, ad capiendum, without declination from any point thereof, being so
inseparably conjoined unto him. Si caput a capio, Brunellus.
vel dixeris a capiendo:
Tunc est Roma caput, singula namque caput.
Si declinando capio, capis, ad capiendum:
Retia laxauit retia larga nimis.


3. Herein also the similidude holds beweene men and fishes, that both kinds
by nature are dissolute and lawless. The fishes without any order or rank,
run every way as they list, without check or controulement; so does the
natural man of himself, thinking every thing to be lawful, which is
lustful unto him. The smaller are a pray to the greater fish: so is the poor
to the Potentate; the meaner to the mightier. If there were not laws to curb
our crooked and cruel natures, each man's sword would be in his fellows bosom,
and right should yield to might; and titles would be tried at the pikes
points: a malignant masterie, should manage matters among men, as it does among
fishes in their element. How wily and wild we are by nature, and how we walk
out of course of our selves, in the way of the worldly, as fishes in the deeps
we may soon consider, if we would please to descend into our selves, and by
others manners, to measure our own. The unruly rule of the old Israelites, is
with a solemn induction thus brought in, by Moses; Remember, and forget not,
Deuteronomy. 9.8, 9, 22.
how thou prouokest the Lord thy God to anger in the wilderness: since the day
that thou did depart out of the land of Egypt: also in Horeb, Taberah,
Massah, and in Ribroth-hattaauah. They were so orderly unorderly, as
notwithstanding they had seen his miracles, which he did in Egypt: Number. 14.22.
yet they tempted him ten times, and obeyed not his voice. Aarons rod that
budded, was cofered in the Arc, Number. 17.8, 9, 10. etc, Of the abuse of power,
strength, prioritie. etc.
as a lively remembrance of their wonted rebellions. Finally, we are rather
Planets of uncertain motion, than fixed stars in their proper stations: or to
keep my self within the hedge of my comparison; we course as fishes without
course, in the whole course of our lives. Besides, as fishes we take the
privilege to the uttermost of our power, prioritie, and authority, over
others; straining it as a skin of parchment on the hooks, and racking every
joint thereof upon the rack of our excessive affections. So that did
magistrates the vocal Laws of the land, by rule of reason, strangle many men's
passions, the lesser would be spoiled by the greater sort, without any
compassion. For what keeps these Pronounes in use, Meum, and Tuum, and makes
every one owner of his own, but the power of good Laws? Why are we rather
Christians, than Albinians, Nigrians, Cassians: That is, religious, rather than
rebellious: but only for such sacred sanctions sake as are set before us? What
divides and distinguishes persons according to degrees, that they skull not,
and skudde not confusedly together, as fishes without difference: but only
such good laws as are provided in such cases? The Poets feign, that Thenus,
the mother of all honesty and virtue, had three daughters, 1. (...), 2. (...),
3. (...). 1. Good Laws. 2. Justice, the consequent of good Laws. 3. Peace an
indiuided follower of them both. I find them all hand-fast together, in this
piece of Psalmodie: Give thy judgments, Psalm. 7.2.1.2.3.
O Lord, unto the King; and thy righteousness unto the Kings son: then the
mountains shall bring forth peace, and the little hills righteousness unto
the people. These alter our nature and property very much, and by these some
sort are ouer-awed sufficiently (though the behavior of some cannot be
bounded, but it will flow: as Iordaine over the banckes) counting as
Theodosius, Theodos.
that only lawful, which the Law does permit. There is also another fashion
which would be left, which was taken from fishes, and that is our pleasure
which we take in the world, as fishes in the water. But therein fishes are
not to be blamed, for they hold their right course: For the deepes are their
dwelling places, and they live no longer then they are in them. But Christians
by Christ are chosen out of the world, and their conversation with the
Apostle, is in heaven, and they are crucified to the world, that they might be
glorified with Christ. What felicity can be in those things, which are given
us for a Judgment? If there were not a judgment in them, they would not be
called Thorns, Mark. 4.7. 1. Tim. 6.9. Phil. 3.8.
as they are by our Savior. If they were not a deathfull danger to some, they
would not have been called snares, as they are by the Apostle. If they were
not of the basest reckning that might be, Paul would have given a better name
than doong unto them. But he gave that name which was worst of al, to that
thing which he himself esteemed worst of all. If the world were our proper
Element, as the waters are to the fish, we had reason for our selves to be
worldly minded: But seeing Christ has said unto us; Ye are not of the world.
For the love of Christ, we must forsake the world; Math. 9.9.
as Matthew forsook his custom, when he was called to a better condition: as
the Samaritan woman forsook her watter-pot, having drawn waters from the
wells of salvation, Ioh: 4.28.29. Acts. 9.20, 22. Matthew. 4.19, 20, 21, 22.
by conference with Christ: as Saul forsook all, when he was made a Paul, and
betook himself to Christ: as the Apostles wound up their worldly nets, when
the draw-net of the Gospel by the gracious hand of Christ his dispensation, was
put into their hands.

It is every way commodious to the life of the fish, to be wholly in the
water: But it is every way hurtful to the soul of man, to be given up wholly
to the world. For to get worldly gain, the body would feign live: but the
desire of heavenly glory, makes it glad to die. Worldly cares makes a man
very vnrestie with himself: the comforts of the Spirit, are a supersedeas to
them all, Acts 2.2.
and give them his absolute Quietus est: so that as the holy Ghost filled the
house: so grace, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost fulfilleth his heart. As he
that may walk in the warm Sun, ^^uer desires the light of the Moon; so he
that walks in the way to heaven, will never force of his worldly ways more.
The fish lives only by the water, but man lives not by the world only, but
by every word of God. Matthew. 4.4
As that picture is more cunning and curious, which the master painter
himself draws and casts into colors, than that which is but done by his
Apprentises: so our life is more lively under God his protection, tha^ with all
whatsoever worldly provision. The water suffices the fishes in their
appetites: but when we have whatsoever the world can afford us, we are not
contented. For when Alexander had conquered the whole world, Alexander.
he was cast into a melancholy passion, because he had not any other world to
war withal. The world rather feeds than slacketh our appetites, as oil
does the fire. The worldling rises early, and goes to bed late, and eats
the bread of sorrow, Psalm. 127.2.
laboring to labor, and caring to take care: plowing upon the rocks, Herod.
lib. 4. Psylli: Democritus, and Heraclytu.
and rolling the stone of Sysiphus, and is never at rest. He is likned by one,
to a people in Africa, called Psylli, that are at great wars with the winds.
Democritus Abdorites, had in derision the whole estate of the world: and
Heraclitus wayled and lamented the course of it. Solomon gave a blow to the
world on both cheeks, when he doubled the word Vanity upon it: Ecclesiast. 1
2.
and when he trebled he, he showed that he knew what he spoke: and that he
would not repeal it. Iona. 2.8.
And Jonas does not nickname them at all, when he terms all the delights of
it, Tysing vanities. It is Jehovah, only which is his Name for ever, that
suffices us for ever. The Rabbis.
The Rabbis do observe, that all the letters in that his Name, are Literae
quiescentes: from whence they expressed this mystical meaning, that all
creatures have from God their rest. And the Prophet countenanceth not a little
that construction; saying: Psalm. 11.1.
In the Lord put I my trust: how say you then unto my soul, Fly to your
mountain as a bird? We say with Bernard: Bernard in Cat^c. sermon. 4.
Sane esse omnium dixerim deum: non quod illa sunt quod est ille: sed quia ex
ipse, and per ipsum, and in ipso sunt omnia. He is God of all: not that those
things are of that nature as he: but because of him, by him, and in him are
all things. So that a stone that is cast out of a sling, or bow, never rests
until it comes to his center: so God, whose center is every where, and
circumference no where, is our only rest, and without him only infinite, our
desires are never satisfied that are infinite. 5. Further, if we consider of
men and fishes in their natural stoliditie, we shall find agreeable
correspondencie between them. Whereas other creatures, as well birds in the
air, as such as walk upon the ground, give many outward shows and tokens of
wit: only the fish is a foolish creature altogether indocible. So as by the
surname of a fish, they understood a man of absolute folly among the
Egyptians.

If we give man his right, Ephe. 2.11 12. Psalm 32.9. Of the folly of man, as
he is without God. And of true wisdom. Isa^ 1.3. 1. Cor. 1.20. and 3.19.
as he is without God, he is as foolish as the fish. For the horse and Mule
without understanding, to whom David compares him; by the judgment of God in
the mouth of the Prophet, is of better understanding than he. The Ox knows
his owner, and the Ass his masters cribbe: but Israel has not known: my
people has not understood. I grant they have the wisdom of the world, which
the spirit of God calls foolishness: Exodus 1.10.
The wisdom of the world, is foolishness with God. Pharaoh said, Let us
work wisely: when he wrought most foolishly. The Apostle makes a great
inquiry after the wise, and would feign find him out; 1. Cor. 1.20
Where is the wise? where is the cribe? where is the disputer of this world?
has not God made the wisdom of this world foolishnes? Christ calls such,
Wizards, Dizzards, wise without understanding: Matthew. 11.25.
when as he says: I give thee thanks, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth,
because thou have hid these things from the wise, and men of understanding, and
have opened them unto babes, And the wisest of men (the Son of man only
excepted) calls them stark fools, Prou. 1.22.
saying: O ye foolish, how long will ye love foolishness? He is no more to
be admired that can make much matter, by invention of wit, of a slender
subject: than the shoemaker is, that can make a great shoe for a little foot.
How can they be wise, whose whole cogitations and actions are foolishness? For
there is no true wisdom, but that which is heavenly, which is the word of God,
or Christ the son of God, the only subject and argument of the word, who is
made unto us (by God his Father) Wisdom, Righteousness, 1. Cor. 1.30 Col.
2.3.
and Sanctification, and Redemption. In whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge.

But this wisdom, is of little worth with those, who in the eyes of the
world, seem of most worth; who stop their ears with wax, when this
wisdom is spoken off, and think themselves wiser than any of their teachers.
But they are but wise after a sort, Luk 16.8.
in their generation, as Christ distinguishes: wherein indeed they have eyes
as broad as the Moon, and have a privilege above their betters. But such
advantage has the Owl of a man, whose sight is better in the nightime, than
a man's. In deeds of darkness, such Owls faces are better sighted than the
children of light. So is the Catte cunninger than a man, to beguile a Mowse: in
wily craftiness, the rudest rusticke easily circumuenteth the greatest
Scholar. But he is but an Ass in the shape of a man, who has not learned
Christ: and whose bringing up has not been in Gods School. That is Moses
judgment, when he says: Keep the ordinances and Laws which I have taught
you: Deuteronomy. 4 6.
for that is your wisdom, and your understanding in the sight of the people,
which shall hear all these ordinances, and shall say: Only this people is
wise, and of understanding. When Saul started from the wisdom of the word,
Psalm. 78.57
like a broken bow, he was but a sotte for it, and Samuel doubted not to
befoole him to his face, saying in broad words: 1. Sam. 13.13.
Thou have done foolishly. Solomon, I assure you, left his wisdom behind
him, when by marriage of strange women, he worshipped strange gods, doing as
foolishly as I heard of any, as the consequent thereof, even to the common
calamity of his Country, (it being beside the scandal of example, 1. King.
11.1.2.3.4.5.14.23, 25, 26.31. etc. Ierem. 8.9.
the ocasion of the rupture, and mangling of his monarchy) too lamentably
confirmed. Jeremy wondered, how he should be a wise man, that is not a
Gods-man, saying: How do ye say we are wise? ye have rejected the word of the
Lord, and what wisdom is in you? As Ezechiel calls them, Ezech. 13.3
foolish Prophets: and denounces a woe as bitter as worme-wood, to such as
take not their text from Gods mouth, but broach their own fancies: so folly is
with them, and they have no less woe, that are wise in their own conceits
only; The Turks
and wise to the world, and not to Godward. Though it be a rascal religion
that the Turks profess; yet they have that grace, as they command that
religion, by the level of their actions: For their Professor of the Law
stands up, and in his charge especial commands, that before they begin
to sit in counsel, they consult of nothing derogatorie to religion:
insinuating religion to the foundation of all wisdom.

Heathenish men, to draw on the popular applause to those Laws which they
should propound to them: did bear the people in hand, that they were grounded
upon the rules of Divinity, and that they were warranted by their own Gods.
Numa in a general assembly at Rome, Of Aegria, and Numa: Iuuen. Sad. 3. and
metam l. 15. sab. 1. and 44. liu 1. ab v^b condit. and Plutar. in Numa. Solon.
Ly^urgus. Minos. Cha^ondas. Osyrus. Zamolxis.
alleged that he had conference with the Nymph Aegeria, in the scrowle of
those statutes that he then set out. Solon suggested direction of authority
from Minerua in like case: Lycur gus of Lacedemon, pleaded his commission from
Apollo: Minos in Creete, said he came from Jupiter. Charondas of Carthage,
took counsel of Saturn, as he suggested: Osyrus of Egypt with Mercury:
Zamolxis of Sythia with Vesta. And the people of those times upon such
supposals yielded, and became obedient unto them. wherein they plainly
distrusted their own wisdom, and thought it the best wisdom to anchor
themselves upon heavenly wisdom: wherein they were misled with the blindness
of those times, ignorance as a hand-kerchiefe covering their eyes.

But sure we are, Exodus 19.16, 18, and 20.1, 2, 3. etc. and 31.18.
that Moses had his laws delivered him from God, upon the mountain Sinai:
which have been since confirmed unto us by the oracles of Prophets, and by
Christ the Lawgiver and life of them himself. To this, bear all the Apostles
witness, and the Martyrs have set their red wax thereunto. Wherefore,
stultorum omnia sunt plaena: The world runs quick with fools; the children
thereof sauouring, and fanouring nothing less, than Gods word, the wisdom
of the spirit. For if we take a survey of men's natures: we may place them all
in one of these 3. 3. Ranks or classes.
ranckes and classes. 1. First, of such as are simple by nature, and of
shallowe capacity, who are made to dwell in their homeborne stoliditie, by
such as are about them of a perverse subtlety: These do not so much as wet
their lips at this wel-spring of wisdom, they have not a smacke or taste of
Gods words, and therefore fools they are every inche of them. 2. A second
sort there are, that are as dangerous, as the former were pitious; who are
those that make a mock of the counsels of God, 2, Pet. 3.3.4. Jude. 18.
and entertain with derision whatsoever is delivered to them of God, of the
end of the world, of the reward of the good, and of the wicked men, and of the
whole mystery of our sacred Religion. Such are fools in grain, but they are
lewd and knauish fools; and I marvel that the earth is not weary of such a
burden. 3. But the ranckest brood of all, are that butcherly brotherhood, who
not only are cold in religion, but burn in hatred and detestation toward
all such as are of that most holy profession. The flockrs of these diuilish
foolish companious are beyond all comparison, hell it self never casting up
more horrible abomination, than proceeds from their viperous mouths. And are
there not every where rablements of these? do not this folly set up a
monarchy in the Theater of this world? were the world sacked and ransacked
accordingly, what a pitious part of true wisemen should we find? Wherefore the
Egyptians spoke by book, when they followed a man with a fish for his folly.
For as we have measured wisdom by the lype of truth, and weighed it
accordingly by the shuttle of the sanctuary: man is wholly by nature out of
square, and wayeth not a grain.

THE NINTH CHAPTER. Of the Antipathie and differences of fishes of both sorts,
and of the angling of both kinds.
ALthough in some properties (as we have formerly showed) men so sort with
fishes, as if they were of the same body with them in those things, and
specially that are of baddest nature: yet in many parts, they differ between
themselves, as we may now consider. 1. First, though they be of hurtful nature
to those of their own nature, in their own element, where they catch and kill
all they can, and live upon the spoil, yet they covet not to go beyond those
bounds to prosecute their cruelty. But man will have his mind, though he
compasses sea and land, and takes the widest perambulation that may be
throghout the whole world. We may say with the Poet unto him.

Quae regio in terris vestri no^ plena laboris?
What Country round about,
your labor is without?
The sea with his bars, cannot bar him of his purpose; but as the Poet
says of him, Impiger extremos currit mercator ad Indos.
The merchant, wealth to win, does run through thick and thin.


The fish is but foolish and innocent, in respect of man; for the munitions and
machinations that he daily does devise are wonderful, and those only
excogitated, and opposed against mankind. It would pose the best man's skill
in cogitation (I will not say Oration) to comprehend the several deuillish
devises of man against man; his threats, reproaches, prisons, tortures, thefts,
piracies, violent affections, of which no man can be secure in his greatest
security. Cicero.
Cicero makes mention of a certain Philosopher, who had made a book of the
varierie of diseases (unto which we are subject) together with the proper
causes thereof: as inundations of waters, epidemies, apoplexies; the venomous
teethe of beasts, and such like; in conclusion of all, says, that more are
cut off by the cruelty of man, than by all other means else. For he is a
hammer that is never batterred: a sword, whose edge is never dull: a snare,
into which every one must fall: a prison, which no man can escape: sea, by
which we must needs travel: a general punishment, that must be undergone.

The fish in the stream, is only in danger of the greater sort: for there is
none of them assaulteth a bigger than himself: but the veriest mennow among
men, the salt and sweepage of the court, dare conceive and contriue the death
of the Prince of the court: the man most despicable, dare arise up against the
honorable. More ungracious is man by much in his generation: than fishes in
their kinds. 2. Herein also is absolute disproportion between the ordinary,
and spiritual angling, and the fishes of both natures: that in the one, the
fry and smaller sort, do keep off the greater: in the other, the greater do
hinder the smaller from coming to the bait. In ordinary angling, you shall
often perceive the bait so nibled away, and the end of the hook made so bare
by the paltrie sort of fishes, as the great ones seeing it, dare not adventure
on it: wherefore anglers often draw up their hooks, and put whole baytes unto
them. But in our angling for men-fish, we have the contrary experience, the
great water Pikes and Pearches, I mean Prelates and Potentates, by their corrupt
examples discouraging them, or by their ouer-insolent authority, Isai. 1.5, 6,
10, 20, 23. etc. Matthew. 6.22.23.
detaining them from biting. If they would give better example themselves, the
people would soon be better. But if the head be sick, the whole body will be
heavy. If the eye be blind, the whole body will be dark. The ointment of
example, Psalm. 133.2
runs from Aarons head, down his beard, and the skirts of his clothing:
that is, to the middle and lowest sort of the people. Prou. 29.12
It is Salomons saying, and Scripture examples bind it; and modern proofs
find it: Of a prince that hearkneth to lies, all his servants are wicked. For
the people take their precepts out of princes, and prelates practice; suting
themselves to their disposition, according to the Note the Prophet Isaiah
takes of them, Isai. 24.2.
saying: There shall be like people, like Priest: and like servant, like
master: like maid, like mistress: like buyer, like seller: like lender, like
borrower. The sins of Jeroboam, 2. king. 14.24. 2. Chron. 13 6, 7. 1. king.
2.28.30. and 14.16. etc.
were attractiue as the stone, that draws iron after it, wherefore to the
mention of him you have always this addition: Jeroboam the son of Nebat,
that made Israel to sin. Every superior stands doubly charged. 1. With the
sin. 2. With the example. For their sin is, 2. Chron. 26 19, 20.
as Oza his sore that was in his forehead, which every one might see. But a
fault in a meaner man, Exodus 4.6, 7
is as Moses his leprous hand, which he did hide in his bosom Princes, prelates,
predominant powers, are the proppes and pillars of the people, Exodus: 13. and 14.
and they are as the cloudie pillar to the Israelites, who went as that went,
and stood still as that stood still. Genesis 34.20 24.
The Sichemites were circumcised, Lord Hemor their prince being circumcised
before them. The whose garrison, Judge. 9.48.49.
did cut off every one a branch from a tree, after the imitation and direction
of Abimilech their leader. The armor-bearer slew himself: 1. Samu. 31.4, 5.
Number. 10.2.3.4.5, etc.
his sovereign Saul being slain first before him. It was given in charge by
God, that the captains and ringleaders, at the first blast of the trumpet
should set forward, that the people might follow them. Iosu. 3.15.16.17. Iosu.
4.1.2. etc.
Duke Joshua, first himself passing over Jordan, with the Arc of the Covenant,
and the Priests with him: the rage of the waters abated, and all the people
followed securely after them. No sooner came the Kings writ to his Lieuetena^t
Ioab, 2. Sam. 11.15.16.
for the dispatch of Vriah, but he executed it accordingly. Baltazar, first
giving that evil example, all his concubines profaned the holy vessels of the
Temple. Dan. 5.2.3.4.
Augustus laying an heavy taxation upon the people, Syrenius his substitute,
Luke. 2.2.
by and by leauied it. Herod signing the bill for John's death, not one of his
Nobles would speak a word against it, Matthew. 14.9.10. etc. Jonas. 3.5.6.7.
but temporisors they are all the sort of them. The whole city and court of
Nineveh, were converted with their King. The Ruler first believing in Christ,
and becoming a Christian, his whole household was a Christian congregation
immediately. John: 4.46.50.51.53. Math. 9.9.^0.
When Matthew the master Publicane, would be a professor; he invited with
Christ, many Publicanes to his house, thereby to toll them on to the same
profession. The sea follows the temperature of the air: so that if the air
be calm, the sea is quiet; but if the air ruffleth, the sea foorth-with
stormeth: so the people wagge after the example of greater powers, whether it
be good or evil. The river has his nature from the fountain from whence it
flows: so that if the fountain be pure, the river water is clear: but if
the fountain be corrupt, the river must needs draw corruption from it. The
heads of Countries, make their people like unto themselves, in condition of
manners. Matthew. 2.3
When Herod was a troubled fountain, at the tidings of Christ's birth, all the
waters of Jerusalem (I mean his subjects) as the Text says, were troubled
likewise with him. Such things as we perceive to be drawn into example by our
betters, we conclude with our selves, that we may safly imitate. Hereupon
says Chaerea in Terence: Chaerea in Terence.
Haec inquit non facerem quae Jupiter fecit? Should not I do those things that
Jupiter does? Though reason rule some; yet othersome, measure actions by the
rule of examples: as the Poets notably do observe. For what says Claudian in
the case?

Componitur orbis.
Regis ad exemplum, Claudianus
nec sic inflectere sensus
Humanos edicta valent quam, vita regentis:
Mobile mutatur semper cu^ principe vulgus.
The world does wagge in every thing,
After the example of their King.
The people stand in greater awe
Of Princes life, than of his law.
The common people variable,
With every prince is changeable.
From which observation, the self same Poet lessoneth them thus.

Hoc te praeterea crebro sermon monebo,
Vt te totius medio telluris in orb
Viuere cognescas, cunctis tua gentibus esse,
Facta palam, nec posse dariregalibus vsquam
Secretum vitijs.
This I moreover often thee tell,
That thou in midst of all do dwell
Where all thy deeds are soon espide,
For Princes acts can no place hide
The same Poet in another piece of Ode and Dittie has the like tunable
harmony, In stilliconis laudibus.
writing thus: Scilicet in vulgus manant exempla regentu^;
Vtque ducu^ lituos sic mores castra sequntur.
The peoples practice is, as Regents give example:
After their lives as sound of home, they willingly do trample.


Ovid has the like direction upon the like observation. Epist. ad Linia de
morte filii.
Imposuit te alto fortuna, locumque tenere
Iussit honoratum, liuia perfer onus:
Ad te oculos auresque irahis, tua facta notamus
Nec vox missa potest principis ore tegi.
Has Fortune heau'd thee up on high,
And set in honors seat:
Thy shoulders Liuia do apply
To bear the burden great.
Thou dawest to thee our eyes and ears,
Thy deeds we do record:
Once spoken, cannot be suppressed
A public persons word.


Iuuenal to show the force of examples, Iuuenal. sat. 14.
writes in this wise. Sic natura iubet velocius and citius nos,
Corrumpunt vitiorum exempla domestica magnis:
Quum subeant animos authoribus:
Sooner and swifter unto sin
We are inclined and brought
By evil domestic president
Corupted and mistaught:
Calling to mind how like has been,
By greater persons wrought.


But here is the mischief, that this our contrariety to the fish is so
dangerous. For if it were but through the meaner men, by whose rudeness and
barbaritie the blessed bait of the Gospel were detained from the worthyer
sort, it would be far better than it is. For the supine security of the
ruder rowt, should red ounde upon their own heads alone: and the greater
persons should have no damage by it. But the case being as it is, that the
greater ones scare their inferiors from the hook that should heave them up to
heaven, and from the bayte of their bliss, which are the souls, that by their
hurtful example, are carried headlong into hell. For like oil, they run
into every joint and vain: like a Gangreene, they spread over the whole body:
like leven, they sour the whole lump: they are like a sincke in a City;
like a boil in a body: a spark that sets a whole country afire. Isa.
1.5.6.
It is the consequence of the Prophet: The whole boby is heavy: having told
us first, that the head was sick. The rank corrupt humor runs from the
crown, to the soul of the foot, and leaves no free spot of a sound body.
Though a smaller stone chance to drop out of a wall, the void room is not
espied, or if it be, it with ease again filled: but if a great corner stone
falls, it brings down a row and heap of smaller with it: when a mean
man sins, he falls alone, but the misdoings of the mightier men by
hurtful example that draw on others with them, do very mighty mischief.
Wherefore the sins of the inferior sort, are wholly given to their rulers and
gouerours. Wherefore Moses, Exodus 32.21.
when the people had sinned, censured Aaron the Priest for it, saying: What did
this people unto thee, that thou have brought so great a sin upon them? And
he does rightly in it. For if a clock be out of kelter and frame, I trow
the clock-keeper is more to be blamed, than the clock which is at his
ordering? And be such sure, that they shall be one day soundly charged for
it. So was David by Nathan, who in the midst of mercy pronounced over him in
the forgiveness of his sins, snebbed in this sort for his evil example: The
Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not dye. Howbeit because by this deed,
thou have caused the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, 2. Sam. 12.14.
the child that is borne unto thee shall surely dye. The Olive tree that is
planted among the vines, because it occupyeth but a little room hurts not
the vines: but the nuttree, that co^breth the ground, and takes up such a wide
space, does greatly hinder them. The Potentates, that take up all the room of
the land, and sway al things as they list, are dangerous to the vineyarde of
the Lord of hoasts, by their security and hostility: the trebuler sort that
are thrust to the wall, that never grow high, or ouerdreepe others little, by
all the evil they can do, can damnifie others. Otherefore, that it would
please God, to sweep their house, that we might find his lost groat: to turn
them that they might be turned, and thereby turn such as are under their
charge, unto the worship of God. For as by their fearful evil examples, they
hold up as it were the chinne of iniquity: so by these good examples in their
conversion unto God, piety would set up a monarchy among us. David only by
the line of his good life, did draw Saul unto him, holding up such a lump of
uprightness unto him, as did enlighten and inflame him. 1. Sam. 24. and 26.15.
The Baptist being a man of such absolute carriage, as no man could approve:
he had heaps of followers, who swarmed like Bees about him, and admired him,
and applauded him, as the Messiah. Luke 3.7.12 15. and 23.43.
The thief that was crucified with our Savior Christ, seeing such strange love
in the Lord, as praying for his persecuters, at the very nicke and last cast
was converted by it. Paul by his learning and life, together by his words and
works wrought a great work among the Gentiles. He did not fight as one that
beats the air: but he looked to his carriage, and so humbled his body, 1.
Cor. 9.21.22.27.
that thee might not be a reprobate himself, whilst he brought salvation
unto others. It is the point Peter much stands upon, and labors to
persuade, that such as are lights, might so lighten the world: 1. Pet, 2.3.
that it seeing the same, may glorify God in the day of visitation. 3. There
is further this mark of difference between this two-folde fishing: that the
fishes of the one side are taken to dye: but such as are taken by our
Ministerial fishing, are taken that they might live, they are translated from
death to life for ever.

Their resurrection from the pit of their perdition, makes them partakers of
the second resurrection to eternal salvation. Common proof teaches the one,
and spiritual proof the other. You has he quicked, Ephesians. 2.1.
that were dead in trespasses and sins, says the Apostle. Answerable
hereunto; is this his other assertion: Col. 2.13.
And ye which were dead in sins, and in the uncircumcision of the flesh,
has he quickened together with him. And this estate and condition of the
faithful, is plainly declared by Christ, when he says; Ioh. 5.^5.
The hour shall come and now it is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God. We were all of us without Christ, dead in our sins, and were
buried in the bed of darkness of all errors, and superstitions, into which
by the subtle illusions of Satan we have been led, and held in the
captivity and bonds of them. But Christ, who has destroyed the kingdom of
darkness, has brought us back to life, and the light of faith. As he stayed
the widows son when the Porters had him on their shoulders upon the bear,
Luke. 7.15.
and restored him to his mother: So when we were given up to the second death,
The great mercy of Christ in saving repentant sinners.
and the devils officers were busy about us, to carry us away with them:
Christ with his saving Word came among us, seized upon us, took us out of
their hands, and restored us to our heavenly Father. Christ was the day-man,
and mediator between God and man; and spoke comfortably to us, as unto
Hezechias, 2. king. 20 5. Genesis 2.15. and. 3.23.24. Job. 30.31. Genesis 3.15. 1.
Cor. 15.45, etc. Romans 5.14. 1/5. etc. and Romans 1.3.
Thou shall not dye, but live. Adams state was happy in his earthly Paradise,
but the case was quite altered with his sin. And we may take up Jobs words
concerning him; His harp was turned into mourning, and his organs into the
voice of them that weep. But we are safe enough again by his seed, the
second Adam by whom we are saved, the omnipotent word of God, Hebr. 9.14.28.
1. Pet. 3.18 John. 19.34
taking our nature upon him, and undergoing the wrath of his Father, and death
the wages of sin due unto us. Whose side being opened with a spear, there
entered living creatures into him, all such as are to be saved, both clean
and unclean: as of all sorts into the Arc of Noah, Genesis 7.1, 2, 3. etc.
that were preserved from danger of drowning. Wherefore my soul sleep
securely within him, as in a Cave; and nestle thy self in him, as Doves in the
clifts of Rocks, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. 2. Tim.
2.7.


FINIS.

