The Rutter of the Sea, with the hauons, rodes soundynges, kennynges wyndes
flodes and ebbes, dangers and coostes of diverse regyons with the laws of the
yele Auleton, and the judgments of the sea.

With a Rutter of the North added to the same. () *

The prologue of Robart Copland the translatour of this said Rutter.
EVery science artyfycyal or mortal is moest commenlye enuretd with reason,
speculacyon, and practyse, by the which is known and tried the parfyte
doings of the same, formallye to the behote at the doers, and to them, which
of necessite must set to work such as ben practysed and auctorysed i^ every
such science as thus.

Every man that entendeth to buyld be it habytacyon, fortress or other edifice
on land or water, behouethe to have such worekemen that can cast the plat and
know the substance and the ground for the foundation: and that can saflye,
and dyrectlye frame, and raise the hole work. For whosoever has not the very
science of Arsmetryke, and geometry to aim and measure ye platte and
conjecture of the hight, dread and lenght, and to fortifye it with
Pryncypalles, gistes, beams, tenau^tes, morte^ses, cou^trebrases. and not
knowing the nombre in eueri piece duly framed is in doubt and peril to lose
all the frame and without tools thereto belonging, as rule squyre, cu^pas, line,
prychel, tryangle, and such other, and for the safeguard and reparacio^ thereof,
to store it with brick, or stone, lime, sand, l^me, lath board, nail tyle,
lead, and other Howbeit yt by reason a man that never was builder by
speculacio^ may rease and edifi, but nothing like yt entired practice. In like
manner I coniecte that in the feate and course of Nauigacyon or sealyng a man
may presume and take upon him by his speculacyon to co^ducte a vessel, as a
blind man i^ a desolate wyldernes does walk till he be lost. But ye sure wise
and enured master mariner, or lode^ina^, not ygnorauntly trusting his own
se^sual reason dylygently for the safegarde of his doings and assuraunte of
his practyse, consydereth if his bessell be sure, and decked at all points,
and wi^h great solicitude sequeth enquyreth, and geteth such necessary
instruments as behooves to the industry of his practyse, as the card,
compass, rutter dyal and other which by speculate practyse shows the place,
that is to say, the costs havens rodes, soundinges, dangers floodes, ebbes,
winds k^ninges courses and passages fro land to land, and to be the more sure
in the conductynge of his vyage, he busyly purueyeth for all takelynges and
store thereto behoffull as cables, roopes, ankers, mastes, sails, ores,
artyllery, vytayle, fresshe water, fuel, and other necessaryes.

*All this discretely pondred by a sad ingenyour and cyrcumspecte maryner of
the City of London being in the town of Bourdewes bought a pretye book
Imprynted in the French language called the Rutter of the sea conteynyng many
propre feats of his science. And consyderyng that it was expedient and
necessary for all English men of his facultye to have it in their own
language to the erudicyon, and save guard of our merchants as other hauntynge
the sea, not knowing the content thereof. The which book he insta^ted me lo
translate into Englysh. which over seen, me thought very d^ffycyle to me, not
knowing the terms of mariners, and names of the coostes and havens, for I
came never on the sea, nor by no cost thereof. But following my copye by the
advise, and ouersyght of certain co^nyng men of that science which bolded,
and informed me in many doubts, I did vntertake in doing my diligence: as a
blind horse in a myl turnyng the querne ygnorau^tly, save by conductynge of the
mylner that sets him on work. Desyryng all expert masters to correc^e
this and make other for the common vitlite and safegarde of these our natyfe
country men and goods flotynge in diverse regyons, In the which doing they
shall not only obtain thanks, lauds and be prayed for in this world and
also in the other, but he hyghly rewarded of almyghtye God which is chefly
master and lodesman of and to every streme and coost. To whom be given laud
and glory in the world of worlds. Amen.

The translatour. Robart Copland.
Gentle maryners on a bonne vyage
Hoyce up the salye, and let god stere.
In ye bonaue^^ure maki^g your passage
It is full see the wether fair and clear
The nepetydes shall you nothing dear
A see bordmates S. george to borow
Mary and John, ye shall not need to fere
But with this book, to go safe through
*Of the tides, that is to wit, the stood and ebbes fro the raze of Said into
Flaunders.
AT the raze of Said the moon in the southewest and point of souhtful see,
and in the southeast and a point of east low water.

At saint Mathews ye moon north east, full see. And south west low water

At the fourne the moon northeast a point of east full see, and in the
southwest a point of west low water.

At Portsall and at Bergroagh the moon in the east northeast full see, and
(...) the south weste low water.

At Lyganan the moon in the east northeaste full see, and southeast low water.

With in the isle of Basepole the moon in the east northeastfull see, and
without in the channel the moon in the east, and the moon in the southe
low water.

At Melenem the moon in the southe apoint of southwest low water, and in the
west a point of Northwest full see *At the.vii. yles the moon in the east
southeast full see, and south southwest low water.

*Fro the isle of basepole to saint Malowes al alonge the coost unto Carteras
the moon in the south low water and the moon in the west full see.

*At Cause, Granesey, Iarsei, fourne and Clerk the moon i^ thy south low
water to the grouende, and in the west full see.

*At Roktowethe moon in the southeast a point of the east full see, and in the
cost of garnesey without the moon in the southe east low water.

*At the race of Brehac the moon in the eastful see, and in ye south low
water At Ferrere the moon in the southe east full see.

At the race of Blanchey between the Hag and Aldreney the moon i^ the south
east, a point of the east full see.

Between Creke and alderney is a ba^ke called the bank of share, and over it
is ix. fadomes without the casketes the moon in the east southeast full se,
and in the southwest low water.

At the Hag and aldreney the moon in the south a point of southwest low water
to the ground.

At the sherbrugh, at Barflewe and at the Hag the moon in the south southwest
low water to the ground.

At Carteras the moon in the south south east full see, and in the west
southwest low water.

From the chief of Cause to Diepe the moon in the south southeast full se

In Said at the folle deleure, also for the landuange and the moon auay lynge
fro southeast full se.

Without antifer or Lantrygat unto the basse of Sum the moon in the east
full sec. In some the moon in the south full see, and with nepetydes, and
northwynde the moon in the southe southeast full see.

At Staples and boleyn unto the stabler of Tenet yt moon in the south
southeast full see.

At the strayte of Calays the moon in the southwest full see.

Fro the strayte of Calays to Ostende the moon in the south southeaste low
water. Fro Ostende to Blankborowe the moon in the southeast and a point of
south low wather, and over all the baukes of Flau^dres the moon in ye south,
full see. At the Cape Loupin the moon in the south full see.

Courses fro the raze of Said in to Flanders, and how the tides toward
Brytayne bears.
Within the Channel of yra is the flode bears in the east and, the ebb into
the west.

Between Moyles, and Vsshant the floode bears into the east northeaste and
the ebb i^to weste southwest, with out ye yles ye shall find.xlv. fadomes, and
small gravel. Between Vsshant and Sylley the floode bearethe in the east
northeast. In the gutter of Vsshant ye shall find good road at.xxv. fadoms and
beware of a rock that is in the minds of the baye Between fourne, and
Bergroagh unto the isle of Basepoole the flow bearethe to northeaste, and a
point of east and the ebb again ward

At the cost of the isle of Basepole the flow bears into the east southeast.
Within and without ye.vii. yles the flow bears into the east and point of
southeast, Without Brehac the flow bears in the east and the ebb against it

From Brehac the flow to Saint Malo the flode bears east southeast Between
casket and alderney ye flow comes out of southwest unto half flod From
Alderney to Barflewe the water comes out of the east.

Fro Barflewe to the yles of Marcoll the water comes out of the south son
theast all long the said coost.

Fro barflewe to Lantrygat and the thief of Causethe water comes out of the
east northeast, and in the route ye shall find the soundyng.xvi. or.xviii.
fadomes, with a good botome and sand

For Lantrygat to the base of So^me the water comes fro north northeast

Fro the base of So^me unto Boloyne the water comes fro north northeast

Fro Boleyne to the Hurdels the water comes fro the north.

Fro the Hurdels to grauelynge the course without the Base the water comes
north northest, and with out grauelynge to Dunkyrke ye water comes fro the
northeast.

Fro the bay of the downs to ostende the water comes fro the northeast, a
point of the east. Fro Ostende to blankborow the water comes fro the east
northeast.

Fro Blankborowe to the point of saint Katherine the water comes fro the east
and by east northeste.

Routes and courses fro the raze of Said in Flaunders.
ROutes and courses fro the raze of Said to com to saint Mathewes, ^e must go
north ward and bear the point of the nedle somewhat aftere board.

Fro saint Mathewes to Fourne goye on the north northeast and beyond saint
Mathewes without ye point in fair land. But take good head, the Fourne and
the nedles of ye isle of might lies northeast and southwest.

The isle of Basepole and Garnesey lies northeast and southeast. Roktow and
Garnesey lies north and south. Garnesey and Aldreney lies northeast and
southeast. Alderney, and the Caskettes lies northeast, and southwest a point
of the east and a point of the west

The Caskettes, and Lantrygate lies east and west, and if ye will go to Harfewe
in Said go east southeast.

Lantrigat and the shef of Cause lies north and south, and if ye will go fro
Lantrigat in Sum and staples the courses lies northeast, and southest.

if ye will go fro the strayte of Calays into flanders go northeast with the
floode and against water goo east Northeast as far as the baye of the Downs,
and when ye be at.xvi. fadomes ye be in the right course of the Channel of
Fla^nders, and when ye have.xii. fadomes of water ye shall be hard aborde the
base, and forth with ye shall fall to three or four.

Entringes and Harborowes of the cost of Normandye.
IF ye will lie at Sherburgh east auker at.vi. fadome, and ye shall find fair
botome, and ye shall go north west fro the point of the south and beware of the
said point, for there it is dangerous.

if ye will lie at Hagge cast anchor beneth the church at.xii. fadomes.

If ye will lie at the fosse of Coluyll cast anchor without at.vii. or.viii.
fado^s.

If ye will lie in the roode of the shefe of Cause go in and cast anchor at.vi.
fadomes, and ye shall have the north fro the land as ye enter, and have no
landua^g of the north northeast.

If ye will lie in the rode of Dyepe cast anchor at, vii. fado^s before ye town

If ye will lie at the base of So^me cast anchor without the banks, and take heed that the monastery of Cayo be in the east northest, and cast anchor at six
or at seven fadomes of water.

And if ye will go in take hye water under you, and take your marks beyond
the castle of Crotey, a little with out Lordell, and ye shall go at two fadomes
and an half or three.

if ye will lie beforest aples cast anchor at.vii. fadoms or.vi.

if ye will lie at anchor before Beloyn, before the heaven, and cast anchor
at.viii. or.vi. fadoms.

if ye will lie before the Hurdels with a north wind, cast anchor before
Ordecellus at.x. or.xii. fadoms and ye shall have landuang of the north
coming fro hurdels, and ye shall have a good botome. And if ye cast anchor in
the depeste, ye shall find rock and evil botome.

Floodes fro Sylley and England into Flaundres.
AT sylley a point in ye northest a point of east full see, and with out silley
the moon in the east full see. At Moushole the moon in the east northeast
full see to land. And without the moon in the east southeastful see also.

*At Falmouth the moon in the east and. by north east full see to the land;
and in the east southeast without full see also.

*At Fowy, and at. Plummouth the moon in east full see to land, and without in
the east southeast full see, also.

At Dartmouth the moon in the east full see to land, and without, in the east
southeast.

At Portlande, without, the moon southeast, and a point of the East full see,
at the ankerage of Portlande, thee moon in the east south east full see,

At Hounde fast, and at Poole the moon at the southeast full see, and south
west full see.

At the Nedles of the isle of wyghte without the moon at the Southeast, and a
point of south full se, at the cost of the said isle at an high spring the
moon at the southweast full see.

At Shorham the Moo^e at south and a point of southeast full see.

At Bewchey the moon in the southe full see. At the chamber of wynchelse ye
moon in the south full see.

At the thwart of romney the moon in the south southwest full see.

At the strayte of Calays the moon in the southweast full see,

Courses from ye Cape of Cornewale into flaunders, and how the tides dobere.

Fro the Cape of Cornwayle to Lezarde the water comes out of the east, toward
southeaste.

Fro Lezard to Dodman and unto Bodesters called the Sterte the water comes
from the east northeaste.

Fro the Sterte to Portland the water comes from the southeast, and as well is
the time known that the flode shall bear in to sutheaste by reason of that
ebb at Portlande.

At the isle of Wight the water comes from the east toward northeast and if
ye beat the coost of the swingles at two fadomes, the water shall come from the
east northeast.

Unto Dover the water comes from the east toward northeast.

From saint Margare^e to (...) the water comes from the north.

Into the Temse the water comes from the east southeast.

Routes from, Sylley, and England into Flaunders.

SYlly and Longshyppes ly east northeast and west southwest.

Syllye and Lezarde, lie east, and west. Between Sylly, and Lezarde is a Rock
called Reynoylde stone, called golffe in brytysshe.

And who so departs fro the cape of Cornwaile must sail east southeast for
the double Lezard. For so lies the two lands.

Moushole, and Lezarde lies southeast, and northwest.

Lezarde, and Dodman lie northeast and soutwest, a point of the east, and a
point of west Dodman, and the starte lie east northeast, and west south west.

The Starte and Portland lie east and West, a point of Northeast, and a point
of southwest.

Portlande, and the isle of Wight ye east and west.

The isle of wight: and Bewchey lie east and west, a point of northeast and a
point of southwest.

Benchey and the point of Romney lie east northeast and west southwest.

Saint Margaretes point and Tenet lie north, and south.

Entrynges and Herborowes al a long the coost of England.
IF yt you will lie at the trauers of Moushole go nygh ye land, and cast anchor
at.vi. fadomes and ye shall be in a good place at.vii. fadome, it is al rock.

if ye will enter into falmouthe ye shall find a rock in the myddle of the
entering, Leave it on the larborde side and go toward east by shore, and wha^
ye be past it go straight in. For the bay is great sound and large, and cast
anchor where ye will at.xi. or.xii. fadoms amyd the baye, and if ye will go at
the tornynge of the full see. For there is abanke to pass which ye shall find
a^ low water and at full see at.ii. fadomes and a half or three ankeryng, and if
ye list ye may go into the town of peryn. If ye will enter at Plummouth, go in
straight, and come not to nere the isle for there is danger, and if ye will lie
dry go before the town and hold toward the Tour for the causey, and if ye
will pass toward the west, goo nyghe to the main land, and cast anchor
at.xx. fadomes.

If ye will enter at Dartmouthe, go beneyth saint Patrykes mynster, that you
shall se at the entering of the hau^^, and hold you toward the west with a
south wynd, and give somewhat a burth fro the pay at of saint Patryke for
because that there is the flat of a rock, and take heed of the rock on leer
board side. For this rock is thwarte of saint Patryke amyd that channel, and
at the ebb of a spring tide rests ^uth.iii. quarters or a fado^, and cast
anchor nigh the town at.vi. or. (...) fadomes.

If ye will pass to portland cast anchor at.viii. fadomes, and ye shall have,
landuang of southwind through that isle.

if ye will enter within the poole go nygh the shore, and aim the st^ple of the
Poole throught a little house that is at the entering of ye haven, and go
between the two banks, and ye shall find at low water.ii. fadomes and a half
or three.

If ye will enter wtin the nedles of the isle of w^ght, go hard aborde ye
nedles right in and beware of ye rock in the mids of ye chanel, and amyd ye
chanel, ye shall find viii. or.ix. fadoms and hard aborde, ye nedles is.iii.
or.iiii. fadomes

If ye will lie at saint Heleyns, cast anchor at.vii. or.viii. fadoms and beware
the point that (...) he little without.

If ye will lie without saint Helens take the floode, and go south southeast, so
farforth (...).

If ye will lie at. (...) go to the sorde and cast anchor at.viii. fadomes and ye
shall have laduange of weste southwest, in the myddle of Bewchey: *If ye will
enter into the chamber of weynchelse, take half flode under you and se that
bewchey be north of you without Fayrle and goo by the shore and ye shall goo
alonge by it, and beware of the point that lies a little without.

If ye will lie at anchor by Romney lie before a small vyllage that ye shall se,
and cast anchor at.viii. or.x. fadoms For. at.vi. ye shall have landuange of
southwest and rockye botome, and at x. fadomes ye shall have no landuange of
southwest. And at the anchor ynge of Romney is a bank well half A quarter of a
lyege fro the Dun^onnesse, and there is often depthe between the bank and the
Dunionnesse hard abord the bank.xvi. fadomes. And the bank, and the point of
Romney lie east northest, and weste southwest and there remains at the ebb
of a hye floode but one fadome of water over that bank, and ye shall find good
harborow fro Romney to the Dounes al alonge the same cost at.xvi. or.xx. fadom,
and shall have landuange of the west southwest.

If yt ye will lie before saint Margaretes, cast anchor at.xvi. fadomes, and ye
shall have landuang of the southest *If ye will lie in the downs cast anchor
at.vi. or.vii. fadomes.

How the ports and havens of England, brytay and Normandye do lie and how
many leiges fro one to another

Fourney and Vsshant do ly east, and west; and between them there is two
leyges.

Vsshant and Sylley do ly northeast and southeast, apoint of the north, and
apoynte of the southe, and there is between them.xx v in leynges.

*Fourne and Long shypes lie ^^orth east, and south southest. And there is
between them.xxvii. leyges.

*Fourne and Darthmouth ly north northest, and south southwest, and there is
between the^.xxxviii. leyges.

Fourne and dodman lie north and south and there is between them.xxxiii. leyges

The isle of Basepole, and Garnesey lie northeast and southwest.

Melenen^ and Bodestour or the starte lie north and southe, and there is
between them.xxviii. leyges.

Garnesey, and Dodma^ lie east and south east, and west northwest, and there is
between them.xxxviii. leyges.

*The Caskets and Portlande do ly north; and south, apoynt of northweste and a
point of southeast, and between them is.xx. leyges.

*Portlande: and Barflete lie northewest, and southeast, and between them
is.xxviii. leyges.

Saint Heleynes, and the Cule of Haglie northeast, and southwest. And between
them there is.xxiii. leyges. *Saint Heleyne and barflete lie north and south,
and between the^ is.xxiiii. leiges. *Saint Heleyne and shef of Cause lie
northwest, and southeast, and between them.xxviii. leyges.

*Bewchey, and Barflete lie northeast, and southwest.

*The point of Romney, and Dyepe lie north, and south, apoint of northwest and
a point of southeast. And Bitwen them is.xxvi. leyges.

*Soundynges that ye shall find coming fro spain, Leuaunt, or Portyngale to
seek Vsshant.

A Ship that comes from Portingale ta seek vsshant or Lizard in this route at,
c. or. lxxxx. fadomes and ye shall find byg sounding, and shall be nygh about
to the ^ayntes. And in this ^onte at. lxxx. fadomes ye shall find cockle
shelles and dyntes in the leed. In this route hold on the north till ye chaung
soundyng.

If ye be at. lx. or. lxv. fadomes ye shall find small sand, and mathey
grount and ye shall be at the cost of Vsshant.

And if ye have time and day, go seek it, in the northeast, and ye shall be
about x. leyges of the isle.

If ye come making your Rout about the Bas frede ye shall find course sand
reed and brown, ye shall find soundynge of.xl. fadomes.

And if ye be toward the bank of Sylley ye shall have. lxxxvi. or. lxxxx.
fadomes, and ye shall find in the leed stony ground, and ye shall make a great
way toward the bank of Sylley.

When ye be at. lxxx. fadom ye shall find small black sand, and ye shall be
at the toward of Lezarde.

When ye be at. lx. or. lxv. ye shall find white sand, and white soft worms
And ye shall be very nygh to Lezarde.

Between the cape of Cornewayle and Vsshant amyd ye chonel ye shall find. lxx.
fadome, and nere enough the shore.

Between Dodman, and Fourne in the channel ye shall find lx. fadomes.

When ye be thwarte of Plo^mouth or the Starte ye shall find streymye ground,
and dyntes in the ^alowe, and soundinge of.xli. or.xlii. fadomes.

At the coming fro Portla^d ye shall have.xxxv. fadomes, and small shingle

And if ye be nyghe Portlande ye shall find.xxx. fadomes, and stones like
beans. And this sou^de lasts to saint Aldam and in the said sou^ding ye
shall find white stoones like broken aules, and other be grater. and then ye
shall be warte of saint Aldam or of the isle of wight. And from thense go east
ward fro the swyngles

Two leyges or three from the isle of wight ye shall find.xxv. fadome, with dyntes
and clyftes in the talowe like small threde

Two or three leyges from the caskets ye shall find.xl. fadomes, and bygge
stones, rugged, and black.

Between the isle of wight and she Hagge the depest is but.xxxv. or.xl. fadomes.

Between the isle of wight and La^trygat the depest is but.xxv. or.xxx. fadome

Between Bechey, and the isle of wight at leyge from the land ye shall
find.xxxviii. Fadomes and popples bygge as beans.

Between fayrle, and sum in the depest but.xxv. fadomes.

Between fylstone, and Boloyne is a banlie that is called Ryppe rappe, and is
in the mids of the route as nygh Pycardye as England, and hard aborde by it
is.xxvi. or.xxvii. fadomes.

Beneth the Castle of Dover ye shall find.x. fadomes.

In the strayte of Calays ye shall find.xxx. fadomes.

Between Calays and Thenet, ye shall find.xxv. fadome.

In the rode of Calays is.xvi. fadome

In the cost of Flaundres at the depest ye shall find but.xx. fadome.

The kennynges from Sylley, and England unto Flaundres.
From Sylley to Longshyp (...) is a kennynge.

Fro Longships to Lezarde viii. leiges

Fro Lezarde to Dodma^ a kennynge.

Fro Dodman to Rams head there is a kennynge.

Fro Rainshed to the Cape of Beures there is a kennynge.

Fro cape of Beures to Torres there is a kennynge.

Fro Torres to Portlande.xiiii. leyges

Fro Portland to s. Aldam.iiii. leyges

Fro Saint Aldam to the nedles. vi. leyges.

Fro Nedles to Saint Helyns.vi. leyges.

Fro Saint Heleyns to Bewechey xviii. leyges.

Fro Bewchey to fayrle.vii. leyges.

From fayrle to Romney.

Fro Romney to dover.vii. leyges.

Fro Dover to Calays.vii. leyges.

Fro Calais to Sluice.xxi leyges.

Floodes and Ebbes, fro the foreland or Cape of cornwayle, into wales all a
long by the sea coost.

At the Cape of Cornwayle the moon in the east northeast full see, and in the
south weste low water.

At Pastowe the moon in the east and apoint of northeaste full see.

At Londaye the moon in the east full see, and in the south low water.

At Caldaie the moon in the east, and apoint of the southeast low water.

Ad Grashormes the moon i^ the east south east full see.

In the Rams eyes, at ye point of kardygan the mon in the southeast full see

At mylfort the moon in the east south east full see.

At the isle of Fer at ye i will of Colompes, and at Naskingeoles the moon in the
east southeast full see.

In the route of the isle of Mag^^sykes in the mountains of Gaswaye ye moon in
the south southeast full see. And in all the rout of the isle of Man and unto
arglas, and so forth into Scotland the moon in the south.

*Routes for Sylley and England into wales alonge the coost of wales.

SIlley, and Lo^dey lie northeast and southwest and between them is.xxviii.
leyges.

The Cape of cornwayle, and Londay lie northeast, and southwest, a point of
north and a point of south, and between them is.xxv. leyges.

Londay and Calday lie north and south, and between them is.x. leyges.

Cape of Cornwayle, and Consquere lie north and south, a point of northweste
and apoynt of southeast, and between them is xxxiii leyges.

Cape of Cornewayle and Maskin geoles lie north and sauth, and bytwne them
is.xxxiii. leyges.

Maskyn geoles and Grashormes ly east northeast and west southwest, and between
them is. two. leyges.

The isle of Fer, and Mylforde lie east and west, a point of northeast and a
peynte of southwest and between the^ is.ii. leig Courses fro the cape of
cornewayle into wales alonge by the sea cost

From the cape of cornwayle the flod comes fro the south, and ye ebb fro the
north, and without at two or three leyges the tide comes from the south west.
And fro the cape of cornwayle to Londay the ebb comes fro northeast, and the
flode fro southwest and without Londay the flood comes fro the west, and the
ebb comes fro the east. Between Lo^day and Calday the floode comes fro the
east northeast and the ebb fro the east sutheast.

Fro calday to, Scalmay the flod comes from northeast, and the ebb south
west.

Between Scalmay and grashormes the floode comes fro the south, and the ebb
fro the north.

And fro grasholmes all the cost unto Hol^heed the flod comes from the so^th,
and the ebb agaynewarde, and without in the rout it takes of the northeast
and of the southweast.

Fro Holyheed to the isle of Man the flode comes fro soutwest and the ebb
comes fro northeast, and alo^ge the isle of Man unto without, the flow
comes fro southwest, and the ebb northeaste

Between the isle of man and Scotland the flow comes fro the east.

Between the costs of Scotland, and the mountains of Galwaye the floode
comes fro the east northeast, and the ebb fro the west southwest.

And fro the mountains of Galway to the peynt of Lokestene comes the floode
fro north northwest, and the Ebb contrary, fro the point to tarke it comes
south soutwest, and the ebb contrary.

*Routes fro Sylley, and England unto Ireland a long the cost.
SYlley and c^pe of Clare lie East southeast and west northwest and between
them is L. leiges.

Cape of Cornwayle and the Cape of Veyll lie northwest and southeast, and a
point of east, and a point of west, and between them is.xxiiil. leyges.

Cape of Veyll and the cape of clare lie cast northeast, and west southwest,
and between them is.xiiii. leyges.

Cape of Clare, and ye Musenes lie east and west, and between ye is.vii. leyge
Musenes and Dulfay lie east southeast and west northweste and between them.
is.vii. leyges.

Dulfay and the sonde of Blaskaye lie North and south and a point of northwest
and southeast, take heed of ye ne^^les between them is.xvii leyges.

*Blaskaye and thy yles of Dare^ lie ^orth northeast, and south southwest. and
between them is.xviii, leges.

Blaskaey and blakrocke lie north, and south, and between them is, xl, leyges,

And from Blakrocke sail north, and ye shall go out of Irelande.

Between blakrocke and cantere is, vi. kennynges,

Courses from the cape Veyll unto cantere, and how the fo^ldes toward Ireland
to ^ere.

From cope of Veyll unto the yles of wiltay the floode comes from southwest
and takes of the east and without in the south comes the flood fro the west
southweste and the ebb fro the east northeast.

Between Saltaye, and Vkelo the floode comes out of the south south west, and
the ebb again ward

Between Vkelo and Lambaye the flood comes from the north and the ebb from
the south.

And fro the isle of Lambay along the cost the flode comes fro the south
southeast, and the ebb agaynwarde. fro Malynes to the point of Arglas the
floode comes fro the south southwest and the ebb agaynwarde.

Fro the point of Arglas to Cantere comes the floode fro north, northeast, and
the ebb fro south southeast.

Routtes fro the ^oy of Bayone along the cost of Gasgoyn unto the race of
Spain.
HE that will sail fro the baye of Bayone alonge by the cost into gyrone, sail
northward and by northwest for to double Alcassone, the^ go north, and by the
northeast, and ye shall go in the Asues or pole head, to ye way of Anthyoche go
on the northwest, the way of Anthyoch lies west southwest and east northeast,
If ye depart from saint Martyn your right course is to go by Bretons way in
the west northwest, and ye shall goo out of the isle of Eus.

The way of Brytons lies east, southeast, and west northwest.

The isle of Eus and Bell isle lie northwest and southeast. And fro Byl isle to
glenam goo west northwest, to double the rocks of glenam, and ye shall goo
far enough fro Penwarke.

Groye and glenam lie east and weste, a point of northwest and southeast.

If ye will sail without white Rock take most of the weste, and to beware
of ye white rock take sure marks beyond saint Nycolas without Penfrede and
then fere not. And when yo are in glena^ leave the two parts toward the isle of
mutto^, ye third part toward Glenam, and go west by shore The isle of Mutton,
and saint Nicolas lie north and south.

The route of glenam lyth east, and west Depart from the rout of glenam, and
fail west, and nortwest, and ye shall come before saint Tudy.

And wha that parts fro the route of Glenam, and will double P^marke. his
course is weste, and by southwest, for the route of Glenam, an the fourke
lyeast and west.

Penbroke, and fountenance lie, northwest and southeast.

The kenynges fro rochell into. Flaunders.
Fro la Palace to Bylyuers is.vii, leyges.

Fre Bylyuers to Holonue is.vii. leyges, From holonue to the isle of Eus
is.vii. leyges.

Between thy isle Eus and Bell isle is, xx. leyges. Fro bell isle to Groye vii.
leyges Fro Groye to Glenam vii. leyges Fro Glena^ to pe^marke vii. leyges Fro
pe^marke to the Race, ix. leiges Fro the Race to. S. Math.ix. leyges Fro S.
Matthew to fourne vii. leiges Fro southe to Bergroagh, vii. leyges Between
Bargroagh and the isle of Basepole is.xiiii leyges. Between the isle of Basepole,
and the vii, yles is vii, leiges. Between the vii. yles and Brehac.vii. leyges.
Between Brehac and Freel x. leyges Between freel and saint Malo, iiii. leyges.
Fro saint malo to Chause vi. leyges Fro Cause to Iarsey vii. leyges Fro Iarsey
to Hagge viii. leyges From the Hagge to the isle of wyghte xxviii. leyges. Fro
ye isle of wight to Calas.xlij. leyg Between Calais and S. luce xxi. leiges
These are the. Soundynges coming fro spain on the outward pa^tes to the
yles north ward, and abau^ Rochel.

IN this saylynge at. l. fadomes ye shall be, xvii. leyges fro and If ye be
at.xl. fadome ye shall be at, vii, leyges fro land.

*And if ye be at, xxx, fadoms ye shall be at.vii. leyges. fro land.

If ye be at, xxii. fadoms ye shall (...) at, iiii, leyges fro land.

In this route ye shall find Ose. and ye shall be toward Maumusson, and nyghe
the land, and ye shall find stones like peason, and then ye shall be toward
Balyuers or toward Hol^nne, but go no nighe except it be thy day in this
soundyng of.xv. fadomes of water.

If ye be south at of the isle of Eus at lx. fadomes ye shall find small sand
and be.xiiii. leyges fro land.

If ye be at. l. fadomes, ye shall be at x. leyges fro land.

At.xxx. fadomes ye shall see the isle clearly.

If ye be in the sea of Layre at.xl. fadome is Ose, till ye be at.xxv. fadome.

At ye south of Bellye at.xl. fadome ye shall be at.x. leyges of it, and come
not nerer then. l. or.xl fadome but by day. For in the rout of Bellye, and
glenam at. l. fadome ye shall be nygh the land And take good head, for there be
false soundynges in the thwart of glenam. and Penmarke.

How the land of Brytayne and of Spain do lie and how many leyges is from one
to another.
BAsefrede and caplye north northeast and south southewest pellem Penmarke and
Sysserges lie northeast and southwest apoynt of south, a point of north, and
between them is xvi, kennynges,

Glenain and saint Vyncent de laberker lie north and south, and between them
is. lxxxv, leyges.

Groye and saint Andrew lie north and south between them is, lxxxv, leyges.

Bell isle, and lar^don lie north and south and between them is, lxviii, leyges,

The isle of Eus and Martrychaco lie north and south bitwene the^ is, in. leiges.

Holonne and saint Sebastya^ lie north and south.

These leyges be fro the buckewe of Gyronde to the buckewe of bayone along the
cost of, Spain, and portyngale

THere is between the Buckew of Gyronde and the Buckewe of Bayonne xxv. leiges
Bytwen Bayonne and fountaraby is vii. leyges. Between fountaraby and saint
Sebastyan is, iiii, leyges. fro, s, Sebastian to quytayre, iii, leyg, fro
quitayre to, Montrygo.iii, leiges, fro Montrygo to Vermio v. leyges fro Vermio
to Bylbame vi, leyges fro bylbawe to Castres iii, leyges, fro Castres to the
Rade iii, leyges, fro the Rade to S. Andrew vi. leyges fro saint Andrewe to
saint Vyncent, dela bekete.v, leyges fro saint Vynce^t to Lagues v, leiges fro
lagues to Rybdecell v, leyges fro Rybdecel to vyll vicious v. leyges fro
vicyous to Gynnon iiii. leyges fro gynno^ to pe^nes de go^sen ii, leyges fro
Gonson to veylles ii, leyges fro veylles to pronne ii, leyges fro pron to
Lyenarke, ix, leyges fro Lyenarke to Rybaydue v. leyges fro Rybaydue to s.
fabyan v. leyges fro s. fabyan to Vmero ii. leyges fro Vmero to cap de Vere ii.
leyges fro cap de Vere to Ortiguer ii. leyges fro Ortiguer to Sydera.iii.
leyges fro Sidera to cap de prieui.iiii. leyges fro cap de pryenl to
colome.iii. leyges fro Colome to Sissergues v. leyges fro Sissergues to cormes
iii. leiges fro cormes to Mongye v. leyges fro mongye to ye cap of feuyster
there is.iiii. leyges fro the Cap fenystre to cea v. leyges fro Cea to Mores v.
leyges fro mores to bayo^e de moror viii. leigs fro Bayone to camino iiii.
leyges fro comino to Vyenne iiii. leyges fro Vyenne to Vyll de count.v. leiges
fro Vyl decount to Porto in Portyugale is.iiii. leyges fro Porta de vere de
Mo^dego.ix. leyg. fro Monde^go to paradeu^.ix. leyges fro Parades to barlynges
ix. leyges fro Berlyngues to rock de Semper there is.xii. leyges. fro Semper
to Cap de fycher.x. leygs fro fycher to Cap. s. Vynce^t.xxviii. ley Between
cap. s. Vince^t and cap saint Maryis.xviii. leyge Bitwene the cap of saint Mary
and the abbeye of Dolues is.xvii leyges Between the Abbaye of Dolues, and saint
Lucas de bemeredo is.viii. ley.
Routes fro Pontewe de Feron unto the flome Iorda^ and how many leyges is
between them.

POntewe de feron and the isle of cales lie east and weste, and between them
is.xx. leyges.

The isle of Cales and Trefaldogar lie east southeast, and west southweste and
between them is.viii. leyges.

Trefalga^ and the straytes of marock lie east and west, apoynt of southeast
and of northwest, and between them is.xii. leyg

The straytes of Marock and cap of Gad lie east and west, a point of north
east, and of southwest, between them. lxv. leyges.

Cap de gat and the formynges lie northest, and southwest, and between them is.
lx. leyges.

The formynges and Mayerke lie north east, and southwest, bitwene the^.xxx. legs

The isle of Mayerke conteyneth in length.xxviii. leyges.

Mayerke and Sardayn lie east and west, and between thew is. lxxxx leyges.
*Sardayn and Fozyl lie east and west and a point of Southeast, a point of
northwest, between them is.xxii. legs. The isle of fozyl in lenght is. lxii.
leigs

The isle of cecyll, and the isle of sapyence lie east, and west betwne them is.
ii. leyges.

The isle of Sapience and the isle of Candrye lie east and west, a point of
southeast and a point of northwest, between them is. lxii. leyges.

Candre in length is. lii. leyges.

The isle of Candre, and the isle of Famagos lie east, and west between them.
cxv. leyges. The isle of Famagos in length. c leyges. Famagos and capde Danaco
lie east and west. Cap dedinaco and Flo^e Iorda^ lie north and south and
between them is lxxxx leyges.

*Thus ends the Rutter of the sea and here follows, the courses of the
moon, and judgments, of the isle of Auleron.
TO reken the Courses of ye moon truly, it behooves to take for every,
quarter of the moon.xxxii hours and a half. For two quarters. xlv. hours.
For the quarters. lxviii. hours and a half.

For four quarters. lxxxx. hours.

*Note one course before the son in the south the moon in the east.

For five quarters. c.xii. hours, and a half.

For.vi. quarters.cxxxv. hours.

For.vii. quarters. c.lvii. hours, and a half.

Fro.viii. quarters. c.lxxx hours.

Two course before the son in the west the moon in the south.

For.ix. quarters. cc.ii. hours.

Fro xi. quarters. cc.xlvii. hours.

for.xi. quarters.xlvii. hours.

for.xii. quarters. cc.lxx. hours.

*The course before the son in the west, the moon in the south

For.xiii. quarters. cc.lxxxxii. hours. and a half.

for.xiiii. quarters. ccc.xv. hours.

for.xv. quarters. ccc.xxxviii. hours and a half.

Another course before the son in the south the moon in the north and so of
other. Note it well and shall find.vii.c.xx. hours.
HE that will reke^ the moon well by the days, ought to take for every
quarter of the moon three quarters and half a quarter of a day and an hour
and an half.

And for two quarters there is a day and three quarters, an half a quarter of a
day. For three quarters there is two days, three quarters, an hour and an
half. For.iiii. quarters is three days, and three quarters of a day.

One course before.
And for.v. quarters there is four days and a half four hours and a half.
For vi. quarters is v. days, and an half, and half a quarter.

For.vii. quarters there is.vi. days, and a half. an hour and a half.

For.viii. quarters there is.vii. days, and a half.

Two course before.
For.ix. quarters.viii. days and half a quarter, an hour and a half.

Fo.x. quarters.ix. days, and.ix. hours and a half.

For.xi. quarters.x. days.vii. hours and a half.

For.xii. qaurters.xi. days and a quarter of a day.

Three course before.
For.xiii. quarters.xii. days four hours and a half.

For.xiiii. quarters.xiii. days and half a quarter of a day.

For xv. quarters.xiiii. days, an hour and a half.

For.xvi. quarters.xv. days and no more

Thus ye shall find but.xxx. days in every moon.

*Note this well.
*At.xviii. days and.xviii. hours of the Moon, the Son in the south, what
shall ye tide be at glena^. Answer It shall be low water, and the moon shall
be in the north and ye shall have three wyndes bitwene the Moon, and the son.

*These be the customs of the Vicou^tyes of Brytayne.
ALshyppes or other vessels when they go to wrack by adventure on the
coostes of Brytaine be as if they were won to the said Vicount so that no
merchant nor other shall take nothing but they that saves the^ which ought to
be rewarded after their deseruyng. That is to wit, if they goo at adventure of
the sea to fetch them far they have the third part. And if they take it on
shore they shall have but a co^petent reward, as justice requires.

And because the country of Brytaine is so pereryllleous that, scantly a ship
ca^ sail thither the spare of.ii. years with outcommynge in danger of the
said fordship. Therefore it was accorded between the said Duke and all manner
of ships, by the assente of the King of france, at the prayer, request, and
supplycacyon of all the country, that the said earl should give seals the
which been called bryfes to whom he would in his ground, and so where holde^
all the ships that laded in the duchy of Brytayne unto the realm of Spain
to take the said bref^s on payue to lose the said ship and the goods.

It was a greed therefore among them that what ship that aue^tured into
this said ground, and fyndenge the brefes in witnesses of the registres of the
places where they do lie that the said Lordshyp ought not to take nor suffer
to take any of the goods that is in it, nor of the wares that is saved, saving
the right of the sauers yt was agreed because thy labor to save the goods,
and by these couenauntes of brefes, al manner of shyps and marchau^^yse be^
assured of right and noblesse of ye said prince, and they ought to show to the
admyrall or his lieftenau^te ye brefes of all the vyages that they have made in
a hole year, at al times yt he will require the^ or else he may hold the^ as
for fayt and because yt the king of Spain nor his ports, nor English me^
were not at his agreement to sail under ye first condycyon, in case yt they
come laded or void from their cou^treyes, if they by charged where the bryfes
be they must take of them. for if they be without the^ they be at the princes
pleasure body and goods.

THe ordinances wherefore the vycount of Leon is acustomed to ye seals called
seals of co^ducte and not brefes was because the said Vycou^te was at the
passage there as it behooved al vessels to assemble, laden or empty, to the^de
that none should misdo other because they were of strange cou^tres it was
agreed yt he should keep vessels to save and co^ducte them toward their lands
from the said harborowe, and to suffer that all manner of people might take
vitailes on his foresaid ground, it was accorded therefore that he should have a
certain sum for the seals. And in case yt any ship passed forth without
taking vytayle on his said ground not having the said seals, to be forfayt in
body and goods. And ye said vicou^t may follow then what part soever they go
and lead them with him as things forfayted to iustyfie in his said ground and
they beholden to show all the seals of vyages that they have made for years,
and by this the said Vycou^t is holden to keep the said vessels in peace
within this said ground to her power And this is his right with the mind of
many Sith the Lords of Brytain have conquered the said Vycount, and these be
the two noblesses of the prince. And sith the said noblesses were hole to him
has wylled that the Spanyerdes and other that they may take harborowe in his
ground without adventure charged or to be fraught fro strange lands, yt where
the brefes should be saufe to them to demand the said brefes with in the
third tide after that they have cast yt anchor, on land in the haven to rest,
or else to fetch the^, what part soever they be, in case that they should not
have passed by the race of saint Mathewe, but if they do not pass, they shall
not be saved by such will and manner.

Here begins the judgments of the Sea, of ships, of masters of
maryners, of merchants, and of al their doings.
First one man is made master of the ship and the ship belongs to many
parteners and departs from the cou^tey of whence it is, and comes to London
or o another place, and is fraught to go into a strange country the master
ought not to sell the ship without he have a procuracyon or license of the
owners. But if he have need of money for the expenses of the ship, he may
lay to guage some of the take lynges, by the counsel of the maryners of the
ship.

This is the judgment.
A Ship lienge in a haven, and taryeth for ye freyght and time to depart, the
master ought take counsel with his fellows, and say, mates how like ye this
wether, Some will say it is not good, let it over pass.

Other will say the wether is good and fair. The master ought to agree to ye
most, or else if the ship peryshe he is bound to restore the value as it is
praised, if he have where with.

This is the judgment.
IF a ship pereysh in any place the maryners ought to save the most part of
the goods in the ship and in so doing the master ought to give them their
costs reasonable to good to land, if they have saved so much that the master
may do it. And the master may lay to bledge of the saved goods to some honest
man for them. And if he can not help them so he is not bound to reward them,
but they to lose their rewards when the ship is lost. And the master may
sell no takelynge of the ship but if he have procuracyon or license of the
owners. But he ought to put them in saufgarde to the time yt he do'th know the
will of the owners, and he ought to do it the most truly that be can, and if
he do otherwise he is holde^ to make ame^des if he have wherewith.

This is the judgment.
ALso if a ship depart fro Burdewes or another place laden, it chances
sometime that it wracketh and the most part of the goods that may be his
saved, the merchants and ye master be at great strife, and the merchants
ask their goods of ye master They ought well to have the^, having the freyght
as if the ship had made the vyage ke^nyng, by ke^nyng, and course by course, if
it please the master and if ye master will he may amend his ship if it be in
case to be lyghtlye mended, and if not he may hyre another ship to fynyshe his
vyage, and the master shall have his freyght, as if he had saved the goods,
and the freight of the said goods yt be saved ought to be rekened pound by
pound, and the good to pay the part of the costs that were done in sauinge
of the said goods, and if so were that the master and the merchants do
promise to tolke that should help to save the ship and goods, to have the
third part or half by the^ so saved for the peril yt they be in the justice
of the country ought well to regard what labor and pain they have done in
the saving and after that pain (not conte^tynge the promises made by the
said master and maryners) to reward them

IF a ship depart fro any place laden or not, and aryuethe at another place
the maryners ought not to go out without lene of the master, for if the ship
should peryshe or hurt by any adventure, they be holdeen to make amends. But
if the ship were in a place where it were ankered with two or three Cables
they may well go out without the mayesters leave, leaving some of the
maryners to keep the ship and goods, and they to come betyme to the ship and
if they tarry long they ought to make amends if they have wherwyth.

Such is the judgment.
MAriners bind them with their master and any go out without leave of the
master and drink dronken and make noise and strife so that any of them he
hurt, the Maiester is not bound to cause them to be healed, nor to puruey
ought for them, but he may well put them out of the ship But if the
master send them in any erande for the profit of the Ship, and that they
should hurt them, or that any did grieve them, they ought to be healed at
the costs of the ship

This is the judgment.
IF it chance that any mariner be taken with sickness in ye ship doing service
thereto belo^gyng the Master ought to set him out of the ship, and seek lodgyuge
for him, and ought for to find him light, as talow or candel and give to him a
lad of the ship for to take heed of him, or hyre a woman so keep him, and
ought to puruey him of such meat as is used in the ship that is to wite as
much as he took when he was in health and no more but if the master will. And
if he will have deyntyer meats, the master is not bound to get him any,
but to be at his tostes. And if the ship be ready to depart it ought not to
tarry for him, and if he recover to have his hire in prayeng and rebatyng that
the master laid out for him. And if he dye his wife or next kyn or friend
ought to have it for him.

The judgment, is such.

ALso a ship is freyght to go toward London, or elsewhere and if it do chau^ceth
that tourme^te takes it being on the sea, and it can not escape but if the
goods because out the master ought to say, mates it behooves to cast over
these goods to save the ship, and if there be any merchant that will answer
and will be contrary of the castyng out by their reasons and will not agree, the
master nevertheless oughtnot to leave but cast over so much as he shall se need.
He and the thyr depart of his fellows making their oaths on ye holy gospel
when they become to the right place of their discharge yt he did it for to save
the bodi of the ship and the other goods that is yet in it and ye wynes yt were
cast over ought to be praised at the value of them ye be come saufe, and when
they shall be lord they ought to be divided pound by pound among the said
merchants and the master ought to deuyde, and teken the ship or three
freyght as his choice and for recouerynge of the domages the maryners ought to
have a tonne fre, and any other ought to have part after his deseruynge, and
if he has not behaved him as a good man to have nothing of the franchyse. And
the merchants may charge the master for it by his oath.

This is the judgment.
SO may chance that ye master must cut of his mast by force of ye wether,
but he ought to call ye merchants that owe the goods, if any of them be
there and say. The maste must needs be cut to save the ship, and goods, it
were reasonable by truth. And sometime behooves to cut a so^der Cables and
leave the Ankers and rothers to save Ship and goods all these things been
rekened pound by pound. And when god sends the ship to dyscharge in saufte
the merchants ought to pay each their rate without delay, or to sell or
guage for money, or ever the goods be out of the ship. And if the ship be at
hyrynge, and the master tarry by reason of there debate and perceives lekage,
he ought not to part with the losses but have his freight as if the tones were
full.

This is the judgment.
WHen a ship comes saufe to the right dyscharge ye master should show ye
merchants the ropes yt they have to hoyse withal. And if they se need, the
master ought to amend them. For if the tonne lose because of the hoysinge or
of the ropes the master and the Ma^^uers among them must pay the
merchants, and the master ought to pay after as he ought to take for the
vnladyng, and the vnladynge to be set first to recover the losses, and the
resydue to be departed among them. But if the ropes break without that the
Master show them to the merchants they are bound to recompense the damage.
But if the merchants say, the ropes be sure, and good, if they break each
of the^ ought to have part of the damage, that is to wite ye marchaunte that
owes yt wine only, and the master and the maryner

This is the judgment.
A Ship being charged at Burdewes orels where, and hoyseth the sayse for to go
with the wines, and the master and his maryners trymmeth not their sail as it
should and ill wetherynge takes them in the sea, in such manner yt the
takelynge crusheth or siniteth out the botome of ye tonne or pype, the ship
being saufaryued at the right dyscharge, the merchants says to the master,
that ^y his take lynge there wine is lost. The master says nay, and if he
will swear, and three or four or half a dosyn of his maryners or any of them
which the merchants will that the wine was not lost by their defaute nor by
thyr takelynge as the merchants put on them they ought to be quyt. But if
they will not swear they be bound to order their sail well and truly or they
part fro their charge.

This is the judgment.
A Master hyreth his maryners and ought to keep them pesably and ostre to be
their Judge and if any say yt his felows lies, having bread and drink at
the table, ought to pay.iiii. d. And if any belyeth the master to pay.viii.
d. Or if the master belie any also to pay.viii. d. And if the master smite
any of the mariners the mariner ought to abide the first buffet be it with
fyste, or stath with his hand but if he smite any more he may defend him. And
if a maryner smite ye master to pay.v. s. or. to lose his fyst.

The judgment is such.
Any ship freyght at burdewes or any other place and comes to his right
discharge, and be charged half party tonnage and small lodmans servants ben
to the merchants. The custom of Brytayn is all they that be taken steth they
pass the isle of Bas, and bepayuz la main. And they of Normandy and England,
and flaundres, syeth they pass Garnesey, and they of syeth they pass Garnesey
do not.

This is the judgment.
IF variaunce fall between the master of a ship, and the mariners the master
ought to take the torwell a way that is before the mariner or he put him out,
and if the maryner offer to make Amends at the Agreement of his mates that be
at the table and the master will not but puts him out, the mariner may
follow the Ship till it come to the right dyscharge, and ought to have as
good wawages as, if he had gone in the ship, amendynge the trespace at the
verdite of his fellows, And if so be that ye master take not in as good a
maryner as be, and the ship by chance take harm the master is bound to
restore the ship and the goods, if he be able.

This is the judgment.
IT may so be that as a ship lies ankered at rode, another ship comes out of
the sea, and by mysguiding hitteth against the ship that is in the way, so
that the ship is domaged with the strocke that ye other ship gave it, and there
is wine shed on both bartes, the loss ought for to be praised and divided
half to half between the ships and the wines lost in the said ships
also among the merchants, and the master of the ship that hit the other
must swear on a book, and his merchants with him that he did not with is
will. The reason why this judgment was made is that an old ship wyllynglye
lies not in the way of a better so ferforth as it knows not to damage it by
greuyng but when it knows well that it must part byhalfe, it will pass by
out of the way.

Such is the judgment.
TWo ships or mo lyenge in A haven, at scante water, and one of the ankers
lie to nere another ship, the master of the said ship ought to say. Master
take up your anchor it is to nere us and may do us harm And if they will not
remene it, the master and his maryners that might have the damage may take it
up, and set it ferther from them, but if the other will not suffer them, and it
do them damage, the other must restore it, and if so be yt they had fastened
to it, no. But and if it do hurt they be hold to yield the hurt all alonge,
and if they lie dry in a haue^, thy ought to set marks at their ankers that
may plainly be fene above the water

The judgment is such.
IF a ship be arrived to be charged at Burdews or at any other place the
master is holden to say ta his fellows. Mates will ye freyght by your self,
or be allowed at the freyght of the ship. That is to be at their own prouysyon.
They must answer what they will do, if they take at ye freyght of the ship,
they shall have as the ship shall have. And if they will freyght by them self
they ought to freyght it in such wise as the ship do not tarry.

And if it chance that they find no freight the master is not to blame, and
ought to show them their fare, and may set ye weight of their ship meat to
each of them, and if they will lay in a tonne of water they may* for a tonne
of wine, and if throwynge over into the sea happen the ton of water ought to
be for a tonne of wine, or for other goods, pound to pound, whereby the
maryners may healpe them in the sea. And if so be that they freyght it with
marchaundeyse, such fraunchyse as the maryner has ought the merchant to have.

That is the judgment.
THe mariners of Bri^ain ought to have but one meal a day, by reason of that
they have drynkes going, and coming, and they of Normandye ought to have two
meals of the kytchyn on the day, because they have but water going at the
ship costs. And when the ship is at the shore the maryners to have wine to
drink and other at the fyndyng of the master. This is the judgment. A Ship
comes to dyscharge, the maryners will have their finding some there be yt
have neither bed nor caben in the ship, the master may retain of their
hyre fill the ship be there as they took it, if their put no good suerty to
furnisshe their viage.

This is the judgment.
ALso the master of a ship hyreth his maryners in the town that is of some of
their own finding, and other at his coostes. It chau^ceth that the ship can
find no feyght to go where he would be, and they must go ferther. They that
find them self ought to follow him, but they that be a this coasts he ought
to raise their wages, kennynges by kennynge, and course by course, after the
rate of their hyre for to go to a tertayne place. And if they go nerre then the
place, or well as far as they were hired to all to be allowed but they must
yield the ship, where they took it, and set it at the adventure of god.

This is the judgment.
WHhen a ship comes to Brystow or any other place Of such meat as is in the
ship, two of the maryners may bear to shore a mease or an half mease, such
as they be cut in the ship, and such bread as they have, as may eat at one
time, but no drink. And thy ought to haste them shortly aborde again that the
master lose not the ernestes of the ship, for if the master have damage by
that loss, they be holden to allow it. Or if any of their fellows hurt him
self for lack of help, they be holden to heal him and to make a fine at the
verdyte of one of the maryners, and of the master, and of them of the table.

This is the judgment.
IF a master freyghte his ship to a merchant, and set a certain term
within the which at ye merchant should lade, ready to depart, if the
merchant does it not, but keep the the Master and his maryners by the space
of.xii. or.xv. days or more, sometime he leseth his wetherynge and time by
defaute of the merchant, the merchant is holden to make the master amends.
And of such amends as the master has the maryners ought to have the fourth
part, and the master the other iii. parts, because he finds their expenses.

This is the judgment.
CErtain merchants or one freighteth a ship, and sets it in way The said
ship enters into a haven, and is there so long that money fails them. The
master ought for to send in have into his country for money, but he ought not
to lease his armoga^ for if he do he is bound to redress all the domages of ye
marchau^ts. But he may take of the wine, and of the marchasites goods, and
make sale for his store. And when ye ship comes to ye right discarge the wine
that the wayster has so taken ought to be praised after the rate as the other
shall be sold comenly and neither more nor less. And the master ought to have
his freyght of the wine that he has taken.

This is the judgment.
A Lodesman under takes to lade a ship to hulle or to other places, if he
fail, and the ship perysshe to the merchants domages he is bound to restore
the domages if he have wherewith. And if he have not wherewith to lose his head,
and if the mastes or any of the maryners or Merchants do smite of his head
they be not bound to make amends, but they ought first to know before they
do it if it be able ta make a me^des

This is the judgment.
TWo vessels be fellows to take Herynges or Makerelles, they ought to lay as
many gynnes one as another. and they be a greed to part the gain by half
between them, and if it chance that one of them peryshe both men, gynnes and
other things and the other scapeth and comes sauf to shore, the fre^des of
him that is ded asks part of the gain that they have made, of the gynnes,
hearing, and vessel. They shall have part and gain of the gynnes and
hearing, by the oaths of them that be escaped. But of the vessel they get
nothing.

This is the judgment.
A Sippe hoysseth up at the discharge and lies dry where she is so iocoud that
the Maryners takes at the main. Maste, or at the scurtyll before or behind
the master ought to increase hyre their kenninge for kenneynge, and in
wyndying of wynes it chances that they leave a pipe or other vessel open,
and have not well fastened it with roopes at the end of the ship and it
slyppeth and falls upon another, and marreth them bote, the Master and
maryners ought to restore the merchants, and the Merchants must pay the
freyght of the two pypes, because they shall be paid at the price that other
besolde. The master and maryners ought to set their hoyssynge first to
recover the damage pound to pound. The owners of the ship shall take
nothing, for it was faut of the master, and maryners in fastenyng of the pype.

This is the judgment.
Witness the seal of ye i will of aulero^ establysshed by the contractes of the
said isle, the Tuesday after the feast of saint Andrewe. The year of our
Lord. M.CC.lxvi.

Finis.
A new Rutter of the Sea, for the North; parties. Compyled by Richard.
Proud. M.D.XLI.
BArwyke lies southe and north, of the Cold stone land, and Barwyke haven
lies west nor west and east south east and from ba^bewe unto the point of the
land. The course lies north and southe, but beware of the Golstones, it flows
north nor west, and quarter tide under roder from Tynmouth to fayreyla^d, ye
course is north Northwest, and south south east. And Tynmouth is tide
northeast, and south west betwexte the headland and hand clyf the course is
norwest and southeast and it flows west southwest east northeast and at Why
thy is half tide, and from Ho^dclyf clyf so forth to humber the course is
southeast and by south and nortweste and by north, from Lyernesse to the head
land the course nor nor weste, and south south east, at the head land the
stremes set norweste and southeast and it flows on the head Land of
holdernes northeaste and quarter tide in the fair way and at the head Land
quarter tide, and half quarter and, if ye go fro Lyernesse to the shield ye
shall go east south east, for to go clear of to sand and if ye half a neb go
southeast and by east, and if ye go from sporne the shield And wind be at
North west, your course is southeast, till ye be paste well Banks in the
wells flows west, and East, and there goes also streams under other, and at
the sheldes it flows on the Land, West nor weste half streams Under other
by the Land to ye come to Winter towns, and fro Winter towns to ye, come to
Kerkely Roode, it flows on the land, it flows northwest and quarter and half
quarter tid under other and if ye go from shield to the Helmes, and it be in
the night ye shall go but x. fadom of the cost till ye guess be pass the
Lymber and vry. And so go the estemmar course till ye come to.xiiii. fadome and
goo your course sodtheast till you be past the holmes. But the most wisdom
is to bid till day. From Kerkeley roode holmis to orforde, and be westin, it
flows on the land south southeast, and at the halmes head quarter tide fro
or fordnes to or will wannes the course is. southwest, and flows south east,
and in or will hauyn within the were south and north and ye go fro or will
wannys to the nesse ye weste go southe west fro the nasse of makres, of ye
spette your course is west south west, and it flows south and by east bring
your marks together: That is the paryshe church steple out be east the abbaye
of saint Vsseys, then go your course over the spetes south till you come in ten
fadoms or.xii. fadome the^ go your course with the sho south southwest. If it
be flode come not within eyghte fadomes And ye bring you to.xi. fadome or.xii.
fadoms then goo your course into the Te^mes with ye grenebanke west south west
and at the sho it flows south and north, and out of Orwilwandes to go out at
the flod your course is east south east for cause of ye roge and the ^ackes till
ye come to.xv. fadomes dep^, and for the landefang, then ye may go southe
southeast till ye come to.xviii. fadomes the^ ye must go southe one glass or
two glass for cause of the knock. Then go south southwest and fetch up Tenete
and tetch up.vii. fadomes on the break the^ go your course south, it is your
fair way, and take the knok in Kentisee it flows south, and at the north head
of god win the streams re^neth to south south west and at the south heed of
goodwin the streme renis to south west, and by south it flows fro tenet to
wyze on both sides on the main Land south south east, at sandwych at downs
goo to south by east, And in the down goo half tide under other, and if ye
ride in the downs And will in to Sandewych haven ye must ryre and it be
tonynge wind at east, southeast move. And if it be a following wind ye may
bide to south east moan. And ye bowne to Calays haue^, and ride in dowues, and
the wynd be west southwest or south west, ye must rere I north east moon and
get you into your marks, the stepell in the Fan, then go your course, east
southeast over and after your tide serve your wend, And Look you seek Cales
haven, at south southeast moan or south and by east And if ye turn in the
Downs, come no near goodwyn the^.ix. fadome, ne no near the brakes them five
fadome, from saint Margaretes stayre and ye will go to donginas your way is
south, southwest and retch xviii. fadome deep betwixt-saynt Margaretes stayre
and Donginas goes half tide. And fro dongynas to hyld ninas your course is
east and west. Donginas and the water of sin lies east southeast, and west
norwest, Dunginas and deep lies south east and by east, nor west and by west
and Donginas and saine heed south southweste go from donginas and ye have.xx.
fadome deep. go west south west, that is your course alonge see. And at
donginas is half and is half quarter tide And unto Hastynge half tide, and at
Becheffe quarter tide, Becheffe and Deep south east, and norwest becheffe and
said heed south and north the hyland of a Rondel and strouttart south
southeast, and nor nor west, the said head and wolves head southeast, and nor
weste Barflette nas and wolneserde south southeast, and nor norwest.

The schapel hogs and neldes south and north. The hagge be east, Rokys nese,
and Wolnesord south and by west, north and by east. Wolnesorde and Garuesaye
south southeweste and quarter tide under other at Wolnesord. From Wolnesord to
the Beg of saint telynes half tide under other And from saint Telines to
chaike sord is half tide, and a south moan make highest water with in wight
nedelles.

And they forne lies south west and by west, and northeast and by east the
neldes and ye cornela^de west and east and the nedylles it flows south east,
and by south from the nedelles to portland west south west, and east north east
at the Poll within Haven it flows nor west, and southeast, and in the fair
way southe southeast and north north west, at Waymouth within the haven east
and west at the byll at Portlande south southeast and north north weste. The
said heed and Portelande lies west northwest, and east southeast. Portlande
and Garnsay south and north. Said heed and the Hyunde by west dartmouth east
and by south west and by north Portland and bery land east and by north, west
and by south Bery land and Sterte-west southwest and east north east. Bytwyxte
Portland and start every haven is tide east west Bytwyxte Berylande and the
lands end of England that is half tide in the fair way Bytwixte the start
and Lessart the course is east and west and beware of the Edy stones all the
havens he full Bytwixte the Starte and Lessarte the course at weste southweste
moon the lands end and Lessarte lies east south east and west Norwest at
the lands end lies the. Raynolde stone a little yurth of but.xii. fadomes
shall led you without him And south south west of the lands end lies the
Golfe the Lange ships and the lands end lies nor nor west, and south south
east, the lange shypes and saint Mary ^ou^de of Sylly lies west south west and
east northeast. Saint Mary stound and Visha^t lies nor west, and by north
south east, and by south. Sylly and the said lies south south east and nor
norwest, The said and Vsshant lies south and north. Vsshant and the Popyll
hope lyethe north and by west, and south and by east. Vsshant and Lyssart north
and south, Lyssart and saint Mary stounde of Sylly lies weste and east, but
beware of the Gulf, but Saint Mary stounde and the Forne nor west and
southeast. The Forne and Popyl hop nor north west. and south south east. The
Forne and Lyssart north and by east, and south and by west. The Forne and the
Gred by east. Falmoth north and south. The forne and the Ramhed nor north east,
and south southwest. Vsshant and the Ramhed north east and by north south west
and by south. The Forne and Bery land north east and by north, south west and
by south. The Starte and Baspal north and south. Basepal and Ramhede north and
by weste, and south and by east. Garnsay and the Hiwnd by west Dartmoth west
north west, and east southeast. (*)

FINIS.

