A PEARL of Price OR, The best Purchase:

For which the Spiritual Merchant Ieweller sells all his Temporalls.

By Samuel Gardener, Batchellor of Divinity.

It shall not be valued with the wedge of Gold of Ophyr, nor with the precious
Onyx, nor the Saphyr.

Job. 28. verse 16. Printed by V.S. for Thomas Bushel, and are to be sold at
his shop at the North Door of Paul's. 1600.



To the Right Honorable sir Thomas Egerton Knight, Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of England, and one of her Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel.
MY Lord, having nothing but two mites with the poor widdowe woman, to cast
into your Treasury, even the service of the body and the mind, and the whole
man, a tribute that of duty is due unto your Lordship: seeing I am justly
charged with this oblation, I hope your Honor will acquit me of presumption,
both use and lively feeling, giving me protection: use with every tenant to
pay his Landlord rent, and sensible feelyng of your Lordships bounty, justly
extorting this as my bounden duty. Our Lord forbid, that we receive a benefit,
as a beast his diet, and never respect and behold the founder of it. My master
Christ, John 6
who commanded the fragments of a benefit bestowed upon an hungry people, to be
gathered up in baskets: insinuates thereby, that the basest benefit that is
done upon us, should not be forgotten. Having therefore so deeply dyued into
your Lordshippes debt, how can I not but draw from as deep thoughts, as ever
any water was drawn from Jacobs well, the memorial of your goodness. John 4
Since it pleased your Honor by the right worshipful sir Hierome Bows Knight,
the only worldely arch, and supporter of my estate, to take sight of my poor
person, and honorable commiseration of my afflicted condition. If I make no
relation of your Honors most christian clemency when J drew my breath but
faintly, how I had recovery, and regained free recourse to my woonted study: If
I rip not up the circumstances of your zealous favors, J do but as Solomon
with the brass in the Temple, who because it was so massy, he would not
stand to weigh it: or as Portius Latro who engraued in his mind, that which
others engrossed in a book.

This precious pearl of the word of God, which shines, which way soever you
turn it, and flies unto all, I have wrapped up in this little manuel, and
fastened it unto your Honors virtuous name, as unto a ribband and golden Chain
that will keep it the better. Your Lordship have always worn it about you,
and have bound it as a Signet unto your hand, and with the faithful
Congregation of Colosse have suffered it abundantly to dwell in your heart:
whenas with most worldlings, Gods word, as the Leuite that went to Gibea
wandreth in the streets, and have but slender entertainment among men. I
encourage my self, that GOD will give a blessing to these labors, that the
argument it self will draw hearts unto it: and you my Honorable Patron will be
a sufficient protection to my person. God almighty every way prosper your
Honor, double your honor and days among us, and give you all honor in his
heavenly kingdom.

Your Honors humble Orator Samuel Gardener.

To the Gentle Reader.
IT is a matter of no mean marvel, that man so quicke-sighted in worldly
affairs, should be so purblind in things concerning God. That whereas he is
Totus occulus and manus, all cie and hand, to observe and practice in lively
imitational other things, only this main and fundamental thing, how to order
his conversation right, that he might see the salvation of his God, he is wholly
ignorant of: Though he wants the wings of a dove, to fly to the utmost parts
of the earth, yet he can so subdue to himself his mules and dromedaries, as
their feet like hearts feet shall carry them whither they list. And though he
has not the finnes of a fish, to scudde through the channells and paths of
deep waters: yet instead thereof, his head has bin occupied in excogitating
great vessels, keels and tall ships to transport every where. Naturally he is
unarmed of himself, yet this art and cunning has devised for him self, his
sword, his bow, and his spear, and all sufficiency of weapons of offense, and
armor of proof to cover his head in the day of battle, enough for his
defense. He is unable so to tune his pipes, and chaunt and sing under every
green tree with the nightingale and melodious bird: yet that his music is of
more delight, which by Lute and Harp, and loud Cymbals, and other exquisite and
devised instruments, he has formed and framed to himself. Thundrings and
coruscations of the air, are peculiar unto God, the arrows of his quiver, and
his Bailiffes arrant, and Purseuants of his anger: yet behold in a strange and
prodigious imitation hereof, he has found out most fearful roaring Cannons of
all sorts, most horrible to consider of. Finally, he provides for this kind of
life, infinite kinds of ways, which are like an intricate maze past our
finding out, by laws, by trades, by all manner of learning. But Finis vltimus,
the last end of all is least considered of, wherein the whole state of all
blessedness of the man so fully does consist. Man (as says the Psalmograph) is
deceitful upon the weights, and is altogether lighter then vanity it self.
Man being in honor, and having no understanding, is compared to the beasts that
perish. We bewail those our friends that are dead in body: O let us weep and
bewail their estate who are dead in heart, and are twice dead, and to be
plucked up by the roots. The Apostle accounted all things, but dung to gain
Jesus Christ. This is better then the gold of Ophyr or India, albeit we stop
our eyes with wax, and bind a napkin before our eyes of knowledge, and think
that there is a wisdom in the world far better then this. Thesewipe their
mouths with the whore in the Revelation, and say unto themselves, that they are
rich, and need no more, whenas they are the poorest and most miserable of al
men, as the last end shall prove unto the^. They that have tasted of this
heavenly Manna, will scorn the gross food and diet of Egypt, and being called
to the kingdom of grace, will with the shepherds leave their flock, and with
Matthew their custome-seat, with Peter their nets with Paul their process and
writs, that were signed to be sent unto Damascus, when the love of God is fallen
upon us, the love of this world, will fall from us, as Elias mantle when he left
the world, and was carried up to heaven. Buy therefore this Pearl and Treasure of
the soul, and lodge it in thy heart: it will be instead of all riches unto
thee. Covet heavenly things, and let our conversation be in heaven, seeing we
have here no abiding place, but we look for a city whose builder and maker is
God. And so I commit you to the grace of God, who is able to build further, and
to give thee an inheritance among those that are sanctified: and the Lord
sanctify these my labors, and direct them to his glory and the common
salvation. Farewell.

A Table setting out the several Contents of the Chapters of this Book.
CHap. 1. Of the purport and necessary use of this parable. Folio. 1. Chap 2.
That the word of God, is all kind of Treasure. Folio. 16 Chap. 3. That the
word of God, is a Pearl of great price. Folio. 33 Chap. 4. That the word of
God is a Treasure that is hidden: and wherefore it is so called. Folio. 55
Chap. 5. Of this Merchant man his task imposed upon him, for the attayning
unto this Treasure, and Pearl of great price. Folio. 73 Chap. 6. Of the
gladness of this Evangelical Merchant, upon the finding of this Treasure, and
Pearl of great price: under which, the joy which the saints of God do feel by
the power of his word typically is shadowed. Folio. 89 Chap. 7. By the example
of this Merchaunt, who did hide his Treasure: the necessity, not only of the
hearing of the word, but also, of the faithful hiding it in our hearts, is
manifestly euicted. Folio. 110 Chap. 8. That this heavenly Treasure, is to be
preferred and esteemed of us, above all earthly riches. Folio. 125 Chap 9. That
God and the world, cannot agree together. Folio. 141 Chap. 10 Of the necessity
of our mortification, and the abiuration of all our worldly lusts, under the
person and example of this Ieweller, who made a simple sale of all that he had,
for the purchase of this Treasure, and Pearl of great price, evidently
euicted. Folio. 157 Chap. 11. That all our endeavors, are to redound to the
glory of God, and to tend only to a spiritual end, as is lively shadowed in
the example of this Merchant, whose bargain of sale of all his temporalls, was
only for the purchase of this heavenly Treasure. Folio. 174 Chap. 12. An
Exhortation to the love of the word, and the spiritual life, the purport of
the premises. Folio. 188
Faults escaped in the printing, I pray thee correct thus.
Page 7 line 26. read Gelbea. Page 15. l. 19. scarcirie for security Page 28.
l. 4. Sisara for Si^opa Page 36. li. 9. distant for descant Page 51. l. 13.
eareth for eats, twice Page 55. li. 2. read omnipotent Page 56. l. 11.
read, it was not the Page 59. lin. 4 for Coelo read Celo Page 71. li. 9 for
nullique read nuila Page 74. l. 14. wages for ways. Page 82. lin. 13. whole
for holy. Page 84. l. 23. read Was not this Page 87. l. 19. read and rudiment
Page 87. last line read kabish Page 105. lin. 12. read in that Page 115. lin.
2. dele to the Page 123. lin. 23. moate for moath Page 126. li 8. read This
gospel-like Goldsmith Page 130. lin. read coruscant Page 133 l. 5. read loath
the word Page 135 lin. 14. read Bochri Page 136. line 20. read delights of
the world are in steed of nurses. Page 153. line 6. for so read in. Page
154. line 4. read favor of Page 157. line 2. read abiuration Page 160. l 27.
Christ for christians Page 176. line 7 read Athenian.
The best Purchase, for which the Spiritual Marchant-aduenturer sells all
that he has. Mat. 13
CHAP. I.
Of the purport and necessary use of this Parable.

THese two Parables, as Pharao his two dreams of the seven fat kine, and
seven ears of corn, Genesis 41
are in effect but one. Both of them chalk out the way that we must walk,
that we seek not happiness out of the way, as E^^^ hunting venison, Genesis 27
was prevented of his blessing.

It is wonderful how the world is greedy of the world, striving for it as
beggars for a doale; preying upon it, Job 8
as the Eagles on the altares, and as the busy Birds upon Abraham his
sacrifice. Genesis 11


These rave with Rachel, Give me children, ^r else I die: Give me worldely
riches, Genesis 10.
pleasures, and desires, or else I die: doting upon this Dittie with the ruder
rowt, Happy are the people who are in such a case, Psalm 144
whose sheep bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in their streets etc.
which the Singer of Israel mendeth with his harp, trebbling and quauering
melodiously in this manner; Yea happy are the people who have the Lord Jehovah
for their God.

Now, Numb. 12
because it is our custom to set worser things first, and to esteem more of
onions, and the fleshpots of Egypt, than of heavenly manna with the older
Israelites; to prefer trash before treasure, swine before our Savior with
the greedy Gergesines; Matthew 19
to turmoyle our selves with Martha about many things, Luke 8 Luke 10 Luke 3
and neglect the chiefest thing, which was Mary's choice: here the Holy Ghost
answering like John Baptist too, what shall we do? sets us (as it were) in
the kings hie way that leads unto heaven, that guides us to a treasure of
incomparable value, to a Pearl, and Purchase of the greatest price and profit
whatsoever.

Hitherto our Savior has spent much speech, about the preaching of the
Gospel, which elsewhere he terms, Matthew 4
The Gospel of the kingdom, and in this place, The Kingdom of heaven, because
it is the key that opens heaven door, and the right path that brings us to
heaven: sampling it to triuiall and trifling things, that are of common use, in
certain former special Parables, as to Corn, Leaven, Mustard seed, and a
Field, in the which, with good wheat, tares and darnell, and other wild weeds
did spring up and grow together.

Now, because these mean comparisons should not cause us deem the Gospel to
be mean, he matcheth it here with matters of most moment with a Treasure,
with a Pearl of inestimable riches; to reform our judgment in spiritual
cases, that we should set more highly by them then we do, as there is good
reason why.

David was so highly conceited of the scriptures, as defining them, Psalm 119
he doubts not to prize them, above great spoils for value, and thousands
of gold and silver, yea all manner of riches, Psalm 19 Psalm 119
and to prefer them before the honey, and the honey comb for sweetenes; and
when he ends to define, he begins to admire, Wonderful are thy
testimonies, I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy commandment is
exceeding broad, understanding infinite. The necessity of this Treatise.
Psalm 107


This doctrine is more than necessary for these dangerous days, wherein the
greater sort abhors this meat, and their souls (as says the Psalmograph)
is at deaths door.

The Devil, the Bel-wether of the Politicians of our time, resembles in
conditions, A similitude.
subtle soldiers in the wars, who having won a Castle or strong Tower, do
stop and shutt up all passages by the walls, that none by any secret entry may
come in: the devil scaling the territory of our heart, and seating himself in
it, provides with slight and cunning enough, that the casements, portalles
and eyes of our souls, and our ears, should be stopped, and thoroughly closed
up, that the light of the Gospel of the glory of Christ, Hebrews 1
the character, image, and brightness of his father might not shine into our
hearts to our eternal comfort.

The cluish disposition of these the diuell^ darlings, the kingly Prophet has
narrowly observed, thus portraying, and desciphering it oriently in colors,
Psalm 38
They are like unto deafe^^ Adders, stopping their ears, refusing to hear the
voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely^^ for as the Aspe setting one
ear to the ground and with his tail covering the other, A similitude.
is deafe^^ and sensles at the voice of any charm; so men^^ thus madly minded,
their cogitations partly being fixed upon earth, and the tail of the red
dragon of the other part hiding them, the voice of the Preacher is not heard of
them.

A huntsman chasing and pursuing a dear (...) labors not so much, A
similitude.
to take him with his hands, as to wound him with his arrows whereby he is
sure of him; the devil this cursed Nimrod and huntsman of our souls, drives
at this only, that our hearts being din^ed with his deadly darts, and our
inward man struck down unto the ground he finding us there groueling, he may
gripe us as he list, and snatch us away with him. Psalm. 91.
The Lord deliver us from the snare of this hunter, and from his noisome
pestilence.

But his school is very great, his mischief horrible, and the occasions
hereof are many. Hypocrites.


The Pharisees and glorious hypocrites of our age, a viperous generation,
painted and spotted bravely without, like to vipers skins, but inward, like
vipers full of rank corruption, do derrogate much from the dignity of the
word, and debase the Pearl and Treasure overmuch; A similitude.
whilst like the Smiths boy that does nothing but blow, their works are
nothing answerable to their words. The enemies of the truth do scandalize
and blaspheme the blessed word of God, viewing, and considering their corrupt
and sinful lives.

The Saduces, Epicures, Politicians, Number. 22.
and Political Na^als, whose god is their gold, whose pleasure is their
treasure, who savor nothing but the things of this earth: 1. Sam. 3.
are blind with Balaam with their eyes open, and so dim eyed with ^dely, as
they can not see the clear lamp of God burning in the Temple: Romans 1
whilst they seem wise, they become fools, and fall away with the deceit of
Balaams wages, Jude. verse. 11
and perish in the gainsaying of Chore. These are those that make a mock of
Gods word, and have the Preachers of it in exceeding great contempt,
accounting themselves Cedars, and the other the briars, and thistles of Lebanon.

The wisdom of these men fancieth not so much that wisdom of the spirit,
it is thought but simple in comparison of theirs. They suppose themselves able,
with the rolling of an eye, and as it were, with a breath, to attain to a
sufficiency of knowledge thereof. Once reading cursorilie of the Bible is
enough with them, and by a part, they conjecture of the whole, and therefore
they seek after another Schoolmasters, and a deeper wisdom, then the
wisdom of Gods spirit.

But little do these know, what a library of learning, and store of al
wisdom is to be had out of the blessed Bible: nay, how many sundry points,
both of Doctrine and Manners, are couched and contained under one period and
sentence of the Scripture.

As those that are Wine-drawers, A similitude.
by one draught of wine into a silver bowl, do present unto the buyer, an
experiment of the whole: so the new wine of the word, being ^ut into new
vessels, has bin tried what it is, by a smacke, and small taste out of one
place of Scripture, that has bin drawn out unto us.

This I dare avouch, that no book of humane eloquence, has ever been so
pathetically and perfitly penned, so garnished with ornaments and figures of
Rhetoric, of such a subtle wisdom of persuading (as I may so say) of such a
grace in setting forth one thing, such sundry kinds of ways. There is none
who has sufficiently bin taught out of this book, or has learned Christ
enough: That which is there contained, we know but in part, many things the
spirit has reserved to himself, and kept shut from us, that we might be his
scholars unto the end of the world.

The earth is not clothed with such sundry sorts of plants, fruits, and
sweet herbs, as the Lords Eden and garden of Scripture is adorned and set
forth with most comfortable constructions. In sorting and matching man's
^earning with this, it is to compare the barren mountains of Belboa, with the
fruitfullest Paradise of the whole world. 2. Sam. 1.


A Pearl is not known of what value it is, A similitude.
but of Lapidaries and craftes-men of that trade, who have judgment in it: Oh
that we had judgment to consider of the worth and worthiness of this Pearl!
that we knew that it were such a treasure as it is.

I counsel therefore our unwisely wise men, A similitude.
to blincke with cunning gunners with the one eye of carnal wisdom, that the
eye of the spirit may better hit the mark, that we should all shoot at, and
obtain the price that is set before us.

The third sort of people, The Papists.
who like unto swine, tread this Pearl under foot, are our Popish Centaures,
who would have Gods candle hidden under a bushel, and not to be set upon a
candlestick on high, to show light round about, Math. 5. Math. 6.
who have made the whole word of God of none effect with their lewd traditions,
who are grown past grace with the common harlot, that permits every knave
to have access unto her, going a whoring after every balde invention, which
is, to play the harlot with those whom Hierome the Prophet taxes under every
green tree. Hier. 2. Jude verse. 12.
These are trees without fruit, twice dead, and plucked up by the roots: for
as the open strumpet, who without any difference, admits all companions
alike that come unto her, is always barren, and without fruit of womb: So the
Romish strumpet admitting into the lapp^ and bosom of the Church, a confused
chaos of very rascal rudiments, no marvel it is that they are barren of
grace, and the immortal seed of Gods most holy word cannot regenerate and
better their affections.

The fourth and last enemy, Tyrants.
but not the least, is the Cyclopicall Tyrant of this world, 2 Reg. 9
whose marching is like the marching of Iehu the son of Nimshi, who marched
furiously: who advance their cruelty above the stars, Ierem. 3.
and offer villainy and defiaunce to the throne of Gods majesty; men of whoorish
foreheades that cannot be ashamed, casting out all wickedness, as a fountain
casts out water. This precious Pearl, fit to be worn in the Diadem of
princes, is trampled under foot, and cast out by these wretches, as the clay
in the streets. These lay Jacob waste, Psalm. 79
and destroy his inheritance, and spil blood like water on every side of
Jerusalem. This the church of God, by too too lamentable and woeful
experience, has felt continually; as Jacob by Esau, the Israelites by the
Egyptians, Anna by ^eninna, Elias by Achab, Amos by Amasiah, the latter church
of God by Lucian, Julian, Porphiri, and such like. Cain may not brook Abel,
because he sacrificed: nor the brethren Joseph, because he divinely dreamed:
nor Saul David, because he sweetly singed: nor Demetrius Paul, because he so
plainly preached.

As dogs cannot abide the sound of bells, A similitude.
so these hellish hounds yalpe and howl extremely at the preaching of the
Gospel. Isaiah must be slain with a saw: Jeremy with stones: Daniel with
Lions: Amos with a club: Peter with the cross: and Paul with a sword: and true
bearted Christians with all strange kinds of torments.

Wherefore to withstand such temptations as do grow upon these occasions, that
neither hypocrisy may blind us, or superstition deceive us, the pleasures of
sin allure us, or any worldly fear affright us; the Holyghost to great
purpose compares his word to things of cheifest choice, the subject, matter,
and end of our desires, fitting himself to our distempered minds, as the good
Physician to diseased bodies.

The Physician perceiving his pained patient, A similitude.
thorough his evil disposed stomach, to resist such diet as best makes with
his health, and to choose that only which feeds his disease, tempereth and
seasoneth those things so by art which he so much loatheth, with those things
that he loves, as by that which please him, he may the better take that which
will ease him. Now because we are given to loathe the word which we love not,
and like too much the world which we should not: under those things in the
world as pearls and treasure which we love most, to which he resembles and
compares his word, he wins us to that which we love so little; namely, to
the better receiving of his word.

And herein I seem to see the tender affection of our loving father in his
style and course of writing, A similitude.
how he imitates the nature of best affected mothers toward their tender
children, who to please their fancies, do stammer and suit themselves to their
kind of speech, mincing and nibling their words like their children.

And because we are as greedy of worldly treasure, as Absalon of a Kingdom, 2.
Sam. 15.
he speaks grossly after the manner of men, and abaseth his wisdom,
applying it (as you see) unto our worldly wisdom.

And I may not unfitly liken him to an excellent experienced angler, A
similitude.
who the better to toll fishes to his hook, has his choice, delightsome
baits, that best do fit that purpose, to draw those that lie in the bottom to
the top: So the wisdom of God here angling for our souls, angleth (as you
see) with a golden hook and the best bait that is, at which he knows well,
we will be sure to bite with stomach enough, that we that are in the bottom of
misery, may be brought up to the top of all felicity.

Since therefore the word is of that worth, I hope for the gaining it we will
easily swallow up such former hooks, as are laid to catch those that have a
love hereof mentioned before: and will be so wise to esteem it as we should,
and embrace and honor the loving kindness of our God, who has opened unto us
the treasures of his house, and has powered out the riches of his mercies on us.

Seemed it not to be grace enough that we were so created after his own image
in righteousness, and holiness? Ephesians 4.
that we were made partakers of so many of his blessings, and that it was his
pleasure to give us a kingdom? unless he also followed us with ouerflowing
favor, by giving us his word, in the which he has wrapped and sealed up his
will, whereby we may know what legacy he has given us, and how we may be able
to attain unto this kingdom? Herein is more then fatherly affection toward
us, and it is as needful, as comfortable unto us. For if the Prince should say
to any of us: If you shall be conformable to my laws, and obsequious to my
will, I will advance you, and bring you to honor; but if you shall be obstinate
and rebellious, you shall have judgment without delay, and the sword shall
consume you: and this prince should conceal and keep close his laws from us,
whereby we are not able to conjecture of his will, were not our estate and
condition very miserable?

In the whole map of Scripture fix we our eyes on Nabucad-nezzar, only the
anotomy of man's life, without knowledge of Gods word.

He dreaming a dream which none of his dowty Doctors could unfold, how moodie
and melancholy was the man upon it? into what a fury and ecstasy was he
driven, Dan. ^.
look but how the story does portray out his passions. And in this case
should we be, had not the Lord bin gracious to his servants, in giving his
laws unto Jacob, his statutes and ordinances unto Israel, in delivering us
state and possession of his Kingdom, by these charters and court-rolles,
evidences and deeds surrendered unto us.

This is the instrument which God has v^ed from the beginning of the world,
whereby it has pleased him to work our salvation, as the parable of the vine
sufficiently insinuates, to the pruning, trimming, and dressing whereof, there
were laborers successively, from the first hour, to the last, sent into the
same.

It is one of the first arguments of the Lords fury, Amos. 8
that when he means to be a sharp schoolmasters unto us, his hand shall be
so heavy upon us, as he will smite us with a spiritual famine of his word,
wherein he shall handle us manifold more roughly then if he should have pulled
both our arms from our shoulders.

Elsewhere denouncing vengeance against unrighteousness, Isai. 3.
he threatens to strip them, and deprive them of the Prophet, the interpreter
and vnfolder of his heavenly oracles.

Hereunto answers this denuntiation of the Lords judgment: Hosea. 3
The people of Israel shall be without God, without Priest, without Law: Mark
how he confounds them, and makes them both one, to be without a priest, and
to be without a God, as they are indeed. For, Homo sine doctore, est vt coecus
sine ductore; A man without a teacher, is like the blind without a leader:
like sheep without a shepherd, subject to the wolf, easily to be wurrowed,
like a ship without a pilot, splitten of rocks, Syrtes and sands, easily
overwhelmed.

Let a man be never so grievously sick, A similitude.
we despair not of recovery, so long as he has help and benefit by physic;
but if physic fails him, Isay. 1
he is a dead man, and there is no hope of him: our head is sick, Isa. 1.
and our whole body is heavy, there is nothing whole within us, yet there is
good hope, so long as we are comforted, by this heavenly physic of our health
and salvation; but want this, and want altogether, there is no help and
recovery to be had.

Be the handy-crafts man and artificer very beggarly, A similitude.
yet so long as he is not driven to sell away his tools, but keeps them by
him, he may be able to provide for his living: but if he palter away the
instruments of his trade, he may take him to his heels, for it is impossible he
should hold up his estate: Let the world ^^owne upon us as much as it will, we
are well enough, so long as the old and new instrument of the word is preserved
among us; but if that be once gone, Psalm. 109
we shall all like run^agates continue in security, and be driven to ^^ke our
trade in desolate places. But of the (...) further dignity, and necessity
hereof, he sequeale shall entreat.

CHAP. II.
That the word of God, is all kind of Treasure.

AS Job says of wisdom, Job 28
so it may be said of the word of God, the wisdom of the spirit. It is not
t^ be valewed with the wedge of gold o^ Ophyr, nor with the precious Onyx, nor
the Sapphire: The Gold nor the Cristall is not equal unto it, it shall not be
exchaunged for plate of fin gold. No mention shall be made of the Corrall o^ of
the gabish, for it is more precious then pearls The Topaz of Aethiopia shall
not be equal vnt^ it, neither shall it be valewed with the wedge o^ pure gold.

The name of a treasure contains vnde^ it, whatsoever is to be named: and
when w^ have named all, in comparison of the word, (...) is like a candle set
before the Sun which vanishes before it, and like a stope of water to the
huge Ocean sea, which is nothing vnt^ it.

The place wherein this Treasure is, is heaven, so that our conversation must be
heauen^^ (as the Apostle teaches us) if we will attain^ unto it: The Lord high
Treasurer is the sp^^rit of God, and his Vnder-treasurers, wh^ have also keys
thereof, are his able ministers of the new Testament, 2. Cor. 4.
that carry about this Treasure in their earthen vessels. Men, for their
outward persons, that are base, 1. Cor. 4
the very abiects, and excrements of the world, such as the Prophets and
Apostles were before them, vulgar and mean men, as shepherds, fishermen,
Publicanes, and such like. But the indignity of our persons derrogateth
nothing from the dignity of the word: There is none so unwise as to forsake a
Treasure, for the baseness of the bringer; gold is gold, from whose hands
soever it come.

If the King should send a general pardon, A similitude.
to all condemned captives in his kingdom, by some pittious poor person, the
poverty of the Purseuant disgraceth nothing the gratiousnesse of the pardon,
it is of as full power, and no doubt, should be as welcome, as if one of the
Nobles of the Court should have ^rought it. The faculty of this gift, and
riches of this Treasure, is from God alone, neither depends it upon the
person of a man: wherefore, respect ye not what we are, but what we bring unto
you, and what it will make you, if you esteem it as you ought.

To him that faithfully runs his race, 2. Tim. 4.
finisheth his course, keepe^^ the faith, we do not here propound an O^^^e
branch, an Oaken garland, a Laurel bough, as monuments of his stout
stratagems and actiuitie; we set not up for his memorial, marble, silver, or
golden pillars: But we teach him that his name is written in heaven, Hebr. 12.
that he shall have an inheritance among the faithful, that he shall be free
denison of his heavenly Jerusalem, that he shall have true and everlasting
Treasure, and finaly, be made the dear child of God, in his dear son Christ.

A Treasure properly, is a store of al provision, serving, not only as a
supply for present wants, but for all future haps, and necessities whatsoever.

The word is this Treasure, is respect of Christ, the object, subject, and
argument of the word: Col. 2
In whom all treasures of wisdom, and knowledge of his father are hidden.
Col. 1.
In whom the fullness of the Godhead bodily does dwell, who is made to us of
God his Father, 1. Cor. 1.
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. The bread of life,
John 6.
whom whosoever eats, he shall hunger no more. John 4.
The water of life, which does away the thirst, of our dry and droughtie
souls. John 8.
The light of the world, which whosoever follows shall never walk in
darkness. The door by which we have passage, John 10.
and possession of the kingdom of heaven. He has also prepared a table for
us, and seats of estate, thereupon of sit as Judges upon the twelve tribes of
Israel. He is therefore a true treasure, surmounting all other kinds of
treasure whatsoever: so as, having this, we have our general quietus est, and
need not look after the gold of Ophyr, or the mines of India. But with
gladsome hearts may take up this Antheme and dittie of David, Psalm 23.
The Lord is my Shepherd, therefore I can want nothing. He shall bring me to
the green pasturs, and lead me forth to the waters of comfort. And break out
with the Apostle into this sentence of thanksgiving. Ephesians. 1
Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with
all spiritual blessings in Jesus Christ.

Let God do so and more to me (for I willingly swear so deeply in so devout a
cause) if from hence, as from a fountain, from a root, Ruth 1. 1. Sam. 3.
and from a treasure, al needful graces, temporal and spiritual, lawfully to be
wished or conceived of us, do not stream, spring, and come unto us. There are
many I doubt not that believe not this report, and but few to whom the arm of
^he Lord is revealed: yet be persuaded, Isay 53.
but to make experience of it, to come to his word with reverence and religious
devotion, rather like a Be to gather sweet honey, then a Spider to suck
deadly poison out of it, and thou shall find thy self framed in a new mowld,
metamorphosed and moulted into an other form: Acts 2.
we shall be led to confess as it is indeed; that as the holyghost filled the
house, so this is a treasure that fills the heart, that it is of that
working, that the water of that well was of which Christ did speak unto the
woman of Samaria, John 4.
He that drinks of this water shall thirst no more.

The word of God raises up the dead, regenerateth the living, heals the
sick, and preserves the whole: delights the godly, reclaimeth the wicked,
lightneth the blind, warmeth the cold, comfort the sad, and confirms the
desperate. The want of this, is the high way that leads to the chambers of
death, and deadly misfortune. For from hence only proceed vain hope,
trembling fear, consuming care, furious lust, boiling covetousness, fretting
envy, and fuming anger, and the whole black guard, rablement and retinue of
malignant mischiefs, of impotent affections the carbuncles, boils and botches
of our souls.

Infinite are the attributes to express his properties, which are given to the
word: It is called Light, Bread, Wine, Medcine, a Sword, a Hammer, a fire,
Seed. Light, because with his orient brightness it illuminateth our minds,
informing them, and induing them with heavenly wisdom. Bread, because it
sustaineth our hungry souls, Psalm. 107
and fills our empty souls with goodness, strengthening and staying us in
the way of godliness. Wine, because it cherishes man's heart with the gladsome
memory of his mercies and promises, and makes him merry with the joy of his
countenance. Medicine, that it heals our putrefying sore, swellings, and
corruptions. A Sword, that it divides between the soul and the marrow, Hebr.
4.
and heweth asunder all our works, and affections that are sinful. A Hammer,
because it battreth and mollifieth our hard and stony consciences. A Fire,
because it kindles the spirit, and the love of God within us. And Seed,
because, it being sowed in the furrows of our hearts, by the spirit of God
our husbandman, it is of very great increase and cast, in some, an hundred, in
some, threescore, in othersome, thirty fold.

Since then the use hereof is so great and manifold, and extends it self so
far, why works it not these wholesome effects in our ^^nfull consciences?
why is it still as a dead letter unto us, as bitter to our taste, as is the
very gall, or the water of worme-wood, and we can not digest it?

If Gods word be a light, why walk we not in this light, but groape at noone
day, and ^^t still in palpable and damnable darkness of horrible ignorance?

If it be Bread, why do we not as the Angel say de to John, Take this book
and eat it? Revel. 20.
but we do still remain hungry like dogs, and go about the city.

If it be Wine, why do we not power out, take our fill of it, and make our
hearts cheereful and merry with it?

If it be Medicine, why do we not bind it to our blisters and wounds, to draw
out the rancor and corruption of them, and to make us whole?

Since it is a Sword, why do we not with it cut the cords of vanity, and
cart-ropes of iniquity, and hew all the bonds of ungodliness asunder?

If it be a Hammer, why does not the noise of it grate thine care, and the
power of it break thy heart; A similitude.
but thine ears like Smiths dogs used to such noise, give no heed unto it:
and thy heart more hard and stubborn than the adamant, yield not a whit at all
the blows therewith?

If it be Fire, why does it not take hold of sin, and consume our wickedness
like stubble and melt all the ungodly of the earth like dross? and inflame and
lighten al our heart with Gods love?

If it be Seed, why comes it not vpp^^ and take deep root in us? but we
are still as waste ground, which has not been sowed at all?

The rain is alone which descends upon the corn, and upon the thorns, A
similitude.
but the effect is not one: for it falls upon the corn to ripen it for the
barn; but upon the thorn, to fit it for the fire. The gracious deaw of the
blessed word of God, has been great among us; it behooves us to see to his
effect, whether this moisture does bring up thorns within us, oringendreth
good seed.

Go to then, now tell me, what is it that thou want? and, tell me whether
this be not a treasure, and a storehouse, to furnish every want.

Do thou hunt after honor, 2. Cor. 4.
and praise of men? by this shall every man have praise of God. Does thy heart
covet after riches and ^ong life? behold, Prover. 3
the length of days is at his right hand: Riches and plenteousnesse is in his
house. David rests wholly conten^ed with this, The Lord is my portion. Moses
before him prefers Christ's rebuke before ^he coffers and riches of Egypt,
Hebr. 11
All the riches that are in the world, make not an end of ^his joyful harvest;
for it is not shut up under the promises of this life, 1. Tim. 4.
but it stretches to the promises of the life that is to come. The Spirit
speaks evidently, Psalm 34
They which seek the Lord, shall want nothing that is good. Answerable
whereunto is this Aphorism of our Savior, Matthew 6
First seek the kingdom of God, and this shall be the Porter that shall bring
in all your living, all other things shall be put into your mouths.

If ignorance does trouble thee, here thou may have knowledge: if heaviness,
comfort: if doubt, counsel: if fear, hope: if despair, encoragement: if
temptation, protection.

The latter David with these small smooth stones, Matthew 41
smote the hairy scalpe of our ghostly Goliath, and put him to confusion. And
the former David with his shield and buckler did bear off bravely the buffets
that sin gave him, Psalm 119
I did hide (says he) thy Law within my heart, that I might not sin
against thee.

There is no age, or sex, or condition of persons, that has not a great
benefit, and treasure of the word. It is a rule for the young man to square his
life, and for the old man to order his death. 2. King. 4
It is unto the poor instead of the meal, that took away the bitterness and
death of that herb which was in the pot it gives them comfort in the midst of
al their sorrows. It shows the rich man, how to use his riches, it teaches
the Senator wisdom. So that even as Joseph had no use of Astronomy, because
he had the gift of prophecy, so he needs not any other riches, that has
this imcomparable riches of Gods spirit.

Since therefore we so diligently read books of humane learning, from whence we
observe nothing, but either commonwealth discipline, or government of health,
or precepts oeconomicall, or points of husbandry, or inventions of trades, or
allurements unto pleasures: how much more ought our whole study be set upon
Gods law, by which God himself speaks face to face unto us, by which the
mind is exceedingly comforted, disquiet thoughts dispelled, the whole man
enabled, beyond all imagination to every good work?

Be thou of what mould and constitution that may be, here is argument and
reading for thy turn. Art thou of a grave and severe disposition and does
nothing but a sad and austeare style delight thee? here is law agreeable ^o thy
humor. Is thy heart so obdurate, as nothing but judgment, and terror can
soften ^^^ repair unto the Prophets, whose dreadful comminations are hammers
and thunderboltes, and as scepters of iron to beat them unto powder. Art thou
light hearted and of a iocund, and delightsome nature? here is psalmodie and
harmony for thy fancy. Art thou philosophically and gravely bent, and
delightest thou to hear concise, and curious sentences? Psalm. 78.
the Lord here opens his mouth in parables, and declares unto thee hard
sentences of old: Read Job, Ecclesiastes, the proverbs of Solomon, and there
are quick inventions suitable to thy vain. Last of all, art thou nice and
curious in thy reading, and does nothing but Chronicles and antiquity affect
thee? there are none such brave antiquaries as the penmen of the Scripture,
the admirable actuaries and historians of all times. Thus every kind of way
whither soever we turn our selves, and name what we will, we have here a
tresure to bear out al our wants. So as it seems not unlike a princes
armory, A simiiltude.
which affoordeth plenty of all sorts of armor and implements of warrefare,
suitable to every condition of person, whether of tall or low stature, whether
of strength or weakness of body.

What is worldly treasure which we esteem so much, but base and vile in
comparison of this which we esteem so little? Paul not being able to find out
with himself a worser thing to which he might compare it, likeneth it to dung.
Phil. 3.
A homely comparison, yet fitting right the nature of the thing. For what is it
else, being considered as it is? what is the substance stance of our chiefest
treasure, as of gold, silver, or the Onix stone, but the very guts and
exhalation of the earth? Luke. 16.
The gorgeous glutton who was in the ruff, robed in purple: what was the
matter of it, but the wool of dead beasts, and what was the die and color of
it, but the excrements of the shel fish? His lawnes and dainty diapers, what
were they, but the bark and the skin of the flax? His delicate dishes sent
from his dresser, what were they but the carcasses of beasts, birds, and
fishes? his pompous palace was nothing else but a confused lump of earth
congested together.

And if I should lead you with a long discourse, and recite of particulars, I
must brand them on the foreheads with Salomons make, Eccle. 1.
Vanity of vanities and all is vanity.

There is nothing earthly, stable and permanent: The word of God only endures
for ever.

Our life passes away swiftly like a post, ^ur youth wax soon old, fortune
often frow^eth, and riches ebb and flow, A similitude. Isai. 4.
as the waters of the sea, and resemble harlots, who do nothing but flatter,
coozen, and forsake us. The people that calls thee blessed, deceives thee
says the Prophet Isai, Trust not this flattering and deceitful world, which
will kill thee with culling thee, as Ioab did Amasa, and Iahel did Sisopa. It
will promise thee one thing, and give thee another thing, as Laban, who promised
Rachel unto Jacob, Genesis 29
and foisted in Leah, It promises thee prosperity, and it gives thee
adversity, tempering poison in a golden challice, like the whore of Babylon.

What did all the treasure and pleasure of Egypt avail to help Pharao, when
as in the height and top of his gallantnesse, Exodus 14.
the waters overwhelmed him, the depths covered him, and his whole host did
sincke to the bottom like a stone?

Nabucad-nezzar had trussed up much treasure, and had brought in the wealth
of the whole world, into his exchequor and treasury at Babylon, he stalked in
his galleries, and crowed pertly like a cock upon his dunghill: Is not this
great Babel which I have built, Dan. 4.
for the honor of my kingdom? But his comb was soon cut, he soared up so
high in the lightness of his mind, even as the bird by the lightness of her
feathers, but he was made come down with mischief enough, and of the other
side brought as low, driven from his court and courtly retinue, and dieted,
couched, and driven among beasts.

Baltasar braued it passingly for a time and who but Baltasar? but this
lustiness lasted not, Dan. 5.
for imediately he saw upon the plaster of the wall his definitive doom, which
brought him to his dumpes, perplexed his thoughts, dissolved his joints,
knocked his knees together, and what good then did all his treasure do him?

Most miserable therefore and woeful is their estate, who prefer this earthly
which is so frail and fickle, before the celestial treasure of the word which
abides for ever: whereunto shall I liken such a generation? They are like unto
dogs, A similitude
who will not depart from the dry bone they gnaw upon, for any piece of money:
or like Aesops cock, that having found a great jewel in the dunghill, is
desirous to permute it with a barley kartell.

If thou fear that thy corn will foist in lower ground, to prevent such
mishap, Aug. in Psalm. 89.
thou caust hoist it up to a higher granerie. Thy ^^^asure which thou cofferest
and hoardest up ^^earth, will canker and corrupt in this case, therefore be as
provident for thy soul, as thou (...) careful of thy corn for the sustenance
of thy body, and lay up such provision as is needful for it, in the highest
loft, where it may lie safely, and be as forward to lift thy soul to heaven, as
thou art to lift up higher upon any occasion thy grain here in earth: if thou
ask how, and art herein desirous to b^ taught? I answer with Augustine the
pullies gables, ladders, and instruments hereunto belonging, are thy well
qualified and godly affections. Thy love is the captain that gives the onset,
the foot of the soul, according (...) this proposition of S. Augustine, Amor
men pondus meum; Amore feror quocunque feror. My love is my burden, whither
soever I am carried, it is love that carries me. Base account (...) made of
some kind of money, in a double respect, partly, because the substance is but
base^ and partly, because it is false, and counterfei^

Such is the treasure which the world yee^^ death us, Psalm. 12
the word of God only is of simpl^ substance, purer the^ gold, yea then fine
gold purer then the silver which has bin seaue^ times in the furnace purified.

Bag up therefore such money as is current, and will be sure to go for
payment it the resurrection of the just. A similitude.
Send thy treasure thither, whither thou art sure to go, as the
merchant-factor lays out his money abroad to be repaide it at home. A
similitude.


We are here travelers and pilgrims upon earth, and have no certain dwelling
place As travelers cannot carry any great burden with them, neither is it
wisdom to bestow ^^st there, where ye may not abide, so to rake up treasure
here, from whence we must al depart, and to burden our selves with heavy leads
of worldly possessions in our travel toward heaven, is both importable and
absurd.

Look not thou for water to be yielded to thee out of the flintie stone,
Similitudes.
or wool to keep thee warm from the asses back. It is madness to hunt the
winds with a net, it is lost labor to build upon the sand, and to draw up
water with a syue. Have recourse to Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles and from
these fountains which can never be dried up draw waters of salvation. Lay this
good ^^undation, and it shall be like Mount Syon, Psalm. 125
which can never be removed.

Let the glutton in hell, Luke. 16.
out of the midst of the flame, desire that some preacher might be sent from
the dead, to fore-warne his brethren: we mindful of the censure, and reproof
(...) the Prophet: what? Isai. 8
from the living to the ^^ad? hear Moses, and the Prophets: to whom (...) we
shall have diligent access, we do not (...) our hands in a beggars wallet, but
into a ^^ore-house, and treasury of wealth which (...) never be spent.

The holy Scriptures are like a deep well, Similitudes.
and fountain, which is not to be drawn ou^ and emptied by a bucket, but the
more y^^ laue it forth, the fresher it runs: or like t^ gold or silver,
which, the more you rub i^ and turn it with your hands, the brighter it
appears: or like unto fire, which, the more it i^ blown, the cleerer it
burns. These similitudes fall well into our purpose since the scriptures use
them, and the word of God is compared unto them. For as these things are
cheifest in request, and excel all others: so God^ word easily does excel,
and rules over all.

Let the Poets therefore stand upon their numbers, odes, and verses, and draw
them from their fained and far fet fountains Helicon, Castalio, Parnassus,
and such like: w^ have the word from heaven, published to the church upon the
mountains. Sinai, Sion, an^ Jerusalem. Let the Heathens hunt after their idle
imaginations, and run into the holes an^ caves of the earth, to their worm
eaten oaks to their paltrie pillars; for their oracles are directions in all
their proceedings, we insteed^ of these broken reeds, do wholly rest ou^
selves upon the sure foundation of the word^ which stands fast for ever.

Pithagoras may parley as long as he please^ with owls, and with Eagles.
Apollonius Thy^ aneus may listen till he list after the chirping and piping of
birds: we lend our ears alone ^o the God of heaven, the creator of al things,
by Moses, the Prophets, his son Christ, and ^he Apostles speaking unto us.

Let worldlings delight them selves still if ^hey will, in their foolish
wisdom, or wise ^oolishnes, or continue blinded in their rude, and gross
ignorance, or gape still for gold, ^he very garbage of the earth and with
wretched Esau, hunt for venison abroad, we shall ^u^t with blessed Jacob for a
blessing at home, ^e shall lay up treasure for our selves in heaven, we shall
climb the mountain of this worldly wisdom, and tread it under feet:
whereby we shall behold as in a clear re^^on, the secret mystery of al
heavenly wisdom, and all the spiritual treasure of salvation; which grace,
the Lord give us.

CHAP. III.
That the word of God, is a Pearl of great price.

MOses the lawgiver to the Lords people, being to set forth Gods precepts
unto them, that they might be the more zealous of them, he puts this
peremptory preamble unto them. These words which I command thee this day,
Deuteronomy. 6
shall be in thine heart, and thou shall rehearse them continually to thy
children, and shall talk of them when thou tariesT in thine house, and as thou
walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. And thou
shall bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets
between thine eyes, also thou shall write them upon the posts of thine house,
and upon thy gates.

Thus he trimmes his matter with sundry ornaments and circumstances of art, A
similitude.
to make it to be loved, as a woman deckes her self with a great number of
jewels, that she might be more esteemed.

Here is a muster of circumstaunces together, marching and following in very
strange array: every several word is the edge of a sharp sword, and the main
blow of a beetle, to drive this wedge through our knottie blockish consciences.

A man would have thought he had used force enough, and made his matter sure
with the first onset, in commanding, that this word should be within our heart,
which is a casket and offer sufficient to keep it safe enough. For that is a
castle and fortress that repelleth the battery of sin. Wherefore David
says, Psalm 119
I have hidden thy commandments in my heart, that I should not sin against
thee.

But not so satisfied, he requires further, that we rehearse his precepts to
our children, and that as a Nightingale, who has got a pleasant note, is
always harping and chirping upon it, we should always dilate and descant
upon them, when we come into the house.

But, albeit domestical study and quiet, much furthereth meditation, yet a
further ask and labor is enjoined us, namely, that whilst we are in our
journey, and the outward feet of our bodies run their ways, ^he inward feet
of the mind and soul should ^unne with David, the ways of Gods commandments.

And yet as though this work thus en^yned us, were not enough for us, he
commands moreover, that couching and lying ^owne, our minds should watch and
wait ^erevpon. This seems to be such a hard ^eece of service, as the like
whereof, no master ^seth to lay upon his servant, who among us ^o so abridge
their servants of their natural ^est, as to exact and claim that time which
is ^ue to rest, to be spent in our affairs.

One would think now he could go no further, but that he must here stop and
set up his rest: but behold, as soon as we are out of our sleep, and do cast
up our eyes, he sets work enough before us. For to help our memories that
are weak and slipperie, he wills us to wear them as rings upon our
fingers, and bind them as signets upon our hands, and yet as though the hand
were too far distant, and removed from the heart, and for all this help and
good mean, might be forgetful, he provides that his precepts should be the
object of our senses, in setting them as frontlets between our eyes, which may
always rub and quicken up our memories.

And yet there wants this clause to make full the period. Thou shall write them
upon the posts of thine house, and upon thy gates, that thy studs, gates, and
portals, at thy ingresse, and egresse, may be public preachers to thee.

Now thou, Deuteronomy. 33 Joshua. 14
O man of God, let me ask thee this one thing; why do thou amplify and
enlarge this matter, and give such letters of commendation unto it? No doubt
thy answer is, that treasure of much worth, has need to be well kept, and that
pearls of cheifest price, which are easily lost, should be fast tied to
ribbands, and warily locked up.

It is to much purpose that the word is sampled and patterned to a pearl, and a
manifold and comfortable use we have hereof, and it lively sets forth the
dignity, nature, and excellency of the word.

This Pearl is the omnipotent and eternal word of God, properly so called, for
sundry good respects, whether we consider the subject, matter, or form, manner,
and operation of the pearl.

For the matter of it, Plinius.
it consists wholly of the dew of heaven, which a certain shel-fish, usually
at a set and certain season of the year draws to it self, as natural
philosophers and historians do report: now how in this property it fitteth
Christ's nature, the kingly Prophet shows us directly in this wise. Psalm 110
The fruit of the womb is of the dew of the morning. Aug. Tom. 4. Quaest. in
Mat. quaestio 13.
Ille ad margaritam iam ipsam peruenerat, quae integumentis mortalitatis quasi
ocncharum obstaculis, inter profunda huius saecnli atque inter duritias saxeas
Iudaeorum aliquando latuerat. Christ now, (as says Augustine) grew unto the
very substance of a pearl, enclosed and shut up in virgins womb, and mantle of
mortality, as it were in the shell, and couerture of the fish, lying hid a
while in the depth of this world, as it were in the sea, and among the cragged
rocks of the people of the Jews.

The form of the pearl is orient and glistering, and exceeding beautiful,
wherein it has a notable agreement with this word, as the same father in the
same place thus witnesses, Verbum Domini lucidum candore veritatis, and
solidum firmitate aeternitatis, and vndique sui simile pulchritudine
diuinitatis. The word of God shines through the brightness of the verity, it
is firm and sound through the solidity of eternity, and it is in all parts alike
in the beauty of divinity.

The virtue and operation of the pearl is great, and for diverse uses is
exceeding medicinable, among other, to remedy the panting of the heart, to
quicken, comfort, and restore the vital spirits, to depell and drive away the
giddiness, dizzinesse, and swimming of the head. Now how all these conspire in
one in Christ, and are complete in him, and are brought to pass in us by
feeling experience, by the operation of the word, it is as clear and apparent
as the Sun.

This was that which was David's comfort, and quickened him in the midst of his
trouble. Psalm 119


The want of this, 1. Sam. 28.
drove Saul into all perplexed and pitiful passions, and most desperate
designements, whilst he rolled in his melancholy and mad mood and bethought
himself, how God was departed from him, and aunsweared him no more, either by
Prophet, or by dream. A similitude.
This is the comfortable electuarie of our souls, made by the art of the best
Physician, and approved by long experience as most excellent.

This is that aqua vitae, which does, A similitude.
not only slack and alay our thirst, but works within us to the quickening of
our life, when it is dead in sin. John. 6
Therefore Peter calls it the word of life, saying: Lord, whither shall we
go? thou have the words of eternal life. And Christ calls it life. This is
life eternal, John. 17
to know thee the true God, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ.

There is no sinner so swallowed up of sin, so dead and buried in it, whom
the word can not quicken and raise up again.

It cried out to the dry and dead bones in the field, and lo they were knit
together, Ezech. 37
the flesh came upon them, and the skin above covered them, they breathed,
lived, stood upon their feet, and became a mighty army.

Lazarus who had lien four days in his grave, was quickened by this word.
John. 11


As the body lives by his bodily food, A similitude.
so does the soul by his spiritual food: the food and diet of the soul is
the word. But herein this food exceeds much the other, that this is
effectual and lively to the dead, but the other is nourishable only to the
living. Take thou heed therefore of the wretchles regard and loathsomeness of
the word, since it is thy meat. A similitude.
For as among the diseases of the body, there is none more desperate then his,
whose stomach either loatheth or retains not his meat, the strength of his
life, without which the body dies: so he, whose soul abhors this meat, is
in all extremity, and is brought according to the saying of the prophet,
Psaim. 107.
even to deaths door.

What man is so desperately and irrecouerably sick, A similitude.
who does not gladly hear that Physician, who does but barely make him promise
of his health, albeit he be not able to perform it? wherefore since Gods word
is life of it self, and heals all infirmities, suffers us not to be giddie
in the spirit, or waver in the faith, but gives us assurance of our eternal
salvation, o dear and precious! let this pearl be in our sight.

Let the Poets boast of Orpheus as they please, who with music tamed savage
beasts: of this we are most sure, that Gods word has reclaymed and altered
beastly minds, Act. 9
and of Apostates, has made them Apostles, of purloyners of Gods secrets, and
merchandizers of the word, has made them the faithful dispensers of his
mysteries.

Paul very expressly lays out so much, whenas portraying out our
counterfeit, as it was, without Christ, after whose glorious image we have bin
perfected and transformed, he indigestly shadoweth us out with a black coal
in this mishappen manner. We our selves also were in times past unwise, Titus 3.
disobedient, deceived, serving the lusts, and diverse pleasures, living in
maliciousness and envy, hateful, and hating one another. Likewise, leading us
along with a rehearsal of sundry enormities which we rifely committed, he
infers thereupon, that this was our estate, but the case is altered with us,
we are washed, sanctified, 1. Cor. 6.
and justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of God.

Be we never so profound and deeply wise in humane wisdom, it may beseem us
well to seek after this wisdom, as a Pearl of greater price and virtue than
the other.

Solomon, the wisest that ever was, saw very manifestly, that wheresoever the
uncreated wisdom of God spoke, Prouer. (...)
it spoke of excellent things, even things seemly for Princes. And although
some places are shallow enough for the lamb to wade in, yet there be some deep
enough to drown the very elephant: of the which we may say with the holy
Apostle, Oh the deepenesse of the counsels and wisdom of God! Romans 11.
how unsearchable are thy ways, and thy paths past finding out? One Plato is
worth a thousand vulgar men, the Scriptures surpass all the writings in the
world.

Lo, thou that art so highly conceited of thy self, and think thou can
see far beyond the Moon, imagining that a Preacher can speak nothing unto
thee, but that thou knew before, or that he is not able to stir thy
affections, 2. Sam. 11. 2. Sam. 12.
I wish that David might be a president unto thee, to reform thy judgment,
who being mightily inspired with the Spirit, yet for all his wisdom dwelt still
in the damnable ignorance of his sin, without remorce of conscience, until
the lively voice of Nathan the Preacher pierced his heart, opened the eyes of
his understanding, and taught him knowledge.

Nabuchadnezzar had a vision of a tree, Dan. 4.
which was a figure of his fortune: but all his wisards in court and country
could not lay it open, but he tormented himself with the hidden mystery of
it, until Daniel did unfold it.

Paul was a choice man, Acts 22.
of very rare parts and induments of mind, traded up in learning at Gamaliels
feet, Acts 9.
a doctor of the law mightily read, and checked by his adversaries openly, for
overmuch studying of himself: yet for all ^^s privilege of his wisdom and
learning, ^^e was sottish and senseless, until he entered ^^to Christ his
school, his learning was but a ^ead letter unto him, until the spirit quickened
^im, and he was sent to Ananias, who informed him what to do.

If the Spirit opens not the door of thy ^ppes, thou speak like a Parrot,
A similitude.
thou can ^ot tell what, as Caiphas, who prophesied and ^reached of Christ,
but did not know so much.

Trust me, there is no estate of life more miserable, than to remain in
ignorance of the word, and no estate happier, than to have the knowledge of it.
What say I of this Pearl? that it eases panting hearts, dizzie heads, and
theereth vital spirits, this word is (...), and (...), it is all in all unto
us.

If Saul be mad through melancholy, 1. Sam. 16.
if David play these songs and ditties upon the harp, his frenzy leaves
him, and his mind is again quieted.

This charmed the very devil, and made him swell, he did burst when he did set
upon our Savior, putting him to shame, Matthew. 4.
and to his heels suddenly.

This curbled, and so ratled the ruffians that were sent from the Scribes and
hie Priests, John 7.
to attach and arrest Christ as they had no power over him.

It exhorts, it threatens, it inciteth, it reclaymeth, it instructs, it
conuinceth, it sings, it mourns it prays, it detesteth, it commends, it
disalloweth, it recounteth things past, foretells things to come, it sings
of mercy, and discourses of judgment. It bends every way like to soft wax,
to bend our stubborn consciences.

Paul in this especially commends his Timothy, 2. Tim. 3.
that he had spent his time in the study of the Scriptures from his tender
age, whereby he was able to show himself a workman, to cut the word aright, to
do the work of an Evangelist, to be prompt and furnished to every good work.

Thrice happy was the state and government of Israel, Exodus 28.
which by Vrim and Thummim asked counsel of the Lord; we are now in blessed
case, who have the light and lantern of Gods word set upon an hill, set out in
our pulpits, as in a candlestick, by which we have Gods counsel and
direction for our doings: so as, having this Jewel and Pearl upon our breasts
void of all fear and trembling at the heart, freed from al wavering and
unstable ways: and finaly, revived in our vital spirits, we take up the
songs and sayings of Gods saints. As with divine David, who merrily makes this
melody on his harp and humble bandore, Psalm. 27.
The Lord is my life and my salvation, whom then shall I fear? The Lord is
the strength of my life, of whom then shall I be afraid? What if hosts of
men beset me? Psalm 23.
yet shall I not fear: and though there rise up war against me, yet shall I put
my trust in thee. And with Daniels consortes show our heroical and invincible
stomachs, with faithful hearts, saying, Behold the God whom we worship,
Dan. 3.
he shall deliver us out of the fiery furnace. And with peerless Paul,
commune the case, and challenge all adversary power into the field, and
expostulate thus with them, Romans 8.
Who shall separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord?
And with him, when we have seen all that they can do, be of this courage and
resolution with our selves, that nothing shall be able to sunder and divorce us
from the favor of the Lord.

But all this while here is but one Pearl spoken of, to which the word of the
kingdom ^s compared. And not without good cause: For there is but one at one
time engendered in ^he fish, and it seems, that the name that is given unto
the Pearl, which is called, Vnio, expresses this his nature, which signifies
One.

In this it has a fit allusion unto Christ, who is our sole and alone
mediator, and has no other, either Angel or Saint to share, and partake with
him. 1. Tim. 2.
There is but one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus: Neither
is there salvation in any other else: Acts 4.
For there is no name under heaven whereby we must be saved, John 6.
but the name of Jesus: For whither elso shall we go? Lord thou have the
words of eternal life.

As all the light and brightness of the stars proceed from one Sun, A
similitude.
so all our righteousness proceeds entirely from one Son of righteousness,
Jesus Christ only.

As Pharao said to Joseph (which name in the Egyptian language is a Savior) I
am Pharao, Genesis 41.
and without thee shall no man stir his hand, or his foot, in all the land of
Egypt. So may it be said of Christ, that without him we are able to do
nothing of our selves: Math. 28.
For all power is given by his father unto him, both in heaven and earth.

One sun alone chaceth away the foggy darkness of the night; A similitude.
there are infinite other stars, but all of them shining and glistering
together, and putting to their power, are not able to dispell it. I grant that
they are to us as lamps and burning torches, and minister great light, but yet
the blacknes of darkness does remain, and is not expelled by them. The only
son of God has done away our night, and has turned the darkness of our
gross ignorance, into the daylight of his glorious gospel shining into our
hearts: God has also given us many helps besides, by which he has much
illuminated our minds, as men of learned skill, much seen in philosophy and
points of humane learning, who shine as smaller stars in the firmament of this
world; but these have carried, as it were, a candle before the sun, which
vanishes before it; it has not removed the night from us, but thick clouds,
and darkness has still ouershadowed us: only Christ, the brightness of his
Father gives clear light to us that sit in darkness, the light that lightneth
the Gentiles, and the glory of the people Israel.

Since then one Pearl supplieth all our wants, what need we more than one?
Luke 2.
The stars of heaven are many, A similitude.
because they are ^mperfect, and one of them severed, can not give such light
as all of them conjoined. The ^tarres are many, because their light is little,
therefore that which is wanting in them singularly, is supplied by them
generally. But ^here is but one sun, because his light is sufficient of it
self, he needs not the aid of ^lanet or of star to increase his light:
So Christ is light enough, and in him is no darkness, he is a sole and
sufficient Savior, and therefore he abides no copartners with him.

Augustine by a plausible and plain similitude thus dilateth upon this point,
August.
and makes the matter manifest: The gold which thou possessest can not be
thy silver. Thou can not call thy bread which thou eatest, thy wine: but
Christ may be said to be instar omnium, all in all unto thee. And herein he
only satisfies and contenteth himself, and this is as the Philosophers stone
unto him, and the golden mine, desiring nothing in comparison of this, or
beside this alone, saying in this sort: O Lord, I require nothing but thee,
for thou art only my Doctor and Doctrine, Physician and Medicine, the sole
preparer and perfecter of my mind, my love and lover, my gift and giver, my
life, and the only preserver of my life.

But the learned Schoole-man Gregory paraphraseth pathetically and properly
upon this point: Gregory.
I consider (says he) the fathers of the old and new Testament, David,
Daniel, Amos, Peter, Paul, Matthew, and mine eyes of faith are fully fixed on
them. He inspireth the young harper, and he makes him a Psalmist. He breaths
upon the babe, and he is wiser than the aged, and is made their Judge. He
gives the simple shepherd and heardsman in the field, the wisdom of his
Spirit, and he becoms a famous shepherd and prophet of the people. He calls
the fisherman, and immediately he angleth and fisheth for men, and with his
nets draws thousands at once from the bottomless pit of eternal
destruction, to the highest top of their eternal salvation. He enlightneth the
persecutor, and he proves a passing Preacher of an erratical and wandering
star, a fixed star, keeping his station, a star that is in the right hand
of Christ. He reclaymeth the customer, and ^he impure Publicane, and lo, he
becomes a blessed actuary and penne-man of a Gospel.

Since therefore all riches and graces of god do stream from one fountain,
since one ^oote ingendreth and brings forth all fruit, since one and the same
spirit is the craftes^an of al trades, and the founder of al knowledge; were
it not better for us to be acquainted with this on (...) which is the porter
that brin ^eth in all our exp^r, then to run to vnderings, inferi^ up (...)
base creatures, which shall ^euer be able to supply our necessities? A
similitude.
What ^eggar beggeth alms of his fellow beggar, whenas a right honorable and
liberal nobleman passes by him, and is ready to bestow greater alms upon
him? We are but beggars brats in this world; from the sun, moon, and stars
we do beg our light, from the earth we beg our bread, from beasts, birds
and fishes we beg our meat and clothing; and what do these yield us without
the Lord, or in comparison of the Lord? let our recourse therefore and suits be
unto him.

What marvel is it that this one spirit should work all things in us, A
similitude.
since one mind rules all the senses and faculties of the body? and stirs
us up to such infinite kinds of actions?

Be persuaded therefore to make purchase of this Pearl, whatsoever it does
cost thee being that which Christ calls, 1. Pet. 11
the hidden Manna, and Peter, the joy unspeakable, and David, Psalm 36
the fountain and well of all pleasures, and which in this parable is set at a
high rate.

This the devil labors especially to deprive us of, knowing in his
subtilty, that it is o^ that worth. For, as pirates on the seas principaly do
bend their force ^^^inst those ship^ which they know to be (...) with gold^
pearl, A similitude.
and treasure, and go^^^^ of greate^ wealth: so, such as are endued with
heauen^ riches, and fraught with the graces of his h^^ly spirit, and bear
about them this pearl (...) peerless price: against such, this rouer an^
pyrate of our souls especially lays his dangerous assaults, and shootes his
fiery darts.

The Spirit here in a subtle kind of wisdom (as I may so say) to win us to
the word, suteth himself in his form and frame of speech to our fancies, and
affections: A similitude
like a skilful angler, covering his hook with a pleasant bait, to toll fishes
unto him; setting out his speech with most delightful words, to draw our
souls unto him.

The hope and expectation of gain set before us, rowseth us up, plucketh us
by the ears, and causes us to stir, and abide all adventures, He that
eats, eats in hope: 1. Corint. 9
and he that thresheth, thresheth in hope. The hope of a good harvest hartneth
the husbandman all the year long, to all tedious toil and turmoyle of his
body.

The soldier gives a hardy onset, and dreadeth no danger, upon the comfort
he conceiueth of a conquest, of sharing out the ^poyle, and of a bountiful
booty at the last. The Huntes-man, for the love he bears to his game, in
expectation of his sport rangeth about, and vnder-goeth all wrathful spite of
any cold and tempestuous weather: finally, ^here is nothing, of which we have
any hope, which is not as a spur to prick us forward unto any attempt,
whereby we may atchieue (...).

David, ^. Sam. 17.
before he gripleth with Goliath of Gath, first communeth about the case,
asks the standers by, What shall be given to the man that overcomes him?
And when answer was returned, that the King would bestow great treasure
upon him, and give his daughter in marriage unto him, and would make him free
denison in the land of Israel: David had enough, the hope of this reward
forthwith gave him boldness and stomach enough to fight hand to hand with
him.

Now, if it shall be asked what that man shall have that shall overcome the
spiritual Giant, the world, and the flesh: we answer, that treasure at his
pleasure shall be given him, he shall have a Pearl of incomparable price
bestowed upon him. And we send him yet further unto Esaias the prophet, who more
at large acquainteth him with the kings mind, herein giving him to know,
Isaiah 64.
That the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither has the heart
of man conceived the things that God has prepared for them that love him.

Whenas God would breed in the breasts of the Israelitos, Number. 13.
a loving and longing desire after Chanaan, he did set their teeth on edge
with the fruit of the land, with a cluster of grapes pomegranats, and figs,
which those that searched the land brought with them, and presented to their
view. To ravish our hearts with a desire of heavenly things, a taste we have
here of a heavenly reward, which we shall receive for it.

The treasure and pearl that is here named, is as much as our sense is able
to conceive: but yet it sufficiently defines not unto us the riches of Gods
kingdom. In a word, A similitude.
it ouer-matcheth all worldely treasure and pearls, as much as the sun in
brightness exceeds all the stars besides in the firmament.

It is the manner of our subtle merchants, A similitude.
to show the buyer the best end of their cloth, but to deceive them with the
worst, the middle being nothing answerable to the end. But Christ far
otherwise descending into this world, to sell us his glory, shows us here a
piece of his wares, wherein an endless treasure and a pearl of highest price
is folded, and wrapped up: but if we could unfold the end, without end, the
height, and depth, and measure of his grace, how would the sight thereof
astonish our hearts with unspeakable admiration?

Christ demeaneth himself in that affection toward us as the father toward
his child, A similitude.
who to get him to the school, of which he is afraid, because of the rod, he
shows him a gay thing, and promises to give it him, and the child thereupon
obeys his father, and goes to school willingly. Christ in like manner
entreats us his children, to repair unto his word, which is our common
School, we are dismayed hereat, as the child is at the rod: forasmuch as this
word is Seuior magister, a rougher Schoolemaister to dull and careless
scholars. Therefore, to hearten us the better heereunto, he shows us a
Pearl; for which (if we be wise) we shall be willing to step forward to this
school, to attain to all knowledge.

The respect of the reward minisheth (says Gregory) the rigor of the rod.

When the Assyrian soldiers beheld the comely beauty and feature of Judith,
Judith 10.
they says among themselves, who would not fight for Israel, which affoordeth
such fair and beautiful women? so may we say, who would not fight against
the devils assaults for the kingdom of our God, which yields such a
munificent and honorable a reward?

Here in this life by our entire and duetiful conformity to the word, we
presently do possess a treasure and pearl of peculiar passing price: but
after all this life, all endless felicity, whenas at his glorious coming in
the clouds, he shall change our base bodies, and make them like his own
glorious body, Phil. 3.
by the admirable impotent operation of his power. A similitude.
So as, though we be here as vilde and filthy rags, raked out of a dunghill,
which to view, can not but provoke the stomach, and procure vomit, yet
brought to the mill, and cast into the water, and afterward well grinded, it
makes very white, smoothe, and fine paper. The Lord open our eyes to see this,
and our hearts and affections to desire it daily.

CHAP. IIII.
That the word of God is a Treasure that is hidden: and wherefore it is so
called.

THE word of God is not simply compared to a Treasure, but to such which is
hidden and is dug out of the ground.

It is hidden, because the mysteries thereof are not open unto all, but only
to such, to whom the Son has revealed them. Luke. 10.
It is hidden from the wisdom, and reason of the world, and manifested unto
us by the inspiration of the spirit. And so says Christ himself: I give thee
thanks, Matthew 11
O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from
the wise, and men of understanding, and opened them unto babes, even so, O
Father, because it is thy will and pleasure.

Whenas Peter made that maine, and fundamental confession of Christ, Matthew 16
saying: Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God: Christ told him flatly,
that it was the quickness and nimblenes of his wit, that found out this
matter, he could not see so far with a carnal eye, but it was the eye of
faith that reached so far, and the good will of his father that did make it
known unto him.

It is not in the power of the fleshly man (says the blessed Apostle) to
comprehend in his conceit the things that are of God. 1. Cor. 2


Baruch would not give the adventure to go against Sisara, Judge. 4.
unless he had the prophetess Deborah in his company: without the
association of this heavenly prophecy, we are able to do nothing against
spiritual wickedness.

Paul was greatly booke-learned, Acts 9.
and brought up in university, yet was this learning hidden from his eyes,
until Christ, with a celestial light at noone day stroke them, and enlightened
them.

As God is unsearchable, so are his gifts: the running head of man, has
attained unto many and very mighty mysteries, and has disclosed many things,
which has long laien in darkness: but yet his ignoance is far greater then
his knowledge, a few things in comparison of those that are hidden, are
revealed unto him.

Whenas Croesus willed Thales to define what God was, he required time for it,
and when the time was come, he did still put off his answer unto further time,
and continually being called, redoubled that time: for the more he meditated,
the more he was confounded, he could not attain unto it. So, to set down the
Treasure of Gods kingdom, and to comprehend the riches of his grace, the more
we scan them, the more we demurre of them, it is like an intricate Laborinth,
out of which we cannot get, it is a secret hidden from our eyes.

If the bodily pain be sometimes so great, A similitude.
as the extremity of our passions do ouercom our senses and are distracted
with it, and our sense is not able to set down his sorrows, the pleasures of
Gods kingdom, being like a great deep, able to drown and devour the
Elephant, passing all understanding, how are we able to wade through the same,
and search the bottom of it?

It happens with us whenas we would comprice in our carnal imaginations, A
similitude.
the estimation of this treasure, as it does with them who seeing a picture of
exact workmanship, howsoever curiously painted and varnished, yet not fully
finished, they admire the passing perfection of it, deeming, that nothing can
be added further to it: but the Painter himself sees well enough (having a
further work conceived to himself then others can desire) how far it is
distant from the hue and bravery, which he minds to give unto it before he
has done with it. So think we, as we will of the beauty of Gods house, of
the inestimable treasures and pleasures of his kingdom, dispearse them, and
extend them, as far as we may by all imagination, we are bleare eyde with
Leah, and we see with the blind man not yet fully cured, Mark. 8.
men walking like trees, things nothing answerable to that they are indeed.
Before the chief workman has put his last hand to his image and counterfeit,
it will show it self wide and distant from our judgment.

Some think that Coelum, which is called heaven, comes of Coelo, which is to
engraue: and so it may well, for we see how it is carved, graued, and adorned,
round about with glistering and orient stars. But I subscribe to them, who
think that Coelum is taken a coelo, which is to cover, hide, and conceal,
because the treasure laid up for us in heaven is covered, concealed, 2. Cor.
12.
and hidden from our knowledge. For whenas Paul was snatched up to the third
heaven, he uttered more with silence, then he could with speech, for he
plainly says, he heard such words, which cannot be spoken, which are not
possible for a man to utter: for indeed, man's tongue in such kinds of cases,
stammereth, and cleaves to the roof of his mouth, so disable it is to unfold
divine mysteries. So that our chiefest commendation of them, is our silence of
them. Isai. 24.
And this use did the Prophet make of them to himself, who being full of secret
Revelations, kept them in a dutiful silence to himself, saying: My secrets
are to my self.

God his wondrous works so exceed all number, measure, and proportion, as it
is more commendable to conceal them with a godly admiration, then to pry into
them with a curious inquisition. A similitude.


Set a round bowl or globe in any place which is of that quantity that may
fill the place, and will that vast substance think you be dragged out of the
narrow, and strait passages of the door of that place? there is no reason so
to think, the spiritual joys of heaven are of that huge capacity and
substance, Cui magno nihil est magnum, ^eneca.
there being nothing great in comparion of this great, as they cannot enter
into the doors of our souls, or be drawn through the portall and passage of
our lips.

The Queen of the South coming from far to hear Salomons wisdom, ^. King.
10
it perplexed and astonished her, and took her spirit from her: how much more
shall the wisdom of the word, far greater then Salomons, put us to filence,
and amaze us suddenly.

Christ informing Nicodemus but in the rudiments of religion, John. 3
and beginning with him at the first element of our redemption, pointing as it
were with his finger, at the fountain and head thereof, which is the love of
God to mankind, he handles it so, as thereby we are not able to see the nature
of it, for saying thus of it, so God loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son, this first word so puts us to a non plus. For how did he
love it? he loved it, but so, as cannot be expressed. And he cannot speak
otherwise, because he knows Gods love to be unspeakable.

The blessed Apostle entreating of the passion, Heb. 12
not being able in particulars to extend it, thus generally comprehends it,
Consider him who has suffered such shame for you. But Paul, what was this
shame? why rippest thou not up his stripes and his blows, his mockes and his
mowes: the crown, the nails, the spear, the cross? because howsoever they
were lively and sensible, yet were not sufficiently explicable and intelligible.

We will you likewise to consider of the word, as of a Treasure, and a Pearl
of great price. If further, we would know the uttermost of his worth, the
spirit answers here, that it is hidden from us, it is more then any is able
to declare. The treasure of inward heavenly inspiration, the pleasure of divine
celestial consolation, the crown of glory laid up as a reward of our bitter
persecution, and finally, God our father his most gracious compassion, by the
tongue of men or Angels cannot be spoken of, they are hidden mysteries, that
are too deep for us.

This Treasure is hidden, because it has need of spiritual Revelation: It is
not so hidden, but that whatsoever is needful to salvation is opened unto us.
God deals not as Poets, and Philosophers with the truth, who with the dark
clouds of their fabulous inventions, have so eclipsed and obscured the clear
light thereof, as the minds of the readers are confounded with them, and can
give no judgment of it.

Gods spirit has not so mocked and dallied with us, as to set actuaries and
penne-men a work to engrosse such books, which being so perplexed, can
minister no instruction and comfort unto us: in this kind of vain may Apollo
please himself. ^. Pet. 1
God his word is a light that shines unto us out of a dark place. This book
howsoever it is sealed up by the Lion that is of the tribe of Judah, is broken
open to us.

Howsoever heretofore, Exodus 19
upon the publication, and giving of the law, the Lord ouershadowed all Mount
Horeb with a cloud, and with a thick clowd obscured the temple that was made
by Solomon, and covered the Arc of the covenant with a veil: 1. Reg. 10
Christ the image and brightness of his Father has dispelled this darkness,
chased away this cloud, and taken away the veil. So that as Elias when he went
up to heaven, 2. Reg. 2
left his mantle to Elizeus behind him, whereby he divided the deep waters of
Jordan; so Christ going up on high, Ephesians. 4
left his wisdom and gifts among men, whereby they might divide the deep
mysteries of the spirit contained in the scriptures.

If Pharao be nothing skillful in his dream, let him send for Joseph, who is
able to interpret it.

If Nabuchad-nazzar his vision does perplex him, Genesis 41
if he calls Dauiel he will presently unfold it. Dan. 2. and 4


Ananias will inform and acquaint Saul what he ought to do. Acts 9.


The Ethiopian Queens Chamberlain understands what he reads by the help
of Phillip. So, Acts 8.
if we find the Scriptures to be hidden, let us send for preachers who may lay
them open for us.

But above all, 1. Cor. 3.
let us pray for the assistance of the spirit of God, knowing that it is
neither Apollo in watring, or Paul in planting that does us any good, but God
that gives increase: we may have heaps of Doctors, Preachers, and
Schoolemaisters, but all in vain, unless this catholic and universal
doctor, sit in the chair and seat of our hearts, and read a lecture unto
us. For, A similitude.
as the harp or musical instrument moves not the ears, but the cunning
hand that strikes it: so the tongue of the Preacher avails nothing the heart
of the hearer, without the spirit that guides it.

This treasure is not so hidden from us, as the enemy would persuade us, who
prate, I know not of what Cimmerian darkness, and obscurity unsearchable, every
where obuious and occurrent in the Scriptures. The wily tempter herein
resembles him, A similitude.
who minding to strike fire with his iron steel out of a flinty stone, looks
round about what end of the same might be the fittest for it. There is no
fitter end for him to strike out the sparks and fire of the grace of God, out
of our stony consciences, than the word of God is, which he often strikes
at, especially by his often suggestion unto us of the obscurity of the word.

But doat ye not (beloved) upon such a vain and deceiuable dream, the idle
thought, and invention of man's brain, Psalm 19
The commandment of the Lord is pure, and gives light unto the eyes: The
testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple.

Socrates, a Pagan and heathenish man, attributes to the light of nature, thus
much, as what questions he shall move plainly in good order, albeit his Scholar
shall be dull and gross headed, he will undertake, shall aptly and naturally be
assoyled by him. And shall the Philosopher, in humane matters accomplish this
much, and shall not Gods spirit, the Spirit of al truth, the light of our
blindenes, our al sufficient Schoolemaister, the joy of our hearts, the breath
of our nostrils be aequiualent, and comparable unto him.

So long as we hear any mention to be made of Gods hidden oracles let us
have before our eyes, A similitude.
the trade of navigations, such as now it is, by use, and long adventure. The
pilote by a habit and continued experience, knows what seasons are fittest
to bring out his ships into the road, is acquaynted with the course and
disposition of the winds, the paths, the windings, the narrowest cuts of the
vast Ocean sea, as well as with the streets and houses of his town; he auoydeth
the sands, rocks and gulfes, as well as we the pittes and dikes that are
before us. So study we the Scriptures, and be we traded and brought up in the
course and knowledge of them, and by Gods especial grace abiding in our
hearts, there is nothing so hidden, needful to salvation but shall be found
out of us, and it shall be most ready and familiar unto us.

The Scriptures are the harder, A similitude.
and more hidden from us, because of our slacknes in inquiring after them. Such
as travel for pearls of great price which are hidden in the sea, must not lay
down lazily at the bancke side, or draw circles or triangles with his finger,
or a stick upon the uppermost sand. Such as dig for silver and gold in the
heart of the earth, A similitude.
must not dig lightly upon the face of the earth, but he must pierce the very
veins and bowels of the ground. There is nothing so hard, which is not with
labor and pains made easy to us.

The difficulty of the scriptures which falls much into our reading, is
hurtful unto none, but to such as are perverse; for it is expedient for the
godly every way: It stirs them up to study, the better to attain unto it:
It kindles in them a desire to understand: It adds spirit and life unto the
prayers which the Saints make to God for the comprehending of it. Moreover,
this makes them not to disdain to ask counsel of the learned, and so
thereby their pride is notably repressed, mutual love and charity singularly
preserved.

Chrysostom, A similitude.
by a fine similitude, shows how diligence overcomes the difficulty of
Scriptures. The mind (says he) and thoughts of man's heart are very hidden,
yet such as are commonly consorted with him, by his actio^^ gesture, and
outward behavior, do conjecture what they are. Let us love the word and
daily converse with it: I assure thee, mude meditation is the key that opens
the lock of this exchequer and treasury where the riches of God lie; let
therefore, such as will, please themselves in their wicked ignorance: A
similitude.
there is no man, not altered or distempered in his wits that is not
persuaded, that it well pleases every Prince, that every of his subjects should
be acquaynted with his Laws, which otherwise, be they never so perfectly
penned, if for want of knowledge of them, they be not duly executed, are but
in vain published.

See we not how the Lord has set the Sun in the firmament of heaven, A
similitude.
as it were, on a high throne, that, because it is the fountain of light, to
lighten all the creatures of thearth, every creature might behold it? Now
then, if it be hidden from our sight, the fault is in our fumish and evil
affected eyes, that cannot behold it.

For, A similitude.
as their eyes which are always fixed upon the soote and smoke of the
chimney, we see how they are watrish and redound with humors, and are bleared
and dimmed, so as ^he sight of them much fails them; and of ^he other side,
how they, who behold the green meddowes, and view the open and clear air,
and the cristall pure water-flouds ^nuironing the sweet pastures,
distinguished with all variety of redolent flowers, wherewith the earth is
mantled, they are pure and quicke-sighted: so sottish and earthly minds,
always drooping and hanging over the gross and fumish exhalations of the
earth (for what is else our silver and our gold, but the brackish and brynish
sweat and vapor of it?) I marvel not if the sight of their mind fails
them, spiritual understanding departs from them, and they be stark blind at
noone day with the Sodomites, with their eyes open with Balaam, Genesis 19.
and will not suffer the sun of righteousness, and the clear light of the
Gospel to shine in their hearts.

The sun gives light to the whole world alike, A similitude.
and is denied unto none: but let him remain as he well deserves, in
uncomfortable darkness, who shuts his windows to keep out the light of it;
or wilfully runs down into the holes of the earth, that he might not
behold it: So let his blood light upon his own pate, and let him remain in
the blackenesse of darkness for ever, that when the true light that lightneth
every one that comes into the world, shines among us, by the light of the
word, we shut the casements of the eyes of our minds, and enkennell our selves
in our earthly affections, that it might be hidden from us.

In the Winter season, A similitude.
the Sun is much hidden, and absent from us, because we cannot see it, the
interposition of thick and black clouds, between that and us, keeping it from
our eyes: the Son of God Christ lesus is a light unto our paths, but our
sins, as it were a cloudy curtayne, is drawn so betwixt us, as we are not
the better for it. The fault hereof is wholly in our selves, the Son is
clear of it.

God indeed does blind the wicked, but he blindeh them negatiuely; namely, to
recusant and obstinate sinners he does not communicate the light of his
spirit; and for this cause (as Job says) They do groape at noone day. Job 5.


Whenas men wilfully do hide themselves from God, God, not unwillingly does
hide his word from them. This hiding is ever in the creature only, and not in
the Creator. He would have cured Babylon, Ierem. 51.
but she would not, therefore he must leave her.

The word must have a fit subject to work upon, or else, no marvel though it be
preached in vain; and is as a sword hidden in a scabbard, and seems a dead
and hidden letter to us.

The plowman, A sumilitude.
when he casts his seed into the ground, loses it, if the soil be not
fruitful and fit for it: so strowe Gods good seed in the furrows of bad
hearts, and the seed shall never be seen to come and spring up in them.

In every action natural and spiritual, these two things chiefly are regarded,
the agent, and the patient. In the agent, there must be power and ability of
action: and in the patient, conformable disposition to entertayne the action.
The Smyth must first make his yrons fit and pliable by the fire, A similitude.
before he can hammer them, and make them serve his turn. Dry billet is a fit
substance to work upon. Some earth is so lean, Similitudes.
as to sow it with wheat, it thriueth not thereby, it brings forth nothing
but light and wild oats. Man's heart is like an Inn that entertayneth
alguests confusedly, alike of what sort soever. It is like a boat that leaketh
and takes water at every seame and cranny. It is like an open City without
walls, object and subject to the invasion of the enemy. It is like a vine
without a hedge. And finally, like a house without locks and doors unto them,
and every one has ingresse, and makes a lakes of them.

Depart not thou from God, hide not the self from him, let no fault be in
thee, and God will not forsake thee, or hide his word from thee, but he will
open this his measure (...) thee. As the Sun by his departure from the earth,
is the cause of the congelation of the earth, not directly, but indirectly: so
God, A similitude.
to the condign punishment of impotent sinners hides himself from them: for,
for God to hide himself from a sinner, and a sinner to hide himself from God,
it is all one.

Therefore since this treasure is hidden from them. I marvel not they esteem it
so little, and make no seeking for it: Ignoti nullique cupido, who lusts and
loves that which he did never know? A base fellow by the high way often
beardeth and braueth his better, A similitude.
because he knows him not. A clown takes more pleasure in his cottage, and
prefers it before a sumptuous house in London, that never yet knew the
inequality between them. Pearls are not to be prized by those that have no
skill of the nature of them. Aesops Cock will barter it away for a barley
karnel, inasmuch as the virtue of it is hidden from him: and truly such
apalogues are instructine enough, and I find that the wisest sometimes do use
them.

Taste therefore, and see how sweet the Lord is, Psalm 14. 1. Pet. 2.
and pray to him to open the wonders of his law, so shall thy delight be in his
commandments which thou have loved, and thou shall prefer the^ above gold,
Psalm 119
and worldly treasure, if thou knew what they are.

This treasure moreover, may be said to be hidden, because unto such as are
dispensers of it, Math. 7
we are not to open it. Christ his precept in this case is flat, who charge
that pearls should not be cast among filthy swine, that will tread them
vnderfeete. The damage that from hence will ensue upon us, if contrary to Gods
will we shall with Ezechias open this treasury to the ambassadors of Babylon,
^. King. 20.
by the terrible commination by the Prophet denounced upon Ezechias, for this
fact is not obscurely showed us.

Last of all, this treasure may be said to be hidden, because the estate and
possession of this treasure which the word affoordeth, is as yet whilst we
soiorn in this miserable world, detained and hidden from us: Dum est spes, not
estres, says Augustine. This treasure and pearl we have yet b ut in hope,
Colost. 3.
and our life (as says the Apostle) is hidden in Christ, but when Christ which
is our life shall appears, then shall we also appear with him in glory.

Therefore the Apostle defines faith, which is the hand which reaches us this
glory, the substance of things hoped for, Hebr. 11.
and the evidence of things that are not seen.

Now as this treasure is never the less worth, albeit the having of it, is yet
denied us, and the unspeakable wealth and worth thereof, is as yet hidden from
us, even so it is with our souls and bodies, that are grafted in Christ Jesus
by a true and lively faith, albeit those joys which we undoubtedly look for,
are yet shut from our eyes. Beloved, 1. John 3
we are now the sons of God, but yet it does not appear what we shall be,
and we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, and we shall see
him as he is: which time the Lord hasten, that we may receive that inheritance
with the faithful, which the Father of old has prepared, the Son of late has
purchased, and the holy Spirit has consigned, which as yet is hidden from us.

CHAP. V.
Of this Merchant-man his task, imposed upon him for the attayning unto this
Treasure, and Pearl of great price.

THings of excellency, are not had without difficulty: Gold and Pearl grow
not, as the ordinary fruits of the earth, in the outward face of it, but they
lie hidden in the entrals thereof, and with hard deluing, and tedious turmoyling
must be found out of us.

Our Evangelical Merchant in this place, got not up these goods by gazing
about him, in an idle speculation: but he buckled himself to the ordinary means
of attaining thereunto by industruous operation. He found this treasure as it
is in the first, and he sought these good pearls as it is inserted in the
latter of these parables.

Wherefore in this man, each man may see the nature of his task that expect
this man's ways. He must not stretch himself upon his bed, and fold his arms
to sleep: he must not keep his tabernacle, or stand in the market place, but
he must gird up his reins, put his sandalls upon his feet, he has a painful
pilgrimage and chargeable voyage; he must have the feet of an Hind, and the
wings of a Dove, Abac. 3.
and give all diligence to find out this hidden and unspeakable treasure, Psalm.
55
and to make purchase of it.

I know that God has opened unto some, the treasures of his grace, who have
bin careless enogh of it, as little, or not at al inquiring after it, clocking
like a hen, and putting out his hand unto a wicked and gainsaying people as to
Matthew the Publicane, Math. 8
to the woman the Samaritan, to Zachee the usurer, John. 4 Luke. 19 1. Tim. 3.
Hai. 6^
and to Paul the persecutor, and to the nation of the Gentiles generally, of
whom, by the mouth of Isaith he says planly, I was found of them who never
sought me. Thereby manifesting, that the riches of his goodness without our
merits, depend upon his mercies: yet unto such, to whom he gives this
particular grace, he requires their diligence for their better furtherance;
and that we should use his appointed means to attain unto that end he has
propounded unto us. That our eyes should not be evil, because he is good, nor
our pains and carefulnes be in the rereward, because his loving kindness is in
the foreward. Isal. 55
And therefore by Isaiah he cries alowd saying: Seek the Lord while he is to be
found, Amos. 5
call upon him whilst he is nigh. Answerable whereunto is that of Amos the
Prophet, seek the Lord, and your souls shall live, whom our Savior Christ
answers like the Echo, seek, and ye shall find, knock, and it shall be
opened unto you: Math. 6.
The estate and condition of a christian life is laborious and painful.

It was a law before the law, Genesis 3
that with the hard sweat of our foreheads, and labor of our hands, we should
bring in our living. And the covenant of the law of the Gospel is so straight,
as he that refuses to undergo this labor, 2. These. 3
his mouth must be muzled, and he must not eat.

The first Adam was not seated in the garden of Eden, Genesis 2
there to take his perambulations and his pleasure, and there to sit at ease,
but to dig and dress it, and to take due pains with it. And the second Adam
came not into this world, here to rest himself in a chair of ease, and to
live without labor: but he did eat his bread, not only in the sweat, but
also in the very blood of his face, and made his whole life, unto his very
death an exceeding painful pilgrimage. Math. 25
He excluded the nodding and drowsy virgins, and did shut heaven gates against
them. And he shakes up very roundly the idle gazers and standers in the market
place, Math. 20
and sent them into his vineyard for to labor in it. This life is the vineyard
of the Lord of Hosts, into which, none but laborers are called. In this life
we have but our labor only, our penny and wages for our labor is kept for
us, to the life that is to come, where we shall hunger and labor no more, and
where all tears shall be wiped from our eyes. Therefore the spirit in the
Revelation says: Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, they rest from
their labors, and their works follow them

Job calls our life a warfare, Job. 7
to express the painful nature, and condition of it, which rowseth us, and
makes us to trusse up our loins, and to look about us. Else where he
likewise says, that a man is borne to travail, Job. 5
as the sparks fly upwards; yea, as we may so say, Genesis 47
as the bird is made to fly wherefore Jacob termed his life a pilgrimage, and
Paul properly compares it to a race.

Jacob his life, 1. Cor. 9
whenas he soiourned with his uncle Laban, is the right line and level of our
lives; if we live as we should do, which he storieth out himself, and rippeth
up to Laban in this wise: Genesis 31
These twenty years haul I been in thy house, I was in the day consumed with
heat, and with frost in the night, and the sleep departed from mine eyes.

Seems this a hard thing? it cannot be but that hard things must be gotten
hardly. A similitude.
He that is desirous to have the gold of India, must take a painful journey,
and abide a great adventure, before he may attain it.

As every thing has his end, so there are means which we must use, which may
bring us to this end. He that will be cured of a most grievous disease, must
not refuse such physic as best serves thereunto. Similitudes.
He that buyeth a bargain and purchase of land, immediately bethinketh
himself therewithal, what may be the price of it. I know it, that albeit al
laborers are not chosen, yet there are none but that are laborers chosen, and
have their penny of the master of the vineyard.

The fruitless fig tree that has nothing but leaves, Mar^. 11
is blasted at the breath of Christ's heavy displeasure, and so being dead in
natural vegetation, it is twice dead in spiritual malediction. The edge of
the sharp axe is put to with force to the root of the sear, and unprofitable
tree, so as, serving not for fruit, it shall be hewed down and serve for the
fire.

Be our labor never so sower to us, yet it gives a great sweetness and
pleasure to those things which we bring in by labor. Wherefore that may be
argument enough unto us, if there were nothing else to minister encouragement,
to be painful and industrious in all godly enterprises. Do not all things
seem sweet and delitious unto him, whose life is most laborsome? I refer you
to the husbandman, and day-labourer herein, whose diet and quiet, through
work and weariness, is more toothsome and delightsome, than his that
surffeteth himself with ease, cowcheth on soft pallets, stalketh and strowteth
sluggishly enough in his orchardes and galleries, and pampereth himself with
his new devised dishes.

He that never labors, can never recreate, and refresh himself with ease.
The pauement is a pallet more pleasurable to the laborer, than the field bed
of dowlne is to the lordly loyterer. A course and gross diet batleth, and
better goes down with the pesant, sweating at the plough, than the finest
food does with the curious Courtier sweating in his bed, or in his drowsy
chair by the fire side.

Survey the common course of all creaturs under heaven, and we shall find
that their condition and nature is such, as directly crosses and ouerthwarteth
all security.

The heavens, the planets, Psalm. 1^
and the whole frame thereof, have their distinct and peculiar motions, they
go as a bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoice as a Giant to run his
course.

The earth never rests, but yearly yields his natural increase, Psalm. 104
bringing forth fodder for the cattle, and green herb for the service of
man: wine, oil, liquors of all sorts, with long standing still, are corrupt,
and wax sour, and unfit for any service.

Gold, silver, and mettalls of all manner, do fret and canker, through disuse,
being unoccupied. Every thing generally in his naturally use, thriueth, and for
want thereof, perishes.

The horse, and other cattle, through want of travel, are seebler in the
feet, and unfitter to travel.

The bird that lies, is not in such danger, but sitting still, is shot at with
an arrow.

The soldier that is the greatest sluggard, is the greatest coward, and thus
we may extend and draw out our discourse with innumerable particulars.
Wherefore, since the case stands thus, Ephesians. 5 Isai. 60
Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee life, idleness being nothing but a painted toombe and sepulcher, which
burieth us quick.

We hear here of a great purchase, of a Treasure, Psalm. 119.
and a Pearl far better than our life. Psalm. 108
Up therefore, why sit thou still? why does thy flesh cleave unto the
pauement? summon with David harp and lute to awake, and say, Romans 13
I my self will awake right early. Now, even now, Phil. 2
our salvation draws nigh; Oh work we our salvation with fear and
trembling. Now are we called to work in the Lords vineyard, why then do we
stare one upon an other, Math. 20
and stand idle in the market place? All riches and plenteousnes is here
offered unto us for our labor and pains: wherefore let us, for the reward
sake, cheerfully undergo them. And in this case, be advised by wisdom, who
gives us this instruction: Call afterknowledge, Proverbs. ^
and cry for understanding, seek for her as silver, and search for her as
treasure, and this will be the issue, We shall understand the fear of the Lord,
and find the knowledge of our God.

Shall Jacob for the love that he did be are unto Rachel, serve two
prentise-hoods, Oen. 29. etc.
twice seven years together, a most miserable master, (uncle I will not call
him) he was so absurd, and of that bald behavior every kind of way, as
foysting in his bleared bird, Leah. for Rachel, and ten several times hucking
and dodgeing with him for his wages, and shall we scotch to serve God so long,
for the beauty, bravery, and bounty of a kingdom, who pays us such great
and exceeding wages, and never sticks with us, but ever gives us more then
he does promise us? Nay, rather then through idleness we will loose such
blessedness, O Lord, by thy grace we are votaries with David, not to suffer our
eyes to sleep, Psalm 13^
or our eye liddes to slumber, or the temples of our, head to take any rest,
until we find the temple of the Lord, the habitation of the mighty God of
Jacob: we shall shake off the sluggards sickness, who ever finds some fault or
other with the season of the year, which is, either too hot, Proverb. 1^
or too cold, so as he is not able to give himself to work: or else he fears a
lion lurking by the way, or a bear in the street, so as he cannot go forth
out of his house. We can go to bed late, and arise early in the morning, and
eat the bread of sorrow, and grudge at no pains in plodding, Psalm. 127
and prowling after paltry worldly pearl and treasure that is transitory, and
shall we stomach to labor in Gods work, the worth thereof surmounting beyond
the imagination of man, all the wealth whatsoever in the world.

If a man should offer thee a huge heap of money, A similitude.
upon condition that thou should run one holy day on his crand, and he
should promise thee at thy return, at the days end to give thee this money: I
know thou should not need to have spurs to prick thee forward thou would
post it away cheerfully. It is thus with us: our life is called a day, our way
which God has set us to walk, is long, the wages and hyre of our travail, is
incomparable, run we therefore with David, Psalm 119
the way of Gods commandments, and let our whole labor be employed thereupon.

Hypocrates says of the art of Physic, that the study of it is long, the
experience of it doubtful, and our life but short, which he said not to
discourage any from this laudable profession, but to incite us to follow after
it, with a more earnest contention: the like may be said of our divine study,
the physic of the soul, to animate us to all painful labor in this
business, for the obtaining of this true treasure and inestimable jewel that
is set before us.

Solomon spent double more time in building his own house, 1. King. 6
then he did in erecting and setting up Gods temple; he did set it forward with
such speed and diligence. A perfect presidence for us to do the like, teaching
us to spend all the pains we can about the affairs of Gods worship, and to be
more careful of heavenly matters, then we are of our private and worldly
commodities.

If we would but consider and weigh with our selves how we run upon the score,
into what a deep debt with God and arrerages, we are fallen: the palpable and
damnable security we take in matters of religion, cannot but seem admirable.

The Roman Emperor Augustus, hearing how a nobleman of Rome was behind hand,
and yet for all that took his sleep kindly, and snorted of both ears, spending
no thought of acquittancing of any of it, was very desirous ^o buy the couch and
pallet that he slept on; for he could but muze mainly at the matter, now a man
in such deep debt, should take such deep rest. If we would bethink our selves,
what bonds of duty we have broken and forfeited to God, our country, and our
household, and chiefly to those of the household of faith: it is not possible
that we should pass away our time in such dalliance, pastime, and pleasure, as
we do, a great audite being nigh at hand; Matthew 12
wherein we must give up a very straight account, not only for works, but for
every idle word, and for every vain thought: Oh then what sower sauce shall
every banquet have; which we have had here, at which so rifly evil words have
bin vttred? well, well, when, Gods sernants shall return this message to their
master that sent them, Zach. 1
We have goue through the world, and behold it sits still; and is at rest:
What will Gods answer herunto be but this, that their security shall yield them
^^tle safety? 1. These. 5
for when they shall say, Peace, peace, all things are well, then shall come
soda^^ destruction upon them, as travail upon a woman laboring with child,
and they shall not escape it.

Was this security the downfall of Sodom, and her sister Gomorha, Exech. 38
and their neighbor Towns about, who for all their dead sleep escaped not
destruction, and their damnation sleeped not? Eccle. 33
The whip and burden belongs to the Ass, correction and work unto the
servant, send him to labor that he go not idle for idlanesse brings much
evil, yea, it is indeed the root of all evil, and the spawne of al sin. I
passed by the field of the slothful, (says Solomon) and by the vinyard of
the man destitute of understanding, and lo, it was all grown over with
thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof. Prou. 24
Furthermore, this king in the wisdom of his spirit, made a singular use of
this his meditation, in this matter to himself, He beheld and consideredit
well, and received instruction by it, that a little sleep brought in a great
deal of poverty, and a little slumber a great deal of necessity: Corruptions
and vices spring up in the bodies and souls of the wicked, as thorns and
briars in the fields of the slouth-full.

The running stream gives pure and wholesome fishes, A similitude.
but the standing poole ingendreth frogs, and diverse noisome creatures.

The land that is laid, and is unoccupied, A similitude.
what else produces it but lascivious weeds, waxing waste and wild, like to a
wilderness?

If thou would have thy soul empty of alvnclean thoughts, replenish and
fulfill it with all godly motions, and so no wickedness shall be able to enter
in. For as the glass violl that ^s already full of water, A similitude
is not capable of any other thing beside: so the vessel of thy soul, being
fraught with the best desires, it has no lodging for evil disposed purposes.

Nature teaches thee with thy two hands to work, as it does the bird with her
two wings to fly.

Behold how painfully the worldly man seeks after wealth learn of him to
seek for the true wealth indeed, and express thou his diligence and thou shall
attain unto it. Be not slow and slack in Gods service, Genesis 4
as Cain in his sacrifice, but be as forward in duties of religion, Genesis 22
as Abraham was in his own sons oblation, of whom the Scripture says that
he arose early in the morning to sacrifice unto God.

Thou can not without labor with thy stope and bucket draw water out of a
well: A similitude.
much less without labor thou shall draw this lively water from the
wellspring of salvation.

There are many main motives, and inducements to this duty. As the respect of
our natural infirm condition, being in it self such, as without this treasure
of the word of God, which ministers present help to all our necessities we are
not able in this present life tesustaine our selves, much less to provide for
our better estate in the life that is to come.

The promises of God are pithy and plausible persuasions hereunto, by which he
assures us his assistance and direction in all our proceedings, if so be
laboriously we shall inquire and seek after him.

Moreover, the presidents and examples of the faithful, are as good orators as
we need to have to plead this assertion. Nicodemus a Pharisee every inch of
him, of a very cursed sect, sought late for this treasure, and came to Christ
by night to disturb him in his sleep, sculking in the dark, and like unto the
night-Owle, not daring to behold the Sun at noon day, politickely temporizing
and playing with both hands: yet was he not repulsed, but he found this
treasure which was hidden from his knowledge, Ioh 3.
(albeit he was dubbed such a doctor among them) when Christ discoursed with
him of the prime point of rudiment of regeneration. Mary Magdalen the harlot,
the publicane in the temple, the thief upon the cross, inquired after him
whom their souls loved, and their labor was not lost, buthey enjoyed their
desires. Math. 6
It is but Ask and have: seek, and find: knock, and it shall be opened unto
you. Wherefore, seek for knowledge as for treasure, and for heavenly wisdom,
as for the wedge of gold of Ophyr, the Coral, the babish, Job. 28
and the Onyx stone is not equal unto this. Sell not thy righteousness for
silver, Amos 8
preferring the merchants of Babylon, before the citizens of Jerusalem. Be
not like the Gadarenes, Luke 8
who for love of their swine, were willing enough to leave Christ, and willed
him to depart out of their coasts.

CHAP. VI.
Of the gladness of this Evangelical Merchant, upon the finding of this
treasure and Pearl of great price: under which, the joy which the Saints of
God do feel, by the power of his word, typically is shadowed.

THe word of God is not in nature unlike unto a Fishermans hook, A similitude.
for it takes us as soon as it is taken of us. But herein it differs, that
it catches us not to kill us, but to save us alive; it hurts and wounds
not but rather comfort and heals all our wounds.

It is like unto fire, A similitude.
never ceasing, until it conuerteth all the fuel cast into it, into fire.
This fire of the Spirit melts all our hearts and rests not, if it may take
hold of them, until it turns our sear and dry affections, into the hot
burning coals of zealous dispositions. A glad man was this, as soon as he
had with long digging in the ground found out the golden mine, his heart
rejoiced, and his tongue was glad, (...)
his heart and flesh rejoiced in the living God, he went away ravished, and
fulfilled with all joy.

It seems therefore that he had a great guess of the price of this pearl,
of the value, worth, and worthiness of this treasure. For there is none who
takes pleasure in any unknown thing: for, the sensible experience that we
have of a thing, is that which breeds in us our love unto a thing.

And truly (dear christian) I will lay my soul upon it, that if thou shall
but taste how sweet the Lord is, and come unto Gods word in godly sincerity,
without politic partiality, thou will be so satisfied with the fullness of
that joy, as nothing else, in comparison of this, shall be able to delight
thee. A similitude.
For this is like the precious perfume of the apothecary, that takes away an
evil savor and leaves a good behind it. Prou. 10
Thou shall be like the buyer, of whom Solomon speaks, who whiles he is in
buying, disgraceth the thing, saying, It is naught, it can not be worth the
money, but when he has bought it, he boasts of his penyworths, and
wonderfully extolleth it, and says it is far better than his money. A
similitude.
As apples that are decocted with honey and sugar, loses their old taste, and
savor only of the honey, or the sugar: so our souls dedicated and devoted to
heavenly things, they are nothing conditioned as they were before, but they
rellise only the sweetness of Gods word.

It fares with us, A similitude.
as with the Gentleman's hawke, who being hooded and blinded, is sluggish, and
has no pleasure to follow his game, and to soar alost: but being vnhooded,
he takes his flight, and with delight enogh pursues his pastime.: so we whom
the god of this world has blinded with earthly cogitations have no heart or
stomach unto heavenly matters, and perceive not (being sensual and carnal
men) the things that are of God: but if God vnhoodeth us, and opens unto us
the eyes of our minds, then we fly up, as the hawke, on high; we look
upon heaven, and have our whole conversation in heaven, and do place all our
pleasure and felicity in heaven.

As one nail or wedge is driven out with another, A similitude.
so one pleasure does expel another: The joy and pleasure of the holy Spirit
chaceth away the paltrie pleasure of the world.

Wherefore, such who are affrighted and dismayed within themselves at the
preaching of the word, have not yet learned Christ, or understood what is the
nature and operation of the word. The name of the gospel desciphereth plainly
the nature of the Gospel: It is called Euangelium, which signifies Bonum
nuntium, that is, a glad message, and tidings of great joy. Behold (says
Christ his heavenly harbenger Gabriel, Luke. 3.
unto the shepheardes) I bring you tidings of great joy which shall be unto all
the people. Behold what joy this is, it is not a slender and light kind of joy
appertaining unto some few; but it is a great and universal joy belonging unto
all.

This joy (in some sort) is familiarly laid open, under the plain
similitudes of harvest men, and of soldiers, at the end of their harvest, and
at the dividing of their booties, Isai. 9.
They have rejoiced before thee according to the joy of harvest, and as men
rejoice when they divide a spoil. And what is the subject occasion of this
joy, the Prophet there tells thee. The yoke of their burden, the staff of
their shoulder, the rod of their oppressor have thou broken, as in the day of
Midian.

The Turk takes a great company of prisoners, and puts them to his
galleys, A similitude.
and galleth and wastes them with most cruel bondage. Their king sends his
son with great power to procure their jail delivery: what joy and gladness
is there now, as you imagine, in the hearts of these captives upon so happy
news?

Yet let us further press this sweet and comfortable doctrine, by making this
the case. A similitude.
A serpent has bitten a man unto the death with his venomous mouth, and there
is no other means to preserve his life, but an other man's death, some man must
die by licking him whole, and by taking away his rank contagion with his
tongue; well, some base man of no reputation may serve this turn; yet life for
life, that must be the ransom. But the case is quite contrary, a miserable man
has been stung by this serpent, and rather than he should die, the king
sends his only begotten son, whom he nourished in his bosom, whom he
made heir of all, with his sweet lips which were full of grace, to lick
his contagious, and putrefying sores, and to die for him.

Or, A similitude.
if you please, let us paraphrase thus: there are notorious thieves for capital
crimes committed to the jail, and the doom of death by the searlet Judge is
given out against them, and they must be executed all the sort of them: But
lo, as God would have it, in the mean time comes the Kings son with his
retinue and guarde about him: at the sight of whom, these enormous caitiues
out of their grates and prison holes, cry with a loud voice, saying, Save us
master lest we perish. The Kings son hereat amazed, and standing still,
asks his followers what this clamorous and shreeking outcry means. They
answer in this wise; they are famous malefactors, whom thy father has
imprisoned, and adjudged unto death, for their due demerites, and they are
forthwith to be led out to execution, and to suffer death as traitors in the
highest degree. But the bowelles of this young Prince, moved with their
doleful and most extreme estate, commands them to be slayde, and offers
himself as a ransom and redemption to his father for them. Whose heart is so
stony, that will not be mollified and broken in pieces, upon tidings of such
strange and unspeakable joy? Our case is even the same, and this is the
benefit which we have by Christ, the object of our joy, the subject of the
Gospel, which we preach unto you. By him we have deliverance from the
thraldom of Satan, Psalm. 107
being fast bound in misery and yrons. By him, we that have been stung by the
Serpent, the old red dragon, are healed again. And by his red blood the
ransom of our sins, he has pacified the wrath of his Father, and has
delivered us his prisoners, appointed unto death. For this cause, Psalm 126
let our tongues be filled with laughter and our hearts with joy. And let us
gladly entertayne all such as bring this happy legation unto us.

The longing expectation which our Fathers had of this, John 8.
lifted up their hearts, and through this, they were comforted before he was
exhibited.

Abraham did see Christ, but a far off, and greatly rejoiced; we have him
nigh at hand, and possess him in deed, whom they had but in hope, and
therefore we have argument of greater joy than they.

If Solomon so rejoiced, 1. King. 8.
and al Israel with him, as the earth it self rang with the noise they made,
when they brought the Ark of God into the Temple of God: much more ought we
to rejoice, having had the lively Arc, Psalm 48.
the Son of God among us, and having seen the loving kindness of the Lord
in the midst of the temple.

The Eastern Magicians, Matthew 2.
at the sight but of a star which conducted them to the way where Christ was
to be borne, were exceeding glad: we have Christ himself directing us in the
way that we are to walk, therefore we ought in duty to go beyond them in
ioyfulnesse.

If great mirth and melody was in the fathers house, Luke 16.
for the joyful welcome home of the prodigal son: whenas we prodigal
children come home unto our father, and do his holy word, we shall likewise
hear of joy and gladness, that the bones which he has broken may rejoice.

If John the Baptist leapt in his mothers womb, Luke ^.
upon the coming of the mother of Christ into his mothers house, how should we
leap and skippe like young Unicorns, whenas Christ by his word enters into
our souls?

Finely says Chrysologus, Chrysologus.
A letter comfort but no longer than when the party is present that did send
it. A bil of debt binds, but it has no further use when the handwriting is
discharged. The flowers of trees are pleasant, but until such time as the
fruit of them are ripe, the flours are consumed in the fruits the obligation
is cancelled upon payment of the debt. Therefore, by how much the presence of
the Bridegroom is welcomer then his letter; and the money better than the
parchment scroll; and the Apples better than the ^lowers; the fruits of the
spirit better than the flowers of the dead letter: so much ioyfuller ought we
to be, than our fathers of old time, who had but the epistle, covenant, and
shadows, which were insteade of leaves: we have the Bridegroom, the earnest
penny it self the fruit of the holy ghost, the substance of salvation
effectually among us.

A great difference is to be putt between this joy, which this merchant
conceived to himself, upon this happy having of this treasure, and that which
he had before of his worldly treasure, whether bequeathed unto him by his
friends, or brought in by his careful industry. For worldely joy is
counterfeit, and mixed with much mourning. And of this the Prophet Esaias thus
speaks: Isay 24.
All that were merry of heart do mourn: the mirth of the tabrets cease, the
noise of them that rejoice ends, the joy of the harp cease.

The fickle joy of this world, A similitude.
is like the fond joy of birds, picking karnells of corn under a net which is
spread for them, and like the joy of fishes skudding in the water after a
worm, under which a hook is covered. The world like Rachel seems to be
beautiful: but Gods word it is that is like Leah, fruitful.

All worldly merriment is but mere madness, ^celes. 1.
in the Wise man's judgment, I said of laughter, thou art mad, and of joy,
what is it that thou do (says the wisdom of Solomon.)

The insufficiency of worldly joy, the mutable and changeable condition of it:
and of the contrary side, the soliditie and stabilitie of the joy that is
spiritual, Genesis 25
is considered in the persons of Ismael, and Isaac. Ismael wandering in the
wilderness of Bersheba, fainted in his journey, his water in his bottle was
spent, and he grew thirsty, almost unto the death. But Isaac that was the son
of the free woman, borne after the spirit, and not after the flesh, never was
in want, Genesis 26
but he dug wells and fountains of living water, which streamed without
ceasing. Worldly solace is soon finished and consumed, with the water that was
in Ismaels pitcher; but the comfort and gladness of the godly, as the spowtes
and conduit pipes of Isaac, spowt out the waters of eternal life continually,
John 16.
and this their joy and comfort shall no man take from them.

The Manna of the Israelites, Exodus 16
is a special type of the singular comfort and sweetness of Gods word, the
Manna of our souls. The people of Israel wist not what it was: in like manner
we know not what this is which is so sweet in our lips, and comfortable to
our taste, which slacketh the thirst of earthly affections, and carries the
mind after heavenly matters. A similitude.
For, as the little Ant, who has smelled the sweetenes of any honey or sugar,
runs to and fro through the smallest chinkes and crannies of the ground,
tickled and ravished with the pleasant scent of it: so the godly soul, who
has tasted how sweet the Lord is unto him, he runs with all speed unto the
savor of his sweet ointments, and more delights in the pleasure of his
house.

Lean not thou therefore upon the broken staff and rod of Egypt, which will
deceive thee, put not thy trust in any help of man, set not thy mind upon
earthly things, but rest upon god as the anchor of thy soul, and thy certain
stay and refuge in all thy extremities. A similitude.
For, what aged weak man will commit the whole poyse and burden of his body to
a small and tender crutch, to be supported by it, which being overmuch charged
with his burden, crusheth a pieces, and breaks asunder, and gives him a
main overthrow, and if so be he do trust in it?

It is not in the nature of earthly joy, A similitude.
to satisfy our minds. For it is with it, as with the estate of a man that
has an agew, who in the extremity of his burning fit, thinks himself not
a little eased, with a draft of cold drink, and indeed the heat is somewhat
allayed and qualified for a time, but to his further vexation and danger in the
end: for it feeds and norisheth his redundant humors in him: So, earthly joy
seems to have some iollity in it at the first assay, but it is like cold
water, pleasing in the beginning the inordinate and distempered desire of the
mind; in the ending to work the greater torment and peril of the mind. For,
2. Sam. 13.
be at that Ammon be for a brunt sick of love toward his sister Thamar, it
is but for a fit, for having glutted his lust, and fulfilled his filthy
mind, his hatred that he bears toward her afterward, will far exceed all that outward love which he showed her before.

If we knew but the end of worldely delights, which makes us such show of
sweetness in the beginning, we could never fancy them. It is short that
delights, and eternal that tormenteth.

There be some ulcers that breed under the skin, A similitude
by reason of a salt running humor that abounds, which so tickleth the skin
with a pleasurable itch, as by the rubbing of them to and fro with the fingers,
for the time, it seems much delightsome, but when the itch cease,
immediately thereupon the sore increases, ranckling, festering, and burning
exceedingly: so worldly vain joy that does but tickle us at the first, does
but double our smart and misery at the last.

The bird that is enclosed in the net, A similitude.
does not feel it at the first, but in the end, when she would fly away,
she sensibly finds it: So men, entangled with the snares of the Devil, the
pleasures of this world, which we swiftly like a bird fly into, privily in
this nett are our feet taken, and before such time as we would escape out of
it, we cannot epsy it.

The joy that the world yields, A similitude
pierces no further than the bodily sense, it does not touch, or come near
the inward man. It does no more good than a spooneful of cold water dropped into
his mouth that has an extreme agew, which cooles his pallat, but riddeth not
his thirst, for the heat that is within him presently consumes it, before it
can enter and pass into the stomach.

In the presence of God, is the fullness of all joy, and without him there is
nothing but heaviness. Psalm 42.
David could not eat the bread that did him good whilst the enemy vexed him,
and asked him, saying, Where is now thy God? If God be not with us, Psalm. 137.
we may hang our Harpes upon the willow trees: For there is joy and gladness
only in the dwellings of the righteous, and only they that are true of heart
shall be glad. Psalm 118.
The organs, shack-buts, Psalm 64.
and tuneable pipes sounded alowd, Luke 15.
and filled the house, when the prodigal son came home unto his father: when
we return from our sins unto our father, Psalm 30.
we shall put off our sackecloth, and girde our selves with gladness, Psalm
16.
for at his right hand are abundance of pleasures for evermore.

But of this joy, which is the true joy indeed, which the gospel does begette
in the hearts of those that love it, can none better speak, than such, who
have had a lively feeling of the same, whereof in holy page we have
innumerable examples. Virtue comes out of every part of this, as out of the
fringe and garment of Christ. For as Christ with five loaves and two fishes fed
five thousand men; Acts 2.
so Peter with one sermon did convert three thousand souls. Acts 26.
Agrippa hearing the Apostle Paul but once, was almost made a christian. The
Eunuch hearing Philip but once, he became a convert. Acts 8.
Zacheus hearing Christ but once, for joy, he shared out his goods unto the
poor. Luke 19.
Innumerable souls that have lighted upon the word, have lighted upon
salvation, but without the word I find none that has been converted, and
has found this salvation. The dead have heard the voice of Christ, and have
been restored unto life. The blind have heard the word of Christ, and have
received sight: the dumb have heard the word of Christ, and their tougs have
been loosed, and they have glorified Christ. The lame have heard the voice of
Christ, and they have skipped; the winds, and they have ceased. The sea, and
it has bin calmed. The devils, and they have obeyed: But we, far worse
than they, hear it continually, and are not reclaymed.

A sinner can no sooner resign his sinful life, and betake himself to a
christian godly course, but a strange metamorphosis and change immediately is
to be seen in him, and the inward effects of the blessed word of god will soon
be espied, by his outward glad affects.

As Haman was so exceeding joyful when he was bidden to the banquet to the
King, Ester 5.
as he could not conceal it, but he must needs boast to his wife and
neighbors of it: so the righteous being caled by the preachers of the word to
the supper of the Lamb, and to the kingly marriage, they can not but make
their godly boast of it, and all the day long be talking thereof.

As heat that is hid under a thick cloud, A similitude.
will not be restrained from breaking forth into a thunder and great noise: So
the heat of Gods word abiding in our heart, rests not, but it searches all
the parts and makes great motions and commotions in them.

There be diverse kinds of houses builded, two chambers, or three chambers
high, like the Arc of Noah; and insuch, that noise which is made in the higher
room descends to the lower, and is easily heard in it. The inward man is
much of this making, standing upon two lofts, in the upper room lodges his
understanding and will, and below cowch his sensual and brutish affections
and grosser motions that are carnal, and beastly: and these two distinct
pauilions are so compact, and conjoined together, and there is such a
combination betwixt them, as let there be any stir more than is ordinary in the
higher room, they that dwell beneath are made partakers of it. If God his love
be earnest in motion in the inward and spiritual man, it is wonderful how
the outward and carnal man is possessed with it. They go hand in hand
together, like unto two Twins, sampling and fulfilling this Aphorism of the
Prophet David, My heart, and my flesh, rejoiced in the everliving God. Psalm
eighty four.

If as yet thorough want of knowledge of the word of God, thou have had no
feeling of the joyful effects of it: do but taste and feel how sweet the
Lord is, and thou shall soon perceive it. The ignorance of it, is the only
maine cause of our general loathing of it.

Gregory showing the odds that is betwixt both kinds of joy, that which the
world yields, and that which the word offers, passing elegantly discourses
in this wise. Bodily pleasures, whenas they are wanting us, as most desired of
us, and being fulfilled with them, we are soon glutted and surfeited with
them. But spiritual joy, the more we are without it, the less we esteem to
have it, but the more we have it, the greater affection and pleasure we have in
it.

In earthly delights our appetites only please us, which being fully to our
desires served, they presently do displease us. In heavenly things our
appetites only fail us, and the sole experience and feeling that we have of
them, only does affect us. In the other, our appetite does engender fullness,
and fullness breeds fulsomnesse: but in these, our desires beget fullness,
and fullness increases continually more delightsomnes. The more the sweetness
of this joy is perceived, the more ardently it is loved, the beter it is known
of us.

A sottish country man obscurely mewed up al his before, A similitude.
in a base and simple cottage, when he comes to the famous city of London,
he stareth about him every step that he does make, and is a man made of
wonders, every object which is before his eyes, being unto him a subject of
wonder. It is not so with them that are borne citizens, and there have their
abode, their long continued conversation of that place, takes away all
admiration of the place. Those who have hitherto dwelt in Egyptian and
damnable darkness, who are rude, and ignorant and as a beast before him, when
it pleases the Lord that they should lift up their eyes, and behold the light,
and with that eye of Faith, see that great city, not of London, but of
Jerusalem, not to see new stately houses, but to see new glorious heavens,
they are in a world of wonder, they are astonished and suddenly cast down,
they marvel to see such things; and sensibly, they feel that which before
they believed not. But the free denisons of this Jerusalem, who do serve the
Lord day and night in the temple, and are always before him, they muze not at
that which they have so long enjoyed, which have bin their comfort in all their
afflictons, with faithful hearts acknowledging with holy David in all dutiful
thanksgiving; Psalm. 31
How great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee,
and done to them that trust in thee, even before the sons of men?

As the Lord of old, when his Israelites wandered through the waste wilderness,
toward his promised land of Canaan, which abounded with milk and honny,
provided Manna, a celestial diet for them, and fed them with the bread of
heanen: so, for us who are travelers, as all our fathers were in the
wilderness of this world, the Lord has likewise given us Angels food, the
word of God, the spirtuall Manna, whereby we live for ever. Now as the former
rellised most pleasauntly in their mouths, and contained all toothsome and
delightsome taste in it; which all other his sweet creatures jointly or
severally could affoorde unto us: So this Manna and diet of our souls is
instead of al delights, and dainties unto us, and is like a perfume which has
odor for every one.

This the spouse sensibly did taste and feel in the presence of her
bridegroom, Cantie. 1
and therefore she desires to be still united unto him, and that he would kiss
her with the kisses of his mouth, inasmuch, as her love is better then wine,
and because of his sweet ointments, for which the virgins loved her.

Of this joy our Savior Christ speaks in his general proclamation, Math. 11
under the comfort and refection, unto which it pleases him most graciously to
inuit us, by our obedience unto his word, saying unto us: Come unto me alye
that trauail, and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you.

Such therefore, as make that the argument of their sorrow, which should be
unto them an occasion of great joy, who are grieved and disquieted at the
preaching of the word, who entertain a preacher with no other congee, then
Achab did Elias, saying unto him, 1. Reg. 21
art thou come my enemy hanging down their heads like bul-rushes, Isaiah 58.
when the ovice of the preacher touches their sins, and with the sword of
the spirit launcheth them deeply, and cutteth them to the heart, saving within
themselves, John. 6
Durus est hic sermo: This is a hard saying, and who is able to abide it? Such,
I say, A similitude.
may well be likened unto those, who suffer shipwreck at the havens mouth, and
the key side, the only place of harbor, and refuge in such danger.

But we cannot be ignorant, how untoothsome and unwholesome this spiritual diet
is, to the stomachs, and affections of the greater sort, who are grossly
minded. A similitude.
And we marvel not much at it. For as swine are not delighted with the smell of
sweet herbs, but with the stinking savor of corrupt, carrion: so swinish
souls regard not the fragrant odor of the sweet word of GOD, but they drink
puddle, as an ass drinks water, and their pleasure is to wallow in the mire
of their sins.

The wicked, A similitude.
who are senseless, and without feeling, both of God and godliness, are like
green and moist faggot sticks, which are so far from taking hold of the fire
put under them, as thorough the sap that distilleth from them they do
extinguish and utterly overcome it. The hearts of the godly, are of the nature
and condition of the gunpowder, which is presently set on fire by the lest
touch but of a spark that is put unto it. So the fire of Gods word is choked
and smothered in ungodly men, being not a fit combustible subject to work
upon. But it soon makes a light and bright flame, in the souls of his
saints, as being a sulphurous and apt matter, upon which it may extend and
exercise his force.

A kettle of water set on the fire, A similitude.
as soon as it conceiueth the heat thereof, expresses, as we see, the motion
of the fire, for albeit, it be a heavy and weighty body, and so by nature
should descend, yet when it boyleth, it lays aside his nature, and bubbleth,
arises, and ascends upward in the manner of fire. The bodies of the
righteous, howsoever by nature they are of an earthly and heavy substance, and
so do bend downward and have a prospect to the world: yet the fire of Gods
spirit that burns within them contrary to their course, lifts them upward,
and causes them to mount up to heaven.

Wherefore, as John wept until the book was opened, Apoc. 5
and so soon as it was opened, all the Elders sung: so let us adiudge it to be
the greatest cause of weeping, when the word is taken from us, and the best
occasion that can be of joy, when it is restored and given to us again.

Therefore be like unto this learned Lapidary, and learn out the value and
price of this pearl, and thou shall soon find joy in it.

It is a memorable example that Socrates in his ecclesiastical hystory,
sets down of a certain Abbot, who dieting himself with bread that was of
a gross and course grain, Hist. Trip^^^. lib. 8 cap. ^
answered thus finely such who would know his reason thereof of him. I take my
whole repast upon this bread that is so sower, so vild, and mean, that nothing
but God might be of any pleasure and delightsomnesse with me. Oh that we were
thus devoted unto God, and stood so affected toward heavenly things! it
could not be otherwise but that they would express their joyful effects in us.
A similitude.
For even as those that walk in the Sun, be the occasion of what it will,
must needs be parched and colored with the Sun: so they that shall walk in
the sunshine of Gods word, the light of the world, I doubt not, but that it
shall comfort their hearts, and warm their souls with the love thereof, and
alter their conditions, and set a new die and hue upon them, and minister such
joy as they are not able to conceive.

CHAP. VII.
By the example of this Merchant, who did hide his Treasure, the necessity,
not only of the hearing of the word, but also, of the faithful hiding it in
our hearts, is manifestly euicted.

FOrasmuch as this Ieweller, when he lighted upon this Treasure, was as
careful in keeping it, as he was joyful in having it, which he evidently
showed in his provident hiding of it: it is argument enough to conclude the
necessity, not only of the reading and hearing of the word, but also of the
industrous preserving it in our hearts. Without this, the immortal seed of gods
word, A similitude.
shall never take deep root and fructify in our hearts. For, even as the seed
that is strowed upon the furrows of the earth, unless it be ploughed in, and
buried in the earth, that thereby it may take root, can never spring up, and be
fit for the harvest: so the word of God, unless it may be thoroughly fixed in
our hearts, and there abide and remain his full time, it will never yield any
grain of good works, or serve to any profitable pur pose any way.

We must not be trewants in the Church of God, as Scholars in the school, or
be idle in the church, as children in the market, who neither buy, nor sell; but
we must hear, mark, and hide up that which is taught us.

As the iron steel, A similitude.
so long as it is cold, can not be joined and united to another: and as a sword
that is right, cannot be put into a scabberd that is crooked: so the cold
affections, cannot be so near conjoined, as they ought, to duties of devotion:
and crooked consciences are not fit cases to hide and keep in them, the sharp
and two edged blade of Gods spirit.

If there were a lettice, into which we might but peep into the hidden heart
of man, we should soon perceive how few of those many, to whom this treasure
of Gods grace is offered, and who come unto the word, come in this good spirit
to this good and godly end, to benefit themselves by it, to hide it with this
good Merchant, in the secret closet of his heart.

Some come like Somners, and hollow hearted; Math. 22
Herodians, to trippe and entangle the preacher in his words, and if he can
catch any thing, that by his misconstruing it may but seem offensive to the
present state, he writes it in his tables, and he runs as Doeg the Edomite
to Saul, 2. Sam. 21.
and makes a great tale of it, such a one is a devil called in the
Scriptures, the accuser of our brethren. A similitude.
Such hide the word indeed, but only for a time, and that part which makes for
them: and they resemble brood hens, who pecke up barley carnells with their
beak, but they keep them not, but let them fall again to their young chickens of
their feather.

Othersome hear, to please their itching ears, and observe only figures and
colors of Rhetorike, co^ceited invention, histrionical discoursing a fine
phrase or two, and that they carry with them. Hoses 1^
Such are fed as Ephraim with the wind, with round periods, and square
words, without any substance or show of any matter. A similitude.
Plutarch compares such unto those who carry nose-gayes about them, only for
the smell, and outward show of them, and not for any virtue that is hidden in
them.

Others are newfangled, Acts 17. A similitude.
like unto Athenians, and do listen after news; and if the Preacher be a like
man to discourse of novelties, he is a lure unto them.

Some come to scoff, others for their fancy, A similitude.
others for a fashion, for they do no good, no more than young children, whom
we lead with us to church, and carry home with us: for either their thoughts
are dispersed to and fro, so as they are like the starlings and doves that fly
about the Church, or else they fall asleep, and are, for a time, like a dead
corpse, without any motion. They think as Samuel, 1. Sim. ^.
that it is not God that speaks unto them, and therefore devoutly they
return unto their sleep. Thus our greatest sort of hearers, if we divide
them aright, either have no pitchers, or else they leave their pitchers behind
them; or else, if they bring them, they are cracked and broken pitchers that
will hold no water in them.

But the good sort of hearers, as bees out of flowers gather honey out of the
flowers of the word: A similitude.
and as skillful A potecaries make many good confections for diverse kinds of
sick nesses of such simples as they gather: so these out of the field and
garden of Eden, and such simples as that yields, make such electuaries, and
physic for the soul, as shall be restoratiue, and shall cure the soul.

The godly hear the Preacher, as the patient the physician, A similitude.
who advises and remembers his precepts given unto him.

If we knew what rubs do lie in our way, to keep us from the heedefull
hearing of the word, and the hiding, and laying it up as we should, what
thorns, what tares, what tetters do spring up, to choke and stifle the
towardly growth of the good seed of the word in unsettled hearts, more then
the necessity of this point would be confirmed, and apparent unto us. A
similitude.
It is as impossible to win all unto the word, as it is for the wood-reeue
and wisest husbandman to alter the condition of every wild tree: or for the
Huntes-man to tame and keep under every wild beast.

The brackish water of the sea, though it be not good for drinker, A similitude.
yet it serves well for sundry other uses; it is good for fishes, that do live
in them, and to transporte and bring in our wares and necessities. The word of
God is unsavory unto many, but to the godly man who lives by it, as the fish
by that element, finds very wonderful relief by it.

The word of God that is preached in our ears, is by the devil taken out of
our hearts, Judge 6.
who destroys this good seed, as the Madianites destroyed the corn grounds
of Israel.

Men's hearts, are like unto the high way, A similitude.
upon which, all the seed that is scattered, is lost: we see how a fruit tree
that grows by the way can not preserve her fruits till they be ripe, for
every passenger has a fling at them. But such as are far removed from the
eye, and grow solitarily by themselves, such do reserve their fruits to due
season. Wherefore depart from the high way of this world, and have no doings
with it, but hide such fruit as this tree of Life yields thee, secretly from
such as would rob thee of it, and thou shall keep justice, and righteous
dealing, faith and good conscience, the fruits of a good christian, unto the
very end.

There is also hard ground, A similitude.
into which this immortal seed cannot enter; hard and stony consciences,
which admit not wholesome doctrine: and they are like such, who having corrupt
and putrified members, their senses are so senseless, and benumbed, as the
Surgeons Saw, or other iron instrument is not felt of them. Psalm. 22
Therefore, before we can do our selves good, our hearts, as David's, must be
like melting wax, or else it receives not the impression of the word.

But the thorn that pricketh and choaketh this good seed, that it cannot
abide, and be hidden in our hearts, is the wealth of this world, which we will
have, we are so set upon it, though we pierce our selves through with
innumerable sorrows. Like desperate lewd boys hat will venture to go through
a quick. A similitude.
set of thorns, briars, and brambles to rob an orchard plot.

Moses sees a burning bush, Exodus 3
which consumes not in burning: so worldlings are in the midst of burning
thorns, and yet are not consumed: wherefore, unless we remove these blocks
that lay in our way, and subdue these enemies and sinful affections, and have
our hearts like to good ground, capable of this seed, and of virtue to retain
it, all our preaching, and your hearing, is in vain, and this poetical
invention fitteth us.

Quid facis Oenone? quid arenae semina mandas?
Non profecturis littora bobus aras.
Take not in hand to sow such land, as is but sandy flore:
It quites not cost, it is labor loft, to plow up Ocean shore.
The good ground are they, Luke. 8
by the testimony of Christ, who with honest and good hearts hear the word,
and keep it, make their hearts the bag to carry this treasure.

The good man's heart is the arc of the covenant, Hebr. 9.
wherein, not only the tables of the old Law, but the Gospel of the new, is
hidden and locked up.

It is a fools heart that is like a broken pitcher that holds no water: or
like a spend-thriftes purse that holds no money: of a giddy and changeable
disposition, as leaves of trees, shaking every way with eucry puff of wind;
turning round about, as the door upon the hinges; and as a tennis ball that is
tossed to and fro, and not suffered to rest upon the ground.

In the old Canons, such beasts as did not ruminate and chew the cudde (as
swine, Leuitic. 1^ Deuter. 14.
and such like) were defined to be unclean by the Law of Moses, as no doubt
those souls are, who do not ponder and lay up in their hearts such precepts
and commandments as the Lord gives them.

Therefore, that you may not hear the word in vain, the best counsel that
may be given you, is this, to record and write in the tables of your hearts,
such lessons as you do learn.

You must follow the Angels counsel to Ezechiel, Ezechiel 3
saying unto him, Son of man, eat this roll that I give thee, cause thy
belly to eat, and fill thy bowelles with this roll. The like charge did the
Angel give to John, that he should eat and digest the book. Revel. 10.
It is the fashion and guise of many, to read much, but to eat little, to
devour a great deal, but to digest and concoct nothing. They return from the
sermon to their dinner, and remember nothing, no longer than their bodies are
in the church; as Siues that hold no water no longer than they are holden
within the river.

These men labor of a dangerous disease, A similitude.
that is next to deaths door, for their case is like unto that sick man's
estate, whose stomach is so weak, as it is not able to retain and keep such
meat as is put into it, but immediately does cast it up. His life is in his
nourishment, which if he cannot keep, how is it possible that he should keep
his life?

I therefore fear much their eternal death, who loathe and leave the diet of
the soul, which only preserves the life of the soul. And the prophet David
seems to conclude so much, and to make it an infallible and irrefragable
consequence. Psalm 107
Their souls (faith he) abhors all kind of meat. And what follows
heerevppon? They are next unto deaths door.

Is there possible any good to be had in the only hearing and reading of the
word, without any further heed thereunto?

Can the hen hatch chickins of those eggs, A similitude.
which, after she has a little set upon in the neast, she immediately
utterly forsakes them? It is against all belief: no more can we bring forth
any good by the hearing of the word, which as soon forgotten as it is heard of
us.

There is nothing more forcible and effectual then fire, A similitude.
powerful to consume, but it must have a time to take hold of his combustible
subject, before it can show his strength upon it: For, if thou runnest swiftly
through it, be the fire never so quick, thou can not be scorched, or once
singed with it. A stay must be made, that it may apprehend and claspe the
fuel, or else it is impossible that it should consume it.

Gods word is the fire of the spirit, Luke 24.
which inflameth all our hearts, and makes them to burn like a torch, which
burns up al our sins like stubble. But if we slubber it up carelessly, and
haste away from it, and make no stay at it, that it may kindle the coals of
zeal within them: it shall never kindle, or warm our cold consciences, or
give them any comfort.

Wherefore, be persuaded to follow this course which reason advises thee, and
the practice and examples of the better sort at all times, have animated and
incited thee unto.

Christ's Disciples were led by this rule, Luke ^.
whenas their thoughts did run upon his speech, and brought them back again
to ask the meaning of it.

The Virgin Mary is a woman twice or thrice noted for this, Luke. 12.
that she pondered with herself the words of the Angel, and what kind of
salutation is should be, and that she lodged such sayings as the heard secretly
in her heart.

The men of Berea are registered in the chronicles of the spirit for this, Act.
17
that they carried home with them the Sermon of Saint Paul, that they might try
and examine by the scriptures whether things were so or no.

So David used this, for thus he speaks of himself, saying: Psalm 119
I have hidden thy commandment within my heart, that I should not sin
against thee. There is this mark of difference between Jacob and his sons,
when Joseph discovered his dream unto them; his brethren vouchsafed, not to
give hi audience, but the text says, Genesis 37
that Jacob noted the saying.

As spicery yields thee more forcible smell, A similitude.
the more it is brayed and stamped in the mortar: so the word of God is of
better savor to us, the more it is beaten and bruised in our hearts.

Wherefore this our Marchant-Ieweller is wise, who hides his treasure as soon
as he finds it. And he does but that which is of common practice.

The Captain or Lieftenant, A similitude.
to whom the general Governor in the field shall commit a tower or a strong
city to be kept, not only fortifieth it with garrison and munition, but
foreseeth it to be so diked and fenced round about, as it may be sure against
intended invasion.

If we shall be thus provident for the safeguard of this treasure, which the
enemy so subtily endeavors to have from us, and keep that thus carefully,
which our general commander, the Lord of Hosts has committed to our trust,
and of which he will one day take a straight account of us, we shall like loyal
subjects discharge our duties well, and shall be very highly rewarded of him for
it.

Let the example of Ezechias be a fair warning to us, 2. Reg. 20
and let us bind it as a sign upon our hands, who for opening that treasure
unto the ambassadors of Babylon which should have bin privately kept to
himself, and hidden from them, gave occasion to the enemy afterward to rob
his posterity of it.

As those that do lay seige to any great place, A similitude.
do stop such passages, by which they may conceive their enemy may be
succored: so the devil an old beaten soldier, to this craft, intercepteth
all the keys and ports, by which he knows the Lord conuayeth unto us the
comfort of his spirit: especialy the word, the conuoy, and viati^um, and releef
of the whole man, and therefore we cannot be too careful of it.

We see how every Princes exchequer is strictly kept, A similitude.
they must pass through many walls, doors, and locks, that intend to rifle
it. Let us therefore keep our heavenly treasure, which far surmounteth this,
as fast locked up, that it may be rescued from the hand of the robber.

As Ladies fasten their pearls to golden A similitude.
chains, or twisted ribbands, that they might not be lost: so let us fasten
this pearl to our heart, that it may not be lost.

This we shall do, if we shall continue as we begin in the spirit. If,
as we hear, we mark and lay up, that which we have heard: if we resort unto
sermons, not for carnal respects, but for the glory of God, to receive
comfort from them, if our treasure shall be where the heart is, as the heart is
where the treasure is.

Be not therefore slack, and remiss in this duty, for if it be not continued
and well kept, it will be gone from thee.

Such as keep it not when they have it, A similitude.
are compared by saint James to a man that beholds his face in a glass. Iam.
1
The man looks not so well on the glass, as the woman does, for the man
carelessly seeing a spot and blemish in his face, lets it alone; but the
woman curiously prieth into it, and with a linen cloth wipeth away every
little moath, and whatsoever she espieth amiss in her. Is this point of
wisdom to learn of a woman it is no disgrace unto us, to be as nice to
reform by the glass of Gods word, every spot and wrinckle of the soul, as
women are by an outward glass to do away the stains, and uncleanness of the
flesh.

It is labor lost to plant a vineyard, A similitude
if before it should yield his sweet and pleasant grape, the hedge be broken
up, and the way be laid open for the wild board out of the wood, Psalm. ^0
and the bear out of the forest, to devour and root it up. It is in vain to
plough the ground, and to sow thy field, and to neglect thy harvest: to fight
manfully at the first brunt, and before the victory, like a seely coward to
take thee thy to heels; to lay a good fou^datio^, and not to go forward with
the rest of the building: so to sail prosperously in the wide Ocean, and to
perish at the key side, to go to school for a time with children, and a little
while after, to give it over quite.

Blessed are they that hear the word and keep it, Luke. 11
and hide it in their heart, says Christ, for that is the use, A similitude.
and the end of it. If we hear it to any other vain end, we do like idle
boys, who being sent into the street by their parents, for to buy a thing, do
loiter by the way, and gaze upon every vain and idle toy, that they see
before their eyes.

CHAP. VIII.
That this heavenly Treasure, is to be preferred and esteemed of us, above all
earthly riches.

COmparisons between heavenly and earthly riches, are both odious and
dangerous. There is as great difference and ods between them, as between light
and darkness, righteousness and unrighteousness: God, and Belial. 1. Cor. 6


He that sees a Physician to make good account of such herbs and simples, A
similitude
which him self in simplicity has ever trampled underfoot, argues himself
by this man ^^ection of former indiscretion.

We have hitherto bin too erroneously led with an object opinion of duties of
religion. The lusts of the flesh have bin more set by, then the laws of the
spirit; this present evil world, more then Gods most blessed word: and
momentany vanity, more then endless felicity.

The base brat of the bondwoman, too presumptuously lordeth the son of the
freewoman; a deadly debate and dispute there is about Moses his body, between
the Angel and the devil, not that each of them might have part, but which of
them should have al. And thus whilst the strife is endless between them, we are
put to our dumps and doubts within our selves, with the damsel that has many
suitors coming to her, and knows not whom to choose.

This Gospel like a Goldsmiths is in the right, and his imitation is our best
direction. His cunning serves him to make chiefest choice of that which we
chiefly do debase: and for the gain of godlynes, which we esteem of least, to
barter away as beggarly trash, all worldly kind of wealth which we set by so
much.

This man, for the gain of his golden mine, and for the purchase of this
matchles pearl, gives over all, whether it was bequeathed unto him by legacy,
or coffered up since, by foreseeing industry, whatsoever it was, it was
morgaged, and sold for the purchase of piety.

And surely, herein his choice is very good, and cannot be reproved. A
similitude.
For better reason rules him, and wisdom that goes beyond the reach of man's
wisdom is his warrant in this action.

Is it not good reason, when offer is made to him of the wedge of gold, at the
same rate which the foyl and rays are set at, which this metal casts, and
the true pearl indeed stands him in no more, then that would do which is
counterfeit and of glass, that he should more esteem of the one then the
other? the treasures of Gods kingdom are offered unto him at the same charge
that he bought his worldly wealth: true pearl is as cheap as the dung of the
earth unto him: I marvel not therefore, that be accounted other things as
lost, to win and wear this inestimable jewel.

The rudest poorest peasant, A similitude
that feeds most grossly, masting himself with akornes, a swinish food, if
he may have wheat as cheap, a pure and kind repast, the natural strength and
staff of man's life, he would be glad of such an exchange, and would cope the
other for it. Worldly riches are but hoggish husks, rather filling us then
fatting us, rather aggravating, then recreating the stomach; if Manna, which is
heavenly and angelical food, may be given us for this, I hold him miserably
mad that shall make refusal of it.

If God does put upon us the persons of Agamemnon, and will make us kings for
ever, have we reason still to bear the image of Thersites, and to live as
servile slaves and caitiues for ever?

See we not how Clergy men do resign and give up their mean and smaller
livings, A similitude.
whenas benefits of more worth and sufficiency are given them? if the benefits
which the spirit yields, are of more value then such which the world is able
to afford us, why work not we so wisely, as to make our choice of them?

What esteemed Saul the loss of his asses, 1. Sa. 9. and 10.
when he found a Kingdom? The wealth of this world is a burden fit for asses,
it is meet that we should disburden our selves of it, being called to a
Kingdom: Abraham made no reckoning of Vr of the Chaldeans, Genesis 12
of his own kindred or his fathers house, when the Lord did prefer him to a
better exchange, multiplying his nation, and increasing his joy.

David no more followed his ewes big with young, Psalm. 78
when the Lord had called him to go before his people.

The Baptist hunted not for honor of the world, Math. 3
when the spirit gave him summons in the wilderness of Judea, to be a
Forerunner and Preacher of his word.

Matthew being called to the chair Apostolic, Matthew. 9
left his custom seat. Peter, to embarke himself in Christ's ship, and to
be of his household forsook his torn nets, his fishermans boat, and the
affairs of this world.

Zacheus preferred the usury of godliness, Luke 19.
before the usury of sinfulness.

Moses would no longer abase himself to keep Iethro his sheep, when his
heavenly father imposed upon his shoulders a charge of greater weight, even the
keeping of his people.

One thing that was necessary Mary more sets by, which was spiritual, Luke 10
than those many things, about which her sister plodded, which were but only
temporal. Tu nanigas, sedilla iam in portu est, says Saint Augustine. Aug.
Tom. 1^ in haec verba Lucae.
Martha sailed in the troblesom sea; but Mary was arrived quietly at the haven.
Erant in illa domo istae duae vitae, and ipse fons vitae. In Martha erat imago
praesentium, in Maria futurorum. Quod agebat Martha ibi sumus, quod agebat
Maria hoc speramus: hoc agamus been, vt illud habeamus plene, Again, says the
same father: There was in this one house, two kinds of lives, and in the
midst of them, the fountain of all life. In Martha are figured those things
that are present: but Mary bears the image of things that are to come. That
which Martha did, we all enjoy. That which Mary did, we all do hope for. Let
us do this dutifully to obtain the other plentifully.

He that labors for the world, A similitude.
is like a soldier pressed to the wars, and but putting on his harness, and
hired but for very slender wages, and that not duly paid him, object and
subject to all kind of danger: but he that labors about the word and
doctrine, is like the soldier that has won the field, that puts off his
harness, and is out of gunshot, and triumphantly, and joyfully divides the
spoil.

God is in us, God is with us, and we are with God, in our godly exercises:
whenas we are in prayer, we talk with God: when we sit at the Preachers
feet, God speaks unto us. What a blessing is this? what is dust and ashes,
Genesis 18
that the Lord should speak unto him, or he speak to the Lord?

When this Ieweller saw the beauty and riches of Gods house, A similitude.
he cared not for seeing any more his own house. It is with him as with those
that behold the Sun in his orient brightness, who having fully fixed their
eyes upon it, it so dazeleth their sight with his radiant beams, as when they
come home, and do go apart into any inward closet, the room seems darkness
unto them. So such as look upon (with the eye of faith) the son of
righteousness, and are dazeled with the corascant surpassing hew of it, the
things of this world seem obscure unto him, as soon as again he shall set
his eyes upon them.

He that has a taste of the good spirit, of the joys that are to come in an
other life, lets fall the love of the world from him, as Elias rapt to
heaven, 2. Reg. 2.
did let fall his Mantle from him to the earth.

In the beginning of the creation God him self divided light and darkness
asunder, Gene. 2
to teach us to distinguish, and to put a difference between the works of
light and darkness, and not to confound and iumble them together.

The first thing that God willed, Genesis ^
after that he made man, was, that he should increase and multiply. But this
propagation and fruitful increase must begin in the best manner, not in the
flesh, or world, but in the spirit. Christ, in his copy, or rule of prayer
prescribed unto us, tells us what things are to be first sought for, in
willing us, first to pray for such things which concern God, as the halowing
of his name the coming of his king dome, the fulfilling of his will: before
we prefer any suit for our selves that respect the world, and appertain
unto the flesh, as daily bread, and such other things as follow.

It pleased Christ, Luke 6
not to found his Church upon the earth, Math. 16 8. Corin. 10
but upon a rock, to teach us, not to build upon the things of this world,
but upon the rock, which is the Spirit.

We are willed to lay up this treasure, which is heavenly; but that which is
earthly, is not to be kept for times that are to come, which we may never see.
Therefore, the same day that the oblation was offered, Leuitle 7. Exodus 12.
Exodus 18
it was by the Lord commanded to be eaten. As likewise there was nothing of
the Pascall Lamb to be referued to the morrow, by his positive iniunction.

The Manna that putrified and swarmed with worms, hatched up by the Israelites
for the day following, is not an obscure argument of the judgment of God
hanging over such, who carke and prowle so miserably for this world.

The great Doctor of the Gentiles illuminated round about him, Acts ^.
with an heavenly light, would no more post with letters, and epistles to
Damascus against the Saints of God, and dwell in former darkness, but having
sauoured the sweetenes of Christ, he accounts as doung, Philip. 2.
the sweetness of this earth.

Such as are besotted in the inward man, A similitude.
having their cogitations darkened, the god of this world blinding their
minds, and their eyes of understanding troubled with the sand and dust of the
earth that is gone into them, so as they can not see the things that are of
God, but look down upon the ground, and loath the world, in comparison of the
world: they are like babes newly weaned from the breast, esteeming more of an
apple, and of a nut, than of a piece of gold, or of a precious pearl. Or like
children in the market place, A similitude.
who think better of their riding reed, than of the greatest and stateliest
steed that the prince has. Or like the young minion, that more fancieth her
puppet that is made of clowtes, than all the beautiful women that she sees.

It is wonderful how this world runs a madding, as Samson without eyes,
Judge. 16
not able to find out the pillars of the house; not able to comprehend the
pillars of religion.

The prowling and coil that continually we do keep, to bring in the world,
is monstrous to behold: as though we were made to gather in the gold, and
immediately to die.

What worth is that of which men labor for so hardly, with the hard sweat, and
blood of our brows, about which all the wit and whole man is employed. I see
the shadow and image of it in the water. It is a pastime to see how the fishes
skudde after a worm or a crumme of bread that is cast into the water, what a
strife and contention is between them for it: this the fishes themselves do
not regard, only those that stand still at the shore side, do observe and
mark it well. It is no sporting matter, but it is lamentable to consider, how
the world labors, of the disease called the Woolfe, or greedy Worm, which
makes them to gape, with mouths so wide for every balld bait that is cast
before them: so as, 1. Reg. 21.
it is hard for Nabacth to hold his own, his vineyard lying so fit for
Achab, on the backeside of his orchard. They are never satisfied, though the
devil should say unto the^, All these things will I give thee. Math. 4
Such as sit at the shore side quietly, contented with their private meaner
estate, have this their practice in notable derision. Such, whose eyes God
opens, to behold this vanity, do admire their misery. Rom 11.
But the other sort are smitten with a spirit of slumber; and the doung that
fell out of the swallows neast, and did strike Tobias blind, Tob. 2
so terribly blinds them, as they cannot see their ensuing infelicitie.

If a beggar be called to a half penny dole, A similitude.
good God what haste he makes to it! what a crowding do we usually see among
them at such kinds of meeting? and behold, being called to an incomparable
treasure, we creep more flowly than snailes thereunto. Exodus 5.
Pharao was not loather to let Israel go to serve the Lord, than we are loathe
that our selves and servants should go and serve God.

If a poor man be invited to a rich man's table, he gladly comes to it; A
similitude.
but if he be invited to Gods house, he excuses or refuses flatly, with the
guests in the Gospel, Luke 14.
to come to it.

The world calls us to labor, and care, and we come when we are called:
but God calls us to wealth and ease, and we will not hear of that. Ohorrible
contempt! 2. Sam. 20.
Seditious Siba the son of Bochi blows his horn, and rabblements and
swarms of nastie companions come out and meet him: But Jesus the just man, the
son of David, the son of God, sounds out his trumpets and we refuse to
hear the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely. The world calls
thee to deceive thee, and the flesh to defile thee, and the Devil to destroy
thee, and thou hear them willingly, and obayest them cheerfully: thy saving
God, thy King of glory, thy prince of peace calls thee to peace, glory, and
salvation, and thou turnest thy back, and fliest away from him.

The respect hereof puts good Micheas to his muse and mourning, Woe is me,
Mich. 7.
for I am as the summer gatherings, and as the grapes of the vintage, there is
no cluster to eat.

But if thou knew the gift of God, John 4.
as Christ said to the woman of Samaria, it could not be thus with thee. I
would to God, as Paul said to Agrippa, that not only thou, but all that
hear me this day, were as I am.

If the Prince should set forth a general proclamation, A similitude.
that all that would, should be of his Court, and bear office in it, I think
there is none would make refusal of it: but behold, being called to the
high Court of heaven, where is all honor, we give no heed to that.

We are like infants and sucking children, A similitude
who being cockered and pampered of their nursses, love them better than their
parents that begat them, and at whose cost and charge they are nursed of them.
The gross and sensual delights of the world, etc. insteede of nurse, to
foster and sustain us, and with who^ familiarly and usually we converse. But
God alone is our creator and preserver; by whom we live, we move, and have our
being, and lo, in a childish and senseless immitation, we prefer these base
creatures, before our eternal and omnipotent creator.

If thou should see the Princes pompous court, A similitude.
and a paltry swinish stie, or stable for beasts on fire at one time: can
thou with any reason neglect the Princes house, and prefer this so loathsome
a dounghill before it? and first of al run to the quenching of that, not
caring though the Court be consumed ere thou come? This is our wit in our
worldly practice, we labor about the world, a stie of unclean beasts, full of
filth and corruption, and forsake the word of God, the palace of all
pleasure, and the only paradise from whence we have all our spiritual
consolation.

What is the inducement moving hereunto, and what do we propound and promise to
our selves by this kind of proceeding? Does it bring in the best riches, the
greatest gain with it? I would to God it did not the contrary, and import
greater damage then any man can divine.

I wish from my soul, that a worldling would fasten his cies on two things:
What is his loss? And whereupon it grows. His loss is God. The cause is for
gold, for greediness of his gain, for the sink of sin thou loosest thy sweet
savior: who is not affrighted and astonished at this? Truly because man is not
moved at it, the Lord commands the senseles elements to be moved at it,
speaking unto them by Jeremy in this wise. O ye heavens be astonished at this,
Ierem. 2.
be afraid, and utterly confounded, says the Lord. But what is the matter
Lord? For my people (says he) has committed two evils: they have forsaken
me, the fountain of living water; to dig them pittes, even broken pits, that
can hold no water: That is, their thirsty and droughty souls, they have left
God the fountain of eternal life, which would have refreshed and fulfilled
their souls, and they have run to those decayed spoutes, and broken wells,
as treasures transitory, and pleasures that are carnal, which are unable to
extinguish or delay, but rather to sharpen and provoke their thirst.

Thus we have altogether lost our taste, since the first tasting of the fruit
forbidden us. A similitude.
So that we are as those, whose stomachs stifled with distillation of evil
humors, and their senses senseles with grieuousnes of sickness, they cannot
taste and rellise the sweetness of their diet, but that which is sower, they
adiudge to be sweet, A similitude
and so of the contrary. Or as those, who being bidden to a costly banquet,
have so filled themselves before with their gross diet at home, as they can
eat nothing, nor take any pleasure in this banquet when they come. Our
stomachs are so charged and full of worldly thoughts, as we have almost no
room for any heavenly cogitation.

David sets us out in our colors, Psalm 62.
and hitteth our vain right, whenas he says, that we are deceitful on the
wayghts. For, from this deceit proceeds this wrong judgment that we have of
the word, when we set the world before it.

The scales are false and deceivable two ways. First, whenas those things
that are put into them, are weighed hastily, and time is not given to see the
full weight of the^. Or else, whenas one part of the balance or weight is
heavier then another: we put Gods laws and our lusts together in the balance
of our foul, and we are too hasty and rash a great deal, in taking the world
to be of more weight and substance then the word. Again, one part of the
balance is too heavy: the heaviness of the world weighing us down, and
weighs more with us, then the treasure of Gods spirit: John 18.
we prefer Barrabas before Christ; sinfulnes, before dutifulnes; gain,
before godliness.

If we would discreetly, with mature advice consider of them both, and not
define of them with forestalled affections, but hear what God and the world
can say indifferently, thy voice no doubt will pass on Gods side, and this
treasure shall be more esteemed of thee, then all the treasure that the world
gives thee.

We fight therefore as Paul with the beasts at Ephesus, 1. Cor. 25.
after the manner of men, whilst we dispute the case with those, who set all
their hope upon the things of this life, and place them before those of the
life that is to come. For what is the nature and condition of beasts, but to
look upon the ground, whose whole care is, to satisfy their bellies, and to
couch in the holes and caves of the earth?

Such men's case is extremely miserable, Number. 16.
and they are in the taking of Dathan and Abyron, Psalm. 106.
whom the earth devoured. For does not the earth devour up him, whose whole
cogitations are fixed upon earth, whose desires only are of earthly things,
whose eyes do look never above the earth, who has no fear of God, no hopes
of his promises, no belief of the souls immortality, and no expectation of any
future felicity. Surely, faith Origin, wheresoever thou see such, tell them
flatly to their faces, that the earth has devoured them.

CHAP. IX.
That God and the world, cannot go together.

THE practice of this Merchant concludes this point, whom I should not hold
wise, for doing away the world for the purchase of heaven, if heaven and this
world might be enjoyed together.

By selling therefore one, for the buying of the other, it is insinuated, that
he was not able to keep them both together.

There be many states and gouernements vpholden and ordered by sundry
constitutio^s, differing each from other, yet are they not so contrary but a
man may have his freedom in diverse of them together: but God laws, and man's
laws: the lusts of the flesh, and the desires of the spirit: the Ark of the
Lord, and the Philistines Dagon: God and Mammon; 1. Sam. 5 Math. 6 2. Cor. 6
Christ and Belial: light and darkness, are at such enmity and deadly food
between them, as no composition or conclusion of peace, is to be looked for
between them. For the nature of things disclaimeth it our civil course of life
gainsaith it, and the Scriptures every where, flatly are against it.

What motions and commotions are in the air, between lightning and thundering:
heat, and cold, without reconcilement ever to be had, experience often shows
us. Light succeeds darkness, Math. 9
and darkness light, and they two will never be consorted, and matched together.
Old wine and new vessels cannot agree, the patching of new cloth with old can
not be suitable.

There were laws and statutes in this behalf enacted, that cattle should not be
permitted to engender with those of diverse kinds, that our fields should not be
sowed with sundry kinds of seed, Leuit. 19
and that a garment of Linsie wolsie, which is of two substances, that are
contrary, should not be worn of us.

A weak Ox and a strong, 1. Cor. 6
cannot draw equal yokes: Jacobs voice, and Esaus garment are easily
distinguished, the kingdom of God cannot go in fellowship with the kingdom of
this world, 1. Cor. 10
we cannot be partakers of the table of the Lord, and the table of the devil.

The Scriptures do make that report of the Samaritanes, 2. King. 17
which we admire and laugh at, that with the worship of God, they adored and
worshipped their profane idols. Is not this the bias and fashion of the
world? it will seem holy, and profess both a knowledge and service of God,
but they will not leave covetousness, which is worshipping of images, they
prostrate themselves before the idol of this world. This kind of people does
take two cross and contrary ways, and do go out of the way, and their labor
is in vain. A similitude.
For what voyage can he make, who intending one way, goes another; points at
heaven, and looks to the earth, Et manu committit solaecismum, erreth with
his finger: with such does Elias expostulate the case, and thus censureth their
folly: 1. King. 18.
How long will ye halte between two opinions? if God be God, worship him: but
if Baal be God, follow after him.

The Lords jealousy burns like fire against such deceitful people, utterly
to consume them, who will be united, and will marry themselves unto these two
contrary comma^ding husbands, having espoused us to Christ before, who is our
only husband. For thus he breaks out into this deep protestation: I will cut
off the remnant of that place, Soph. ^
that swear by the Lord, and swear by Malcham.

Whenas Pharao could permit the Hebrew people to sacrifice to the Lord, so as
they would sacrifice out of the land of Egypt. Ho there, says Moses, Exodus ^
this may not be endured, to sacrifice unto God the abominations of the
Egyptians. Superstition cannot possibly stand with true religion. The laws of
God may not be lincked with the lusts of this world.

The Philistines took great pains hereabouts, to couple their Dagon, 1. Sam. 8
with the Arc of the covenant, but it could not be effected. For Dagon fell
groueling to the ground before the Arc, and could not stand before it.

The Israelites never knew what heavenly Manna meant, Exodus 16
before all their meal which they carried from Egypt was utterly spent:
until thou have consumed the worldly affections, look not to be partaker of
Gods heavenly blessings.

The stomach that is distmpered with diseases, A similitude.
and surcharged with evil humors, relliseth and tastes not the sweetness of
his meat. The Israelites were so glutted with the garlic of Egypt, as they
had no fancy to a finer food. Let us be purged of these hurtful evil humors,
and so shall our souls be fulfilled with Gods word.

Whenas Christ upon his entrance into the temple, chaced away such with a whip
of cords, John. 2
who chopped and changed, and made their worldly bargains, and matches in the
Temple: what does this his zealous fact conclude else, but that the impure
negotiations of this world, cannot be intermedled with the exercise of his
word. He cannot away with such paltry doings, when as his holy mysteries which
are of such moment are needful to be handled.

What Courtier would not think himself greatly injured, A similitus
who whilst he is busy in talk with his prince, about his great suits, a
country pesant with his irksome clamor, should interrupt his business? It is
a grand dodge, that the soul so excellent a creature sustaineth, who whilst
her suits should be put up to God, it is disturbed and cut off by the untimely
importunat molestation of the world.

God never presented himself unto Moses, so long as he was a Courtier in
Egypt, Exodus 25
and lived in pleasure daintily, dandled in Pharaoes daughters hands, and
dieted delitiously with the princes iunkets: but he was first espied of Moses,
in the middst of a bramble or bush of thorns: to insinuate thus much, that he
is not to be found in a pleasurable life, but in a state that is pricked and
wounded with the briars and thorns of persecution. And at that time God
straightly charged Moses to put off his shoes, before he came unto him: teaching
us thereby to put off our worldly minds before we presume to prease to the
presence of the Lord.

When the prophet Elias saw Gods glory and majesty, passing by before him, he
covered and blinded his eyes with his mantle: whosoever will be partaker of
Gods glory, he must close up the eyes of his earthly affections, and must not
behold the vanity of the world. Psalm 89.


He will not dwell in the stinking cage of our bodies, of whom it is written,
Righteousness and judgment is the habitation of his seat.

If thou have a vessel that thou would fill with any liquor, A similitude.
and that stands full of another already, is it possible to put them both
together? or to put in the one, without emptying the other? Thou art to be
filled with the liquor of life, with the sweet balm and oil of the grace of
God: thy glass vial, even thy heart, is full already of bitter water of
wormewoode, of the brackish and salt water of the sea of this world; therefore
power this out first, and rince thy vessel clean, that it neither may keep
out or infect that pleasant confection, and restauratiue that is to be putt
into it. And embrace the sweet counsel of saint Augustine in this case, in
this sort directing us: Ex inani quod implendum est, bono implendus es funde
malum quia melle vult te implere Deus; August.
si aceto plenus es, vbi mel pones? Empty that which is to be filled. Thou art
to be filled with the goodness of thy God, power out thy wickedness: God will fill
thy belly with honey: but if that be full of vinegar before, where shall he find
room in thee for his honey?

As he that will graffe a wild olive tree, A similitude.
unfruitful by nature, first loppeth and cutteth off his riotous branches, and
graffeth in that stock in the room of them, the branches of a fruitful and
fertile three: so, such as will be planted in the Lords house, Psalm 92.
and will flourish in the courts of the house of our God, and be graffed into
the stock and body of Christ, he must first prune, and top his worldly
inclinations, the shrubbes of sin, and the arms of ungodliness must be broken
off: and the love of God, the estimation of his word, and the branches of
holiness, and righteousness of life must be graffed in their place. Psalm 137
How shall we sing the Lords song in a strange land says the kingly
Prophet? The world and heaven are as strange as may be: and therefore, so long
as we are given to the world, we cannot sing unto the Lord in our hearts. If
we therefore cannot sing, Oh let us sigh to be delivered from it, that we may
in heaven make that cheerful noise of Haleluya to the Lord: and in the mean
while trebble with one harp upon David's dumpe, weeping and mourning for the
remembrance of Syon.

Sarah was first past her youthful years, Genes. 1^
and was dead to the world, before she conceived and brought forth Isaac,
which was his fathers joy. We must first subdue and overcome the world, and be
dead unto it, or else we shall never bring forth the effects, and fruits of
true joy, which is of Gods Spirit.

Every beast was to be killd before it could be sacrificed: Leuitie. 1.
so first our beastly worldly lusts must be killed before we can be a sacrifice
to God.

Jacob was called Jacob, Genes. 25.
which signifies a supplanter, before he was called Israel, which is, Genesis 32
Seeing God, to teach us, that we must first tread the world under feet,
before we can see this presence of the Lord.

As Daniel first destroyed the Idol Bell, Dan. 14.
and then he buckeled with the Dragon well enough: so destroy thou this dumb
idol of the world, and thou shall griple with the devil the old dragon well
enough.

It is dangerous to ride on an untamed colt that labors to cast thee: A
similitude.
this world is thy unruly lade, assaying always in thy voyage to Jerusalem,
to throw down thy spirit.

The spirit and the world are as a pair of balaunces and scales, A similitude.
when the one of them mounteth up, the other is weighed down: when the Spirit
is elevated and cast up to heaven, our worldly affections are thrown down
to the earth.

Or they are like an hour Glass, A similitude.
which emptieth one part to fill another: the soul, when it is full of the
spirit of God, emptieth it self of the lusts of the world.

Abraham received not the covenant of circumcision, before he went from Vr,
Genesis 18
which was his worldely possession: before about receiuest Gods covenant in thy
mouth, and professest his religion, it is looked that thou should, as thou
art called of God, give up and renounce thy too worldly disposition.

As the tree leans, so it falls, A similitude.
when the axe is put unto it: if the body and branches weigh to the left side,
it will fall on the left side: If al thy life time thou leanest to the left side,
namely, to the world, never look when thou die, that thou shall fall on the
right hand of his glory and felicity.

If thou will live to God, the world must not sunder thee, but thou must be so
united and knit unto him, as the soul to the body, the beams to the Sun,
the branches and arms to the body of the tree.

The glass that is obscured and dimmed with dust, A similitude
presents not aright our counterfeit unto us: If the soul be ouer-layde with
the dust of this world, the image of God, after which we were created, which
is our right face, is not to be seen in us.

Such horses as are put to grind in the mil, A similitude.
have their eyes blinded, that they might fitly execute that office: we must
blind our worldly eyes, that we may the readier dispatch such duties which the
Lord shall lay upon us.

In a gentleman's great horse, A similitude.
it is the best grace and quality that commends him, that he is ruled by the
bridle, and keeps his circles, lists, and roundes, that the rider will put
him to: there is nothing that graceth us more than to live in the compass, and
straight course of Gods commandments, and to suffer gods word to be a bridle
to our lusts, and a bitte to keep us from the race of our sins.

Herod was first dead, Math. 2
before that Christ would return out of Egypt into the land of Judea: we must
first die to the world and sin, before Christ Jesus will enter into our souls.

There was a certain Musician, who of such scholars, who were initiated, and
taught by others before, required double the sum of money which he took of
others, who were informed but by himself alone: and his reason was, because he
considered, that double the labor must be taken with them: first, in rooting
out their former balld fashions, after which they had bin taught; and then in
planting and fixing in their minds, his own ordinary compendious course quite
contrary to the other, by which they might exactly and perfectly be taught. So,
if we will be trained up in the school of Christ, and will profess our selves
his scholars: Christ must needs take double pains with us; He must first
make us to forget our old lessons, which our former badde Schoolemaisters, the
world, the flesh, and the devil had before taught us, and then to take out
new, which his holy spirit shall put into our hearts, which tacheth us all
wisdom.

Augustus taking upon him to beautify his Empire, and to leave Rome made of
marble, which he found made of brick, acquainted one Apollonius Thyanaeus with
his purpose, and asked his direction for his better proceeding: the Philosopher
thus answered him, that if he would happily atchieue that which he professed,
he must set before his eyes, the course that memorable Musician did take with
his son, whom he would not instruct himself, but sent unto an unlearned
Musician to be taught, who gave him this caveat and memento, only to carry
away with him, and he should speed well enough, to mark well the fingring and
lessons of his master, and do clean contrary, for they were exceeding
naught: So, to beautify and adorn our souls, and to be perfect scholars in
Gods word, it is meet for us to be taught of the world, to mark but the
worlds fashions, and to do the contrary, and we shall make a good profession,
forasmuch as the word with this present evil world, can never be lincked and
combined together.

The condition of man's mind is like his estate, A similitude.
whose middle part of his body is taken with a palsy, by reason whereof his
joints being dissolved, that part is so benumbed, as it is made insensible; but
the other part that is not strooken with it, but is sound and healthful, is
nimble and pliable unto any outward action. It fares thus with the soul and
mind of man, for when it should apply it self to holy exercises, it is snatched
away with a worldly palsy, which makes us senseless in these kinds of duties,
but a remainder of it that is not touched, is very full of life, ravished and
transported with the love of earthly things.

The pleasures of this world are the devils baits, that he lays for our
souls, and this is the poison which the whore of Babylon tempereth and
seasoneth in sauory meat, and in her cup of gold.

As the Moon never suffers an eclips, A similitude.
but when it is at the full: so is thy soul never darkened and eclipsed, but when
it is glutted and fulfilled with the world.

Moreover, A similitude.
as the Moon in her fullness is most distant and removed from the Sune: so
our saturity and fullness of this world, as it was with Sodom, we forget God
that made us, and the strong God of our salvation, and are furthest off from
the son of righteousness, Christ Jesus our Lord, and the light of our salvation.

Augustine by an elegant and dainty similitude, shaddoweth and sets forth
the nature of the world, an extreme and irreconcilable enemy unto God. A
similitude.
He likeneth the love of the world unto bird-lime, which so fast hangs and
cleaves to the soul, as it holds it below, and suffers it not to climb to
higher motions that it might be saved. These are his words, Amor rerum
terrenarum, viscus est spiritualium pennarum: August.
The love of earthly things, is the bird-lime to our spiritual wings. Now how
we are fettered and entangled with this lime, he shows us, saying: Si
concupiuisti, haesisti: If thou covet, thou art catched of it.

It is impossible but that the world should be every way like it self, and
follow his own nature. It is incident to the flesh, to fight against the
spirit, and it is the trick of the world to be at ods with God, riches and
righteousness will hardly be combined.

A vessel cannot but retain the savor of that liquor that is in it. A
similitude.
If into a glass that is full of vinegar, thou shall drop a little honny, the
sweeter substance being nothing in quantity to the contrary sower subject, it
vanishes away, and is consumed of it. In our bodies are vessels full of sower
affections, the little sweet honny of the word of God, thorough the redundance
of the other, is easily overcome, as often as it shall be distilled thereunto.

He that will love God, A similitude.
and will not loath the world, but thinks he may have gold and godliness
together, and chase away sin, and not chase away his sinful worldly
covetousness, is like him, that desirous to drive away a dog, does cast a bone
or crust of bread unto him.

The god of this world is at enmity with God, they are two contrary imperious
masters, that will not be served together. He that loves the world, 1. John.
2
the love of the father is not in him.

Is it possible to perform true allegiance to thy prince, A similitude.
and be in league and pay with his greatest enemy? Gal. 5
If we live in the flesh, we shall die. But if we shall kill the deeds of the
stesh with the sword of the spirit, we shall live for ever.

Be we circumspect therefore, and let us look about our selves, and let this
holy Canon be always in our minds: If ye love God, Psalm. 97
hate the thing that is evil.

We make our boast of God all the day long, Psalm. 44
and his name is in our lips, but it is in vain, since the love of the world
is wholly seated and ingrafted in our hearts.

Whenas God before he would covenant with us, would we should be circumcised,
it is plain enough that his mind is, that first we should circumcise the
outward man, and cut off with the knife of the spirit our ingenerate
corruption, or else he will not have any doings with us.

Themistocles on a time, made asolemne sermon to the people of Athens, giving
them to know that he could acquaint them with that which was most behooueful
and needful for their estate, but it was a secret and not to be blurted out
and published unto all, but only to be privately imparted unto some few of
trust; such whom the magistrates in this case should depute to have audience of
this matter. Hereupon with the general consent of al, the cause was referred to
Aristides his hearing, authorized by them to determine of it, and according to
his judgment to approve or disallow of it, now all the mystery and secrecy was
this, that it was meet to set on fire the whole Grecian Navy, that thereby, so
weakening and infeebling their power, the Athenians might be lords and
commanders of all Grecia. Aristides repairing to the Senate with his news,
certified the bench, that Themistocles his counsel was most profitable, but
therewithal most unlawful. Thus this Pagan may condemn us Christians, who
while we respect wordly gain too much, do esteem of the gain of godliness too
little.

Even as a ring that is upon one finger, A similitude.
can not be put upon another, unless it be first drawn off from the former: so
the heart being lincked to earthly things, it cannot be fit for heavenly
matters, before it has put off the former disposition.

Wherefore, since both these treasures will not be consorted, and the purchase
of this heavenly and hidden treasure, exceeds by infinite degrees, all the
riches that the world may yield us, we do well, if with this Merchant we take
hold of this excheat, whatsoever it does cost us.

CHAP. X.
Of the necessity of our mortification, and the adiuration of all our worldly
lusts, under the person and example of this Ieweller, who made a simple sale
of all that he had for the purchase of this Treasure, and Pearl of great
price, evidently euicted.

ONE thing is necessary, Luke. 10
(says Christ to Martha:) and of this with Mary this Ieweller makes choice.
For the purchase whereof, he does not stick to renounce and give up his state
and property in all his worldly hereditaments and emoluments, of whatsoever
nature and condition they are.

He dodgeth not with God, Act. 5
as Ananias did with Peter, keeping part behind. He puts not his hand to the
Lords plough, and has an eye with Lots wife unto Sodom. Luke. 9
He minceth not God of any part of his dew, as the King of Arams muster-master,
2. King. 5
excepting with the Prophet his worship with his master in the house of Rimmon.
It is not the pleasure or profit of the world, that he stands at with God:
Phil. 3
but he reputeth all things with the Apostle, as doing for the gain of
godliness.

This man is every christian man's looking-glass, in whom we may behold that
image of perfection, that is pleasing unto God, and by which we may see how to
reform such blemishes which disguise us so much, and make us so unclean and
laothsom in his sight.

We are reasonably contented to part stakes with God, and willing enough with
the false mother, 1. King 3
who pleaded for the division of the child before Solomon, to divide him out
half of that all, which is his portion, dealing with God altogether like as
Hanun with the servants that were sent from David, 2. Sa. 10.
who shaued off half their beards from their faces, and slashed off their
garments from the middle to the buttockes.

But God may not endure such paltring at our hands.

The true mother may not abide to hear of the mangling of her child; and David
may not digest such barbarous indignity offered to his servants, and God may
not suffer him self to be so mocked; as to have his glory of which he is so
jealous, communicated unto others.

Very many we find, howbeit, otherwise of very proper parts, and induments of
nature, who halt with God too much, and cannot, without struggling to one way or
other, keep in the right way: we are as the grain that wants measure, and
the gold that will not hold weight. There is in every one of us, somewhat which
blemiseth and disgraceth all our beauty.

Many, albeit they are of chaste behauior, of very civil nature, and (as by
outward appearance it seems) of religious disposition: yet are their minds
fixed upon covetousness, they go after worldly thoughts, and incomber themselves
with Martha about many things. Luke. 10.
They cannot be parted by any means from their profit, or stride over those
blocks that lie in their way, or deuote themselves wholly with this Ieweller
unto God We find other some of liberal and bountiful affections, yet
violently miscarried with a desire of ambition.

There was death in the pot, 2. King. 4
which marres all the broth of the children of the prophets: so some sinful
profit or pleasure always spoyleth whatsoever good graces the Lord gives us
beside.

There is none of us, who does not hucke with God, who is not ready for some
excuse or other; we ask our flesh, our lusts, our pleasures leave, and if they
consent not to it, God is answered as Pharao answered Moses, Nabal, David,
Matthew. 21 1. Sa. 15.
and the Lord of the vineyard was answered when he demanded fruits. Who is
the Lord (says Pharao unto Moses) that I should let Israel got who is the Lord
(says the stubborn soul) that I should let my sinful pleasures go? Who is
David, and who is the son of Ishai (says Nabal) that I should take my bread,
my water my flesh, which I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men,
whom I know not whence they be. These be the terms wherer upon we do stand, we
commune the case in this wise with Nabal, who is Christ the son of David,
that I should take that which I have deputed to my pleasure and my sin, and
give it unto him?

Be not deceived, God will not be stinted, he will have all, or nothing at all
of thee: and when thou give all, thou give him but his own. Thou do but
like the copy holder that pays his rent, and performs his bounden homage
and service unto his Lord, the diminution of any jot thereof being the
forfeit of thy whole copy.

This is a slye policy of the devil, to have us dernie christians, to serve
GOD by halues, to draw us on to some duties of devotion, that whilst we do
flatter and beguile our selves with a counterfeit profession, he may cause us
privily, and unawares, to fall into the pit of his destruction. A similitud
And herein he has the trick of a cunning angler, who having hold of some
great fish upon his hook, is not greedy of him to draw him up to shore, but
he stretches out his rod, and gives him more line, that he might more
thoroughly swallow up the hook: for otherwise through too hasty violence that
is offered him, he will break all asunder, and the fish shall so escape him.

Thus he playde with Herod who having snarled and hooked him before with the
hook and line of inordinate lust, Mark. 6.
he dallieth with him, and gives him some liberty to hear John Baptist
willingly, and to reform many things according to his directions.

As along as the devil has us under his line, and has any hold of us, either
by our pride, by our usury, by our covetousness, by our envy, by our
emulation, by our ambition, by our hatred, by our cruelty, by any kind of
sin, he will so sport with us, as he will be sure of us, he will not let us
go.

For as a bird, if she be limed, A similitude.
and taken by one wing, cannot fly away: so though we pray or fast, or give
our alms, repair to sermons, and give our selves to many good devotions: yet
if any sin has a limme of us, it is impossible to escape. To be bound in any
part is all one, as to be bound in the whole.

To what use is it to rampire up all the gates of the city, A similitude.
and to set watch and ward about the walls, if one gate or breach of the wall
shall be suffered to lay open, for all the power of the enemy to come in? Give
thou the devil but an entrance into thee, and thou shall never remove him,
but he will be wholly at the last seated in thee.

Christ his charge to those that will be followers of him, Math. 11.
flatly is this: Take my yoke upon you. He names not any part of the body
that should be yoaked above other, the head, the neck, the shoulders or such
like; but the whole: that we should not think that we have served God well,
by myncing him a pittance, unless he has the whole.

Wherefore David summoneth al his parts to the Lords courts. Psalm. 34. Psalm.
103. Psalm. 119.
All my bones (says he) shall say, Lord who is like unto thee. And again,
Praise the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name. And
again, I have an eye unto all thy commandments, and all false ways I
utterly abhor.

The devil is an importunate suter unto us, to have any room, or tenement
within us, be it never so little, rather then he would be utterly shut out.

When as Pharao could no longer hold the Isralites in durance, Exodus 10.
but the time was come that they should be set at liberty, and sent away to
serve the Lord, he craves that their cattle might remain behind them: so
when the devil is not permitted to domineere as he list, to have his full
power and pleasure over us, he beggeth but a part and little portion within
us. But give the devil that answer that Moses gave to Pharao, who snobbed him
thus roundly; No not a hoof shall remain behind us, but every part shall be
consecrated unto God.

Or let us say in this case unto Satan, Genesis 27.
as Isaac said to Esau: Jacob have I blessed, and he shall be blessed: we have
given up all to God already, and he shall possess it.

Yea let us say to God as Peter said to Christ when Christ would wash his
feet: Lord, Ioh. 1^
not my feet only, but my hands, and my head. For why should we deny him any
thing, seeing he is the owner of every thing we have. The devil, the world,
the flesh indeed have no more right in us, then Achab had to Naboth his
vineyard, or Herod to his sister. 1. reg. 21.


If we give all to God, Mark. 6.
he will save and preserve it: there is nothing that the devil would have, but
that he would destroy. And yet we are overcome of such folly and madness, as we
will rather put our selves to our destroyer, then to our merciful Savior. A
similitude.
As many a young man does, who ravished with lust of a droyling slavish bond
woman, does bestow himself upon her, and albeit that he knows that he is
cast away by her, yet will he marry her: so our will, forgetful of Gods love,
is so lincked to the lust of this wretched world, as hap what hap shall, it
will not be divorced, but will be obsequious to her imperious hestes.

Sampson could not be so absurdly ignorant of Dalila her drift, Judge. 16.
for former experience and trial that he made of her, discovered her deceit.
He saw too plainly, that her so earnest practice with him to understand
wherein his power might be weakened, did tend to his destruction, yet he could
not be warned by former admonitions, but is so intoxicated, and besotted with
her, as he chooses rather like a mill horse to grind at the mill, and to be
made a fool as afterward he was, when he was the subject of the Philistines
pastime, then to be offensive to this his abject mynion.

As the Lord is Alpha which signifies the beginning: Apoc 1. A similitude.
so is he Omega which signifies the ending. He will not be put off as Lawyers
do their clyents from term to term, with dodges and delays.

Moses asking Pharao, when he should pray for him: his answer was to morrow;
And why not to day Pharao? since every day is Gods, and he cannot be served of
any man too soon. How do thou know, that thou shall live until to morrow?
Thus the wicked prescribe God his time, whenas every time is his.

Lycurgus making laws for the Lacedaemonians, propounded them unto them to be
observed of them, until he should return from that region and country,
whither immediately he was to take his voyage: and so sailing into Creet, he
never did return, but there dying, commanded his bones to be burned, and the
ashes of them to be thrown into the sea: supposing, that if his body might not
be carried over, his laws and ordinances should never be repealed. Such a
tender care had this Gentile Philosopher of the zealous and continued
observation of good laws: which care of his, taxes our carelesnes, and
remisnes in keeping the commandments of our God: serving him by fits as our
stomachs serves us, and affording him what we may spare from our pleasure and
our sins. It should not be so with us, but we should take that course which
this Ieweller by his practice here prescribes us, who resigneth up all that he
had in the world, that he might buy this treasure of Gods word.

Let us do the like: Augustine.
Nos ipsos pro illa margarita demus, non quia tanti vateamus, sed quia plus
dare non possumus. Let us give our selves for this pearl of great price, not
because we are worth so much, but because we have no more to give. Minus dat vt
plus accipiat: hoc fac and tu. Da modica, accipe magna: da temporalia, accipe
aeterna: da terram, accipe coelum. This Ieweller has a wonderful bargain, in
giving up his state and interest to this world, for livery and seisin of this
better purchase of the world that is to come. For as Augustine says, he gives
the less, to receive the more: do thou the like; Give mean things, and
receive greater for them: give temporal things, and receive eternal: give
earth, and receive heaven: give gold, and receive God.

As thou forsakest father, and mother to cleave to thy wife: so forsake father,
and mother, wife and al, be it never so near and dear unto thee, to cleave to
God.

To sell all that we have, is to renounce the lusts of the flesh, and of the
mind, and so to shake off the world, which inticeth us to wickedness, as Joseph
shaked his cloak from him, Genesis 39.
and left it with his mistress, egging him to uncleanness.

But, this is that that breaks off the bargain, and keeps us from this
purchase; we endure well enough to hear of the pleasure and profit of this
purchase, but we like not the covenants, we are loath to be touched in our
worldly state, or to alter the condition of our life; the doctrine of
repentance, and the Gospel of Christ teaching us to deny all ungodliness, and
worldly vanity: and to live soberly, justly, and uprightly, in this world, is
grievous unto us, Tit. 2.
and we cannot abide it.

The children of Israel hearing of the fruitfulnes of the promised land of
Canaan, Number. 14
buckled themselves in all the haste unto the battle, and marched toward it,
eger of the present possession of it: but hearing the place was inhabited with
Giants, they hung down their heads, and their hearts failed them, and altered
quite from the men they were before, their fancies were set upon Egypt again.
So many hearing by Gods spies, that came from heaven, of the joy and happiness
laid up in store for us in the life that is to come, especially of saint Paul,
who was rapt up to heaven, and was full of revelations, 2. Cor. 12
and discoursing of the unspeakable riches of his kingdom, rauisheth the
hearers with these delightful tidings, that the eye has not seen, the ear
has not heard, 1. Cor. 2
neither can the heart of man conctiue the things that God has prepared for
them that love him: men I say, heartned with such consolation, they take
stomach to themselves, and are zealous and hot in spirit after it, to win
and enjoy it: But withal, understanding that the way is narrow, Math. 7
and the door straight, that leads into it, and that there will be some
difficulty in our passage, our hearts grow heavy, and our journey is dashed,
and our whole mind is set upon retiring unto Egypt, and to embrace this
present world.

He that has earnest occasion of speech with another man, A similitude.
coueteth to find that man alone, and free from other business: when as God
would speak to us, he would find us in this case, he would have us love men,
sequestered and put apart from the world.

Therefore when he was to commune with Abraham, Genesis 12
he willed him to be private, to resign his native soil Vr of the Caldeans,
and to enjoy his blessed presence, to forget his own kindred, and his fathers
house.

And because that cares are the daughters of riches, which as thorns do choke
the good seed of the word, in worldly minded men; the Lord enacted in the
state of Israel, that clergy men, Deuteronomy. 18
separated and put a part to the ministry, should not have worldly
hereditaments and possessions as other of the tribes: that their minds, whilst
they were in their holy ministration, might not be distracted, and miscarried
with them.

As also it was a constitution among them, Leuit. (...)
that he that was bunched and crooked in the back, should not serve and
minister in the temple. For this defect and impediment of body, is a hindraunce
to their eyes, that they cannot lift them up to heaven as they should. So, such
as are distorted and crooked in mind, and have their affections always stooping
and looking on the world, are no fit persons to serve before the Lord, and to
enter into his courts.

Mortify we therefore all our worldly lusts, and slay we them down right with
the sword of the spirit. Let us not imprison in the bowels of our souls, such
sins as we like best, and keep them alive as Saul did Agag, 1. Sam. 15
whom God commanded should be put to death: but let us hew them in pieces, as
Samuel did Agag in Gilgal before the Lord, and beat them as small as the dust
of the earth.

If we pity our sins as Ely did his sons, 1. Sam. 2
when we ought to punish them, God will punish them, and will bring a great
judgment against us for them.

Oh heavy and most grievous is that commination of the Lord against Achab, 1.
King. 20.
for demissing Benhadad: Because (says God) thou have let go out of thy
hands a man whom I appointed to die, thy life shall go for his life. The
like sentence is gone out against all, that save alive that sin they should
destroy, they shall die for it.

If ye live (says Saint Paul) after the flesh, ye shall die; Romans 8
but if ye shall mortify the flesh by the spirit, ye shall live. Thus Paul
makes two men of one: the one the outward and the other the inward man: both
which are united in one, yet are they so sundry, as they cannot agree in one,
but the generation of the one, must be the others corruption, the life of the
one, must be the death of the other, and therefore to save and keep alive the
one, we must needs mortify and put to death the other.

What a good match we shall make, in coping away the pleasure of the world, for
the joys of heaven: at that general county day, wherein the books and
scrolles of consciences shall be laid open, plainly will appear, at what time
all those things that we have here gathered together will do us no good, where
no manner of excuse may serve our turn, where there will be no place of any
refuge for us.

Here there have bin found some places of small succor, in the time of danger.
Genesis 3 Genes. 18 Genesis 19 1. Reg. 18 Iona. 1.
Adam could run behind the trees of his orchard. Sarah could hide her self
within her tent. Little Zoar was a sanctuary to Lot. Elias could shroud himself
in Mount Carmel: and Jonas could go down to the hatches of the keele, that he
might flee to Tharsis, from the presence of the Lord. But in the judgment,
Luke 23. Apoc. 6
we shall say to the mountains, hide us, and to the hills cover us, from the
anger of him that sits upon the throane, and of the lamb.

Tell me what it is, whereat thou should stick to go through with this
purchase? Or what it is that thou should desire in comparison of this? One
says riches, another says honor: one desires beauty: this man is for his
back, and this man for his belly, one for his mirth, another for his credit,
another for his pride: here one, and there one goes up higher, Genesis 28.
and desires heaven, and steppeth up this ladder, as the Angels that Jacob
did see in his dream.

It is even as the shaking of an olive tree, Isai. 17
here and there a berry is to be had. A similitude.
Thus like bruit beasts, who set more by stubble and gras, then by gold: they
sottishly esteem more of earthly vanity, then of heavenly felicity.

As the Sun which is but one, A similitude.
does minister far more light then all the smaller stars which are innumerable:
so the sunshine of the glorious gospel of Christ, does us more good by
infinite proportion, then all the creatures which the world yields us: as by
particular discourse shall appear in the winding up of this history in the
last Chapter.

Wherefore grudge we not to do away those things that are of meanest moment, for
those of greatest substance: to change chafe with wheat, dross with gold,
mire for pearl, earth for heaven.

Know we not how that pearls and precious stones, A similitude.
are not set upon iron and copper rings, but only upon gold? In like case, the
glittering gemme of heavenly glory, may not be set into iron hearts, brazen
affections, impure and earthly minds: but into such as are purified as fine
gold from all impure commixtion. For the estate of the soul, is in nature not
unlike a pure crystal glass, which is so dimmed with the least dust, and is
so obscured but with once breathing on it, as it neither gives the image of
that face that looks into it, neither sends back such bright and clear
light as is object unto it.

He must partake with God in his life, that will share with him in glory. If
Christ our grand Captain despised the world, and renounced al, to do his
fathers will it appears that we fight not under his standerd, and are not his
soldiers, who are as greedy of the world as a crow is of carrion, and who can
savor nothing but the things of this world.

There be many with Balaam, Number. 23.
that desire to die the death of the righteous, but they refuse with Balaam, to
live the life of the righteous. They would live rebelliously with Judas, Mat. 26
and die in peace with Simeon: Luke. 2
but it may not be: for the life of beasts, and the glory of Angels, may not
be knit together. It is not to be hoped for, that if we live in this world like
beasts, we shall live in the other like Angels.

The sheep, otherwise a seely creature, A similitude
yet is so wise, as he knows what herbs are most wholesome for him, and
what as hurtful he is to refuse.

He knows the woolfe to be his enemy, and the shepherds curre that is like a
wolf, for to be his friend. The Lord has given us judgment and discretion,
if we would use it thereafter, to leave the evil, and to choose the good; to
eschew sin, and to ensue righteousness; to loath the earth, and to love heaven.

The birds of the air naturally are disposed, A similitude.
though the cage be never so precious, wherein they are enclosed, be it of
Iuory, or of gold, or howsoever they are daintily dieted and tended, to desire
to be at liberty abroad, which they show by the often grating their beakes
against the wire window: so the godly scorn all the plesures of the world, in
regard of their joys prepared in heaven, and to be in state and fruition of
them, are willing and desirous to make a surrender of all their earthly profits
and commodities whatsoever.

CHAP. XI.
That all our endeavors, are to redound to the glory of God, and to tend only
to a spiritual end, as is lively shadowed in the example of this Merchant,
whose bargain of sale of all his temporalls, was only for the purchase of this
heavenly Treasure.

THis Merchant in this Chronicle is celebrated and renouned, for this
threefold action. For the sale of his substance. For the sale of al his
substance. For the end thereof, only for a heavenly Purchase.

The two first must wait upon the last, without which, the former shall be
done in vain.

Many there have bin, who have renounced their worldly right, and simply have
surrendered all their earthly state, Ezech. 13
yet never were accounted in the assembly of Gods people, neither shall they be
written in the writings of the house of Israel.

It is not the action that God respects, but the intention, and end of the
action that he only beholds.

God loves not Adjectives without Aduerbs, Bonum without Been. It is better to
do well then to do good: for a man may trespass in doing good, if he does it
not well. Deuteronomy. 5 Deuter. 12.
The Pharisees in prayer, fasting, alms, duties that were good, offended in
that they did them not well, the end and the manner marring the whole matter.

How many heathen people have gone before us, in a severe conversation, in a
strickt mortification, and yet have utterly lost al their devotion, because it
has wanted the only use, and end of true religion?

They wrought, but yet they wrought not like cunning artificers, according to
the rule, which is to do that which is good in good order.

To forsake our wives, to neglect our children, to despise our friends, to
contemn the world, if it be in wordly sort, and it does not tend to an
heavenly end, it is to no end. The Roman Curtius, the Athanian Codrus, the
Theban Crates, and others, the famous philosophers of the Gentiles, Socrates,
Diogenes, Bias, Thales, Milesius, Mucius, Scaeuola, Fabricius, Romanus, and
such like, who have martyred themselves, offered strange violence and torture
to their bodies, have lived private austere lives, scorned worldly wealth, and
have sequestered themselves aloof from all the inticements of the world;
inasmuch as the ends of their actions were in vain: the lyme, the stone, the
timber, wanted a foundation whereupon to lean, all their whole structure and
building tumbled down, and all their labors and endeavors perished.

The manner therefore in matters of Gods service, Genesis 4
is chiefly to be regarded. And because that Cain was careless of the manner,
the Lord looked not to the matter of his sacrifice.

If thou would bring thy actions to perfection, let God be the end of them.
The Mathematicians hold, that the circular figure is the perfect figure,
because that in a circle, the beginning, and the end, do iump and meet
together: we shall be perfect christians, if God the first cause and beginning of
all: of whom, Romans 12.
in whom, and by whom are all, shall be the consummation and end of all: if we
shall set this watchword before all our doings, whether we eat or drink, or
whatsoever else we do, we do all to the glory of God.

Have an eye therefore to the end of every thing, that thou go about, that
thou may not do amiss.

Artificers, by a line and leaden plummet, A similitude
do measure and survey the proportion of their work: our level and square
must be this heavenly word; so as, our life being conformed to this rule, it is
even in every part, and of perfect dimensions.

God expressly wills that all valuation shall be according to the shekell of
the sanctuary: Leuitic. 27
The love of God, and the glory of his name is this shekell and weight that
weighs all our actions: so that wanting this, they are rejected as the gold
that wants weight, and as the corn that wants measure. They may like the
smoke, climb toward heaven, but, like the smoke, they shall vanish away, and
never come to heaven.

Whatsoever action thou give thy self unto, Psalm. 37
whether to praying, fasting, giving, receiving, suffering, weigh aright with
this shekell of the sanctuary, in what spirit, purpose, and devotion, thou
take it in hand. For be thou well assured, if it tends not to his glory but
be without that, it shall also be without his reward.

A fearful woe shall be thundered out against them, Math. 23
as we read in the like case was denounced by Christ against the Scribes and
Pharisees.

As no man might enter into the court of King Ahashuerosh, ^^est. 4
that was clothed in sackcloath: so no man, not clothed with a wedding
garment, that is, with Gods love, may press into Gods presence.

Christ many times in his actions, Mat. 22
did eleuate and lift up his eyes to heaven, John 11
to teach us in our actons, and all our intentions to look up to heaven, Mat. 6
for the eye is taken for the intention, according to that our Savior Christ
says: Luke 11
if thine eye be simple, that is, thy end, and intention of thine action, set
before thine eye.

These two I hold as good conclusions. First, that all our sorrows for our
sins, though our contrition were as great as the sea, if it be only for the
fear of hell, and not for Gods love, and the love of heaven, can do us no
good. A similitude.
For as the confession of a traitor is constrained, who for fear of the rack,
and not for any dutiful affection to his prince, bewrays and bewaileth his
mischeuous designements, and this confession and lamentation, turns not to
comfort, but to his certain destruction: so such contrition, as comes by
coaction, makes not unto salvation, but unto endless perdition. For in sin
there are always these two things chiefly to be considered. The first is, the
evil thou have wrought against God: The second is, the evil that thou have
brought upon thy self, which is eternal damnation. Now if thou be grieved
for thine own mishap only, and not for the high and mighty indignity offered
unto God, is it not manifest, that thou would only escape that which makes
against thee, not caring for that which makes against God, and therefore thy
repentance is repelled of God?

This is made evident by a pair of examples of Saul, and David; they were both
of them Kings, both of them sinned, 1 Samuel 15. 2 Samuel 12
both of them were reproved, and both of them repented: and yet the Lord, who
accepts no persons, accepts David's, Acts. 10.
and excepteth justly against Saul's repentance: for it was defective and faulty
in the end, and it was not done aright, there was as great odds and difference
as might be, between their intents and purposes of repentance: David repenting
that he had lost God, and Saul repenting, only because he had lost his
kingdom. For he opens his mind plainly enough by his words to Samuel, 2.
Sam. 15
saying: Honor me before the elders of my people, and before Israel: So Saul
might have bin safe and settled in his kingdom, and men might do him worship,
little did Saul esteem how his GOD was woorshipped.

For this cause Esau went without his blessing, Heb. 12
though he sought it with tears and extreme passions, because they proceeded
not from sincere affections. The love of God which should have made them
forcible, was wanting to them.

The second proposition is as plain as this, that is, that although we do
conform our selves to the Canons of his word, and do his commandments, honor
his name, avoid profane swearing, sanctify his Sabbath, and come as nigh to
the perfect obedience of his law, as possibly we can, if with this Merchant we
renounce all our worldly both profits and pleasures, and have not the intention
of this Merchant in our minds, to illustrate Gods glory, and let our end be
God; God will not bless or favor these our doings, or give them enteraunce
and passage unto him.

For as before in sin, so in every good work there are two chief respects:
The one is the honor which redoundeth unto God: The second is the profit that
returns to our selves. If therefore in a good action, we rather have an eye to
our private advantage, then to the public praise of God, we discover thereby
our worldly minds too much, that gold more then God, the world above the word
is esteemed of us.

Wherefore let us look, that as we serve him, so he will serve us: if we serve
him with the worst, and with the last, he will serve us with the dregs and
bottom of the cup of his wrath, Psalm. 73
and will make us suck them up.

The end before God is of more value, then either the greatness or excellency
of the action: for every action shall be weighed by the intention, and
respected, and recompensed according to the end.

This the subtle serpent knows well; wherefore, as he brought Adam to another
tree, Genesis 1
that he might not taste of the tree of life: so he brings us to any other
end, that we might not follow the true end, which God has commanded us to set
before our eyes in all our enterprises.

When he cannot strip us of such excellent works, as the Lord works in us, he
depraueth the^, by disgracing our intentions in them, suggesting, that they
were wrought to some private worldly end.

For thus he sophisticated and glosed with God, upon the inclination of Job his
devotion: for, upon the commendation of Job his disposition, which God had made
unto him, how that he was a just man, and one that feared God: Job 1
Behold how this iugler privily undermines him, diueth to the depth of him,
sits at the heart and reins of him, snatcheth at the secret intendment of
his mind, that Job his religion stood with good policy, for thus he descanteth
upon Job his devotion: Does Job serve God for naught? Have thou not made a
hedge about him, and about his substance, and about all that he has on every
side? Thou have blessed the work of his hands, and his substance is increased
in the land: But stretch out now thy hand, and touch that he has, to see if he
will not blaspheme thee to thy face: as if he should have said, he works on
the surer side, and plays upon the advantage; his gain is his godliness,
but touch him in his purse, and cross him awhile in his estate and substance,
and the case will soon be altered with him, and Job I will warrant you, will
not prove the man you take him for.

Thus he does like Pioners in the wars, A similitude.
who dig at the foundation, whereupon the whole weight of the building
leans. He does not deny a matter manifest, such attributes and praises as God
does give to Job: but he wrangleth and cauelleth about the manner, which he knew
well enough, if it had bin true, would have ouer-throwne all the matter.

Well, this will be a bone, wherewith he will choke us upon our death beds;
let us deliver our selves of it as we can: whether we have served God for
naught, is the question propounded to us to assoile, our inclinations and
inward affections, at that time will be thoroughly canuised. Let us prove them
therefore, and examine them before, Psalm. 111
that there be no frawd and wickedness in them, so shall they be able to stand
in the judgment and congregation of the just.

Set therefore this watch-woord of the Apostle before thy race, 1 Cor. 9
So run that thou may obtain: Apoc. 1
Let God be Alpha and Omega with thee, the beginning and end of all thine
actions.

Fasten not the anchor of the ship of thy heart, upon the dangerous sea of the
love of this world. Gather up thy wits, and set down in thine accounts, how
much thou have devoted thy self unto the world, and how little unto God.

It is with us, A similitude.
as it is with the windmill which grindeth not the corn into meal, without a
gale of wind which may turn it round about: we cannot turn us to any good
action, unless we may be puffed and rocked to and fro with the wind of
worldely vanity.

Good works are as good wine, but done in a bad mind, we mingle worme-wood and
gall with it, and do like the Jews, who tempered gall in their cup of drink,
that they gave to Christ. The devil recoyleth and goes back, not by our
doing good, but by our doing well. It is that that makes him to reel, as the
rams horns did the huge walls of Jericho. Joshua. 6


As Jeremy says, Cursed is he that does the work of God negligently; so no
doubt Gods curse shall light upon those that do it deceitfully, and that do it
not with a faithful heart.

But there are hypocrites among true christians, as Saul among the Prophets.
But the glory of God, which should be the end of every good work, is the
touchstone that tries our works, of what worth they are, whether they be of
gold, or any other baser substance.

Sichem and Emor were circumeised as well as Jacob and his sons, Genesis 34
but if was but counterfeit holiness that was in them; for they only regarded
the goods of Gods people, and not the good of Gods glory. This much they not
obscurely insinuated in their words unto the people, saying: their substance,
Genes. 34.
cattle, and flocks, shall be ours.

There is no reckning to be made of such religion, which is grounded on a
carnal intention.

What father esteems that obedience of his son, A similitude.
showed him for a fear of loosing his possessions, and not for love in a
natural disposition?

Whatsoever good we do, whatsoever evil we suffer, the maine motive thereof
must be the honor and glory of his name: So our Savior teaches us in many
places of the new instrument. Mat. 5
Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake. Again, Mat.
10
ye shall be brought before Kings and rulers for my names sake. Again, he that
loses his life for my sake. Mat. 10
Again, he that forsakes father and mother for my sake, and the Gospel. Luke 1^


God will say to such as he said, Genesis 15
to Abraham, I will be thy exceeding great reward.

Wherefore let us say to God as Jacob said to Esau: Genesis 33
Let my Lord go before his servant, and I will follow according to the pace of
the cattle which are before me, and as the children be able to endure. Let God
go before, and we will trace his foote-steppes, as he shall enable us.

It is said in the Judges, Judge. 9
that Abimelech their Judge and principal ruler, did cut off branches from
the trees, and did bear them on his shoulders, and said unto his fellows:
What ye see me do, haste and do the like: So, whatsoever we see Christ do, let
his example be our imitation, who made Gods glory the scope and drift of all
his proceedings.

Every handy-crafts-man, A similitude.
in every kind of work, does observe the pattern that his master gives him,
and frames it to that end, which he before had purposed, for if he shall make
it to an other use to please his own fancy, his master makes refusal of his
workmanship, and his labor is lost: wherefore, that that we do may be
pleasing to our Lord and master, and acceptable in his sight: let us with holy
David, Psalm 16.
set the Lord before our eyes, and we shall not do amiss.

Therefore God would that the two Chorubins, with stretched out wings should
cover the mercy seat where God gave his answers; Exodus 25
to insinuate, that when we intend any good, we desire not ostentation to be
seen: so man seeing that God, when he would show mercy, pleased that the
place wherein he would appear, should be thus shadowed and covered.

As Christ wills the Spouse in the Canticles that She would set him as a
seal unto her heart, and as a signet upon her arm: Cant. ^
So let us make God and his glory, the object of our eyes, the scope, drift,
and mark, at which we only aim, in the whole course of our life: so shall we
make with this heavenly Ieweller, an exceeding good purchase, and receive with
him, an everlasting inheritance, an incomparable crown of glory, all treasure
and happiness in the kingdom of God world without end.

CHAP. XII.
An Exhortation to the love of the word, and the spiritual life, the purport
of the premises.

IT is not gold, but dross, not honey, but gall, not credit, but shame, not
life, but death, not good, but evil, which the world yields us; divide the
world aright with the sword of truth, and the vanity of it will soon
appear unto thee.

But thy word, Psalm 119
O Lord, endures for ever in heaven. Mat. 13
It is, the word of the kingdom, because it brings us to no less than a
kingdom. It is, John 6
the word of life, which gives life unto all creatures. Mat. 2
It is, the star which conducteth us to Christ. Genesis 28
The ladder, whose top reaches up to heaven. The water, which purges and
cleanses our leprosy. 2. Reg. 5 Psalmey ^.
The manna, which satisfies our hungry souls. John 6
The book that we should study upon day and night. The royal and celestial
Testament of God. The Oracles of his Sanctuary. Psalm. 1 Ierem. 31 Isai 22
The Key that opens his counsel chamber door. The milk of his breasts; Mat
16 1 Pet 2 Psalm 11^
the gage of his love. The light of our paths. The breath of our nostrells. The
pillar of our faith. Pro 3
The anchor of our hope. The ground of our love. Heb 6
The charter of our happiness. Pro 4
The School and Library of all spiritual learnings.

This is the pathway that leads unto heaven: Luke 18
so says Christ to the young man in Luke: If thou will enter into heaven, keep
the commandments. So says the Spirit, Revel. 2^
Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it. So says the Angel,
Blessed are they that keep the words of this book. So says Solomon, Prou. 29
Blessed is the man that keeps the Law. So says Isaiah, He that does this,
is blessed. Isai 56 James 1
So says James, The doers of the Law are justified. And to this give all the
Scriptures witness, if we will consider them.

Good cause therefore have we to love this Law, and all the day long to have
our study in it.

Worldly Lawyers increase daily; they are called common lawyers, because they
are too common, and they are not weary in following that study: but Gods Law,
which speaks of far better things, and promises to the faithful
professors thereof, not the gold of Ophir, or India, but the infinite and
unspeakable treasure of a kingdom, lies open in the window, or shut in the
study, altogether neglected, or retchlesly regarded.

Sommon all the Law giuers, and convent them together, and let them worship
their politic ordinances and statutes as they list, they must not be matched
and consorted with this Law.

None of these ever durst, or did promise unto any that were keepers thereof,
the recompense of a kingdom.

Mercurius Trismegistius gave Laws to the Egyptians, Phoronaeus to the
Graecians, Solon to the Athenians, Lycurgus to the Lacedaemonians, and Numa
Pompilius unto the Romans; yet none of these pricketh them with that praise,
as to assign such a recompense and reward unto them: Such glory has all his
Saints, says the Kingly Prophet. 1 Chro. 12


As one of the least of the captains of the sons of Gad, could chase away a
hundred, and the greatest a thousand: so one of Gods books, exceeds a
thousand of humane constitutions. Prou. 31


Many daughters (says King Lemuel) have done virtuously, but thou surmountest
all: so many writers have written learnedly, but the actuaries of the
scriptures have gone beyond them all.

Whereas others of Gods blessings, as food, light, and life, are communicated to
others of his creatures, as to birds, beasts, and fishes; this privilege of
the word, as a pre-eminence and prerogative royal above all other creatures,
he has appropriated only to man. And this is argument pregnant to persuade us
to the love of the word.

As man is most happy by his having the word, so had he bin of all most
miserable, if he had bin destitute altogether of this word. For what comfort
(says Tobias) can I have now I sit in darkness? so, what comfort could we have
had whilst we sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death, whilst we were
without knowledge and hope of our salvation; aliants from the common wealth of
Israel, Ephe 2
strangers from the covenant of promise, and were without God in the world?

Whenas God would check the ingratitude of his people, he calls to mind his
benefits done unto them, and as the chiefest among others, Miea. 6
he grateth their ears with a rehearsal of his word. That as he had given
them Moses to govern them, Number. 34
so he had sent them Aaron to instruct them: as he had given them a Joshua to
lead the people, Joshua 15
so he did give them a priest to bear the Arc, a Iehozadach with Zorobabel:
Agge 1
and a Iayrus in the Synnagogue with a Centurion in Capernaum. Mat 8 and 9


His word has bin the badge and cognizance of his people, the hedge and
partition, whereby they have bin distinguished from all other people.

So sings the melodious musition of Israel, Psalm 147
He has not done so to any other nation, neither have any people such
knowledge of his laws.

This is that one thing that is necessary (as Christ said to Martha) howsoever
many other unnecessary things are preferred before it, Luke 10
and we prefer with the ungentle and unmannerly guests in the Gospel: Luke 14
our wife, our farm, our oxen before it.

Herein we resemble and imitate such porters, A similitude.
who lets every one that is costly apparrelled into his masters gate, and
keep out such who are far their betters, because they carry not such an
outward show.

Or they are like the raue^, A similitude.
who when sheseeth her young ones in the nest, first do begin to fether, and
then their feathers seem white, she does not know them: but afterward
perceiving how the feathers grow black, she nourishes and preserves them. The
world loves not a godly man, because he seems to be of a contrary fether:
but let him turn black, and be like the world, and the world will know him
for his own, and make much of him.

As in desperate diseases, A similitude.
such medicines as do serve simply in their nature, as preservatives of life,
are turned, thorough the dangerous corruptions of the patients, into occasions
of death: So in some most dangerous diseases of the soul, the word, which
otherwise in nature, is a salve, is a corsiue unto us. For the word is of
sundry effects, according to the diverse dispositions of the subjects, that it
principally works upon.

The Sun works diversely, as we see, A similitude.
according to the variable nature of the matter upon which it has his force.
For as it softneth wax, so it hardneth clay: as it whiteth some things, so it
blacketh othersome things: and yet the Sun is one, but the subject is not one.

The word of God is one, but we are not one that are hearers of the word, to
some, it is a savor of life unto life: and to others, it is a savor of death
unto death.

We are first to be sundred from our dearest kindred, rather then to be
separated from the word. Hierome has a zealous saying to that purpose, in a
letter unto Heliodore: Hieron. ad Heliodorum.
Licet a collo paruulus pendeat infans: licet vbera quib. te nutrierat ostendat
matter: licet in limine iaceat pater vt te a Christo retardet contemn matrem,
calcandus est pater, solum est pietatis genus in his fuisse crudele^. If thy
young babe hang about thy neck: if thy mother lay forth her breasts wherewith
she gave thee suck: if thy father lie upon the threshall of thy door to stop
and withhold thee from going to Christ: throw away thy child, despise thy
mother, spurn thy father, it is piety not to show pity in this case. By our
joint obedience unto the word, that shall come to pass, which the Scribes said
of Christ; Ioh. 12.
All the whole world will follow after him, and the devil shall be left, as
Rachel, without children. Genesis 30


Let us but take that course in this matter of debate, that is between
worldlings, and Gods people, about the best purchase, that the two harlots
took when they iangled and could not agree between themselves, 1. Reg. 3
whose the living child should be, who appealed and pleaded their case before
Solomon. Math. 12
So let us appeal to the wisdom of the spirit that is greater then Solomon.

A rude man treads upon simples of very good account, A similitude.
through want of judgment, which the skillful Apothecary gathers up
carefully, because he has experience and good knowledge of them.

Oh if we did know (as Christ said to the woman of Samaria) who it is that
speaks to us. John. 4.
If we knew what purchase here is offered us, and who it is that offers it
us, we would not hucke with him, and stand so indifferent and careless in the
matter.

If we would compare both these lives together, the spiritual, and the
temporal; the word and the world, and lay them on even balances, we should
find the world too deceitful on the weights, and the things of this world, we
should see to be lighter then vanity it self.

In politic affairs, and matters temporal, we will try before we trust, our
eyes shall be our judges, and our knowledge and experience shall witness with us
of the goodness of a thing. Grasiers try their bullocks. 1. Reg. 3
Solomon tried who was the right mother. Isaac would try his children before he
would bless them. Genesis 27.
And the Ephramites were tried when they would have passed Jordan. A
similitudes.
What fool is he that buyeth a horse, Judge. 12.
and only beholds the bridle and saddle, and furniture of the horse, and
never tries or sees the horse before he buyeth him? We have weights to try
gold, and measures for our corn: we try our cattle, servants, wives, and
children, and all other worldly things: and shall we not make trial of heavenly
matters, that we may attain to the better knowledge of them?

This was the folly of the frantic Farmer, Luke 14
spoken of in the Gospel, which utterly undid him, that first (as it is said of
him) he bought a farm, and after that, he would go down and and see it: was
it not enough that he bought vanity and repentance so dear, but that he must
be so ready and greedy to buy it, as he will not first take a time to see it,
whether it will serve him, whether it be worth his money? what an oversight was
this? for if he had first seen it, he would never have had any incorage meant to
have bought it. 2 Samuel 13
It is so with us. Absalon was never more greedy of a kingdom, the^ we are of
the honor, ambition, and wealth of this world. And we first buy them before we
do try them, otherwise we could have no pleasure in them. A similitude.
For as the fish sees only the pleasant bait, but not the deadly hook, that
is covered with the bait: so we see only the pleasure that delights, but we
do not see the sorrow that tormenteth. It gives us poison in a golden boule
of wine, and with precious balm breaks our head.

The channells and rivers of the pleasures of the world, do all of them run
into the sea of death. The house of this harlot is the way unto the grave which
goes down to the chamber of death.

Wisdom sets out the conditions of the soul of the virtuous and wise, Prou
31
among other things praises and graceth her in this, that she considers a
field, and buyeth it. First she considered with her self that it was good, and,
because it was good, she bought it. So we read of our Ieweller, how first he
found a field, and before he bought it, how he departed home, and took time to
make sale of all that he had, to make purchase of that field.

The rich glutton that pransed in his purple, Luke 16
opened his eyes and saw the worlds vanity, but al too late; for it was when he
was in hell in torments, when he espied Lazarus in Abraham his bosom. It was
affliction, and not provident discretion that opened his eyes.

The world seruethh us as an Inne-keeper does his guests, A similitude.
who furnishes his table with choice of dainty dishes, very seruiceably set
forth, delightsome to the company, whereof they take a very liberal repast: but
he sawceth them in the price when they come to the shot, exceedingly
ouer-prizeth them, and too intollerably grateth upon them. Wherefore
travelers have now learned to be wiser, who will first know their price before
they will taste of those meats that are set before them; and if that they
perceive their host to be a nipping and pinching companion, they leave him, and
betake them to a cheaper Inn. It is good that thou should take this course
with thy soul, whenever the preferments, and the pleasures of this world, as
meat for thee to feed upon, are presented to thy soul.

If the dignity of a Bishop be imposed upon thee, consider the charge and the
shot of it, be persuaded that thou must reckon with God, for innumerable souls
committed to thy care; and if thou be bound, to pay deerly for thy dignity,
be first well advised before thou take it upon thee.

Likewise, when the pleasure of sin flattereth thee, and a harlot does entice
thee, consider how rigorous a rate thine host has set upon this vild and
sinful flesh, which thou must needs pay, even the tortures of hell, and the
lake that ever burns both thy body and thy soul.

This respect and consideration before had, Genesis 39
will make thee, with Joseph (who left his cloak in the hands of his Mistress,
and ran away naked, rather than he would yield to her wicked lust) to leave
all that thou have in the world, rather than to the offense of God, and
destruction of thy soul, to cleave unto wickedness.

What prisoner that is fast shut up in prison, A similitude.
and condemned to die for his capital crimes, and he sees no other mean of
escaping, but by the breach of the wall, and his friends advises him
hereunto, will not take their counsel; and the better to get through so narrow
a passage, will not put off al his apparel to the skin, and leave it behind
him to preserve his life. We see how death is set before our eyes for our
heinous sins, and rebellions against God, and we cannot shun it, but by
striving to go through the straight gate that enters into heaven: and to
crowd into that, Iet it not be grievous to stripour selves, of whatsoever
burden we do carry about us; but to press in, lets make any shift, albeit it
be with grating, galling, and wounding these our mortal bodies.

To be blind in soul, and to be ignorant of Gods word, is a far more
horrible and palpable blindness than that which the Lord in judgment did bring
upon the land of Egypt, Exodus 10.
which was so foggy and gross for the time, as one man could not see an other,
or once stir out of the place wherein he was.

For whereas man consists of two parts, the body and the soul, how far the
soul does exceed the body, it is not so easy for us to define. But this is
most manifest, that the body, if it might be sundred from the soul, little
differs from the bodies of bruit beasts: and if that the soul might be
singled from the body, it would be but little inferior unto angelical spirits.

Whatsoever ornament, A similitude.
grace, and feature is in the body, it has it from the soul, his vigor,
functions, and natural induments are from thence derived. For, as the beauty
and bravery of a picture ouer-layde with gold, consists not in the wooden
subject, but in the orient, and golden form, which being defaced and put out,
it is nothing but a rude, and deformed substance: so the soul being the life,
and the liuelihoode of the man, which gives essence and form unto the man,
being taken from the body, the body becomes a most unclean carrion, most
ugly and fearful unto us to behold. Yet in most preposterous and brainsicke
manner, all the whole care is set upon the body, and we grow most remiss and
careless of the soul. The base bondwoman the flesh is advanced, and set in
the higher room, and the spirit our peerless and beautiful lady, to her
great disgrace is debased, and put down to the lowermost end.

If the body be diseased, how many Physicians are sent for to succor it? if in
want, what cares do we take to supply it? if in danger, we run through thick
and thin to shun it: but the deadly disease, the woeful want, the
extremest danger that can be of the soul, is not respected of us.

Whereas the soul is the Mistress, and the body but the chamber-mayde: whereas
the soul is the rider, and the body but the beast that bears the rider: lo,
the minion maid is graced, and her Mistress despised: the simpler jade is
stroaked, and the rider is thrown off, and cast unto the ground.

The body is but the garment, and couerlet of the soul. It is mere madness
for any to spoil his body, that he might not spoil his garment: so is it for
us to save the body, to destroy the soul.

If all outward things be ordained for the body, and the body be created for
the soul, and the soul for God: is it not gross and absurd folly, to busy
our selves wholly about those things that are to this end, and to neglect the
maine point of all, which is the end it self? To provide such stuff as may
set up a house, and never to go in hand with the house. To get many books,
and to procure us many teachers, and yet to make no use of these books and
teachers? To go to war, and to be careful to have a fine scabard enamelld
and embossed with pearl, and with gold, and not to care for the matter of the
blade, whether it be of iron, or of lead, or of any other base and impure
substances? The body is the subject, and as it were the case, and sheath of
the soul, wherein the soul is hidden: it is a frantic fashion therefore, to
be so curious and nice about the pleasures of the body, and to be so careless,
and unwise for the treasure of the soul.

Let us lay them both together, and weigh them in the ballaunce of judgment
and discretion, and the disproportion that will appear between them, will
convince in our election, our too too blind and preiudicate affections.

If no tongue be able to unfold the pre-eminence and dignity royal, that the
soul does carry above the body: I think that much less the glory of Gods
Saints in the life that is to come, how much it exceeds and excels all
the glory that this present world affords, is able to be expressed. For how
can both themselves admit a just comparison, whenas one is momentanie, subject
to all vanity, the other eternal, comprehending all felicity? Isai. 64
Of this says the Lord, The eye has not seen what the Lord has prepared
for them that expect him. And of the other says Saint James, It is a vapor
that appears for a time, James 4.
and vanishes away.

The Philosophers of the Gentiles prying into the nature and condition of this
life, but with the eye of humane reason, found matter enough of coffeehouse
with it, inasmuch as Seneca is of that mind as he thinks that no man would
vouchsafe to take upon him this life, if first he might be certified of the
estate and manner of it.

Silenus, another of that sect says plainly, that the best thing, in his
conceit is, not to be borne, and that the next to that is, to die.

Stories do speak of a people in Thracia, who entertain their infants, when
they are borne into the world, with tears and great lamenting, and do
celebrate their funeralles with all melody and triumphing. And I marud not at
it, why the heathen sort should be so conceited of this life, since the dear
Saints of God, Job and Jeremy were so malcontented with it. Job 3 Ierem. 20


Give me a man, in whom all the favors of this world shall conspire, who is
in the faunt, and lives as he list: anotomize his lfe, and give a right
judgment of all the pleasures and wishes he enjoys, and tell me what they are.
Is he in honor and estimation amongmen, and does the world applaude him?
What is this to him in the rigorous judgment, whenas he shall not be tried by
his country, but his conscience: not by other men's sayings, but by his own
doings? If all the world commend thee, and thy God condemn thee, what will
this avail thee? Be therefore like those that run a race, who do stand
herein to their judgment only, who will reward them for their running. Call
only upon God, as the blind man by the way side of Jericho called upon Christ,
Luke 18
howsoever the world, as it checked him, reprooueth thee for it.

Is he in great honor and preferment in the world? then is he in greatest
doings? as the highest trees are most of all in danger in the violence of a
wind: A similitude.
and as the greatest fishes in fishermens nets, which can not get out, whenas
the small fry and menowes do run out as fast as they list. Every man's
promotion binds him in a greater obligation. If he has received much, he is
bound to gi^e much: Luke 12
if he sins, the greater is his sin: the higher he climeth, the more
grieuousy he falls.

Is he comely and beautiful to behold? Beauty is nothing but the shadow of the
fa^e, and like the outward color of a picture, whch is soon put out, a little
spot deformeth the one, and a little sickness does take away the other. The
beauty of Gods creatures should serve as spectacles, by them to behold the
glory of the Creator. If we make not this godly use of it, we shall do like
young children, who beholding only a picture in a book, wholly neglect the
lessons in the book.

Is he sumptuously and richly arrayed, he need not boast of that, for his robes
do but serve him as rags, to cover his nakedness. He that braggeth of that
which is but the cover of his shame, does like the prisoner, that is rescued
from the gallows, who braggeth of his rope: or as the spittle man and Proctor
by the way, that is proud of the filthy and corrupt clowtes, wherewith he
wrappeth and binds up his sores. Such as as boast of their bravery, Isai. 14
God tells by the mouth of Esaias the Prophet, that the worms and the earth
shall be the clothes and garments that shall cover him. Is he a nobleman, and
draws his pedigree from Princes, and does he show the arms of his nobility in
his shield? these are but painted and counterfeit arms, his right arms indeed
of most ancient inheritance, are mortality and corruption. If he list to see
his lineal descent, let him open the grave, and let him with Job, call
corruption his father, Genesis 3
and the worms his mother and his sister: Corruption did beget him; and as it
was that which made him, so it shall be that which shall mar him: out of dust
he came, and into dust he shall return, be he as noble, and high borne as he
may.

Has he riches at his desire, so as he has substance enough for his babes?
what is the matter and substance of riches, but the very vapors and
exhalations of the earth? It avails nothing to virtue and godliness, to make a
man more wise, more humble, more temperate, more patient.

How little the Lord does esteem of riches, Psalm 17
hereby it may appear, in that he imparteth them so prodigally to the wicked,
and deals them out so scantly to the godly. The nature of riches, A
similitude.
is like the nature of a mill, which albeit, it turns about all the day, yet
it rests in the end in the same place as it was in in the beginning. So, though
we have our swing in this world, and do run our circuit, and prowle for the
world, 1 Timothy 6
yet the ending of our life, will answer our beginning; nothing we brought with
us, and nothing shall we carry out of the world with us.

Is he a man full of mirth? Eccles. ^
what is the mirth that the world yields? Solomon tells thee, I said of
laughter, thou art mad, and of joy, what is it that thou do? It is like
the mirth of the mad man, Feb. 11
that in the doting distemperature of his brain, does smile and make
laughter. Moses made no reckoning of such kind of mirth, but rather, chused
affliction with the people of God, than to live in the pleasure of sin for a
season. As Pharao was drowned in the waters of the sea, so the devil is
drowned with our salt tears, and godly sorrows conceived for our sins. Psalm.
37.
Thus there is nothing in the world that satisfies us; only God, he gives us
our hearts desire, howsoever he is the least desire of our heart.

FINIS.

