A letter of a young gentylman named master Germen Gardynare, written to a
friend of his, wherein men may se the demeanor and heresy of John^ Fryth late
burned / and also the dyspycyo^s and reasonynge upon the same, had between the
same master Germen and him

ALbe it I doubt not ye do from time to time understand, such news as be
here occurra^t, partly by the comen rumor and fame, partly by the letters of
your other friends and old acquayntaunce in these parties, much sooner than I
can by any certain messenger aduertyse you of the same. yet seeing that for
correspondence unto your goodness here tofore showed toward me in most gentle
sort, ye have ever required of me kind remembrance only thereof, and
declaracyon of my desire to accomplish in some part my duty, by often
writing unto you, showing how thankfully (what so ever they were) ye would
accept my letters: I have thought yt my part to follow herein your pleasour,
and to troble you always with redynge my rude letters, though none other matter
were contained in them, than ye had both hard and read ere that mine could
come unto your hands.

wherefore having such occasyon and argument of writing offered unto me, as
whereof neither the comen fame can report all the truth, and which is so
tedyouse as few men would accomber their famylyare letters wythall / being
nevertheless such as you for your devotion to christen religyon be most
desyrouse to know: I have most gladly embraced the same, trusting by the
contents of these, to requyte in some perte the importunytie of mine idle
letters written to you before.

ye have herd how John^ Fryth sometime scoler in that college whereof ye were
after his departing master, was afterward among other at Oxenforde found
besye in setting abroad these hersyes, which lately spronge in Almayne, by the
help of such folk be spread abroad into soundrye parts of christendom,
tendyng to nothing else, but to the dyuysyon and rentyng a sundre of Christ's
mystycall body his church, the pulling down of all power, and utter
subuersyon of all comen welthes.

And he being therefore for his amedement punyshed, of obstynatie fled over
the sees unto the fathers of that relygyon / where in the company of wyllyam
Tyndale, George Joy, (at whose name I am sure ye sygh, seeing your self to have been so deluded with the hope which ones ye conceived of him) and other
heretykes: he profyted so myche within a while in un graciouse unshamefast
boldness, that being not myche above the age of xxiiii. years, ye arrogant fool
nothing doutynge the judgment of the hole world, took upon him to teach the
^ole church of Christ, reuokynge us from our error (as he calls yt) of
purgatory, wherein we have this xv. hundred years co^tynued / willing us to
trust herein the spyryt which now in the end of the world, god has raised
in his young breast to rebuke the world, of their long horrible error and
destable blyndenes, wherein so many hundred years all men have abyden, save
only a small chosen number of blessed babes, whom it has pleased god to
instruct and teach pryuyly in their ears the truth of his gospel from time
to time / which ye pore children (feryng by all lykelyhode to be beten if they
told any tales out of the scole) kept close among them self, and like good
dyspensatours laid up their treasoure surely and secretly for losing or
stelynge away, till their master return.

This young apostle sent from the deuell to sow ^ocle among the corn of
Christ seeing no such success or effect of all his pain and travail taken
in writing and setting forth that his wholesome work as he looked for / wyllyng
in no wise that by any his negligence or sloth, yt brethren might impute
unto him the mys^ynge of their purpose: took upon him to come again in to
England, and presently to aid, assyste, counsel, and comfort the brethren
of his guylde here, to stand styffe in their abstynacye / whereof like a perfyt
doctor he has given the^ example himself / persystynge so long obstynate,
^ll he has brought his fylthy carkace to the temporal fire, and his sel^
wretched soul to ye fire everlasting, as ye shall more plainly perceive here
after.

For after that he was taken and prysoned in the tower, notwythstandynge the
danger of his life, with the wroth of god and all good men; which he had all
ready purchased ^y his shameful arrogance and abhomynable heresye declared in
his fore said book: yet (so god of his goodness blyndeth ye enemies of his
doctrine) the shameless heretyke so declared him self there, as neither good
man nor almost evil, could without abhorrynge and detestyng his wickedness
here him named / for so much as vtterynge his malice there against god and the
doctrine of his church ferther then he had done before, lettynge pass all
other heresies as unworthy to be treated by such an apostell, and leuynge them
for other no^ so hyghly after his own opynio^ enspyred with their new holy
ghost as him self: he set upon the blessed body of our lord in the sacrament
of thaulter, denyenge it to be there presentely, and affermynge the worship
thereof to be ydolatrye. Me think I se hereat your joints tremble, your* dies
stare* your hears stert up, and all the behauour of your body alter,
abhorrynge these deuelyshe words of this cursed wretch. But who can let the
devil to be like him self.

After that this goodly apostle had written this wholesome book, and sent it out
already among his brethern: there came unto him a leter from Tyndale warden
of their guylde, exhorting him not to meddle yet with the blessed sacrament,
nor no high matters passing (as he clalleth them) the comen capacyte / but
wylled him to crepe low by the ground, and follow mekenes (for he knew well
the young mannys arrogaunce neded ye counsel) how be it gyuynge him much
deuelysshe counsel wythall / and among all other, that if the bysshoppes
would fall at a composy^yon and be content to suffer the new testament of his
poysened translacio^ to be sold, then Frith should promise for them both to
write no more / and else they would not spare to write still

I trow the old apostles had never the wit which these new have, to put the
prechynge of gods word in compromys, till a ferther laysour and a more
advantage.

How be it he wylleth in the mean season, to grant the bylyefe in the
blessed sacrament as indyfferent / but in no wise to confess it for a
necessary article of the faith.

His counsel not to meddle in high matters came to late / for this letter came
after that Frythes book was abroad. But this last counsel to afferme that a
man might chose, whither he would believe the body of our lord to be there or
not, so that in neither case he worshypped it, ye cay^yfe followed so long till
he brought his own body into ashes, and his soul to hell / notwythstandynge
the great pains taken with him, and gentylnes showed unto him for his
amedeme^t.

The fool was so gloryouse that when he had nothing to say for his opinion:
yet would he not revoke it, for losing the glory and renoume which he had ones
purchased among his brethren / but then ever fled to this refuge, that his
conscience was not satisfied. And if you be desirous to have his facyon and
manner plainly declared unto you, no man that has seen it can declare it
better then saint Athanase does in ye Arrians saying.

In their opynyons they be diverse ^nas^a* in decretis Nicene sy* nodi aduersus
Euse*
and variable, even as the bestes that be called Chameleo^tes chan^ge their
color. when they be reproved they be ashamed / when they be questioned with,
they stycke and stagarre / and after they take to them unshame fastness, and
pretend excuses: But than if any man confute and reprove them in those excuses
to: they study till they have found out things that be not / and according
as it is written they deuyse vain things, for this cause only that they may
persysre and stand styff in their impyete. And so doing, they do nothing
else but openly declare that they facke reason and follow the peruersyte of ye
Jews.

To show you all ye means used for his reconcylyacyon, by the lords and
other of the kings most honorable counsel both spyrytuall and temporal, it
were very long. And of some part thereof ye shall be (I dowte not) informed by
other. But whereby ye may suffycyentely perceive his obstynacye and arrogau^ce,
and how little he was able, for all the boste made of his learning, to say
against the troth, I shall write and declare unto you.

His learning (to say the truth for his age) was to be praised, if his
arrogau^ce had not made him esteem it more ever the^ it was. I mean his
learning in the tongues and other humanite / for in any thing else (what so ever
he has kept in store) suerly he has uttered none. For his works of
heresies, be but Luther, zwinglius, Hwyskyn, and such other, translate out of
latyne into english. And in his co^municacio^ how little he showed by his
answers made to my lord my master both presently, and by message, ye shall
easily perceive and judge.

My lord my master (besides ye gryefe that any man should wylfully of
malicyouse arrogaunce cast away him self both body and soul) berynge a
special love and affection toward this young man, because that ones he was his
scoler, sent for him unto his house, and there began to enter co^municacio^
with him hereuppon / thinking surely, that if the devil had not all together
possessed him, ye words of our savior Christ so manifest, the sentence of all
learned men before Berengarius and wicklife, as well catholyke as heretykes, the
consent of Christ's universal church from his blessed passyo^ unto this day
should have converted him from his arrogaunt and malycyouse pride.

But he having ones alleged upon a certain point, this place of Esaye. Et
acceperu^t de manu domini duplicia, understanding therun to for his purpose,
premia / and theruppon ye book showed, wherein followed, pro omnibus peccatis
suis: being confounded, would no more dyspute of any thing / but said,
except my lord were touched with the same spirit wherewyth all he was
himself, yt should not avail to dyspute with him. whereunto my lord answered,
if I should say likewise to you, and every man to other: then should no man
labor to bring in again him, that ones were out of the right way. For he
should think with him self* this man is moved with an other spirit than I
am, therefore I should lose my labor. wherefore said he leave this found
persuasyon, and when ye have said what ye can for your part, hear what I ca^
answer thereunto and say for ye the other: if your cause be the better / why
should ye not think to win me?

All this was not enough to incorage him to dyspute of ye matter any more, but
without any proof, required his spyryte to be admitted and followed / nor my
lord could have any other answer of him.

yet after this, considering by all lykelyhode that if he did answer nothing,
indifferent men must think. he could answer nothing: the gloryouse fool
affyrmed (se the vanytie of arrogaunce) that all the old doctors of the
church were of his opinion and professed, that if the contrary opinion were
showed unto him, plainly declared by any doctors of the church, he would
knowledge for a troth / but yet none article of the faith. For that Tyndale
(whose counsel as myche as came not to late he followed) did in any wise
forbid him, willing him not to bind the conscyences of the people (what a
knauyshe kind of flaterynge was this, as though yt lay in him to bind and
losen) to believe yt as necessary, but to leave unto their own judgments, to
take yt as them list for a while.

The man entendeth when he can spy a time, to write against yt / and therefore
would be loath this young doctor should have done any thing in derogacyon of
his wo^ke, whom he estymed more than all the old fools of his sect / and had
thought (if god had not prevented him) to have left him as heir of his
heres^es, to perfyte all which he had begone, as appears by Tyndales letter
sent unto Fryth being in the tower.

But to return to the matter. All good men understanding this promise of his
to follow thauthoryte of the catholyque doctors, reioysed excedyngly. For they
hoped he had meant good faith / where as he did yt only for a brage to get
him an opinion and estymacyon among the rude unlearned, and a glory among his
brethern. Other me^ thought him won, when he would in any part abandon his
own wit, and lene to authoryte.

Above all other my lord reioysed, as to whom yt seemed, that his scoler whom
for his wit he loved ever very heartily, ^adde risen from death to life,
trusting that he had left his arrogaunce and yielded him self to reason /
and therefore began very dylygently and ernestly to labor in taking* away
such causes as moved him to doubt therein. And because yt would not synke into
his head, that the natural body of our lord could be in two places at ones,
more than any other mannys body: my lord answered unto him, that in this body
be gotten and brought forth against the laws of nature, nature was notso much
to be regarded, showing him also, that contrary to the laws of nature, he
rose from death, and thorough the stone, without either brokynge yt orr
cushynge his ^odye. And yt is as much against nature to have. ii. bodies in
one compass at ones without the one geuyng place to the other, as that one body
should at one time be hole in two places, which our savior did not only at
that time, but also afterward coming thorough ye door fast shyt, without
brekynge the door or hurtynge his body / which having ones by death
ouercome^deth, cold no more be hurt of no creature.

To this he answered according to Tyndales counsel, that yt was a phrase of
scripture, to say he came in the gates being shyt, instead of, he came in
late after that the gates were shyte / and so knocked and had the gates opened.

And to the the other place of rysyng thorough the stone, he said ye Angel left
up the stone, and so our lord rose.

Jhesu how relygyousely these men handle the scripture, which pratel nothing
else put scripture? when the gospel was laid against him, where the women
coming to the tomb after his resurreccyo, doubted how they might attain
unto his body for the stone which covered his grave / and devised who should
help them to remove it / and straight lokynge toward it again, saw the
stone removed, and thangell at the tomb: to yt he answered, why might not the
women cast these doubts by the way as they came, as well as when they were
there. Se you not ye exceeding obstynacye of him, who so long as he could
have any thing to deuyse for an answer (were it never so false and folyshe as
this was) yet would not show himself confor mable in any wise / but would
rather say any thing what so ever it were, then either confess the troth or
hold his peace.

Against his devise that thangell lyfted up the stone, yt our lord might at
his ease come forth, my lord showed unto him saint Austayn, saying expressly,
He went forth the grave being still close. what would he require more plain,
who professed to knowledge for troth what so ever were plainly written of any
doctor of the church in this matter. yet it took no place with him as plain
as this place of saint Austayne is.

Saint Hierom also among his answers to Hedibia, declares this place saying
thus.

Let us not think that thangell came to open the grave for our lord when he
should rise, and turn over the stone. But after that our lord had risen at
such hour as pleased him, and is known to no man, to declare what was done,
and to have showed by tournynge over the stone, that the tomb was empty etc.

What is plain if this declares not plainly, that ye angel removed the
stone after that our lord was risen?

And where as the pharyse would not admytte, that ye body of our lord might be
received of a sinner and enter into him: he showed him saint Austayne, saying
that our savior gave Judas the price of our redempcyon. And also an other,
where he says: he gave the same to Judas which he gave to his other apostles /
so that his noughtynes in nothing altered that which was received of him.

After that Fryth had glosed the first place with a gloss of his own, saying
that saint Austayne there called the mystery by ye name of that which it
represented: to remove away all doubt therein, and show plainly that how so ever
it appeared to our carnal eyes and our other bodyly senses, yet i^ deed there
were nothing else but the very body and blood of our lord, my lord showed
him an homelye written by saint Chrysostom, of that matter / wherein among many
other things spoken with great reverence of the most blessed sacrament, he
says thus.

Is it bread that thou seeste* or is it wine, or does it pass thorough the as
other meats do? God fordyd: Look thou think not so. For like as if wax
brought unto the fire melte in to it, none of tho^de substance remains, nor
nothing is thereby increased: so think the things semynge to be there,
consumed with the presence of his body.

And a lytellafter he says: Suppose the blood of our salvation to flow out
of his godly and undefiled side / and so approchyng, receive it with pure
lyppes.

When Fryth say this Homily (as shameless as he was in answering) he found
nothing to answer here unto. But yet reteynynge still his high lokes / and
like one who were consulted rather like a censour and correctour of the
catholyque doctors, than taught by them to know his folly in respect of
this, dyspysynge the other places which were alleged unto him, saying as for
the other, that they were little to the purpose, but yt had pyth / repetyng
often, this has pyth, and desired my lord that he would deliver him that part
of the homylie in writing, which incontynently was delivered. For my lo^d had
commanded yt to be wryte^ out before for the nones / and so departed in very
good hope, which neuerthe less came to none effect. For the next day my
lord repayrynge again un to him, in hope to acomplyshe that which he had
begone, found him all an other man than he left him, clean fallen to his old
arrogau^ce of his new spyryte / so that demaundyng of him, how he lyked this
Homylie, and whether there were any thing else wherein he were not yet
satysfyed, he could get none other answer of Frith, but that he had slepte
little after their last communycacyon. And when he was asked why so: he said
he had occupied him self in prayeng to god for knowledge of ye truth in this
matter. And faynynge him self assured yt god had herd his prayour, said yt
stood not with his conscye^ce to confess that faith / and therefore he knew
that opinion was not true? As though, if it had been so, god would by special
inspiracyon have reveled yt unto him.

The great clerk had not learned, that he who mystrusted the word of god,
and byleued not the prechers sent by him, should dye in his incredit lyte
without receyuynge either sign or special demonstracyon / according to
thanswere made unto the rich man in the gospel, who would Luce. 16
have had the lazare sent to his friends to teach them the troth / and
diverse answers made by our savior to the unfaithful Jews.

Thus this detestable wreche abode in malice obstynate / but in his answers so
inconstante and varyable, that he would sometime show him self content to believe
any doctors of the church / sometime he was sure, if yt were otherwise, god
would show yt unto him self / that at length yt seemed unto my lord of London,
in whose dyocese he was, most mete to proceed with him iudycyally / and either
cure the infect sheep, or if it were desperate, cast yt out of the fold.
wherefore on Friday the. xx. day of June, calling unto him my lord my master
and my lord of Lyncoln^, and calling Fryth before them, examynyng him openly
in powles / and finding him still obstynate, finally left him to the seculer
power, as he had right well deserved.

But what pain they took with him first, how fatherly they labored and
trauayled for thamendement of that ungracious child / and of an other also,
which only for company of Fryth held the same opinion, without groundynge
himself upon and scripture but Frithes bare word and his spyryte, wherewith he
was himself also possessed, and therefore left also with Fryth. Of an other
heretyke also one Thomas Philippes, which was examyned the thursdaye next
ensuenge, I shall not need to write unto you / for there be other enough which
both^ can and I am sure would, aduertyse you of yt which was openly done.
wherefore leuynge to write of these matters, whereof ye either are already,, or
shall be better ad nertysed by other: I shall write what means my lord my
master used / for that only can I best declare unto you.

After the body of Fryth was despayred to have saved ye soul, which the fool
him self regarded not as he seemed, nor thought peradventure for all his
hypocrysye, of no life to come after this, but only as the hethen do to live
by glory: surely the latter day of my being with him, he said plainly that
he thought no saints soul came in heaven before the day of dome / but in the
mean season reposed him self he wiste not where. And some of his sect say
that the soul of our savior Christ him self (O what blasphemouse wretches be
these) is not yet in heaven. But malice has no bounds.

After that he was condemned as you have herd, and delivered to the temporal
officers, my lord sent unto him a chapellayn of his with Rupert who on the
syxte chapyter of John^ declares the matter so plain, and so rejects Frythes
obieccyons, as though it had be specially written against him. which author he
refused, alledgynge that no learned man did ever refer that place to the
sacrament of thaltare / and that therefore Rupert was not learned and understood
the place amysse. which his slender obieccyon my lord understanding, and
hopyng of some good effect if that were put away: sent me ye next day with
the third tome of saint Chrysostom, where he in ye xliiii, xlv, and. xlvi.
homily, not only refers that place to the most blessed sacrament / but
also proves by ye same, the bodyly presence of our lord there

I showed him only the. xlv. which in deed (if any drop of grace had remained
in him) had been enough.

Hereby a man may se, how much his brage passed his learning, who durst so
precysely affirm, that no learned man referred that place to the sacrament /
which not only saint Chrysostom, but also all other catholyke doctors (as
ye know) do / because Luther, who dyffereth from them in the bodyly presence
of our lord, and else not in substance of the sacramental sign, is
content, not to have that place referred to the sacrament, which makes so
sore against them both.

After salutacyon I put him in remembrance, first of his answer made to my
lords chapellayn, which he knowledged to be so / and than told him, how my
lord being loath he should cast away him self for ignorance, had sent him
there Chrysostom, whom he must needs confess for learned, referryng the said
place of John^ to the blessed sacrament, for which only cause he had reiecte
Rupert as unlearned. well, said he, let me see yt.

After that he had read a good part of the homylie, so far as hanged
together perteynynge to that questyon I asked what he could allege why he
should not knoweledge the authoryte of Rupert, seeing that Chrysostom (whom he
could not deny to be excellently learned) understood that same place of the
most blessed sacrament as Rupert did. To which after that he had mused a
little, he answered that he gave no great crede^ce to Rupert for diverse causes,
whereof nevertheless he named no mo but this only, that he was after Gregoryes
days the pope / and yet he told not so myche as which Gregorye he meant.

when I saw him, in whom after the come^ rumor I thought to have found some
learning and knowledge in these matres* (specially knowing him ever before in
other scyences to have showed him self of a good wit and understanding) utter
no more conning then he did, but only tryfle and play with every thing,
studyeng after that he had obiecte one thing, what he might babble when that
were taken away, and so estymynge of that he spoke, what by all lyghtelyhode
he could speak or answer in this matter, which seemed to be nothing else but
inuencyons of his own brain, which I thought my self able enough with the
grace of god, either to put of, or at the lest to bear (for neither should he
nor the devil him self for any appearance of reason, make me believe one
arrogant fool better than all good chryst^ men consenting in one) and being
loathe to bring home the heavy news of desperacyon: I began to pass somewhat
my commyssyon, and adu^ture farther than peradventure bycame either my years or
my lernyng / not doubtyng though my years were but young and my lernyng very
small (considering how many hundred times his years were under the age of the
church, which he takes in hand to reach this new lesson, more than my years
were under his / and how ^o comparyson is between the spyryt which Crist
promised and sent his church, and this new ghost of Luthers, full of lies,
diuysyon, and all falshod / for what comparyson ca^be between god and the
devil / to dyspute the matter with him, who with arrogau^ce only and
allegacyon of a strange spyryte labored to overcome the troth so long
rooted in all christen hertes which is of it self without any foreign aid
inuyncyble. wherefore seeing Ru^et rejected, only because he lyked not master
Fryth, and spoke to plain against him, so that no gloss would serve to make
them two agree: I began to press him with that place of Chrysostom, which
I had showed him, desiring him to consider and way yt dylygently, saying I
nothing douted if he so did, but yt should clearly appear* v^ him, that the
troth was agayn^^ him. wheruppon taking the book again into his hands, he
read over again the same place stoppynge ever and gloryenge at any mencyon of
the mysterye / and glosynge with his own deuyse where any thing prycked him.

As first at this, we be one body and members of his flesh and bones. Very
well quod he, so we be / for seeing yt he took our very nature upon him in the
virgyne Marye, we be one body with him, one blood, the same bones, the same
synues, the same members / according as David said unto the jews: Os meum and
caro mea vos.

And this is yt said he that deceyueth you / ye refer that which is spoken
of our communyte with him by his birth, to his presence in the sacrament of
thaulter.

Nay said I not so. But the scryptures and interpreters of the same, showing
most euydently both the natural cognacyo^ we have with him by his
incarnacyon, and ye spyrytuall union the church being his mystycall body /
and likewise in the most blessed sacrament showing both his corporal presence
there, and also the mystycall representacyon of his passion, he and such other
where the sacrament were mencyoned, drew all to ye mystery though ye words
plainly repugned, deuydynge the mystery from the thing yt self / or else for
a shyfte, when the words were so plainly spoken of the very substance, that
they could not be referred to the mystery, turn them to his incarnacyon,
though the words were precysely written of the sacrament.

And that good holy fathers preuentyng by the spirit of god the malice of the
devil, though none heretyke had yet ben so shameless as to hold the
contrary, had nevertheless most plainly and apertly divided the mystery from
the thing self / and yet showed both twain to be in that blessed saccament.
which thing might I said unto him (if he list not to blind himself)
clearly appear unto him by many other places, and by this also of Chrysostom,
which I had brought unto him, where followed.

But that not only by love, but also in very deed, we might be turned in to
that flesh, that is done by the meat which he has given unto us.

Here he says said I, that by the meat which he gave us, we be turned into
that flesh and not by his birth / and not only mystycally by love but also in
very deed.

How can you with all your gloses inuerte this from his corporal presence,
with either of your gloses.

He answered yt was troth, that receyuynge the mystery and sygnyfycacyon, in
deed we were by faith turned into him / and that the mysterye there bare the
name of that which yt ^^th sygnifye, as it does in many places else in
scripture.

And being asked than, why he put this article, that, unto the name of flesh,
if it were not to declare not a bare sygnyfycacyon, but ye very flesh which
he spoke of before: he made no answer, but desired he might be suffered to
read forth / shaking of this matter with a certain gyrnyng laughter after
his fashyo^, as though yt had been nothing to the purpose / which made me even
then almost despair of any good effect, and suffered him to read forth.

when he came to this place, which Christ did, because he would bind us with
more charity, and because be would she we his desire toward us / not only
sufferynge him self to be seen unto those which desired him, but also to be
touched and eaten, and the teth to be set in his flesh, and all men to be
fulfilled with the de^yre of him.

Here he thought to have had me in a ioly snare, and asked if that place (as
precysely as it wrote) were not spirytually to be understood / and whyther in
deed we did tere the flesh of our savior with our teth or not.

I told him that I believed in very deed as the words were, yt we set our teth
in his blessed body, and yet tere yt not. For in what part of the host so
ever we set our teth, in that same part is his whole very body. As I believe
that when the priest brake the host, he tare not the body of our lord, for
that were to put him every day to a new passion / but that every part of the
host was his hole body / and that he who made all thing of naught, could
compass this to.

Here he laughed and read forth, with many gloses by the wayelytell to the
purpose / till he came to the place were he compares the lambs blood in
tholde law to his blood, which was thereby fygured saying thus. But if the
figure thereof had so great strength in the temple of the Hebrews in the
mids of Egypt sprynkeled upon the threshold: much more the trouch.

This troth he said was referred only to the passion of our savior, and the
shedynge of his blood / and not to the sacrament of thaultare. when I replied,
that in this place saint Chrysostom treats of the sacrament and not of the
passion, he answered magno supercisio, with a solemn contenaunce, that this
was nothing to the purpose, and that (I wys) he had looked and red over that
place when he was at his lybertye. And therewithal he shyt the book and be
ganne to comen.

where first he began to induce me, yt all were to be understood in mystery
by a place of saint Chrysostom in a homilye which my lord him self had
given him before. And hereby ye shall se the symplycytie and the playnes of
this euangelycall man, and how with false dissymulacyon he labored to have
gotten me to his opinion.

Saint Chrysostom (says he) wylleth ye people to call away their wits from
the words as they be spoken, and understand them spiritually / telling them
yt else they lied when the priest said, up with your mind and your hearts,
and they answer, we have to our lord. where as in deed saint Chrysostom in
that place only blamed them, which not considering how reverently they
ought there to behave them self, spent in babelyng of other matters that
time, wherein they should have prepared them for the holy word.

Se the myscheuouse matter of this wicked wreche, how deceytfully, and how like
his father the deuell with lyenge and false alledgynge, he went about to
trappe me trusting so to have deluded me and to have shaken me of therwithal,
because he thought I had not read that place before.

who can doubt knowing herin his wylfull and malycyouse peruer syte, of what
deceytfull mind he offered to condescende unto the authoryte of the catholyke
doctors? For if he had faithfully intended to follow their doctrine, he would
never so malycyousely and wyttyngly (for he had dylygently as he said him
self studied that place) have falsely alleged that author, for such purpose
as he knew well he meant not / nor no man redynge the place could so have
taken it. These are saint Chrysostoms words.

O thou man what do^ thou? have Chriso* in sermon admonito. d^ ^^ch^.
thou not m^de a promise unto the priest, who said up with your mind and your
heart / and thou dydest answer him again: we have to our lord. Doste thou
not fear and art thou not ashamed? Thou art taken with a lie even at that
same time. Oh, the board is furnyshed with the sacraments / the lamb of god
is offered for the, the priest is in care and anxiete for thy sake, spyrytuall
fire flameth from the ^wter, the Seraphi^s also are there present, and cou^^
their face with six wings, all bodyles powers make intercession with the
priest for the, spyrytuall fire is come down from heuyn, the blood is
received in the chalyce out of the immaculate side for thy purifycacio^. And
art thou not thanne ashamede Fear thou not? art thou not confunded, nor
doste thou not reconcyle thy self to god? O thou man does not thy conscience
pryche the? The weke has. viii. score and. viii. hours, and of the^ god has
for him self taken out but one hour, and that thou spendest upon seculare
business and lawghyng matters, and in keeping company. with what trust shall
thou than go to gods board. O with how polluted and foul a conscience. If
thou had stynkyng dyrt in thy hands, durst thou approach nyghe unto the
hemme of a kings garment. Do thou se bread or wine? whyther be they voided
into ye drawght as other meats be: god forbede. Think not so. For the wise as
wexe if it be brought to the fire, it waxes like unto the fire, none of tholde
substance thereof remains, nor other substance is thereby encreaced: so
think here to, that the sacraments be consumed with the substance of the
body. And therefore when ye go to gods board think not that ye receive godde
and body at a man's hand, but that ye receive it of ye Seraphyns fire with
the tongues, which fire Esaias foresawe you receive / Count and rekyn that that
wholesome blood in a manet flows out of the dyuyne and vndefysed side, and so
draw nere and receive it with pure and clean lyppes.

If the man wanted not lernyng to understand yt (as in deed he did not) how
can his fautours show that he wa^ted not playnnesse, faythfulnesse, and
honesty, in so declarynge yt.

Hereby a man may plainly se, by what means they allure me^ to their sect /
whyther by the words of god as they pretend, or by their own inuencyons,
false dyssymulacyons and lies. which I would to god allthe world knew as well,
as all they who have co^mened with these members of the devil, these gates of
hell, not being before of their own noughtynes corrupt, do spy and plainly
perceive.

when I had ones made answer unto his allegacyon: the subtle eua^ gelyst
seeing his falshode took none effect but spyed, and laid manyfestly to his
charge, otherwise than he hoped yt should have been, was all astonyed, and sat
still a good while, with out either speaking or making any semblau^ce to
speak. At the length I did interrupte his silence / and showing my self to
marvel that he who pretented so myche symplycyte, so a^dent a desire to know
the truth, would nevertheless in deed labor after such synistre fashyon, to
blind the troth, desired him that he would at the last, rather mekely follow
the troth, than to draw and hayle every thing to his purpose / and so
arrogantly (at that word he gyrned again) set unto every place his gloss, as
though, when he promised to believe the doctors of yt church, it had been
promised him again, that we should understand them as he list, and not as
the words gave.

why I pray you (said he) be not you fayn to gloss those words when on you
ground your self most? And where the words be, this is my body, are not you
feign to say in this is my body, or in this is contained my body. ye se how
like a learned man this was spoken.

The kings hyghnes in his most excellent and erudyte assertyon of the
sacraments, laid this against Luther, who says that the blessed body of our
lord is in the sacrament, the substance of bread nevertheless remaining as
yt was before, whose saying can not stand with the words of our savior,
without such a gloss as who so ever puts unto ye words of god, is accursed
of him, and to be detested of the world. And Fryth thought this had made gayly
against the catholoque faith, which without either adding or dyminysshynge any
thing in the words of god, is to believe that the most blessed sacrament is
his very body, which was betrayed for us.

I am suer said he, ye would not say that that which ye se or perceive by your
other senses is his body, fortha^ should ye say that the form of bread and
wine, were his body.

I asked him where he learned that new logyke, to say that by this word this,
were showed the outward resemblaunce of any thing to the senses, and not the
matter or substance therein contained. And asked him whyther when he said this a
stone or a stock, he meant ye color, or bigness, or smothenes, or other
accydentes, or else the substance, the very stone yt self.

He would have persuaded me farther, because I might (he said) wellse with
mine eye, that yt was very bread / wheruppon I answered, that in this high
matter of faith, that argument was very faint, while in things natural, a pore
peynter might sometime begyle both mine eye and his to. And therefore I willed
him rather to mystrust his senses whereby we be daily deceived, than the words
of god which never can fail, how impossyble so ever they appear unto our
sight.

He said he mystrusted not the words of god, but byleued them as he
understood them / that was, that god gave the name of his body to that thing,
which only betokened his body.

I answered him to show that it was no bare token of his body, but his very
body in deed, our lord said, this is my body which shall be betrayed for you /
and no mystery, no sacrament nor sygnyfycacyon of his body was betrayed for
us, but his very natural body, which henge on the cross.

when he persysted still, saying yt ought to be understood for the token of
his body which was betrayed: I began more ernestly to deteste his arroga^ce in
my mind, who did not only falsely allege and fondly gloss the words of men,
but also durst take upon him to expound the words of our savior him self,
contrary to his own exposycyon.

Nay not so quoth he. For saint Austayne ad Adimantum says, that our lord
calls the sign of his body his body.

So do all christen men (said I) call it a sign, a token, a figure, a
sacrament, a mystery, a sygnyfycacyon, and what such name ye list to call it
/ and yet both call it and afferme it, to be his blessed body to.

And what saint Austayne mente in that one place, writing unto an heretyke
whom he labored to convince in an other matter, may easily be perceived by
many other places of his works, where he speaks most catholykely and
reuerentely of the blessed sacrament. which I told him might well appear unto
him, by such places of the said saint Austayne as were alleged against him at
his examinacyon. And if saint Austayn had been of his opynion in deed, as in
deed he was not: yet had not his opinion alone have been to be preferred before
the faith of all the other old holy doctors and saints, and against
thauthoryte of the whole church of god.

But this has ever ben a craft of heretykes, by false alledgyng or false
understanding of some one catholyke doctor, whose authoryte were much reputed
among good men, to pretend that there opinion were also catholyke.

So did the prechers of the cyrcu^cycyon with saint James, the Arrianes with
Origene, and Theognostus, the Donatistes with faint Cypryane, the Origenystes
with saint Hierome and Theophilus, these mysty mystycall heretykes with saint
Austayne evil understood, and all the rabble of Luthers sect, with words
mysse taken among some wrytynges of Erasmus, wherein how plainly and syncerely
they have ever delte, and yet do, any man may se who has understanding in
the laten tongue, and list to read their acts.

After all this comenynge long with him of his arrogaunce and folly, among
other things, I bad him show me that ever any man before Berengarius time,
did profess this opinion which he took for so true* that he took upon him to
confute the contrary / wherein specially was so great ieoperdye and parell of
the hole destruccyon of Christ's church. For if this be idolatrye, all
christen men these many hundred years have commmytted idolatrye.

For what so ever they thought in heart, in very deed they gave yt the
worship dew only to god, because of the godhed there joined with the flesh
and the soul. And their dissymulacion excuses them not from idolatrye, if
they thought them self to do amysse, but rather encreaced their fault, doing
yt against their own co^scye^ce, to the ruin of other souls.

when he could show none but one Betrame in Charles days the great: than I
told him yt thopynyon which he denies, might be proved unto him to have been
so well allowed by all learned men both catholyque and heretyques before that
Betrame his days, yt the holy me^ as saint Ireneus and saint Hilary, both in
their disputacyons had grounded them self upon that point, to confute other
heresies which him self now denied.

Then began he as yt had been in a tragedye, to ruffle and cry why had not the
bishop told him this / complaynyng sore, that they had showed him no such
place / so that a man would have thought him very sorry, that he knew it not
before, and desyrouse to know it then, which proved afterward clean contrary.

To that I answered, yt unto such places as the bishops had showed him, he
would (as yt were by certain violence) put to his own gloss, and understand
them as he list / which likewise he would have done in this, though now he list
to glory and say, they hyd this place from him, and that else he would have been
reformed.

He blamed therein my hasty judgment, which nevertheless he declared to be
true the next day after, for not withstanding that he promised to knowledge
the catholyque opinion for a troth upon sight of those places: yet having ye
books brought unto him, the places showed and suffered to read a myche as he
list, at length he slypped away / saying they were somewhat to ye purpose, but
not so myche as I said they were.

when I bad him show, what I had promised which was not there, he said the
places were not so vehement as he looked they should have been, whereunto an
other lay man a gentylma^nes servant, whom I brought with me being myche
better learned (without master Fryth kept a great deal more in store then ever
I knew him utter) then either of us both, and yet was younger I wene than
master Fryth to, answered, yt if it had neded, vehemence to persuade yt, and
had not ben a very plain open well known troth of yt self, yt had not ben
mete to be made by those holy doctors a ground in an other dysputacyon,
wherefore that was rather a commendacyon than a fault which he had found.
Among other dygressyons the said young man asked him what first moved him to
leave the contrary opinion of that he held then, which ones he byleued, and
believe this so steadfastly, yt he would dye for yt whereunto he answered yt he
byleued it not, but thought yt only more probable then the other part, so that
his conscience would not suffer him to reprove yt / and therefore thought the
bishops did him great wrong, to give sentence against him as an heretic,
who offered him self to be reformed, which he performed nevertheless never a
whyt, and miracles he showed none. Seeing than we be bydden prove the spyrites
whether they be of god or no, what good man can admytte that spyryte, which
showing no virtue nor knowledged enspyreth only arrogance and blasphemye.

Besides this he had promised at my departing from him the first day, if I
could show him where yt were spoken expressly, that the substance of the
bread were changed by the consecracyon, or that those were not bread still
after the consecracyon, or that a sinner did receive the body of christ, he
would knowledge it for troth: for at the length, seeing him self not able to
answer such places of holy doctors as had been laid against him, for the
corporal presence, of our lord in the blessed sacrament, nor yet to save the
matter with no gloss of his own, but that he must needs confess that we
received the natural body of our lord in the sacrament: he then went about
to save the matter by this, that good men receyuynge the mystery of our lords
body, did by faith receive also his natural body / which sinners could not
do, for they can not do it with assurau^ce, being gylty in their own
conscyences. which saying was contrary to his first opinion / for first he
defended precysely yt there was no natural body / but the sacrament only
without the body / the contrary whereof he saw so determined by doctors of the
church and holy saints of every age, that he could not gloss them to deny
his natural presence, but yet he granted it so, yt in effect he denied it,
showing him self wythall so obstynate a fool, that he had rather say that
thing in some words which he would in other words straight way deny, the^
plainly confess the troth. For he confessed our lords presence there
naturally, but by faith. I marvel how he could be so folysshe, or think any
man else so folysshe, as to be induced to believe, yt receyuynge by faith were
natural receyuynge, specially seeing both saint Chrysostom and saint
Cyryllus (which were alleged unto him) make a dyffere^ce between receyuyng by
love or faith, and natural receyuynge / both which they show to be in the
receyuynge of the blessed sacrament. And this great clerk would have us wene
that both were one / and then were those old saints no very good clerks,
which so divided the^.

But to return to his promyses who herd ever of such an unshamefast brage, as
to say, if any of these things were showed him, that he would confess the
catholyke faith for true, when all those were showed him most euydently before.
For who can speak more plainly that a sinner receives the body of our lord,
then does saint Austayne, saying that our lord gave the price of our redempcio^
to Judas? was any thing else, than his body and blood, ye price of our
redempcyo^? and that was it yt as saint Austayne says, he gave to Judas at his
mau^dy

And that the substance of bread is clear consumed, and none other substance
remaining there but of the blessed body of our lord, who can speak more
plainly then saint Chrysostom, saying, that the things represented to our
eyes, be consumed with the presence of ye body, as wax is with fire / so that
none of the old substance thereof remains, nor other substance is thereby
encreaced.

And yet this simple man would hane seemed both to believe saint Chrysostom,
and yet doubt of the change of ye bread / and also believe saint Austayne, and
yet doubting for all that whither sinners receive the body of our lord /
using none other answer but this only, yt (when we asked him how his saying
could agree with these places alleged unto him) him self had well aduysed these
places, and that they satysfyed not his conscience. For ever when I had showed
him such places as I promised him, and then required him to keep his promise
and knowledge the troth: he answered nothing else, but that yet his conscience
would not serve him so to say for all that / and added thereunto, that those
places which seemed unto us so plainly to prove that we said, seemed the
contrary unto him. when he was bydden show some cause why: then was the
spyryte up again.

A wonderouse wise spyryt, which served only, when he had neither authoryte
nor reason to show for yt he said. And miracles he showed not that ever any
had been done for their opinion / but contempned all miracles that ever had been
done for ours / saying yt we be bydden prove the spyrytes.

when we save him abide by nothing that he promised / we asked him what he meant
to offer such promises as he thought not to keep / and say if yt could be
showed him in any doctor of the church, that he would knowledge yt for truth.
He said yt was not yet plainly showed him in express words, that either a
sinner received the body of our lord, or yet that there remained no substance
of the bread, or that the natural body of our lord were received any other
wise tha^ by faith. wherefore (though we spyed well his fair promyses made
before, were but dyssymulacyons, and that it were not possible for all doctors
that be and have been, to write so plain as to make Frith call them plain) yet
minding for their cause which were present at the lest to confound him: we
showed him of every one of these sentences diverse places plain unto every
man's judgment saving only his own, which only he esteemed. Of which for
example I shall rehearse you some besides those ye have herd here all ready,
saint Chrysostom says thus. For if those which defoyle the kings purple
robe, be punished no less tha^ those that tere it: what marvel of those that
with unclean conscye^ce receive the body of Christ, suffer the same
punyshement that they who nailed him to the cross.

It is a wonder to any man which knows not the unshamefastness of this
arrogant fool, how he could after this deny (knowledgynge this man to be of
authoryte) but that a sinner receives the same body which was nailed on the
cross. yet to this could we have none other answer of him, but yt yt did not
fully persuade his conscience, nor satysfye him, pretendynge nevertheless that
he would gladly know and knowledge the troth.

we showed him also the words of saint Eusebius, wherein that holy man not
only declares by plain words, the conuersyon of the bread and wine into the
flesh and blood of our lord in the blessed sacrament of the altar, but, also
makes yt open by the spyrytual conuersyon of man into the mysstycall body of
Christ, through the sacrament of baptysme. For who can doubt but he can do the
less that can do the more. But a less thing is yt to turn the bread and
wine into his own flesh and blood in the sacrament of the altar, than an evil
dedely sinful man into a good lively member of his mystycall body by grace in
the blessed sacrament of baptysme. For if be yt a less thing (as in deed yt
is) to turn bread and wine into his own flesh and blood, than to make the
whole world of naught: than must it needs be a greater thing to turn an
evil man into a good, and make a dedely sinner, a lively member of his
mystycale body. For as ye wot well saint Austayn says Maius est iustificare
impium quam creare coesum and terram. A greater thing yt is to turn an evil
man into a good, than to create both heaven and earth of naught. The words of
saint Eusebius of which I speak that were showed unto Fryth, are these.

Let no man doubt, but that ye natures of bread and wine which were there
before, may at a trecke of gods power by the p^sence of his majesty be
changed into the nature of our lords body, while we se that man him self by
the conning of the heavenly mercy, is made the body of Christ. For as every
person that comes to the faith, before the words of baptysme is yet in the
bands of the old det / but after the words be ones pronounced, is by and by
cleansed of all the dregs of sin: even so the creatures that shall be
consecrated with the ^^uenly words, when they are said upon the holy aulters
before they be consecrate, by the inuocacyon and calling on of the high god,
there is the substance of bread and wine / but after Christ's word^ ones
spoken, it is the body and blood of Christ. And what marvel is it of those
things yt he was able with his word to create and make of naught, he can when
they be created convert and turn them with his word? ye yt seems to be a
less marvel for him to convert and turn that yt he has made of naught
into a better thing.

Farthermore where as Fryth affermed and said, that in the sacrament of the
altar Christ was in none other wise received than spyritually by faith only /
we showed him very plain and open words of saint Cyrylles to the contrary /
who to confure this false opinion that Fryth held, and to prove that we be
joined and knyt unto Christ, not only by faith but also by natural
partycypacyon of his flesh and blood, says thus.

We deny not but that by right faith and pure cheryte we be spyrytually
joined with Christ. But that ther^ is no mean whereby we be joined with him
after the flesh, that is the thing forsothe that we utterly deny, and that
is we say far from the mind of the holy scriptures. For who douteth that
Christ in such wise is a vine to, and we the branches, whense we get life
from. Harken unto Poule, who says that we be al one body in Christ. For all
though we be many, yet in him we be all one / for we take all part of one
bread. Does he peradventure think that we know not the virtue of the
mystycall blessing, which while it is done in us, does it not make Christ to
dwel^ in us corporally to, through the communicacyon of Christ's flessh. For why
be the members of faithful folk the members of Christ. Do ye not know (says
he) that your members be members of Christ? shall I than make the members of
Christ the members of a stru^pet? God forbede. Our savior also says: he that
eats my flesh and drynketh my blood, dwells in me and I in him. Wherefore
it must be considered, that Christ is in us not only habitually by cheryte,
but also by natural partycypacyon. For like wise as if a man take wex that is
mosten with fire, and with other wex yt is in like manner molten, so myngle it
that both ^wayne be made one: so by the communion of Christ's body and blood
he is in us and we him. For this corruptible nature of ye body could else in
no wise have been brought to incorrupty by^ite and life, but if ye body of
natural life (that is to wit the body of Christ) were joined with it.

Finally after many mo places of diverse old holy saints and very conning
doctors alleged unto Frith all which here to rehearse were a very long
besynes, we laid before him a place of saint Hieromes, whose words be these.

God forbede that I should any ^. Hieroni. in episto. 1. ^d ^^e^iodorum.
evil speak of them, that succedynge into ye place of thapostles, with they^
holy mouth consecrate the body of Christ, by whom also we be made christen
men / who having the heyes of the kingdom of heuyn, are se^ judges in a
manner before the general judgment, and keep the spowse of our lord with sobre
chastyte.

How plain these places be, yese plainly / and yet he denied them to be
plain enough.

After that we had showed him these places, with many mo so plain, that he
could find no gloses for them, but only fled to his conscience and his
spyryt, unto which only they se med not plain: I began to repete that I had
promised unto him, and he to me / desiring him either to show that I had
not kept my promise, or else to keep his. Then he desired us both to be
content with his answer. wherefore seeing no more trust in his word and
promise, nor no better hope of amendment, we were purposed to depart / save
only that we abode to se the end of an other man's communicacyon with him /
wyshynge rather than hoping any good to ensue. After whose communycacyon
ended, we reso^ted again unto him, not to dyspute any more with him by
authorite, against all which he would ever at length use his own conscience
for a shote anchor, when all reason and craft failed, but only to lament with
him his folysh or rather malycyouse obstynacie and arrogance, so myche
estemynge his own fantasye, that none authoryte might drive yt from him / not
of those whose learning and virtue he could not doubt of, having by their
paynfull death and sharp life, borne wytnes to that doctrine which they
taught, and whom god by many miracles has declared for holy sai^tes /
requy^yng him to follow rather their judgment then his own fantasye. ye have
not yet showed said he that this was their doctrine. we have showed said I so
plain words of theyrs for our faith, that ye can not yet deuyse how to make
them agres with your opinion.

Moreover said we there is with us one authoryte passing all these, ye spirit
of god promised to Christ's church, which teaches all men being in the
unity of Christ's church, to confess as we do.

Here began a new disputacyon, what was ye church, whyther known or
unvisible, comen of both good and bad, or else of electes only. For he said
that the faith was ever preserved among the electes. when I asked him how tha^
ye fathers which allege the authorite of ye church, knew the church which was
of authorytie, if yt were not a known church / ye by my faith quod he, if yt
were not for your church ye could say very little. For that is your only
shyft when ye come to extremyte.

By my faith you say very troth quod I, for if yt were not by the authoryte of
the church, I se not how we should prove this gospel which we read and
reach, to be Christ's. And than to show him that this word church, not
only spoken of the universal church, but also spoken of any part of the
same, betokens both good and badde, which we ought in any thing to follow,
were like wise to be understood: I asked him how he understood that place,
Tell the church? and whyther he did therein admyt saint Chrisostomes authorite,
expou^dyng, dic ecclesiae, praesulibus scilicet and praesidentibus, which he
said he did. Than I asked him, if god did not by this place authoryse that
church of his come^ to good and bad, and bind us to follow the judgment thereof
/ adding a fore pain if we did not. wha^ he denied not ye / I said* than
must ye needs grant, yt where we be commanded to follow the judgment of the
church, yt is meant of known men of the church, whether they be good or bad.

In small matters (said he) brethern be commanded to follow the judgment of
their curate, and yt is his part to set them at one.

Then he that was with me asked him, where he serned that gloss* and if a
greater matter chanced, whyther yt should have no judge, because of the
greatness / specially having therefore most need to be judged. wheruppon taking
occasyon / I put him his own case for example, saying* if I saw you besye in
teaching such doctrine as offended me, and that you neither would for mine
admonicyon or any other else, leave yt, ought I not than to tell the church
hereof: he said yes. And which church I pray you? your unknown church of
only electes* or else the comen known church of good and bad, of which we
spoke before, and ye governors of ye same, which church than if you dysobeyed,
ought we not than and were we not bound by the word of god, to take you as
(...) hethen.

To this he would not answer dyrectely / but said take me as you will. ^aye
not so said I, we must order our will if we would do well* And for mine own
part I am desyrouse to know the troth. I pray you tell me, whyther I am
bound by the word of god so to take you / and doing otherwise, whyther I
break the commandment of god or no, specially knowing their pryuate
judgment herein to have be preiudycate by the hole catholyque church of
Christ. ye may take me says he here as you^ conscience serves you. But if I
were beyond the sees from whens I came, I should not be condemned for this, and
you should be excommunicate for the contrary.

yet said I, there is but one truth, and one church which professes ye
truth: so that one of these two chyrches is not of god. If our church be not
the right church / then within these few years before these new gospellers
began to instytute their chyrches, and found these new fangle opinions, there
was no church at all. yes said he the faith was ever proserued among the
electes. Then ye young manne which was with me, seeing him thus torn the
whele, and return ever again to that which he had said before, though it
were never so fond and plainly confuted: began to repreue his vanyte, who
could for shame allege that again, which so lately was answered unto / and
exhorted him to declare that either we were not bound to believe ye judgment of
the church, or that their judgment who condemned him dyffered from the
judgment of the hole church / or else to abide no longer in that miserable
estate, wherein that all christen men should be commanded by god to take him as
an hethen / and he him self be in the most dredefull indygnacyon of god. when
he replied again of his conscience, which would not suffer him to admytte
this opinion: we desired him either to enfourme our conscience, or suffer his
to be enfourmed / saying ^^e had for us the word of god, p^^nyshynge with
temporal* shame and also eternal pain, the disobeyers of his church (for
there follows as y^ know quodcu^que ligaueritis etc) and h^ had nothing for
him but his own fanta^ye, and one place of faint Austayne expowned after his
device; contrary to many other most plain and euydent places, wherein the same
author showed him self most constantely to believe that which the church
byleueth and techeth.

when for all this we could have none other answer but of his conscience,
declarynge first unto these which were present the untruth of his promyses,
who though all were showed unto him which he required to be showed, would not
yet knowledge the truth: I prayed god to amend him, entendynge to depart.

But the the other young man calling to remembrance, how boldly Fryth had denied
any ^orshyp to be d^ to the blessed sacrament, though it were in deed ye very
body of our lord / and trustyng yt Frith seeing plainly proved unto him, that
not only some worship, but most high and dyuyne worship were dew to the
blessed sacrament, would not be so shameless as to deny the corporal
presence of our lord, showed him a place of saint Austayn expowndyng Adorate
scabellum pedum ^ius / plainly declarynge by express words, that not only
he sinned not who did worship the sacrament, but that also he sinned who did
not worship the sacrament with ye honor dew only to god. So that if it were
sin not to wurshyp it / the matter was not as he said indyffere^t to believe
whyther it were the very body of our lord. For of necessyte he that worshyppeth
it, must think it our lords very body, or else he commytteth idolotry in
worshyppynge it after such sort. wherwyth he was abashed and said* He
meruayled that saint Austayne would write so / seeing that this honor which
saint Austayne named after the scolemen (the man would feign have seemed
universally learned) was not dew to the body or soul, but only to the
di^ynyte of Christ* which we said that this place therefore of saint Austayne,
showed well that he and all such as alleged saint Austayne to say that the
sacrament was only a sign, lied on him / for he in this place (as the church
byleueth) knowledgeth the son of god to be naturally present there, both
body soul and also godhed, and therefore says that he synneth who does not
honor the sacrament with the honor dew to god only. Then began he after
his old fasshyon to tryfle, saying that god was present every where. Then I
asked whyther because god was present in every place, he durst worship ye post
which stood there, with the honor dew only to god. The shameless wreche
blusshed then ones, and stutted and stamered, deuysynge in the mean season an
answer which was this at length, that he could not think saint Austayne
would write so / and yet said he if it were so (and there advised him a pretty
while) a man might (and after an other like pause) terge versari / but I wolle
not. which I byleued not, seeing him already do ye contrary. And therefore
lamenting first with him for our old acquayntaunce to se him in that case,
and prayenge god that he might knowledge the treuth. I bad him farewell. And
the other which were there departed saving one, whose labor nevertheless and
cheryte showed toward him, auayled nothing, but only to his merit that took
the pain. For this fool persysted still in his vnwylfulnesse even unto the
fire, whyther he went, as I have known and herd many go to the gybet,
cou^terfaytyng an excessive outward gladness, either to lighten their inward
pensiveness, or to make their judges be hated, or else for a glory, because
they would have it said they dyed like men, dyenge in deed most like desperate
wreches of all other.

Thus ye fe what end his pride and arrogaunce, confermed with the deuelyshe
flaterynge of Tyndale and Joye with such other, not only pray sing his
learning unto him more than enough, but also writing that in him and his
success was all their hope and trust, has brought this miserable wreche
unto. which for his own sake only that he should so cast away his soul,
being so derely bought, and destroy by the deuyls instygacyon such good
qualytees as god had geuyn unto him to employe in his service, is much to be
lamented: else I trust and dout not, almighty god has permytted and suffered,
ordered also and dysposed his punyshement and correccyon in example and relefe
of many other. For both yt has abated the pride of those that would have been
heretyques, and somewhat abashed these pryuy enymies of Crist and his church,
who as saint Ambrose says be myche more to be fered then such as expressly
show and profess their malycyous purpose and mind. For these may easily be
overcome or avoided / but the parell is in such, as agreynge with us in ye
most part, in some one point labor to subuerte the troth. For these entyse
the simple people, which herynge them say myche that they know for troth,
believe them in the rest, and so slide in as yt were into the ^ertes of the
unlearned multitude, where the subdayne violence of the other make them redounde
rather then enter. These be like unto the rokes, which hyd under the water, do
hurt before they be spyed. Against the which saint Hierome was compelled to
cry out: would to god this serpentyne generation would either plainly
confess our part, or constantely defend their own, that we might know
whom ^^ ought to love or fle. But now they hate us (says he) as enymyes,
whose says they dare not openly deny. with many other words, sore
complaining of their deuelyshe malice and wylynes. From ye contagyouse
infeccyon of which sort and kind, I beseech our lord for his tender mercy
evermore preserve us / and send the^ yt such be, which with ye corrupt
stynkyng waters of their own diggyng, alter and turn ye sweet taste of gods
holy and most wholesome doctrine into very dedely poison, send them I say the
grace to amend / and leuynge of their own mad inuencyons, with all mekenes,
to harken unto tholde accustomed teaching of his catholyque church. who also
long preserve you to his gracious pleasure, in bodily health and joy
spyrytuall. From Ashare the first day of Auguste, by the hand of faithfully
your own with my service and prayer, Germyn Gardynare.

The fautes escaped in the prentynge of this book.
Fo. page li. the fautes ye ame^deme^tes.
iii. ii. xxii. master masters vi. in margin Anasta. Athanasine ix. ii.
xiiii. orr cushynge or crusshynge xii. i. xiii. say. saw xiiii. i. xi. would
woll xx. i. viii. threshold thresholde^ xx. ii. xxii^. word board xx. ii.
xxiiii. matter malice xxiiii. i. xxi. this a stone this is a stone x vi. ii.
xviii. and. xxiii. Betrame Bertrame xxvii. i. vii. bishop bishops xxviii.
ii. i. knowledged knowledge xxviii. ii. viii. those there xxxii. i. xx. if be
it a if it be a xxxii. ii. xiiii. trecke bekke

Prented by w. Rastell in Fletestrete in saint Brydys church yard. Anno a
Christo nato 1534.

Cum priuilegio.


