TWO Treatises, THE FIRST, Entitled, THE FOOD OF the Faithful.

THE SECOND Deaths welcome.



AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for Iefferie Charlton. Anno Dom. 1605.

To the right honorable Thomas Lord Garrarde, Barron of Garrardes Bromley: and
to the right worshipful his brother in law^, Sir Peter Leigh of Lime, I. C
wishes health, honor, and happiness in this life, and in the life to come.
I Socrates the Athenians Orator (right honorable) calls Nobility the pillar
of learning, and Plato says, that a true noble man is a faithful favorite of
the learned. And for this reason the Philosophers, Orators, Poets, Divines, and
all other writers, consecrate their labors to the Patronage of such worthymen,
who are placed in the high sobeare of greatness, and seated in the Throne of
Nobility, who can with power, and may with authority defend them under the
favorable wings of their safe protection. In like manner, I who am neither
sound Philosopher, nor eloquent Orator, nor good Poet, nor profound Divine,
have presumed to dedicate to your gracious viewes, these two Treatises (whose
rudeness are far unsuitable to wear the Liueries of your names) for two
especial considerations. The first is, because you two be the great fauorits
of learning, and in you live the sparks of Augustus liberallitie, to cherrish
the Muses, who now for want of succor are almost famished. The second is, which
moves me most of all, to give you a living memorial of the loving duty I
bare to your honored deceased mother, unto whom for many singular good favors,
I will ever recognize my self infinitely bounden, for whose sake I suppose I
have passed the bonds of modesty in this presumptious attempt. Yet
notwithstanding persuaded by my friends earnest entreaties, and moved by that
private duty which I owe, to that virtuous Lady your mother (who is now a
cohabitor with God) I have emboldened my bashful nature, and as he says,
Commasculaui frontem pudoris limits transilire. Accept therefore (most
renowned Patrons) this grateful testimony of my duty, and thankfulness,
which I tender for manifold benefits unto you both, whom I make as honorable
twinns united in the union of my zealous, and duteous affection: I confess it
is a trifle, nor a fit object to be be viewed by your severe eyes, yet I hope
you will receive it as a token, and earnest penny of my long concealed love,
and duty, according to your accustomed, and incomparable gentelnesse: Phillip
of Maccedon did accept a bunch of grapes given by a Countryswaine; and Apollo
did vouchsafe to take a wodden dish as a great gift. So I trust that you
(sithence my ability serves to no better purpose, nor you expect a kind of
remuneration) will receive it in courteous manner, and grant this abortiue brat
(which should have wanted a Godfather, had I not chosen you) to shelter under
the defensive shadows of your patronage, giving it the Alms of your
approouiug commendation, to cloth the naked beggarie of his threed-bare
invention: which if it shall please your good honors to cover like Minerua,
this forsaken deformed Owl, under the sure target of your tumon it shall be as
secure from Critickes, as Vlis^es was free from the Greeks, being defended
with Ajax buckler. So hoping of your wished defense, I commit it with all
submission to your protection, saying, that which Gratian said to his Patron,
Vobis soluo quod debebam, et ad huc debeo quod soluam. So duly, and daily
praying for you, and yours, I humbly take my leave.

Your honors in all duty to command. I. C.

Honoratissimo viro Domino Gerardo, omnibus sapientiae, et virtutis luminibus
clarissimo.
TE mea si tantum anderet sperare patronum
Gera^dum optaret (rustica Musa) sibi.
Gerardu^? (at que^, phoebe viru^) qui lumine me^tis
excellit Phoebum, Phoebigenumque chorum.
O quem te memorem? Phoebum? tu doctior illo.
Mercurium? linguae laurea danda tibi.
Catonem? long superas consultus agendo.
an Maecenatem? laudat Apollo magis:
Ergo Gerardus eris, quo dicinomine gandent,
Macenas, Phoebus, Mercuriusque, Cato.
MIte supercilij iubar, iubarque sororum,
Et decus Auglorum, presentis gloria saecli,
Spe maguus, fama melior, virtutibus amplus,
Gratus ades, nostris falix allabere captis,
Vine meis, sed nec curabis vivere mecum,
Aeternum victure tuis (Gerarde) trophais.
Ad dignissimum, et clarissimum Equitem Petrum Leigh.
BEnignitate, gloria,
honor, claritudine,
tuum praeesse cateris
sit omen. Places Deo,
places patriae omnibusque:
faues literis, foues literatos:
hae metae honoris: macte:
A Spice laetanti librum (dignissime) vultu,
quo fallas vitae taedia longa breuis.
Hic Christus satiat sitibundas sanguine fauces,
et prandere iubet corpore famelicos.
Accipe gratuito caelestia fercula Christi
hospitium caelum, Christus et hospes erit.
Mensa itidem caelum, conuiuae deniquae sancti,
vt sedeas, gustes, prouocat ipse Deus.
Nilest quod renuas, nam dantur pharmaca me^tis,
haec medicina animae, pharmacopola Deus.
Qui te faelicem, lata^tem, glorify antem,
corpore, mente, polo, per sua philtra dabit.
Ergo laudetur, placeat, metuatur, ametur,
hospes et hospitium, pharmacepola, Deus.
To the Reader.
MAy I presume (gentle Reader) out of my penury, to throw a mite into the
Treasury of the Church, when others which have larger talents, bury the^ in
silence, nor will let their labors be perused by the common Argos of the
ungrateful multitude: yet I like a blind Babius, have boldly attempted this
hasty birth of my weak brame to come abroad, hoping that all courteous Readers
will shroude it under their favorable wings, and suffer these feare-blasted
fruits to shelter under the defensive shadows of gentle acceptance: So
blushing that this new spoone-feathered ^mbrion of my rude Invention, has so
soon passed the limits of immodestie, humbly desiring you to pardon my too
rash audacitie, I take my leave.

S. G.

Ad Lectorem.
FAelices animae pascuntur semine verbi,
Ambrosia^ comedunt, nectare deinde potant.
Hic gratia sluvij spatioso vortice stillant,
Et vita pleno gurgite currit aqua.
Si sitis? mimergas fauces in flumine sacro.
I seris? inuenias ferula lauta Iouis.
Ad hanc te mensam voco, caena parata,
Tantum dicenda est gratia, gratis habes.
Tu gratus conuiua Deo, gratiosus et ille,
Qui te commuam reddidit angelicum.
The food of the soul.
John cap. 6. verse 35. I am the bread of life, he that comes to me shall not
hunger, and he that belieueth in me, shall never thirst.
WHen our Savior Christ had performed that heavenly miracle in feeding five
thousand men with five loves, and two fishes, the people which were satisfied
with that gratis cheer, did follow him to the City Capernaum. But when Jesus
perceived their hypocrisy, that they were fleshly and carnal hearers, and as
a good Writer says, Parasiti qu^s patina conglutinat, hypocrites and belly
Gods, who^ the trencher does make friends to Christ: like unto him which when
he sweat over his trencher, yet cried out, O quanta patimur pro amore Christi,
Lord what suffer we for the love of Christ! Jesus therefore reprehendeth these
men, saying, Verily, verily I say unto you, ye seek me not, because ye saw
the miracles, but because ye cate the loanes and were filled. Yet they
obstinatly answered him, What miracles have thou done? have thou commanded
the Sun and the Moon to stand still, as Joshua did? have thou revived the
widows son as Elias did? have thou made iron to swim as Eliza did? have thou
revived the dead bones as Ezechiell did? have thou been in the Whales belly
with Jonas? or parted the red sea with Moses? Our Fathers did eat Manna in
the Wilderness, Moses gave them bread from heaven to eat: but mark I pray
you how Jesus did answer them. Nay, (says he) Moses gave you not bread from
Heaven, but my Father gives you the true Bread from Heaven: For the bread of
GOD is he which comes down from Heaven, and gives life unto the world:
Then said they unto him, Lord evermore give us this Bread. And Jesus said,
I am the Bread of life, he that comes to me, shall not hunger, and he that
belieueth in me, shall never thirst.

And thus much for the cohaerence, and occasion of our Savior Christ's words:
now particularly as they lie in order: first who is this Bread? Which is
Christ, persona loquens, signified in this word, I. Secondly, what is this
bread? It is the bread of life. Thirdly, the powerful efficacy, and effect
of this bread, declared in these words, He that comes to me shall not
hunger, and he that belieueth in me, shall never thirst.

And first, who is this Bread, which is, Christ: I am the living Bread
which came down from heaven, says Christ. Ego sum panis vitae, et fons aquae
viuae. I am the bread of life, and sountaine of living water: Omnia nobis est
Christus (says Ambrose) si esuris, ipse est panis, si sitis, ipse est fons
aquae viua, si carus es, ipse est lumen, si infirmus es, ipse medicus, si
mortuus, ipse vita gratiae et gloriae. Christ is all things to us, if thou
be hungry, he is bread, if thou be thirsty, he is the fountain of living
water, if thou be blind he is the light, he is the health of a feauered
soul, light of thy life, life of thy desire, heaven of the mind, guide to thy
wandering feet, succorer in necessity, helper in adversity: yea he is all
things to thee: I am the living bread, says Christ. The bread which I give is
my flesh, and the drink which I give is my blood, my flesh is meat indeed,
and my blood is drink indeed. He that cateth my flesh and drinks my blood,
has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the latter day.

O blessed meat, O celestial food: O heavenly Manna: it far excels the
Poets Ambrosia: would to God that all of us daily might eat of this Manna:
would to God that all of us which travel in the Wilderness of this world,
might lodge at such an Inn, where God the father is the host, the holy Ghost,
the hostess, the Church the Inn, the cross the sign, and Christ the meat,
and drink. Aristotell must dine when it pleases Phillip, but here thou may
have store of spiritual food for the repast of thy soul, and take it when it
please thy self. Say but thy grace before this blessed banquet, and then sit
down and satisfy thy hunger. The more thou eatest, the more it increases,
like to Jupiters nectar, the more it is drunk of, the more it ouerfloweth.
Neither needst thou use, the counsel of Lysander, which he perscribed to his
Daughters, to drink with a drop of wine a spunful of water. Thou may drink
as much of this precious wine as thou will, neither can thou infuse any
mixture of water, but of the water of eternal life. This meat is of the like
quality with the stone of Thracia, which whosoever finds, is never after
troubled, so whosoever eats of this meat, is never after grieved: labor
therefore to get this meat which endures to everlasting life. No water was so
good as that which came out of the Rock, no meat so delicate as Manna which
came from heaven, no wine so wholesome as that which Christ made of water at
the marriage of Cana, no oil so precious as that which the Samaritan had, no
robe so costly, as that which the father gave to the prodigal son, no bread,
no food, no meat so profitable, as this meat of the soul which endures to
everlasting life. This meat is water to refresh us, and wine to cheer us,
this is bread to strengthen us, and Manna to nourish us, it is a treasure to
enrich us, and a pearl to adorn us, it is a fire to purge us, and salt to
powder us, it is a trumpet to call us, and wisdom to instruct us, it is a way
to direct us, and life to reuine us, it is a Lantern to guide us, and a
buckler to shield us, it is physic to recure us, and a salve to heal us: if
we have this meat, this Manna, this bread, we shall have no need of Elizens
to increase our oil, no need to beg at the gluttons gate, or to send unto
Naball the churl for food: if we have this treasure, we shall not need to
rob the Egiptians, if we have this pearl, we shall not need the gold of
Ophire, if we have this water, we need not draw water at Jacobs well, Naaman
needs not wash his feet seven times in Jordan, the sick needs not to go
to the poole of Bethesda: for this precious meat, and inestimable Manna will
purge us from all leprosy of sin: So that we shall loath to drink of the
slumbering cup, of the devils sorceries to bewitch us to sin: this bread is
Homers Moly, and Plinies Centauria against all lustful inchauntments: for this
bread, this spiritual food, will so cleanse our minds, and purify our hearts,
that we will always detest the eye-pleasing baits of carnal desires, and
wholly delight our selves with this inestimable treasure: carnal voluptuousnes
is transitory and fading; the minutes that lackey at the heels of time run
not faster away, then do those pleasures: but this spiritual food, this
bread of life, is not like palate-pleasing dainties, whose sugered sweetness
once rellisht is presently gone, but it yields the hungry soul an
everlasting fruition of most rauishing pleasantness: labor therefore for this
bread which brings to everlasting life.

The Bees do labor to get a little honey:

Mella stipant et dulci distendunt nectare cellas.

But this bread is sweeter then honey, or the hony-combe. Our forefathers did
eat of the Acorns of the Oaks, and thought them pleasant meat. And we which
by Ceres huswifrie have learned to bury the reviving grain, do think that
Bread most delicate food. O foolish Caterers, let us rather learn to bury in
our hearts this reviving grain, that in this general famine of true Christian
food, we may with Joseph provide abundance of this bread of life, for the
benefit of our souls: the^ should we not have such spiritual penury, and
dearth of religion, if our hearts were made fertile to bring forth the seeds
of our souls nourishment and sustenance. Labor not therefore for the bread
that perrisheth, but for this bread which remains unto everlasting life.

Ay but will some say, where shall we find this spiritual food, this bread of
life? I tell thee Christ is this bread of life. Ay but will he perhaps reply:
how shall I come to Christ to get this food? I bid thee go to the
scriptures, (Christ's treasury) where thou shall find this Manna, this Bread of
life, there is plentiful store, take and satisfy thy self; neither needst
thou go far to seek it, as David did the Ark of GOD, or as Josias did the
Book of the Law; Neither can thou desire with the Glutton, that one from
the dead might arise to teach thee how to find this bread of life: for now
adays (thanks be given to GOD for it) the dispencers of this bread of life be
plentiful, who may without fear or perril show thee the compendious way to
seek this bread of life. Now Obadia need not fear Queen Iezabell, to bide an
hundred Prophets in a Cave. Moses need not fear King Pharao, and say, I have a
stuttering tongue: Jeremy need not fear the Jews, and say, I am a child: for
now the Ministers of Gods word are maintained, and preserved, and may freely
without danger, and boldly without fear, dispense of this bread of life. Yea
and enery one of Christ's faithful children, although he be not an head in the
mystical body of Christ, or an eye, or a leg, yea if he be but an hand, yet
he may gather of this bread of life, if he be but an ear he may hear of this
bread of life, or a tongue, he may praise this bread of life, or a mouth, he
may receive this bread of life. Labor therefore for this bread which endures
to everlasting life: I am the Bread of life: O Jesus art thou the bread which
give life? Thou art a guide to our ways, a guardian to our persons, a
counselor in our doubts, a comforter in misery, a patron in necessity, and
will thou be bread also? Thou art our keeper, our shepherd, our defender, our
Savior, and will thou be bread also? O Jesus, thou art light unto our eyes,
music to our ears, contentment to our souls, and will thou be bread also? O
loving Jesus, O merciful redeemer, O blessed Emanuell, O Jesus, we give thee
our bodies, our souls, our substance, our wealth, our honor, our friends, our
Children, our life, and all that is ours: Jesus we are not our own but thine,
claim us as thy right, keep us as thy charge, love us as thy children: Jesus
fight for us when satan comes, heal us if he wounds, revive us if he
kills, receive us if we fly into thy merciful bosom: protect us when he
approaches, detect us when he comes: Jesus thou art our food in the day,
thou shall also be our repose in the night: Jesus make us pliable to thy will,
resigned wholly to thy pleasure. Jesus forsake us not least we perrish, leave
us not least we be overcome: Jesus direct our intentions, correct our follies,
erect our cogitations, protect our endeavors: Jesus grant us sorrow for our
sins, fear for thy judgments, love of thy mercies, thankfulness for this
bread of life: I am the bread of life, that is, I am the bread of an immortal
and heavenly life, not of this mortal and earthly life: for else Christ might
rather have said, I am the bread of death, and not of life; for this life is a
living death, and a dying life. But Christ is not bread of such a life. But, he
is the bread of an immortal, and never fading life.

Happy therefore is he which is at this hanquet, and tastes of this bread of
life: Neither is this an imaginary fruition, or a painted banquet, resembling
the hungry cheer, which the birds had that fed themselves with Zeuxis
painted grapes, until with picking at shadows they waxt so lean, that they
were glad with Esops Cock to scrape for a Barley corn. But with this bread of
life thy foul shall be so cherrished, with this Manna thou shall be so
wonderfully delighted, that ever after thou shall loath the flesh pots of
Egypt. Hic panis est corpus meum, this bread is my body, and therefore thou
can not mislike it. O you Ministers, the faithful dispencers of this hallowed
bread of life, feed duly Christ's flock with this bread of life. Christ said to
Peter Pasce, pasce, pasce, feed, feed, feed: Feed with this bread of life,
with your doctrine, with your alms: Feed first with this bread of life, for
it is the bread of salvation: Secondly feed with your wholesome doctrine, that
Christ's sheep do not surfeit with vice, and so need the corsiue of his
correction to amend them. Thirdly, feed with alms: but what shall I press
you to that? Nay I must in conscience spare you, for the case now so stands,
that you are liker to live of alms, then be able to give alms: and therefore
till happier times come, wherein your divine function may more bounteously be
rewarded, I will spare you for that point, for necessity has no law. In mean
while feed with this bread of life, and spend your breath happily in the fires
of devotion, crying alarm spiritual against soul vice, and all wickedness: so
at last you having not defrauded Christ's children of this bread of life, may
have a most bountiful remuneration for your painful labors, and enjoy all
heavenly happiness, and celestial joys, tasting this bread of life, which is
prepared for all Gods faithful children: And thus much shall suffice to have
spoken of the first parcel of my text, I am the bread of life.

Now it follows that I should briefly speak of the powerful efficacy, and
effect of this bread of life. Which by the tongues of Angels cannot be so well
declared, as by these our Saviors words, He that comes to me shall not
hunger, and he that belieueth in me shall never thirst. After a man has
tasted of all manner of delicate meats, yea although he has caroused new
grapes in Alexanders cup, and plentifully paid that daily Tribute to the
stomach, which the law of our nature exacteth, yet that food will not
satiate him for ever, so that he shall never hunger, or thirst after. But this
bread, this bread of life has another power, and effect, for he that eats
of this bread, shall never hunger, or thirst more.

We read in the fourth chapter of Mathewe, that man lives not by bread only:
but I say, man only lives by this bread: for this bread is the bread of
heaven, which gives life unto the world. Therefore be careful to seek for
this bread, for Christ does not forbid us to seek for this bread: he says
in Matthew the sixth chapter; Be not careful what you shall eat, or what you
shall drink, behold the fowls of heaven, they sow not, neither reap, nor carry
into their barnes, yet your heavenly Father feeds them: the Lillies do not
labor nor spin, yet Solomon in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of
these: therefore take no thought, saying, what shall we eat, or what shall we
drink, or how shall we be claothed? but seek ye the Kingdom of heaven, and
all these things shall be ministered unto you: yet in all these exemplified
admonitions of our Savior Christ, he does not forewarne us to be careless
for seeking of this bread of life: will Christ forbid us to seek himself?
Christ is this bread of life, feed on his flesh, and nourish your souls: he
is the oil, and lamp, with which the five Virgins entered into the
Bridgromes chamber. He is the Lord of life, the way of life, the bread of life.

Believe in this Lord, come unto this way, eat of this bread, you shall never
hunger, or thirst after. But some man peradventure may object, can bread
extinguish hunger, and thirst? When a man is dry and thirsty, he does not use
to eat bread: I answer, that the Hebrews do use this phrase, panem
comedere, pro caenare, for to sup, as Master Calvin here well notes: so we
say in the Lords prayer, danobis quotidianum panem, give us our daily bread,
signifying all necessary things belonging to a man; eat of this bread of life,
and you shall not need to say, give us our daily bread, for you shall never
hunger, or thirst after: He that comes to me, shall not hunger: accedat ad
Christum omnis anima: let every soul come to Christ, and he will refresh it:
I will (says he) feed the hungry soul, and refresh all faint hearts. I am the
strength of the feeble, the succor of the hungry, a refuge against evil
weather, a shadow against heat: I am a continual feast, where all hungry and
languishing souls may satisfy themselves with celestial food. O well are
they, and happy shall they be, which sit at this heavenly Table, and eat of
this blessed, and spiritual meat, the price and redemptian of their souls.
Here is Manna which the children of Israel shall never loathe: the wise Ethnic
man's saying upon a feast, here takes no place: Prima cratera (says he) ad
sitim pertinet, secunda ad hilaritatem, tertia ad voluptatem, quarta ad
insaniam: The first cup belongs to thirst, the second to mirth, the third
to pleasure, and the fourth to insobrietie. But at this feast of the Soul, it
is quite contrary, for the more thou drinkest, tanto propriores ad animae
sanitatem, et salutem: thou art so much the nearer to the health, and welfare
of thy soul. Calistenes said to Alexander, that he had rather carouse old
grains with Diogenes in his dish, the^ new grapes with Alexander in his cup,
for of all the Gods (quoth he) I love not Esculapius. But whosoever drinks
in this cup, shall not need Aesculapius physic, for it is a present remedy,
and a sovereign restoratiue against the maladies of a sinful soul: it is an
excellent potion, and a most wholesome purgation to expel the leprosy of a
sinne-seauered soul.

The precious stone Sandastra has nothing in outward appearance, but being
broken, it pours forth beams, like the sun: so this bread of life has not an
outward glea of superexcellent goodness, but taste it, and then it pours forth
such admirable excellency, that thou shall never hunger any more. Therefore the
sheepheards of Christ's flock, should only feed his lambs with this bread of
life.

When they be hungry, they should fill them with this Bread of life. They
should cry unto them always, Come unto Christ, and he will give you the bread
of life, so that you shall never hunger or thirst any more. The Ministers
should have a continual cry, not like the Swallows, which have matutinu^
cantum, a morning song, or as the Grasshoppers, meridianum cantum, a noone song,
or as the Owls, vespertinum cantum, an evening song, or as the Cocks,
antelucanum cantum, a song before morning, but they should have a morning song,
a noone song, an evening song, and a song before day light, to awake Christ's
slumbering sheep to come unto Christ, and eat of this bread of life, so they
shall never hunger or thirst more. He that comes to me shall not hunger, and
he that belieueth in me, shall never thirst.

To believe in Christ, is the total sum of all Christian religion: For our
faith in the death, and passion of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, is the
sure foundation of our salvation. Fides in Christo (says S. Jerome) est
fundamentum humanae saluationis: Faith in Christ is the foundation of man's
salvation: without this faith, all our virtuous actions, and good endeavors, be
in vain. So says S. Augustine, Sine fide falsa est omnis virtus, without
faith, all virtue is in vain: Sine fide impossible est placere Deo, with out
faith it is impossible to please God: Sine fide omnis labor vacuuo. Without
faith all our labor is frustrate. Faith is the porter of heaven gate, and not
Saint Peter.

He that has faith, yea but as much as a grain of mustard seed, shall be
able to remove Mountains: Wherefore let us labor to get this faith, which
being obtained, we shall not need any other treasury: let us lay up this jewel
in our hearts, which will enrich us ever after. The Anotomists say, that in the
heart of a man, there is a little whole, which has nothing in it. VVhereupon a
good writer says, that this little Cabinet and Cell of the heart, God does
reserve for himself, to be a chamber, and a private mansion for him to dwell,
and keep therein: let us therefore bestow upon our gracious Lord this precious
gemme, this excellent ornament to adorn, and beautify this inward chamber.
That when it shall please the Lord to call us to the high star chamber over
our heads, he may Antipelargein, that is, requite us with far more
sumptuous jewels, and richer ornaments, making us cohabitors with Angels, and
the admired paragons of all perfection: let us therefore confidently believe in
Christ, desiting him most heartily, and unfeignedly, to give us of this bread
of life, which is the only restoratiue against hunger, and thirst. Auicen like
a fool said in his Aphorisms, that gold was the best restoratiue. No, no,
this bread of life, is the most heavenly remedy against al diseases: it is a
poison for vice, but a life-giuing potion for virtue. It is the bread of death
for carnal gluttony, but it is the bread of life for spiritual hunger. If
thou be famished, eat of this bread, and it will revive thee: it can heal
all leprosy of sin, and remove all maladies from a sin-sick soul: it is
the nectar of our salvation, and the Lethe of our iniquines: taste but once of
this bread of life, and thou shall ever after loath the sugered cares, and
bewitching damties of lustful affections: look daily upon this bread of
life, and thou shall ever after hide thine eyes, and stop thine ears, which
are now captiued vassailes to behold, and hear the legerdemaine of human
iugling desires: all siren songs of carnal concupisence, and vices
loue-lines, which now are imprinted in thy breast, shall be quight cancelled
out, after thou have once digested inwardly, and thy soul has had an happy
concoction of this bread of life: it purges all the hidden corruption of man's
folly, and gives working pills to vomit up original transgressions: it is the
present remedy for a body, which lies in a consumption of grace, to taste of
this bread of life, with in a short space by the unspeakable hidden operation,
will make a blessed recovery for this languishing creature. If thy soul be
hungry or thirsty, behold two sacramental rivers flowing out of the Paradise
of Christ's body, in the one, thou shall find this bread of life, in the other,
this water of life: taste either of them, and thou shall never hunger, or thirst
more; yea the power of this bread cannot be sufficiently declared by the
tongue of the worthiest Orator. Wherefore let us only satisfy our souls with
this bread of life, whose power, and efficacy our daily Orator Christ Jesus,
has declared unto us in these words, He that comes to me shall not hunger,
and he that belieueth in me shall never thirst. Wherefore to draw to a
conclusion, let us from the bottom of our hearts, desire Christ Jesus evermore
to give us of this bread, that when the glass of our life is run out, and
with the Phoenix we may discern the term of our days, and with the Swanne
discover our fatal end, that it would please him to feed our hungry souls
with this spiritual food, this bread of life, and place them at his heavenly
table, to satisfy themselves with this celestial banquet: yea when our breath
vanishes, our eyes wax dim, and we turned out of the houseroome of this
transitory world, repair unto our doomesday house, where the worms (the dead
men's lawyers) shall take their fees out of us their graue-clients, and our
bodies shall be their bread to satiate their hunger, yet thou (O Jesus) would
vouchsafe to give us thy body, the only bread of life, for to nourish our
hungry souls, that by the wings of a lively faith we may fly up to the
heavens, and enjoy that age of unspeakable pleasures: the eternal father
through the merrits of his dearest son, by the scepter of his holy spirit, so
rule our hearts, that we being righteous as Elias, and our prayers fervent as
those of Elias, they may pierce the clouds, and open heaven, and thence bring
down this bread of life, this dew of divine grace upon us, and satisfy our
souls with this mystical banquet of Christ's body. O Lord inflame our tongues
with the zeal of devotion, that our prayers may be fervent, and may make a
sweet incense to pacify thy wrath, that thou blotting out all our
unworthiness out of thy memory, may graciously hearken to our petitions, and
may grant us this inestimable treasure, the price, and raunsom of our souls
redemption: if the Lions seek their meat of God, if the Ox know his owner,
and the Ass his masters crib, grant unto us a most careful desire to crave
this meat of our souls, and to wait and seek for this bread of life, that
we which were created by a consultation of the Dietie, redeemed with the
precious blood of Christ, sanctified by the holy Ghost, may be partakers of
this blessed bread of life, and in the end, and without all end, sit at his
heavenly table, reigning together with the Trinity in the Kingdom of heaven,
to which be all glory, power, praise, and dominion, both now, and for evermore.

FINIS.
A SHORT AND necessary Treatise, entitled: Deaths welcome.

By Sa: Garey.

AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for Ieffery Charleton. 1605.

To the most puissant Emperor, and Conqueror of all the world, Death, greeting.
LIfe (says the Philosopher) is but a borrowed dream of pleasure, a vision of
delight, a pageant of transitory happiness, and Death is a Harbinger of
eternity, a bringer of felicity, a Messenger of glory; it is a pyrat of life,
and yet a pilot to life, a conductor to the heavenly haven of bliss, the
Angel to keep Paradise, wherein none enters but by the entrance of his fatal
sword. Since therefore (o Death) thou art the Groome-porter to let out life, and
let in life, the remoouer (as Aeschilus calls thee) of worldly sorrows, the
deliverer (as Cicero says) of troubled minds, the laylor which art content
with the fees of our life, to set our Souls at liberty, I here inuit and
welcome thee to the loathsome banquet of my body, fat thy pale cheeks with the
cates of my life, and glut thy hungry appetite with my vital spirits, only
do me this favor, that I may say my Grace at this last supper, and then sit
down upon my dying bed, and drink up the sweet drop of sower life, and the
scraps, and dead bones of my body, and carcass of my flesh take away, and
keep the^ in the doomsday house, until my Soul by the lively wings of faith,
descending from heaven at the general resurrection, be united one to another,
and there enjoy an endless age of pleasures, to the which (o Death) soon
bring me, that I may say to the Worlds misery, which I say to thee, farewell.

Your loving, and until you come living friend, Sa. Garey.
Tu nil rescribas, attamen ipse veni.
A Treatise, entitled Deaths welcome.
THE principal motive which does encourage a man to welcome and embrace
death, is the assured hope of the future life, and of those joys, which he
shall enjoy in the never fading kingdom.

Therefore S. Paul says, Unless the dead be raised again, what aduantageth
it me to have fought with beasts at Ephesus? For unless there were a
resurrection of the dead, and an immortal life to be obtained after this our
pilgrimage, why should we live in ieopardy every hour, and suffer such
persecution in this world, and not rather follow the rules of the Epicures,
eat, drink, for to morrow we shall die: and upon our graves, engraue the
Epitaph of Sardanapalus, which he writ a little before his death,

Cum te mortalem noris, presentibus exple,
Delicijs animu^, post mortem nulla voluptas,
Et venere, et plumis, et caenis Sardanapali.
This I say, were the best pleasing life, to eat with the Epicure, sleep with
Endimion, carouse with Alexander, and with the rich man in the scripture, to
flatter our selves, saying, Soul thou have much goods laid up in store, eat,
drink, and take thy rest. Who would endure the mocks and scorns of the
world, who would be roasted with Laurentius, or martyred with the Apostles,
unless they hoped, that after the vessel of their bodies were seasoned in the
womb of the earth, they should arrive at that blessed undiscovered country,
where is no mediocritie of joy, no end of pleasure. So then we Christians, who
are illuminated with the bright sunny beams of Christ's Gospel, will reject
such Epicurian opinions of godless Atheists, who believe there is no
resurrection, no crown of glory remaining for them after their life is ended:
but S. Paul teaches us an other lesson; For (says he) if the dead be not
raised, then is Christ not risen, and if Christ be not risen, the^ our faith is
in vain. And in another place; If in this life we have hope only, then of all
men we be most miserable.

So Job said, when he was overwhelmed with a sea of sorrow; I am certain
that my redeemer lives, and that I shall rise out of the earth in the latter
day, and that I shall be clothed again with this skin, and see GOD in my
flesh, yea I my self shall behold him, not with other, but with these same eyes.

This point of religion concerning our resurrection, the very Heathen VVriters
have approved, for thus Cato speaking to Scipio and Laelius in Ciceros book
De senectute, says; Do thou think that I would have undertaken so great
labors both by day and night, both at home, and at the war, if my glory
should have had the same limits which my life has? So Plato in his Book De
animae immortalit. says, That the soul of man is immortal, and that it shall
live in another world. So Socrates when he did drink the venomous poison, with
which he should break of the feeble thread of mortality, said: I am sure that
my soul shall live, and that my body shall arise in the second never dying
birth.

But why do I spend my time in a matter so needless to be confirmed, since the
scripture (the oracles of wisdom) be so plentiful of proves: and all VVriters
do defend this undeniable verity: for who can deny, but that there is a
resurrection, and a reward reserved for them, which die in the Lord: if that
this life were the only Paradise where we should take our delights, who would
not desire a long life with Methusalah, or store of wealth with Solomon, or
honor with Haman: but we that know this earth to be nothing else but an
element of sorrow, this world to be but a Hydra of renewing cares, will not
place our eternal affairs, and treasures of heaven upon the gliding stream,
of this uncertain life. For we are surely persuaded, that after the hour
glass of this momentary life is run out, we shall be imparadized in heaven,
and made free Denizers in that celestial Jerusalem, whose joys and praises
do superabound all inhumaine invention to comprehend: for so says Saint
Gregory; No man is able to tell how great, the joys of the heavenly City
shall be. Because (as Saint Bernard says) the dishes of the heavenly banquet
are so great, that they cannot be measured, so long that they cannot be
limited, so many that they cannot be numbered, and so precious, that they
cannot be esteemed. Yet notwithstanding, that those joys be inestimable, and
innumerable, we shall be certain to enjoy them, after this life is finished.
For so says Saint Paul, when this earthly house of this Tabernacle is
destroyed, we know we have a building given of God, that is, an house not
made with hands, but eternal in the heavens: there shall we have joys
without measure, pleasures without end. We shall (says Saint Augustine) see
without weariness, we shall love with-measure, and shall give praises without
end. Then shall David taste how sweet the Lord is. I am sure (says he) I
shall see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. These joys and
the hope of the fruition of that blessed future life, does inbolden and harden
a true Christian against his fatal hour, willingly, and joyfully to leave
this world, (which is valles miseriae, as Augustine says) that he may see the
new Jerusalem, and that blessed company of Angels, whose glory, whose
praises, whose blessedness, whose delights, no tongue is able to express, no
heart to conceive.

Yet that I might give you a taste of those joys, and as it were a shadow of
the Sun shine of that glory, which we shall possess after the dissolution of
our earthly bodies, I will recite a few things, which I have read in the
Scriptures, and in other places concerning the blessedness of that happy
life: for the joys of heaven be the only causes which do move and incite
us, to live godly in this present life. For what does make the laborer to
work, but his hire: The husbandman to toil but the hope of a good harvest.
The Soldier to fight but the hope of victory, and of obtaining of a Garland:
so in like manner, what does stir up mortal men to live religiously, and
lovingly to welcome the approach of death, but only the confident hope of that
hire, which none of them by vertuall merrits shall deserve. The hope of that
good harvest, wherein they shall reap all contentment of mind. The hope of
that wished victory and precious Garland, wherewith they shall be adorned and
flourish like Angelis. These be the true motives and inducements, which do
give alacrity and bold spirits, to undergo the pangs of death willinly, and
encourage and animate all timorous and fleshly minded persons, to be
delighted, and their ears tickled with music in the dance of death, when
they shall seriously consider, they shall pass from death to life, from
mortality to immortality, from misery to joy, from pertill to security, from
bondage to liberty, from adversity to prosperity, and in fine, from hell and
damnation, to blisle and salvation. Howbeit, that I may give some kind of
savor and feeling knowledge thereof, which may allure fearful men
cheerfully to expect, and patiently to suffer the Iayler Death to lock up the
windows of the prison house of their souls, I intend here to rehearse even
word for word, what S. Augustine says in one of his Meditations, namely,
the 22 meditation, speaking of the felicity of the future life.

O life (says he) prepared by almighty God for his friends, a blessed life, a
seeure life, a quiet life, a beautiful, a clean life, a chaste life, a holy
life, a life that knows no death, a life without sadness, without labor,
without grief, without trouble, without corruption, without fear, without
variety, without alteration, a life replenished with all beauty, and
dignity, where there is neither enemy that can offend, or delight that can
annoy, where love is prefect, and no fear at all, where the day is
everlasting, and the spirit of all is one, where almighty God is seen face to
face, who is the only meat whereupon they feed without any loathsomeness. It
delights me to consider thy brightness, and thy treasures do rejoice my
lo^ging heart; the more I consider thee, the more I love thee. The great desire
I have of thee, does wonderfully delight me, and no less pleasure is it unto
me to keep thee in my remembrance. O life most happy: O Kingdom truly
blessed, where there is no death, no end, neither yet succession of time, where
the day continues evermore without night, knows no mutation, where the
victorious conqueror, being joined with those everlasting quieres of Angels,
and having his head crowned with a Garland of glory, sings unto almighty
godone of the songs of Syon. O happy, yea and most happy should my soul be,
if when the race of this my pilgrimage is ended, I might be worthy to see thy
glory, thy blessedness, thy beauty, thy walls, and gates of thy City, thy
streets, thy lodgings, thy noble Citizens, and thine omnipotent King, in his
most glorious Majesty. The stones of thy walls, are precious, thy gates are
adorned with bright pearls, thy streets are of very fine gold, in which there
never fail perpetual praises. Thy houses are paued with rich stones, wrought
with Zaphires, and covered above with massy gold: where none enters that is
not clean, neither does any abide there, that is defiled.

Fair and beautiful in thy delights, art thou O Jerusalem our mother: none of
those things are suffered in thee, that are suffered here. There is great
diversity between thy things, and the things that we do continually see in
this miserable life. In thee is never seen darkness, nor any change of time.
The light that shines in thee, comes neither of Iampes, nor of the Moon,
nor yet of the bright glistering Stars. But God that proceeds of God, and
the light that comes of light, is he that gieueth clearensse unto thee. Even
the very King of Kings himself, keeps continual residence in the midst of
thee, compassed about with his officers and servants. There do the Angels in
their orders, and quiers sing a most sweet and melodious Harmony: There is
celebrated a perpetual feast, with every one of them that comes thither,
after his departure out of this his pilgrimage. There be the orders of
Prophets; there is the famous society of Apostles: there is the inuicible army
of Martirs; there is the most reverend assembly of Confessors, there be the
true religious persons. There are the holy Virgins, which have overcome the
pleasures of the world, and the frailty of the flesh: there be the young men
and women, more ancient in virtue, then in years: there are the sheep, and
little lambs, that have escaped from the wolves, and from the deceitful
snares of this life. There charity reigns in her full perfection. O happy
were I, yea and very happy indeed, if at what time I shall be loosed out of
the prison of this wretched body, I might be thought worthy to hear those
songs of that heavenly melody, sung in the praises of the everlasting King, by
all the Citizens of that so noble City: Happy were I, yea and very happy, if
I might obtain a room among the Chaplens of that Chapel, and wait for my
turn also to sing my Alleluia: if I might be near unto my King, my God, my
Lord, and see him in his glory, even as he promised me, when he said, John,
17. O father this is my last determinate will, that all those, that thou have
given unto me, may be with me, and see the glory which I had with thee before
the world was created. Hitherto are the words of Saint Augustine: Mark also I
pray you, how Saint John describes in his revelation the new Jerusalem, xxi.
And I John (says he) saw a new heaven, and a new earth, for the first heaven
and the first earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea; and I John saw
the holy City new Jerusalem, come down from God out of heaven, prepared as a
bride trimmed for her husband; and I heard a great voice out of heaven saying,
behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and
they shall be his people, and God himself shall be their God with them. And
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain.
For the first things are passed: and there came unto me an Angel, saying,
come, I will show thee the Bridegroom the lambs wife. And he carried me away
to an hie mountain, and showed me that great City, that holy Jerusalem,
discending out of heaven from God, having the glory of God, and her shining was
like unto a stone most precious, as a Jasper stone as clear as Crystal, and
had a great wall and hie, and had twelve gates, and at the gates twelve Angels,
and the names written, which are the twelve tribes of the children of Israel;
and the building of the wall of it was of Jasper, and the City was pure gold,
like unto clear glass; the foundation of the wall of the City, was
garnished with all manner of precious stones; and the twelve Gates were twelve
pearls, and every gate is of one pearl, and the streets of the City is pure
gold, as shining glass: and there is no Temple, for the Lord almighty, and the
Lamb are the Temple of it. There is the pure River of water of life, clear as
Crystal proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb. There is the
tree of life, which bear twelve manner of fruits. There is no night, no
candle, or light of the Sun, for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall
shine for evermore.

Now then tell me (o zealous Christian) what need thou fear death, since
from a most miserable world, thou shall pass to a glorious kingdom, from
miseries to euelasting joys, from labors and troubles, to eternally pleasures
and delights. Will not the hope of these rewards move thee to welcome Death?
The^ hear some more joys, which thou shall possess in the blessed future
life.

The righteous shall shine as the Sun in the kingdom of their Father; They
shall have the inheritance of everlasting life; They shall be as the Angels of
heaven; they shall be in Abraham's bosom; they shall be where Christ is, and see
his glory.

The Apostle S. Paul says, The eye has not seen, the ear has not heard,
nor has it entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared
for them which love him; we shall be with the Lord, and live with him for
ever; we shall be vessels unto honor; we shall have the crown of
righteousness; we shall dwell in the City of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, and see the innumerable company of Angels.

When Christ our chief Shepherd shall appear (says S. Peter) we shall
receive an incorruptible crown of glory; and S. John in his Revelation says;
To him that overcomes. I will give to eat of the Tree of life, which is in
the midst of the Paradise of almighty GOD; The righteous shall neither hunger
nor thirst, heat nor sun shall not hurt them: for he that favors them,
shall lead them, and give them drink of the springing wells: they shall eat,
drink, and be merry for very quietness of heart: yea, their gladness and their
joy shall continue for ever and ever.

The wise (says Daniell) shall glister as the shining of heaven, and be like
the stars world without end. My people (says God) shall dwell in pleasant
peace, and safe holds, and shall have continual rest without disturbance.

Therefore when the Psalmograph did consider the excellent things that are
spoken of the City of God, and of the great City holy Jerusalem, he cried
out, O how amiable are thy dwellings (thou Lord of Hosts) my soul has a
desire and longing to enter into the Courts of the Lord. My heart and my flesh
rejoice in the living God: for who can be delighted with the kennell of this
life, when he shall read what the divine Egle, the Egle of Divines has spoken
of this city, that it is pure gold like unto clear glass: that the streets
are pure gold as shining glass: that the shining is like unto a stone most
precious, as a Jasper stone, clear as Crystal: that the foundations of the
wall are garnished with all manner of precious stones: that the twelve gates
be 12. pearls: that the keepers of the 12. gates be 12. Angels: that the
light is the gloty of God, and the lamb: that the temple is the Lord God
almighty and the lamb: that the inhabitants be pure, and that no unclean
thing enters therein: that the Records be the book of Life: that the water
is a water of Life: that the tree is a tree of Life: and of the mimunities of
the Citizens, that there shall be no more curse, no night, no need of candle,
nor light of Sun: and that the estate of the Citizens is this, that they shall
reign for evermore. Oh who would not willingly diue into the whitlpoole of
devouring Death, and desire that the twisted feeble threads of our life would
every hour untwine, so that we might be received into this heavenly foeietie,
after the joyful diuorcement of Soul and body.

Balaam wished, that his soul might die the death of the righteous, and that
his last end might be like unto theirs: and the Prophet David wished rather to
be a door keeper in the house of God, then to dwell in the tents of the
ungodly; one day in thy Courts is better then a thousand: and blessed are they
that dwell in thy house, they will always be praising of thee.

These joys might allure us to raise our thoughts, above the ordinary level
of this world, and to say with Poule, I desire to be loosed from this body of
sin, and to be with Christ; no music should be so sweet unto our ears,
as the remembrance of death; for death is our faithful conductor to this
Jerusalem: I have often wondered at the folly of our nature, which do so abhor
to hear the mention of our death; yea even aged men whose spring was past,
whose summer spent, and even arrived at the fall of the leaf, and winter
colors had stained their hoary head, whose tired ship did begin to leake
and grate upon the gravel of their grave, yet how timerously they were
amazed, when they perceived, that the trumpet of death began to give his last
sound. O foolish imbecillitie, who would not willingly be luiled in deaths
slumbering fits, and close up the day of his life, that from a mortal day he
may come to an everlasting morrow. It is they will say themselves, the greatest
delight and pleasure in this world, to hear the Nightingales recount their
tunes with dainty variety: to see Valleis compassed about with silver Rivers.
To see meadows enameled with eye pleasing flowers; to see Gardens bedecked with
roses and lillies, and pleasant shades. Or to hear the Lambs crave their Dams
comfort, with their bleting oratorie, yet these be trifles: from heaven you
shall hear the Angels singing Alleluia, which will surpass the music of
Nightingalls: there is the Eden of content: the Paradise of pleasure. Will you
have pastures to pastime in: Mark what Saint Gregory says, pasma electorum
sunt vultus Dei, vbi erit perpetua latitia et securitas: Do thou delight in
shepherd and Lambs? there is our watchful shepherd Christ, and there is the
Lamb of God, craving day and night for the comfort of our souls: yet I will
sail a little further into the broad Sea of these celestial joys. It will
be no small joy unto us, when our souls shall be presented before the
Throne of the most blessed Trinity, by the hands of the Angels, and they
placing them before the Tribunal seat of almighty God, shall declare our
good works, our alms deeds, our prayers, our fastings, our innocence of
life, our temperance in diet, our crosses, our tribulations, torments,
injuries, and afflictions we have suffered for Gods sake. Saint Luke writes
that when holy Tabitha, the great alms giver was dead, all the widows and
poor people came about the Apostle Saint Peter, showing him the coats, and
garments she had given them, wherewith the Apostle being moved, made his
prayer to almighty God, for that so merciful a woman, and by his prayers he
raised her again to life. Now what a joy and gladness will it be to us, when
the Angels shall rehearse our virtues, and good deeds, which we have
performed in our lise. Then shall we fully perceive the value of virtue; there
the obedient man shall talk of victories; there shall the Kings come laden
with the spoils of honor. There shall the valiant men enter with triumph,
which have conquered satan and all his devises. There shall the innocent
Virgins enter, which have lived chastely in the world, adorned with Garlands of
Lillies and Roses; There shall the whole Court of heaven embrace with kisses
religious bishops, which have been watchful shepherds over the whole flock
of Christ: There shall the constant Martirs be received, which have suffered
martyrdom for the Gospel; There shall the aged men enter, which have with
discretion and wisdom passed their days on earth; There shall the virtuous
young men receive there reward: There virtue shall be honored according to her
merit. Oh how sweet and sauorie shall the fruit of virtue then be. Sweet is
the fountain to the weary traveler, sweet is rest to the tired servant,
sweet is the cold evening after a hot sunny day; yet much more sweeter will it
be to the faithful servant of almighty GOD, and Saints of the heavenly
City, to have peace after war, continual quietness after pains, joy
after trouble, security after danger.

Then shall not the children of Israel need to fear Pharao. Then Mardocheus
need not fear proud ambitious Haman. Then Joseph's feet shall not be pinched
and hurt in the stocks.

Then the VViddowe of Sarepta may cast away her cruse and her meal, for she
shall be satisfied with heavenly manna. Then may the blessed Father Saint
Jerome take his rest, who in his watchings made no difference between days
and nights, beating his breast in his devour prayers, and fighting against the
violence of the old serpent.

Then Jeremy need not renew his tragical note in his prophecy, saying; O that
my head were a well of water, and my eye-lidds fountains of tears, that I
might weep day and night for the slain of the Dangliters of my people.

Then may the stout hearted Soldiers lay down their swords and spears, for
there is a region of peace, and a place of tranquillity: for every one in that
City, enjoy the fruit of sweet peace.

That City is situated above all the Elements, where no clouds can arise, no
stormy winds can blow, no tempetuous waves can come. There is the lamb of God
Christ Jesus, embracing his dear spouse the Church, saying, My sister, my
spouse, how fair and how pleasant art thou, o my Love in pleasures: thy lips
(my spouse) drop as honny combs. Honey and milk is under thy tongue: my spouse
is as a Garden enclosed with Roses and Lillies, o Paradise of Gardens, o well
of living waters, o my vvel-beloued, thou art the fairest among women. O
joyful time, when we shall see face to face Christ Jesus, and hear the sweet
communication between him and the Church his beloved Spouse.

Blessed are they (says holy Tobias) that love thee, and enjoy thy peace.
Wherefore Bernard might well say, If any man should taste in his heart, how
great the pleasantness of the heavenly reward is, then every thing in the
earth will seem bitter, every comely thing shameful, and all joy
sorrowfulnes. Also in another place he says, In comparison of heavenly joy,
all pleasure is grief, all delights sorrow, all sweetness bitterness, and all
honor horriblenesse. Wherefore I will exhort all godly Christians, with the
grave sentence of blessed S. Augustine, where he says, O man be fervent in the
love and desire of Eternal life, where every action is without labor, rest
without idleness, praise without disdain, life without defect; where there is
no want, but all superfluity, where there is no good hidden, and no evil
present.

Oh into what an Ocean of joys my joyful tongue leads me, my eyes wax dim
at the sunshine of this glory, my pen begins to tire, and yet I will not
like a badde Historian, speak of the meanest ioyet, and cut of the course of
the greatest happiness. Therefore my tongue, mine eyes, my pen, each of them
shall sing a part to make up the harmony of this excessive felicity. It is an
unspeakable pleasure to a christian when he shall arrive at this blessed haven,
and shall turn back, and look upon the course of his navigations, wherein he
has sailed in the tempestuous sea of his former life: when he shall remember
the waves wherewith he has been tossed, the rocks which he has escaped, the
Pirates, (namely the devil and his Angels) whom he has happily avoided. When
he shall consider this transitory world to be but a dungeon of sinners, where
the growth of Virtue is poisoned with the puddle water of penury, where rancor
and despite chiefly reigns, and all goodness is ouer-whelmed in malice,
where virtue is a handmaide to sugared hypocrisy, smooth malice, hidden
ambition, smiling envy, wicked tyranny. Besides, when he shall behold so many
thousand souls descending into hell, and that it has pleased the omnipotent
King, among so many millions of damned persons, thou shall be one of that
predestined company, which should obtain such inexpressible felicity and
glory. Yea what a glorious sight will it be to thee, to see so many persons
having on their heads golden Crowns, and to see the Kingly seats of heaven
filled up, and that City builded, and the noble Jerusalem repaired again. Yea
what a joy will it be to thee, to see Archangells, Angels, the souls of
Saints, the company of Martirs, the Sun, the Moon, the glistering Stars,
and all other things, each one of them in their course and quality, show
themselves obedient to his will, giving veneration, glory, and praise, singing
this sweet song, praise, and honor, and power, and glory be unto him, that
sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for evermore.

Is not this a glorious company? a joyful country; a happy life; who shall
be these so fortunate, and so happy, that are elected for thee. Happy shall I
be, if the remnant of my posterity, might come to see the clearenes of this
Jerusalem. To behold her gates wrought with Emeraldes, and Zaphires, and all
the circuit of her walls built with precious stones, her streets paued with
polished marble, and in all her parts shall be sung Alleluia. It seems a
presumption to desire thee, and yet I will not live without the desire of thee,
for by the grace of God, (which grace I hope in Christ shall more and more
daily abound in me) I purpose to refuse no labors, pains, and travels, so
that at the end of my natural life my soul may rest with my Redeemer. Let
tribulations afflict me: let diseases molest me; let my days be consumed with
weeping, and tears always run down by my cheeks; let me always drink
the bitter wormewoode water of adversity; let lamentation and mourning always
accompany me: let me be persecuted with captivity. Nay let my head be cut off
with John Baptist, or let me be stoned to death with Stephen: yea let my eyes
be pulled out of my head, or my flesh be torced with pincers; let vexations
pour down as thick as hail, so that all that pass by may behold and see:
if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow. Yet all these griefs would I
willingly sustain, if it would please my God, that when pal^ death shall shut
up the eyes of my body, that my eyes of my soul might still behold, and look
upon my Red emer. And that when I shall be stripped out of this mortal weed,
and turned both out of the service, and houseroome of this world, yet at last I
may arrive at that blessed Haven, the celestial Jerusalem, there to be placed
among the glorious company of the holy Angels and Saints, and receive an
immortal and incorruptible crown of glory. For what will it grieve a man, to
have a troublesome-night, so that joy comes in the morning. The Mariner will
not regard a short tempest, so that presently after the storm, there follows
a quiet calm: even so should it seem to us. Although for a short season we
suffer sorrow in this world, yet for that short sorrow we shall reap
everlasting joy. Therefore let us constantly endure to the end of our sorrows,
for he that endures to the end, shall be saved. Would we not esteem him a
foolish man, who would refuse to suffer patie^tly the tortures of one moment,
so that after, he should enjoy perpetual happiness.

Well says S. Augustine, So great is the fairenes, and pleasure of Eternal
light, that if one might not live there longer then one day, for this only,
innumerable years full of the delights of this life, and abundance of
temporal goods, he might rightly and worthily be contented. For in heaven, we
shall have light without end, brightness without comprehension, peace without
invasion. In this world our senses are benumbed, and frozen with the extremity
of miseries coldness, but in heaven there shall such unexpected bliss shine
upon us, that all the parts of our body and soul shall be miraculously
cherished with the lightning of selicitie. In this world, if the whole
worthiness of all humane creatures were comprised in the globe of one man's
breast, yet were not that one man so happy, as the least Saint in Heaven. In
this world we are but as it were ships without a Pylot, tumbling up and down
in uncertain waves, till we run upon the rocks of self division, or be
overthrown by the stormy wind of foreign invasion: In this World we are
but as it were tenisbals, tossed by the racked of injurious fortune, but in
heaven we need not fear the tempests of adversity, for there we shall dwell
with Saints united in perfection; there we shall taste the golden fruit of
blessed souls: there we shall have Christ a guide unto our ways, and a
Guardian to our persons; there Christ shall be light unto our eyes, music unto
our ears, sweetness to our taste, contentment to our souls.

The state of the Church militant, here in this world, is like the Arc
floting upon waters, like a lilly growing among thorns, like Christ's ship in
the 8 of Matthew, covered with waves, and yet not drowned: But in the second
world it shall be triumphant, where it shall gloriously reign for evermore.
Man in this world is but an Anatomy of misery, or a spectacle of a dolorous
ending tragedy, but in the world to come, he shall be a paragon of glory, and
a pattern of endless happiness. Therefore, since the reward of our godly
endeavors, shall be so well recompensed in the future life, let us abandon all
vicious pleasures, and never be recalled to the vomit of carnal desires: Let
us fight manfully under the banner of our grand captain Christ, until we
vanquish all his enemies, the denill and his angels: and for that good service
performed in Christ's quarrel, we shall receive at his hands a large pay,
namely, an everlasting life, and an immortal crown of glory.

Now therefore, since I have (as it were) lighted a candle to the glorious
sunshine of this heavenly glory. which cannot any way be better shadowed out,
with the best pensil, then by covering it over with the veil of silence, I
will speak but very little more concerning this happiness, but will only
compare the torments of hell to the joys of heaven. For as beauty seems more
excellent, when it is paralelled with deformity, so will heaven show more
glorious when it is compared to hell. For as it is an axiom with the
Logicians, Of contrary things the reason is contrary: so in this contrariety
in heaven, and in hell, he which does perceive the joys in heaven, may easily
conjecture at the torments in hell.

If the joys in heaven cannot be expressed by the tongues of Angels, then
the torments of hell cannot be declared by the best Orator. For as those two
places be distant in quality, so their joys and pains be equal in
quantity. If that the joys of heaven be infinite, the pains of hell must
consequently follow to be infinite. Now then, since these two opposite places
be distinguished with such a contrariety, the joys of the one every man
would gladly enjoy, the pains of the other, every man would willingly eschew,
it follows that this is the greatest impediment for a man, not willingly to
welcome death, because he is wonderfully afraid, least he should be punnished
for his sins in these hellish torments: these torments do engender such a
fear in a man, that he horridly quaketh at the mention of death.

For when a man shall recount with himself that he offered the May crop of his
life to the devil, that he sacrificed his blooming years to the service of
the devil, and that now the flowers of his youth are blasted, the fruit
perrish, the body of the Tree grows to decay, then he shall think with
himself, that he being void of the sap of good fruits, shall become fuel
for hell fire. When he shall lie on his departing bed, burdened with the heavy
load of his trespasses, and vexed with the worm of conscience, and feeling
the crampe of death wresting his hearts strings, and ready inpathed in his
finally voyage, and not far from the period of his days. Oh how he shall be
distracted in his senses, when he should make a free gift of his body and soul
to God, and by bequeathment to dispach the whole menage of all eternity, and
of the treasures of heaven: Oh how shall he be mazed, when he shall consider,
how the morning pleasures of his youth lulled him a sleep in sin, how the
violent heat of the noone of his age did provoke and excite sinful affections,
and therefore in the cool and calm of his evening, how can he hope to retire
to a Christian rest, and close up the day of his life with a clear sunset,
wanting the light of grace, without which every one shall abide in everlasting
darkness. These considerations I say, will make a man tremble at the mention
of death: for peccati stipendium mors, the reward of sin is death, and these
torments in hell fire; therefore when he shall think with himself, that the
most virtuous, can scarce attain to heaven in mountenance of years, whose
lives were died in the beautiful grain of virtue, how then shall he wretched
sinner hope to obtain heaven, since all his life time he has perseuered in
sin, and that now death having taken away ability in sinning, and left him
to the lees of his dying days, how shall he believe to be infranchised in that
heavenly City, which is not so penurious of friends, that it should be made
salable for the refuse and reuersion of every sinners life. A King which has
lived like an Epicure here upon earth, and in nothing took delight, but like
a Nero to oppress the innocent; shall not enjoy the heavenly happiness. (For
as Bernard says) It is impossible to join present, and future delights. And
as the same father in another place adds. He that is fed with earthly
pleasures, is counted unworthy of eternal joys; The shining title of worldly
glory, shall nothing help to the happiness of that life: they be like bladders
which are puffed up with the wind of prosperity, and only do affect the
smoke of vain glory; they do not observe the precept, given by Moses unto
Princes, Princes must read the Law all the days of their lives, and as
Joshua, let not the book of this Law depart out of thy mouth, but record
therein day and night. Their Laws should be axioms, arising out of their own
deeds, but they themselves are the readiest to infring the same. Now then when
the lease of the lives of these Stewards, who hold all their possessions by
service, is expired, and shall be summoned by death, to appear before their
Landlord to give there accounts, how beneficially they have employed their
talents, then they will begin to have a feeling sense of there own misery,
seeing how ill they did govern the people, over the which the Lord had made
them overseers.

We read that David being chosen of God, to feed his people in Jacob, and his
in heritance in Israel, did feed them according to the simplicity of his
heart, and guided thee by the discretion of his hands. These David's be few now
adays; and as the Poeth says,

Rex bonus est sapiens, qualem vix repperit vnum,
Mellibus e cunctis hominum consultus Apollo.
A good King and wise, such a one as Apollo, being asked counsel of, could
scarce find one among all men.

Yet thanks be given to God, who by his blessed providence has elected a
second David to reign over us, whose loins are girded with righteousness,
and faithfulness the buckle of his raines: in whose throne Astraea sits weying
every man's merrits by the equal balance of their actions, whose mind is
environed against vice, with the clear streams of sweet virtue. And
therefore, since it has pleased God to set a temporal and transitory crown of
glory on his head, he needs not fear, but that in the world to come, he shall
be crowned with a far surpassing weight of glory, and there shall taste the
heavenly Manna, and drink the nectar of joy: But as for other Princes, who
here do taste the Roses of prosperity, shall in the world to come, for their
wickedness drink the worme-wood of adversity: when they shall recount with
themselves, that they have touched the Lords anointed, and done his Prophets
harm, injured the fatherless, oppressed the innocent, profaned the sanctuary
of God, and only delighted themselves with the vain pomp of this world, how
can they hope that their impure souls should be translated to this pure
place of endless comfort? So likewise to descend lower by a lineall degree,
throughout all the pedigrees of men. Behold the Ministry, who have the
ouer-sight of our souls, see if they can boldly run unto the goal of death,
who have not led their lives according to their enjoined vocations. The
Ministers, which should have two eyes, (as Gregory says) one of famous
learning, the other of an upright and godly life; many of them have one of
these eyes, but want the other. And as the same Gregory says, Many declare
that in words, which in life and manners they go against. These have the eye
of learning, but want the eye of honest life. Yea many are blind of both
eyes, but they be worse then the former: For the Ministers should by their
endeavors and honest conversation, reclaim the wicked from the brink of
perdition, they should invent medicinable receipts against the gostly maladies
of sinners: they should in the general famine of spiritual food, prepare
with Joseph abundance of the bread of Angels, for the repast of their souls.

Yea, they should study spiritual Physic, and be traveled in the scrutinie
of the souls diseases, and be acquainted with the beating and temper of every
man's pulse: they should purge their flock from the leaprosie of sin; they
should lift up their voice like a trumpet, and show the people their offenses,
and the house of Jacob their sins. They are the Prophets of the Lord, that
shall bring the messages from the Mountains, and proclaim peace. They be the
light of the World, the salt of the earth; they be watchmen, which for Sions
sake should not hold their tongues, and for Ierusalems sake should not cease.

Now when they shall remember that they have been dumb dogs, which did not
bark, when the wolves did tear their flocks. And as Gregory says, Thou have
seen the wolf and have escaped, saying, by chance I have escaped all: Thou
have escaped because thou have kept silence: Thou have been here in body, thou
have escaped in spirit.

Or as Saint Bernard says, when they shall remember, they were Ministri
Christi, sed serni anti Christi, or call to mind the straight commandment
given by christ to Peter, to feed Christ's flock, and they have been rather
wolves the^ shepherds, which did rather fleece and oppress them, then protect
them: when they did imitate, Soldiers in habit, husbandmen in gain, indeed
they were neither, because they did neither fight against the Wolves as
Soldiers, nor as husbandmen labor in Gods Vineyarde, nor as Clerks preach
the Gospel in the Church, and while they desire both, they confound both. As
Bernard says: therefore their consciences will be perplixed, their minds
distracted, nor shall they perceive, the melodious harmony of excusing
thoughts, or persuade themselves of that comfortable assurance, that the
opening of the book will show, that their names are written in heaven, or
shall they taste that continual feast, of a clear conscience, the souls
blessed banquet; they shall wring their hands for grief, when they might have
clapped for joy, they shall tremble, when they might have triumph^d, they shall
weep, when they might have laughed, they shall wish that the Mountains would
cover them, and hide them from the sight of God: and these be the causes, why
so unwillingly they yield to die, yea even when their forces languish, their
senses impair, their body droupeth, and on every side the ruinous cottage, of
their frail body threatens a fall, yea when they may behold their grass
wasted, their grapes gathered, their house broken, and nothing remaining but
the stock of the grapes, the skin of the flesh, and but one only blast of
life, yet notwithstanding they will say with Callimachus, I am too old to live,
and too young to die; and they are afraid to close up their eyes, when they
hear the Bell of death knelling in their ears: but had rather fight still in
this Camp of misery, then by deaths paspot, to be conducted out of this
world. They had rather with Aristippus prolong life, then with Socrates yield
to die; and the causes be these, because they have not been careful in their
functions, but have been careless in their lives, dissolute in their actions:
they were not the instruments of God, having a sound to teach well, but the
bones of the devil, because they did want the feeling: and therefore they
having devoted their lives, only to the devil, their conscience do assure
them, that they having gorged the devil, with the fairest fruits of their
lives, God will not feed upon the scrappes of his leauings, and gleane the
reproof of his harvest, and therefore they be unwilling to depart out of this
life.

But to pass over the spiritual governors, and come to ciuell Magistrates:
The Lawyers they make the laws and statutes limetwiggs, to catch the simple,
which should be as it were Sea-markes to avoid shipwreck, for ignorant
passengers; they studdie for to invent, policy, how to palliate committed
disorders. The Judges imitate Samuels songs, which did not walk in their
fathers ways, but took bribes and rewards to pervert right. The widows
complain, the Orphans are wronged, the poor are not regarded. And (as
Isidorus says) through the love of desire, laws are of no force, he that
has to give, has also to govern. And (as Saint Augustine says) a fat Hen
does more prevail with Judges then justice, and money more then innocence.
They will not regard any plea, unless the evidence contains golden eloquence.
But there is another commandment given them in Deutronomie, Wrest not the
law, nor know any person, neither take any rewards, for gifts, blind the wise,
and pervert the words of the righteous: and as there is a common axiom among
the Canonists, Ni nire non debet esse acceptio personarum: the Judges, and
Lawyers should not regard the great men more then the poor, nor the plaintifes
bags, more then the defendants, in forma pauperis. Woe be unto them that make
unrighteous laws, whereby the poor are oppressed. Woe unto that abominable
City, whose Rulers are as roaring Lions, whose Judges are as Wolves in the
Eucning: these threatenings out of the Scripture, will make the Lawyers timorous
to die, when they shall recount with themselves, how often they have trangressed
these divine laws, how many bribes they have received to give unjust sentence,
how often they have stopped their ears, against the cry of the needy, how often
they have heard the accuser, and would not hearken to the accused. Rejecting
Alexanders grave judgment, who did always stop one of his ears, when any one
did complain again another, saying, this care I lend the accuser, the other I
reserve for the excuser. When I say they shall record their public and
private injuries, their conniuence at manifest faults, and too much severity
at small crimes, their unlawful condemnations, and their partial absolutions,
I say these committed offenses will so examinate them, and strike such a terror
into them, when the stream of their life runs at a low ebb, and the date
of their life here in this world is expired, and they entering into the
kalends of death, then they will sit quiuering for fear, and knock at the
door of their conscience, and there summon a quest of inquiry for their
sins, and when they shall come to appear at the Bar of consideration, and
there be arrained, they shall answer as prisoners at the Bar, guilty,
guilty. And this is the reason why they are so unwillingly to depart out of
this life: in like manner the Tradesmen, who are customers to the world, who
have gotten false ware suitable to the shop of such Merchants, whose traficke
is to toil, whose wealth trash, whose gain misery: they I say, are unwilling
to depart this life, because by their fraudulent dealings, they have purchased
an ill conscience, which does make them sleep like the Nightingalls, who
always sleep with a pricked against their breast, so do they sleep, or rather
slumber, having a pricking conscience. It always registreth their misdeedes,
showing them their offenses, and so they have no confident perswasiion that
their election is sure. Also the husbandmen, who have long time tilled the
earth, and by the sweat of their labors, have increased their worldly
possessions, and now perceive by the infirmity of their body, they be not
able any more to endure the churlish entertainment of the world, or to prolong
the tedious line of life, and recount with themselves what infinite pains they
have undergone, for to obtain worldly riches, and never labored one hour in
the field of Gods Church, to possess beauenly treasures, sowing the seeds of
repentant sorrow, and watering them with the tears of contrition, that they
might reap a more beneficial harvest, and gather the fruits of endless
comfort.

Then they will think with them selves, that it is an unseasonable time to
alter the course of their vnthriuing husbandry, when in the April of their
years they might have brought forth the flowers and fruits of salvation, and
these be the causes why they be unwilling to depart out of this life, and dare
not say with father Simeon, O Lord command that my Soul may depart in peace.
Nor dare not cry out with David, the pyller of mother Sion, who lived in the
childhood of the Church, when the cloud of the Law did ouershadow the
appearance of the Sun in fullness of comfort, before Christ had opened the
storehouse of joy; and yet he being weary of his life, and the burden of his
body, cried out, Oh how long shall I live in this prison? And Paul, the
notable organ of the holy Ghost, sings the same long with David, saying; o
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin? So did
Father Jeremy wish, that the womb had served for his tomb. And so did Esaias
be wail his birth, and murmured against the knees that held him up, and the
breasts that gave him suck. For they knew that the world was but a sea of
sorrow, and our life like unto a new ship put into the sea, fleeting to the
bottomless swallow, where as the tempestuous winds and waves of this world do
beat upon, and always threaten a drowning of life: but when this frail
mortal life seems to have broken her wings by the force of death, then
presently as immortal she takes her flight, and lands at a good port: Why
therefore should we desire to add more feathers to the wings of time, since
after our dissolution we shall be made lively members, fully knit in our body
Christ Jesus.

Ay but a man will say, if I were fully persuaded, that I should be made
partaker of this beauenlie life, I would willingly desire to die, and wish that
the feeble threads of my life would every hour untwine: But now my guilty
conscience does accuse me, my ill led life does terrify me, and all my
wicked deeds do so molest my mind, that I am afraid to die. Sure this
serious consideration of our former offenses, does much amaze a good grounded
christian, when he lies upon his dying bed, waiting for the rufull
diuorcement of his body and soul, having a fettered conscience, which always
will assure him, that he having been a sluggish drone in the hiue of Christ's
Church, shall not taste the sweetness of pleasure, nor the honey comb of comfort
in the heavenly City, but he shall be glutted with the sower grape of
persecution, of Gods wrath, and these hellish torments: that he having been a
careless Mariner in this world, and always the ship of his body remaining
in the scope of the wicked wind and vveather of this world, the Pirate the
devil shall make shipwreck of his salvation, and so he perrish upon the
rocks of eternal ruin.

But against all these desperable considerations, the saying of Saint Augustine
is the best remedy, If thou fear judgment to come, rebuke thy conscience. In
the whole course of thy life so live, that thou may have a secure conscience:
for thou must live here for a time in such sort, that thou dying godly, may
live for ever. We must die that we may live, and we must live that we may
die well. If thou live well, thou shall die well, and thou shall live well,
if thou do follow the holy course which Saint Hierome observed, Whether I
eat or drink (says he) or what soever else I do, always that same terrible
trumpet sounds in mine ears, Arise you that be dead, and come to judgment.
For as the same Father says in another place, He easily contemns all things,
that does always think that he shall die.

For he that always takes the memory of death for his inseperable spouse, and
bitter sighs for his children, and holy compunction for his mother to depure
him from his filthynesse, he which hates the world perfectly, favors
godliness zealously, endeuoreth to amend his life seriously, obeieth his
superiors gladly, and bears Christ's cross patiently, shows good tokens
that he will die a good Christian: such a man needs not fear the mention of
death, nor need his soul weep in secret, nor his eyes drop down tears, for
he may be certain that he is one of that perdestinated company, which shall
reign for evermore. But as for a man that has lived dissolutely, and through
the whole course of his life, has been a notorious sinner, yet for all that
he needs not despair; for Christ was not surprised with a rauing fever, when
in the tragedy of his passion, he made his body as a Cloud to resolve in
showers of innocent blood, and suffered his decrest veins to be launced, to
give a full issue for the price of our souls redemption. He came not to call
the righteous, but sinners to repentance. O ye sinners, behold the Lamb
bleeding, and shedding his precious blood to cleanse you from sin, and to save
you from satan, drink up in faith the droppings of his blood, and moisten
your souls therewith, eat him and chew him, for he is the bread of life,
which whosoever eats, shall never hunger more. Say with Christestome, Omnis
mea salus in passione Christi est posita. For whatsoever does belong to my
salvation, paratum est per Christi mortem, as the same father says: his death
has made a sufficient ransom for my sins; It is the Lamb of God which does
purge me from all my sins: I fully believe that therefore all my sins
shall be forgiven me, not for my merrits, but for Christ's death, not for my
righteousness, but for Gods mercies, which does extend to thousands, and ten
thousands, whose sins in respect of Gods mercies, are but (as Augustine
says) one drop in respect of the whole Sea. And (as Bernard says) the
mercy of God is greater, then any misery of ours. Hold up thine eyes to
heaven, behold the God of all consolation and mercy, crave of him to pour
down the influences of his comfort to help thy unbelief, to confirm thy
faith, to strengthen thee with a steadfast assurance of his heavenly Kingdom.
Wast away thy wickedness in the Fountain of repentance, and the leprosy of
thy sin, in the streaming Rivers of penitent tears. For this heavenly dew of
repentance never falls, but the Sun of righteousness draws it up; for it was
sweetly uttered by a Divine of sweetest utterance, that repentant eyes are the
Cellars of Angels, and penitent tears the sweetest wines, which the savor of
life perfumeth, the taste of grace sweetneth, and the purest colors of
returning innocence highly beautifieth. Oh that our hearts were evermore such a
limbecke, distilling so pure a quintessence of godliness, drawn from the
weeds of our offenses; by the fire of true contrition, heaven would mourn at
the absence of so precious waters, and earth lament the loss of so fruitful
showers. Sure till death close up those fountains, they should never fail
running: which if they did always run, we need not doubt of our salvation,
but that GOD would wash away all our sins. The world (says Bernard) had not
perrished with the flood, if they had betaken themselves to repentance. And as
it is in Jeremy, If we repent of our wickedness, God will repent of his
wickedness devised against us, and as it is in Ezechiell, If the ungodly will
turn away from all his sins that he has done, doubtless he shall live and
not die. And again, be converted, and turn you clean from your wickedness,
so shall there do sin do you harm. So when the Ninevites did repent,
mourning in Sackcloth and ashes, he repented on the evil which he said he
would do unto them, and did it not. Examples of repentant sinners, who
obtained remission for their offenses, be Paul, the sinful woman, David,
Manasses, Peter, the theife this day on the cross, this night in Paradise. For
Jesus is like an Evangelical hen, never cease clocking to gather thee
under his wings like a Chicken; for it pleased Jesus of vnmerrited goodness,
to leave the nintie nine mist sheep, the society of blessed Angels, to seek
the straying sheep, the groate that lost the royal stamp of pure nature: man
this lost sheep thou soughtest (O Jesus) thou foundest sweet Jesus, by death
thou foundest him, by bleeding pains thou foundest him, by nailed hands and
boared feet thou foundest him, by a thornie Crown, by drinking vinegar, by
sweating drops of blood, by suffering the violent death on the cross thou
foundest him. O loving Jesus, and tender hearted Samaritan, that of a sick have
salued, of a grievous sinner have saved him, of a wicked creature, have washed
him in the stream of thy inestimable mercy. Therefore I confidently believe
although the flower of my age is faded, the grass withered, and my whole life
as a vanishing vapoure is passed away, yet when I shail be dissolved, I
assuredly hope to be joined fully to Jesus my head, and only Vine, wherein I
live; although the purseuant sickness must visit this body of sin, and death
must row me over the Seas of this world, yet I hope in the bark of faith,
and merrits of Christ Jesus, and by the Ancor of Gods couenaunts made to the
house of David, I shall arrive at that blessed Haven, from whence I shall never
more hoise up sails, or lanch into the deep of misery, but shall sit
imparadised in heaven with fullness of grace, till the day of thy great
visitation shall com, when meeting thee in the clouds, I shall enter into the
store house of joys, there for evermore to reign.

If a sinner could thus absolutely confirm himself, and not distrust Gods
mercy and clemency, without all doubt he would not fear to die: but withal,
he must have a settled determination, to mortify his body, to abandon vices,
and with the trumpet of a Christian life to sound a retraite from sin, always
remembering Christ crucified: For as Bernard says, The remembrance of Christ
crucified, crucifieth sin. And as S. Augustine says, Then Christ does
sleep in thee, when thou have forgot his passion. The readiest way, and direct
path to go to Heaven, is to swim through the red sea of Christ's blood. The
drops of Christ's precious blood reigning down from the clouds of his
mercy, must quench the angry flame of Gods wrath, which we cannot extinguish
by the virtuous water of any merit. It is the oil of Grace, which must purge
our defiled hearts: It is the dew of heaven which will make us flourish, being
ingrafted into the true Olive. It is the welspring of our salvation, it is the
heavenly manna, which all of us should gather up in the wilderness of this
world. Love this good thing, in which all goodness is, and it is enough for
thee: yea observe but this short lesson which Augustine gives, and thou art a
good Christian: Ama deum, et amices in deum, et inimicos propter deu^, et
beatus es, Love Christ who loves thee, love his friends, that love Christ, and
thee, love Christ's enemies, that hate Christ and thee, and then thou shall be
beloved of Christ; for loving him, thou shall be beloved of Christ: for loving
the^ that hate Christ, and thee, the haters shall perrish, yet thou loving,
shall be beloved. Love GOD without measure, the^ shall thou be happy without
measure. Love God withal thy heart, who^ thou shall behold without end, love
without pride, praise with out wearines. Therefore, if men did but observe this
brief lesson, we need not fear death, but welcome him with a thousand
kisses, for that messenger does bring us glad tidings; for by him we change
transitory, mortal, and corruptible things, for certain, immortal, and
incorruptible treasures, earth for heaven, sin for godliness, darkness for light,
fear for security, travel for quietness, sickness for health, death for
life, the company of men, for the company of the omnipotent God, and heavenly
angels, the vile pleasures of this world, for the inestimable joys of heaven.

Oh therefore let us heartily wish to be losoned from this life, that we may
come to appear before the presence of God: let us say with David, Like as the
Heart desires the water brooks, so longs my soul after thee, o God, O GOD,
thou art my God, early will I seek thee, my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh
also longs after thee, in a barren and dry land where no water is. Let us say
with Job, It grieueth my soul to live longer in this mortal body. Let us say
with holy Toby, O Lord deal with me according to thy will, and command my
spirit to be received in peace. For when the lively threads of our life untie,
the spindle undo, the web riue, and our natural life ends, yet the
spiritual and essential part, namely the soul, shall be received with
Angels, and carried to heaven most lovingly, as a precious relic into the
kingdom of heaven. It shall be like a Dove carried on the wings of Angels, into
this heavenly Palace: For as Augustine says, It is the office of Angels to
carry souls to the company of the blessed. Now therefore, when Death shall
break up your mortal house, imprint this lesson in the forefront of your
languishing flesh, yea even when you are half berest of life, that you
remember Christ crucified; remember him to be the only Savior; remember God
the Father, to be a most merciful Father. Fix the eyes of your faith on
Jesus Christ, and on his merrits, on his passion and death, on his blessed body
breaking, and his most precious blood shedding, on his triumph and victory over
fathan, and his hellish army. Forget not that all your sins are washed away
in Christ's blood, and that by virtue of his death and passion, you are made
beyre of everlasting salvation. Fight a good fight, be not discouraged by the
pains of death, never shrink in Deaths battle, call upon Jesus, for no
baulme will be more comfortable to a wound, the^ the name of Jesus to deaths
wound. Put on the Helmet of salvation, the breast plate of righteousness, the
girdle of truth, the shield of faith, the sword of the spirit, and your feet
shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. Fear not, stand fast, quit
your selves like men, for in this spiritual battle, you sight under the
banner of the mighty and victorious Emperor Jesus Christ; only continue with
these weapons, and the day is yours. If satan tempt you, you may with hearty
prayers, (good Orators for your salvation) inchant that Dragon, that he may
sleep, while your soul is translated to taste of the golden fruit of blessed
souls: persevere in this battle, which is the true complement of virtue: The
pain of the battle is small, the glory of the triumph shall abide for ever
and ever. For so says the scripture, To him that ouerco^mmeth, I will give to
eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of Paradise: be faithful unto
the death, and I will give thee a crown of life. He that overcomes, I will
make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: yea to him
that ouerco^math will I grant to sit with me in my seat.

These precious promises and rewards, may make us courageous against death:
follow your captain Christ and you cannot err, for he is the way, believe
christ and you cannot be deceived for he is the truth, abide and remain in
Christ, and you cannot die the death everlasting, for he is the life: wherefore
cleave with strong faith to Christ, and say with that wise man; My mind is
rooted and built in Christ, and then you need not fear when death shall give
your soul the wings of true liberty, to depart out of your frail flesh, and
to fly up to heaven, and rest within Abraham's bosom: for the^ you shall rest
from your labors and travels. For so says the scripture; the souls of the
righteous are in thy hand o God, and the pain of death shall not touch them.
In the sight of the unwise they appear to die, but they are in peace; they are
as the Angels of God: they are clad with white garments, and have golden
crowns upon their heads. They do stand day and night before his Majesty,
there they have all joy, solace, and hearts contentments. By death we pass from
earth to heaven, from men to Angels, from war to peace, from pain to
pleasure, from grief to gladness, from misery to perpetual felicity: we
pass by death from this life, which is like a bubble in the water, like a
weauers Shettell, like a smoke, like a vapoure, like a shaddowe, like a flower
that fades, like grass that withers, it is but a span-long: it is a
warfare, it is like a ruinous house ever ready to fall, it is like a cloud in
the element, whereof we are uncertain, where and when it falls. This cloud
sometimes melts in the cradle, sometimes in the chair. Death is like the
Sun, whenever it shines, it melts our cloudie life, be the cloud
thereof never so thick or thin in years: this life is like an uncertain
wethercocke, which turnech at every blast; like a Wave that mounteth at every
storm: like a reed that boweth at every whistling wind. This world is an
exile, a vale of misery, a wilderness of sorrows, a dungeon of sinners, a
sea of miseries, where we pass away the wavering days of this uncertain
life, sailing as Pilgrims on the waters of this world, tossed by the tempests
of adversity, and oppressed by sundry Pirates, the flesh, sin, and the devil,
and yet by the Bark of a lively faith, and by the Mariner death, we shall
be transported from the flesh pots of Egypt, to eat of comfortable Manna, not
in the wilderness, but in new Jerusalem: Therefore have o good God to deliver
me from this painful life, to that glorious life, from this wretched mansion,
to that excellent tabernacle: from this stormy world, to the calm country of
heaven; where I shall have liberty without imprisonment, health without
sickness, joy without sorrow, pleasure without pain, in such security,
eternity, and perpetuity, as passes all thoughts. Come therefore Death, thou
art welcome, thou art thrice welcome death.

For when the Tree of my life shall fall down here upon earth, and I shall
see my father dust, and my mother ashes, yer my soul shall be carried into
Abraham's bosom. Adieu vile life, farewell life, sinful life adiewe: and
welcome Death, the Ambassador from my loving Savior: for by thee my misery
shall end. So that (O Death) thou art welcome. VVelcome sickness, for my Lord
Jesus has now sent thee to fetch me from this prison to his Palace, from a
strange pilgrimage, to dwell in the restfull Country of Canaan, from these
tears and mourning, to the day of marriage (sweet Jesus) to be espoused to
thee in thy merrits for evermore, where I shall live like a Demie-god, having
the sight of the glorious Trinity, and the company of holy Patriarks,
Prophets, Apostles, Martirs, and blessed Saints, and inherit such joys, as
neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor heart ever conceived.

Therefore welcome death, welcome sweet death, for thou shall remove me out of
this prison, and deliver me from this body of sin, to enter into the amiable
tabernacles of my Lord, where one day is better then a thousand elsewhere: I
shall no more weep by the waters of Babylon, when I shall remember thee o Sion,
for now I shall be in Sion, and dwell there for evermore. Come therefore, o
death to me at thy pleasure, for it is a pleasure for me to die, com death, o
my joy, for it is a joy for me to enjoy thee. VVelcome death the beginning of
joy, the first fruit of pleasure, when thou commes^ ^ar well sorrows, adieu
miseries, death is the Prince of delights. Arise therefore and make have o my
beloved, my delight, my comfort, for at thy coming my winter is past, and the
tempestuous waters of miseries are ceased: thou art io^es messenger, and glad
tidings bringer, o life thou art my death, o death thou art my life: this life
is a co^tintia^ll death, but after this death has ceased upon my body, the^
shall my soul go unto her life. Adieu therefore, o miserable li^e, welcome,
thrice welcome death; farewell also o death, welcome immortal life.

Laus Deo.
FINIS.

