A TREATISE OF CHRISTIAN RENVNciation.

Compiled of excellent sentences and as it were diverse homelies of Ancient
Fathers: wherein is showed how far it is lawful or necessary for the love of
Christ to forsake Father, Mother, wife and children, and all other worldly
creatures.

Against the enemies of the Cross of Christ, who by temporal respects of
obedience or other earthlye bonds, withdraw themselves or others from the
Confession of their faith and Religion.

Whereunto is added (...)

Luc. 14. Every one of you which does not renounce all things which he has,
cannot be my Disciple.

Mat. 16. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his Cross, and follow me.

Luc. 14. Many man come unto me and does not hate his father and mother, and
wife, and children, and brethren and sisters, ^ea and moreover his own life,
he cannot be my Disciple.

THE CONTENTS OF this book.
The Preface, wherein is showed the occasion purpose and order of this Treatise.
That it is very meritorious and acceptable unto God to renounce parents and all
things for perfection. Cap. 1.
That a man is bound under pain of eternal damnation unto a perfect
renunciation of all friends, kinsfolks, Cap. 2.
Parents, and Superiors their entreaties, examples and commandments, yea and
himself also and all that he has, when otherwise he should be hindered from
the dewty of a Christian. Of the necessary renunciation sometimes to be made of
husband and wife: Cap. 3.
although that which has been said above, belong also to them. Cap. 4.
Of renunciation of a man's patrimony and care of provision for children, more
particulerly than was said before. Of renunciation of a man's self yet more in
particular and of the necessary obligation to suffer Martyrdom when otherwise
God might be offended. Cap. 5.
with diverse forceable exhortations to the same. The Conclusion to Catholic
wives and children. Whether it be lawful for Catholics to go to the
Protestants Church, with a protestation that they come not for liking which
they have of the Religion there professed.
THE PREFACE.
IT has always been an ancient custom even from the very beginning of
Christian religion, The necesity of Renunciatio^
that whosoever gives his name to our Savior Christ, professing him self a
sworn soldier of his spiritual Camp, therein to fight under his victorious
standard; should by no other oath be admitted to this holy warfare: than by a
solemn profession either made by him self, or by his godfathers in his name,
of renouncing the Deuell and all his works with all his pompes and vanities.
This abrenunciatio^ has ever been accounted in the wholl life of a Christian,
not only most forceable for the most strict obligation; it being an homage and
promise unto the greatest Sovereignty which possible may be, that is to God
himself: but withal, a most effectual remedy and a most sure protection for
the comfortable memory thereof, against all tentations and incounters of our
ghostly enemies.

For who is he, wc being assaulted with proud and haughty cogitations, or
tickled with the flattering representations of unlawful delights, or allured
with the transitory vanity of worldly riches, or terrified with the barbarous
manacings of bloody persecutours, or daunted with the manifold difficulties of
the daily and continual combat with flesh and blood, or finally environed on
every side with never so diverse troops of the world the flesh and the Deuell
all conspiring in one against the welfare of the soul: by the remembrance of
this irreuocable profession, and indispensable promise unto God, will not
presently be encouraged thereby utterly ouercoming all manner of difficulties,
confidently to say either with that heathen Captain lacta est alea, my
chance is cast: or with the devout and spiritual soul, Inceptum est, retro
abire non licet: I have begone, I may not return backward: or with our Savior
himself: no man putting his hand to the plough, Luc. 9.
and looking backward is fit for the kingdom of God. For this cause did holy
S. Chrysostom exhort us that we should continually have this word in our
mouth, Hom. 21. ad pop. Antioch.
I renounce thee o Satan, affirming that there is nothing more safe than this
word, if in all our works we remember it. lib. 1. de Sacra. c. 2.
Yea this moreover he adds and thereunto does S. Ambrose consent, that all the
account wc we must in the day of judgment yield unto almighty God, is but of
the observation of this one word, and of the dilligent fulfilling of ye strict
obligation contained in the same. As there is none of you (says S.
Chrysostom) who without shoes and vestments would choose to go into the
marketplace, so never go abroad without this word: but when thou art stepping
over the thresholde, first speak this word, I renounce thee O Satan, and I
join my self unto thee O Christ. Neither ever go forth without this voice.
thou shall find this voice a staff, thou shall find it thy armor, thou
shall find it an invincible fortress. with this word also make the Cross in
thy forehead, The Cross in the forehead.
for so not only any man whom thou may chance to meet, but the Deuell
himself can nothing hurt thee, when he shall see thee every where appearing
with this armor. thus S Chrysostom.

Neither do we want most evident places of scripture, which do plainly
testify unto us the necessity of this renunciation, it being the very su^me of
Christian religion, and the only end of the coming of the son of God into
the world: neither did he come to bring peace into the earth, but a sword:
neither can that man follow him which daily takes not up his Cross: neither
can any one be his Disciple which renounceth not together with him self,
whatsoever other thing may be under God. What greater renunciation can there be
of any thing, than the hatred of the same? What thing can be more dear unto us
than our own life or soul? and yet is this a necessary rule for whosoever
comes unto Christ, that he carry a continual and rooted hatred even to his
own life and soul. than is our life hated when it is despised for Christ:
tha^ is our soul hated wha^ it is afflicted, mortified, and cleansed from the
filthy disorder of seculer delights for the love of the same Christ: who for
one brittle and transitory life, either despised or lost for his name, will
repay an eternal and most happy immortality: and for an imperfect, unclean,
rebellious soul; humbled, mortified, and purged through the assistance of his
grace according to the measure of this life: will tender the same soul in the
other life without spotte or wrinckle, adorned with all the bewtifull gifts of
his unspeakable glory. How little regard there is now of renuation.


This is the wholle occasion of this present treatise. For I see (and that not
with small grief) that for want of dew consideration of this so necessary a
precept of Christian life, infinite multitudes of all manner of estates do daily
perish: I see that such is the forgetfulness of those which should be the
soldiers of Christ, that as though this vertew of renunciation were a ceremony
only of Monks, Ermittes, Freers and other religiouse persons, they esteem the
same as no part of their Christian dewty. I see that in steed of that virtuous
and fruitful hatred of ones self (the necessary effect of this renunciation)
every one almost is overcome with a blind flattering perniciouse selfeloue;
and in steed of building in him self a spiritual Jerusalem by love of God,
builds a confused Babylon by love of the world. And that we may bring
examples only of our own country, and those in one kind only of iniquity
(although what iniquity is there committed amongst Christians but for want of
renunciation into the hands and will of God?) who is there in our poor and
lamentable estate, either withhoulden from God, holy Church their tender
mother, or made shameful by reuolte and fall from the same; but for want of
renunciation? where do we not see, that either parents by children, or children
by parents: husbands by wives, or wives by husbands: one friend by an other:
the subjects by the superiors, and superiors by subjects, are hindered from
the service of God? and that as our Savior said, Math. 10.
inimici hominis domestici eius; the enemies of a man are those of his own
household? Which general pestilent disease we can surely impute to no other
cause, than to the want of renunciation. So that we see nothing in the world,
so ordinarily, so daily, so generally renounced, as God him self and Christian
dewty. Those which are by Gods law, Parents
and the very law of nature commanded to bring up their children in the
discipline and correction of our Lord; Ephesians. 6.
are now bent to no other thing so much as to dedicate them unto the Deuell:
Psalm. 105. Married persons
as David also complained of the like case. those which should in the holy
estate of wedlock represent the unspotted and inseperable conjunction of
Christ and his Church: Sicut equus and mulus in quibus non est intellectus,
Psalm. 31.
not regarding any other thing but base affections: seek to draw one another
from Christ the spouse of their soul, and do divide Christ his spouse from
Christ, whose perpetual lincke they should rese^ble. Obedience.
And that which is most sacrilegious and blasphemous to speak or think: all
these so great and heinous disorders are oftentimes fathered either upon that
sacred power wc God has ordained whereby either wives unto their husbands, or
children to their parents, or other subjects to their superiors do owe a
kind of dewty and obedience: or upon the most honest lincke of humane
frendshippe. as though either wives had sold both body and soul to be by
their husbands morgaged to perpetual slavery of the Deuell: or parents had
authority to kill the souls of their children over whose bodies they have no
such power: or those which are as it were Gods Lieuetenants in their several
offices, might convert their forces to fight for hell, and lawfully constrain
their soldiers and subjects to rebel against God: or finally as if there
were any perfect friendship, where there wants honesty. All these and many
other iniquities in the like sort, as by defaulte of renunciation they are
committed: so by the performance of the same according to the most sacred law
and will of Christ, they may easily be avoided. The purpose of this Treatise.
I purpose therefore by Gods assistance to whose glory I direct my labors, in
this treatise briefly to show how necessary and meritorious a thing Christian
renunciation is, and that for no respects of kindred, obedience, or affection
in the world it is to be neglected. Renunciatio^ is sometimes of Counsel,
sometimes of precept. See chap. 2 out of S. Augustine ^p. 89. q. 4
And that the same sometime is of counsel to those which are free: but many
times of necessity from which none can be free. It is of counsel: when
voluntarily he which aspireth unto perfection without any bond at all, sells
that which he has and gives to the poor and follows Christ, that he may
have a great treasure in heaven. Yet I say that this is of counsel, for those
which are free. For those wc are in the estate of marriage cannot without
mutual consent severe them selves except in some cases as we will declare
herafter. Bishops also, bondslaues and whosoever for some condition or
circumstance have not free power to alter the estate of their life, cannot
undertake a religious or solitary life. Parents can not hinder their children
from religion.
Yet this we say that neither parents may hinder their children, nor any other
superior his subject wc is free in this point: from such a resolution.

We urge also and defend: that in some case: that which is of counsel may be
of necessity: and that which is of counsel for some only because it is not
lawful for all: may be a thing so absolutely required of all manner of persons:
yt they may under pain of damnation be bound to forsake not only riches and
external goods of fortune; but parents, husband, wife, children, and all
whatsoever is not God him self. The child is not bound to forsake his parents:
but yet he may do it with meritt for the service of God. A wife may be bound
to forsake her husband. See chap. ^
The wife may not forsake her husband at her pleasure although it were for to
be religious: yet if either the son must forsake his faith or his father: or
the wife her husband or her maker: most certain it is, that the thing which
was lawful before in the son is now necessary; and that which the wife could
not do before but sinfully: now she cannot neglect but da^nably. Hence shall
it easily appear what account as well children as wives, ought in this
lamentable contagious time for to make, either of the evil examples or of the
perverse commandments of their superiors: the first whereof shows them the
way: wherefore this treatise was compiled of sentences of holy Fathers.
the second even drives them to hell. And of this matter we will not bring our
own discourses, but the most grave sentences of ancient holy Fathers at
large: for three causes. First for that they do not only declare us their
uncorrupted judgment in these matters which we desire to persuade: Catholic
in steed of a comfortable sermon whansoeuer he wa^teth other means of
fruitful encouragements. Wherein also every one shall so much more effectually
be moved: because he is sure that he reads the devout speeches of those in
whom he may not doubt but God inhabited, and he may very well hope that eue^
in these particular discourses it is not they them selves wc speak, Mat. 10.
but the spirit of their Father within them.

Secondly for that the misery of our tempestuous time continually more and more
increasing, Job. 38.
to say: hitherto thou shall come, and not proceed any farther: and here thou
shall break thy swelling waves: it may surely happen that this work may be
more necessary hereafter than at this present. For whereas now perhaps parents
and husbands are ready to prevent unjust laws, and to do before they be urged,
that which hereafter may chance to be urged unto all: it will be no small
advantage at that time to have in readiness a Parliament of Gods Saints, and of
his most holy and ancient Pastors, for the declaration of our dewty in so
weighty a matter. The third cause wc moves me to make this a work of ancient
Fathers, rather than mine own: is least happily the like befall in this
question which we handle, (...) here to (...)
wc does ordinarily happen in other questions of the same importance. Our
present difficulty is (I call it a difficulty although in deed the case be most
evident, because to worldly rich men there is nothing but seems difficult:
an inheritance which Christ has permitted them, Mat. 19.
until they leaving their Camells hugenes, will submit themselves unto the
lowlines of Christ) But this our present question is; whether a child by the
commandment of parents: or a wife for obedience to her husband: or a servant or
inferior for dewty to his Superior: or a father for providing for his
children: may lawfully do that which of it self is against the law of God,
and prejudicial to the necessary confession of his faith: and contemptuous
withal unto Christ his Church, and a very separation from the same: Whether I
say by these respects of temporal dewty, these heinous deformities may be
taken away: and a contrary bond caused of such te^porall obedience or duty: or
rather any of those may with meritte in case of perfection, yea and be bound
necessarily when Gods honor so requires, to renounce all worldly persons, and
temporal respects, only cleaving unto Christ and his holy will. This is our
case, this is our question. But what do we see in the like? who knows not how
often the question of going to heretical Churches has been tossed in our
country? And who is ignorant of the general resolution of all those learned
reverend and godly Priests which are and have been in the same? The enemies of
the Cross of Christ whose end is destruction whose God is (...) belly, (...)
their (...) in their cofufio^, which mind (...)dly (...) Philip^^.
But what has happened? Certain private persons, who have wholly addicted
them selves to make them Gods either of their belly and ease, or of the
(...)ked mammon; setting God behind all things (...) may delight them; will not
only (...) their pernicious custom of frequenting heretical conuenticles (wc
were a crime more tolerable) but they refuse also to believe that they do
amiss: and that which is more heinous and a most high degree of pride; they
defend their wickedness: neither content with this, (as though it were no
comfort to perish alone) they induce and by all possible means allure their
friends and subjects to the same iniquity. But with what foundation and ground?
because forsooth the contrary doctrine proceeds only from the persuasions,
terrors or fears of some self minded and wilful persons whom if you desire
to know: they will tell you they be the young clergy. These men undoubtedly
after they have once learned to conster latin, and to turn our Ladies Primer,
and perhaps the Breuiary, or at Oxford to talk a little of logic, Dion. c. 2
de divine. nom.
where it may be they have looked into the Divinity school (as for Divinity
who knows not that amongst heretics none can be learned:) these men I say
betaking them selves afterward to the study of Bucolicall and georgicall
affairs, and attending to that worldly substance which God has cast upon
the^: no otherwise than that young man, which, as the Poets feign, being sent
by his father to keep sheep by dreaming that he was made a Poet, became in
deed a Poet: Hesiodus
have so soudainly become Deuines, that they are more learned, more humble,
discreet and virtuous, than those which scornfully they call the young clergy:
but should in deed if they were such as they flatter them selves to be
acknowledge as the rulers and shepheardes of their souls.

For otherwise what clergy must we send these men unto for their spiritual
relief? or wherein differs the young clergy from the old? or what Catholic
clergy can they find in the wholl world of contrary judgment? But let us send
them to the Convocation house, there shall they find the ancient reverend
clergy which they appertain unto, for unto the clergy of Christ his Church
they nothing belong: And let us permit these new Doctors with (...) old
Prelates to gage their souls so often soul^ already to the Deuell, not
understanding (as S. Paul says) neither what thing they speak, nor of what
they affirm: 1 Timothy 1.
daily prospering to the worse: erring and driving into error. 2. Tim 3
It is no marvel if refusing to be of the sheep of Christ, they disdain to
acknowledge the shepheardes of Christ. Those who esteem their souls and
tremble at Gods judgments: in so ruled a case, will fly from such
Counsailours as from the Deuells instruments. This am I willing and desirous
that they should know, that although the Church of Christ has learned by the
mildnes of her spouse to tender the case of those which of humane frailty fall
into sin, and can handle with lenity such as go from her, and yet in heart
are with her: yet does she and all her true children profess an eternal
hatred unto those which are peruerters and seducers of souls as unto
heretics themselves: as I hope they shall shortly be discovered what they are
if after the definition of the chief Pastor, they will remain self minded
and wilful in their so pernicious opinion. Of the young (...). Ser. o (...)
Virg.


As for the young years of Gods true clergy wc these men seem to contemn, we
may first say, as the Church sings out of S. Ambrose of the glorious virgin
S. Agnes. Ser. 90. ad Virg.
Infantia quidem computabatur in annis, sed erat senectus mentis immensa.
Infancy truly was reckoned in her years but deep old age was in her mind.
and that of the wise man Senectus enim venerabilis est non diuturna, Cap. 4
neque annorum numero computata. cani autem sunt sensus hominis, and aetas
senectutis, vita immaculata. honorable old age is not that which is of great
and long time, neither is measured by the number of years. for the wisdom of
a man are his gray hears, and the auncientnes of old years is an unspotted
life.

Besides it is very well known that both in England and out of England, there
are even of this young clergy which they speak of not only more wise, more
learned, more virtuous, than these reverend men, think them selves (for
perhaps they think better of them selves than their neighbour^ do) but also
even as far grown in years as they. although this makes nothing to the
verity of doctrine, and jurisdiction which they have over souls wherein our
Savior Christ respects not age, but his own will and pleasure in bestowing
his holy gifter. S John was the youngest of all the Disciples, and yet he was
elevated to more high conte^plation than the rest. S. Peter was not the eldest
of them all, as being younger than S. Andrew his brother: and yet did our
Savior give him charge a (...) over all.

But if these men call it the young clergy, because it is succeeded unto that
old reverend company which for the most part many years sithence is dead and
rotten: than do they show the base conceit wc they carry of Gods Church, as
though it were at any time forsaken of Gods spirit, and wanted that assistance
in latter ages which it has had in the former. and so they will rotte in their
sins, because the clergy of our Fathers age is rotten in the grave. Yet this
must they of necessity acknowledge, that as the holy Church of Christ now
dispersed over all the world, although in most diverse places, yet is but one:
even so if we compare that Church wc now is with times forepast: although in
most diverse times, yet has it always been but one, and is now and shall be
to the worlds end, that which always it has been, that is the self same one.
and in like manner although the particular members of this same Church do
necessarily alter for the mortality of our nature: yet in respect of the same
universal and Catholic unity, and of the same spirit which governs the
Church: it is always the same. and so this very young clergy as they call it
cannot be different in manner of government and doctrine from any clergy never
so old which has been Catholic, so long as this clergy which now is though
different in persons from the old, yet observes all manner of subjection and
unity to the one only root which is the sea Apostolic. As without all
arrogance we may say thus much, that never since the first conversion of our
Country such unity was greater. there being not one person of the same either
ordered, or endowed with necessary jurisdiction, but receiving it not from any
particular Bishop, or ordinary authority of Diocesans, but by the immediate
delegation or extraordinary commission of the only chief Bishop: from whose
particular knowledge they do not swerve, in the resolution and managing of
matters of the chiefest moment, appertaining unto our religion. So that of the
soundnes of this very new Clergy these scrupulous Gra^marian Deuines need not
for to doubt: and if there be any old Clergy wilfully and obstinately opposite
unto this wc now it pleases them to term the young Clergy: that Clergy surely
is not the Clergy of the Catholic Church, because it has swarued from the
infallible direction of the spirit of the Catholic Church, speaking and
teaching in Peter's chair. Neither can they prove this of that most Reverend
and constant old Clergy which spent their lives in Dura^ce for Christ. of
whose perpetual union unto the young Clergy our wholle country can be a
witness. Neither can the being ordered in foreign countreies, make a new and
distinct Clergy from such as live at the same time in our own country, but
that they must in all respects be of one and the same Clergy, and therefore all
Clergy persons of one age make not two Clergies, but one only. So that very
vain is that distinction of theirs of an old and new Clergy. But whatsoever
they mean by this new Clergy: Sure it is that either of this Clergy which now
is they must have their spiritual food and relief if they will have any
(which I scarce can hope for) or of none.

Finally of our wholle Clergy for the most part, only excepting those who by
this flattering doctrine that it is lawful to go to the Church have sought to
feed the covetous and fearful humors of these sons of this world, and
therefore have cast the^ selves out from the sight of God, by fighting against
his Church: and as so many Cains are noted with marks of wicked licentiousnes;
(a worthy punishment that those which do fornicate from God and his Church, are
suffered also to run headlong into that other fleshly and beastly
fornication:) excepting I say those few whom God has permitted to renew unto
us the examples of Judas, Simon Magus, Nicholas the Deacon, and others of those
most high and most ancient Colleges: we may by Gods especial grace in the
rest see that counsel fulfilled which S. Paul gives unto Timothy: Let no man
contemn thy youth: 1. Tim. 4.
but be an example of the faithful in word, in conversation, in charity, in
faith, in chastity.

A wonderful young man (says S. Ambrose was the most holy Timothy, in hunc
locum.
by whose example disordered youth was to be bridled, and the vndewtifull
irreuerence of the aged was to be punished. But the holiness and learning and
purity of life, of this very same young Clergy, in so many dangers, amongst so
feculer behavior, in this great decay of discipline in all ages: as it is now
renowned all abroad whilst these senseles defenders of schism wallow in flesh
and blood: so shall it be celebrated in all ages when their bodies are rotten
in the grave, and unless they repent, when their souls, as the Psalm says,
like sheep shall be consumed in hell. Sufficient it is for true Catholics,
that the worthiness of the young Clergy is acknowledged and feared by the Deuell
him self.

That question therefore of Going to ye Church being supposed) as sufficiently
resolved by diverse means heretofore, let us hear for our Catholic
brethrens comfort the doctrine of the old Clergy of Christ his Church,
concerning Christian renunciation: that so all hope may be taken away from the
renouncers of Gods ancient Church, to blame the wilfulnes of any young Clergy;
How important this case was in S. Ambrose his opinion.
The matter trewly seems unto me so important, and the case so urgent: that
if the holy Bishop of Milan S. Ambrose accounted it to be the necessary dewty
of Gods Priests even unto death to resist those Parents wc withdrew their
daughters from being Nuns, a thing of indifferent choice unto every one: l.
3. de Virg.
far greater necessity will there be in confuting those even with danger of
death, which seek to withdraw them from all Christian dewty. Et potest esse
(says that most godly Doctor) patientia Sacerdotum, vt non vel morte oblata,
si ita necesse est, integritatis sacrificium vindicetur? And can a Priest have
patience that even with manifest peril of death if occasion be offered, he
reschue not the sacrifice of integritye? marvel not therefore (good reader) if
I one far unworthy of the least credit of any Catholic Clergy man seem
over earnest in this my preface: for by reading over this treatise thou shall
see that I differ not herin from the zeal of most grave Saints of God. if I
shall profit the^ any thing by my reprehension: I shall be gladd, because they
are made sorry unto penance: if I shall do no more but incense them; yet I hope
I shall profit many: they must expect from the judgment of Christ if they will
not be reformed, and except they hold their hands from paper, and avoid
public occasion of scandalous doctrine in this behaulfe: they must needs
think that if Priests for want of means and commodit^ have patience and hold
their peace: there will be notwithstanding some one or other always ready to
revenge Gods cause, and to stand in the defense of the necessary confession of
Christ our Redeemer, and of his holy Cross.

Thus much therefore being spoken of the cause and general manner of this
Treatise: The order of this Treatise.
I will now set down the order of proceeding therein for although I could not
easily distinguish the several matters handled by the Fathers, and almost in
every particular allegation there is occasion of speaking of every thing
belonging to our purpose: yet have I for the more perspicuity, and for the more
ease of the reader so divided the wholle, of husband and wife. where as well
for to take away occasion of error, as for to repress the arrogant perverseness
of some husbands which challenge more authority over wives than God or nature
has given them. We must necessarily entreat of some lawful separations of man
and wife: wc we must be forced to do of our own: although (if leisure will
permit) we purpose to prove it out of Gods word and ancient Fathers. which
if we shall not for haste be permitted to perform: yet this will we promise
that we will set nothing down, but according to the common opinion of
Catholic Doctors.

The fourth chapter we will make,

The fifth besides that which was said in the second chapter shall entreat of
renunciation of a man's self,

Finally shall follow the Conclusion. So that in no part of this Treatise
except only in this preface in the conclusion and in some part of the third
chapter thou must think that I speak (gentle Reader) but imagine that the
Saints of God do speak unto thee. I have undoubtedly lest infinite places,
and many Doctors wc might have been brought: but this is as much as my time and
commodity could afford thee: others perhaps may take occasion hereby to add
other like, these I hope will no less move them which with sincere minds
shall read them, than they have comforted my self when I have wrotten them.
This only I desire of the devout Readers, that as I have sought nothing else
in this small labor, but my Catholic Brethrens comfort: so I may reap again
the comfort of their grateful acceptance.

S. Bern. lib. de praecept. and dispens.

Sieve Deus sieve homo vicarius Dei mandatum quodcunque tradiderit, pariprofecto
obsequendum est cura, pari reuerentia deferendum, vbitamen Deo contraria non
praecipit homo. quod si contigerit, Act. 5.
pergendum indubitanter consulo in Petri sententiam, quia obedire oportet Deo
magis quam hominibus.

Whether God, or man, being the Vicar of God do give any commandment: with the
like care it must be obeyed, with equal reverence it is to be esteemed, yet so
long as man commands not contrary unto God. which if it happen, than do I
counsel every one to follow Peter's counsel, that we must obey God rather then
men.

A TREATISE OF CHRISTIAN Renunciation.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. That it is very meritorious and acceptable unto God to
renounce Parents and all things for perfection.
The 38 epistle of S Augustine unto Laetus.. 1
I Have read the Epistle which you sent unto our Brethren, An exhortation to an
estate of perfection against the mothers will.
requesting that they would comfort you, because your new beginnings were
shaken with great tentations. where also you signified that you desired our
letters. I was very sorry and could not cease from writing: least I should
withdraw both from my own and from your desire, that which I saw in deed I
did owe by the duty of charity. If therefore you profess your self a nouice
of Christ, forsake not the tents in the which you must even build that tower of
which in the Gospel our Lord speaks: for whosoever remains in the same
tower and under the banner of the word of God does fight: him no tentations may
pearce on any side. from thence both darts being cast do fly with great
force, and being foreseen are with most firm repair avoided. Luc. 14.
Consider also that our Lord Jesus Christ although he be our King, yet by
reason of that society through which he vouchsafed to be our brother, he
calls his soldiers kings and forewarned us that every one by setting forth
ten thousand should be fit for to sight with a King which has twenty
thousand. but a little before he brought those forceable similitudes of the
tower and the king, mark what he said. If any one come unto me and do not
hate his father and mother and wife and children and brethren and sisters yea
and also his own soul, S. Augustine and other Fathers indifferently understand
this place of life and of soul.
he cannot be my Disciple. Than he adds. wc of you desiring to build a tower
does not first sit down and reckon if he have the cost for the finishing
thereof, least when he has laid the foundation, he be not able to build it,
and all that go bie and see, begin to say, this man began to build and
could not finish. Or what King going to join war with another King, does not
first sit and consider if he be able with ten thousand to go against him
which with twenty thousand comes unto him? otherwise whilst he is yet far
of, he sends an embassage praying peace. But whitherto these similitudes
should tend, by the very conclusion he sufficiently opened. for he said. So
therefore every one of you which renounceth not all things which he has,
cannot be my Disciple. Therefore as well the cost for the building of the tower,
as the ability of ten thousand against a King with twenty, is nothing else, but
that every one renounce all that he has. And the beginning of his speech does
accord with the last conclusion. For in this that every one renounce all things
which he has, is that also contained that he hate his father and mother and
wife and children and brethren and sisters, yea and his own soul. For all
these things are his own, which for the most part do entangle and hinder the
obtaining not of these private temporal and transitory things, but of that
common good which shall remain for ever. For in what manner at this present a
certain woman is your mother: in that manner surely she is not my mother. this
therefore is temporal and transitory: Even as you see already that to be passed
away that she conceived you, that she carried you in her womb, that she
brought you fourth, that she nourished you. But in that she is a sister in
Christ, this she is unto you and to me and to all those unto whom one heavenly
inheritance; God, as a Father; Christ, as a brother, in one society of charity
is promised. These are eternal things: these are not wasted with any
consumptio^ of time: these things are hoped for, so much more firmly to be
possessed, in how much the less by private but rather by common right they are
to be obtained. This may you very easily acknowledge in your own mother. For
whence proceeds it that she does now incomber and intrappe you, and wrest and
pull you back from your course begone; but of that, that she is your private
and proper mother? for in that she is the sister of all those whose father is
God, and whose mother is the Church, she hinders no more you than me, and
than all our brethren which love her, not so as you in your own house with
private love, but with public charity in the house of God This veyr thing
therefore that you are lincked unto her with carnal alliance, ought for to work
this benefitte, that you may with more familiarity talk unto her, Affection to
a mother
and with greater commodity counsel her, that this her private love unto you
may be destroyed in her, least she make greater account that she has brought
you fourth, of her womb, than that her self together with you, was brought
forth out of the wombeof the Church. And this wc I have said of your mother,
must you also understand of all your other kindred Yea let every man so esteeeme
of his own soul, To any kindred. To our own soul
that even in it he hate all private affection, which out of all doubt is but
temporal: but that he love in it that communion and society of which it is
said; they had toward God one soul and one heart for thus your soul is not
your own private soul, Act. 4.
but of all your brethren, whose souls also are yours: or rather whose souls
together with yours are not diverse souls, but one only soul of Christ, of
which it is soung in the Psalms: Psalm. 21.
that it may be delivered out of the hand of the dog From hence may you very
easily attain to the contempt of death. Contempt of death.
And let not parents be offended that our Lord commands us to hate them:
whereas the very same is also commanded us of our own soul. Hatred of Parents.
For even as in this place of scripture concerning our soul we are commanded
to hate it with our parents: even so that which in another place the same Lord
speaks of the soul, may most fitly be applied even unto our parents also.
Io. 12.
Who loves his soul (says he) shall destroy it. I will say also
confidently. Who loves hisparents, shall destroy the^. For of the soul, that
wc he called it in the other place, hating here he calls destroying it. For
even as this precept by the which we are commanded to destroy our soul, what
it is to destroy our soul
is not so to be understood that every one may kill him self, wc is a most
heinous sin, and vet it tends hereunto that every one kill in him self the
carnal affection of his soul, whereby this present life is delight full, with
the ^inderance of the life to come: (For this is that which was said, let him
hate his soul, let him destroy hissoule: which notwithstanding is done by
loving it: whereas ^ost plainly he lays before us the benefitte of getting the
same soul saying: Who has destroyed it in this world, shall find itto life
everlasting.) Even so in like manner of our parents it is most justly said,
that who loves them must destroy them, not by killing them in parricidiall
manner, but that devoutly and courageously with ye spiritual sword of the love
of God he striking and killing that carnal affection of theirs, wherewith they
endeavor toentangle both themselves and those also whom they have begotten we
the inticements of this world; may cause that to live in them whereby they are
our brethren, and whereby together with their te^porall children, they
acknowledge their everlasting parents God and the Church. Beh^ldethe desire of
knowing ye truth, God and the Church our Parents
and understanding the will of God in his holy scriptures does draw thee. the
office of the Euangelical preaching does draw thee. Our Lord gives a sign
that we watch in his tents, that we build the tower, out of the which we may
both espy and keep back the enemy of everlasting life.

The heavenly trompett does inuit the soldier of Christ unto the combate^ and
thy mother does withdraw thee. not such a mother truly as was that of the
Machabees: nor yet like unto the Lacedemonian mothers, 2. Match. 7.
of wh^m it is recorded that more effectually and earnestly then the very
displaiing of banners and sound of trompetts they incited their children to
shedd their blood for their earthly country. For that mother which for the
learning of life, does not suffer you to be estraunged from seculer cares, does
sufficiently show how well she would permit you if such necessity happened)
utterly to abandon the world, for to suffer death. But what says she? What
does she allege? perhapps those ten months in which you loaded her
bowels, and the travails of her bringing forth, and the labors of your
bringing up. O this, this, o kill this with the word of salvation, destroy this
of your mother, y^ you may find her for life everlasting. This do you remember
to hate in her, if you love her, if you be the Nouice of Christ, if you have
laid the foundation of the tower, least the passengers say: Luc. 14. Carnal
affection.
this man began to build and could not finish. For this is a carnal
affection, and yet smells of the old man. This carnal affection as well in
our selves as in our friends does the warfare of a Christian exhort us to
destroy. Yet let no man be unthankful to his parents, neither set light by
these very benefittes of his bringing forth, and nourishing in this life: but
let him rather observe every where piety. Let these things take place, The
Church our mother.
where greater things do not inuit us. The Church our mother, is mother also
of thy mother. she has conceived us of Christ, she has brought us forth by
the blood of Martyrs, she has borne us unto everlasting light, she has nursed
us and yet does nourish us with the milk of faith, and preparing still more
perfect meats, quaketh to see you yet little ones and like toothles infants to
do nothing but cry.

This mother enlarged over the wholle world is tossed with so many and so diverse
incursions of errors, that her untimely children are not now afraid with
deadly armor to war against her. Also through the sluggishnes and benumbed
dulnes of certain which as yet she has in her lap: Necessity of the Church
she bewaileth that her members are in very many places waxen cold, and now
unfit for to cherish her little ones. Whence, but of her other children,
whence, but of her other members, amongst wc your self are one, does she
require her just and dew succor? And you forsaking her necessities will you
turn back unto carnal speeches? does not she with more grievous complaints
fill your ears? does not she show unto you more loving bowels and heavenly
pappes? Herunto add her spowses taking flesh upon him that you should not
cleave unto fleshly things, and the eternal word undertaking those things
which your mother does contumeliously reprove, least you should deal therewith:
add also reproaches, whippings, death, yea and the death of the Cross. O you
which were conceived of such see, o you borne unto a new life in such a
wedlock, do you languish and consume away again into the old man? Example of
Christ.
Yea had not your Emperor an earthly mother? who notwithstanding whilst he
was busy in heavenly things, hearing tidings of her answered: Which is my
mother, or wc are my brethren? and stretching out his hands toward his
Disciples said, Mat. 12.
that none belonged to his kin, but such as did his Fathers will. In which
number undoubtedly he comprehended the holy Virgin her self, for she also
fulfilled the will of his Father. And so that excellent and Divine master both
despised in comparison of heavenly alliance the name of a mother which was
spoken unto him as private and peculier, because it was earthly: and declaring
the same heavenly alliance in his Disciples, showed with what lincke of kindred
that same Virgin with other of his Saints was joined unto him. But least by
this most wholesome instruction wherein he taught that carnal affection in
parents should be conte^ned, he might give any color unto error, whereas some
men deny that he had a mother: in another place he warns his Disciples, that
they should not say they have a father on earth: to the intent that as it was
manifest that they had fathers, so it might be evident that he had a mother;
whose earthly alliance yet he despising, might give unto his Disciples example
of despising the like affinities. And are these things interrupted by the
voices of thy mother, and amongst these things is there any room for the
memory of a big belly and of a nurse, that of Adame and Eve thou might be
borne another Adam? Behold rather, behold the second Adam from heaven, and
carry now the likeness of the heavenly Adam, as thou have carried of the
earthly. Yea here let take place those motherly benefittes, which are reckoned
up unto thee for the effeminating of thy mind. Let them in any wise take
place, be not ungrateful: return spiritual things for carnal, for temporal
everlasting, if she will not follow thee, let her not hinder thee. Will she
not be converted unto better? let her not pervert thee unto worse, and so
overthrow thee. What Skilleth it whether in a wife or in a mother so that in
enery woman Eve be avoided? For this pretense of piety and dewty, All excuses
in the service of God are Adames leaves. Genesis 3.
comes from the leaves of that tree, wherwt our first parents did first cover
them selves in that damnable nakedness. And whatsoever in those words and
suggestions she alleges unto you as an office of charity, that she may wrest
you from the most pure and sincere charity of the gospel: appertains unto
the craft of the serpent, and to the dubble dealing of that King which has
twenty thousand, which we are taught by the simplicity of ten thousand, that is
by the simplicity of a heart wherein we seek God, to overthrow. Carrying the
Cross.
Harken rather unto these things my dearest, and take up your Cross and
follow our Lord. for when we being together I perceived, that you were hindered
by domestical cares from the study of godliness, I esteemed you rather to be
carried and lead by your Cross than to bear and carry it. For our Cross wc
our Lord will have us carry that we may readely follow him, what does it
signify but the mortality of this flesh. For this is that wc crosses and
afflicts us, until death be swallowed into victory. This very Cross
therefore it self must be crucified, and pearsed with the nails of the fear
of God, least with loose and not restrained members you be not able to carry
her rebelling. For follow our Lord, but carrying her you can not For how do you
follow him, if you be not his? Gal. 5.
but those which are of Jesus Christ (says the Apostle) have crucified their
flesh with her passions and desires. If there be any money in your worldly good,
with the trouble of which it is neither expedient nor decent you be encumbered:
that is truly to be given to your mother and domesticalls. Parents if they be
in necessity must first be provided for in distribution of alms
For their necessity (if you have purposed to distribute such things unto the
poor that you may be perfect) is for to be first regarded. for if any man
(says the Apostle) has not care of his own especially of his domesticalls,
he has denied the faith, and is become worse then an infidel. For the
ordering of which things, and to free your own shoulders, that you might
receive upon them the chains of wisdom, 1. Tim. 5.
if you took your journey from us: what hurt can you take, or how can you be
moved with your mothers tears flowiug forth nothing but flesh, or with the
running away of your servant, or death of your maids, or sickness of your
brethren? If charity be ordered within you Skilfully to prefer the greater
thing before the lesser, and to be moved with pittye that the poor may be
preached unto: Cant. 2. Order of charity
least the plentiful harvest of our Lord, through want of workmen may lie a
pray unto the birds. Skillful also to have a ready heart to follow the will of
our Lord in that which he shall determine to do with his servants, either by
scourging them or by sparing them: meditate these things: study on these
things, that your profiting may be manifest in all things. Beware I beseech you
least you cause more sorrow in your good brethren by your slacknes, than before
you wrought their comfort by your forwardnes.

Sanit Ambrose in the end of his first book of Virgins. 2.
Some man will say unto me^ thou every day set forth unto us the
commendation of Virgins. Of maidens entering in to religion without Parents
consent. Consecrating of Nuns.
what shall I do, whereas every day I inculcate the same things and profit
nothing? But it is not my fault. Behold out of the territory of Placentia
there come Virgins for to be consecrated, there come out of the state of
Bonony, there come out of Mauritania that here they may take the Veale. A
strange case it is which you see: here I preach, and there I persuade. if the
matter go so, let us preach other where, that we may persuade here. What a
thing is it, that even they that hear me not, do follow my advise, and those
which hear me do not follow it? For I understand, that many Virgins desire,
but y^ they are forbidden so much as to go abroad by their mothers, and that wc
is worse, by their mothers being widows, with whom I will now talk a while.
Children may choose their marriage but wc their Parents direction and likinge
Truly if your daughters loved a man, according to the law they might choose
whom they would. than to whom it is lawful to choose a man, is it not lawful
to choose God? Behold how sweet is the fruit of purity: which sauoureth even
in the actions of barbarous people. From the uttermost parts of the nearer and
farther Mauritania, Virgins are brought, desiring to be consecrated here: and
all their samilies being in captivity, yet cannot purity be kept captive. she
professes the kingdom of eternity, wc lamenteth the injury of her servitude.
For what need I speak of the Bononian Virgins, a fertile flock of purity, A
Nunnery
which depriving them selves of worldly delights, do dwell in a sanctuary of
virginity, without any company of the other sex, not without the company of
purity, and now arriving to the number of twenty, and the hundred fould fruit,
their parents houses being forsaken, walk in the tents of Christ, unwearied
soldiers of chastity. sometimesthey are heard all over singing spiritual
songs, otherwhiles with their own labors they get their living, and with
their hands they seek a succor for alms and liberality. and if they do but
smell the savor, whereby to trace out Virginity (for above all other games, It
is meritorious to induce to religion.
they seek after the hunting of purity) wc all manner of careful diligence
they tracke the hidden pray even unto the den. or if they perceive any one
now ready to the flight: you shall see them all to rise up with wholle wings,
to flutter with their feathers, to dance and leap, and with a chaste quire of
purity to compass her flying, until she being delighted with the bewtifull
assembly forgetting her house and country, fall into the nets of purity, and
the haies of chastity. A good thing than it is if the endeavors of parents
favor the Virgin, as certain flabells of purity. But that is more gloriouse,
if the fire of tender age, Children may be religious without consent of Parents
without anyolde tinder, of it self do thrust it self into the sewell of
chastity. Will thy parents deny thee a dowry? But thou have a rich spouse, with
whose treasure thou being contented, need not to seek the benefitte of thy
fathers inheritance. how much better is a chaste poverty, than the commodity of
a dowry? and yet whom have you ever heard by the love of Virginity to have been
deprived of their lawful portion? Thy parents speak against thee, but they
desire to be won: they resist at the beginning, because they are loath to
believe thee. Oftentimes they are angry, that thou may learn to overcome;
they threaten disinhereting, to try if thou can set naught by all worldly
losses. They flatter thee with exquisite allurements, to see if the
inticementes of diverse pleasures cannot mollify thee. they exercise thee (o
virgin) whilst they enforce thee And thisis the first Skirmish, which thy
parents pensive desires do offer thee. First o maiden) overcome Piety is the
duty we Children owe unto Parents and Parents to children. Luc. 19.
piety. if thououercomest thy house, thou ouercomest the world. But go to,
suppose you lose your patrimony do not the future Kingdoms in heaven requite
the loss of fading and brittle possessions? Although if we believe heavenly
words, there is no man which shall leave house, or parents, or brethren, or
wife, or childrne, or sons for the Kingdom of God, and does not recaue
seven times as much in this time, and in the world to come life everlasting.
Repose thy trust in God: thou which committest thy money to a man, lend it unto
God. The good guardian of thy pledged hope, will repay the talent of thy faith
with multiplied vsuries. Truth does not deceive, justice does not circumuent,
virtue does not beguile. And if you believe not the oracle of Gods word, at the
least believe examples. An Example. Au^tars stood in S. Ambroses time. Mass a
Sacrifice and Christ really present in it. Of the hating of carnal kindred for
perfection.
In our time a certain maiden, once noble in the world, now more noble unto
God, when she was urged to mar^age by her parents and kinsefolkes, took her
refu^^e to the holy altar for whither better could a Virgin fly, than where
the sanctuary of Virginity is offered up? But here was not the end of her
boldness. There stood before the altar of God, the boast of purity, the
sacrifice of chastity: sometimes laying the Bishops hand upon her head,
demanding consecration, other whiles impatient of that just delay, and laying
her head under the altar. Can thou (says she) o mother, As well in
marriage as in consecation are given veiles the one being a marriage to the
world the other to God
veale me better than the altar can veale me, which sanctifies the veiles
them selves? more comely is that ve^le, in which Christ the head of all men is
daily consecrated. What mean you my Cosins? why do you yet still turmoile my
mind, by soliciting my marriage? I have it long since provided. Do you offer me
a spouse? I have found a better. Reckon up never so great riches, boast of
nobility, vaunt of authority: I have him to whom none may be compared: rich
with the wholle world, authorized with absolute empire, noble with heaven it
self. If such a one you have; I refuse not your choice: if you cannot find
the like; you provide not for me, but you envy me.

Than the rest being silent, one only said very abruptly: what if thy father
lived, would he suffer thee to remain unwedded? But she with great religion,
and modest piety: and therefore happily he died that there might be none to
hinder me. Which answer concerning the father, A daungetous thing to hinder
vertew
that person by his speedy death showed to be a prophecy of him self. By that
means the rest, every one fearing his own case, began to favor her whom
they sought to hinder. Neither did the Virgin suffer any loss of her riches,
but rather received the increase of her integrity. You have heard (o maidens)
the reward of devotion, beware (o parents) the example of offending.

Greg. lib. 7. mor. c. 17. and 18.. 3.
THose which with earnest study and not with disordered steps do follow the
reward of everlasting promise, even as they despise them selves for the love of
God, even so do they set at naught all things by which they feel them
selves hindered. and whereas for Goditis necessary they serve to whosoever they
are able, for God they deny even unto their kinsmen their private services.

Hence is it that when one said, sufferme first to go and bury my father: Mat.
8.
he presently heard from the mouth of truth, suffer that the dead bury the
dead, but thou go and preach the Kingdom of God. wherein is to be noted that
whilst that chosen Disciple is restrained from the burial of his father, no
devout man may of carnal affection perform that to his father, which for
the love of our lord he is bound to do eue^ for others. Hence again says the
truth: if any man come unto me, Luc. 14.
and hate not his father and mother and wife and sons and brethren and
sisters yea and also his own soul, he cannot be my Disciple. in which place
whereas the hate of our own soul is joined with the hate of our kinsefolke:
it is manifestly showed us, that so we are commanded to hate out kinsefolkes as
we are commanded to hate our selves. that drawing them unto everlasting things
and neglecting their carnal friendship when it hinders us, we may learn with
the temperate Skill of discretion both to love them conveniently, and to hate
them holesomely, that our hatred may so arise through love, that we may be able
by hating the^ more sincerely to love them. Hence also is it said by Moises:
Deuteronomy. 33
Who says to his father and his mother, I know you not, and to his brethren I
do not know them, neither have known their children: these have observed thy
word, and thy bargain, and have kept thy judgments. For yt man does desire to
know our Lord more familiarly, who for desire of piety desires not to know
whom he knew carnally. For with great loss is the knowledge of God diminished,
if therewith there be any part for fleshly knowledge. Every one therefore must
be severed from his kinsemen and friends, if he will the more truly be joined
unto the father of all, that so much the more soundly he may love those whom
valiantly he neglects for God, by how much the more he forgets the fading
affection of carnal society. We must truly even temporally do more good to
those unto whom we are nearer: because even the fire burns that which is
applied unto it, but first it consumes that whereof it was kinled. We must
acknowledge ye nearenes of earthly alliance, and yet when it lets the course
of the mind, not so much as know it. that so the faithful mind inflamed with
godly devotion, may neither despise those things which are so near it here
below, and yet setting the same in convenient order within him self, he may
surmount them for the love of those things above. With diligent care therefore
must we provide least the love of the flesh creep upon us and diuerte the gate
of our heart from the true way, and hinder the force of the supernall love, and
with the laying on of a heavy burden, press downewarde our arising mind. For
so must every one have compassion of his kinreds necessitye, that through
compassion he suffer not the force of his intention to be hindered; that the
affection of his mind may fill his bowels, and yet not auerte him from his
spiritual purpose. Neither truly do not holy men love their kindred to help
their necessities, but this very love do they overcome with ye love of
spiritual things: that so they may temper it with the measure of discretion,
that they may not thereby swerve from the direct way never so little. Whom
therefore those Kye do very well signify unto us, Affection to children
which going under the arc of our Lord unto ye mountains do show at once both
their affection and rigor. as it is written. They took two Kye which did
suckle their calves, 1. Reg. 6.
and yoaked them to the carte, and shut up their calves at home, and laid
the ark of God upon the carte. And presently there follows. the Kye went
directly by the way we leads unto Bethsames and they went with eqnall pace,
still going forward and bellowing, and declining neither on the right hand nor
on the left. For behold the calves being shut up at home, those Kye which
are tied to the carte under the arc of our Lord, do groan and go forward:
from within they send forth bellowings, and yet from the way they change not
their freppes. through compassion they feel affection, and yet do they not bow
their necks backward. So; So is it necessary that these do proceed which
having undertaken the yoke of the sacred law, do now by inward knowledge
carry God's ark, that pitying their kinnes necessity, they decline not from
their former virtuous journey. For Bethsames is the house of the son. than, to
go under the arc of our Lord to Bethsames, is with heavenly science to draw
near unto the habitation of eternal lightsomnes. But than do we truly go
unto Bethsames, when going straight forward, we decline not no not for the
affection of our children, unto bywaies of error. The love of whom must truly
possess but not bow our mind, least the very same mind either be to hard, if
affection do not move it, or be to soft, if such moving do bow it. We will
consider a little blessed Job, Jobs affection to his childern
in whom the yoke of Gods fear had mortified the neck of his heart, with
what great wisdom of discretion he carries the arc of divine knowledge.
having lost his calves he belloweth. for having heard the death of his sons
he shaued his head, and fell to the ground: but yet he goes bellowing on the
right way, because his mouth in lamenting is opened unto Gods praise, he
presently saying. Our Lord has given, our Lord has taken away, even as it
pleased our Lord so is it come to pass; blessed be the name of our Lord.

S. Hierom. ep. ad Furiam.. 4
You desire in your letter, He commends unto her the crown of widowhead
against the assaults of Parents and friends
and humbly entreat me, that I will answer you, or rather write unto you in
what manner you may live, and conserve the crown of widowhead, without any
blemish of the honor of your good name. my mind reioiceth, my bowels do
dance, my assection does leap, because you desire to be such after your
husbands death, as your mother Titiana of holy memory was long time her husband
living. Her prayers and devotions are heard. she has obtained in her only
daughter, that which she possessed whilst she lived. You have moreover a very
great Privilege of your ancestors, that even from Camillus, either none at
all or very few women of your stock was married the second time: so that you
are not so much to be praised if you remain a widow; as to be detested, if
being a Christian you perform not that, which heathen women for so many ages
have observed. I say nothing of Paula and Eustochium, flowers of your family,
least I may seem to take occasion by the exhorting of you to praise them. I
let pass Blesilla which following her husband your brother, She died halfea
year after her husband
in a short space of life fulfilled many years of virtue. And I would to God
that men would imitate the praises of women. and wrinckled old age would
perform that we voluntary youth does offer. Wittingly and willingly I thrust
my hand into the fire, many cou^tenances will frown, many arms will be
throwe^, and angry Chremes will rage with his foaming mouth. So do now adays
worldly Politics against Priests and others
many great personages will be incensed against my epistles, the wholle company
of nobles will thunder, that I am a witch, that I am a seducer, worthy to be
banished from all civil common wealths. Let them add if they will, a
Samaritane also, that I may acknowledge my Lords title. Surely, I do not
divide the daughter from her father. neither do I say that of the gospel,
suffer the dead to bury the dead. For whosoever believes in Christ lives and
whosoever believes in him, ought surely for to walk even as he walked. Honor
your father: but so, if he severe you not from your true father. So long
acknowledge the lincke of your blood how long he acknowledges his creator.
Psalm. 44.
For otherwise David will presently sing unto you: Hear o daughter, and see.
and incline thine ear, and forgett thy people and the house of thy father: and
the King will desire thy bewty because he is thy Lord. Forgetting of Parents
O great reward of forgetting ones father. the King will desire thy bewty.
because thou have heard, because thou have seen, because thou have inclined
thy ear, and forgotte thy people and the house of thy father; therefore will
the King desire thy bewty, and will say unto thee: Thou a^te all fair, o my
friend, and there is no spotte in thee. What thing more fair than the soul
which is called the daughter of God, and seeks no foreign ornaments? she
believes in Christ, and with this ambition she goes to her spouse, having the
same to her Lord and her spouse. What miseries marriage have; you have learned
in marriage it self: and you have been filled with He all udeth to the quavles
wc the Isralites first desired and after Ioathed. Number. 11.
quails even unto lothsomenes. your jaws have tried most bitter choler you
have cast ont those sower and unwholesome meats, you have eased your boiling
stomach. Why will you yet throw in again yt which once was hurtful unto
you? 2. Pet. 2.
The dog returned to his vomett, and the sow washed. into her wallowing in
the mire. The very brute beasts, and restles birds, Hope of posterity and of
conseruing the family.
do not fall the second time into the same shares and nets. Do you fear
least the family of the Furij be extinguished, and least your father have not a
babe by you. which may creep in his bosom, and beslauer his neck? What I
pray you, have all which are married children, and those children which they
have do they always answer to their kindred? Yea surely C^ceroes son did
resemble his fathers eloquence: and Cornelia your auncestresse, an example of
honesty and secundity, had much joy of the Gracchi her sons. it is ridiculous
to hope of a certainty for that, which both many have not had, and have lost
when once they had it. To whom will you leave so great riches? to Christ who
cannot dye. Who shall be your heir? he which is also my Lord. your father will
mourn, but Christ will reioise; your family will be sorrowful, but the Angels
will be ioifull. Children are not their Parents.
Let your father do what he will with his substance: you are not his by whom
you were borne, but his by who^ you were borne again, and who redeemed you
with an exceeding great price, eue^ with his blood.

Out of the epistle of the same Saint unto Marcella of the sickness of
Blesilla.. 5
Abraham is tempted in his son, and found more faithful. Joseph is sold
into Aegipt, He defends Blesill^ embracinge an estate of perfection against
her friends desire whom he calls Antichrists.
that so he may feed his father and brethren. Ezechias is terrified with his
death at hand, and resolved into tears, has his life prolonged for fifteen
years. Peter the Apostle is afflicted with our Lords Passion, and weeping
bitterly, he ^eareth; Feed my sheep. Paul a ravening woolfe and another young
Benjamin is strooken blind in a trance, that he may receive his sight: and
being compassed with a soudaine horror of darkness, calls him Lord, whom
before he persecuted as man. Even so now, o Marcella, we have seen our loving
Blesilla thirty days continually to have been tormented with the burning of an
ague: that she might learn to reject the delights of that body which shortly
after is to be consumed with worms. To her also came our Lord Jesus, and
touched her hand, and behold she arising now serves him. she sauoured
somewhat of negligence: and being tied with the bands of riches, she lay in
the sepulcher of the world. But Jesus groned, and being troubled in spirit,
cried out: Blesilla, come forth. Who arose when she was called, and being come
forth now sits at the table with our Lord. Let the Jews threaten and
swell, These men are like to Jews spiritually seeking to murder Lazarus
let them seek to murder her which has been raised up again; and let the
only apostles reioise. she knows that she owes her life unto him, who did
restore it. she knows that she embraces his fecte, whose judgment lately
she feared. her body lay almost dead: and death approaching did shake her
gasping members. Where were than the helps of her kindred? where were than the
words full of vanity? she owes nothing unto thee o ungrateful kindred, which
dying to the world is revived unto Christ. Who is a Christian, let him
reioise: he that is angry, shows that he is no Christian. A widow loased from
the bond of marriage, needs nothing but perseverance: The description of an
holy widow
But does the brown garment offend any person? let John offend him, than whom
amongst the sons of women there was none greater: who being called an Angel,
baptized our Lord him self, for he also was cladd with a camells Skin, and
girded with a girdle of hear. do gross meats displease the^? nothing is more
gross than locusts. Let those women rather offend Christian eyes who with
vernish and colorings paint their cies and cheeks, whose plaistered
countenances deformed with overmuch shining, do resemble idols. who if they
happen for want of heed to let fall a tear, it trickleth down in a furrow:
whom not so much as the very number of their years can persuade that they are
old: who with other folks hair set forth their head: and paint out in aged
wrinckles their youth fore spent: who finally in presence of many nephews are
trimmed like trembling girls. Let the Christian woman blush, if she force the
comeliness of nature, if she make provision for the flesh unto concupiscence,
in which according to the Apostle, whosoever are delighted, cannot please
Christ. Our widow before was very carefully dressed: and all the day at the
glass she studied what might be amiss. now she confide^tly says. But we
behoulding the glory of our Lord with face revealed, 2 Cor. 3.
are transformed into the same image, from glory unto glory, as of our Lords
spirit. Than the maids did platte her hear, and the harmeles head was
wringed with friseled tops: but now the untrimmed head knows this to
suffice it, that it is covered. Than did the very softnes of feathers seem
hard and she could scarce lie in the raised beds now she rises betime for to
pray, and with her shrill voice preventing the others in singing Alleluia, she
is the first which begins to praise her Lord. she kneeleth upon the ^are
ground, and with often tears that face is purged, which before was defiled
with painting after prayer, there are soung psalms: and the feeble neck, and
wearied knees, and sleepy eyes, for the earnest fervor of the mind, can scant
obtain any rest. the mourning gown is least fouled, when she lies on the
ground. The course pantoffle affords the price of gilte shoes unto the poor:
the girdle is not besette with gold and pretiouse stones: but woollen, and most
pure because of the simplicity: and such as may rather straiten the vestiments
than adorn the^. If the scorpion enuieth fo good a purpose; and with
flattering speech persuade again to eat of the forbiddeu tree: in steed of a
shoe, let him be crusshed with ANATHEMA, A deseription of Antichrist.
and whilst he dies in his poison let him have this answere^ Go after me
Satan: which is as much to say, as adversary. for he is ye adversary of Christ,
and an Antichrist, whosoever is displeased with the precepts of Christ. I pray
you what have we done like unto the Apostles, that they are so offended? The
Apostles forsook their Parents.
They forsake their aged father with their ship and nets: the publicane
rises from the custom house, and follows our Savior: The Disciple which
desired to return home, and bidd his friends farewell, is forbidden by our
masters voice. The burial of a father is not allowed, and it is a kind of
piety, for our Lord to be void of piety. We, because we go not in silks; are
esteemed Monks: because we are not droncke neither open our mouths unto
dissolute laughter; we are called grave and melancholy: if our coat be not
gorgeouse, we strait hear that common proverb: he is an hypocrite and
deceiving Grecia^. See how
Let the^ use even yet more rude scoffs; and carry about with the^ men stuffed
with fat paunches. earnest Gods Saints have been against the Persecutors of
virtue.
our Blesilla will laugh and not disdain to hear the reproaches of croking
frogs, whereas her Lord and master was called Beelzebub.

A notable epistle of Saint Bernard in the person of one Helias a monk unto
his parents. ep. 111.. 6
THe only cause for which it is not lawful to obey our parents, He defends
his entry into religi^n against them. Mat. 10 True love of parents toward the
is children. Mat. 10. Mich. 7
is God. For he says: Who loves his father and mother more than me, is not
worthy of me If you love me in deed as good and godly parents: if you carry a
true and faithful piety toward your son: why do you disquiet me being
about to serve God the father of all, and endeavor to draw me back from the
feruice of him to whom for to serve is to reign. Verily I now perceive that a
man's enemies are those of his own household. In this I must not obey you, in
this thing I ta^e you not for my parents, but for my foes. If you loved me, you
would certainly reioise, because I go to my father and yours, yea and the
father of all. otherwise what have I to do with you? What have I of you, but
sin and misery? only this corruptible carcass which I carry; I confess and
acknowledge that I have of yours. is it not sufficient for you that wretches
that you are, you have brought me a wretch into the wretchedness of this world:
and that also sinners yt you are, you have in your sin begotten me a sinner:
that you have in sin nourished him which was borne in sin: but by envying
me that mercy which I have obtained of him which will not the death of a
sinner, you seek to make me also the son of hell fire? O hard hearted father,
o cruel mother, o parents most tyrannical and impious, yea rather not parents
but parricides, whose grief is the salvation of their pledge, whose comfort is
the death of their son. The dangers of the world.
which had rather have me perish with them, than reign without them. which go
about to recall me unto the shipwreck again, from which I escaped at the
length though naked: to the fire again, from whence I scant could get forth
half consumed: to the theefes again, by whom I was left half murdered:
although by the mercy of the Samaritane, I find my self some what recovered:
which endeavor to bring back the soldier of Christ now almost triumphing at
the winning of heaven (which I boast not of in my self, but in him which
conquered the world) from the very entrance of glory, as a dog to his vomitte
and a sow to her mire, even into the world again. A strange abuse The house
is on fire. the flame is even at our back: and he which auoideth it is
forbidden to depart, he we has escaped it is persuaded to return. And this,
by those which are in the midst of the flame, and with most obstinate
foolishnes, The madness of those wc hinder others from Gods service.
and most foolish obstinacy refuse to avoid the danger. O madness, if you
despise your own death, why desire you also mine? if you neglect your own
salvation, what delight have you in persecuting mine? Why do not your selves
follow me and run away least you also burn? does this lighten your torment
if you can also cause me to perish, and is this the only thing you fear,
least you perish alone? What ease can one wc is burning yield to another in the
flames? What solace can the damned have by having companions of their
damnation? What comfort is it for the dying, to see others a dying? I learn
not this by that rich man who in torments despairing his own delivery desired
that his brethren might be warned least they also should come into the same
place of torments, The rich glottone Luke 16.
fearing undoubtedly least by their misery his own should be increased. what
than? shall I go and comfort my sorrowful mother by my temporal visitation,
that perpetually I may lament both her and my self without any consolation?
Shall I go and pa^ifie my angry father for my temporal absence, receiving also
my self a temporal comfort by his presence: that afterward either of us for
him self, and both of us one for another may be discomforted with irrimediable
sadness? Behold rather after the example of the Apostle, without harkening to
flesh and blood, I will hear the voice of my Lord commanding me: Mat. 8. Psalm
76. Hier 17.
suffer the dead to bury the dead and I will sing with David: my soul has
re^used to be comforted. And with Hieren y^^ I have not desired the day of man,
o Lord thou know. For why? the Ch^rdes have fallen v^te ^e in notable
things, and I have gotten the noble inheritance of heaven: and does earthly
p^^^ise ^atter me, and carnal comfort t^^kle me? The spirit being once
tasted, the flesh must needs be^niau^ry ^^ desire of heavenly things loatheth
the earthly w^o hunteth that which is eternal, abhors that wc is
transitory. A denoute farewell to Parents.
Cease therefore my parents, cease I pray you, both by weeping without
profitte to afflict your selves, and by reuoking in vain, to disquiett me.
least by continuing any longer to send messengers for me, you constrain me to
get me farther from you. But if you let me alone, I will never forsake
Clarauallis. Apply this to the Catholic Church. Those with continue in Gods
Church pacify Gods wrath toward their worldly friends.
Haec requies mea in seculum seculi, hic habitabo quoniam elegi eam. This is my
rest for ever and ever: here will I dwell because I have so chosen. Here will I
continually pray for my own and for your sins: here with daily prayers (even
according to your own desire) will I obtain, if I can, that we which for Gods
love are severed one from another, in this short time, may in the other world
live together with a happy and inseperable knotte in his love for ever and ever
Amen.

S Hierome in his Epistle to Heliodorus: of the praise of a solitary life.. 7.
Because at your departure from me you requested, He exhorts to forsake
parents and kindred.
that after I were come unto ye wilderness, I would send you letters of
persuasion, and I promised that I would satisfy your desire: Behold now, I
inuit you, It was not yet made treason to persuade to the old religion.
now come away speedely. I will not that you remember your old familiars: the
wilderness loves naked persons: I will not have you terrified with the length
of the ^orney: you which beleeue^ in Christ, give credit to his words. Seek
fir^^ the kingdom of God, and all these things shall be^^ put upon you. Take
neither wallet, nor staffe^^ Abundantly is he rich, which with Christ is poor.
But what do I? yet again unwisely do I pray you? Away with entreaties, let
flattering be laid aside. my iniuried Joue must be angry. thou which despisedst
me entreating, perhaps wilt hear me ch^ding. What do thou in thy fathers
house, o delicate soldier? Where is the bulwark, where is the trench, where
is the wintering under the tents? Behold from heaven the trompett sounds:
behold the armed Emperor marches with the clouds, for to overthrow the
world. Behoulde the two edged sword proceeding from the Kings mouth cutteth
down whatsoever he meets, and must we have thee come forth from the
chamber to the field, from the shadow into the sun? The body accustomed to
clothes, cannot bear the burden of the breastplate: the head used to a
kerchiefe, refuses the helmett: the hand sostned with idleness, is gawled with
the hardness of the hilte. Hear the proclamation of thy King. he that is not
with me is against me, and he that ^a hereth not with me does scatter Remember
the day when thou first wast made a soldier, The Christian soldiers oath in
Baptism.
when being buried together with Christ in Baptism, thou tookest the soldiers
oath, that in his name thou would not spare father nor mother. Behold the
Adversary goes about to kill Christ in thy breast. Behold the adverse army
longs for the donatiue which thou than receiuedst. Although thy little Nephew
hang about thy neck: A n ^table lesson.
Although with scattered hear, and with rent garments, thy mother show the
breasts wherewith ^he su^kled thee: although thy father lie overthwart ye
thresshould: go on though thou tread on thy father, and with dry eyes, fly
away to the banner of the Cross. It is the only kind of piety in this thing
for to be cruel There will come, there will come hereafter the day, when thou
shall return a conqueror into thy country, and like a valiant champion go
crowned into heavenly Jerusalem. Than shall thou with Paul become a citize^:
than shall thou demand the like freedom for thy parents: than shall thou also
pray for me, A great advantage to have one in heaven by our means
who have encouraged thee, that thou may overcome.

Neither am I ignorant with what impediment thou say thou art settered. we
are not of an iron breast, nor of a stony heart. we were not borne of a flinte,
nor nourished by the Tygres of Hircania. We also have passed through such
things our selves. Sometimes with flattering arms thy widow sister hangs
upon thee: sometimes those bondslaues which have been brought up with thee, do
say: unto whom will you leave us to serve? Otherwhiles thy dry Nurse once, but
now an old graundame, and thy fosterer, or second father in affection, do cry
out: stay a while, until we dye, and bury us Happily also thy mother with the
shaking Skins of her breasts, and her furrowed and wrinckled browe,
according to her old custom ceas^eth not to lulle thee to the pappe.
Obedience Unto paterits.
Let the grammarians also say if they please, In teomnis domus inclinata
recumbit; the wholle deca^ing house leans upon thee Easily are these ba^ds
overcome by the love of God, and fear of hell. But the scripture commands us
to obey out parents. Ye: but who loves the more than Christ, loses his
soul. The enemy holds his sword for to kill me, and shall I regard my
mothers tears? Shall I forsake Christ's warfare for my father, to who^ for
Christ's sake I owe not the labor of buriing, wc yet for Christ's sake I owe to
every one! Peter ge^ing fearful counsel to our Lord before his Passion, was a
scandal unto him Paul when the brethren held him, least he should go to
Jerusalem said: what mean you to weep and trouble my heart? I am not only
ready to be bound, but also to dye in Jerusalem for the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ. This engine of piety which shakes our faith: must be bruised with the
wall of the Gospel. Those are my mother and brethren, which do the will of my
father which is in heaven. If they beleeu^ in Christ, let them than fa^our me
which am about to fight for his name. if they do not believe; let the dead
bury the dead.

But thou will say: this is true in Martyrdom. Thou art deceived mybrother)
thou art deceived if thou think that a Christian is ever free from
persecution. than art thou most of all assaulted, when thou know not that
thou art impugned. Our aduersarye like a roaring Lion, Psalm. 10.
seeking to devour goes about, and do thou think there is peace? he sits
in ambushes with the rich, that secretly he may kill the innocent. his eyes
are bent toward the poor man: he lays wait in secrett, as a Lion in his
den: he awaiteth to devour the poor man: and do thou, that thou may be
his pray, under the shadow of a thick leaued tree give thy self to sleep.

And toward the end he exhorts him to leave the world, with such devout
sentences as we may very well apply unto our own estate, and matter of perfect
renunciation.

O deserte which blossoumest the flowers of Christ: Apply this unto ye prison
which is our wilderness.
O wilderness, in wc do grow those stoues, of which the house of the great King
in the Apocalips is builte. O solitude, which enioyest the familiarity of God.
What do thou o brother in the world, wc art greater than the world? how long
will thou be oppressed with the shadow of houses? how long will thou be kept
fast in the prison of smoking cities? Believe me; I see, I know not what
greater light. I long that having cast of the carriage of my flesh, I may fly
away unto the pure brightness of air. art thou afraid of poverty? but Christ
calls those blessed which are poor. art thou terrified with labor? But no
wrastler without sweat can be crowned. Do thou take care for meat? but faith
fears not hunger. Fear thou to rub against the bare ground, thy body
consumed with fastings? but our Lord lies with thee. Do thou loath the
untrimmed hair of an ill favored head? but Christ is thy head. Does the huge
vastenes of the wilderness amaze thee? but thou must walk with thy mind in
heaven. So often as thy heart ascends thither, so often shall thou not be in
the wilderness. Does thy vnsmothe Skin wax rugged for want of bathing? But
who is once washed in Christ, needs not again to be washed. And that I may
briefly answer all: hear the Apostle saying. The Passions of this world are
not condign to the glory to come that shall be revealed in us. Romans 8.
Thou art very dainty my brother, if thou will both here reioise with the
world, and hearafter rain with Christ. There will come, there will come the day,
when this corruptible and mortal body shall put on incorruption and
immortality. Than, blessed that servant whom our Lord shall find watching than
at the sound of ye troumpett shall quake the whole earth with ye people thereof.
and thou shall rejoice. When our Lord shall come to judge, the world shall give
a mournful groan: one tribe shall strike another breast. those which were
once most mighty Kings, with naked sides shall tremble. There shall be
presented Venus with her son. than fiery Jupiter shall be brought, and Plato
with all his foolish scholars. Aristotle's Arguments shall not avail. than
thou a clownish and poor creature shall reioise and laugh, and shall say:
Behold my crucifixe: Behold my judge, which wrapped in cloutes cried in the
cribbe. this is that son of the Carpenter and the workewoman: This is he
which carried in his mothers bosom, fledd being God from a man into Aegipt:
this is he which was clothed with purple: this is he which was crowned with
thorns. this is that enchaunter, possessed with a deuell, and a samaritane.
Behold the hands o lew which thou nailedst: Behold the side o Roman which thou
pearcedst. See the body whether it be the same, which you saled was secretly
taken away by the Disciples in the night. The love which I bear thee o brother
has compelled me to write thus unto thee: that we may once be present at those
things, for which we now sustain so hard labor.

The spiritual man's kindred out of S. John Climachus Grad. 3.. 8.
Let him be thy father, who both can and will labor with thee to disburden
thee of thy sins. This man lived in the time of Constantine the great.
Let thy mother be, holy compunction, which may wash thee from all manner of
filth. Let him be thy brother, who is thy fellow labourer and soldier in thy
heavenly race. Get thee a wife and companion, which never may be separated
from thee, the memory of death. Let thy most dear children be the sighings of
thy heart. Possess thy body as thy slave. make thy friends, the Angelical
virtues, which in the hour of death may help thee, if thou make them now
familiar unto thee. This is surely the generation of those which seek our
Lord. The assection of God excludes the affection of parents. and who faieth
he has them both deceives him self, whereas our Lord says: You cannot serve
God and Mammon. And: I came not to send peace into the earth, Mat. 6. Mat. 10.
and love of parents to children and to brethren, which have chosen to serve
me: but the sword and the battle. For I came to separate the lovers of God,
from the lovers of the world. the earthly and caruall, from those which have
overcome all earthly and material things: the desirous of glory, from the
humble. Our Lord reioiseth at this debate and separation, when it is made for
his charity. Beware, I pray thee, least thou find all overflowed with water, if
thou be entangled with the affection and love of thy kindred, and so thou perish
with them in the deluge of the love of the world. Take no compassion of the
tears of Parents and friends: least thy self do weep for ever. So often as
thy kinsfolks shall compass thee like bees, yea rather as waspes, and shall
begin to bewa^^e thee; constantly and speedely get^ thy se^e to the
consideration of death and of thy own works, that by sorrow thou may
exclude sorrow. Our friends and not our friends do crastily promise us, that
they will provide us all things to our pleasure and contentment, but with that
intention, that they may hinder our notable good course, and that being
obtained, may draw us to their own will.

It is more pr^sitable to contristate our parents than God. for he has both
made us and redeemed us. they have oftentimes made to perish those whom they
have loved. He is a true Pilgrim in this world, who like unto one of a
strange language, amongst men of an unknown tongue, only dwells at home in
the knowledge of himself We do not therefore depart from our Parents and
kin^efolkes, because we hate them: God forbid: but that we may avoid that
hinderance, which they are wo^t to procure us.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. That a man is bound under pain of eternal damnation unto
a perfect renunciation of all friends kinsefolkes Parents and Superiors their
entreaties examples and co^mandments, yea and him self also and all yt he
has, when otherwise he should be hindered from the dewty of a Christian.
S. Augustine epist. 89. quest. 4 Disputing against the Pelagian Heretics,
who taught amongst other heresies that every one was bound to sell all, and
give to the poor: which S. Augustine denies: although every one is bound to
leave all when necessity is offered.. 1.
Does that perhaps move them that our Lord says: He shows the necessity of
renunciation. Mat. 19.
whosoever shall forsake all his goods for me, shall receive in this world a
hundred fould, and in the world to come he shall possess everlasting life? It
is one thing to forsake and another to sell. for even in those things which he
commanded to be forsaken, is the wife also numbered: whom by no humane laws it
is lawful to sell, and by the laws of Christ it is not lawful not so much as
to forsake, except in the case of fornication. What is the meaning than of
these precepts? (For they cannot be contrary one to another) but that there may
happen a case of necessity when either the wife must be forsaken or Christ: The
wife and husband in this matter of forsaking one another are in the same case.
as, that I may omit other examples if the wife cannot abide her Christian
husband, and propound unto him, either divorce from her or from Christ. Here
what should be choose, but Christ, and laudably forsake his wife for Christ.
For when both are Christians, our Lord has commanded that none forsake his
wife but for sornicatio^. But wha^ either party is an infidel, let the
counsel of the Apostle be observed: that if the infidel consents to dwell
with the faithful husband: the husband forsake not his wife. in like manner
neither ye faithful wife forsake her husband if he consent to dwell with her.
But if the infidel depart, let him depart. for the brother or sister is not
subject to servitude in these things: that is if the infidel will not be with
the faithful, let the faithful a knowledge this liberty, that he yield him
self not so subject unto slavery that he forsake his faith, Sonnnes Parents,
brethren and sisters.
least he lose his unfaithful sp use. This is understood also of sons and
parents, of brethren and sisters, that they are all to be forsaken, when this
condition is propounded that he must forsake Christ if he desire to retain
them. This therefore is to be understood even of the house and land and of all
those things which are possessed as money worth. House, land and possessions.
Of the necessity of this band.
For in like manner does he not say of these: whosoever shall fell for my sake
whatsoever is lawful to be sold, but whosoever shall forsake them. For it may
come to pass that it may be said to a Christian by some Magistrate, either
thou shall not be a Christian, or if so thou will remain, thou shall lose thy
house and possessions. Than truly let even those rich me^ who had determined
so to remain rich that by their good deeds they might win Gods favor,
let them rather forsake these things for Christ, than Christ for these things.
that they may receive even in this world (Centuplum) a hundredth fould, by the
perfection of wc number are signified all things. For unto a faithful man all
the world is riches, and they become in this manner as having nothing and
possessing all things, that they may in the world to come have life
everlasting, least forsaking Christ for these temporalities, they may be cast
headlong into death everlasting. It is an act of perfection to fell all and
give to the poor.
According to this law and condition not they only which with an excellency of
mind have embraced the counsel of perfection, for to sell all and to give unto
the poor, and with lightened shoulders from the burden of this world to carry
the light burden of Christ: but also every weak person, and not so fit for
that most glorious perfection, yet such as remembers him self sincerely to be
a Christian: when he shall understand that occasion is given that unless he
forsake all these things he must forsake Christ: he will take hold rather of
the tower of fortitude against the force of the enemy, The abrenunciation in
baptism
because wha^ be builded the same tower in his own faith, he reckoned the cost
with which it might be made that is, with that resolution be came unto faith,
that he might renounce the world not in words only: because if he bought any
thing he was as one which possessed it not: and if he used this world, he was
as i^ he used it not: not hoping in yt uncertainty of riches, but in the living
God. For whereas every one which renounceth this world, undoubtedly renounceth
all that which he has, that he may be the Disciple of Christ, (for Christ when
he had expounded the parrables of the charges necessary to the building of the
tower and of the preparation of war against another King adioined this: Luc.
14.
Who does not renounce all things which he has, cannot be my Disciple: Two
manner of renouncing of riches actually and in preparation of mind.
he truly renounceth also his riches if he have any: either so that not loving
them at all he distribute them wholly to the poor and disburden him self of
superfluous carriages: or so that loving Christ more than them, he transporte
his hope from them unto him: and so use them, that giving and bestowing easily,
he may lay up treasure for him self in heaven. and be ready and prepared to
leave, even as his parents, sons, brethren and wife; even so these also if
such condition be laid before him, that unless he forsake Christ he cannot
have them for if in any other sor^e he renounce the world, Abrenunciation in
baptism.
when he comes to the sacrament of faith, he does that which blessed Cyprian
lamenteth of the lapsed, saying: that they renounced ye world in words only
and not in deeds: For of this man it is said: Luc. 14. Some fall from God
before they be urged.
When tentation coming he fears rather the loss of these things, than to
deny Christ: Behold the man, which began to build and could not finish. He
it is also which when his adversary was as yet a fair of, that is, tentatio^
not as yet afflicting him, but hanging over him and threatening him, to the
intent that he may not want these things which he loves more than Christ,
consents to forsake and deny Christ. Yea there are also many who persuade
the^ selves that even Christian religion ought to further them to increase
their wealth, and multiply their earthly pleasures. A description of a
Christian Gentleman
But Christian rich men are not such, who although they posesse these things,
yet are they not so possessed by their goods that they prefer them before
Christ: for with a sincere heart they have renounced the world, so that they
repose in such things no hope at all. These men instruct with sound doctrine
their wives, sons and wholle families to maintain Christian religion.
Receiving of Priests and recusants
These men's houses excelling in hospitallity, do receive the just in name of a
just, that they may receive the reward of a just. They break unto the hungry
their bread, they cloth the naked they redeem the captive, they hourd up to
them selves a good foundation for the time to come, that they may attainc to
the true life. and if happily for the faith of Christ they must suffer
pecuniary mulctes, Pecuniary mulctes according to the proclamation.
they hate their riches; if the world threaten them for Christ, to be bereued
and severed from their friends: they hate parents, brethren, children, wives.
Finally if they must bargain with the adversary for the very life of this body,
they hate even their own life. For of all these things have they received a
commaundment, that otherwise they cannot be the Disciples of Christ. Neither
yet because it was commanded them to hate for Christ even their lives, have
they power to sell their lives, A difference. between selling and loosing.
or to deprive them selves thereof with their own hands, but they are ready to
lose them by dying for Christ, least they may live dying by denying Christ. So
also their riches which they were not ready to sell by the counsel of Christ,
yet must they be ready to lose for Christ. least with them they perish, by
losing Christ. Martyrs have spr^^ of renunciation.
Hence have we of both sexes most rich and noble personages honored with the
glory of martyrdom. So also many wc were before loath to become perfect by
selling their goods. by imitating Christ his passion were on a sudden made
perfect: and these which with their riche^co^mined some infirmity of flesh and
blood, upon a sudden against sin did fight for their faith eue^ unto blood.
I which write this: S. Augustine was a religious man.
have earnestly loved, and not by my own strength, but by the assistance of
Gods grace have fulfilled that counsel of perfection which our Lord spoke of,
when he said to the rich young man: Go sell all that thou have, and give unto
the poor, and thou shall have a treasure in heaven, and come and follow me.
Neither surely because I was not rich, therefore shall it be accounted the
less: Mat. 19.
For the very Apostles which first did the same were rich. But he forsakes
the wholle world, which forsakes both that which he has, and that which he
desires to have. But how much I have profited in this way of perfection, I my
self in deed do know more than any other man, but God knows better than I.
And unto this purpose with as much vehemence as I can, I exhort others; S.
Augustine lived in a reguler life.
and in the name of our Lord I have companions, which have been by my means
persuaded to the same: yet so that above all things found doctrine be holden,
and that we judge not with vain stubbornes those which do not the like, as
though it could pro fit them nothing, that they govern their houses and
families Christian like, that by works of mercy they hourd them selves up
treasure for the time to come. least by such disputation we be found to be not
expounders, but accusers of the holy scriptures.

S. Aug. ser. 6. de Ver. Do. c. 5. 2
Speaking of those which went to the idolles feasts in the temple, although
not to sacrifice, but only to bankett, and yet came to the Christians Church,
whom he says therefore not to receive health in the Church as the woman which
had the flux of blood, Luc. 8.
and so not to touch Christ, as she, but rather to press him as those
multitudes.

Thou will say I fear least I should offend my Superior. Of obedience to
superiors.
And do thou fear least thou offend thy Superiors, and art thou not
afraid to offend God? Why art thou afraid least thou offend thy Superiors?
See I pray thee least perhaps there be a greater Superior whom thou searest
not to offend. there is surely a greater. do not offend him. This rule is given
thee. is it not a clear case, that he must not be offended which is greater
than the rest? The order of superiority.
Reckon up now thy Superiors? The first are thy father and mother. if they
bring thee up well, if they nourish thee for Christ, they are to be heard in
all things, thou must obey them in every commandment and serve them, so that
they command nothing against a greater. Who (faiest thou) is greater than he
which begotte me? he wc made thee. for man begets, but God creates. man
knows not how he begets, he knows not what he begets. he which saw
thee for to make thee before thou wast whom he made, Obedience to ye Country.
he surely is greater than thy father. Let thy country be greater yet than
thy parents them selves that whatsoever thy parents comaund against thy
country thou hear them not, and what thy country commands against God
thou obey it not. How a man must show him self thankful to God for his
reconciliation.


For if thou will be healed, if after the flux of blood, if after 12. years
continuance in that discase, if after the wasting of all thy goods in physic
and yet not having recovered thy health, thou desire to be made wholle, o
thou woman which I speak unto in figure of the Church: thy father commands
this thing, and thy people command this other thing. but thy Lord God faieth
unto thee forgett thy people, and the house of thy father. With what good, with
what fruit, Psalm. 44.
with what reward? Because faieth he the King has desired thy bewty. he has
desired that which he has made. for that he might make her bewtifull, he loved
her which was filthy. For an infidel and filthy one, he shedd his blood, he
made her faithful and fair: he loved his own gifts in thee. For what did
thou bring unto thy spouse? what dowry did thou receive of thy first father
and of thy first people? Did thou not receive luxuriousnes and cloutes of
sins? he cast away thy cloutes, Your dowry when you were out of the Church
he cut in pieces thy hearecloth: he pitied thee that he might deck thee,
he decked thee that he might love thee.

Idem lib. cont. Adimant c. 6. 3
OF that which is written in Exodus Honor thy father and mother. Parents are
to be honored and also contemned
Unto this place where our Lord gave commandment of honoring Parents, the
Maniches say that, that place of the Gospel is contrary, where our Lord unto
one which said, I will first go that I may bury my father, gave this answer:
suffer that the dead bury ye dead, Mat. 3.
but thou, come and preach the kingdom of God. Which is answered in like manner
as we answered the former place, concerning the leaving of the wise for the
kingdom of heaven. For both we must honor our Parents, and yet we contemn
the^ without any impiery for the preaching of the kingdom of God.

And after longer disputation he concludes thus. Whereupon it is manifest, that
both the houour of Parents in their degree is to be observed, and yet in
comparison of the divine love, especially if they be a hinderance thereunto
without all scruple we ought to contemn them. Deuteronomy 33.
For we read also in the old testament: who faieth to his father or mother, I
know you not, and who acknowledges not his tonnes, he has known my testament.

S August. Conc. 1. in Psalm. 70.. 4
In that thing only the son must not obey the father, Obedience to Parents
if his father command him any thing against his Lord God. neither ought the
father to be agreeued, when God is in this manner preferred before him.

S. Aug. in Psalm. 136. in fine.. 5
What has this Babylon done unto us? Psalm. 64.
we have already soung in that other psalm: The speeches of wicked men have
prevailed against us. For when we were borne; the (...) of this world found us
little ones, (...) yet infants stra^gled us with vain opinions of manifould
errors. A sit revenge to Paents for evil bringinge up.
The infant i^ borne a future citizen of Hierusa^em, and in Gods predestination
already a citizen: but in the mean time inthralied for a while, when he
learneth to love that (...) his parents whisper unto him. they instruct and
reach him couerousnes, extorsions, daily lies, diverse worships of idols, and
Deuells, unlawful meditines of inchamments and knottings. What may the tender
soul yet an infant do, attending what his Elders do, but follow that which he
sees them to do? Babylon therefore did persecute us when we were little ones.
but God gave us the knowledge of him self being great ones; that we should
not follow the errors of our Parents: which than I fared was foretold by the
Prophet: Hier. 16.
Unto thee shall die nations come from the end of the earth: and shall say:
Verily our fathers have observed a lie; and a vanity which has not profited
them.

Even now do young men say thus, wc were killed little ones by following such
vanities: but by casting away vanities and re^^uing unto God let them go
forward, The persuasions of Parents to go to the Church are these little ones
and reader unto Babylon what recompense shall they render it that which it
has rendered unto us. Let her little ones also be crushed and dye. Which are
the little ones of Babylon? Evil desires nowly arising. For some d^^guarrell
with their desires being old. When the desire first arises, before e^ell
custom get^ any force against thee, when she is a little one, let her not
get the strength of a custom, when she is a little one crushe her. But thou
art afraid least being crushed she will not dye. Crush her against the
Rock. 1. Cor. 10.
And the Rock was Christ.

Whatsoever (Brethren) in the world does flatter you: be not over bold: do not
confer with your desires. is it a great enemy? kill it at ye stone: is it a
small enemy? crushe it against the Rock. Let the Rock overcome: build your
selves in the Rock if you will not be carried away either by the flood, or by
the winds, or by the rain.

Idem in Psalm. 50.. 6
But yet (my dearest) in such diversity of manners and so detestable corruption
govern your houses, govern your sons, Parents ought to teach virtue and not
wickedness.
govern your families. Even as it is our parts in the Church to speak unto
you, so unto you does it appertain to deal in such sort in your houses, that
you may give good account of those which are your subjects. God loves
discipline. but it is a perverse and false innocence, to let loose the bridle
to sins. Very unprofitably, God reuengeth ye Parents sins unto the fourth
generation.
very perniciously shall the son feel the fathers lenity, that justly
afterward he may feel Gods severity. And this not alone, but together with his
dissolute father. For what? if him self sins not and does not as his son,
must he not therefore forbidd his son from that wickedness? what? would he
perhaps seem to his son, that him self would do the like also if he were
not old? The sin which displeases thee not in thy son delights thee:
What if the father inuiteth ye son to that with displeases him.
but age has forsaken thee, not desire. But perhaps the evil son neglects
either the admonition or childing or se^^^ty of his father. Thou fulfill that
which belo^ goth to thee, God will exact of him that which ^elonged to him.

S. Augustine. ser. ^^de verbis Dom. of him which said unto our Sauiout.
Permit me first to go and bury my father. Mat. 8.
. 7
The faithfulness of his heart did offer him to our Lord: but piety did detain
him. God is to be preferred be fore Parents.
But Christ our Lord when he prepares men for his Gospel, will have no excuse
to be pretended of this carnal and temporal piety. The law of God surely has
it, and our Lord him self does reprove the Jews, because they destroyed the
commandment of God. Ephesians. 6.
And Paul the Apostle in his epistle said: this is the first commandment in
the promise, which? Honor thy father and thy mother. God him self spoke it.
This young man therefore would do Gods commandment, and bury his father. but
there is place, time, and matter, which is convenient for this matter, this
time, and this place. We must honor our father, but we must obey God. We must
love him which begotte us, but we must prefer him which made us. I (...) thee
(faieth (...)) to the Gospel, there is (...) of thee for another work. this
work is greater than that which th^^ intendest to do. suffer th^^ (...) their
dead. Is thy father dead? there (...) persons for to bury their dead. (...)
dead which bury the dead? can a dead man be buried by the^ which are dead? how
do they wind him if they be dead? how do they carrry him, if they be dead? how
do they lament him, if they be dead? They wind him they carry him, they lament
him, and yet they be dead, So is any dead wc is in mortal sin.
because they are infidells. He taught us that which is written in the
canticles: where ye Church says: 1 Io. 3, 14. To 6, 21. Iac. 1, 15. Apoc. 3,
1.
Do you set in order charity in me. What means this, do you set in order
charity in me? Do you make degrees, and yield unto every one that which is dew
do not set the greater under the inferior Love your parents, but preserre God
before your parents. Harken to the mother of the Machabees. 2. Match 7.
My sons says she I know not how you appeared in my womb. I could conceive
you, I could bring you forth: but I could not fashion you, hear therefore him,
esteem him above me: neither have any regard for to leave me deprived of you.
She commanded them, and they obeyed her. That which this mother taught her
sons: the same did our Lord Jesus Christ teach this man to whom he said;
follow me. For presently there stepped forth another Disciple, to whom nothing
had been said: Luc. 9.
and promised that he would follow our Lord: but I go first (says he) to take
my leave of them which are at home. Which, I suppose, has this meaning. I will
give them warning, least perhaps, as it is an ordinary thing, they seek me.
But our Lord answered: no man putting his hand to the plough and looking back,
is ap^e for the Kingdom of heaven. The East calls thee and do thou look
upon the west?

S. Augustine. set. 6. de verb. Do. cap. 7.. 8.
If he be good which has authority over thee; All superiority is to be
contemned in that that it is against Christ.
he is thy nourisher, if he be evil, he is thy tempter. thou therefore both
willingly accept his nourishment, and be tried by his tentation. Look thou be
gould, consider this world as the gouldsmithes furnace: in one narrow place
there are three things gould, chas^e, fire To those two fire is purte, the
chafe is burnt, the gould is purged. Some person has yielded unto
threatenings, and was brought to go to the idols temple. Alas, alas, To go to
the Church
I bewail the chafe, I see the ashes Another has not yielded unto
threat^ings, has not yielded unto terrors: being brought before the judge: he
was constant in his Confession: he bowed not to the idol. What does the fire?
does it not purge the gould? Behold the constant in our Lord, my brethren:
mighty is he wc has called you. fear not the threatenings of the wicked. You
suffer your enemies, you have for whom to pray. Let them not in any case
terrify you this is perfect health, draw your selves drink out of this
bankett, here drink that you may be satisfied: not there where you may become
madd. Be constant in our Lord. you are silver, you shall be gould. Sap. 3.
This is not our own comparison, it is out of the scripture you have read it,
you have heard it. As ^ould in the f^rnace has he proved them, and as a
sacrifice of holoce u^t, he has accepted them Behold what you shall be in the
treasure of God. Be you rich with God, not as to make him rich, but as to be
rich of him. Let him fill you, admit nothing else unto your heart. But do
we perhaps make you proud, or teach you to contemn ordained power? We say not
so. You which are diseased in this point, To. 13.
touch also the hemme of Christ's garment for to be instructed and cured. The
Apostie faith: Let every soul be subject to higher powers, for there is no
power but from God. And those that are, of God are ordained. therefore he that
resists the power, See also l. 3. confess. c. 8
resists the ordinance of God. But what if he command that which thou
ought not to do? here truly contemn power, by fearing power. Do you
consider the very degrees of humane laws. If the governor command any thing,
is it not to be done? yet if the Proconsull command the contrary, than truly
do thou not despise power, but choosest to obey the greater. Neither herin
ought the lesser to be angry, if the greater be preferred. Again if the
Proconfull command one thing, and the Emperor another: is it doubted but that
be is to be obeyed, the other being despised? S. Augustine would not allow
going to the Church if he were a among us. Ephesians. 6.
Therefore if the Emperor bids one thing, and God another: what do you
judge? Pay tribute. Attend unto my service very well: but not in the idols
temple. In the idols temple forbids it. Who forbids it? a greater power.
Pardon me, thou threatnest prison, he threatens hell. Here now must thou take
upon thee thy faith as a buckler in the which thou may quench all the fiery
darts of the enemy.

S. Cypri. libro de oratione Dominica.. 9.
Our Father which art in heaven. The new man, How God is our Father.
borne again and restored unto his God by his grace: in the very first
beginning says, Father: because now he has begone to be the son of God.
He came says the Apostle into his own, and his own received him not, but as
many as received him, Io. 1.
he gave them power to be made the sons of God, to those that believe in his
name. He therefore that has believed in his name, and is become the son or
God, must hence begin, that he may both be thankful and profess him self
the son of God, whilst he confesses that he has a father in heaven, which
is God, and that he may also witness, that even in the first words of his
nativity, he renounced his earthly and carnal father, and began to
acknowledge and account him only his father which is in heaven; even as it is
written. Who faieth to his rather and mother, I know you not, and have not
acknowledged their sons, Deuteronomy. 33
these have kept thy commaundernents, and observed thy (...). Mat. 23.
Also our Lord in his Gospel commanded that we call not a father unto our
selves on earth, because we have one only father which is in heaven and unto
that Disciple which made mention of his departed father, he answered let the
dead bury the dead, for he had faied that his father was dead, Mat. 5.
whereas the father of the faithful is alive.

S. Gregory in the 4. book of his dialogues chap. 18.. 10.
Peter. A strange punishment of a father in his son evil nurteted.
Whereas mankind is subject to many and insinite vices, it seems to me, that
the greatest part of the heavenly Hicrusalem is filled either with little ones
or with very infants. Gregory. Although we must believe that all Christened
infants dying in their infancy do enter into the heavenly Kingdom: yet is it
not to be thought that all little ones, especially those which can speak do
enter into heaven. because unto some infants the entry of that Kingdom is
shut up, by their own parents if wickedly they bring the^ up. For a certain
man very well known to all this city, three years ago, had a son of five
years of age, as I think. whom because he loved over carnally, he brought up
over loosely. The same child which is a grievous thing to speak so soon as
any thing went contrary to his mind, was a customed to blaspheme the Majesty of
God, but in that last contagiousnes sickned to death. And when his father held
him in his bosom, as those which were present did witness, the child with
ghastly eyes perceiving that malignant spirits were come unto him, began to
cry; Help father, help father. And so crying he bent away his face, for to
hide it in his fathers bosom. But wha^ his father asked him what he saw, he
answered certain (...) ^amores are come which will carry me away, and when he
had said this, So many children miserably perish in heresy, being first made
to distemble by their parents.
he presently blasphemed the name of Gods Majesty, and yielded up the ghost.
For that Almighty God might show for what offense he was delivered to such
tortures, that which his father would not correct him for huing, that he p^^^it
ted he should iterate dying. that he which long time had lived in blasphemy
through God patience: should once by Gods judgment dye blaspheming to the
intent that the father should acknowledge his offense, who being careless of
the little soul, brought up for hell fire, no little sinner.

S. Hierome upon the 10. chapter of S. Matthew.. 11.
Who loves his father and mother more than me: Hatred to ones kindred sometimes
is piety to God.
is not worthy of me. He which before had said, I came not to send peace, but
a sword, and to divide men against father and mother, daughter in law, and
mother in law: least any man should prefer piety before religion: he added:
Who loves his father and mother more than me, is not worthy of me. And in the
canticles we read: Cant. 2. The order of charity.
he has ordered in me charity. This order is necessary in every affection.
After God love thy father, love thy mother, love thy children. But if necessity
come that the love of parents and children must be compared to the love of God,
and both cannot be observed: hatred to ones kinted, is piety to God.

THE THIRD CHAPTER. Of the necessary renunciation sometimes to be made of
husband and wife: although that which has been said above belong also to them.
S. Aug. cont. Adimant. c. 3.. 1
THe true faith and the discipline of the Catholic Church affirms both to
be true and spoken of our Lord, A wife is to be left for the kingdom of heaven.
and no way contrary: that both the couiunction of man and wife is of our Lord,
and the leaving of ones wife for the Kingdom of heaven is of our Lord. For not
because Jesus Christ has raised up dead men and given them life, therefore is
not life it self to be left for the Kingdom of heaven. Even so than although
our Lord has joined a wife unto a man, yet is the to be left (if need be) for
the Kingdom of heaven. For this is not always necessary as the Apostle
says. 1. Cor. 7
If any faithful has a wife an infidel, and she consents to dwell with
him, let him not dismiss her. he means truly, that if she do not consent
to dwell with him, that is, if she detest in him the faith of Christ, and
suffers him not because he is a Christian, she is to be left for the
Kingdom of heaven. even as the same Apostle afterward says: if the infidel
depart, let him depart. for the brother or sister is not subject to bondage
in such things. If any man therefore does leave the Kingdom of heaven, whilst
he will not leave his wise which cannot abide a Christian husband: he is
reprehended by our Lord. The wife also must leave her husband in like sort.


So he concludes that these scriptures are not contrary, because (says he
there the wife is joined to the husband that together they may deferue the
Kingdom of heaven. and so is a wife commanded to be left, if she hinder her
husband from getting of the Kingdom of heaven.

S. Greg. Lib. 3. mor c. 14. in 2. caput Job. treating of Job. sitting in the
dunghill and his wines wicked impugning of his holy patience.. 2
But what do we say thus much of the insidells, Who sight against Christ.
whereas in the Church it self we se many carnal persons by their wicked
manners fight against the life of their Redeemer? For some there are who because
with the sword they cannot, yet do persecute him with perverse actions. for
when they see they want in the Church that which they desire: they become the
enemies of the good, and not only addicte them selves to crooked behavior,
but endeavor also to bend the righteous me^nes straight nes to their
perverseness. They neglect to consider the things eternal, and with the baseness
of their mind they are subdued to the desire of that which is temporal. and so
much the deeper they fall from things everlasting, because they repute that
besides temporal goods there are no other. To these men is much displeasant
the just men's simplicity, and when they find occasion of trouble, they persuade
them to embrace their doublenes. Wherefore is that very fit which follows.
His wife said unto him, do thou yet remain in thy simplicity. Bless God,
and dye For whose person did this deceiving woman bear, but of certain
carnal persons within the Churches bosom, who in that they be within by their
outward profession, do the more oppress the good with uncorrected manners. for
less perhaps should they have hurt, if the holy Church admitting them had not
received them in the very closett of faith, and by such receiving them unto
this profession were not in estate that she cannot avoid them. Luc. 8
Hereof is it that the multitude oppressing our Redeemer, but one only woman
did touch him, wherefore he said, who has touched me? To whom when the
Disciples answered: the multitudes throung and press thee, and do thou say
who has touched me, he forthwith added, some body has touched me, for I know
that there is virtue proceeded from me. Many therefore do press our Lord, and
one only touches: because those wc are carnal in the Church do press him,
being far from him, and those only do touch him which being truly humble
are joined unto him. The multitude therefore do press him, because the company
of carnal folks, how much nearer it is admitted, so much the harder is
tolerated. A new kind of persecutours.
it presses and touches not, because it is importunate being present: and yet
in good life always absent. For sometimes they persecute us by wicked
speeches: but sometimes only by perverse manners. For sometimes they exhort
us to that which they follow: other times although they exhort not, yet cease
they not to give us examples of iniquity. Those therefore which by words or
examples intise us to evil, in very deed are our persecutours: by who^ we are
brought unto the combat of tentations: which at the least in our heart we may
overcome. But we must understand that those which are carnal in the Church:
sometimes through fear, sometimes through presumptuousnes go about to persuade
perverseness: and when them selves either for pusillanimity, or haughtines do
shrincke, they seek to instill the same things into the minds of the just,
and that under pretense of charity. Charitable perswaders to schism. 2. Reg.
19. Mat. 16.
Peter had a carnal mind before our Saviors death and resurrection. Saruias
his son with a carnal mind followed his captain David, yet the one sinned
by fear, the other by pride. The first hearing of his masters death, said:
Lord be it far from thee, this shall not be unto thee. The other not
suffering ye injuries of his captain says: And for all these words shall
not Semei be killed, which has cursed the anointed of our Lord? But answer is
given him. what have I to do with you o sons of Saruias: Evil counsailours
are called Devils.
why will you this day become Satan unto me? Evil counsailours than are called
by the name of the Apostata Angels, who with flattering speeches pretending
love, do draw unto wickedness. Such are those who contumeliously oppose them
selves to Priests.
yet far worse are they, which not of fear but of pride give them selves to
this vice, whose figure especially was this wife of Job, endeavoring to bring
her husband unto pride: saying: yet do thou remain in thy simplicity? Bless
God, and dye. She reprehendeth simplicity in her husband, because despising all
that which is transitory, he desired with a pure heart only things eternal.
as if she had said: why do thou simply desire things everlasting, and
patiently groanest at thy present euells? departing, despise that which is
eternally good, and even by death avoid that which is presently evil.

But those which are elect, whilst inwardly they suffer of carnal men that
which is evil, how great an vprightnes they show within them selves, we may
learn of the words of him which is wounded and yet sound, How wives shoud
answer their Schismaticke husbands.
of him which sits, and yet is erected. Thou have spoken says he like a
very foolish woman, if we have received good of the hand of our Lord, why
should we not abide evil? Holy men being overtaken with the conflicte of
tribulations, when at the very same time they abide some striking them, and
others persuading them; to the first they oppose the buckler of patience:
against the second they hurl the darts of Doctrine. Two combares of
Catholics.
and with wonderful conning of virtue they prepare them selves to both manners
of fight, that both within they may wisely confute that which is perverse, and
without they may stoutely contemn whatsoever is contrary: and by teaching the
first correct them, by tolerating the second oppress them. For by suffering
their enemies which rise against them, they despise them: and by compassion of
their diseased friends they reduce them; to those they resist least they draw
others; but these they cure, least utterly they loose the life of all honesty.

S. Hier. in ep. ad Tit. c. 3. 3
If it be good which the Emperor and Governor commands: obey the will of
the commander, God is to be obeyed before husband or any other
but if it be evil: answer him out of the acts of the Apostles: It behooves
to obey God more then men. This same let us understand both of servants to
their masters, and of wives to their husbands, and of children to their
Parents: that in those things only they must be subject to their masters,
husbands, Parents, which are not contrary unto Gods commandments.

An explication of diverse lawful manners of separation of man and wife,
according to the holy scriptures and the sentence and practice of holy Church.
WE have in diverse places above, set down ye doctrine of Christ him self
with the declaration of the Doctors of the Church,. 1
concerning the forsaking of wives for the love of Christ.

But whereas in this matter of forsaking, or of living in the estate of
wedlock, and perfourming matrimonial dewty one to another, the husband and
wife is of like Hieron. Ep. ad Oceanum. Aug. lib. 2. de adult. con. cap. 8. and
19. Sylu. verbo Deuortium 1.
condition, and that divorce or separation or forsaking wc is lawful to the
husband is lawful also to ye wife: as well least wives should in this point be
too rash, as that they may know if need should require how far they may
either with meritte or without sin proceed: we must necessarily although in
few words entreat hereof.

There are therefore in general two kinds of divorces of man and wife. Two
kinds of divorces in general.
the first is nothing else but a declaration of the inualidity of a marriage
unlawfully contracted. when because of some impediment, the contracte could not
be sufficient, and therefore is dissolved by the Church: and of this we have
nothing at this present to say. The other is, when that marriage which according
to the law of God and nature was a true and perfect marriage, is notwithstanding
separated by lawful means and of this must we make our wholle discourse.

This separation therefore is of three sorts. Three kinds of separation of a
lawful marriage.
For either the marriage is quite dissolved the parties remaining free from the
former bond: or the bond of the marriage being still in force, there is a
separation made sometimes of bed only, sometimes even of all cohabitation..
2. Separation of bond.


The very bond of a marriage once sufficient may be in diverse ways dissolved
otherwise than by death (for we speak of that dissolution which leaves both
parties alive)

First if two infidells be married together which were never baptized: 1. Cor.
7.28. q. 2. Can. si infidelis. etc. Qua^to and cap Gau demus de diuortijs.
the one party coming to our holy faith, may marry again and so the first
marriage may be dissolved in three cases. first if the party which remains
infidel will not dwell with the faithful secondly if he will not (sine
contumelia aut iniuria Creatoris) without contumely or injury of Christ.
Thirdly if by reason of some scandal which may happen the faithful be bound
to forsake his first marriage. as now in diverse places it is practiced and by
law established, that such a faithful person shall be separated from the other
remaining an infidel. For S. Paul does not absolutely command, but gives as
it were counsel, not to dismiss the infidel if he be content to dwell still
with the other.

Of this dissolution of marriage we need not to entreat the case being clear,
and not in our country occurrent. yet this must be taught to all Catholics,
that they beware herin of the doctrine of those heritickes, who agreeably to
the rest of their licentiouse opinions maintain that an heretic may forsake
his Catholic wife and marry another. The holy Church teaches that this rule
of S Paul has no place in the marriages of those which have been baptized.
although they were become heretics yea and infidells or Turks, before the
time of the marriage: or although afterward either both or one should fall into
heresy or infidelity. For the marriage of two baptized not lawfully hindered by
any canonical impediment, is always a Sacrament and if it be once consummated
by no means can be dissolved.

Secondly the bond it self of marriage is taken away, when after the
solemnization of the same, before it be consummated by carnal copulation, Cap
Ex publico. de conuers. coning.
yet for to take away all occasion of fraud, the cannon law allows two
months of liberty unto one which determines to enter into religion: after
which time he is either bound to matrimonial dewty (which being once yielded,
the marriage cannot be dissolved) or presently to enter without any longer
delay. This doctrine is confirmed by the continual practice of the Church.
Haer. 78.
of S. Tecla induced herunto by Saint Paul as l. 2. de virg
S. Epiphanius and Beda and Simeon Metaph.
S Ambrose acknowledge. of S. Alexius a most noble Roman and famous for this
act in all ages. of two soldiers whom S. Augustine reports in his time to
have forsaken their spouses and to have become monks at Treuers. Lib. 8. conf.
c. 6 lib. 3. dial. cap. 14. See 27. q. 2. can. despo^satu^ and can. Decreta.
and de conuers. coniug. c. ex publico. and can. ex part tua and can. vertum.
by whose example their spouses did also dedicate as S. Augustine says their
virginity unto God. of S. Gregoria a Roman Nun, who because she ran from
her spouse in earth (as writes S. Gregory) deserved to have a spouse in
heaven. and of many others in several times. Besides we have the same in
diverse ancient canons of diverse Popes. S. Gregory, S. Eusebius, Alexander
the third and Innocentius the third.

Finally the Council of Trent Sess. 24. c. 6.
defines it in these words. If any one say that marriage only contracted and
not consummated, is not dissolved, by the solemn profession of religion of the
one party. Let him be anathema. Thus much of this shall suffice.

A third dissolution of matrimonial band, may be, may lawfully marry again.
except that the dishonest party cannot without dispensatio^ remain with the
second companion, there being between them that impediment which is called
impedimentu^ criminis. which is (for as much as belongs to our present
purpose) when a married party commits adultery and withal either promises
or presently contracteth although secretly marriage with the adulterer. Antonin.
3. part. tit. 1. cap 21.. 3. Nauar. c. 22 number. 21. Sylu. verbo Diuortium q 4.
Caiet. Tract. 25. q. 1. D. Tho. 4 sent. d. 27. q. 1. ar. 3. Why marriage not
consummate is dissolved by religion. Cap. Debliu^ de Bigamis and glossa ibi.
For the allowing of this doctrine we have the practice of the Church and
opinion of all old Canonistes and most Divines of our age. and it may very
plainly be deduced out of the former verety of our faith. For although every
marriage contracted between baptized couples be a Sacrament yet we see that it
has not that indissolubillity and firmenes, which it has after it is
consummated: whereas without any dispensation it is dissolved by profession of
religion. And that with great reason. For there be three significations in
marriage: first of the invisible conjunction of Christ and the soul which is in
grace. the second of the conjunction of Christ with his wholle Church by the
same grace and charity. the third of the conjunction of Christ with his Church
by the conformity of his humane nature, which he took upon him in his
incarnation. Now of this third does proceed the perfect firmenes of marriage:
although the other two are sufficient to make it a Sacrament. Hence was it that
our Savior said not: Mat. 19. Alex. 3 cap. Ex publico. De conu. coning.
That which God has joined let not man separate, but after that he had said:
now they are not two but one fresh. What marvel therefore if that marriage may
by some Ecclesiastical means be divided, which is not yet consummated, and
where they be properly as yet two, and not two in one flesh?

Besides. Hugo de S. vict lib. 2. de Sacr. par. 11
in marriage there are two conjunctions: the one spiritual by mutual consent
of minds: the other carnal by conjunction of bodies. But it seems very
great reason that one spiritual bond, should yield to another more perfect
which is that of religion, whereby the soul is joined after so singular a manner
unto God. especially, here being no injury unto the education of children
because there are none: nor unto the other party now remaining free, and no way
blemished or made unfit for another marriage by the loss of virginity.

And whereas by the doctrine of the Apostle the carnal bond of marriage is
dissolved by the natural death of the one party, 1. Cor. 7.
in so much that if the same party should be miraculously revived again, yet
might the wife choose whether she would have him, and if she had married another
she could not have him: why shall not the spiritual death of one wc by
religiouse profession dies to the world, be of sufficient force to take away
ye spiritual bond of a marriage not consummated?

Now if there be this difference in the firmity of these two marriages: why
shall we not attribute the same authority to Gods Vicar in earth, for to
dissolve that by his sovereign power of binding and loasing, Mat. 16.
which a man may without his dispensation by his proper act dissolve?
especially whereas there may be so urgent causes of such dispensation, and so
important for the good of souls. All this we may confirm with an other truth
in Divinity. For according to the more common and sound opinion of Deuines the
Pope may dispense in solemn vows of religion, Nauar c. 12. number. 75. D. Tho.
4. d. 38. q 1. ar. 4.
and give a Monk upon just causes leave to return to the world again and to
marry. and this has been diverse times done. and there is no reason why he
may dispense in simple, and not in solemn Vows. Richardus Durand. Palud.
Mayor. Henricus S. Antonin. Angel. Innocentius Hostien. Panorm. Caiet.
now if one should thus be dispensed withal which had after a contract of
marriage before the consummation entered into religion: than might it happen
that he should live in the world married, his first wife being married also to
another. Than why may not the Pope do at once, that which by such a
circumstance he may do severally?

Let us than conclude that in marriage which is co^summated none but God
himself can dispense. who has not dispensed, but only in the marriage of
infidells, when one comes to our holy faith. But in marriage only contracted
and not consummated, the bond may be taken away in two sorts. first by
entrance into religion of the one party, without dispensation or consent of the
other party: secondly by the dispensation of the Pope at the suite of both
parties, or of the one only whom the other has already unjustly forsaken. And
although this last be not expresely defined by the Church: yet is it very
secure in practice: and it becomes every devout Catholic with godly
affection to persuade him self, that so many chief Pastors of Gods Church.
in so weighty a matter have not erred.. 3


Thus much being said of the dissoluing of the very bond of marriage let us go
now to that which follows of the separation of bed. Of the separation of
bed.


This separation may be with singular meritte and with great congruency made by
common consent, 1. Cor. 7.
For those men are far deceived, who by the holy name of matrimony, seek to
excuse their intemperate desues, wholly inclining the^ selves to the satisfying
of their disordered appetite. These should diligently consider the speech of
the Angel unto young I obye. Tob. 6.
I will show thee who are those against whom the Deuell can prevail. For they
which so undertake marriage, that they may exclude God from them selves and from
their mind: and attend unto their lust as a horse and mule, who have no
understanding: the Deuell has power over those. For this cause does S.
Augustine allege S. Ambrose and approve his saying, Lib. 2. cont. Iulia. c. 7.
where he calls him which is intemperate in marriage, his wives adulterer. and
S Hierome worthily has wrotten: it Skilleth not for how honest a cause a man
become mad. Lib. 1. cont. Iouin.
wherefore even the Philosopher Xistus in his sentences, says. a too earnest
lover of his wife, is an adulterer. toward another man's wife every love is
shameful: and so is toward ones own wife that which is over much. a wife
man must love his wife by judgment and not by passion. he will rule the
hastines of pleasure, neither will he be carried hedlong unto copulation.
Nothing is more filthy than for to love his wife as an aduoutresse. Thus S.
Hierome

This we say not to condemn the act of matrimony which God has ordained and
allowed: but that every one should understand that even in that estate there is
danger: The matrimonial act how it is sometime sinful.
and as the act may be meritorious when it is done for some virtuous end
either of desire of children so that they purpose to make them children of God
and members of his Church: or for to render the debt to the other party
demanding: as it may be also at the least void of sin when it is done for
the avoiding of fornication, when the one party doubts that otherwise he
should fall either in thought or deed: so is it always at the least a venial
sin to pretend in that action only delight: and if such delight do pass
the limittes of matrimony (as if it be joined with unlawful concupiscence of
any other person, or if the natural order and necessary decency which God has
ordained be not observed) it is always a deadly sin. Those therefore which
are the true children of God, must before they marry, The ends of marriage.
lay before their eyes the lawful and godly ends of matrimony. that is, the
desire of children for to increase Gods house: the mutual fidelity one to
another and continual services and comfort of this miserable life: and the
avoiding of fornication if they be such as list not to fight against ye
assaults of the flesh: finally and principally the dignity of the Sacrament
and perfect resemblance of the conjunction of Christ and his Church. For
reverence of the which, they must imprint in their minds, that saying of young
Tobye: Tob. 8.
we are the children of Saints, and may not be so joined together as the
Gentills which know not God. And the danger of marriage being so great as in
very deed it is, and the corruption of our nature so ready to extend it self
in delightful things once permitted beyond the dew limittes: it were also very
convenient that every one which undertakes such an estate, should seek some
Angel to be instructed by of what manner of inconvenience he may fall into, if
diligent care and continual heed be not taken. Certain it is that the more
we severe our selves from sensual things, the more we approach unto God. And
those that for Christ refrain from lawful delights, are more disposed to
receive of him the heavenly pleasures. At some times therefore as well to bridle
the disorder of the appetite, and teach it to obey reason: as also to avoid
Aug. l. 14. ciu. c. 16.
the distraction which the acts of marriage do bring whereby that devotion may
be hindered which is required upon solemn days in a Christian: there is a
kind of separation to be made between man and wife. which we call separation
of bed, although it require not separation of place: of which the Catechism
of the Counsel of Trent does thus entreat. De sacr. matr.
Because all good things by holy prayers are to be obtained at Gods hands: the
faithful are to be taught that for to pray and worship God, they abstain
sometimes from the office of matrimony, and especially that they know how they
should observe this, three days at the least before they receive the holy
Eucharist, and oftentimes when the holy fast of Lent is celebrated, even as our
Fathers have very well and holily commanded us. For so will it come to pass
that they shall feel the very benefittes of marriage with greater measure of
Gods grace daily to be increased: and following the study of piety, they shall
not only pass this life quietly and peaceably, but have a true and firm hope
which never confounds of obtaining through Gods goodness the life everlasting.
To. 5.


A second kind of separation of bed there may be with excele^t perfection, 1.
Cor. 7.
where he only by indulgence warns them to return again together least
they be tempted: although he desire that every one were as him self. And this
kind of separation is the more meritorious, when by mutual consent it is
vowed. neither can the one party lawfully vow continency without consent of the
other. The excellency of vows. Aug. ep. 45
for a vow always gives a higher dignity unto every virtuous action: both
because of the stability wc is there where it is not lawful to go back:
faelix necessitas (says S. Augustine quae ad meliora compellit: happy is the
necessity wc enforces to the better things: and also because it makes every
act whereunto it is applied, an act of religion, a principal vertew of
Christian life: and particulerly in the vow of chastity or continency the
soul there by becomes after an extraordinary manner the spouse of Christ.

This kind of separation although it be highly reverenced of Catholics, as it
is of fleshly heretics contemned: yet is perhaps hardly to be found in our
country or age. except it be if happily the persecutours make it by keeping
the one party in prison (as it is a familiar quality in them to despise marriage
in others, but in them selves:) when it were no small meritte for either party
to make of necessity a virtue and to offer that unto God by vow wc they are
otherwise enforced unto, at the least for that time until God shall bring the^
together again. For even of such things as are commanded by ye law of God may
a vow be made, Sotus. l. 7. de just. q. 1. ar. 3 of things necessary to be
done a Vow may be made.
when it is so undertaken, that although I were not otherwise bound yet I would
in this particular case bind my self. And so in this case the person which
has vowed unto God to observe that chastity which he is other wise bound unto:
does not only exercise acts of temperance and chastity, but of religion also
wha^soeuer he auoideth or ouercometh any contrary suggestion or occasion.

But this manner of heroical separation of bed and perpetual abstinence from
that which before was lawful was in ancient ages very familiar unto gods
saints, Epist. 32.45.199. See S. Greg. l. 9. ep. 39. Theodoret l. 4. hist. c.
13. Hier. ep 14. ad Cela^t
and highly come^ded by holy Doctors of the Church and namely by S. Augustine
who to the confusion of sensual heretickse which understand nothing but flesh
and blood, in three several epistles discourses of three married couples,
which all had vowed perpetual continency. neither want we examples of most
notable personages. of our blessed Mat. 1. Aug. l. 2. de conf. Euan. Cap. 1.
Lady and S. Joseph: Krantz. (...) c. 32.
of Emperor Henry the first of that name, and Runegunde his wife, both Saints.
Of our S. Edward confessor. And of a lay man which Cassian Coll. 14. c. 7.
says for this virtue to have cast out a Deuell which a holy Eremite could
not expel. And of diverse others, which all have in marriage either observed
perpetual virginity: or after carnal knowledge vowed perpetual co^tinency. who^
if heretics have not the gift for to follow neither can this gift be found
where the spirit of wisdom does not dwell let them cease yet to abridge gods
mighty hand in bestowing his liberality where there is capacity of his heavenly
grace. Sap. 1.


32 q. 7. cap. non solum. and q. 4. cap. meretrices. Aug. q. 71. super Exo.
Mat. 5.
of unlawful copulatio^ of either party. For than (if it be manifestly known
unto the innocent party) it is lawful to whold the debt of matrimony. This is
the doctrine of our Savior him self: For if it be lawful to dismiss the
fornicator, much more to deny him the matrimonial debt. yet be there some
exceptions wherein it is not lawful to make such separation. First if ye one
party supposing yt the other is dead marry another. Tha^ if the act were
committed by violence. Likewise if the wife admitted another man, thinking that
it was her own husband. Besides when both parties have committed fornication
also when one party consented or gave an imediate occasion to the adultry of
the other Finally when a reconciliation is made either by an expesse remission
of the fault: or by the innocent parties demanding or yielding the debt of
marriage after the saulte is once known. For than is he deemed to remitt the
same. Except ye wife for some notable fear of the husband should render the
debt: for tha^ she has not lost her right to deny the same, neither was that a
reconciliatio^, wc was not voluntarily made. In like manner after a voluntary
reconciliatio^ made although both parties were faulty, yea and although the one
parties adultery were altogether unknown to the other: by such reconciliatio^
they are both restored to their prime estate. so that notwithstanding any
fault past, that party which shall fall again, may be justly denied the
matrimonial debte by the other party perseuering innocent.

Neither will it be amiss here to admonish, that the husband using the act of
marriage after any copulation had by his wife with an other man whether sinfully
or not sinfully: whether him self still remaining bound to her company or no:
yet he is accounted Bigamus by the Church: and not admitted without
dispensation unto holy orders after the decease of his wife, even as if he had
been twice married, or had married a widow. which I the more willingly here do
utter, that whosoever is desirous so to live in the estate of marriage that he
may not prejudice the undertaking of a higher estate if it please God to set
him free: may beware herby to return to the company of his wife, after such
accidents except in cases where he may not without sin refuse the same. For
than better is it to put him self in impossibillity of a higher estate to
come, than in his present estate to offend God. Finally whansoeuer one may
lawfully make separation of bed, the same party may make a perpetual vow of
chastity without the others consent, for he is not bound to any reconciliation.
But if he chance to fall than is he bound to reconciliation and the other
party may irritate the vow as being made without his consent. But if one not
disposed to vow gives the other leave to vow continency: it can never be
revoked again: but only upon sufficient cause be dispensed by the Church.
Now in the separation not only in bed, 4.
but also in the very cohabitation it self: Of the separation of dwelling.
and both together to enter into religion the one of men, the other of women.
For many married cooples there are, which for that they have worldly charges, or
because they cannot so easily frame them selves to the strictnes of a
religiouse life, or because of their age and unfitness for a religiouse estate;
do perfome that in the world, which undoubtedly might be more perfect in
religion. And these are not defrauded of their reward. for they also gheld
themselves for the kingdom of heaven, although they do not sell all and follow
Christ. Nevertheless that this is a very great stepp unto that absolute estate
of perfection, we may not doubt, whereas many such persons have entered into
religion. This is a case very well known by experience in Gods Church. And
although as we have said, the one only may vow continency by the others
consent: yet, with the mutual consent of both, In three cases one may enter
into religion, and not ye other
the one only cannot enter into religion without the other: but only in three
csses. First if the one party be very old (as of threescore years of age as
Sotus requires) and out of all danger of incontinency: for than the same
party vowing chastity the other may enter into religion. C Ad apostolicam and
C. cum sis de conue coniug.
yet this must be with leave of the Bishop. for although the profession of the
other would hold without such leave: yet were it not free from sin. and such
consent of the one party remaining seculer may be revoked before the profession
of the party religiouse, but not without sin, when there were not very just
cause. Secondly if the one party fall into notorious infidellity or heresy:
than after a divorce made by the Church, the other may enter into religion.
Thirdly for adultery in like manner: but of these two cases we will say herafter
more.

I say therefore that the one party may separate him self not only in bed but
also in habitation from the other for fornication. Mat. 5.
although there is no such bond of necessity, but only when there were
scandal: as may very well happen if the party delinque^t be the wife, and the
man knowing her fault should seem to allow it: for than by reason of scandal
he werer bound to divorce her. the like danger is not in wives, toward their
husbands whose nature is known more to abhor from their husbands disorder
herin. and by diuorcing their husbands they could not amend them: and
especially because they are not their husbands superiors, as the husband is
the wives. In this case as we have said the party innocent may forsake the
other, and enter also into religion or take holy orders without consent: so
that the conditions be observed which we spoke of before in the like case of
separation in bed. Yet is there here required the Churches authority, because
it is a public matter and subject unto scandal if it be not orderly done.
But when the case is notorious and known to the world: Panorm. Couar. ^otus.
Sylu.
especially if the dishonest wife dwell in house with the adulterer, a bare
separation without entering into orders or religion may (in my judgment) be
made by private authority: much more where there is no lawful Ecclesiastical
Court and no likelihood of scandal. C. de illa. etc. quanto. de diuortij^.
that is for infidelity or heresy. wha^ there is joined obstinacy with all, or
danger of infecting the innocent party.

For than may the innocent by the authority of the Church (or in some cases
without as we will presently say, forsake the other. and if he be by the
sentence of the Church once condemned of heresy, the innocent party is not
bound to receive him again repenting, but may either live alone in a seculer
life, or else enter into religion. For this must be well carried in mind that
(as we said above) no marriage of baptized persons once co^summate can be so
dissolved that either of the parties may marry another. although the heretics
in this behalf do play their parts: whom we cannot at this present attend to
confute.

All these separations are after a sort perpetual ^s we have declared.

There are other causes of divorce, which are for a time, until the causes be
taken away. as, for unreasonable cruelty of the husband. or if the wife or the
husband were a witch: or killed the children. Nauar. c. (...) n. 22.
or sought the others death. or were daungerously furiouse; or finally if the
one party should draw the other in whatsoever manner unto deadly sin, and
could not be reformed. And in these cases when necessity urges, the wife may
forsake her husband without judgment of the Church: for it standing her upon
to avoid so imminent danger of body or soul: she may when she is in safety
more conveniently procure the divorce. But of the last case it does especially
behoue us to speak a little. For of that it is which our Savior says: If
any one come unto me and hates not his father and mother and wife etc. Luc. 14.
he cannot be my Disciple. also in another place: Mat. 18.
if thy eye scandilize thee pluck it out and cast it from thee. Saint Paul
also in the case of heresy commands to avoid all persons without exception.
Tit. 3. S. Hierom.
and S. Hierome upon the place alleged of S. Matthew thus notably discourses.
Therefore (says he) all affection is cut of, and all kindred is dispatched:
least through occasion of piety any faithful person may be laid open unto
scandal. if any man (says he) be so lincked unto thee as thy hand, thy
foot, thy eye, and be profitable, and careful, and provident in foreseeing of
things: and yet cause thee a scandal, and through disagreing of behavior, do
draw thee to hell: it is better for thee to want both his kindred and helps,
least whilst thou will gain thy kinsemen and friends, thou have causes of
ruin. therefore do thou not prefer neither wife, nor children, nor friends,
nor any affection which may exclude us from the Kingdom of heaven, before the
love of our Lord. Every faithful knows what hurts him, or wherein his mind
is troubled and often tempted. it is better to lead a solitary life, than for
the necessities of this life to loose the everlasting. Thus S. Hierome.
Wherefore I do conclude that in case a woman by her husband bevrged to go to the
Church or to do any unlawful act of religion: much more than in other carnal
sins she may, yea and is bound to forsake him, least loving danger she perish
therein. Eccle. 3.
yet if she perceive her self by Gods grace to be so strong and constant that
she fears no peruersion at all: she is bound for to remain with him, and so
to seek to gain him. But if there be notorious adultery joined withal, and
injurious want of all necessary spiritual helps of Catholic religion: I
would not doubt but in our country where there is no lawful Ecclesiastical
Court even without any danger of peruersion she may forsake him. Thus much
have I thought good to say of this matter now let us return to the Fathers
again.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER Of renunciation of a man's Patrimony and care of provision
for children, more particulerly than was said before.
Cyprianus libro de lapsis.. 1.
But unto many persons their own destruction was not sufficient: Rich men
should leave all, rather than fall.
they quaffed as it were death one to another out of a poisoned cupp. And that
there might want nothing to the heap of their crime, Impiety of Schismatic
parents to their children
young children being brought by their fathers hands, lost whilst they were
little ones, that which in the very entrance of life they had gotten. Shall not
they say when the day of judgment shall come, we our se^ues did nothing,
neither forsaking the meat and cup of our Lord did we of our own accord
run unto profane contagion: others perfidiousnes destroyed us, we felt our
parents our patricidial slaughterers they denied for v^ our mother the Church
and God our father. The Church our mother.
that whilst being as yet little ones, improuident, and ignorant of so heinous
an offense we were joined by others to ye fellowship of crimes, by other men's
fraud we might be entrapped. Voluntary Banishment and loss of patrimony.
neither is there (o pitiful thing any just or weighty cause to excuse such
iniquity. they should have forsaken their country, and sustained loss of
their patrimony. for who is he which is borne and must dye, which must one day
leave his country and forsake his patrimony? that thou may not loose
Christ, fear the loss of thy salvation, and of thy eternal habitation.
behold the holy ghost cries by the Prophett. ^^sa. 52.
Depart you, depart you, go forth hence and touch not that which is unclean
Go forth out of the midst of her: sever your selves you which carry the
vessels of our Lord. and those which are the very vessels of our Lord, and
temples of God, do not they go forth of the midst of her and depart, least
they be constra^ned to touch that which is vn^^eane, and to be polluted and
defiled with deadly dishes? in another place also a voice is beard from heaven,
Apoc. 1
forewarning the servants of God what they should do, saying. Go out of her my
people, least thou be partaker of her crimes and be punished with her torments:
who goes forth, and departs, is not made partaker of the crime. but
whosoever is found partaker of the crime, is also ^ormented with the plagues.
And therefore our Lord did bid us to retire our selves and to fly in time of
persecution: and that we might do the same, him self both did it, and taught
it. Martyrdom is wisely to be expected
for whereas the crown of marty dome comes from the only liberality of God,
and cannot be obtained but wha^ the hour is come of receiving it; whosoever
remaining in Christ does go for a while aside, denies not his faith, but
expects time. But who by not going aside, is fallen, remained that he might
deny. We must not my brethren dissemble the truth, neither must we conceal the
matter and cause of our wound. Blind love of patrimony.
the blind love of their patrimony has deceived many: neither could they be
willing and ready to depart, who were fettered with their riches as with
chains. These were the irons of those which remained, these were the
shackells, whereby their force was weakened, their faith oppressed, their mind
inchained, their soul imprisoned; that such as were addicted unto earthly
desires, might become a pray unto that serpent, which according to Gods own
sentence is appointed to feed upon earth. And therefore our Lord all good men's
master, both forewarning and counsailing for the time to come, says in this
manner. Genesis 3.
If thou will be perfect, go sell all that thou have, and give unto the poor,
and thou shall have a treasure in heaven, Mat. 19.
and come and follow me. if rich men would do this, they should not perish
because of their riches. if they laid up their treasure in heaven, they should
not have an enemy and persecutour at home: their heart and mind and thought
should be in heaven, if their treasure were in heaven. neither could he be
overthrown by the world, who had nothing in the world whereby he might be
overthrown. he would follow our Lord easily and freely as the Apostles, and
many in the Apostles time, and others have done, who forsaking their goods and
parents, with inseperable conjunction were fastened to our Lord. But how can
they follow Christ who are holden fast with the bands of their patrimony? or
how can they go up unto heaven, or clime up unto high and heavenly things, who
with earthly desires are pulled downward? They think they possess, who rather
are possessed, slaves of their substance, and not masters of their money, but
rather their moneis prentises. This time and these men does the Apostle
signify, 1. Tim. 6
saying. They that will be made rich fall into tentation and the snare of the
Devil, and many desires unprofitable and hurtefull, which drown men into
destruction, and perdition. for the root of all evils is couetuousnes: which
certain desiring have erred from the faith, and have entangled them selves in
many sorrows. But our Lord, o with how great rewards he inuiteth us to contempt
of riches? these small and trifling losses of this life, o with what hire he
recompenseth? Mar. 10.
There is none (says he) which leaves house, or lands, or parents, or
brethren or wife or children for the Kingdom of God, which receaueth not
seven times as much in this time, and in the world to come life everlasting.
Loss of riches is not to be feared but wished.
These things being once known, and warranted by the assurance of our Lord wc
promises, such loss is not only not to be feared, but also wished for, the
same Lord again affirming and warning us, Blessed shall you be, when they
shall persecute you, Luc. 6.
and separate you and cast you forth, and curse your name as wicked for the
son of man. Be gladd in that day and reioise, for your reward is much in
heaven.

Cypr. lib. de Opere and Eleemosinis.. 2.
Let not that thing (my dear brethren (hinder a Christian from good and just
works, Providing for children is no excuse of want of love to god
that any man think him self excused by the benefitte of his children: whereas
in that which is bestowed spiritually, we ought to think of Christ who
acknowledges that he receives it, and herein we do not prefer our fellow
servants, but Christ him self before our children: him self instructing us.
Mat. 10.
Who loves his father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me. and who
loves his son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. Deuteronomy. 33.
and in Deuteronomie for the strengthening of our faith, and the love of God,
the very like is written. Who says unto his father or mother, I know you not,
neither have known their children, these have kekpt thy precepts, and observed
thy testament. for if we love God with all our heart, we must not prefer
either parents or children before God. for if by alms given unto the poor,
Christ borrows upon interest, and when we give to the little ones, we give to
Christ, there is no cause why any man may prefer earthly things unto heavenly,
or esteem more humane things than Divine. 3. Reg. 17
So that widow in the third book of Kings when in a drought and famine having
spent all, The wonderful reward of Alms.
of a little meal and oil wc was left she had made her a cake, which being
eaten she might dye with her children: Helias suddenly came, and requested
that first she would give him for to eat, and of that which was left she and
her children should feed: neither did she stick to obey him, or in that hunger
and necessity preferred her children before Helias. Yea she did in the sight of
God, that which pleased God, readily and willingly she offered what was asked,
neither of plenty did she give a little, but of a little she gave all, and her
children famishing she first feeds another, neither in penury and famine does
she think of meat before mercy; that whilst in a wholesome work she despises
her carnal life, she might keep the spiritual life of her soul. Helias
therefore bearing the figure of Christ, and showing that he rewards every one
for his alms, answered and said. This says our Lord, the pot of meal
shall not fail and the vessel of oil shall not be deminished until that day
in which our Lord will send water upon the earth. According to the faithfulness
of Gods promise, there was multiplied unto the widow and augmented which she
bestowed, and her just works and merittes of mercy receiving increase, the
vessels of meal and oil were filled.

Neither did the woman take from her children that which she gave to Helias,
That wc is given in alms, is not taken from children.
but rather she gave to her children that which liberally and devoutly she
performed. And she as yet knew not Christ. she had not as vet heard his
precepts: she did not being already redeemed with his Cross and passion,
render meat and drink for blood: that hereby it may appear how much he
offends in the Church, who preferring him self and his children unto Christ,
keeps his riches, If riches are to be forsaken for the poor: how much more
for to keep fidelity toward God.
not imparting his abundant patrimony, unto the poores necessity. But thou have
many children at home, and the number of children hinders thee that thou do
not attend to good works so liberally. But in this respect thou should
work more largely, because thou art a father of many children. Thou have the
more for which thou must pray, thou must satisfy for the sins of many, thou
must purge the consciences of many, thou must deliver the souls of many.

As in this seculer life in nourishing and maintaining of children, the greater
the number is, Spiritual care of children. Job. 1.
the greater is the cost: so in a spiritual and heavenly life, the greater
number of children thou have, the greater also must be thy charge. So did Job
offer up many sacrifices for his sons, and such number of hosts he gave unto
God as was the number of his children and because there cannot any day want
whereby God may be offended, there wanted not daily sacrifices whereby sins
might be cleansed. if therefore thou love thy children sincerely, if thou
cariest toward them a perfect and fatherly sweetness of charity: thou ought
the more endeavor with just actions to commend them unto God. neither think
him to be the father of thy children, who is mortal and weak, but prepare
them that father, wh^ is an everlasting and stable father of all spiritual
children t^ him do thou assign thy riches, which thou keep for thy heirs:
let him be the tutor and guardian of thy children, and by his divine majesty a
protector from all worldly injuries. Patrimony is safe in Gods hand.
Thy patrimony once committed unto God neither the common wealth can exact,
nor the exchequer invade, nor lawyers cauilling overthrow. in safe is laid up
that inheritance, which is reserved in Gods custody. this is to do for thy
dear children against the time to come, this is with fatherly piety to provide
for thy future heirs; according to the true saying of the scripture: I was
young, Psalm. 36.
and now am old and I have not seen the just man forsaken, nor his seed
wanting bread All the day he pittieth and lends, Prou. 20
and his seed shall be in benediction. and again, he which co^uerseth with out
shame in justice, shall leave behind him happy sons. Thou art therefore a
perverse and traitorous father, if thou do not faithfully provide for thy
children, if thou look not how to maintain them with religiouse and true
piety. Thou which seek rather the earthly than the heavenly patrimony, Some
fathers commend their children to the Deuell.
and to commend thy children rather to the Deuell than unto Christ, offendest
twice, and committest a dubble heinous sin. both in that thou preparest not
for thy children Gods fatherly help, and in that thou teach them to love
more their patrimony than Christ. Be rather such a father to thy children as
was Toby. give them profitable and wholesome precepts, Tob. 4.
such as he gave to his sons, command thy children that which he commanded
his: saying, and now my son I charge thee serve God earnestly: and do before
him that which pleases him, and give charge unto thy children that they do
justice and alms, and be mindful of God and always praise his name and fear
not whilst thou geuest alms, for thou layest up for thy self a good reward
against the day of necessity. for alms delivers from death, and suffers
not the soul to go to hell.

Pratum spirituale. Cap. 201.. 3
A certain Father told as follows. A notable example of the care wc god
has of good men's children.
I went upon a time to Constantinople, for some necessary business. and whilst
I satte in the Church, there came in a seculer man, of great nobility, and
singulerly devout. He when he saw me, came and saluted me with all dewtifull
charity. And sitting down afterward, he began to ask me of things
appertaining to the good of the soul. And when I told him that to such as
order well these earthlye things, there are given also those which are
heavenly: you have said very well O Father says he: For blessed in deed is he
which reposeth his hope in God, and commits him self wholly unto him. And
he said moreover. I was the son of a certain seculer man of great nobility
and glory. my father was very much addicted to the giving of alms and bestowed
very much upon the poor. And one day he calling me, showed me all his money:
saying, my son whether will thou rather, that I leave thee this money, or
leave thee Christ for thy guardian? I liking very well that wc he did, answered
him, that I would rather have Christ. For all these things fade, and this day
are, and to morrow shall not be: but Christ remains for ever. Which when he
had heard, he frankely and liberally gave all to the poor: so that dying he
left me almost nothing. And I now being brought unto poverty, conuersed
meanly, having my hope in Christ, to whom he had left me. there was a another
very rich and principal man, having a very devout wife and fearing God, but
had but one only daughter she therefore said to her husband: We have but this
only daughter: and God has given us so great riches: what therefore does she
want? if we seek to bestow her on any principal and rich man, which is not
of good behavior, he will be a perpetual affliction unto her. Let us seek
forth for her an humble and devout maqn, which may love her and cherish her
according unto Gods will and pleasure Who said unto her. Thou have said very
well. Go therefore into the Church and pray very deuoutely, and there remain:
and look who first enters, he it is whom God sends as a spouse for our
daughter. She therefore did as her husband willed her. and when she had prayed,
and there fat still, I was the first which entered in. She therefore sending
her servant caused me to be brought: and began to ask me: whence are you?
Than I answered, I am of this city, and the son of such a one? What says
she) of that great alms geuer? Even of the same, say I Than she: Parents now
a days do nothing but heap up Gods wrath against their children.
have you ever a wife? I answered, no. and told her what my father said unto
me, and what answer I gave him. Than s^^ee glorifying God, said. Behold your
good guardian has sent you a wife, and money, that you may use the one and the
other with the fear of God. And she gave me her daughter and her money. And so
I pray continually, that I may follow my fathers example even unto my end.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER. Of renunciation of a man's self yet more in particular and
of the necessary obligation to suffer martyrdom wha^ otherwise God might be
offended. with diverse forceable exhortations to the same.
S. Cyprian Epistola 56. Cyprian unto the people of Thibaris, sends
greeting.. 1
I Had thought my beloved brethren, He animateth them unto martyrdom.
and did earnestly desire if the estate of our matters and the condition of the
time would permit, according to your often desires to come unto you my self,
and being present by such mean exhortation as I could afford you, to
strengthen your fraternity. But because with urgent business we are so hindered,
that we cannot conveniently make any long excursions, and be long absent from
the people which by Gods mercy we have under our charge, He had a revelation of
the trouble at hand.
I have in the mean while in steed of my self sent you this letter. for
whereas we our selves are oftentimes urged and warned by our Lords mercy
instructing us: we must of dewty be careful for to warn also you. For you
must know and of certainety believe and hold it for true, that the day of
tribulation begins to hang over our head, and that the sunsetting of the
world and time of Antichrist is at hand. so that we must all of us stand ready
unto the battle, and think of nothing else but of ye glory of everlasting
life, and of the Crown of Confession of Christ. neither let us think that the
things which do now come are of such manner as those which are past have been.
A greater and crueller conflicte is at hand, for which with incorrupted faith,
and valiant courage the soldiers of Christ must prepare them selves.
considering that therefore they drink daily the blood of Christ, that they may
the^ selves also shed their blood for Christ For that is truly to desire to be
with Christ, to imitate that which Christ taught and did. according to S. John;
1. Io. 2
saying. Who says that he remains in Christ, must so walk as he has
walked. The blessed Apostle S. Paul also exhorts and teaches us saying: To.
2.
we are sons: but if we be sons, we are heirs also of God, and coheires of
Christ, if so be that we do suffer with him, that we may be glorified with him.
all which things are now to be considered by us, that no man desire any thing
of the now dying world; but follow Christ who both lives for ever, and
quickneth his servants, which retain the confession of his name. Io. 16
For the time is come (my dear brethren) which long since out Lord foretold,
saying: The hour will come, that every one which shall kill you, shall think
he does God good service. But these things shall they d^ because they know not
my father nor me. This have I spoken unto you, that when the hour of these
things shall come, you remember that I told you. neither let any one marvel
that we are afflicted with daily persecutions, and oftentimes oppressed with
grievous tribulations, whereas our Lord has foretold that these things should
happen in the latter times, and has furnished our warfare with his own
instruction and exhortation. Peter also his Apostle has taught us that
therefore persecutions are made, that we may be proved, and even we also by the
example of those just persons which are gone before us, 1. Pet. 4
be joined through death and sufferings unto the love of God. My dearest
(says he) wonder not at the fervor which happens un to you, which is made
for your tentation, neither do you shrink as if any new thing happened to you:
but so often as you communicate with the passions of Christ, in all things
reioise, that in the revelation of his glory you may reioise being gladd. If
you be reviled in the name of Christ, you are happy, because the name of the
majesty and virtue of God rests in you. which name truly by them is
blasphemed, but by us is honored The Apostles taught us concerning the
precepts of our Lord and heavenly commaundments, that which them selves thereby
had learned. whereas our Lord him self does confirm us saying. Mat. 1^ Luc. 1^
There is none which leaves house or land, or parents, or brethren or sisters,
or wife or children, for the Kingdom of God, and receives not seven times as
much in this time, and in the world to come life everlasting. And again:
blessed shall you be when men shall hate you, and separate you, and thrust you
forth, Luc. ^
and curse your name as evil, for ye son of man: Be you gladd in that day
and reioise, for behold your reward is much in heaven. our Lord would have us
be gladd and reioise in persecutions because when persecutions are raised, than
are crowns of faith bestowed, than the soldiers of God are proved, than unto
Martyrs are the heavens opened. Neither did we so ascribe our selves to this
warfare, that we should only think of peace and shun and refuse the
battle whereas in this very warfare our Lord has walked before us, that
master of humility and patience and suffering, first doing that which he taught
for to do, and first suffering that which he exherteth to suffer. Lay before
your cies, most beloved brethren, that he which only has received all
judgment of his father, and is for to come to judge, has already set down
the sum, Mat. 1^.
of his judgment and sentence to come, forewarning us and proclaiming, that
before his father he will both confess those which confess him, and deny
those which deny him. if we could escape death, we might worthily fear it. But
whereas it is necessary that he which is mortal do dye, let us embrace this
occasion proceeding from Gods promise and liberality, and leaves so pass by
death, that we may receive the reward of immortality: neither let us sear to
be killed, it being certain that when we are killed we are crowned. Catholic
Prisoners ought not to be dismayed by the want of Priests.
And let no man my brethren seeing our people for fear of persecution to be
driven away and scattered, be therefore troubled in mind, because he sees not
the co^fraternity gathered together, neither hears the Bishops preaching. All
cannot than be together as who may not lawfully kill, but must of reccess^ty be
killed. Whersoeuer at such time any brother shall be separated for a while in
body but not in spirit from the flock, because of the necessity of the time,
let him not be moved with the horror of such flight, or retiring and hiding
him self be terrified with the solitarines of a deserte place. He is not
alone, whose companion is Christ even in his flight. he is not alone, which
conseruing the temple of God, whersoeuer he is, is not without God. And if
whilst he fl^eth in the wilderness and mountains, the murderer oppress him,
a wild beast destroy him, hunger or thirst or cold confume him, or if whilst
he hastes by the seas with dangerous navigations, a storm or tempest do
drown him: Christ behouldeth his soldier whersoeuer he fights, and to him
which dies by reason of persecution for the honor of his name, he gives that
reward wc he promised to give in persecution. neither is it a less glory of
martyrdom, that one dies not publickely and amongst a multitude: wha^ the
cause of dying is to dye for Christ. Sufficient to the testimoy of a Martyr is
that witness who proves and crowns the Martyrs. Let us follow (dear
brethren) just Abel, Genesis ^
who laid the first foundation of of martirdomes, whilst be first was killed
for justice. Let us imitate Abraham, Genesis 2^
the friend of God, which did not stay to sacrifice with his own hands his
son, whilst with a faithful devotion he obeyed God. Let us imitate the three
children Ananias, Azarias, and Misael: who neither astonished with their age,
Dan. 3
nor discouraged with their captivity, after the conquest of Iewry, and the
surprising of Jerusalem, by the valor of their faith, overcame the King in
his own Kingdom: who being commanded to adore the image which Nabuchodonozor
made, were stronger tha^ either his threats or flames: by these words
proclaiming and witnessing their faith. O King Nabuchodonozor we need not
answer thee concerning this matter For God whom we serve is able to take us
forth of the furnace of burning fire: and to deliver us out of thy hands, o
King. And if he will not: know thou, that we serve not thy Gods, and we worship
not the goulden image which thou have erected. They believed that according to
their faith they might escape: but they added; if he will not, that ye King
mighty know that they could even dye for the God wc they worshipped. For this
is the force of courage of faith, to believe and know that God is able to
deliver from death eue^ present, and yet not to fear death, nor to yield at
all, that faith may so be more effectually proved. There issued forth of their
mouth the uncorrupted and invincible vigor of the holy ghost. that we may see
those things to be true which our Lord says in the gospel: Mat. 10
when they shall apprehend you, do not think what you may speak, for there
shall be given you even in that hour what you may speak. for it is not you
which speak, but the spirit of your father which speaks within you. he
said, that from above there should even at that time be given us what to
speak and answer: and that they did not than speak, but the spirit of God
their father: which not departing nor being separated from Confessors, both
speaks and is crowned within us. So also Daniel when he was compelled to
adore the Idol Bell, whom both the king and people did worship with full liberty
of faith broke forth for the defense of Gods honor into these words. I worship
nothing but my Lord God wc made heaven and earth. What I pray you? the grievous
torments of the blessed Martyrs amongst the Machabe^s, 2. Match. 7
and variety of pains of the seven brethren, and the mother comforting her
children in torments, and dying her self also with her children, are not these
great examples of fortitude and faith, and do not these persons by their
passions excite us to the triumph of martyrdom? The Prophetts whom the holy
ghost did inhabit to teach them things to come: the Apostles whom our Lord
did choose: the just persons which are killed for justice; have not all these
taught us to dye? The nativity of Christ presently began with the martirdomes
of infants, when for his name all were killed from two years of age douward.
the age not ready for the Skirmish, was fit for ye crown: and that we may
know that those are innocent which are killed for Christ, innocent infancy was
slain for his name. it was showed that no man is free from danger of
persecution: when such as they received martyrdom. What shame were it than for
a Christian, if the servant would not suffer, when his Lord first has suffered
and for us to refuse for to suffer for our sins, when without sin of his
own he suffered for us? The son of God suffered that he might make us the
sons of God: and will not the son of a man suffer that he may persevere the
s^nne of God? if we sustain the hatred of the world: the same hatred of the
world Christ suffered before us if we a^^de in this world reproaches, if flight,
if torments. more grievous things has tasted ye Lord and maker of this world;
who says; if you were of this world, Io. 15.
the world would love that wc were his own: but because you are not of the
world and I have chosen you out of the world: therefore does the world hate you.
remember the word which I said unto you: the servant is not greater than his
Lord: if they have persecuted you, they will persecute you also.

Our Lord God, whatsoever he taught he also did so that the disciple cannot be
excused, wc learneth, and does not Let not yet any of you my bre thre^ be so
terrified with the fear of persecution, or with the coming of Antichrist at
hand, that he be not also armed against all things with the Evangelical
exhortations Antichrist comes, but Christ comes after. the enemy assaileth
and rages: but Christ presently followth to revenge our sufferings and
wounds. the adversary fretteth and threatens, but there is one who is able to
deliver from his hands. Mat. 10.
he must be feared, whose anger none can escape: whereas be forewarneth us;
saying: fear not them which kill the body, but cannot kill the soul: but
rather sear him we can destroy both body and soul into bell. Io. 12.
And again who loves his life shall lose it, and who hates his life in this
world, Apoc. 14. To go to yt Church is to adore the beast.
shall conserve it unto everlasting life. And in the Ap^calipse: if any man
adore the beast and his image, and takes his mark in his forehead and in his
hand, be also shall drink of the wine of the anger of God, mingled in the
cup of his anger, and shall be punished with fire and brim slone, before the
eyes of the holy Argells and before theeies of the lamb: and the smoke shall
ascend from their torments, world without end, and they shall have no rest day
and night who soever do adore the beast and his image. For worldly Skirmishes,
men are exercised and practiced, and they repute it a great advantage of their
honor if they chance to be crowned in the sight of he people, and in the
presence of the Emperor. Behold here a singular and excellent Skirmishe, and
honored with the reward of a heavenly crown: how God does behold us
fighting, and opening his eyes upon those whom he has made his children, is
delighted with the view of our Skirmish whilst we fight and Skirmishe in this
conflict of our faith, God behouldeth us, his Angels behold us, Christ him
self behouldeth us. O what excellency of glory, o how great felicity it is, to
Skirmishe in the presence of God, to be crowned by the judgment of Christ?
Let us arm our selves dear brethren) with all our force. Let us be ready for
the combat, with a pure mind intiere faith, and denoute courage. Let Gods
army march to the field which is bidden us. Let the constant be armed least
they lose the benefitte of their late constant standing Let the lapsed be
armed, that he may recover the loss of his fall. Let honor provoke the
constant, and sorrow the lapsed, unto the combat The Apostle armeth and
prepares us, saying our wrestling is not against flesh and blood, but against
Princes and Potestates, Ephesians. 6.
against the Rectours of the world of these darkness, against the spiritualls of
wickedness in the celestialls, Therefore take the armor of God, Spiritual
armous.
that you may resist in the evil day, and stand in all things perfect. Stand
therefore having your loins girded in truth, and clothed with the breastplate
of justice, and having your feet shodd to the preparation of the gospel of
peate: in all things taking the shield of faith, wherewith you may extinguish
all the fiery darts of the most wicked one. and take unto you the helmet of
salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God. Let us take
these weapons, with this spiritual and heavenly armor of proof. Let us
safegarde our selves, that in the evil day we may be able to withstand and
resist the Devils threatenings Let us put on the brestplate of justice, that
our breast may be fensed and secure from the darts of the enemy. Let our feet
be shodd and armed with the Evangelical doctrine, that when we begin to tread
on, and crush the serpent, he be not able to bite or trippe us Let us carry
stoutely the shield of faith, which garding us, whatsoever the enemy hurleth,
may be extinguished. Let us take for the cover of our head, a helmett of
salvation, that our ears may be fensed, that they hear not the bloody
proclamations: let our eyes be defended, that they see not the detestable
idols; let our forehead be fortified, that the sign of God may be kept
untouched: The sign of ye Cross.
let the mouth be guarded, that our conquering tongue may confess our Lord
Jesus Christ. Let us arm also our right hand with a spiritual sword, that it
may courageously refrain the deadly sacrifices, and remembering that it has
received our Lords body in the Eucharist, let it embrace him, being hereafter
(...) receive of our Lord a reward of heavenly crowns. O that day, what a one
my brethren and how great shall it come when our Lord shall begin to reckon
his people, and to take account with his divine examination of every ones
meritts, to send the wicked to hell, and to condemn our persecutours to the
perpetual punishment of burning flame. But to yield unto us reward for our
faith and devotion? O what glory, and how great joy will it be, to be admitted
that thou may see God? to be honored, that with Christ thy Lord God thou
may receive the delighte of everlasting light and salvation? to salute
Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob, and all the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and
Apostles and Martyrs: with the just and friends of God, to enjoy in the
kingdom of heaven the pleasure of immortality there to receive that neither
eye has seen, 1. Cor. 2.
nor care has heard, nor has ascended into the heart of man? To. 8.
For that we shall receive far greater things than that which here we can
either work or suffer, the Apostle teaches us saying the passions of this
time are not condign to the glory to come, that shall be revealed in us. what
that revealing shall come, when Gods glory shall shine upon us, so blessed
shall we be, and ioifull. being honored with our Lords liberallity; as they
shall remain confounded and miserable, which having forsaken God, or rebelling
against God have done the will of the Deuell, that now of necessity with him
they must be tormented with unquenchable fire. These things my dear brethren
let cleave to our hearts: let this be the preparation of your armor. let
this be your daily and nightly meditation, to have before your eyes, and to
ponder always with your thought and understanding, the torments of the wicked,
and the rewards, and merittes of the just. What punishment our Lord does
threatten to such as deny him: what glory he promises to those which confess
him. if whilst we think, and meditate of this, the day of persecution come
upon us; the soldier of Christ instructed by his precep^ and admonitions, does
not quake at the battle, but is ready for the crown. I wish my dear
brethren that you always farewell.

Ex Epistola 26. apud Cypria. quae est Confessorum e carcere ad Cyprianum.. 2.
For what thing could befall more gloriouse, The noblenes of mar^irdome.
ot what could more happily be bestowed upon and man from God, than amongst the
very butchers being mangled, to confess our Lord God? than amongst the raging
diverse and exquisite torments of the seculer power, ye body being racked,
tortured and quartered, with a dying and yet a free spirit to confess Christ the
son of God? than having forsaken the world to be gonne to heaven? than having
left men, to stand amongst Angels? than all worldly impediments being cut
of, to represent him self at liberty before the sight of God? than to obtain
the heavenly kingdom without any delay? Martyrs go to heaven without passing
by Purgatory.
than in the name of Christ, to have been made a companion in passion with
Christ? than by the divine liberality of his judge, to become a judge? than by
the Confession of the name of Christ to have carried away an unspotted
conscience? than not to have obeyed humaue and sacrilegious laws against our
faith? Sacrilegious laws.
than with public voice to have professed the truth? than by d^ing, to have
subdued even death that is so feared of all men? than by death to have gotten
immortality? than tortured and racked with all instruments of cruelty, by
torments to have overcome torments? than to have with the valor of the mind
strouen against all ye griefs of a rented body? than not to have loathed his
own gushing blood? than to have begone next after his faith to love his very
torments? than to think a loss of his life, that he is not dead? For unto
this combat does Christ by the trompete of his gospel excite us. saying. Who
lotteth his father and mother more tha^ me is not worthy of me and who takes
not up his Cross and follows me, is not worthy of me; Mat. 10.
And again blessed are those which suffer persecution for justice, for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven Blessed shall you be when they shall persecute you
and hate you: be gladd and reiorse, Mat. 5.
for so did their fathers persecute the Prophetts also with were before you. And
again You shall stand before Kings and Magistrates, Mat. 10.
and a brother shall betray his brother to death, and the father the son. And
who perseuereth to the end, he shall be saved. And to him which ouercometh I
will goue to sit upon my throne, Appoc. 1. To. 8.
even as I have overcome and sit upon the throne of my father. The Apostle
also. Who shall sever us from the charity of Christ? tribulation? or distress?
or persecution? or hunger? or nakedness? or danger? or the sword, as it is
written: for thee we are killed all the day: we are accounted as sheep of the
sacrifice, but in all these things we overcome for him which has loved us.
These and the like things when we read in the gospel, and feel in our selves
as it were certain firebrandes for to inflame our faith, applied unto us by
our Lords voices: we presently do not only not dread the adversaries of the
truth at all, but we challenge them: and even in this only that we have not
yielded to the enemies of God, we have overcome them: and we have vanquished
the wicked laws against the truth: and if as yet we have not shedd our blood,
yet are we ready for to shedd it.

Let no man esteem this lingering of our putting of, The mercy of Prisons.
to be clemency, which rather hurts us, which hinders our glory, which
deferreth heaven, which delaieth the happy sight of God For in such a fight,
and in such a combatte where faith is a champion, not to have put of the
Martyrs by delay, is true clemency. Pray therefore (o beloved Cyprian) that God
will more plentifully and readily more and more every day arm every one of us
and lighten us with his grace: and confirm us and strengthen us with the might
of his power: and like a good Captain bring forth at ye last unto the battle
his soldiers which as yet he has exercised and proved within the tents of
the prison; and that he deliver unto us divine armor, Spiritual armor for
Confessors Ephesians. 6.
those weapons which cannot be overcome: the brestplate of justice which uses
never to break the shield of faith which cannot be pierced the sword of the
spirit which cannot be bruised for of whom may we rather desire that he pray
for these things, than of so gloriouse a Bishop: that those which are appointed
to the sacrifice, may ask help and succor at the hands of the Priest.

S. Cypr. libro de exhortatione Martyrij cap. 6.. 3.
That we being redeemed and restored to life by Christ his blood, Christ his
blood is to be esteemed above all things. Mat. 10.
ought to prefer nothing before Christ; in the gospel our Lord teaches and
says Who loves his father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me. And
who loves his son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. and who
takes not his Cross and follows me, is not worthy of me So also in
Deuteronomy: Deuteronomy. 33.
who say to their father and mother I know you not, and have not acknowledged
their sons, they have kept they precepts, and observed thy testament. Also
the Apostle Paul: To. 8.
who shall separate us from the charity of Christ? tribulation? or distress?
or persecution? or hunger? or nakedness? or danger? or the sword? as it is
written, for we are killed for thy sake all the day, we are esteemed as sheep
of slaughter, but in all these things we overcome, because of him that loved
us. And again. 1. Cor. 6. We are not our own. 1. Cor. 5.
you are not your own: for you were bought with a great price: Do you glorify
and carry God in your body Again. he died for all, that those also which live,
do not now live to them selves, but to him who died for them and arose again.

S. Ambrose upon the 118 Psalm: octo^. 21. upon that verse: Princes have
persecuted me, and my heart did tre^bie at thy words.. 4.
If we considere the ancient history: How to behave a man's self in torments.
both Saul and Absalon, and many foreign Princes persecuted holy David: but
none could prevail against him. There be also Princes of the world and rulers
of darkness, which go about in thy own breast to oppress thee, and raise
cruel persecutions within thee, promising earthly kingdoms, honor, and
riches, if with a base mind thou will yield unto them, and determine to obey
their commandments. These Princes sometimes with a cause do persecute,
sometimes without a cause: without a cause they persecute him, in whom they
find nothing of their own, and yet they go about to suddue him. not without a
cause they persecute him, who yields him self to their power, and wholly
enters into the possession of the world. for over their own they worthily
challenge deminion, and of such they exact reward of their iniquity. Well does
the Martyr say, that unjustly he suffers the torments of persecutions who
has stolen nothing; has violently oppressed no man; has shedd the blood of
no man; has defiled the bed of no man: who owes nothing unto the laws, and
yet suffers more greenous punishments than thieves: who speaks justly, and
is not heard; who speaks words full of salvation and is impugned: so that he
may say: Psalm. 119.
when I speak unto them they impugned me without a cause. Without a cause than
does he suffer persecution, which is impugned without any fault: he is
impugned as an offendour, when he is in such confession to be commended: he is
impugned as an inchaunter, which glories in the name of our Lord, piety being
the sou^dation of all vertew. Verily without cause is he impugned, who before
wicked men and infidells, is accused of impiety, he being a master of faith.
But he which is impugned without a cause, must be valiant and constant how than
does he add, and my heart did tremble at thy words? To tremble, is a token of
infirmity, of dread, and fear. But there is an infirmity unto salvation: there
is also a fear of Saints. Fear you our Lord, Psalm. 33. Psalm. 111.
all his Saints. and. blessed is the man which fears our Lord. wherefore is
he blessed? because in his co^maundments he has all his delight. Imagine than
a Martyr, A meditation for one which is tortured.
standing in the midst of dangers. when on one side most fierce beasts do
rore to cause him terror: on another side the hissing of hot glowing plates
of iron, and the flame of a fiery furnace does cast forth heat: on another
side the drailing of heavy chains does rattle: on another the begoared butcher
stands by: imagine him (I say) seeing all about him nothing but torments. and
than afterward thinking of the co^maundments of God, of that everlasting fire,
of that endless burning of the perfidiouse, of that misery of a reviving
pain: to tremble in his heart, least when he yields unto the present
misery. he addict him self to eternal torments: to be troubled in mind,
whilst he does as it were with his very eyes, behold that terrible sword of
the future judgment. In this trembling of a constant person, do not two equal
things seem to concur together, the confidence of one which desires
eternal things, and trembles at divine things? yet be of good courage; thou
which hopest; be of good courage, thou which art confident I would to God I
might deserve to be such a one, that if happily the persecutour come upon me, I
do not consider the sharpnes of my tortures, I regard not my torments, and
pains, I think not of the horriblenes of any grief: but account all these
things as light; and fear Christ, least Christ deny me, least Christ exclude
me, least he thrust me out of the congregation of his Priests, if he judge me
unworthy of that college. but rather he see me, although moved with the terror
of corporal pain, yet trembling more at his future judgments. Mat. 14.
And if he say unto me: o thou of little faith why did thou doubt? he will
yet reach me his hand, and after the boisterous trouble of the raging billows
of this world, establish me in the safe haue^ of a secure mind.

S Augustine. ser. 6. de verb. Do. cap. 9.. 5.
But perhaps some Ruler lays wait against thee; and seeks to impugn thee.
The benefitte of imprisonment for religion. Psalm. 51.
he whetteth his razour, wherwt he may shave thy hears, not wherewith he may
cut thy head. That which I say, you have even now heard in the psalm: as a
sharp razour thou have made deceit. Why did he compare the deceit of the
Ruler, unto an evil razour! because he is not admitted but to our
superfluities. Even as the hears in our body do seem superfluous, and without
detriment of the flesh are shaue^ away: so whatsoever a furious Ruler can do
unto thee, account that amongst thy superfluities. He takes away thy poverty:
does he take away thy riches? Thy poverty and thy riches are in thy heart. thy
superfluities he may take away, he might damnifie them, and being permitted
even hurt thy body. A Christian should make no account of his life.
For this life to those which think of another life, even this life I say is
to be accounted amongst superfluities. For the Martyrs contemned even it also.
they loased not their life but they found it. Assure your selves (my brethren)
that enemies are not admitted against the faithful, but in as much as is
profitable to tempt and prove the faithful. Assure your selves of this (my
brethren) let none say the contrary. Cast all your care upon our Lord; lay
your selves wholly upon him. He will not shrink from you to let you fall, he
which made us, and gave us security of our very hear. Amen, Mat. 10.
I say to you, your very hears of the head are all numbered. Our hears are
numbered unto God, how much more our manners, when our hears are so well
known? Behold, that God does not despise even our least things: for if he
despised the^ he would not create the^. For he truly both made and numbreth our
hears also. Luc. 21.
But now that they are, thou will say they shall happily perish. of this also,
hear what he says. Amen I say to you, a hear of your head shall not
perish. Why fear thou a man, o man which art carried in Gods bosom? See
thou fall not out of his bosom: whatsoever thou shall suffer there, shall be
for thy salvation, not for thy destruction. The Martyrs suffered the
quarterings of their members, and are Christians afraid of the injuries of
Christian times? S. Augustine here speaks of those countreies where infidel
officers did of malice persecute Christians, by false subornations.
He which does thee an injury now; does it with fear. he says not openly,
come to the Idol; he says not openly, come to my aultars, and there bankett.
And if he say so, and thou will not: let him make his complaint, let him bring
his action: he would not come to my aultars, he would not come to the temple
which I reverence. Let him say it. he dare not. but he deuiseth craftily other
things. prepare thy hear, he whetteth his razour, he is ready to take away
thy superfluities, to shave away whatsoever thou must once leave. Let him take
that which shall remain if he can. what has this unjust ruler taken from
thee? what great thing has he taken? that which the thief, that which the
burglar, and if he go to the uttermost that with the murderer takes. if he be
permitted to kill the very body, what takes he from thee but that with the
murderer takes? I favored him when I called him murderer. for every murderer
how heinous soever, is a man that which the agew, which the scorpio^, which the
poisoning todstoole takes. all this their might when they rage against us, is
to do like the todstoole men eat the venomous todstoole and dye. Behold in
what brittlenes is this life which thou must once leave: do not so fight for it
that thy self be left. Our way is Christ. Consider Christ he came to suffer
but so to be glorified. to be contemned; but so to be exalted: to dye; but
after to rise again. does the work terrify thee? but see the reward. Why
will thou in delicatenes come to that thing, whitherto only labor brings?
But thou fear to loose thy silver because thou came by it with great
labor. if not without labor thou came by thy silver which one day at the
least at thy death thou must leave: will thou atchieue life everlasting.
without labor? Set more by it, which thou shall so obtain after all thy
labors. that thou shall never lose it. if that be dear unto thee which thou
after all thy labors so obtainedst, that once thou shall loose it: how much
more ought we to desire those things which are everlasting?

S. Bernard sermon. 61. in Cant upon those words: My Dove in the holes of the
rock.. 6.
The Martyr needs not to be afraid to lift up his pale and wan face to him,
Cant. 2. A comfore for Martyrs in torments Psalm. 67.
by whose wannes we were saved: or to represent the glorious similitude of his
death, of which it was said the hinder parts of his back in the palenes of
gould. What should he fear, to whom our Lord says, show me thy face? to what
intent? as it seems unto me, he desires rather to show him self. So it is,
he desires to be seen, not to see. For what does not he see? there is no need
that a man show him self unto him, to who^ there is none but is seen although
he hide him self from him. He desires therefore to be seen: the noble
courteous Captain will have his soldiers countenance and eyes to be lifted up
to his wounds, that so he may encourage his mind, and by his own example make
him the more courageous in suffering. Verily he shall not feel his own, when
he behouldeth his Captains wounds. There stands the Martyr leaping and
triumphing although with his body thoroughly quartered: and whilst the sword
searches his sides, not only stoutly but also ioifully he behouldeth on every
side the sacred blood to gush from his flesh. Where is than the soul of the
Martyr? surely in safety: surely in the rock: surely in the bowels of Jesus:
and no marvel: the wounds being open for his entering in if he were in his
own bowels searching them, As Martyrs were in time past tormented for to deny
God: so now to betray their brethren.
he should surely feel the sword: he should not abide the pain: he would
yield and deny. but now dwelling in the rock, what marvel if he be become
hard as the rock? But neither is it to be meruailed at, if being exiled from
his body he feels not the griefs of his body Neither is this caused by
nummnes, but by love. for the sense is subdued, not destroyed. neither wants
there griefs, but it is overcome, it is despised. Than from the rock comes
ye Martyrs fortitude: thence is he fully able to drink of the cup of our
Lord and this sola^ing cup, Psalm. 22.
how notable is it? it is notable and pleasant, no less to the Captain
behoulding, than to the soldier triumphing. for the joy of our Lord, 2. Esd. 8.
is our fortitude. what should he do but reioise at the voice of a most stout
confessed on? Cant. 2
wherefore he does even seek it with great desire Let thy voice sound (says
he) in my ears. neither will he be slow in repaying the reward but that he
will confess him before his father, Mar. 8
whosoever shall confess him before men.

The 77 epistle of S. Cyprian.
Cyprian, unto Nemesian, Felix, Lucius, another Felix, Litteus Polianus, These
Martyrs were condemned to dig in the mines.
Iad^r, Datiuus his fellow Bishop: Also to his fellow Priests and Deacons and
others brethren in the Mines, the Martyrs of God the father almighty, and of
Jesus Christ our Lord God and Savior: sends gre^ting everlasting. 7.
Your worthiness and glory (most blessed, An exhortation unto Martyrdom
and most beloved brethren) is such, that it would have been my dewty to come
my self unto your presence and to embrace you, unless I also being cofined
for the confession of Christ his name, were kept within the bonds of a prefixed
place. yet in what sort I may I present my self, and whereas with body and
feet I cannot, with affection and spirit I come unto you, expressing by
letters my heart, wherein with joy I exulte because of these your virtues and
praises: esteeming my self as a partner with you if not with the suffering of
body, yet in the fellowship of charity And could I hold my peace, and command
silence unto my voice, knowing of my most dearest so many and so gloriouse
matters, wherewith Gods liberallity has honored you: that some of your company
by the accomplishing of their martyrdom are gone before, to receive the crown
of their merittes of our Lord: the rest as yet remaining within the Prison
bars, or kept at the mines in chains; does show by the very delay of
punishments, greater examples for the strengthening and fortifying of their
brethren: Delay of death in persecution increases glory.
by the slownes of their torments, winning higher degrees of merittes, and
being for to receive in the heavenly retribution so many rewards as they
sustain days of afflictions. which thing I wonder nothing most stout and
blessed brethren that they have happened unto you according to the meritt of
your religion and faith: that our Lord has thus exalted you unto so great a
height of glory: Who are those with deserve to be Martyrs.
who always have flourished in his Church by keeping the rule of faith,
firmly observing our Lords commaundments, in simplicity, innocence; in
charity, concord, modesty, in humility; diligence in administration;
watchfulnes in helping the afflicted; mercy in cherishing the poor; constancy
in desending the truth; equity in the severity of discipline. And least any
thing might want in the example of your good deeds, even now by confessing
with mouth and suffering with body you stir up your brethrens minds unto
divine martirdomes, yielding your selves Captains of valor, that the flock
following the shep heardes, and imitating that which is sulfilled by the
rulers, may with equal merittes of obedience be crowned by our Lord. A
pattern of Bridewell
And whereas you being grievously knocked and beaten with cudgells, have by such
cruelties given devout beginning to your confession: we are not to be ashamed
hereof. neither trewly could a Christians body tremble at the cudgel, whose
wholle hope is in a tree. the seru^at of Christ acknowledged the mystery of our
salvation, and being redeemed by a tree unto life everlasting, he was furthered
by a tree unto his reward. And what marvel if you which are vessels of gould
and silver, are confined unto the mines, Martyrs are gould.
that is to a place of gould and silver, but that now the nature of mines is
changed, and the places which were wont to yield, now have begone to receive
gould and silver? They have put irons also upon your feet, Fetters most
gloriouse.
and with infamous chains have bound most happy members and temples of God: as
though together with your body your spirit could be bound: or your gould could
be abased with the contagion of iron. To men which are dedicated unto God, and
with religiouse constancy do profess their faith: these are not bands, but
ornaments, neither do they fetter Christian feet, for ignominy; but they set
them forth for to be crowned O feet most happilly chained, which are loased
not by a smith, but by Christ. O feet most happily chained, with by a fruitful
journey are directed unto heaven O feet bound for a while in this world, that
they may be all ways free with our Lord. O feet for a while hindered with
shackells and boultes, but yet swiftly running with a gloriouse pace unto Christ.
Let envious and malignant cruelty keep you here so long as she will in bonds
and chains: you shall from these countreies and afflictions go speedely unto
the heavenly Kingdoms. Whilst you are in the mine your body is not pampered
with soft lodging and fetherbeads: Hardness of Prisons.
but it is cherished with the comf^urt and refreshing of Christ. the over
travailed bowels do lie on the ground: but it is no pain for to lie with
Christ. Your members are unhandsome for want of bathing, and disfigured with
corruption and filthiness: but spiritually is that washed within, which carnally
is defiled without. There is little store of bread: but not with bread only
does a man live, Deuteronomy. 8. Luc. 4
but with the word of God. You want clothing when you are cold: but he that
has put on Christ is sufficiently clothed and apparelled. rough and ragged is
the hear of your half So were those used with were sent to the mines. See the
like 2. reg. 20.
shaue^ head. but whereas Christ is the head of a man: needs must that head be
comely of what fashion soever, which is honored with the confession of Christ.
This deformity so detested and abhorred by the gentills, o with what brightness
shall it be rewarded? this te^porall and short misery, o with what recompense
of a noble and everlasting honor shall it be exchanged, when as the Apostle
says our Lord shall have reformed the body of our humility, Phillip. 3.
configured to the body of his glory? neither can there be, my beloved
brethren, any loss of devotion or of faith, Want of ye sacrifice of the Mass
is recompe^sed
in that there where you are the Priests of God have no commodity of offering
and celebrating the Divine sacrifices. what? you do celebrate and offer a
sacrifice unto God both pretiouse and gloriouse, and which shall exceedingly
profit you for the obtaining of heavenly rewards whereas the scripture says:
Psalm. 90.
a troubled spirit is a sacrifice unto God: a contrite and humbled heart God
does not despise. This sacrifice do you offer unto God, this sacrifice without
intermission both day and night you celebrate, being made hoastes unto God, and
yielding your selves holy and imaculate sacrifices as the Apostle exhorts
saying. To. 11
I beseech you therefore brethren by the mercy of God that you exhibit your
bodies a living host, holy, pleasing God, neither be you conformed to this
world, but be reformed in yt newnes of your mind that you prove what the good
and acceptable and perfect will of God is. For this is that with is most
acceptable unto God; this is that, in which our works with greater merittes
do come to win the favor of God: this is the only thing which the service
of our faith and devotion may render unto our Lord for his great and wholesome
benefitts, To suffer martyrdom is to recompense in a sort Christ.
the holy Ghost affirming and testifying in the psalms: what shall I render
unto God, for all the things which he has given unto me? I will receive the
chalice of salvation, and will invoke the name of our Lord. Pretiouse in the
sight of our Lord is the death of his Saints. Psalm. 119.
Who would not willingly and promptly receive the chalice of salvation? who
would not with joy and chearfulnes desire that in which he also may render
somewhat unto his Lord? Who would not stoutly and constantly receive a death
pretiouse in the sight of our Lord: when he shall please his eyes, who from
heaven behoulding us in the combatte for his name, approves us willing,
helps us fighting, crowns us ouercoming, rewarding with the liberality of
his goodness and fatherly piety, whatsoever he him self has wrought, and
honoring that which him self did perform. For that it is by him yt we
overcome, and having overcome our enemies we atchieue the reward of a singular
great combat: our Lord teaches us in the gospel, saying, Mat. 10
when they shall deliver you up, take no thought how or what to speak: for it
shall be given you in that hour, what to speak. for it is not you that speak
but the spirit of your father that speaks in you. And again Lay up this in
your harres, Luc. 21
not to premeduate how you shall answer. for I will goue you mouth and wisdom
which all your adversaries shall not be able to resist and gainsay. Wherein
there is both great confidence for those which believe, and most heinous
offense of the perfidiouse: not to believe him which promises his help to
those which confess him, and on the other side not to fear the same when he
threatens everlasting torments to those which deny him All which things you
most valiant and faithful soldiers of Christ have insinuated unto our
brethren, perfourming in deeds, that which before you taught in words and
therefore being herafter for the be most great in the Kingdom of heaven,
according to our Lords promise, Mat 5
saying: Who does and teaches, shall be called great in the Kingdom of
heaven. Finally a very great part of the common people following your example,
together with you has confessed, Martyrs of the common people Virgins and
Boys. Mat. 13
and together with you has been crowned: lincked unto you with the bond of a
most strong charity, and neither in prison nor in the mines severed from their
spiritual rulers. in with number there want not Virgins, who Laue joined unto
the threescore fould fruit the but dreth sold, and whom a dubled glory has
exalted unto a heavenly crown. In boys also a greater courage tha^ age,
through the praise of their co^session has surpassed their years, that both
sexes, and every age might set forth the blessed company of your martyrdom.
The inward comfort of a persecuted Catholic.
O what strength of a conquering conscience is now within you, most dear
brethren? what height of mind? what reioising in your heart? What triumph in
your breast? for every one of you to stand expecting Gods promised reward. and
to be without fear of the day of judgment? for to walk in the mines, with
the body of a captive, but with the mind of an Emperor: to know that Christ is
present with him, reioising in the suffering of his servants, who by his
footesteppes and ways do go unto the everlasting Kingdoms? you daily wait
with joy for the happy day of your departure, and being even now to go forth of
the world, you hasten unto the rewards of Martyrs, and the mansions of heaven.
being for to see after ye darkness of this world a most shining light and being
for to receive a glory far exceeding all passions and conflicts. as
witnesses the Apostle, saying: The passions of this time are not condign to
the glory to come, that shall be revealed in us. Briefly for that now your
speech in your devotions is more effectual, and prayer can the more easily
obtain that which is asked in affliction, pray and desire most earnestly, that
Gods mercy will consummate all our confessions: that he will out of these
darkness and snares of this world, deliver us also together with you untouched
and glorious: that as we have here stood together, being lincked with the band
of charity and of peace against the injuries of heretics and oppressions of
gentills, even so we may together reioise in the heavenly kingdoms. I wish you
all most blessed and beloved brethren in our Lord well to fare, and request you
always and every where to remember us. Fare you well.

The history of the seven Machabees Brethren and their mother all Martyrs for
the obseruauation of the law of God written in the 7. chapter of the second
book of Ma^habees the memory of these holy Martyrs is kept by the Church of
Christ, the first day of August.. 8
It happened that seven brethren together with their mother were taken, and
compelled by the King to eat against the law swines flesh, being tormented
with whippes and scourges. One of them who was the first, Mark in all this
history the Christian liberty of Martyrs in rebuking Tyrants.
and what will thou learn of us? we are ready rather to dye, than to
transgress our country laws of God. The King therefore being angry,
commanded frying pannes and brazen pottes to be made red hot, which being
done, he commanded him which first had spoken to have his tongue cut out,
and the skin of his head being drawn away, that his hands and feet should
be cut of, his other brethren and his mother looking on And when he was made
altogether unprofitable, he commanded fire to be brought, and him yet
breathing to be roasted in the frying pan: in which whilst he was for a long
time tormented, the rest together with their mother exhorted one another to dye
stoutely; saying. our Lord God will look upon the truth, Deuteronomy. 32.
and will comfort us. as Moises declared in the protestation of his Canticle:
And he will comfort his servants. The first than being dead in this manner,

After him the third is deluded: thee and thy seed. After him they brought the
sixth: A godly mother.
and worthy of ye memory of good men, which seeing in the space of one day her
seven sons dying, bore it wc a good courage, for the hope wc she had in God:
exhorted every one of them with her country language stoutely, being
replenished with wisdom: and ioining a manly courage unto a womanly thought,
said unto them. I know not how you appeared in my womb: neither truly did I
give unto you spirit and soul and life, and the members of every one of you,
did not I fette together; but the creator of ye world, which has fourmed the
nativity of man, and wc bath found out the beginning of all things, will
restore unto you again spirit and life with mercy, even as now you set
naught by your selves for his laws. But Antiochus supposing him self to be
contemned, and despising ye vpbraiding voice; when he had exhorted her with
many words, she promised to persuade her son. Therefore stouping down unto
him, deriding the cruel Tyrant, she said in her country language: my son
have compassion of me, which carried thee nine months in my womb and gave
thee suck for three years and nourished thee, and have brought thee unto this
age I beseech thee o son, How parents ought to co^fourt them selves in their
childrens vertew.
that thou look upon heaven and earth and all things which are in the^, and
that thou understand that God made them and mankind of nothing: so will it come
to pass that then do not fear this butcher, but being made a worthy companion
and partner with thy brethren, accept death; that in that time of mercy I may
re^eauet gither with thy brethren, thee also. Even whilst she was speaking these
things, the young man said: whom do you stay for? I obey not the precept of
the King, A lesson of true obedience.
but the precept of the law, which was given us by Moises. But thou who have
been he ^^uent our of all malice toward the Jews, shall not escape the hands
of God. For we for our own sins do suffer these things. And although our
Lord God for our correction and punishment is for a while angry with us, yet he
will be reconciled again unto his servants. but thou o most wicked and most
abominable of all men, be not foolishly extolled with vain hopes, whilst thou
do ra^e against his servants for thou have not yet escaped he indgement of
the almighty God which sees all things. For my brethren having now sustained
a small labor, do repose under the testament of everlasting lise but thou by
the judgment of God shall suffer (...) punishments of thy pride. I as my
brethren also do give my life and body for my country laws: inuocating God
that he will quickly be merciful unto our nation: and that thou by torments
and stripes may confess, that he only is God. But in me and in my brethren
the wrath of almightye God shall cease, which has justly been brought upon all
our generation. Than the King incensed with anger, did show extreme cruelty
upon him more than upon all, being much moved that he was derided. And he
therefore died undefiled, wholly putting his trust in our Lord. Last of all
after the sons the mother also was put to death.

THE CONCLUSION TO Catholic wives and children.
NOw therefore o devout Catholic wives and children whom especially I have in
this labor regarged, remember that you are the spouses and children of God.
these men which are now your husbands, after the short space of this life,
and the temporal cohabitation of this vale of misery, shall be your husbands
no longer. Than shall there be a perpetual divorce of this band of marriage:
and withal either an eternal diuorcement in place, the one being so far
sundered from the other as is heaven from hell: or both of you for ever shall
be divorced together from the face of God, if you dye out of his Church or
graces or (that which is a most happy and gloriouse thing) your carnal
matrimony and temporal conjunction being Catholickly and religiously passed
over in this life, shall be changed into a perpetual and indissoluble union
in the glory of God.

These men after their death cannot forbid you to marry another: because your
promise was made for no longer space. Even so let not them living still with you
cause you to be unfaithful unto God: because that was no part of your plighted
promise the faith promised to your husband does bind you but until death but
ye faithfulness promised to your most ancient and noble spouse of heaven as it
was more ancient tha^ your worldly marriage: so must it never be broken, but
continue for all eternities. Your husbands will justly reprehend you, if you
dishonor their bed: Even so do you plead your other husbands cause, least his
temple be uiolated. most filthy is trewly the crime of fornication: but above
all other vices heresy and profession of heresy is a spiritual fornication.
your husbands over your souls have no authority; and over your bodies but a
limited power: but your heavenly spouse can condemn both unto everlasting
fire, or reward both with everlasting bliss. Let your effeminate husbands
like unto the wife of Job impugn your holy constancy: and you with manly
courage like unto another Job expect Gods patience. Let your husbands like
infidells inuit you to their infidelity: 1. C^^y.
but you by your vertew and godly perseverance endenour to sanctifye both their
and your children. Let your husbands like so many foolish Naballs deserve the
wrath of our victoriouse David: 1. Reg. 25.
you with the wisdom of Abigail secke to as wage his just indignation. Say you
with Abigail: Let not my Lord be angry with this wicked man Nabal: for
according unto his name he is a fool, and foolish nes is always with him. and
you may happily receive that merciful answer of our heatiently I auid:
Blessed be thy speech, and blessed art thou which have forbidden me this day
to go to blood, and to revenge me with my own hand.

And you children whom God has blessed and made his children by adoption:
persuade your selves that it is not so great a benifit^e to have been borne
unto the world, as to have been regenerate unto grace more should you have been
behoulden to your temporal parents if they had not begotten you, than being
begotten if they do d^^ne you. 2. Ma^h 7.
And yet the very begetting is not their own work. God fourmed your body,
distinguished your members, gave lite and soul unto then all. Let not them
desircy your soul who could not give it: let not them destroy your body for
ever, who could not make one hear thereof. And they trewly in the estate of
wedlock sought happily more their own disordered co^tentments then your
temporal being. th^^ke than that they are more than beastly, if they secke
their present quietness, by your eternal undoing. Original sin is contracted
by carnal propagation even of most holy and temperate parents, who like the
godly Patriarchs seek nothing in matrimonial acts but the glory of God and
increase of his people: not offending in the same so much as venially. your
parents added to the sin of Adam their own disorders: married perhaps out of
Gods Church receiving that holy Sacrament which should have been for your
benefitte not holily: lived also happily in marriage licentiously: brought you
up when you were little ones in ignorance and heresy: And God having at the
length showed you their folly, and taught you to amend in your selves, that
which they disordered, will they now fight against God, and make you soldiers
of the Deuell? what wages shall you receane for such a warsarre? is there
favor to be bought with the loss of Christ: or worldly preferment to be
preferred before a heavenly spouse: or earthly inheritance or dowry better than
the rewards of glory? Filij hominum vsquequo graui cord, vt quid diligitis
vanitatem and queritis menda^um? Psalm. 4.
O sons of men, but withal sons of God love not these vanities, carry not
a heart laden with lies, and drowsy with the sluggishnes of this world, but
let it be lightened and waking unto God. Let their riches go with them into
perdition: you have not a father upon earth, but in heaven. Say rather with the
Prophett. Thou art our father and Abraham has not known us, Esa. 63.
and Israel was ignorant of us: thou o Lord art our father, our redeemer: thy
name is everlasting. Everlasting trewly is this name of a father, if you
forsake not your true and everlasting father, your earthly father seeks to
deprive you of your everlasting father: pull of your garments, and leaving your
selves naked with godly fervor restore them him again: and so with devout S
Frauncis you may more freely say: Pater noster quies in caelis. If you have not
crosses in this world, you shall (...) stants. Protesters ^^o kiss Christ
with ^udas. Mat. 26. Luc. 22.
So often as I think of these men, I am putt in Mind of the lacte of Judas.
Judas coming unto our Savior, said Hail Rabbi, and he kissed him. But our
Sauicur said unto him: Judas with a ^isse do thou betray the son of man?
Even so these Protesters if not Protestants, with a Protestation will seem to
kiss our Savior: but with their presence amongst such a Pharisaicall company
they do in deed betray him. I would to God they would open the ears of their
heart, and consider those voices which in silence our Savior speaks unto
them. Judas with a kiss do thou betray me? amongst heretics do thou
profess me? no other place to profess chastity, but in the bed of a harlott?
no other time to profess innocence, but in condemning an innocent? no place to
profess the honor thou owe me, but where thou in highest degree do
dishonor me?

And who sees not how fittely these Pietesters be compared unto Judas? for who
was the first brocher of the practice of a Protestation, but a most treacherous
Judas? and now Judas having in a sort hanged him self, and scattered abroad
the filthy stuff of his most loathsome bowels abominable before God and man,
is it not a pitiful case that our Protesters will still be amongst
Protestants?

With these men therefore will I reason a while: and because the case of it
self is so clear that nothing can be clearer: I will only in all clarity
satisfy that argument, upon wc they wholly do rely.

This argument i, The argument for ^ro testatio^
the preterded rutc^ity of Mr. Cregory Martin, a man of blessed memory, and of
singular learning. But where does he maintain this opinion? forsooth there
where in a wholle volume he proves this action to be schism Admit than that
such was his opinion? Mr. Marin by this opinion would not overthrow his
principal opinion of schism.
would he not if he had well considered it, have rather said that such
Protestation was unlaw ull, than to give license of that which he accounted
schism? shall one word spoken by chance in a wholle treatise, overthrow his
wholl purpose which he goes about to prove in ye same? whether would he not
have argued in this manner: to go to the Church is a schismatic act,
therefore it cannot be justified by Protestation: rather than thus: to go to the
Church with Protestation is lawful: therefore to go to the Church is no
schismatic act: whereas one of these propositions utterly overthrows the
other? For if it be schism to go to the Church, than is it sin of it own
nature, than cannot it be justified by Protestation: for if it were justifiable
by Protestation, than would it follow that it were not schism and sin of it
own nature.

For although in sundry cases which of them selves be lawful, No Protestation
can make a naughty thing good
yet are oftentimes subject to scandal by reason of a likeness of evil wc is
in them, or of some misconstruing of the same by our neighbor, although I say,
in such actions a Protestation may serve to satisfy the well meaning or weaker
sort, and so all scandal ceassing the actions remain fully lawful, as being
before of the^ selves lawful, and only for such a circumstance of scandal
unlawful: yet has not any kind of Protestation so much force as to justify
that which is of it self evil. as Judas his protesting of frendshippe in
kissing our Savior: or Pilates protesting of innocence in washing his hands:
could not make either the one a true friend of our Lord, or the other trewly
innocent. nor Ioab his fair speeches and courteous demeanor toward Amasa,
could excuse his treacherous murder. Even so than in this case of going to the
Church. for whereas such fact is of it self unlawful and schismatic as Mr.
Martin purposely does dispute: how can it be that it may be allowed by
Protestation?

And certainly in this case above all other, a Protestation is most ridiculous
For in this actio^ of going to heretical Churches, A Protestation is most
ridiculous in this case. Going to the Church is a protestation of Protestancy.
the principal deformity and iniquity, is that it signifies a conformity in
schism and false religion: so that it is nothing else of it self but a
Protestation in fact of false religion. now by a contrary Protestation in
words to seek to disanull the Protestation of the fact, what is it else, but
as if a man very expert in the art of lying, should in telling two contrary
tales with one breath, desire to be fully believed in both? But howsoever these
absurd Protesters persuade them selves, Two lies made by Protesters.
yet have they justly received the ordinary reward of liers not to be believed
at all. For where as by the fact they show them selves Protestants, no man yet
believes them: and whereas by their words they seek to alter the nature of
the fact, neither yet can they obtain creditt, the fact of it self
remaining as it was before. So that they come every day from the Church laden
with two diverse and contrary lies. (a small fault perhaps if they were not in
so weighty a matter) the one that they are Protestants. the other that their
fact does signify no such thing, as is the profession of Protestancy. I
remember that I have heard a pretty conceit of one who seeing upon a sudden
that by our Parliaments religion was altered, The Person of Croydon
and that defined and decreed superstition, which all our forefathers before
accounted true worshipping of God: made earnest petition to some Parliament
Lord that it might be enacted by the authority before said that it should be but
five miles from his house to London, that so he might be delivered from a
longer travail when he were to go thither. But whatsoever we may worthily
attribute to Parliaments, where there is higher authority, more general
consent, more public proceedings and means to diuulge abroad the knowledge
of any matter. than in any other temporal thing can be possibly devised: it is
surely overmuch prerogative to give unto the speeches of every particular
schismaticke, A Protestation cannot be public enough to take away scandal.
that he may by one Protestation make that another Protestation shall be no
Protestation: although he would Protest every time not only in the Pulpitt but
also in Printed Papers which surely were necessary if he would make his
speecehes of Protestation as well known as his Protestation of fact, and yet
it were not sufficient perhaps, whereas many would hear of his fact which would
not hear of his papers.

The Protestation therefore being of it self thus absurd, and for such cause
as is worthily to be thought very far from that learned Licentiates
approbation: it seems yet more dangerous for the want of any warrant of
ancient practice or example. For it is a very strange case, that in so many
ages past, in so diverse and long persecutions stirred up against Gods Church
by infidells, heretics, schismatickes: yet no memory should be extant of any
satisfying the persecutours pleasure by doing that which he commanded with a
Protestation: but that this Protestation should first of all be heard of in
communication with Protestants: belike to show that Protesters and Protestants
are as near in inward qualities and conditions, as they are in the outward and
material sound of their names. And surely if the Pope should condemn this
opinion of a Protestation as an heresy: (as it may be he has in co^demning the
defender and maintainer thereof:) than could we have no fitter name for these
new heretics, than to call them Protesting Protestants.

Of contrary Protestations we read oftentimes and almost every where, that is:
that the Saints of God have not only not satisfied their persecutours
desires, but have bouldly protested that they would not obey their unlawful
commaundments. Be it known unto thee o King, Dan. 3.
that we will not worship thy Gods, and the idol which thou have erected we
will not adore. This was the Protestation of ye three children. Act. 4. and 5.
Hear also the Apostles Protestation. We cannot but speak those things which
we have seen and heard. And we must obey God rather than men. 2. Match. 7.
And the youngest Machabee: whom do you stay for? I obey not the precept of the
King, but the precept of the law. These are Protestations fit for Christians,
honorable in the making, famous in the remembering, and most gloriouse in their
everlasting rewards not those which do as it were call God and heaven and
earth to witness, that the obedience of man is preferred before the obedience
of God.

Of like examples of Christian Protestations all Ecclesiastical histories are
full: neither could ever the fury of persecutours or extremity of torments
drive the champions of Christ, to yield or seem to yield to as indifferent
things as going to the Church may seem to be, and to seek to justify such
actions by Protestation.

This has always made me think that that good virtuous learned Divine did
never mean to allow a Protestation as these new Protesters would have him:
considering the repugnance which it has to his wholle argument of his
treatise, and the absurdity of the thing it self, which (although he speak
somewhat obscurely) I cannot think but that his wisdom could very well
perceive

Yet do I not doubt but that he worthily admits a Protestation in some
cases. A Protestation is some times profitable.
For this action of going to the Church is than unlawful, when it is a
Protestation of conformity in religion: which it is always, when there is such
orderly going as is used by the heretics them selves, now it may be that in
diverse cases this orderlines and conformity may be wanting, and than the going
to the Church with heretics is called but a material going and not a
formal: because the formality is by the alteration of the essential
conditions of such going taken away. in this case therefore when going to the
Church is no Protestation of false religion: it is not unlawful of it self:
so that for to avoid scandal if there be any danger thereof, I make a
Protestation, wherein I show my going to be only material and not formal. An
example or two we may show out of the scriptures. The going of the people with
Hieroboam to Bethell when he there was to sacrifice, ^. Reg. 13.
was a formal going to idolatry, because they went orderly all alike. but the
coming thither of the Prophett to reprehend the King, was only a material
going to idolatry, and very well known to be of a diverse nature from the
other. Naaman Syrus was materially present at idolatry but not formally:
because he went not to the temple as unto a temple, but as unto any other place
where his particular temporal service might be exacted. neither did he obey
his King commanding an act of religion, but requiring only the temporal
assistance which to his greatness was convenient. Now if Naaman had seen any
probabillity of scandal, than should he have been bound to have made a
Protestation. generally therefore wha^ there is no contrary Protestation in the
fact, that is when going to the Church with heretics is only material and
not formal. than may a Protestation be very well used in words: which
nevertheless is not necessary, but in danger of scandal. So that a
Protestation does not make that lawful which was unlawful but shows the
lawfulnes of that which was judged unlawful. neither makes it that a
material going which was formal: but only declares that to be material
which was in deed material before.

Many examples might be brought in our own case, Mr. Martins case of
Protestation is examined.
of material going: but it has been sufficiently done in other books. I
will only touch that case which Mr. Martin him self brings. A man may
lawfully go says he to the Church with heretics if he protest that he goes
to pray Catholickly. True it is if he not only protests to pray Catholickly,
but prays in deed Catholickly and is there Catholickly present. Which he
cannot than do, if he be indistinctly amongst them, whatsoever prayers he say.
for his fact is a Protestation that he is there to pray in heretical union
and participation. and that most of all if he protest that he comes for
obedience: for the end of such obedience, is participation with heretics and
conformity with the^. Yet this will I say for Mr Martin, that in case that he
pray Catholickly, that is, that he show a manifest disunion with heretics: he
sins not. But this cannot be as the case is with us. yet can I put such a
case

As if Catholics and herericks in league against the Turk had but one Church,
and being agreed not to molest one the other, should at one time in several
altars have Mass and communion and yet the people of force were confused and
mingled in the Church: in such a case the Catholic sins not: and his
Protestation may be virtuously used, although it be not necessary: for there
being two several services, the presence only is no more a profession of the
one than of the other. Thus I think Mr. Martins doctrine true and I persuade
my self that he in very deed meant no more. Whatsoever Mr. Martin held he
would now alter his opinion.


But letting this pass as a matter somewhat uncertain what he held, when this
shifte was first propounded, and never examined before: there is no doubt at
all, but if he had afterward known the contrary resolution even only of his
Superior, yea and of many other excellent particular persons besides, amongst
so many hundreths which hold now the contrary: such was his humility and
vertew, that he would presently have yielded to any one of them. For in matters
of conscience (a most suttell and unsearchable profundity) all particulers are
not easily seen at the first: and desire of not proceeding rashly with those who
may be endamaged with a severe resolution, causes many times the determiner to
take the more favorable way, wc time ye very mother of truth does after show
to be vnallowable whereof we may find in our country sufficient examples in
more weighty and apparent dissimulations, than is this of going to ye Church,
as in the oath of the Supremacy, and receiving the Protestants communion: which
things how easily they were swallowed up either in K Henryes time or sithence
every man knows: and how some Clergy men first allowed them, which afterward
disproued them, it is to to manifest.

And it is worthy of consideration, how these Protesters do deal dubblely. The
dubble dealing of Protesters.
For when Mr Martin allows as they interpret him a Protestation: that is the
Censure of the most learned man Mr. Gregory Martin. and we trewly think him
worthy of much more praise, and that he needs not the commendation of men,
whom God has; as we hope commended. But when he says that going to the
Church is schism or denial of Catholic religion: than there is no speech of
his commendation nor allowing of his opinion at all. We therefore here have
determined omitting many other things wc has been said herin by others, and
especially by the learned assembly of those of the Counsel of Trent, who
define this act to be of it self unlawful t^ let down against this
pretended and doubtful authority, a true and plain authority of most grave
Deuines even of this point in particular.

When therefore the stature of the monthly penalty for going to the Church came
forth: Most absolute authority against this Protestation.
he wc was than President of the College of Rhemes desiring to tender as much
as with Gods favor he might the distressed case of Catholics, and to allow
them if it were tolerable even this Protestation which we speak of, in which
some perhaps before had been of contrary opinion unto him self and had gone
about to desend it: very charitably according to his accustomed tenderness took
his journey to Paris. and there in the Sorbonists College had the case disputed,
and resolved that it was altog^ther unlawful. Sorbon College.
whereupon he made suit unto the King which than was that he would be a mean
unto her Majesty. to suspend the execution of the statute for one year. but
he breeding than that which afterward he brought fourth, answered that he
would not deal therein. Not contented with this, with fatherly care he wrote to
Rome to the Reverend Father Frauncise Toledo a man of known learning and
practice. fom whom he had this answer which I will presently set down.
Franciscus Toletus.
which was carried into our country by one Mr. Edward Stra^sam now a Saint
in heaven, and delivered unto a Reverend Priest unto whom he related this
wholle history as the same has lately imparted it unto me. Cum tale edictum
sit contra Ecclesiam Catholica^ and in haeretici erroris fauorem and
confirmationem, non est vlla ratione obediendum. Interesse enim haereticorum
Conciliabulis and little Ecclesiam indistincte tanquam vnum eorum frequentare,
non solum est veram fidem and religionem occultare, sed falsam sectam nouo
quodam facto ad id ordinato profiteri: quod iure diuino prohibitum, nec vlla
dispe^satione licitum esse, nec vlla temporalittm amissione bonorum iustificari
potest.

Protestatio autem illa quae a nonnullis Catholicis sit, a peccato non excusat:
cum sit contraria facto. factum enim si tale est vt describitur, nempe
haereticorum Ecclesiam frequentare and eorum Co^ciliabulis indistincte tanquam
vnum eorum interesse, Protestatio quoddam est sectae eorundem, and in hune
finem tale edictum sanatu^ est. That is: Whereas such statute is against the
Catholic Church, and in favor and confirmation of heresy: it must not in any
manner be obeyed. for to be present at the Conciliables of heretics, and to
frequent their Church indistinctly as one of them; is not only to hide the
true faith and religion, but to profess a false sect by a new kind of fact
ordained thereunto. Which being forbidden by the law of God, can neither be
lawful by any dispensation, nor justified by any loss of temporal goods.

And that Protestation which is made by some Catholics, excuses not from
sin, whereas it is contrary unto the fact. For the fact if it be such as it
is described, that is, to frequent the heretics Church and to be present at
their Conciliables indistinctly as one of them, is a certain Protestation of
their sect, and for this end was that statute made.

Thus much of this authority of so grave learned and famous men in this very
point of a Protestation. And yet can I bring far greater: so that we suppose
this as a certain ground, The ground upon which the dissallowing of
Protestation does stand.
that if going to the Church with heretics be of it own nature a sin and
indispensable, than no Protestation can make it lawful. I will therefore bring
the insallible authority of him which sits in the chair of Peter according
to the tenor of a letter lately sent into England: whereof a friend in these
countreies has imparted unto me a copy and I will here set down so much as
shall belong to this purpose, word for word neither must it seem strange to
any, that herin I go about to publish so private a thing: wha^ I do nothing
else but only give a necessary preservative, against diverse venomous tounges,
which out of so sweet and pleasant a flower having gathered poison, are every
where busy to disperse the same: as herafter shall appear.

You must (says the writer of this letter) have great regard that you teach
not nor defend that it is lawful to communicate with the Protestants, An
Italian letter.
in their prayers, or service, or conuenticles where they meet to minister
their untrue Sacraments. For this is contrary to the practice of the Church,
and the holy Doctors and Fathers use and example in all ages: who never
communicated or allowed in any Catholic person to pray together with Arrians.
Donatists, or what other soever. Neither is it a positive law of the Church,
(for so it might be dispensed withal upon some occasion.) But it is derived of
Gods own eternal law, as by many cuident arguments I could convince: and it
has been largely proved in sundry treatises in our own tongue and others: and
as we have practiced from the beginning of our missions.

And least either any of my Brethren might either mistrust my judgment, The
Definition of ye Church.
or be not satisfied by such proofs as have been made therein: or my self be
beguiled in mine own conceit: I thought not only to take the advice of the
best learned Deuines here: but to make all sure; I have demanded the Popes
holiness that now is his sentence. who expressly told me, that to participate
with the Protestants, either by praing with the^, or coming to their Churches,
or service, or such like, was by no means lawful or dispensable. so fair
goes this point of the letter.

Thus we see here this truth defined out of Peter's chair, so that there is no
more place of doubt at all. neither must we think that this is the Popes
private opinion only: it is his express declaration and absolute pleasure by
this resolution to teach and direct our country, See Bellarm lib. 4. de
Po^tif. c. 2.
so that herin he could not err.

But it is a world to see how subtle and cunning iniquity is in defense of it
self. Three objections out of the before said letter.
For out of this very letter I understand that many take occasion to desend
going to the Church, thinking that both by the Popes meaning and by the opinion
of him Wc wrote the letter, they have such liberty. O extreme madness, or to say
better, most impudent malice. If the Pope will have them which fall casely
received again; not the adulterer, thief, murderer, sin, because they must
be easily received again. And who doubts but that every sinner, although
never so heinous, must be received again? God forbid else: but so that he
repent, and (as the letter specifieth in this very case) yield some reasonable
hope that he will herafter stand more strongly?

But the letter says that this sin being done of fear is less, and more
compassionable,

It seems that these grave interpreters make no account of any sin, but
only of that which is against the holy ghost. for so long as you leave any
place for compassion, or hope of absolution and remission, they will have no
sin at all. God grant they be so fearful as they should be even of sins
against the holy ghost, and that they dying in their obstinacy and impenitency,
it may not be said hereafter of the^ which our Savior said of the Jews:
10.8.
I go, and you shall seek me, and shall dye in your sin. As for their fear:
L. 3. ^th. c. 1
Aristotle will tell the^ that such things as are done for fear are
voluntary. And he brings our very example. as says he, if a Prince having
in his hands the Parents and children of any persons, should command these
to redeem the other by any unlawful action. which he concludes not
withstanding such fear to be voluntary. And so is this action of going to the
Church: and consequently a sin still, although it may be by such fear
somewhat diminished: but not transferred from a mortal sin to a venial, as
we will afterward show.

security from falling again, than in any other sin: therefore can this be no
sin, where sufficient security of avoiding it is not exacted.

O deceitful EVE always excusing: o malicious serpent always suggesting
excuses in most weighty matters. Has he not exacted sufficient security
before, when he requires Confession, sorrow, reasonable hope of perseverance,
which is all one with a steadfast purpose of amendment? And that he requires
less security in this sin than in another, it is not for that it is no sin
at all: but because the danger of other sins ordinarily depends upon one
circumsta^ce or upon a very few: but the danger of this upon infinite. One is
given to lasciuiousnes. take away the occcasion Wc is but one, that is familiar
conversation with evil disposed persons, and he is out of danger. One is
given to fighting and brawling: cause him to live more privately in an orderly
and civil house, and you see there is great security in his standing in Gods
favor.

But one is very fearful of his estate, and discouraged and ready to fall with
every blast of searches or Assizes. in this man you can have no security but
his own resolution. For if he conuaigh over his lands, he may be putt in
prison. if he escape the Assizes; he may be visited by Purseua^ts. if these be
his friends; yet some Justice, or some Co^missioner may have him by the back:
as now a days none are so busy in such base services as gentlemen them selves,
and those the nearest neighbors: so that you cannot help this man, but he
must always be in present danger of falling. only his purpose is necessary
never to fall again. which if he have, although his ghostly Father thinks
that he will fall if occasion be offered, yet is he bound to absolve him. For
this is a general rule in all sins, Nauar. c. 3. nu. 13
that certainty or security of amendment can never be required by the ghostly
Father of the Penitent: for neither the office of a soldier, nor of a merchant
nor of diverse other like, can in all probabillity long time continue without
sin: neither is the Confessor only not bound to believe certainly that
such will not sin again: but the Penitents them selves are not bound to
think so of them selves, as Nauar does largely teach. Yett is there always
required to firm purpose of the Penitent, which may very well stand with an
uncertainty of the effect, when occasion shall be offered: experience teaching
us that men of never so good resolution may fall again. Thus do we see in what
manner less certainty may be exacted in avoiding this sin than in others and
yet a firm purpose be necessary in this as well as in all others. Thus much be
said against those which out of this letter defend it to be no sin.

But there arises a more subtle kind of persons, Against those which say it
is a venial sin
who hearing out of the same letter, that this going to the Church is by no
means lawful or dispensable, do confess in deed that the letter condemns
it as a sin. but yet not as a mortal sin, or by which Gods grace is lost,
and the horrible guilt of eternal damnation incurred: but only as a venial
sin, from which no just man's life can be free, and which also is by no manner
of way dispensable, as well as a mortal sin. I must needs in these persons
not only commend their subtelty of wit, in that they very well have
conceived that a venial sin cannot be dispensed withal: but admire also the
tenderness of their consciences: as being so scrupulous and fearful, that they
think it a worthy question to be tossed amongst Deuines, propounded to the
Pope, resolved from Rome to England, whether any action practiced in our
country be a venial sin or no. It were doubt les a most happy estate of our
Country if either Catholics made such account of all venial sins, as this
letter wishes they should make of this, or those Wc are our Supiours had not
need to let pass many thousand venial sins Without co^troulment.

I will therefore out of this very letter bring 8. sundry arguments which shall
evidently convince that by the judgment of the writer, going to the Church is
a grievous mortal sin.

First for that he says it is no ways lawful, 1.2. q. 88. ar. ^.
which S. Thomas does thus declare. When the will (says he) is moved toward
any thing, which in it self is repugnant unto that charity by which a man is
ordained unto his last end; that sin has by the very object thereof that it
is mortal. wherefore it is mortal of it own nature, whether it be against the
love of God, as blasphemy, perjury and such like: or against the love of our
neighbor as murder, adultery, and such others. Thus S. Thomas. So that this
action of going to the Church, whether we consider it as against faith, as
being exterior heresy: or against charity to our neighbor as being schism,
and scandal: or against religion, as being a superstitious action: or against
obedience as being forbidden by so many Ecclesiastical laws: it is always
against necessary vertewes of Christian life, and so mortal of it own nature.

Than do I thus argue. Whatsoever is indispensable in such a kind of sin as
is mortal of it own nature, is always a mortal sin: but so is this. ergo.
etc. The Mayor is common amongst all Divines. S. Tho ibid. and ar. 6.
who affirm that mortal sins ex suo genere, can never become venial,
except it be for the imperfection of the act as not being deliberate, or the
smallnes in quantity, as in the stealing of a halfpeny. neither of which
exceptions can here in this action take place. The Minor is proved above.
Secondly he says that this is contrary to the practice of the Church, and the
holy Doctors,

See Testa^. of Rhemes Mat. 10, 32 and 2. e^ist of S. Ihon.
written heretofore: but those all especially those of his own writing condemn
it as a mortal sin ergo.

Fourthly he alleges the practice of England from the beginning of the
missions of Priests: those Wc have lived in those missions have made it a
mortal sin?

Fifthly he says the Pope willed that such as should through frailty go to
the Church should be easily absolved:

Sixthly he requires sorrow,

Seventhly he calls the absoluing of them a receiving again.

Finally the intent of his letter was only for to repress the singularity of
him Wc was well known to teach the contrary,

God grant therefore that these so grave and manitould autorities make those
which go to heretical conue^ticles, yet at the least to acknowledge their
sin committed therein: and not by defending so great an iniquity, both to
increase their own damnation, and to cause the ruin of diverse others. If the
lapsed will come to acknowledge their fault, to confess their frailty, to
abandon and forsake the same: the door of Gods mercy is as open unto them, as
unto all other sinners. most lamentable is the estate of such, who by obstinae
defense of sin, cannot seek for redress thereof, but most desperately run
into wilful destruction.

And least this small and simple labor intended only for the glory of God and
for benefitte of the simpler sort, might chance to offend any per son at all:
here do I protest that my pen is not directed against any particular person,
neither do I know any one particular person whom these things may touch, and
in my conscience I suspect none. and especially of the Clergy I assure my self
that at this present there is not one (besides some which may live openly in
schism, for whom I can not answer, neither is it necessary) which disagreeth
in this point from his Reverend and worthy fellows. Yet do I perfectly know
that great hurt is done every where and that by Pamphlettes and persuasions
of such Lay persons as amongst the simple have an undeserved conceit of vertew
and learning. Such do I touch: and yet I know none. and therefore conclude with
S. Hierome, ep. ^^^^ep (...) cia.
Neminem specialiter meus sermo pulsauit. Qui mihi irasci voluerit, ipse de se
quod talis est consiteb^ur. It cannot ^^and with Christian charity, for the
necessary good of many, to regard the offenses and speeches of a few.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 43. lin. 19. Voluntarily. ibid. lin. 24. epistle. Page 65. lin. 20. were
not rich. Page 73. lin. 18. Be constant. Page 74. lin. 24. Service. Verywell.
Page 94. lin. 27. Kunigund. Page 102. lin. 15. which must not. Page 120. lin.
9. of proof. let. Page 129. lin. 7. he might take Page 132. lin. 20. grief.
Page 133. lin. 14. confined. Page 160. lin. 12. fit. ibid. lin. 16 quaedam.
ibid. lin. 17. sancitum.

