A DETECTION OF THE Devils Sophistry, wherewith he robs the unlearned
people, of the true byleef, in the most blessed Sacrament of the altar.

Timeo ne sicut serpens euam seduxit astutia sua: ita corrumpantur sensus
uestri, and excidant asimplicitate. 2. Cor. 11.

1546.

STEVEN Bisshoppe of Winchester to the reader.
Consider gentle reader, how full of iniquite this time is, in which, the high
mystery of our religion is so openly assaulted. Believe not every spirit, and
mystruste thine own judgment, above the reach of thy capacite. If thou be
hungry for knowledge, take heed thou fallest not on every careyn. Be desyrouse
of the very truth, and seek it as thou art ordered, by the direction of
Christ's church, and not as deceytfull teachers, would lead the, by their
secret ways. Follow God and his mynisters, whom he orders to rule, and
rather conform knowledge to agree with obedience, where gods truth repugnethe
not unto it, then with violation of obedience, which is a displeasaunt fault to
enterprise the subversion of gods honor and glory. Finally read when thou
read, with favor, to that truth, which the consent of Christ's church,
has from the beginnynge commended unto us, and reuerentlye at their hands
receive the true understanding of scriptures, whose true testimony has
certified us of the self same scriptures. And have always in remembrance the
words of saint James, how God resists the presumptuouse and arrogant and
gives grace to such as be in spirit, meke and lowly, which gift, God
grant the, and well to fear.

A DETECTION OF the Deuyls Sophistry, wherewith he robs ye unlearned people,
of the true belefe, in the most blessed Sacrament of the altar.
THe first chief and pryncypall point of deceyte and sophistry is, to make
every man think of him self, further then is in deed in him, by this
persuasio^, The deuell deceyuyth most craftily when he pretendyth truth.
that god grants true understanding and wisdom, to every man, that would
have it, has need of it, and asks it, in his name, which has such an
euydente truth in it, as no man can dyrectly deny it, and gainesay it, for so
god does in deed, and yet not so as the unlearned do take it, and thinks it to
be understood. For albeit god gives al knowledge, to feed the soul, as he
gives also all food and nourriture to the corporal bodies, and it is for
both, generally said, Iacta super dominum cura^ tuam, Psalm. 54.
et ipse te enutriet* wherein god has also, to show his omnipotency given
suddenly, speech to them that could not speak, lerimae. 1.
as to Jeremy, given the unlearned, suddenly knowledge, to confound the great
clerks, Joan. 2.
changed water into wine in a moment, to make chere to gestes of the feast,
and multiplied by his blessing, Math. 14.
the five loves to the necessary releef of the hungry, Exodi. 16.
fed his people with manna in desert, Exodi. 17.
and given the^ for releef, out of the hard dry stone water: Yet we may not
hereof presume, that god, because he can always, therefore also he will always
contynually work new miracles, and give his gifts out of order and make
heruest in February, or children and rude ignorantes, learned before they go to
scoole. And in deed, we might as well and better ask our bodily food without
our labor, and sesonable time as ask the knowledge of learning, to instruct
the soul, without time or ^ue endeavor, wherewith to attain the same. It is
gods work, that we come by it when we come by it with our labor and
teaching of other, I Cor. 3.
for neque qui plantat est aliquid, neque q rigat, sed qui incrementum dat,
deus. And we that in our Pater noster, Math. 4.
ask our daily bread, knowledge it to come of god when we have it, and yet no
man bosteth him self to have it, by cause he has asked it, or looks
otherwise for it, but by thapplyeng of his labor and industry thereunto, which
persuasion if these simple unlearned, had in the atteinynge of wisdom, they
would mistrust their own judgment and think themself (as they be) unlearned,
and with out long exercise and diligent endeavor, with a vessel mete and apt
to receive the same, not think the^ self to have obtained that gift of god,
ne be able for want thereof, to discuss of lerning. This false persuasion of
lerning, wherewith the devil inueigleth the simple and ingendreth in them a
pride of conninge and understanding, which they have not, is the foundation
and root, whereupon is builded and grows false doctrine in the high misteryes
of our religion, and specially in the most blessed Sacrament of thaulter,
wherein diverse have of late peuersely reasoned, and unlearnedly spoken with such
presu^ptuouse pride, and intolerable arrogance as declare plainly the same to
proceed of the spirit of the devil full of errors, and lies, blyndenes, and
ignorance, by reason whereof, they stu^ble in the plain way, Chrisost. ho. 60
Non sunt humane uirtutis he opera, que tunc in illa cena confecit, iyse nunc
quoque operatur, ipse perficit, nosmi nistrorum ordinem tenemus qui uero hec
sa^ctificat, and tra^s mutat, ipse est.
and can not see in the mydde day. For what can be more evidently spoken of the
presence of Christ's natural body and blood, in the most blessed sacrament of
the altar, the^ is in those words of scripture which our Savior Christ
ones said, and be infallible truth, and still says, in consecration of this
most holy Sacrament, by the common ministre of ye church. This is my body. But
against this truth, the devil strives, and fyghteth by his ministers, and
lewd apostles, with sophistical deuyses, wherewith he troubles the gross
imaginacio^s of the simple people. And having ones enchaunted, the rude wits
with this charm of presu^ptuouse knowledge (whereof I spoke before) whereby the
ignorant, waxes so arroga^t, as he makes himself able to judge and discern,
between playnnes and craft, between reason and sophisticacion, between argument
and argument, exposition and exposition, such as be thus overthrown in their
judgment, and so blinded in themself, the devil easily entangleth and
byndeth fast to him, with carnal reasons, deceitful expositions, crooked
arguments, and counterfeit co^tradictio^s, and thereby leads them away,
captive and thralde, from the true catholtque byleefe in this most holy
sacrament, which sophystry and deceptes, be diuersely tempered, after these
sorts.

AND FIRST to the carnal man, the devil brings carnal reasons, and for
conformation, and proof of them calls to witness, the carnal senses, both of
the body and soul. And straight thine eye says, there is but bread and
wine. Thy taste says the same. Thy felinge and smelling agree fully with them.
Hereunto is added the carnal man's understanding, which because it takes the
beginning of the senses, proceeds in reasoning sensually. And (as the Epicures
did) concludes that ye senses together, can not be deceived. whereupon also
the Epicurians said the son was but two foot broad, because their eye judged
it to be no bygger. And from this they would not be brought, but remained as
ferme, in that folly, as some heretics do, in this mischeuous deuellysh
misbeleefe, against the most blessed Sacrament of the altar. Wherefore all
such as ground their error, against this most blessed Sacrament, upon the
testimonye of their sight, their taste, felyng, or smell, or otherwise upon
their carnal understanding, because they can not by their carnal reason,
comprehe^d it, all such be bestly and blind, and far from the knowledge of
the miseries of our religion, as wherein our senses and reason, be vy faith
condemned and reproved, finally declare them selue to be such men, as seem to
require teachinge in the principles and begynnynges of our religion, wherein
their gross carnal reasons, if they were truly mortified, they should not so
stobbernly and arrogantly meddle, in the discussion of the inscrutable misterye
in the most blessed sacrament of thaulter. For if their senses were by true
faith, overthrown and put to confusion, in the bylefe of ye holy trinite, ye
father of heaven, the son^e, and holy ghost, to be inseparably divided in three
persons, and diuisibly eioyned i^ one godhed and essece which Gregorye
Nazianzene speaks thus in greek. Grego. Naizan. (...).
(...) Wherein we know by faith, the truth, so to be, how so ever our reason
spurneth and tentech us to the contrary, If these men's senses were tamed, in
the beleuynge scripture of creation of the world, by god in time, and of
nothing, contrary to the discussion of man's reason, which the philosophers
could not temper, to agree, that of nothing, was any thing made, If in the
mystery of the incarnation of our savior Christ, the rebellion of man's
senses, were throughlye trod under fete, and brought in due subjection, to
give place to faith, whereby we believe that the son of god (which we confess
truly) to be immensus, was yet contained in the holy virgins womb, and a
creature, to conteyne the creator, and as the church rejoicing, does daily
acknowledge, in worshypping the blessed vyrgin Marye.

Quem totus non capit orbis,
In tua se clausitviscera, factus homo
Which to man's reason implies an insoluble contradiction, to say that in
her womb, should be shut in, that all the world could not conteyne. And then
further the true story of Christ's gospel wherein is truly reported to us how
Christ entered to his disciples, after his resurrection the gates being shut,
and role out of his grave the same remaining still shut, which to our
understanding, makes a signification of two bodies to be in one place together
and occupy the same place, at one time, And is to man's sensual and carnal
knowledge impossible, and is nevertheless in ye said myraculouse passage of
our savior Christ most truly verified. But if in these, and many other, the
carnal man had in the foundation of our faith fully acknowleged his weakness,
his bli^dnes, his imbecillitie and ignorance, the same would never presume
again, Chriso. bo. 60. Credamus ubi quod deo, neque repugnem^s ei. etiam si
sensvi and cogitacioin nostrae absus Lum esse widetur quod dicit, superetque
sensum and rationem nostram quod in omnibus, and pr^^^pue imysteri^^ h^^ qu^
ante nos iacent solum. mo^o spicientes sed uer^^ quoque eius todmentes. Nam
uerbis eius defreudari non possumus, sensus uero noster deceptu facilli mus
est, illa falsa esse non possunt, is saepius acsaepius decipitur. Quoni amergo
ille di xit, Hoc est corpus meum, nulla teneamur imbiguitate, sed credamus (...)
either to improve the presence of the natural body of our Savior Christ, in
the most blessed Sacrament of the altar, in form of bread and wine, by
carnal deuyses, ne travail to be satisfied in consideration of the
circumstau^ces of the same. For like as in the other mysteries of the Trinite,
the creation of the world, the incarnation of Christ, and also resurrection of
the flesh, (whereof I have not spoken, but may say, as I have in the other)
carnal reason is excluded, by certentie of faith: so should it be in all other
mysteries, which all together, be the body of our reeigion, wherein we have
the true knowledge of god, which the devil labors to subuerte and
overthrow, and uses therein the instrument of man's presumptuouse arrogance,
to know all as god does, and to comprehe^de in his capacite, the same, and what
so ever excedeth it, or repugneth thereunto, to call that false folly, lies, and
untruth. After which sort, man's foolyshe wisdom, has enterprised at sundry
times, to impugn the secret mysteries of gods high wisdom, and
incomprehensible works, And so the devil by the Arrians, (as he does by the
Turks at this day) has assaulted the castle and forte of our religion, by
denial of Christ to be very God, and with truths falsely applied, gone about
to make batterye and entrye, to overthrow the same, like as he has also
attempted many other mysteries. But being in them by gods power resisted,
the devil assayeth to make entry now, by subuertinge the truth in the most
blessed Sacrament of thaulter, and to allure ye multitude of most carnal and
rude capacities diuulgeth abroad, gross carnal reasons, and would persuade
the unlearned that their ignorance in the circumstaunce (how,) should plainly
prove to them, that the thing is not, and therewith whistleth in their ears,
this enchauntment. If it were true that is taught in the sacrament of thaluter,
by the papists (which term serves for a token to the^, to prove ye matter
naught) such and such inco^uenie^ces, should not to our senses follow. Do we
not se (says the devil) the sacrament of thaulter that they call god their
ydol, (o blasphemous tongue) sometime eaten of a mouse, sometime wax grene
moulde, read moulde, and blue mould? and here the devil refressheth his
yonglynges with many abominable tales, such as a scoffinge lestynge wit
could deuyse, to have benne done. Does it not enter (says the devil) into the
body, and so forth, and speaks that lyketh him, more then honest ears can
endure? And then the devil frames the matter in fashion of lerninge, and
first with a counterfeit religion of mayntenaunce of gods truth, propoueth god,
to be impassible, incorruptible and immortal, which is a most undoubted truth,
and the^ follows thintended lie, thus, That which these papists make God, and
call ye sacrament of thaulter, that is corruptible, And here the senses bear
witness, The papists god, (the devil says) is also passible. And here ye
senses be also ready, and shall affirm, they have seen the mouse eat it, man's
hand break it, and man's teth tear it. It is also mortal (says the devil)
for the se^ses bear testimony, they have seen it with a sodayn fire in a
church, consumed, Ergo then, (and with this the devil triumphs and ^cludeth)
there is not god, but it is an ydol, which words they uttermost
blasphemouselye and falsely. But consider (christian reader) how far is it out
of ye way, to examyne men's senses or carnal reason, what they can depose of
god; or his high secret works. This reasoning might serve to prove yt either
Christ was not God (which no christian ear can endure) or else not to be true
(which is most true and certain) that Christ dyed or suffered for us. And
thus the deuilles disciple, will reason. God is impassible, Christ suffered:
Ergo he was not god. Or thus. God is impassible, Christ was god: Ergo he
suffered not. So as by these reasos, and reasonynges, wherein the senses serve
for a proof, or carnal reason frames thargume^t: either we must with the
Arryans deny Christ god blasphemousely, or consent most folyshly, to other
false dreams, that Christ suffered not at al. But as we be learned most truly
and certeynely in faith, that Christ was very God and perfyght man, and without
injury to his godhed (which is impassible (suffered nevertheless natural
death, for he was natural man without sin, and when we know this truth
assuredly by faith, regard not what all our senses repugne to the contrary,
ne we do not lean to their testimony in it: So in this high mystery of the
sacrament of thaulter, when we know by faith the presence of Christ's natural
body and blood, by the mighty operacio^ of his word, prouou^ced in the
consecration by ye minister: what a tentation is it of the devil, to keep a
court with our se^ses and carnal reasoning (which be blind, and can not
understand it) and of the^ to make an enquest to know whyther my byleef
therein be right or no? which senses, if they had be^ enquired of christ's body,
being co^uersau^t in earth, their testimony had be^ of christ, yt he was but a
man, as other were, even as they now affirm the Sacrament to be but bread, as
other bread is. Their capacite is no further, and therefore it is a madness, and
over rude grossenes, to commen with them in a matter (I know well) they can no
skille of. But herin we should lean to our faith, grounded upon gods truth,
and confess all to be so, as god works by his omnipote^cy, and therewith
acknowledge the weakness of man's capacite, not able to comprehend it, and
forasmuch as the plain words of scripture, declare, and testify unto us, the
presence of ye most preciouse body and blood of our Savior Christ, in the
sacrament of thaulter, we should not be shaken or altered from that byleef,
what so ever our se^ses or carnal understanding, should bark to the contrary.
If mine eye, sees the host consecrate broken (which is daily done in the
mass) or devoured by a mouse, or otherwise percase abused (which happens
rarely) is this a just cause, why my faith, should by and by waver, and
mystrust the truth, by god declared unto me? Or else must carnal reason and
understanding be satisfied, how it comes to pass, that standing our faith in
the most blessed sacrament of the presence of the natural body and blood of
our savior Christ, the same sacrament may be broken, the same may be devoured
of the mouse, the same may be corrupt, or otherwise mysused? Whereunto first I
say this, that if after the words of consecration, the host consecrate, were
so by god preserved, from the injuries, and violences of other creatures, as it
eoulde not be broken, devoured, or corrupt, it were such an outward miracle,
to the open confusion of our carnal senses, as whereby to take away the merit
of our faith. For unto the faithful, such miracles (as saint Paul says) 1
Cor. 14.
be not showed but to the infidels. And a good true christen beleuyng man,
knows this by faith, that good is inviolable, impassible, incorruptible,
immortal, and that our sauyoure Christ, the second person in trinite, very
god, having the humayne nature, now unite to the godhed and gloryfied, can
not any more suffer in that body, violence or corruption, ne be violate or
brought to mortalyte. Psalm: 15.
Quia no^ dabis sanctu^ tuum videre corruptionem. And therefore what so ever
man's senses affirm of the violation, corruption, or destruction of the host
consecrate, a christen man's faith knows most certainly, that the most
preciouse body of christ, there present in that host, is not violate, is not
corrupted, is not destroyed, for the faithful is asserteyned, that Christus
resurgens ex mortuis, Roma. 6.
iam non moritur, mors illi vltra no^ dominabitur. And therefore the same being
truly taught, and enfourmed of gods omnipote^cie consydereth, that as
Christ being conuersaunt in earth, among the maliciouse Jews, before the
time of his passion, and when the same was not yet come (as the gospel says)
when the furiouse Jews would have precipitate him. Luc. 4.
Transiens per medium illoru^ ibat. And when Herod slew al ye rest of ye
children, Christ being a child, Mat. 2.
was preserved: So in ye most blessed sacrament of ye altar, how soever ye
same be abused by man's malice or negligence, or otherwise broken in the
mystical use of it, yet the very body of our savior Christ there present,
continues inuiolate, impassible, and is beyond the reach of any violence to be
inferred by man, best, or any other accidental occasion, of any other cause,
ne ye true faithful man can be induced by any worldly demonstration, to
depart or swerve from his true faith, and what so ever reasons may be made to
the contrary, he takes them only as tentacions of the devil, whereby to
subuerte, and ouerturne his steadfast faith, being so firm and strong in a
good christen man, as the gates of hell can not prevail against it, and much
less, worldely fancies, reasons or demonstracio^s, and specially such, as be
grounded, upon the senses and carnal arguments, which can not atteine the
secrets of gods mysteries. The devil now a days, diuulgeth by his wicked
mynysters, his leude tales, of the abuses of the host consecrate, when by to
impugn the faith of the presence, of the body of our sauyoure Christ. And
here is made mention of moulding and mouse deuouryng, with such like mysuses,
which the presence of christ's natural body, if it were there (as they say)
should defend, wherein I would ask such sort of men, as be moved by these
reasones, how much these inconveniences so abhomynably told, do excede and be
more strange, whereby to shake our faith but the wonderynge and murmuring of
our senses, then those things which the church does daily ordain and
openly do, wherewith the true beleuers have not ben offended?

Does not the preiste daily in the mass, and has done always, break the
host consecrate, in the sight of the people, without offense or sclau^der, of
such as have these xv.c. years and do at this day believe the presence of the
natural body of Christ? Have not men of weak stomachs (fearing they could
not co^teine, ye they received) used reuere^tly to forbear to receive, ye most
blessed Sacrament, where they certeynly believed ye presence of christ's natural
body to be able and of power to heal body and soul? And have either of these
reverent uses among good me^, empayred ye belief among the^, or good men ben
inquisitiue, how god could be broken, being impassible and present in the
sacrament of the altar, or bencuriouse to ask, why men should forbear to
receive the sacrament, for fear of any weakness of stomach, saying god (whom
they believe there present) is able to heal al: Good men were never offended,
with brekinge of the host, which they daily saw, being also persuaded Christ's
body to be present in the sacrament naturally and really, whereunto with
worshyppinge they lyfted up their hands, and therewith nothing doubted, but
god was inviolable, and impassible, when they saw the host broken in the
mass, ne used not to my struste gods immortalite, when they have seen a
sick man receive the sacrament not a quarter of an hour before his natural
death, as though in that man, the host consecrate (wherein the body of Christ in
present) should with gods injury moulde, or corrupt, wast and consume. And
yet these right uses of the most blessed sacrament, co^teyne as strange
matter, to man's se^ses and carnal judgment, as do the leude and blasphemouse
tales, devised and told whereby to inueigle men's vndersta^dynges, and spoil
them of their true byleef. And yet also these breakinges and uses of the most
blessed sacrament, were never hydde^ in the church, ne kept secret, as
though the true belefe should thereby decay, or be diminished. The church has
not forborne, to preach the truth, to the confusion of man's senses and
understanding, whereunto men faithful and obedient, have yielded, acknowleginge
gods omnipotency, which man's reason can not match, The true church has
taught plainly, and teaches that by the omnipotency of gods word, the
substance of bred is converted to the substance of Christ's natural body,
which is there then by his mighty power, not by mutacyon of place, by leaving
of heaven, where he is ever present, but by his infinite power (whereby he can
do all) and of a specyal favor to wards us, works continually in his
church, this mysterye and miracle, and in form of bread and wine, exhibiteth
and presents himself, to be eaten and drunken of us, So as there is in the
sacrament of thaulter, none other substance, but the substance of the body
and blood of our savior christ, and yet remains the form and accidents
of bread and wine, not altered by this miracle from knowledge of the senses,
wherewith they were before known and also by gods sufferaunce subject to the
same passibilite, they were in before. And yet here in this mystery and miracle
wrought by gods power, we acknowledge, yt contrary to the come^ order of
nature, the substance of bred, being converted into the natural bodily
substance of our savior Christ, the other accide^tes of bred and wine, as
quantities and qualities remain still and without injury of Christ's most
preciouse body, be (as we daily se) altered and broken, and remayni^g and
abiding without their own fourmer substance of the creatures of bred and wine,
whereunto they were by nature adjoined do now service their creatoure there
present the very substance of all substaunces, under which accidents, that is
to say (as we truly speak) under form of bred and wine, the natural body
and received of us, i^ the sacrament of thaulter, who so ordered himself to be
eaten and dronken of us, in his last supper, which continues still, Chriso.
ho. 60. Illa no^ alia me^sa est, hec nulla re minor quam uls est. Non enim
illam Christus, hac homo quis piam facit, sed utranque ipse.
till the worlds end, with a perpetual continuance also, of the meruelouse
workynge of the same festemaker and presence of the same most preciouse meat
Christ him self ( cum ipse sit co^uiua and conuiuiu^) where with he continually
fedeth, Hier ad^ebidia^
such as come unto him in his church, which church according to his
commandment, by special mynisters deputed thereunto, uses and exercises the
same fest, in the most holy mass, where unto good christen me^haue daily
access, which most holy feste when men abuse, 1. Cor. 11.
(as the Corynthians did) it is their condemnation, and can be nothing
preuidiciall or daungerouse, to good men's true belief. Such I say as have
their faith established upon the true teaching of the church, that after the
words of consecration, the substance of bread, is turned into the substance
of the natural body and blood of our Savior Christ. Against which teaching,
good men kick not, with howes, and whattes, for that is a token of
incredulite, and if the chau^cell were with fire, suddenly burned (as has
happened by diverse chances) they think not christ that is god immortal,
there killed, because he was there, in the host after consecracion, or
forbear any whyt less, to worship christ, whom with their eyes of faith,
they se present in the sacrament of thaulter, because their bodily sight,
perceyueth not any visible alteracion of the host, before the consecracion and
after, finally such good me^, believe most steadfastly, without sclaunder of
their senies, that the breaking of the most blessed sacrament, by the ministre
in the mass does no violacio^ to christ's most precious body there present, ^e
breaks the most precyouse body, which is impassible, but only the form of
bread, under which it is contained, and that the same most precyouse body, is
after holy in each of the parts of the host broken, without any increase in
number: as though there were the^ many christ's present, but always one
christ, and the same christ. But ye devil takes his oportunite of man's carnal
living, and whiles the belly has the vpperha^d among a great many of the
world, by reason where of the senses be had in estimation, sturreth up this
abominable heresy, against the most blessed sacrament of the altar, and upon
the senses makes the chyefe grounds whereby now, that before was passed over in
silence, when men's senses were brought in obedience with true byleef, is
questioned and inquired of as a new matter. And now men be asked how a mouse
can eat god, and how god can corrupt, and wax mo uld: and how god can be
broken in p^eces, which be fondly framed questions, And to ye great prouocatio^
of gods high indignation, blasphemously uttered. Answer me then (says the
devil by his apostels) whereunto a true answer is this, and the simplicity
required in a christian man sufficient. Believe, that a mouse can not devour god,
believe that god can not corrupt. Believe that god can not be broken, now after
he is ones rise^, and believe also therewith, that Christ, god and man, is
naturally present in the sacrament of thaulter, For so Christ says. So the
church of god teaches, So we be bound to believe. If thou be further
taught of the devil, to replye, yt if there remain in ye host no substance,
but the substance of the body and blood of Christ, it must needs be then,
These be the doubts of incredulite.
that the same corrupts, or else when goth it away? or where have ye
scripture, to declare the going away and departing of Christ, from the host?
And if Christ depart, then is there no substance remaining, and where is no
substance, is nothing, And so, thou will say (as the deuell lerueth the,)
that by this teaching, we shall have nothing somewhat, And in deed the devil
has taught the, to speak somewhat, that is in effect nothing, or worse then
nothing, whereunto if men in these days can not answer probablye (as I doubt
not a great number can) and yet in this time the world is rather occupied in
garnyshynge the tongue with words, the^ to enter the further consyderatio^ of
i^tricate sophistication, whereby to be able to refell the same. Shall the true
faith of the church, in this high mystery perish in the, by the deuyls
secret tentation, because I, or such other, can not answer thy sophistical
argument. If men's words do not persuade our faith, Non in persuasibilibus
humanae sapienciae uerbis,
but only the power of god, shall the framing of an argument, wrested out of
old matter, 1. Cor. 2.
subuerte the true byleef, by cause thou can not be answered to thy
satisfaction in it? which is as much to say, as thou wylt only believe thy
self: For if thou will not bileue more the^ thine own capacite can
comprehend, then haste thou no byleef at all of god, which can not be of man
comprehended, and haste only a vain deceytfull ymaginacion of thine own,
without ground or foundation, ready to be turned as the wind changes his
cost, and blows slackely or straineably, as is occasioned by the air, And so
is there finally by thy conclusion, no steadfast faith in our religion, but
wavering opinion, which is the deuyls special craft wherewith to wype out al.
For if it were necessarely requisyte, to satisfy man's senses and sensual
reasons, in the mystery of the most blessed sacrament of thaulter, could the
same carnal reason (trow ye) stay there but would desire ye like
satisfaction in the mystery of Christ's incarnation, our resurrection, and the
mystery of the Trinite. Could the philosophers (being without true faith, as
they were) stay natural reason, but she would penetrate al secrets, and for
want of satisfaction, finally among a number, deny god which is the end for
punisshement, of such curiosite, And therefore it is to be noted, that saint
Austen says in the D. August. de Trinitate
.iii. book, in his work. De trinitate. Mihi omnino vtile est, vt meminerim
viriu^ mearu^, fratres quam meos admonea^, vt and ipsi meminerint viriu^
suaru^, ne vltra quam tutu^ est, humana progrediatur infirmitas. It is
expedient for me (says S. Austine) to remember mine own strength and to
admonyshe my brethren likewise, that they remember their strength, that man's
weakness wade no further, the^ it may with safety. According whereunto Solomon
says. Scrutator maiestatis, Prouet. 15.
opprimetur a gloria. He that sercheth the majesty, shall be overwhelmed of the
glory. And it is written in Ecclesiastico. Eccle. 3.
Altiora te, ne quaesieris, and fortiora te, ne scrutatus fueris, sed quae
preaeci pit tibi Deus, illa cogita se^per, and in pluribus operibus eius ne
fueris curiosus. Question not (says Ecclesiasticus) of these things that you
can not reach. Search not for things above thy strength and force, but what
so ever things god command the to do, think of them ever, and in many of
gods works be not over curiouse, whereunto it may be said further (as saint
Augustyne Augustine.
writes) and specially give no credence to thy se^ses, and sensual reasons,
to impugn the mysteries of faith, how so ever they press the, and prycke
the, to enterprise the same, wherein I travail not so much with the (reader)
because this thwarting of man's carnal reason, were an hard objection, which
if thou markest, I have before ass^yled by the way, or that I thought it any
dau^gerouse matter to be answered unto, wherein as I would wish no such
trifelynge arguments in so high and grave a matter, to have been made, and
think it a great plage of god, to se so high preciouse mysteries, so
commonly, so rudely, and grossly spoken of: So I think the solucion very
easy, I mean to senses exercised in knowledge and learning, (as S. Paul
says) being able to digeste strong meat, and to discern sophistery, in the
mistaking of speech, and conceive the fine differences in consyderation of the
things which in deed excede the capacite of the rude people. And therefore
when they hear it, being angry that they perceive it not, improve it
commenly, and call it sophistery, where in deed, they be already with this
gross carnal arguments sophistically entangled. But to the purpose shortly:
First I say this, (whereof I have spoken before) that the devil in his vile
examples, of the abuse of the most blessed host consecrate, although he
troubles the eye of the rude man, and the ear also, with matter of new
circumstaunce, wherewith the simple wit, is suddenly confounded: where in deed
the very matter in those tales depely considered, is no stranger then the
old, and has no cause to trouble or move, but only because it is a new
facion, newly uttered and told. Few men (and those but rarely) have seen a
mouse devour ye host, or churches burnt, wherein the host was then reserved,
and with the church consumed to man's senses, or the hosts, by neglyge^ce
molded or other wise abused. These have chanced seldom, and have comen to
the knowelege of few, but many have known (as of Judas specially we be learned
and taught) that evil men having the devil in them in that they be evil, have
yet received into their bodies the host consecrate, wherein was then present
the most precyouse body and blood of our savior Christ. Many also have seen
good me^, being ye temple of god, receive the most blessed sacrament in to
their body, and dye shortelye after. Moreover the hole church has seen, and
daily does see (such as forbere not to come to church) the most blessed
sacrament broken, by the mynister, both in the mass for a mystery
continually, and some time when hosts have wanted for communion of other. In
which co^sideracio^s, of yt al or many have seen ma^s senses and carnal
understanding should have been as much astoyned, for the matter repugnau^t to
their capacite then, as now in the devils vile tales. wherefore this I say unto
the for a solutio^, that if the true church of Christ has so subdued their
se^ses, and carnal ymaginacio^s, as in it, good men have with the true faith of
the presence of the natural body and blood of our savior Christ, seen
continually with their bodylye eyes, a notable repugnaunce, to their carnal
senses and understanding, and yet not be moved and altered in their faith
therewith: why should the same matter told in a vile tale and fylthy
demonstration, move any man now? For why should any man think worse of the
most blessed sacrament, when he sees a mouse take it, then when he hears of
a thief (as Judas ye deuilles member) to have taken it? Or why should he
mystruste the presence of Christ's natural body in the host, being in the
church when the same is burnt, more then when he sees the man inco^tinently
after he has received ye host, dye, and wrapped up in earth. And as for the
breaking, why have not good men asmoche ben offended in their senses, in the
right use and mystery of the church, which is daily done in the mass, as in
such new tales, as the devil now devised, to declare passybilite? Certeynly,
none other cause is there but this, that in the^ true faith reigned, and had
the senses in captivity and bondage, and in godly simply cite, believed gods
omnipotency, far exceeding the weakness of man's capacite. And thus conclude
I, one plain solucion to the matter. The church of god testifies and
teaches this to be the true byleef of the most blessed Sacrament of the
altar, that there is present the natural body and blood of our savior
Christ. Good men in the same church with their bodylye senses have seen and
herd, as much matter repugnaunt to their senses, in the mystical and devout
use of the blessed sacrament, as the devil now tells in scoffing tales, and
yet therewith retained still the same faith inuiolably, wherefore al good men
should likewise do the same now, without curiosite or search, how the same
might be, which to good men should be a solucion for the hole matter: For true
byleuers know that as the hands of the mynisters that break ye sacrament in
the mass, the teeth also of them that receive it, ne ye natural heat of
their body wherein it desce^deth, does no violence of passibylitie, brings no
corruption, alteration, or co^sumptio^ to the most precyouse body of our
savior Christ: no more can any be yt should touch the host irreuerently,
or any temperature of the air and place, in the moulding or alteryng of the
host. (...).
And further more I answer that being in the most blessed Sacrament of
thaulter, two considerations, one that it is a sacrament, another yt it is also
the thing it self of ye sacrament, that is to say Christ's most preciouse body
and blood, albeit there is in ye host no substance of bread, but only the
substance of ye most precious body and blood of our savior Christ: yet there
is (which appear to our bodily senses) the form of bread and wine, under
which, the most precyouse substance, of the body and blood of our savior
Christ, is covered, and hidden, from our bodily eyes, for our weakness and
infirmity as Theophilus Alexandrius says. And when we call the Sacrament of
the altar, God, we understand the substance of that sacrament, which is
Christ, God and man there present, and according to that understanding,
attribute all godly honor unto it, and in this speech, the word (Sacrament)
sygnyfieth and gives understanding, by a special signification, and by
excellencye (as learned men speak of it) the thing signified there present,
that is to say, the body and blood of our savior Christ, which can not be
broken with hand, can not be torn with teeth, or be altered, consumed,
molded, or devoured of beeste, or putrified, ne herein the bodily senses can
bear any witness to the contrary, for they can not atteyne that. But when we
use, the word (Sacrament) or the word (host) and apply the speech of it,
to such a matter as may not be said of the natural body of Christ, then the
speech is verefied in those fourmes of bread and wine, under which, the most
precious body of christ is covered. As when we say, that the sacrament is
broken or molded, or altered, it is only understood of the said form of
bread and wine, being the outward accidents, as the qualities, or dimensio^s,
which god there preserves not otherwise by outward miracle, being the^
sustained by his most preciouse bodily substance, then when they be naturally
joined, to the substance of bread, whereof that god thus does not, man's
senses (because those accidents be sensible) may judge, for we se it so, and
those accydentes be perceptible, by the bodily sight and sense, and with the
eye of the soul in faith, we se the presence of the most preciouse body of our
savior Christ, who there, is the only substance of the sacrament, so long
remaining under those accidents, as the form of bread and wine (under
which (by the omnipotency of his word) it pleases him to exhibit him self
unto us) does remain and continue. Here the devil whyspereth: If god were
there he would not suffer, thaccidentes corrupt, or be violate by any outward
violence. Whereunto (as I have before touched) I say, this is verily the devils
suggestion, to make the foundacyon of our says, not upon godly teaching, but
upon the continual outward miracle, and nothing to be in my^^ery, whereunto
mylde simplycite yeldeth, Saint Au gustine says outward signs draw to
christ, which in them that (...) drawn be not necessary
but in all open violent signs, such as the unfaithful, could not resist.
And yet if the accidents of the host, were by gods power, for declaration
of his presence, made impassible, and incorruptible, the devil would fur her
require, that man's body receyuynge the same. should also be made impassible and
incorruptible, by the might of Christ's presence, Exodus 7.
For else Magi Pharaonis would presume to cou^terfet the other miracle, and call
it witchecrafte, For the devil is calumniator, and labors to deprave all
thing. But good mean have yielded to gods true teaching in his church, and
subduyng the carnal understanding have avoided by his grace this tentacion of
the devil, to require outward signs, as though god should testify his
presence, in the most blessed sacrament, with preservation of thaccidentes, in
the sacrament and their bodily state, from present corruption and
immortality, that receive him, and so the sick manne by the holy communion,
to attain streyghte bodily health, wherein al though, god has sometime for
encreace of his glory, and to the edification of his church showed his power,
yet it has not ben required as necessary among good men and for the increase
of our merit in faith not expedient, so as the holy martyrs, who after they
had, for their strength in martyrdom, which they saw immine^t, received
Christ's most preciouse body, in the sacrament of thaulter, continued
nevertheless in their bodies, subject to outward violence to be slain (as
they were by tirauntes) wherewith the rest of such as truly believed, were not
offended. For if the carnal senses, shall have such a preeminence and
prerogatrue, as the want of a new outward miracle to their satisfaction,
shall empayre the true faith of gods inward workynge with us, and for us:
we may worthily be called Gens incredula, Mat. ^2. Ruc. 11. Ephesians. 6.
quae signum quaerit, and non dabitur e^. By such mystruste the Capharnaites,
lost the fruit of Christ's teaching, but we should knowledge (as the
disciples of Christ did that Christ's words be life, everlasting, And surely
such as believe not symply our Moses christ, and the holy prophets of his
church, they will give small credence to any other new miracles, though men
rose again from death to speak with them, but rather study to dysproue all
thing, that repugneth to their opynion, who being lyfted up by ye devil in
vayneglory, of knowledge, above ye pinnacle of the temple, think they had more
wit and learning then al bysshoppes and priests that be mynisters of the
temple But now comes the devil, as a mediator, in an other cote, and under
pretense to satisfye all understandings, he would have the belief in the
sacrament in one point releaued, and would we should believe, the remaining, of
the substance of bread, wherewith to assoyle the arguments of the mouse, and
yet grant the substance of the body of christ to be there, for the
substance and food of christen men, which kind of belief good christian men,
taugh by the spyrite of god, have not received, for it can not be maynteyued of
Christ's words, who spoke plainly, Mat. 26. (...) 11.
This is my body, making demonstration of the bread, when he said, This is my
body, by the might of which words of Christ that was demonstrate by the
demonstration (this) which was the bread, was altered and changed into his
body, whereby the substance of bread was converted in to the substance of his
most preciouse body, wherein was declared, Christ's meruelouse power, (...)
whereof Theophilus speaks in this wise. Our lord condescendynge to our
infirmity altered not the form of bread and wine, but co^serueth them, and
turns the bread and wyue into ye truth of his flesh and blood, and this is
the true understanding of Christ's speech, which and if we understand so as
the bread should remain, then follow many absurdyties, and chiefly that
Christ has taken the nature of bread, as he took the nature of man, and so
joined it to his substance. And then as we have God verily incarnate, for our
redemption, so should we have God impanate, and then should we have in Christ
(besides the divine essence) two other substau^ces, absque (...), and be
compelled to feign to the truth, that christen ears abhor, to the
subversion of the same, as we have seen among other come to pass. Wherefore as
the truth, which the church has and does plainly and syncerely teach, is
most certain and sure, grounded upon the plain words of our Sauyoure
Christ, in the most blessed sacrament, so every christen man should receive
it, and believe it fyrmely, without wauerynge, or diuisyng any addition to the
same. Let men forsake their carnal erthlye senses, and the wicked kynred of
malicious seducers, get the out thense good reader, and resort to the company
of true faithful men, and knowledge with them the revelation in the most
blessed Sacrament, of the presence of the natural body and blood of our
savior Jesus Christ, which, caro et sanguis, can not declare, but only, Pater
noster, Mat. 1^.
qui est in coelis, who has declared it, and taught it our mother the
church.

ANother point of the deuelish sophistry, is between ye words and meaning,
wherein the devil shyfteth ye matter thus. Where the words of scripture, be
plain, euydente, manyfeste, and confyrme the catholic truth, there the
devil deuyseth an other meaning, and aduertiseth his scholars, that the
words be nothing without the meaning, and therefore (says he) we must
understand Christ's words, as he meant them, and therefore (says the devil)
beware of the words, and take heed of the meaning. Christ (says the devil)
said This is my body, but take heed (says satan) what Christ meant. O
abominable Satan, full falsely do thou mean. O good christen faithful
man, mark thou this sophistrye. For it is in deed a true lesson, that the very
word of god is the true meaning of scripture, and who has that true meaning
(which is not taughe by ma^s wit and deuyse of understanding but by declaration
from god, reveled to the church) he has gods words, to his comfort and
consolation and who has the words of scripture peruersely taken, is therewith
infected and poysened to his confusion, as the Arrians Sabellyans, and an
infinite number of heretics have been. So as it must needs be granted, that in
the meaning of scripture is the marie, the carnel, the swetnes, ye fode, the
honey of scripture, without which the words be a bitter shale, and an hard
bone, without food or sustenaunce. This must needs be confessed of all men, as
an evident truth, which the devil abuses by cauyllacion and sophistry, to
ouerturne the truth in the most blessed sacrament of thaulter. For opening
of which sophistry it is to be considered, that sometime in scripture, the
words be so placed and ordered, as the meaning is uttered, and opened with the
words at ones, and has such light of the words, as they appear both
together, and without further search, be straight conveyed to our
understanding Sometime again the words be such, or so used and placed, as
they bring not their meaning straight with them in the same light, but more
darkely, and as it were hydden under the words. Now in the first sort of
words, which bring their sense with them if we should in them call for a
meaning, And when we read, Humiliauit semetipsum dominus noste lesus Christus,
Philip. 2.
factus obediens vsque ad mortem. Our lord Jesus Christ has humbled him
self being obedyent to the death, we should call for a meaning and say, we
must understand these words, as sayncte Paul mente them, Can we mean any
thing by calling so for a meaning, but to call the certain meaning (...)
quam aenigma sit, loe^m Heliam esse, and intellectu opus, ad intelligendum,
inquit. Qui habet aures ad audiendu, audiat. Ita inducens eos vt interrogent ac
discant. Which words in latin be in englysh this sentence. And if ye will
receive it, he is Helias, which should have come. If ye will (says Theoph.)
receive it, that is to say, judge it ryghtly, and not with an enuiouse mind,
he is Helias whom the prophet Malachie said, should come. For saint John^
that came before Christ and Helias. have been both allotted to one office. The
one to go before ye first coming of christ, and the other before the last
coming, And then showing how this was a dark speech, yt John^ was Helias,
and contained a secret understanding in it, and required therefore another
sense to be perceived, said, He that has ears of hearing, let him hear, so
inducyng them, to ask and learn. Thus says Theophilacte, by whom we be
learned of the circumstance, to note the meaning, if it be hydden, and so not
only the words to be noted, in their common sense, but the meaning to be
asked and learned, which lesson neglected, (as the devil medleth with such as
marketh it not engenders in ye knowledge of truth, a great perplexite, whereof
the devil takes opportunite to inueigle them, and sometime preaches, sometime
writes to the unlearned on this wise: Christ's words be true, when he said,
This is my body, but as he mente them. For so he said, he was a way, he was a
vine, he was a door, but he was not a natural vine, he was no such way as men
walk in, no such door, as men commonly enter into, but only a resemblaunce of
all these, because he is our way to heaven, our door to enter in to life,
our vynestocke, in whom, we as branches be nouryshed and kept in life. And
so like wise (quod the devil) when Christ says, This is my body, he means
that it is only a resemblaunce, a figure a toke^, a sign of his body, which
seems a strong argument, to such as have not their senses exercised, Nob. 5.
(as s. Paul says) to discern good and evil, that is to say, truth from
falsehode, and sophystry from playnnes. But it is mere sophistry, for in those
other places the matter shows, they be spoken in a parable, and because
christ spoke sometime in parables we may not say, he speaks always in
parables. And because when he said, Ipse est Helias, Mat. 11.
(est) singified a resemblaunce, and not the being, as the verb substa^tiue
properly does signify) that therefore it signifies so in Christ's words,
when he said. Hoc est corpur meum, Mat. 16.
in which (est) is declared the very being. Mar. 14.
And although when Christ said. Luc. 12.
Soluite templum hoc, and in triduo reedisicabo illud, Destroy this temple and
I shall in three days, Io. ^.
build it again. The word (templum) signifies not there a very temple, but
Christ's body (which argument, one ignoraunte made) we may not say that
therefore the word (corpus) shall not here signify Christ's very body, when
christ said, Hoc est corpus meum, Romans 13.
And when scripture says, we must cloth our self we Christ, in which is not
signified Christ's natural body, but Christ's teaching, and so the word
(Christ) has his sense hydden, we may not say, that therefore the same word
(Christ) shall not in another place, have his own open evident sense, of the
signification of Christ's natural person, These manner of arguments, may
circumuent the unlearned, and unstable, and such as be prone to change though
it be ior the worse but learned men, se the^ trifles (such learned me^ I mean as
use the^ not for pastime, as some have done) ^ good men, can not be shaken or
moved with the^. But hear what s. C^pri^a^ says. Panis iste, que^ dominus
discipulis porrigebat, no^ effigy, sed natura mutatus, omnipotentia uerbi
factus est caro, This bread which our lord gave, to his disciples, changed in
nature, but not in ye outward form, is by the omnipotency of gods word made
flesh. Which mystery when christ spoke of, Io. 6.
before the unfaithful Capharuaites, They asked, how god roulde give his
flesh to be eaten, and went their way, but the disciples, who^ god had
prepared by the formet miracle of five loves, and the miraculouse
multiplication of them, to believe this, they tarried and confessed Christ, to
have the words of life. And where as in other places of scripture, where
Christ spoke in parables, the disciples desired Christ to open the^, Matt. 13.
and said: Edis sere nobis parabola^. Show and declare us this parable: So
when Christ, consecrated his body, and gave it unto them to eat, ye
demonstracion of the thing, neaded no further explycation, to understand it,
but faith to believe it. For christ taking the bread in his hands, Mat. 26.
blessinge it, and geuinge thanks, Mar. 14.
said, Luc. 12.
Take ye, eat ye, this is my body, 1. Cor. 11.
What other meaning should here be sought for, where be so plain words, with
such circumstaunce as can have none other meaning, to conceive which meaning
(as I said) christ had prepared the minds of his disciples, when he said.
Panis que^ ego dabo vobis, caro mea est, Io. 6.
pro mundi vita. The bread that I shall give you, is my flesh, for the life
of the world. So as in the very consecration, because it was ye exhibition of
that, Christ had promised, and they had confessed him to have the words of
life, when they saw him, and hard hum execute the same, they understood with
his words, his meaning, and believed him. But I think it much better to
pretermytte further occasion, of that might be my praise, to expound unto you,
the scriptures, and omytrynge mine own speech to lay before you, such
exposition, and opening of the holy, and inco^taminat mysteries of Christ, as
other have left written, which I do afterward in a special place for it, and
yet me thinks here is offered an opportunity, to write that Ihon Damascene
says alone, For he alone opens the matter, so plainly as he might alone
suffice, for declaration of the thing, and confutation, of the deuylles
sophistrye, devised to impugn the same. This Ihon Damascene, was a great
clerk, and one of the greek church and wrote in greek, so as they need not to
be offended, that love not ye latin tongue. Two things in him shall offendsome.
One, that he stout lie defended the maintenance of images, and vehemently
inueyed against them, that brake them, and would not have them stand, wherein he
wrote so vehementlye, as upon false accuseme^t for another matter devised, and
co^triued against him, his right hand was stricken of, and hanged in the market
place as ye hand of and offender, which nevertheless after he had obtained
incontinentlye by grace, and favor, liberty to take it down, the same hand
was by miracle restored to his body, and joined again to his arm in perfitte
use, as it was before, for restitucio^ whereof, he prayed to our lady, in
words of this sentence. Domina and sanctissima matter, quae deum meu^
peperisti, amputata est dextera mea, ob sanctas and diuinas imagines, tu qua de
causa Leo seui at non ignoras, proinde ^iocius succurre, dextera enim
altissimi, quae de te incarnata est, per tuas in tercessiones, multas facit
uirtutes, sanet oro and hanc meam dexteram tuis praecibus. The english of
which prayer is this O Lady and most holy mother, the which have brought
forth my god, my right hand, is cut of for images, such as represente
godlynes, and holiness unto us, thou knoweste for what cause, Leo (themperoure)
is so fierce, and therefore help spedely, The right hand of the highest
which is incarnate of the, has wroughte many virtues, by thine
intercessions. I pray the therefore, that he may by thy prayers, heal this my
right hand. Whereby appears, what opinion this man had of images, and prayer
to saints and by his testimony also what was used in the church, in his time,
which might releaue such as can not abide images, or allow prayer to
saints. For this we have written of him, and in greek, and translated by
Oecolampadius the German, and printed within these six years, in Basile in
Germanye, where the contrary opinion, among the common people, is mayneteined,
so as no man shall have cause to diffame it, as set forth by any papist. But to
ye purpose. This Damascene has written an excellent work under this title. De
orthodoxa fide, of the right catholyque faith, in the.iiii, book whereof,
the.xiiii, chapter, Damis. 4. li. de fide orthod^xa. ca. 14.
he entreats reuerentlye thinstitution of the most holy sacrament of the
thaulter deducyng the conueniency thereof, from the beginning of our
participation of gods goodness, and because it is worthy many readynges, I have been the rather persuaded, to write in, the original in greek, and therewith the
translacio^, in laryn and also english. Ie shall not greatly augmente the book,
and because some children learn greake in this time, it may serve them for a
lesson wherewith to occupy their tender wits, and conferme them against the
malice of the devil. The chapter of greake begins thus.

(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).

BOnus ille, and omnibonus, ac omnem superans bonitarem, deus, cum totus sit
ipsa bonitas, propter immensas diuitias bonitatis suae, non tulit solam manner
bonitatem, hoc est, suam ipsius naturam, a nemine participari, quinetia^ huius
rei gratia, nempe communicandi boni, fecit primum quide^ intellectuales and
coelestes virtutes, deinde visibilem and sensibile^ mu^dum, post haec, qui ex
intellectuali sensibilique constaret, homine^. Itaque omnia, quae ab ipso sunt
facta, bonitatem ipsius, hactenus certe co^munica^t, quatenus sunt. Ipse enim
est esse, sieve essentia omnibus, quandoquidem in ipso sunt, quaecu^que sunt,
non ob id solum, quod exnihilo in essentiam ea adduxit, sed quod ipsa actio
ipsius, quae ab eodem suntiam facta, co^seruat and co^tinet, praecipue vero ea,
quae sunt animalia, quae ita bono communicant, vt cu^ essentia, participent and
vitam. Rationalia autem praeterea, etiam rationem, atque adeo hac part, dei
bonitate, co^municantur multo magis. Sunt enim ista quodammodo co^iunctiora
deo, and propriora, qui tanto tame^ interuallo, omnia superat, vt nihil cum eo
co^ferri, aut de eo ferri iudicium vllum possit. At vero homo, ratione iam
praeditus, and (...) effectus, (hoc est) liberi arbitrij, facultate ea donatus
est, qua se deo, iudicio and electione sua, perpetuo uniret, videlicet si in
bono collato, hoc est, in obedientia creatoris permansisset. Postquam aute^
transgressus mandatu^ eius, qui fecerat illum, morti and corruptioni succubuit,
creator ille and opifex generis nostri, propoter viscera misericordiae suae,
similis factus est nobis, and extra peccatum, caetera omnia factus homo,
nostrae eo modo naturae vnitus est. Cum enim communicasset nobis, tum imaginem,
tum spiritum suu^, quem non adseruauimus: assumpsit ille pauperem iam and
imbecille^ naturam nostram, ut nos videlicet purgatos, and incorruptos
redderet, ac in integrum restitutos, efficeret denuo participes suae
diuinitatis. Oportebat autem non primitias solum, naturae nostrae, de meliori
fore participes, sed and omnem uolentem quidem certe hominem, cum nasci secunda
natiuitate, tum nouo nutriri cibo, huiusmodi natiuitati acco^modo, and
competenti, atque ita adibito demu^ studio, assequi perfectionis modum. Perna
tiuitatem ergo suam, id est incarnationem, per baptismum, passione^, and
resurrectionem, natural nostram a peccato primi pare^tis, reddidit, li bera^, a
morte praeterea, and corruptione. Resurrectio^is uero primitiae factus, seipsum
viam forma^ and exemplar co^stituit, vt and nos eius vestigia inseque^tes, id
efficiamur ad: optione, quod est ipse natura, nimirum dei tum filii, tum
haeredes, ipsius autem Christi cohaeredes. Dedit itaque nobis (vt dixi)
natiuita tem secundam, vt quemadmodum ab Adam progeniti, illi similes effecti,
iure etiam haereditario, maledictionem and corruptionem conse quuti sumus: sic
ex christo nati, eu^ referamus, and haeredes efficiamur, incorruptionis,
benedictionis, and gloriae eius. Cum vero Adam iste spiritualis sit,
conueniebat etiam natiuitatem spiritualem esse, similiter and cibum. Porro
autem quoniam nos duplices quodammodo sumus, and natura composita, oportet and
natiuitatem similiter duplicem esse, and cibum etiam aeque co^ positum, and
duplicem. At natiuitas quidem per aquam and spiritum, da ta est nobis, dico
vtique sanctu^ baptisma. Cibus vero iste, est Dominus noster Jesus Christus
panis vitae qui de coelo descendit. Subiturus enim spontaneam pro nobis mortem,
eadem nocte, in qua seipsum tradidit, testamentum nouum disposuit sanctis
discipulis and apostolis suis, ac per ipsos, deinceps in omnes qui essent in
eu^ credituri. Igitur in coenaculo sanctae and gloriosae Syon, postquam
co^medisset vetus pascha, cum discipulis suis, and testame^tum vetus idem
implesset, lauit pedes discipulorum, symbolum in eo praebens, baptismatis
sacri, deinde panem cum fregisset, dedit illis dicens. Accipite, co^medite, hoc
est corpus meum quod frangitur in remissionem peccatorum. Similiter and
poculu^, ex vino and aqua postquam accepisset, tradidit illis dicens, Bibite ex
eo omnes, Hic est sanguis meus noui testamenti, qui pro vobis effunditur, in
remissionem peccatorum, Hoc facite in meam commemorationem, Quotienscunque enim
manducatis panem hunc, and calicem hu^c bibiris, mortem filij hominis annuntia
it is, and resurrectionem ipsius con fitemini, donec ueniat. Si igitur sermo del,
uius est and efficax, and omnia quae cunque uoluit dominus fecit, Si dixit fiat
lux, and facta est, fiat firmame^tum, and factum est. Si verbo domini coeli
firmati sunt, and spiritu oris eius omnis uirtus eoru^. Si coelum and terra,
aqua and ignis, et aer, and vniuersus ornatus eorum, uerbo dn^t perfectus est,
atque hoc adeo per celebratu^ animal, homo. Si deus ille verbum, sua voluntate
factus est homo, and sanctae, ac perpetuae virginis, purum and immacu latu^
sanguine^, sibijpsi sine semine, carne^ substituit: nunquid qui haec fecit,
poterit panem suijpsius efficere corpus, ac uinu^ aqua, etia^ sanguine^? Dixit
in initio: Producat terra herbam uirente^, and in hu^c usque diem, cum fit
pluuia, sua germina producit, diuino utique praecepto simul impelle^te, uim
atque uigorem subministra^te. Dixit deus, Hoc est corpus meum, and hic est
sanguis meus, and hoc facite in meam co^memorationem, atque omnipotenti illius
praecepto, donec ueniat, fit. Sic enim dixit: donec ueniat. Fit autem nouae
huic agriculturae pro pluuia, sancti spiritus obumbrans uirtus, per
inuocationem. Quemadmodu^ enim omnia quaecu^que deus fecit, coopera^te spiritu
sancto, facta sunt: sic and nunc spiritus energia and actio est, quae haec
operat^ supra natural, quae haud potest capere nisi sola fides. Quomodo erit
mihi hoc (inquit beata uirgo) quonia^ uiru^ no^ cognosco? Respo^dit Gabriel
archa^gelus, Spiritus sctu^s superueniet in te, and uirtus altissimi obumbrabit
tibi. Et tu itidem nunc quaeris, quomodo panis fit corpus CHRISTI, and uinum
cum aqua, sanguis Christi? Respondeo tibi and ego. Spiritus sanctus accedit,
and haec operatur, quae rationem superant and intellige^ tiam. At uero panis et
uinum adsumuntur. Nouit quippe deus humanam infirmitate^, quae plurima quidem
usu and consuetudine, minus trita, and moleste fert and auersatur, ad nostram
ergo consetudine^ se demittens, quae nobis in natura assueta sunt, utitur, ut
efficiat ea, quae sunt supra naturam. Et quemadmodum in baptismate, quoniam in
more est hominum, tum lauari aqua, tum oleo ungui, oleo simui and aquae gratiam
adiunxit sancti spiritus, ac ipsum effecit lauacrum regenerationis: sic quoniam
assuerunt homines, panem commedere and bibere uinum, adiugauit illis suam
ipsius diuinitatem, and eadem fecit corpus and sanguinem suum, videlicet, vt
per assueta, and quae secundum naturam sunt, in hijs collocemur quae sunt supra
naturam. Corpus vere vnitum est diuinitati, illud dico, quod ex beata virgin
est corpus, non quod ipsum susceptum corpus, e ccelo descendit, sed quod ipse
panis and vinum transmuta^tur, in corpus and sanguinem dei. Quod si modum
quaeras, quomodo fiat, sat sit tibi audire, quod per spiritu^ sanctum ad eum
modum fiat, quomodo ex beata deipara, per spiritum sanctum, sibiipsi and in
seipso dominus carnem substituit, breuiter, before and amplius nihil
cognoscimus, quam quod verbum dei verum est, efficax etiam and omnipotens,
modus autem inscrutabilis. Quanquam haud perinde alienum fuerit etiam illud
dicere quod quomodo panis per commestionem, vinu^ ve (...) and aqua, per
potione^, in corpus and sanguinem edentis and bibentis, naturaliter mutantur,
and aliud efficiuntur corpus, a priori suo corpo re diuersum, sic panis
propositionis, uinum etiam and aqua, per inuocationem, and accessum sancti
spiritus, transmutantur supra naturae modum, in corpus and sanguinem Christi,
nec sunt iam duo, sed unu^ and idem ipsum, fit autem hijs qui cum fide digne
susceperint, in remissionem peccatorum, and aeternam uitam, in custodiam porro
and tutelam animi and corporis. Incredulis uero quique minus digne
participauerint, in poenam and ultione^, non aliter ac Christi etiam mors, ijs
qui eredunt, fit uita and incorruptio, in fruitionem aeternae beatitatis,
incredulis uero, and domini occisoribus, in punitionem and ultionem
sempiternam. Non est panis and uinum, figura corporis and sanguinis Christi,
Absit, sed est ipsum corpus domini deificatu^, ipso domino dicente, HOC EST no^
figura corporis, sed corpus, no^ sanguinis figura, sed sanguis, qui i^e^ ante
dixerat Iudaeis. Quoniam nisi manducetis carnem filij hominis, and sanguinem
eius bibatis, non habetis uitamlin uobismetipsis.

Caro enim mea uerus est cibus, and sanguis meus uerus est potus. Et rursum:
Qui manducat me, uiuer. Quapropter, cum omni timore, and co^scie^tia pura, ac
fide minime haesitabunda accedamus, and omnino erit nobis que^admodu^ credimus,
si certo credimus sine fluctuatio^e. Veneremur etia^ illud omni puritate, animi
uidelicet and corporis, quasi geminata ueneratione. Est enim and ipsu^ quod
ueneramur, duplex (Christi nimiru^ diuinitate, and carne co^stans) Accedamus ad
illu^ arde^ti desiderio, and manus in crucis speciem formantes, corpus
crucifixi excipiamus. Applicatis aute^ oculis, labijs, et front diuinum car
bonem concipiamus, vt nostri desiderij ardor, huius carbonis ignitione arrepta,
tum peccata nostra exurat, tu^ corda illuminet, denique participatione diuini
ignis, et igni amur ipsi et deificemur. Carbone^ uidit Esaias. Carbo uero
lignum simplex no^ est, sed unitum igni.

Sic et panis co^munionis, non panis simplex est, sed unitus deitati: Corpus
uero unitum diuinitati, non una natura est, sed una quidem corporis, unitae
uero illi diuinitatis altera. Adeo quod utrumque simul, non una est natura,
Gene. 14. Heb. 7.
sed due. Melchisedech cum esset sacerdos dei altissimi, pane et uino excepit
Abraham, a caede alienigenarum iam reuersum. Illa siquidem me^sa, mysticam hanc
praefigurabat mensam, quem admodum etiam sacerdos ille, very sacerdotis
Christi, figuram praeseferebat and imaginem. Tu enim (inquit) es sacerdos in
seculum, secu^dum ordinem Melchisedech. Hu^c autem panem, etiam panes
propositionis figurabant. Hoc praeterea est purum sacrificium and incruentum,
quod ab ortu solis, usque ad occasum, ipsi offerendum, per prophetam, dominus
eloquutus est.

Corpus est and sanguis christi, ad animi and corporis stabilimentu^, suscepta
a nobis, quae non consumu^tur, non corrumpuntur, non uadu^t in cecessum. Absit,
sed in nostram substantiam, and co^seruatione^ pertinent. Omnis autem noxae
profligatio sunt, and sordis omnis purgatio. Si enim auru^ acceperint
adulterinum, ignitione illa sua (ut ita'di came) censoria, quae purum a corrupto
diuidit, omnino purgant, vt ne cum hoc mu^do in futuro damnemur. Purgat aute^
hoc sacramentum, morbos and inco^moda omnia, quemadmodu^ inquit diuinus
apostolus. Vtique si nos ipsos iudicaremus, non iudicaremur. A domino uero
iudicati, corripimur, ut no^ cu^ mundo co^dempnemur. Et hoc est quod dicit,
quoniam qui participat corpus and sanguinem dn^i indigne, iudicium sibi
manducat and bibit. Per hoc purgati, unimur corpori dn^i, and spiritui illius,
and efficimur corpus Christi, Iste panis est primitiae illius panis futuri, qui
est (...) Varia nobis significat (...) uidelicet pro compositionis ratione,
quam s^ab (...) and participio substantiui uerbi estimes: sonat quasi dicas
imminens, quod autem imminet etiam s^ no^ long absit, no^ est tamen praesens
sed futurum est caeterum quoniam proximum est graecis est crastinum. Sicen^
legitur in act: Aposto. (...) i. postero die, hoc est crastino, a^ quan
ratione^ co^pyete^ter sonat futuru^ Quod stuerbi co^positione^ab (...) et
nomine (...) accipias, analogia deducti in adiectiuum sup substa^tiale
uerteris, uelst ^ a^biguitatem praepositio^is liceret, insubsta^tiale, quest
dicas, insubsta^ tia^migra^s, and quod hic ^pic expressit, substantia^
co^seruans. Ergo in oratio^e dominica pane^ (...) (...) petimus, hoc est,
futuru^ qui nunque desinet, and quae nostra^ substantia^ uare fulciat atque
consernet.
Illud enim (...), significat, uel panem futurum, hoc est panem futuri seculi,
aut pane^ ad conseruationem nostrae substantiae susceptum. Sieve igitur hoc,
sieve illo modo. Christi corpus conuenienter dicetur.

(S. (...) utraque ratione. Nam and in patris Christus nobis cibus futurus, est
idem, qui nunc pascit in uia, and uere cum hic, tum ibi, co^seruat nostram
substantiam Est enim uita nostra in Christo abscondita)

Spiritus enim uiuificans est, caro domini, quoniam ex spiritu uiuificante,
co^cepta est. Quod enim natum est ex spiritu, spiritus est Hoc autem dico, non
auferens naturam corporis, sed quod hoc and uiuificu^ and diuinum etiam sit
cupiam ostendere. Quod autem panem and vinum exemplar dominici corporis quidam
appellarunt, quemadmodum deifer Basilius, locutus est, non id post
consecrationem dixerunt, sed ante sanctificatam oblationem, sic nominarunt,
Participatio dicitur, quonia^ per hoc diuinitatis domini nostri Jesus reddimur
participes. Dicitur praeterea communio, and est reuera, quoniam per hoc Christo
communicamus, and eius carne^, ac diuinitatem participamus, communicamus etiam
dum inuicem vnimur, hac communione. Quandoquidem enim ex vno pane participamus
omnes, unum Christi corpus, and vnus sanguis: and concorporei christo
existentes, mutua inuicem membra efficimur. Omni igitur cautione obseruandum
est, ne ab hereticis participatione^ admittere sustineamus, sed nec illis dare.
Et enim ne detis sancta canibus, Matt. 7.
(dn^s inquit) neque proijcite margaritas uestras, ante porcos, ut non
participes erroris, and malae eorum fidei, efficiamur, and condempnationis. Si
uero omnino est unio nobis ad Christum, and inuicem nobis cum est, denique
omnibus omnino eadem nobiscum consentionem et uoluntatem participantibus etiam
unio est. Ipsa enim unitas ex libera animi electione fit, non absque nostra
sententia and uolu^tate. Omnes enim unum corpus sumus, quod ex uno pane
participamus, vt inquit diuinus apostolus. Exemplaria uero futuroru^ dicuntur,
no^ ta^quam uere non sint, ^. Cor. 10.
corpus and sanguis Christi, sed quod nu^c per illa participamus, Christi
diuinitatem, tunc autem intellectualiter, per solam uisionem.

THe good, and all good, (says Damascene) and t^, excellyng good god, being
altogether goodness, would not suffer the same goodness, that is to say, his
very nature, to remain sole without participation made thereof, by other.
And therefore god, first made the intellectual and heavenly virtues. After
that, the visible and sensible world, and then man of a nature that has both
sense and understanding.

So all things which be made of god, be so far forth partakers of his
goodness, in that they have all a being, for of him, and in him self, all
things be, not only for that he brought the^ from nothing, to have a being,
but also for that his operation continuynge likewise conserueth and mainteineth
all things that he made. But in this participation such things above other
participate, as have life, which communicate of gods goodness, not only in that
they be partakers of their being, but also of their life. Reasonable creatures
forsooth besides being and life, furthermore participate of gods goodness in
that they have reason, which reasonable creatures, be somewhat more nere and
familier unto god then the other, and yet god so excels all, above all
proportion, as neither can there be comparyson with him, nor judgment of him.
Nevertheless man a reasonable creature, and constitute in fredome with the
gift of free will, received therewith also power and faculty, through his own
choice and election, to be united to god continually, if he had remained and
perseuered in that goodness, that is to say, the obedience of him, that created
him. But after man had transgressed the precepte of him that made him, and was
thereby subject to death and corruption, God united to our nature in christ.
the maker and workman of mankind (such is the tenderness of his mercy) being
made in all things like unto us, was made man without sin, and so united to
our nature, And because he had delivered unto us, his own image and spirit,
which we have not preserved and kept he has taken upon him our nature,
then poor and weak, to the intent he should pourge us, and make us
incorruptible, and restore us alsoo again, to be partakers of his godhed and
deity. It behooved moreover not only the first fruytes of our nature, Christ
is the first fruits of our nature.
to be brought to be partaker of the better, but also all ye hole kind of man,
The better that is to say the deite
such as are well willing both to be borne again, with a new nativity, and
nourysshed with a new meat agreeable to ye natiuite, and so with endeavor to
attain the measure of perfection. wherefore by Christ's natiuite that is to
say, his incarnation and baptism, passion and resurrection, he has delivered
our nature, from the sin of our first father, from death also and
corruption. And being him self made the chief and first, and (as it were)
the first fruits of resurrection, he has appointed him self to be the way,
form, and example, to this end, that we following his steps, should by
adoption, be made the children and heirs of god, as he is by nature, and so
become coheretours with him: for which purpose (as I have said) he has given
us the second natiuite, whereby as we being borne of Adam, resembled Adam,
and enherited thereby curse and corruption: So being borne of god, we should
resemble him, and should atteyne by enheritaunce, incorruption, blessing, and
his glory. And because Christ is the spiritual Adam, it is semely that our
natiuite should be spiritual, and likewise also our meat. In asmusche also as
we be doubble, that is to say, of body and soul, and so not of one single
nature, Double of birth of the water and holy ghost.
but compounded, it was mete our birth should be doubble likewise, and our
meat Double meat, that to Christ's flesh vnitied to be diu^^itie.
is given us by the water, and the holy ghost. The meat forsothe, is the
food of life, our lord Jesus christ, that descended from heaven. For our lord
Jesus Christ, when he should take on him his death, wy^^lyngly for us, in the
night in which he gave himself, he ordered a new testament to his holy
disciples and apostels, and by them to al other yt bileue in him. In a chamber
ther^^fore of ye holy and gloriouse Syon, eating the old paschall with his
disciples, and fulfillynge the old testamente, he washed his disciples feet,
giuinge them therein a token of holy baptism. Afterward breaking bread gave
it to them, saying, Take ye, eat ye, this is my body, that is broken for you,
in remyssion of sin: Lykwyse taking the cup of wine and water* delivered
it unto them saying, Drink of this al, this is my blood of the new testament,
that is shed for you into remission of sins, Do the death of the son of
man, and confess the resurrection of him, whiles he comes. If the word of
god, be lively and effectual, and all thing yt our lord would, he made, If he
said, Be ye light made, and light was made. Be the firmament made, and the
firmament was made If the heavens be establyshed by ye wo^de of god, and also
the strength and virtue of them, is likewise establyshed by the breathe of his
mouth: If heaven and earth, water fire, and air, and all thournamente of them,
be perfited by the word of our lord, and not only these, but also man him
self, a beast of al other most renowned and spoken of: If the essential word,
very god (wyllyng so to be) was made man, and made the pure and undefiled
blood, of the holy and perpetual virgin to be his flesh, without any seed
of man: Can not he make the bread his body? And the wine and water his blood?
He said in the beginning. Let the earth bring forth grene grass, And unto
this day the earth when it raineth, brings forth his own buddynges, being
by gods precepte styred and strengthened to do the same. God said: This is
my body and this is my blood, and do this in remembrance of me, which by his
precepte that is omnipotente, is done until he comes. For so he said until
he came, unto which new kind of tyllage the virtue of the holy ghost
ouershadowyng it, is by special invocation, in the stead of rain, for like as
all thing that god has made, is made, by the operation of the holy ghost: So
now the efficacye of the same holy ghost, works these things that be
above nature which can not be comprehended, but by faith only. How shall this
be (said the holy virgin) saying I know no man? The archeangel Gabriel
answered. like as in baptism, saying men commonly used to wasshe them selves
in water, and annoynte the^ selves with oil, Christ added to the oil and
water, the grace of ye holy ghost, and made it the washing of regeneration:
So for that men were accustomed to eat The bread and wine made body and
blood, after which making there is no more bread or witie, but the body and
blood.
his godhed, and made them his body and blood, that by things accustomed and
agreeable to nature, we might be placed in things that be above nature. The
body is verily united to ye Godhed, I mean by the holy ghost, like as of the
holy mother of God, by the holy ghost, our lord made to him self flesh,
and in him self, without seed of man: In which matter we know no more,
but that the word of god, is true, of efficacy and omnipotent, but as for the
manner is utterly inscrutable, and such as can not by search be deprehe^ded and
found. And yet it were not amiss to say thus, that like as the bread by
eating, and wine by drynckynge, is naturallye changed into the body and
blood of him that eats and drinckethe, and now are become another body,
other then their own body which they had before, even so the bread prepared
to be consecrate, and the wine and water, by inuocatyon and coming down of
the holy ghost, be above nature changed into the body and blood of Christ,
blood, but my blood. And before that, said to the Jews, that if ye eat not
the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have not life in your
self, For my flesh is very meat, and my blood is very drink. And again,
he that eats me, shall live. Let us then come to it with a fearfulnes, a clean
conscience, and steadfast faith, and then in all things shall be to us as we
believe constantly. Let us honor let us receive that godly cole, so as the
fire of our fervent desire, receyuynge the fierynes of that cole, may burn up
our sins, and lyghten our hearts, and by partetakynge of that godly fire, be
thoroughly enflammed and deified Esaias saw a cole, A cole is not wood only,
but wood united unto fire. So the food of our communion is not food only,
but food united to the godhead. The Gene. 14.
with bread and wine, when he returned from the slaughter of the foraine
strangers. Heb. 9
That table fygured this mystical table, like as that preiste was ye figure
and image of our true pressed christ, Thou art (says god) a priest for ever,
Psalm. 109.
after the order of Melchisedech. Those loves which in the old law, were
called the breades of proposicion, Exodus ^^
that is to say, the breades appointed to an holy use, were a figure of this
bread. This sacrifice is the pure and unbloody sacrifice, Because blood is not
shed, it is called vnblouddy.
which god said by his prophet, should be offered unto him, from the east to ye
west. The body and blood of Christ, for the establyshmente of body and soul
received, be not consumed or corrupted, nor passes with our corruptions
through us, into ye vile place the gold adulterate, that is to say, corrupt
with any other metal, it purges it, by the same virtue which is
apprropriate to fire, whereby it disceuereth from the gold, and puts away
that is corrupt, to the intent we should not be condemned in the world to come.
It purges diseases and all sorts of annoiaunce. And as says the godly
apostle, If we judge our self, we shall not be judged, when we be here judged
of our lord, we be thereby chastised, that we should not be condemned with the
world. And thus it means that he says, who so ever is partaker of the body
and blood of our lord unworthily, he eats and drynketh condemnation unto him
self. By which sacrament, being purged, we be united to the holy body, and
the holy spirit of him, and be made the body of Christ. This fode is the
first fruytes of the food to come, which is called (...) in greek. For (...)
signifies either the food to come, that is to say, of the world to come, or
the food we receive, for the preservation of our substance. And both
significations, may be aptly said, for whither it be taken in the one
signification or the other, it may well be said of the body of our lord. For
the flesh of our lord, is spirit that gives life, being conceived of the
holy ghost, Ioh. 4.
that gives life, for that is begotten of spirit, is spirit. And thus much
I say, not minding by these words to take away the nature of the body, out
of this sacrament, but only minding to thoblacion after the consecracion,
but before the same be sanctified, It is also called participation, for by it
we be made partakers of ye godheade of Jesus, It is also called communion, and
is so verily, for by it we communicate with Christ, and be partakers of his
flessh and god head, we communicate al by it together, in that we be thereby
made one. For saying we participate all of one bread, we be made thereby one
body and blood among our self and being of the same body with our savior
christ be also to our self each others me^bres. Let us the^ beware as much as
we may, that we neither give communion to hererikes, ne receive it of them.
Give not your holy things, Matt. 7.
to dogs (says our lord) nor cast not your precious stones before hogs,
lest ye be made pertakers of their evil belief, and of their comdemnation also
consideringe that being an unity throughlye, between us and christ and also
between our selves, we shall likewise be united thoroughly with all such, as we
shall chose to participate with us. For this unity is made by our choice, and
free will, not without our mind and determinacion, and we all one body, in
that we participate of one bread (as the holy apostle says). This sacrament
is called also, the examples of that is to come, not in such an understanding,
as though the very body and blood of christ were not present, but that now by
this sacrament, we be made partakers of the godheade of christ, and in the
world to come, shall participate with only contemplacion, in the full light of
knowledge and understanding.

NOw ye have heard Damascene speak, who well heard with the ears of
hearing, were sufficient for the matter too declare, how christ's words, as
they were plain, for the substance and fou^datio^ of our byleef: So have they
in their playnnesse, maynteyned ye true byleef of the church, as this author
for.viii.C. and.xvi. years paste, declares evidently, and testifies
plainly, if thou wylt use him, for comfyrmatio^ of that thou do first
truly believe, and not abuse him, after the facyon of the world, to wrythe
him, and mystake him, as some men do the scripture. And to the intent thou may
be the more able, to mete with such as would abuse them self in him, and thy
self the depelyer conceive the godly learned consideration, of this writer in
the matter: I will note certain things unto the, worthy to be noted. First
this man testifyeth, the presence of the natural body and blood, of our
savior Christ, in the sacrament of thaulter, and expressly reproves the
understanding of them that would say, there should be but a figure, as at
this letter G. in the margyn thou shalt find, so as thou hear by this
author, truth affirmed and falsehed condemned. This man testifyeth also the
worshyppyng of the sacrament, with inward and outward cle^nesse, devotion of
the soul, and outward gesture of the body, as thou may se, in ye letter H.
wherein thauthor declares a co^gruence, and conuemency, that as the meat, which
we receive and worship, is dubble, and conteyneth Christ's flesh and godhed,
so should our worshyppyng be dubble, that is to say, of our two parts of body
and soul, which both be nouryshed, by this precious meat. And where thou
find this letter. A. the author shows that as we be dubble and of two
parts, yt is to say, body and soul: so should we have a dubble natiuite, and
a dubble meat. The dubble natiuite, is of water and ye holy ghost, of water
agreeable to our body, as corporal, and the holy ghost to our soul, which also
agrees, with that Gregory Nazia^zene writes, (...). As he was spirit and
flesh: so god perfiteth with water and the holy ghost. And as for this precious
meat, ye author shows that it is a meat dubble and not one, as where thou
find this letter. L. where he says. The body united to ye godhed, and
deity, is not made one nature, but remains.ii. natures. And because ye
natures be two he calls christ's body our meat in ye sacrament, a dubble
meat. And yet thou may find in the letter. F yt he calls it but one, as
where he says yt the bread and wine, changed by gods mighty word into the
body and blood of christ, be not two but one, and so there remains the only
substance of the body and blood of christ, where as if the nature of bread
remained also, he would have called it in that respect, two as he does in the
other places in two natures united. And so thou see where remain two natures
united, they be called in yt respect two and double, and not one, and yet
again because in the consecration there is not an union of bread to the body
of christ, but transmutation, and as the word transmutatio^ expresses an
alteration of substance the sacrament is not called two, but one. And
concerning worshyppinge, this is to be noted that this great clerk was not
ignorant of the words of the gospel. Io. iiii. that Very adoratores adorabu^t
patrem in spiritu and veritate. True worshyppers shall worship in spirit and
truth. And yet speaks this author of worshyppyng with the body, for by the
text of the gospel, is not denied outward adoration with the body, which
body is with the soul created of god, and shall be hereafter glorified with the
soul, but the sense of that text declares the true order of adoration,
which must be rooted, grounded, and directed by the spirit and truth, and
from thence it must proceed, and where that fayl^th, the rest is hypocrysye.
But else yt the body should not follow and obey the soul, and be affected as ye
soul is, and with outward semely gesture represente the same, that we might
not say as Dauyd did, Psalm. ^8.
Cor meum and caro mea exultauerunt in deum viuum, My heart and my flesh has
reioysed in the lyuinge god, there is no such scripture, but Christ's hauoure
in ye time of his prayeng teaches the contrary, for he fell down on his face
and prayed. And the publicane commended in the gospel, knocked on his breast
and prayed. And in this auctor thou see an exhortacion for men to lay their
hands on cross. And good men have taken great comfort in, the sign of the
cross, wherewith they have blessed them self, and have been glad to receive
the blessinge of other with the token of the cross* And thereupon Tertullian
in his work, Tertulian.
De resurrectione carnis, says: Caro signatur, vt anima muniatur. The flesh
is marked that the soul may be defended. But to return to my purpose to note
unto ye that is notable in Damascene in the letter C. to the^ that ask, and
humbly question, how these mysteries be wrought? like au^swer may be made, as
Gabriell made unto our Lady, by occasion whereof thou may mark two sorts of
questions, whereof one proceeding of pride arrogancy, doubtfulnes and mystruste,
declares incredulity, such as the Capharnaites made when they said, I^an, 6.
How can this man give us his flesh to eat? And another in meekness and
humilite, with desire of so much knowledge only, as the secrecy of ye thing
permits, wherein ye hole is remytted to gods power and omnipotency* with
which our Lady contented herself, and said, Ecce an^illa dn^i, fiat mihi
secundu^ verbu^ tuu^. Lo the handmayd of our lord, be it to me, according to
thy word, which was gods word, by the omnipotency of which when we se, how
many things above man's capacity have been wrought, why should it not suffice
to stay men from further arguing and reasonynge, in the most blessed sacrament
of the altar? Another thing thou may mark in the letter D yt this auctor
testifies how Christ made the bread and wine with water, his body and blood,
whereby thou may perceive how it has been taught in the church consta^tlye,
that after the consecration the substance of bread remains not and yet it is
called bread, for it is called that it was, as I shall speak hereafter. And
albeit when thauthor alludeth to the cole seen by Esaye, as thou may se in
the letter K. he makes this resemblaunce, that as the cole is not wood alone,
but wood with fire, so the food of communion which is in latin, panis
communionis, and in greake, (...) has ye dietie adioined unto it, thou may
perceive, by that straight follows, how he used the word Panis, to signifye
the body and flesh of Christ wher^vnto the deity is annexed, which body and
flesh, is the substance of the nourriture in this holy meat according as
Christ said. Io. 6:
Panis quem ego dabo vobis, caro mea est, and, Caro mea vere est cibus, which
flesh, having the godhed annexed unto it, is of two parts as the cole is,
and remains two natures, and so is a dubble meat* to feed the body and soul
of man, which be likewise two parts of man. And when he said in the letter.
D. the bread has the deity annexed unto it, he signifies the body and
flesh of Christ into which by gods omnipotency, the bread is converted, as
thou may plainly see declared by him, in the place, where thou fyndeste the
letter F. and the sentence before, in which he speaks so plainly and
openly, as can not be desired more euydence for the matter. I can not
pretermytte also to note unto the this, that may serve for a lesson to such as
be captiouse of words, and by the outward apparaunce of them note
contradictions, thou shalt find in the letter M. that the sacrament is two,
and not one, and in the letter. F. one and not two which be no contraries.
First in that place, where he says they be not two, is signified that there
is not two substaunces, of the bread and the body of Christ, but only of
Christ's substance. Again, there be not two bodies of Christ, one in heaven,
anothere in the sacrament, for as he says after in the letter. E. the body of
Christ descended not, but as we truly believe in the article of our Creed, he
sytteth on the right hand of the father, and the^ if thou ask, how can it
be so? the answer is, gods word is omnipotent, and the manner inscrutable:
In the other place, where he says the sacrament is two and dubble, as in the
letter F, there he declarethe him self, that he speaks of two natures, the
humanity and the godhed. Thou may note also, that albeit in one place, he
says, Christ's body is verily in the sacrament, and it is not a figure: yet
in the latter part, he shows how it may be called a figure, not so, but
there is the very body of christ, but yt it is in ye sacrament a pledge of the
glory to come, and his feadinge us here, a figure of that feadynge we shall
have in heaven, which in the thing is all one, for Christ is the feast here
and there, but the manner differs. For then we shall have full fruytyon by
knowledge and contemplacion, in the stead of our faith and hope, whereby we
receive frutefully Christ's feadyng here. Thou majesty note also in the letter.
O. how afraied he was, to be mystaken, because he spoke of the generation, of
the spirit, whereof Christ's flesh was conceived, lest he should be seen to
agree with the Marcionistes, and deny Christ's natural body. So captious have
noughtye men ever ben, that study to make of truth, matter of contention. In
the letter. N. thou shalt se the carnal reasons answered in few words, with
a ((...)) in greake, which sygnyfyeth a detestacyon of the speech before, as
we speak with one syllable in english, fie. And fie and worse on the^, that
so say, and amend not. And of the company of such, he amonisheth all to beware
in the end, and note his reason why, with that also saint Paul alleged of the
ethnike author. Corrumpunt bonos mores colloquia praua. Evil talk corrupts
good manners. I write now, to the multitude in which be many to whom I neaded
not, to have made these notes, unless I would for formalitie, gather notes as
lawiers do in their lessons, but yet I take, my self, such pleasure in
redynge of the author in this place, who so lively and godly sets forth this
matter, and so fully answers al thwartinges to the contrary, that I my self
delight to tarry in him, and would have the reader do the like. For thauthor is
notable, and of a great auncientye, that is to say, viii.c. and, xvi. years,
and he writes in the greake tongue, for a further testimonye, and under title,
De orthodoxa fide, of ye right catholic faith, which has now been
troubled, in this the highest mysterye. And herein they can not tell what they
mean, nor what they would have: they begin to speak of an other meaning in
the understanding of Christ's plain words, when he said, This is my body,
which be the foundation of our faith in their right catholic understanding,
as the church has taught, and good christen men believed hitherto.

THe devil has another piece of sophistrye, which is in cou^terfette
contradictions, wherein he uses for a preface and introduction, a most
certain truth, which is, that truth agrees in it self, and has no part
contrary to another Wherefore seeing the word of god, is an infallyble truth,
it has no co^trarieties in it self. All the world must assent hereunto. But
thus ye devil proceeds to his cauyllacio^ ab euidenter ueris, per breuissimas
mutationes ad euidenter falsa.

From things euydently true, by little chaunginges to things evidently falls,
Heaven and earth have a kind of contradictio^, Christ is in heaven, where saint
Steven saw him, Ergo he is not in earth, Act. 7.
in the sacrament of the altar. A rehersall of the dyuylles sophysme.
Christ ascended into heaven* Ergo he tarieth not here. Act. 1.
He syttethe on the right hand of the father, Hebr. 1.
Ergo he is not in the sacrament of thaulter. Hebr. 1.
He is the creature, Io. 1.
for Omnia per ipsum facta sunt, All things be made by him, Ergo he is not a
creature made of bread. He dwells Act. 17.
not in temples made with man's hand, Ergo he is not in the box upon the high
altar. Christ shall descend from heaven to judge the quycke and the dead, 1.
These. 4.
Ergo he continues there and is not in the sacrament of the altar. And these
be taken for notable contradictions and insoluble sophismes, and in effect, in
all these arguments, there is no contrarite or contradiction in ye things,
but only a repugnau^ce and impossibility to man's carnal capacite. And
therefore here is occasion to admonish men by the words of the prophet, Nisi
credideritis, no^ intelligetis. if ye believe not, ye shall not understand.
^as. 7.
In this high mysterye where god works his secret special work
myraculously, it is suffycient to know it is wroughte, though I can not tell
how it is wroughte ne how it agreth with other of his works, and yet it
agrees. But in this sophistrye the deuell makes a man forget gods
omnipotencye, exceeding our capacite, and causes us to measure gods doings
by our natural imbecillite. Because we can not be in two places at ones,
distaunte one from an other, we judge the same repugnaunt in god but christ's
being in heaven, which saint Steven truly confessed, Act. 7.
was nothing contrary to saint Paul's true affirmatio^ that christ 1. Cor.
15.
was seen after thascention, to him in earth. It repugneth not to christ's
power, to sit on the right hand of the father in heaven, and yet feed the
infinite number of his people with the same his most precyouse body in earth.
It is no repugnau^ce, to gods goodness, being creator of al, therwt in the
form of bread to feed us his creatures, In which we say not, god is become
the creature of bread (as ye devil inspyreth his me^bres to report
blasphemouslye) but that christ familiarlye, and of a merueilouse entier love
toward us, consecrateth him self, in those forms of bread and wine, to be
so eaten and drunken of us. Hier. 2.
God fylleth heaven and earth, and is not comprehe^sible, to be contained in
temples made with man's hand, Act. 17.
ne man can lymitte gods dwelling place. God has power over man, but man
has no power over God. And therefore Salomons godly temple, Mat. 4^ 9. 26.
was no habitation to restrain gods presence from other places. Mar. 14.
And yet scripture tells us how our sauyoure christ Luc. 13. 21
god and man, has taught in tempels, Joan. 7.
tarried in temples, Io. 10.
made with man's hand, and that he dwells with good men, and also in
temples made with man's hand, for the assembly of good men, where good men
trust to be releiued with common prayer, and refresshed with the most precyouse
food of his body and blood, he presents and exhibiteth him self to be
received and eaten, and there is present, and tarieth in the host consecrate,
not by man's ordinance (as the devil inuyously, and spytefullye speaks it)
but by his own institution, to be a continual and daily food, wherewith
being nouryshed we may strongely walk till we come to the mount of god,
where is everlasting life. And this being of Christ in the most blessed
sacrament, repugneth nothing to the continuinge of Christ in heaven till the
day of judgment, whose most preciouse human body, now glorified and united
to the divinity, is not diuisible, by time or place ne by multiplication of
time or place can be multiplied in number, but remains in the same number and
in variacion of time* or alteration of place, keeps still thappellacion, to be
called the same. And notynge this well to be true, although we can not
discuss it by our reason, we shall easily avoid the deuylles sophystrye in
this behalf, whereunto we may be somewhat induced, by consideration of yt god
works otherwise in us, who by his gift of imaginacio^ and thinkinge in our
soul, may represent our self, although not in our gross body, which is
corporal, yet in our mind (I say) we may represent our self, in diverse
places at ones, and one distante far from another, The philosophers that
said. Anima was tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part, the hole in the
hole, and the hole in every part, they could not se how it was, and
nevertheless took it so to be, and yet what a contradiccion is it, to call the
part the hole? And further, do not the words spoken of men, to a multitude,
pass holy to every one of the hearers ears indifferently, that stand with
in the compass of hearing? And if ye matter be intelligible to the^ al, do not
each one hear and understand one as much as another, being the speech but
one, and not diminished, by the participation of the multitude? These
similitudes, do nothing atteine to express the high mysterye of the most
blessed sacrament, and in many things unlike and specially in this, that in all
these similitudes be no corporal things spoken of, and in the sacrament is
present christ's very body, but these similitudes only serve to declare yt in
these lower works of god, which we may call Posteria eius, there be many
things excedyng our capacities to discuss the^ how they be yt we know very
certainly to be, and yet because they be common and quotidian, marvel not at
the^, and much less doubt of them, and such fondnes has man's curiosity, as
was noted by this saying. Quod ante pedes est non vident, coeli scrutantur
plagas, that is before the feet, they se not and search the costs of the
heaven. The devil tempted christ in a rare miracle, to make of stones directly
bread, Matt. 4.
which to be the power of god, the devil then confessed, and yet god did it
not, because it should not have furthered his glory to the devil, who was
indurate. Nevertheless god, whose power rules, governs and tempereth the
works of nature, does co^tinuallye in the work of nature, make of stones
bread, when corn is nouryshed of the stones, and stones altered and resolved
into earth, which nourishes the corn seeds, and increases the same, and
likewise in other works of nature, shows daily manifold wonders of his
power, which we consider not, because they be comme^ly done and only for
raritie and newenes maruayle, when we maruayle at ye is done, and not for the
thing.

And herein the devil utters his sophistrye, and makes us forget that is
continuallye done before our eyes, and by impossibilite of our carnal
imaginacions, in things above our capacity, seduceth us, and deceives us, in
the belief of gods high mysteries, and specially in the mystery of the
sacrament of thaulter, whereby to hinder us, and depryue us, of our great
comfort and consolation, in the same, wherein God instituted, Memoriam
mirabilium suorum and esca^ se dedit timentibus eum, that is to say, a memory
of his maruailes and gave him self mete to them that lovingly fear him.

THere rests now to open the devils sophistry, in the perverse, crooked and
crafty expositions of diverse places of scripture, ye saienges of holy writers,
and of such words, as be attribute to singifie and name that most blessed
sacrament unto us, wherein has been much pain taken, and much crafty
imaginacion devised, to abuse the simple unlearned wits, and uphold in
error, the maliciouse, arrogant and new fangled judge menetes. As touching
scriptures, These fond fools were caled among the garmaynes Toutistes for
notable folly obteinethe names for memory of reproach as wisdom does honor
and glory
I will pass over, the fransies of them, who writhe the principal theife
text, ( This is my body) from consecration of the sacrament, to the
demonstration of Christ's body, there sittinge, and then mynistringe unto the
apostels, where in they declare their malice, that they care not to change the
right sense, with any other, were it never so fond and false. The truth they
abhor, and seek utterly for lies, and them they embrace, who so ever bring
them and lean to such exposycions of the scriptures, as help to the
subuertion of the truth. But let us consider how sophistically they handle the
words that Christ said. 1. Cor. 11.
Do this in remembrance of me, for here is made a great matter of the word
(remembrance) which (they say) declares, that Christ him self is not
present in the sacrament, and that the sacrament is but a memory of him, but
a remembrance of him. And here the devil lurketh in a little word (but) for
in often repetition of remembraunces, the but is taken in, and the speech
goethe round as though the words imported, that the sacrament is but a
remembrance of Christ. In which speech if (but) were left out (as the
scripture has it not) the word (memory or remembrance) is nothing
repugnaunt to Christ's presence in the most blessed sacrament. For seeing christ
is the eternal word of god, and descended from heaven into earth not only to
suffer for man, but also to declare the will of god to be observed, followed, and
obeyed unto of man, which will of god being taught us by Christ we should not
forget, but day and night with the benefits also of christ's passion, remember
therwt the will of god, taught us in the same passion: can there be so
effectual a memoryall of Christ's death and teachynges declared and taught in
ye same death, as if with the eyes of our faith, we se present the natural
body of our savior christ, the self same body that suffered? If ye hearing of
christ's death, entringe at a man's ears, or the seeing of a picture or image
graven, representing christ's death to ye bodily eyes, does stir up man's
memory to have remembrance of that is done by christ for him: how much more
does the lively presence of christ's natural body styr such as perfytely believe
the p^sence of the same, to the remembrance of christ's passion? And if among
men, where honest love reigns as between ye man and wife, such as be godly
conjoined in marriage they use to leave for memory of each other in their
absence, an image of the^ selves, as lively set forth, as man's craft can
attain, knowing by experience that ye image styrreth up the memory most
effectually: Should we not think that our savior Christ much more affected
and joined in love to his spouse, the church, than any man is to his wife, has
left the same church his spouse, a most perfitte image of him self, that is
to say, him self for a memory, who by his omnipotencye, can exhibit and
present his very image, his own very body without change of place, or
leaving his seat in heaven, when and as often as it pleases him? Who also so
loves his church, as we have cause to think, he would do it, and by
scriptures may understand (if we close not our own understandings) that he
does it in deed in this most blessed sacrament, wherein his presence does
most effectually stir up in good men's hearts, such a remembrance of hole
Christ his benefytes, and preachynges together, as in this most holy
communyon good men be so comforted, so strenghtened, so confyrmed in Christ's
doctrine, as thereby shall in their manours, their hauyours, their conversation
and living, show and set forth in them selves, christ's death with his
resurrection also, whiles the day of judgment when shall be Christ's second
coming in majesty and glory, And thus the holy virtuous man Basile,
expounds the words of saint Paul. As often as ye eat this bread, and drink
the cup of our lord, ye shall show the death of our lord till he comes,
which words of s. Paul declare the strength of this heavenly food to work
this effect, and bring forth such fruit in us, not that every man receyuyng
the sacrament, should with his tongue then make a sermon, how Christ dyed for
us, which the presence of the sacrament it self, preaches, if men understand
who is there present, and this point should be learned at ones, and so perfitly
believed, as it neaded not to be learned again. For it is the ground,
foundation, Heb. 6.
and beginning. But the sermon preaching, and showing of Christ's death, of
such as receive this most blessed sacrament worthily, should be in their
manners and living, their love and charity, their contempt of the world and
desire to be with god, whereby should appear that by receiving this most
preciouse fode, we remember christ's death and passion for us, and practice it
effectually, and frutefully in us. For such only, celebrate this holy
communion, with an effectual remembrance of him And yet evil men do receive
the same, to their own condemnation which good men do with a perfect
remembrance of christ, whose benefits with his precepts, they have in
effectual remembrance. Wherein forasmuch as the Corinthyans abused them self,
Saint Paul threteneth them with gods sharp judgment, which every manne
procures him self, when he receives the blessed sacrament unworthily, not
consyderinge nor understanding, that there is in that feast, the very natural
body and blood of our savior christ, which s. Paul signifies in those words
non dijudicans corpus domini.

Which words be translate in english, 1. Cor. 11*
putting no difference between the lords body. And this place by such as
presumynge of their own knowledge, frame also a sense of their own making, or
folowinge such as willingly abuse their knowledge to subuerte the truth, has been mystaken, and of some so taken, as though the Corinthia^s were in those
words blamed, because they (which is a fond imaginacion, and yet men that
wa^der alone go easily far wide out of the right way) took the sacrament, to
be the very body of christ, and put no difference, between it and bread. But
saint Paul contrarywyse (as tholde authors expound that place) declares in
those words, non dijudicans corpus domini, 1. Cor. 11
how such as eat unworthily do not acknowledge, whom they receive. For if
they did, they could not so abuse them self, and therefore the word (
dijudicans) signifies not, puttinge no difference, but not understanding, not
considering, as the greake interpreters say. (...), not considering, not
understanding who is in that feast to be received, whose presence if men
considered, they should neade none other admonyshment, how to prepare them
self to come thither, and how to use them selves at the same. And other
scripture, is likewise misconstrued and crokedly expounded. Spiritus viuificat
caro non prodest quic^, Io. 6.
As though it were to be understood, that the presence of the natural body
and blood of our savior our christ, were not fruteful to us, and therefore by
their reason should not be there, where in deed our savior Christ, refelled in
those words the gross understanding of ye Capharnaites, as though our
savior christ had meant to distribute his natural body in lumpes of flesh,
and so make them a feast of it, and thereupon gave a general lesson unto them,
which serves for ye true understanding of our hole relygion, which is that
our godly life is engendered in us, not of the flesh, but of the spirit, for
quod natum est ex carne, caro est, quod aute^ ex spu^ spiritus est, Joan. 6.
yt is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and that is borne of the spirit is
spirit, and the faithful men be not borne of the flesh, nor the flesh
reuealeth not the truth of god, for the flesshye manne can not se gods
mysteries, and they that dwell in the flesh can not please god, Romans 8.
and thus scripture speakethe of the flesh, the carnal part of man not
illuminate by ye spirit of god, and the Capharnaites fansied of Christ's
flesh grossly to be cut as buchers do in the market, which so considered,
profits nothing, but only the spirit gives life. And so spiritus
viuificat, caro non prodest quicquam, the spirit gives life, and the flesh
profitethe nothing. By which manner of spech the fle^she of our savior christ's
most precious body, being caro viuifica, lively flesh, and which has the
holy spirit inseparablye annexed unto it, is not improued but as it is by
gods high power ministered under form of bread and wine, is also most
holsom and most confortable unto such, as receive it worthily, of which christ
spoke Caro mea vere est cibus and Io. 6.
sanguis meus uere est potus, and panis quem dabo uobis caro mea est, My
flesh is verily meat, and my blood verily drink, and the bread which I
shall give you is my flesh. And the speech of this scripture. Caro non
prodest quic^ is in such wise to be taken as when saint Paul says, Scientia
inflat, charitas edificat. 1. Cor. 8.
wherein knoweledge is not utterly condemned, but only such knowledge as
wa^teth, and is not tempered with charity. And likewise, littera occidi
spiritus viuificat. 1. Cor. 3.
wherein not all letters and wrytinges, be noted to do hurt, but only such
as be destitute and want right and spiritual understanding. And after ye same
form said christ. Spiritus viuificat caro no^ prodest quic^^ The spirit
gives life, Io* 6.
ye flesh profits nothing, which is as much to say after the order of
understanding, in the former speeches, that the flesh porfiteth nothing, where
the spirit of god wants, which in the most blessed body of our savior
Christ, is always present, and can not be separate from it. Thus I have somewhat
travailed in thexpositio^ of this text Caro non prodest quic^, which in deed
perteyneth not to ye purpose of ye matter, but only as the devil wrangleth with
it, as he does in susteining heresies with many other, and among other in this
matter, these. If I go not from you (says Christ) the holy ghost shall not
comme to you. And in an other place: ye shall not se me, for I go to my father.
And also in an other place. I leave the world, and go to my father. With such
like, which sound to improve the presence of Christ's natural body and blood
in the sacrament of thaulter, but sound so only to such, as before they
mark this sou^de of words, would have them to sound so. For that mean the
devil uses to inueigle men, first to allure them by* some worldelye
temptation, to be incline able rather to this or that opinion and in many men,
not for any respect they have to any truth or falseshed, but only because
they had rather have it understood so, as they fansye, then otherwise. And
being so waywardlye affected, they conceive then of the scripture, as they do
of a confuse sou^de of belles, that is to say, the self same sentence and
meaning which they would have taken, and esteemed for truth, and none other. And
to such men, so inueigled by the devil, it is hard to induce the persuasion
of truth, for they care not for it, or be maliciouse and evil willing against
the truth. Sapi. l.
And therefore wisdom (as ye wise man says) can not enter into them. The
devil, Io. 7. 8* 11 14. 16.
for mayntenaunce of his error, he ceasseth not to note to the simple reader,
how Christ speaks of going his way, and going to his father, Ioh. 14.
and in an other place of leaving the world, and in an other place, that he
will be seen no more of the^. And when ye spouse is gone then we shall wayle
and fast. Ioa^. 16. Matt. 9.
All which in the true understanding, signify to us the absence from us of
Christ, in his bodily co^uersatio^ among us, in such sort as he was before
his passion, and before his ascension (that is to say) to speak to us, and
company with us, as he did with his apostelles and disciples, Io. 20.
or to be felt of us, as he was of saint Thomas, to the satisfaction of our
bodily senses, which absence of Christ in conversation repugneth not to ye
truth of our catholyke faith, which is that christ presents and exhibiteth
unto us, his natural body and blood in the sacrament of thaulter. For the
diuersyte, in the manner of beynges present, takes away the co^trariet^ that
should seem in the matter. Now as touching the mysco^struynge and wrong
taking, and sometime false bearing in hand, of that the good holy fathers of
Christ's church, have written of the most blessed sacrament o^ thaulter. First
I shall say this, that how so ever the same holy doctors do agree, in the
most certain truth of our belief much labor has been taken to p^ke out
words and sentences, and dis^eueryng them out of their places, by
cyrcu^stau^ce, whereof they had their true understanding to make them sound, to
such as would have it so, to the co^firmatio^ of their untrue and false
doctrine, in this most blessed sacrament. And like as such as labor, to
confound the truth, be the children of darkness: So in the scriptures and
doctors also, they resort to search the truth i^ obscure dark places, where
they may have opportunite to iuggle and deceive the simple reader. For where
the doctors speak plainly against their falsehead, they fare, as though they
knew not yt place, or had not read it, and then resort to an other place not
so open and plain, and there fall to co^iectures and constructions of their
own, and labor in exposition of those obscure places, as though they could
there more certeynly declare the mind of the doctors to conferme their lies,
then the doctors the^ self do in another place of their own works, where
they plainly, openly, manifestly, and without ambiguite, declare them self to
agree with the truth. And where as the truth grounded in scriptures, and opened
more clearly by holy writers, has been in Christ's church* after discussion
and trial set forth in a wholesome fashion, and convenient order of words,
which words, the true meaning and understanding purged from all ambiguities,
which man's busy wit has also in holy words engendered, to the intent as we
believe one truth, we might also in words and speech, uniformly agree in the
same truth. Such as labor to break this godly agreement in heart and tongue,
they never cease, till by speech, they may bring the truth again in a
corner and with pretense they mean well and speak symply without observation,
even as they have read forsooth, in that holy man, for example, (and in deed a
holy martyr) saint Cipriane, for him they allege. Which saint Cyprians
speech as it was by him devoutly uttered, Ciprianus.
not disagreyng from the truth, so is it by these men maliciously brought
forth, whereby to interrupte the consent truly agreed on, both in the speech
and understanding. I will somewhat speak of this one speech of saint Cypria^
particularly, whereby thou may esteem (good reader) the deuyls sophystrie, in
handelyng of ye rest. We believe truly as the catholyke church teaches, that
there remains no substance of bread in the sacrament of thaulter, but ye
only substance of the body and blood of our savior Christ. And yet saint
Cyprian, speaking devoutly of the food and nourriture, which good Christen
men receive in the communion of this most holy Sacrament, whereby the body
and soul, be conjoined with Christ, uses the word Panis, Panis.
and calls ye blessed sacrament, sacramentale^ panem, which words be not
perfitely expressed in englysh, if in tra^slatio^ it were termed sacrame^tal
bread (as malicious feigned simplicity pretends) but rather sacrame^tal fode,
for Panis in latin is a general word, and signifies not only bread, wherewt
me^ be fed, but also al other nourriture, wherwt man is sustained, which the
word (bread) does not in englysh, but sounds to us a name of special
nourriture and food made of corn. Now if any man shall under pretense of
simple plain speech, call always that bread, in english which he finds in
laten, called panis, he might of well, wheresoever he found sella in latin,
call it in englysh a saddell and then in translatinge some places out of latin
into english, he should sometime set suddenly on horseback in englysh, him that
he read in latin sitting in a seat on ye ground Herin the ignorant, that
perceive not this, will say, I use sophistrye but I open the deuyls sophistrye
herein, wherewith he does abuse the people in speech, and entangle them so in
it, as they for want of other knowledge, can not wade out, and therefore allows
him, that when he reads in saint Cypryan ye sacrament of the altar, called
sacrame^talem panem calls it in englisshe sacramental bread. And here he
spurneth, and will ye make me believe (says he) that panis signifies not
bread? and then for confirmacion, add this, Say we not in our Pater noster,
Pane^ nostru^ quotidianem da nobis hodie? Matt. 6.
which is translate in englisshe. Give us to day, our daily bread? And in
deed if I would replye thoroughly hereunto, I must say more, then it were
necessary now to entreat, and yet I may not pass it all over. For I must
say that panis in our Pater noster, signified not only bread but all food,
both for the body and soul, and is so well known by the exposition that in
thenglysh, when it is translate bread, we may easily conceive by a part, the
rest, and by signification of some part, the hole. But where as there is an
extour spredde by the devil abroad against Christ's miracle, in consecration
of his most preciouse body, in the sacrament of the altar* which error is,
that there should after ye consecracio^ remain bread, in this time of error
to translate in every place the word panis, that signifies in some place
(food) into the english word (bread): can that be without a maliciouse
purpose to advance the deuilles enterprise with his sophistry, cloked under
pretense of plains? After which sort of outward simplicite, wherewith to
cloak malice: Some when they should speak of the blessed sacrament, and with
the catholic church confess the truth therein plainly and openly, then they
say, they will speak as saint Paul spoke, and his words they will use, which
were written by the holy ghost, and for so much they say true, and herewith
they will ask disdainefully, whyther any man will correct saint Paul's
teachinge? as though there were any such sacrilege intended against gods
scripture, where in deed this is only desired, and necessary in Christ's
church, that one should understand another, and al conceive one true meaning of
S. Paul whose most holy true words, diverse (as s. Peter says) 2. Pet. 3.
have for ye hardness of the^, peruerslye understood them, for the exchewynge
whereof, it is necessarely requisite, that preseruyng the words of S. Paul
inviolable, as they be most holy, we should in other words and fashion of
speech truly agreed on in ye church, confess in all tongues, the truth
plainly, in such wise as such as have their belief establyshed in one
understanding, should also utter the same in one manner of spech, whereby the
speech which is ordered of god, to do service to express the inward meaning
of the heart, to the knot and conjunction of men in unity, be not by the
variaction and diversity in it, matter and occasion of discord and confusion,
wherein the devil by his members trauayleth by all means, to disseuer that
christ has congregate, and to dissolve that christ has knyt together. But to
return to the doctors and fathers of ye church, who left most plain, and
euydent testimony in their writings, of their belief in the sacrament of
thaulter even the very same that among good men continues still. Has not
Fryth for all that, in a detestable book remaining after him in English,
defamed Tertulian, Chrysostom, and saint Austen in that matter? And has not
before him Oecolampadius in our time most maliciousely and vntruelye, in
falsely reportynge those holy me^ attempted the same? And has not this ben
their craft herein, to seek out places of derkenes and ambiguitie, wherewith
to deceive them selue and other also. As for example. If they read any doctor
in any place of his book, call the sacrament of ye altar, a figure, or a
sign, that place they brought forth, and they put to the deuylles syllable
(but) and said, those doctors take it to be but a sign, but a figure, and
but a memory, herein the but, has done much hurt, for it is sleighly brought
in, and a small syllable, For this is in deed convenient that christ in his body
living, should be a figure, sign, and memory of his body dead upon the cross
for us, and Christ in the sacrament of thaulter to be a figure of his mystical
body the church, which he vnitethe to him in that sacrament, and of that
effect, the sacrament of thaulter is named the holy communion, Vnus panis ^num
corpus multi sumus qui de uno pane and uno calice participamus.
and because the manner of Christ's being in the sacrament, differs from his
manner of being as he satte at the board with his disciples, 1 Cor. 10.
although the self same body was in the sacrament, that satte at the boorde,
and the self same body is now in the sacrament, that is now in heaven, not by
shyftynge of places, but by omnypotencye whereby god may do all, for these
considerations in all these respects, the speech has not ben abhorred to
call the sacrament of thaulter a figure, and to call it a sign, and a
memorial, Beware of the exclusyues, that they exclude the not from the fruit
of the truth,
for so it is, but not only a figure, not only a sign, not only a
memorial, but therewith the thing it self, as the same doctors that have
used, those words (sign) and (figure), do plainly testyfye. Now if man's
wit, by the deuylles instygacyon, shall travail with sophisticacion in
words, to subuerte the truth: what can remain untouched, of that we should
have most sure? We believe truly, that Christ is the same substance with
his father, to the condemnacion of tharrians. And yet saint Paul in his
epistle to the Hebrews, calls christ, the image of his fathers substance.
Heb. 1.
Then (says the devil) if Christ be but the image of his fathers substance
(do ye not se how (but) crepeth in) then is he not the same substance. Now
because Christ shows us the father, as he said to Philip, Ioh. 14.
Philippe qui videt me, uidet and patreim, Phylyppe, he that sees me, sees my
father, and in another place. Luc. 10.
Nemo nouit patrem nisi filius, et cui voluerit filius reuelare, No man knows
the father but his son, and to whom he will reveal it. Et deu^ nemo uidit un^
vnigenitus filius, ipse ennarrauit. Io. 1.
Never man saw god, his only begotten son, has showed him forth: For
these effects, christ is the image of the fathers substance and we may not
therefore, make the deuyls addition of (but), or make the captious sophisme of
Me^demus. This was a notable sophiste.
Alterum ab altero, alterum est, The image is not the thing whereof it is ye
image, as man is not god, of whom he is ye image Ergo Christ, is not the same
substance with the father, being (as Saint Paul's words before rehearsed
purport) the image of his substance. And as this argument is folysshe in this
point, and yet captious to deceive the unlearned: So be the arguments, made
against the sacrament of the altar, of the word (figure) or the word (sign)
or the word (memory) or the word ( Symbolum) token, which words for a
certain relatition, may be spoken of it, without prejudice of the true
substance, there present, Luthers sect in words grant the presence, and
yet in deeds deny it, when they forbid the worshyppynge of it.
of ye body and blood of Christ, besides those relations. And thus Luther, and
all that followed him have defended against Oecolampadius, and enforced Bucer,
by declaration of the places, to yield unto him in it, and to confess the
presence of the natural body of our savior christ, notwithstanding those
terms of (figure, sign, and memory) the misconstruynge whereof, was but mere
cauillacion and sophistry. So as to condemn the madness of such as follow
Frith, or Oecolampadius, or swinglius, or among us, Joy, Bale, Turner, or
such like, ye devils lymmes: the truth of Christ's church has thayde of al
Luthers sect, But without their aid the truths strength is sufficient. and
bycanse thou may se (reader) how plainly ye holy fathers have spoken of ye
most blessed sacrament, whereby the more to abhor the blasphemy of some, such
wretches, as most vyllainously write, speak (and as they dare) jest at this
day: I will of certain notable writers, such only as were before one thousand
year past take out their plain confession of this most blessed Sacrament, by
redyng whereof, good men may conceive as much joyful pleasure, to the
confirmation of their belief, and sweet meditation therein, as lewd, light
persons, take wanton delight to here scoffing and ^estinge, to the deprauation
of the same, non diiudica^tes corpus domini. 1. Cor. 11.
And first, I shall rehearse, yt has be^ spoken of this preciouse sacrament,
by one of the first since christ, D: Andreas. Apo.
as of saint Andrewe thapostle, who continuing constantly, in the true
confession of christ, and abhorryng ydolatry, when he was moved thereunto, by
Egeas, said in this wise. Omnipotenti deo, qui unus and uerus est, ego omni die
sacrifico, no^ thuris fumu^, nec tauroru^ mugie^tiu^ carnes, nec hircoru^
sanguine^, sed immaculatum agnu^, quotidie in altari crucis sacrifico. cuius
carnes, post^ omnis populus credentium, manducauerit, and eius sanguinem
biberit, agnus qui sacrificatus est, integer perseuerat and vnus, Et cum vere
sacrificatus sit, and vere carnes eius manducatae sint a populo, and vere
sanguis eius bibi ^us: tamen (vt dixi) integer permanet, and immaculatus and
vnus. I do every day (said saint Andrewe) sacrifice to God almighty, Here is
eatinge and dri^ king, which to our senses is as much to say, as tearing and
co^suming, joined with the true co^fiss^on of Christ's imp^ssibilite
immortalytie.
which is the true and one god, not the smoke of incense not the flesh of
lowing bulls, not the blood of gootes, but I sacrifice daily in the altar of
the cross, the lamb without spotte, whose flesh after all the faithful
people have eaten it, and droncke the blood of it, the lamb that is
sacrificed, He says not in figure, but verily eaten ^ v^rely dronken.
contynueth hole and on live. And all be it this la^be is verily sacrificed,
and the flesh of it verelye eaten of the people, and the blood of it verelye
drunken: yet, as I said, it remaynethe hole, without spotte, and still on
live. These be the words of the holy Apostle and martyr saint Andrewe, who
knew the truth of that is written by the euangelystes, before the Euangelyes
were written, and he knew it taught of our savior Christ, and speakethe
herein consonantlye, to the words of scripture and the faith of the
catholyque church, wherein if thou will spurn, because Saint Andrew
speaks of daily sacrifice, and Saint Paul's true doctrine is that, Christ
was but ones sacrificed on the cross, and then it was (as saint Paul says
to the Hebrews) perfited for ever, Heb. 8.
being a hole and sufficient sacryfice, for all the sins of the world: Thou
do herein rehearse a true saying of saint Paul, such as all the world must
confess. For the sacrifice of Christ, is eternal and is one, perfyte,
consummate, suffycient, auayleable sacrifice, and needs no repetitio^, or
iteracion, for the more validity of it. And yet this truth, is nothing touched
or preiudicate, with ye daily sacrifice of Christ in the altar, which to him
yt believes is easily declared, and to him that will wra^gle against all
truth, is in vain entreated of, and (as Hylarius says (Non est humano aut
seculi sensu, Hilarious.
in rebus dei loquendu^. Godly matters should not be commened of, after carnal
understanding* But as saint Andrewe spoke, so ye church does practyse it. For
Christ is daily offered and sacryficed on the altar. If thou ask by what
auctorytie, it may be answered, by thauctorytie of Christ's word, who said,
Luc. 22. (...) 11.
Hoc facite Do this, and saint Paul as Damascene notes it, shows how
long, in the words donec ueniat, till he come, and has from the beginning
taught his church so to understand him* If thou ask, how can (ones) and
(many times) stand together? This (how) declares, if if it be contencyous,
thou do not yet believe, but art in mystruste of the church, that teaches
the, and if thou ask in humility. Saint Chrysostom in expoundinge that
place of s. Paul to the Hebrews, where he ones offeringe is spoken of, D.
Chrisost. sup epistl. ad Hebreos.
opens and dyscussethe thy doubt, as follows. Nonne per singulos dies
offerimus? Offerimus quidem, sed ad recordationem facientes mortis eius. Et una
est haec hostia, non multae. Quomodo vna est, and non multae? Et quia semel
oblata est illa, oblata est in sancta sanctorum: hoc autem sacrificium,
exemplar est illius, idipsum semper offerimus. Nec nu^c quidem alium agnum,
crastina aliu^ sed semper idipsum. Proinde un^ est hoc sacrificium. Aliquin hac
ratione, quonia^ in multis locis offertur, multi Christi sunt? Nequaqua^, sed
unus vbique est Christus, and hic plenus existens, and illic, plenus, unum
corpus. Sicut enim qui vbique offertur, vnum corpus est and non multa corpora:
ita etiam and unum sacrificium. Po^tifex autem noster ille est, qui hostiam
mundantem nos, obtulit, ipsam offerrimus and nunc quae tunc oblata est, consumi
non potest. Hoc autem quod nos facimus, in commemorationem quide^ fit eius,
quod factu^ est. Hoc enim facite (inquit) in mea^ co^memoratione^. No^ aliud
sacrificiu^, sicut pontifex, Heb. 9.
sed idipsum semper facimus, magis autem recordationem sacrificij operamur. Sed
quia sacrificij huius me^tionem feci, uoeo pauca ad vos dicere, quae recor
damini, pauca quidem mensura, magnam autem habentia virtute^ and vrilitatem.
Non enim nostra su^t, sed diuini spiritus, quae dicuntur. Quae ergo sunt.
Plurimi ex hoc sacrificio, semel accipiunt in toto anno, alij bis, alij
saepius. Ad omnes ergo nobis sermo est, non ad eos qui hic su^t tantum, sed
etiam ad eos qui in eremo sedent, Illi enim semel in anno perticipantur,
fortassis enim and post duos annos. Quid ergo est? Quos magis acceptamus? Eos
ne qui semel, an eos qui saepius, an illos qui raro accipiu^t? Neque illos qui
semel, neque qui saepius, neque qui raro, sed eos qui cum munda co^scientia qui
cum mundo cord, cum uita irreprehensibili, istuc semper accedunt. Qui vero
tales no^ sunt, neque semel. Quid ita? quia iuditium sibi accipiunt, and
damnationem and supplicium. Et no^ mireris. Sicut enim cibus, naturaliter
nutritorius extans, si in eum qui prauis cibis corruptus est, incidat, omnia
perdit and corru^pit, efficitur occasio morbi: sic etiam ista quae ad haec
terribilia pertinent sacramenta. Frueris mensa spiritali, mensa regali, and
iterum polluis coeno os tuum, perungis vnguento praecioso, and iterum
foetoribus illud imples. Dic mihi rogo, post annum, perceptionem participaris,
quadraginta dies putas tibi sufficere, admundationem peccatorum totius
temporis, and iterum septimana transeunte, trades teipsum scrdibus primis? Dic
enim mihi, si saluus factus quadraginta diebus ab egritudine longa, iterum te
illis morbificatoribus cibis tradas, nonne and primum laborem perdes? Si enim
naturalia sic mutantur, quanto amplius uoluntaria? Vt puta ueluti quid dico.
Naturaliter uidemus, and sanos habemus oculos, secundum naturam sed aliquando
ex mala quadam affectione, leditur noster obtutus, Si igitur naturalia
mutantur, quanto amplius quae ad voluntatem pertinent? Quadraginta dies, tantum
tribuis saluti animae tuae, arbitror autem quia neus quadraginta dies, and
speras propitiari deum. locaris magis. I will translate all this place for it
may edify the reder, in this, and other matter. Do we not (says s.
Chrysostom) offer daily? We do in deed offer, It is specially to be marked
how s, Chrisostom ^alleth it the same sacrifice,
but in remembrance of his death. And it is one sacrifice and not many? How
is it one, and not many. For being ones offered, it is the^ presented, in ye
inward most holy place, whereof this our sacrifice, is a represe^tacio^, so as
we offer always the same, not one lamb now, and another at another time, but at
all times ye same. So as it is but one sacrifice, or else by the same reason,
because christ is offered in many places we might say there were many Christ's,
The same one Christ offered in every place.
which is not to be allowed, for in eueryplace of offering is but the same one
Christ, here full and hole Christ, and there full and hole christ, The
circu^staunces of time and place encrcase^^ acompte in number when wa speak of
the sacryfice of christ
and every where, ye same one body, And as the sacrifice, every where, where
it is offered, is one body, and not many bodies, so it is also, but one
sacrifice. And our chief bishop, is he that offered the host, that cleansed us,
and the same host, we offer also now, which being then offered, could not be
consumed For that we do, is in remembrance of that was done. For Christ said
Do this in remembrance of me: Wherein we do not make another sacrifice, as the
bishop of the old law did, but make always the same sacrifice, or rather
work the represe^tatio^ of ye same, But because I have made mention of this
sacrifice. I will speak a few words to you, which ye remember, a few words
in measure, but containing great pyth and commodite for you. That I shall say,
proceeds not of my self, but of thinstigatio^ of gods holy spirit. What will
I say then? This it is, that many be partakers of this sacrifice ones in the
year, This is to be noted for the use of the church in his time
some twyse, and some oftener. My speech is directed to all, not only to those
that be here, but also those that sit in wyldernes. For such be houseled ones
in the year, peradventure not in two. What is the matter then? Whom do we
most allow? Those that receive ones in the year, those that receive oftener,
or those that receive seldom. Neither those that receive ones, nor them that
receive oftener, nor them that receive seldom, but those that always comme to
be partetakers of this sacryfyce, with a clean conscience, with a clean heart,
and a life without reproach. And those that be not such, He required not
only faith, but faith with a company of many virtues,
I allow them not to come ones, Why so? Because they receive judgment,
damnacion and punishment. And hereof marvel not. For as meat being
naturally nourishynge, when it happens to come into him, that is corrupted
with evil meats, marreth and corrupts all, and is occasion of a sycknes and
disease: So likewise, yt is contained in this dredful sacrament, where thou
have fruition of spiritual food, He callethe it a dredful sacrament
haste fruition of the kings table, and after defylest thy mouth again with
fylthy mire, you art thoroughly anointed with ye precious anointme^t, and fyllest
thy self again, with evil sauering ste^ches, I pray the tell me. Ones in the
year, thou reparest to this holy communion. Do thou think.xl. days
sufficient, to cleanse thy sins of all that time past, Thus was the lent
spent in the prymatyue church, and now some would use it like other times.
and within a weke after, return to thy former filthynes? How say thou to
me, If you wart in.xl. days, healed from a long bodily disease, and should
return to that meat, that was cause of thy disease, had thou not lost thy
former labor? If the natural parts of man, be so sone altered, with much
less, the parts of ma^s will, may be changed, wherein I mean this, that as
we naturally se, and have by natures order hole eyes, yet by some alteration
our syghte is hurt. And if things yt be natural in us, be so sone changed:
much more that is ordered by our will and is voluntary. Sparest thou only.xl.
days to to provide for thy soul health? I think not al together so much,
and yet thou hopeste, to have god pleased with the. Thou do rather tryfle.
Hitherto I have translate Chrysostomes sentence, and to note unto the these
few words, last spoken.

What would Chrysostom say, to the state of this world, now? in which a
nombre do not only neglecte, to appoint so much time, as the lent is (which
Chrisostom meneth) to attain gods favor again, but think it al
superfluous and not necessary. And bost only the mercy of god, without fear
of his justice. Mark this place of Saint Chrysostom and compare it to only
faith, mark this place of saint Chrisostom, and note how the.xl. days in ye
le^t, were spent not by the bishop of Romes ordinance, but by direction of
ye true discipline in christ's church, in which, Misecordia and veritas, Ps^.
34.
abuia ueru^t sibi, iustitia and pax, osculatae su^t As wherein mercy was so
preached, as ye truth of gods justice, was not neglected, and justice in due
order of al things, was so dece^tly observed as peace and concord remained in
christ's church. But this matter is besides the principal purpose, and yet not
out of al purpose, for this time. In s. Chrisostoms interpretation concerning
daily sacrifice of christ's body and blood, thou may se (reader) how the
church has observed this most preciouse continual sacrifice of Christ him
self, by himself the high priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech
offered on the altar, where the minister of the church by Christ's
commandment executethe the same, which commandment (as Chrysostom
says) is contained in these words. Hoc facite, Now I return to rehearse
other, Luc. 22: 1. Cor. 11.
that have spoken of the most blessed sacrament of the altar, among whom
Ignatius, a gloriouse martyr and Ignatius.
next unto the apostles, in an epistle that he writes to ye Romans says in
this wise, Panem dei uolo pane^ coelestem uitae, qui est caro Jesus Christi,
filij dei uiui, qui natus est in nouissimo, ex semine David and Abrahae, and
potum volo sanguinem eius, qui est dilectio in corruptibilis, and vita aeterna.
I desire, says Ignatius, Christ's doctrine is food and called panis, but in
the sacrament of thaulter in the flesh of Christ, and therefore he speaks
here of the sacrament.
the fode of god, the heavenly food of life, which is the flesh of Jesus
Cyrist, the son of the living god, who was borne in the last time, of the
sede of David and Abraham, and I desire for drink the blood of him, who is
love without corruption, and life everlasting. And to the intent thou may
perceive, reader, that this nourriture is understood of the body and soul
together, so as in this holy communion man's flessh is also comforted herewith:
Note what Ireneus says. Iron^us.
Quomodo negant carnem capacem esse donationis dei, qui est uita aeterna, quae
and sanguine and corpore Christi nutritur, and membru^ eius sit? que^admodum
Apostolus ait, in ea quae est ad Ephesios epistola: Quonia^ membra sumus
corporis eius, Ephe. 5.
de carne eius and de ossibus eius, non de spirituali aliquo and inuisibili,
homine dicens haec. Spiritus enim neque carnem neque ossa habet, Luc. 24
sed ea dispositione quae est secundum hominem, quae ex carnibus and neruis
consistit, qui de calice, qui est sanguis eius nutritur, and de pane qui est
corpus eius augetur. Which may be englyshed thus. How ca^ it be denied that
man's flesh may be partetaker of the gift of god, Man's flesh partaker of the
gift of god.
who is life everlasting, considering it is nourysshed with the blood and
body of Christ, as the apostle says in his epistle to the Ephesians: For we
be members (says the apostle) of his body, of the flesh of him and of the
bones of him, Ephe. 5.
which things thapostle speaks not of any spiritual or invisible man, for
a spirit has neither flesh nor bones, but it is spoken of such an
habitude, disposicion and composition, as man in his own nature has, which
consysteth of flesh and senewes, being nourished of the cup, which is
Christ's blood, and increased of the bread, which is his body. This says
Ireneus. And Tertulian as follows. Tertull.
Videamus nunc de propria christiani nominis forma, quanta huic substantiae
friuolae ac sordidae, apud deum praerogatiua sit, etsi sufficeret illi, quod
nulla omnino anima salutem possit adipiscinisi dum est in carne, crediderit,
adeo caro salutis est cardo, de qua cum anima deo alligatur, ipsa est quae
efficit, vt anima alligari possit Sed and caro abluitur, ut anima emaculetur.
Caro inungitur, ut anima consecretur, Caro signatur, ut anima muniatur. Caro
manus impositio^e adumbratur, ut anima spiritu illuminetur. Caro corpore and
sanguine christi uescitur, ut and anima de deo saginetur. These words be
written in a work made by this author for confirmation of the article of our
belefe for resurrection of the flesh, whereby to refel such as denied the
same, and in englysh they have this sense. Let us now (says Tertulian)
consider the platform of a christen man's state, and se what preeminence is
given by god, to the brykle and vile substance of the flesh, although to it
this preferme^t might suffice yt no soul can attain everlasting life, onles
it believe, whiles it is in the flesh, so evident is it, that the flesh is
(as it were) the groundeselpece of man's salvation. In which, when the soul
is knytte to god, This is verified in the sacrament of baptism In the
sacraments of confirmation, order and extreme unction. As with the cross in
benediction. In confyr^mation and ordres. The sacrament of the altar.
it is the flesh that brings to pass, that it may so be knytte, yea also
the flesh is washed, that the soul may be cleansed of her spots. The flesh
is anointed, that the soul may be hallowed. The flesh is marked, that the
soul may be defended. The flesh by imposition of the mynisters hands is
shadowed, that the soul may be illuminate with the spirit. The flesh is
fed with the body and blood of Christ, that the soul may be made fat of
god. In these words be contained many good things, declarynge the use of the
visible sacraments, in the beginning of the church, such as in these days
some ^este and rail at commenly, besides the intolerable presumption against
the most blessed sacrament, whereof how this man speaks it is evident, how so
ever, the devil used Frith as a mynystre, to deprave him, in this behalf. And
yet this nourriture that man's flesh has by christ's precious body, is after
an other manner as saint Augustine says, then our common nourriture is, for
non digeritur in carnis nostre, substantiam, sed ipse nos in corporat sibi.
Christ's body is not digested into the substance of our flesh, but it
incorporateth us unto it, And note ye word digested appropriate to other common
meats This most preciouse food conserueth our substance, and as Damascene
says, may therefore be called supersubstantialis, but it is by incorporation
of us into it, whereof here what Saint Cyprian says, that holy martyr, who
expounding the ( Pater noster) and declaringe the fourth petition in it, Pane^
nostrum quotidianum da nobis hodie, understands it to conteyne a desire of
the holy communion in the blessed sacrament, and says. Ideo panem nostrum id
est, christu^ dari nobis quotidie petimus, ut qui in christo manemus and
uiuimus, a sanctificatione and corpore eius, non recedamus. Cyprianus
Therefore we ask our daily bread, that is to say Christ, to be given unto
us, that we which abide and live in Christ go not backewarde, from the state of
holiness, and communion of the body. Here Saint Cypryan, calls the
sacrament, Christ, as he is in deed, there present really, and shewethe
therewith an effect of this holy communion, that being so partakers, of his
most precyouse natural body, we may be preserved, in the continuance of our
sanctificacion, and not depart from the fellowship of Christ's mystical body,
the church, which church Christ unites to him, not only spiritually, by
faith and charity, but also corporally: by eating of his precious body, and
drinkinge of his blood, declarynge that he loves his church, as his flesh,
as Saint Paul writes to the Ephesians, Ephe. 5*
where admonishinge the husbands, to love their wives as their own bodies, he
says. No man ever hated his own flesh but nourishes it, as Christ does
his church, for we be members, of his body, of his flesh and of his bones.
To which purpose, Cirillus, Cyrill.
upon the.xv. of Saint John, writes against an heretic as follows. Non
(inquit) negamus recta nos fide charitateque syncera, Christo spiritualiter
coniu^gi sed nullam nobis coniu^ctionis rationem, secundum carnem cum illo esse
id profecto pernegamus, idque a diuinis scripturus, omnino alienum ducimus.
Quis enim dubitauit Christum etiam sic uitem esse, nos palmites, qui vitam inde
nobis acquirimus? Audi Paulum dicentem, quia omnes, vnum corpus sumus in
Christo, Quia and si multi sumus vnum tamen in eo sumus, 1: Cor. 10.
omnes enim vno pane participamus: An fortasse putas ignota^ nobis, misticae
benedictio^is virtute^ esse, quae cum in nobis fiat, nonne corporali ter quoque
facit, communicatione carnis Christi, 1. Cor. 6.
Christu^ in nobis habitare, cur enim me^bra fidelium, me^bra su^t christi
Nescitis (inquit) quonia^ me^brav^^a me^bra su^t christi me^bra igitur Christi,
meretricis faciam membra? Absit, Saluator etiam, qui manducat carnem meam, and
bibit sanguinem meum, in me manet, and ego in eo. We deny not (says Cyril
against the heretic) but we be spirituallye joined, to christ, we be
conjoined to Christ not only by faith and charity, but also by
participation of his flesh in the sacrament of the altar.
by faith, and sincere charity but that we should have no manner of
conjunction, in our flesh with christ, that we utterly deny, and think it
utterly discrepant from gods holy scriptures. For who doubts but christ,
is so the vine tree and we so the branches, as we get thence our life. Here
what S. Paul says: we be al one body with Christ. 1. Cor. 10.
For though we be many, we be one in him. All we participate in one food.

Thinks this heretic, that we know not the strength and virtue of the
mystical benedictio^ (so this author expresses the holy sacrament of thaulter,
Cyryll calls the sacrament of the altar the mystical benediction
calling it the mystical benedictio^) which when it is made in us, does it not
make Christ, by co^municacion of his flesh to dwell corporally in us? Why be
the me^bres of faithful men's bodies, called the members of Christ? Christ does
communicate his flessh in the sacrament of the altar, and so dwells
corporallye in us.
know ye not (says S. Paul) that your me^bres be the members of Christ? And
shall I make the members of christ, parts of the hores body? God forbydde. And
our savior also says: He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
dwells in me, and I in him. Hitherto be Cirylles words, whereby is declared
our corporal habitacion, in christ, by this precious sacrament wherein is
present christ him self* Hilarious. 8. li. De trinitate.
whereof here what Hilarious Pictauiensis, an old author in christ's church, in
the.viii. book, de Trinitate, upon discussion of this question, whither christ
be in us, by the verity of nature, or co^corde and agreaunce in our will,
answers in this wise. Si enim uere uerbum caro factum est, and nos uere
uerbu^ carne^, cibo dominico sumimus: quo modo non naturaliter manner in nobis
existimandus est? qui and naturam carnis nostrae, iam inseparabilem sibi homo
natus assumpsit, and naturam carnis suae ad naturam aeternitatis, sub
sacramento nobis co^munica^dae carnis admiscuit? Ita enim omnes unum sumus,
quia and in christo pr^ est, and christus in nobis. Quisquis ergo naturaliter
patre^ in christo negabit, neget prius no^ naturaliter uel se christo uel
christu^ sibi inesse, quia in christo pr^, and christus in nobis unu^, unu^ in
hijs esse nos faciu^t. Si uere igitur carnem corporis nostri chru^s assu^psit,
and uere homo ille, qui ex Maria natus fuit, chru^s e^, nosque uero sub
misterio carne^ corporis sui sumimus, and per hoc unu^ erimus, quia pater in eo
est and ille in nobis, quomodo volu^tatis unitas asseretur, cu^ naturalis per
sacramentu^ proprietas perfecta, sacramentum sit unitatis? If the word was
made verily flesh, and we verily receive the word, being flesh in our
lords meat: how shall not christ be thought to dwell naturally in us, who
being borne man, has taken unto him, the nature of our flesh, that can not
be severed, and has put together the nature of his flesh, to the nature of
his eternity, under ye sacrament of the communion of his flesh unto us, For
so we be al one, by cause the father is in Christ, Note the mysterye of the
sacrament of the altar.
and Christ in us. Wherefore who soever will deny the father, to be naturally
in Christ, he must deny first, either him self, to be naturally in Christ,
or Christ not to be naturallye in him, for the being of the father in Christ,
and the being of Christ in us, makes us to be one in the^. And therefore, if
Christ has taken verelye the flesh of our body, and the man that was
verelye borne of ye virgyn Mary is Christ: and also we receive under the true
mystery, the flesh of his body, by means whereof we shall be one (for the
father is in Christ, and Christ in us) how shall that be called the unite of
will, when the natural propriete brought to pass by ye sacrament, is the
sacrament of unite? I have thus translate this holy fathers testimony, far
exceeding the capacite of the simple unlearned, and yet most evidently
declaringe the mystery of the sacrament of thaulter, not to be thinuention of
man, as these beasts now a days feign, but the godly tradicion of the truth,
expressed in Christ's words, plainly and truly received, also taught and
continued in the church, syns the beginning, and by this man's testimony,
above.xii c. years past. And were it not, that I think good men will delight to
read the truth: I would esteem it labor lost, to such as be obstinate. For
they be (as saint Paul says) overthrown in their own judgment, and so full
of malice, as nothing else, can enter. But I will not omytte for them to
prosecute my purpose, And now shall ye here what Theophylus Alexandrinus, a
noble author in christ's church, Theop. Alex. super Marc.
and in the beginning of christ's church says, who declaringe the gospel of
s. Mark, and expoundyng the words of christ writes in this wise, Benedicens
fregit. i. gratias agens fregit, quod and nos facimus, Mar. 14.
orationes super addentes, and dedit eis dicens, Sumite hoc est corpus meum,
hoc scilicet quod nunc do, and quod nunc sumitis. Non autem panis figura tantu^
corporis christi est, sed in propriu^ Christi corpus transmutatur. Nam Dominus
ait, Panis quem ego dabo, caro mea est, sed tamen caro christi, non uidetur,
propter nostra^ infirmitatem, panis enim and uinum de nostra consuetudine est,
si uero carnem and sanguinem cerneremus sumere non sustineremus, propter hoc.
Dominus nostrae infirmitati condescendens, species panis and vini conseruat,
sed panem and uinu^, in veritate^ conuertit, carnis and sanguinis. Thenglysshe
whereof is this, Christ blessinge, brake, that is to say, gyuynge thanks,
brake, which also we do adding prayers thereunto, and gave it the^ saying, Take
this is my body, the same that is to say, that I now give, and you now take.
For the bread is not an only figure of the body of christ, but it is changed
into Christ's very body. For our lord said, The bread which I shall
give, is my flesh, and yet the flesh of christ, is not seen, Note this.
in respect of our infirmity, for the bread and wine, be accustomed unto
us, but if we should se the flesh and blood, we should not endure to receive
it, and therefore our lord, condescendynge to our infirmity, conserueth the
fourmes of bread and wine, and turns the bread and wine into the verity of
his flesh and blood.

Thus testifies Theophilus, and who can desire, a more plain testimonye, in
which thou may also note, how the form of bread and wine, by gods
goodness remains in respect of our infirmity, and yet the bread and wine
is turned, in to the body and blood of our sauyoure Christ, which speech,
implies a difference between the substance of bread and the form, that is
to say, apparaunce of bread which every simple wit can not conceive, but
every wit should humbly and reverently believe. For Christ said. This is my
body, as appears testified by such as I have rehearsed, being witnesses of
tholde world, when there reigned in christ's church, simplicity, faith,
charity, mekenes, devotion, with fervent religion, when gods word dwelt in
men's hearts, and came never abroad to walk in men's tunges, but with
majesty and reverence, accompanied with all virtuous living, where as now
iesters, raylers, rimers, players, ianglers, pratelers, and simperinge
parettes, take upon them to be admynystratours and officers, to set forth
gods word, whereof they make a plurell number of words without all fruit
and effect. But I will leave these, and pray god amend them, and add the
devout writings of saint Austen, saint Iherome, and saint Chrysostom,
touching the most preciouse sacrament of the altar. And first of saint
Chrysostom, that he writes upon the.vi. chapter of s. Chriso super 6. ca.
Ioannis
John in this matter. Necessario dicendum quam admiranda mysteria, and cur data
sint, and quaenam eorum vtilitas. Vnum corpus sumus, Ephesians. 5.
and me^bra ex carne and ossibus eius. Quare initiati, eius praeceptis parere
debent, Vt autem non solum per dilectionem, sed re ipsa in illam carne^
conuertamur, per cibum id efficitur, quem nobis largitus est. Cum enim suum in
nos amorem indicare uellet, per corpus suum se nobis commiscuit, and in unum
nobiscum redegit, ut corpus cum capite uniretur. Hoc enim amantium maxim est.
Hoc Job significabat de seruis a quibus maxim amabatur, qui suum amorem
praeseferentes dicebant. Quis daret nobis ut eius carnibus impleremur? Quod
Christus fecit, ut maiori nos charitate ad stringeret, and ut suum in nos
oste^deret desiderium, non se tantum uideri permittens desiderantibus, sed et
tangi, and manducari, and dentes carni suae infigi, and desiderio sui omnes
impleri. Ab illa igitur mensa, tan^ leones ignem spirantes, surgamus diabolo
formidolosi, and caput nostrum intelligamus, and quam in nos praesetulit
charitatem Parents saepenumero, liberos suos alijs alendos dederunt, ego
autem, mea carne alo, me hijs exhibeo, omnibus faueo, omnibus optimam de
futuris spem praebeo.

Qui in hac uita ita se nobis exhibet, multo magis in futura. Vester ego frater
esse uolui, and communicaui carnem, propter uos and sanguinem, and per quae
uobis coniunctus sum, ea rursus uobis exhibui. It is necessary to show, how
maruelouse these mysteryes be, why they be given, and what profit is of them.
We be one body and members of his flesh and bones. Wherefore such as be
received into this religion, must obey his precepts. And to the intent we
should not only by love, but also in deed, be turned into that his flesh, it
is brought to pass by the meat, which he has given unto us. For when he
would show his love toward us, he has myngled him self with us, by his
body, and has brought it, to be one with us, that that body, might be united
with the head, which is a special point of such as love together. And that
Job signified of such his servants as most loved him, Job. ^1
who for declaration of their love said. Who can grant us that we may be
filled with his flesh? which Christ has done, and to bind us with the more
charity to him and to declare his desire toward us, has not only suffered
him self to be seen, of such as have desired to se, but also to be touched and
eaten, and the teth to be thrust, into his flesh, and so all to be filled
with desire of him. Wherefore let us rise from this table, snuffynge fire
with our nosethrilles, like lions, let us rise both fearful and terrible
to the devil, considering who is our head, and what love, he has showed us.
The father and mother, many times have given their children to other, to nourse
and be brought up, but I (says Christ) feed them with my flesh, I exhibit
my self unto the^ I favor all, and give all most best hope, for that is to
come.

And he that in this life, shewethe him self, so to us, he will much more do
it in the life to comme. I have (says Christ to us) wyllyngly ben your
brother, and for your sake, The same flesh christ took of the virgin, the
same he gives us in the sacrament of the altar.
communicate in flesh and blood with you. And wherein I am knytte and
conjoined unto you, I do again exhybyte the same unto you. Thus says
Chrysostom (the mouth of gold) of this matter more preciouse then gold, and
sweter then honey, and honey comb, of which holy man, if thou haddeste asked
(how) he would have answered, as he writes in the same place. Idem Chriso
Io. 3.
Quando subit quaestio (quomodo aliquid fiat) simul subit and incredulitas. Ita
and Nicodemus perturbatus est, inquiens. Quomodo potest homo, in ue^trem matris
suae iterato introire? Itidem and hij nu^c, Quomodo potest hic nobis carne^
suam dare, Matt. 14. Mar. 6 Luc. 9*
ad manducandu^? Nam si hoc inquiris, cur non idem in quinque panum miraculo
dixit, quo modo eos, in tantum auxit? Quia tunc, tantum saturari curabant, non
considerare miraculum. Sed res ipsa tunc docuit, (inquiens,) Ergo ex eo and
haec credere oporcuit, ei facilia factu esse. Propterea id prius fecit
miraculum, vt per illud, non essent amplius increduli, hijs quae postmodum
diceret.

When so ever this question comes to mind (how any thing should be done?)
there enters therewith vnbel fe and incredulite. For so was Nicodemus troubled
saying. How can a man enter again into his mothers womb? And likewise the
Caphernaites in this gospel now questioned with them self of Christ. How
can this man, give us his flesh to be eaten? But if thou Caphernaite,
askeste this question now, why dyddest thou not ask likewise in the miracle
of the five loves, how he increased them so much? I might answer for the
thus, that then thou caredst only, to be filled and dyddest not regard the
miracle. But thou Capharnaite, will percase say, the thing there showed it
self. Well by that then, thou should believe, that he that did that might
easily do this, and therefore he wroughte that miracle before* that thereby
they should not be mist rustynge, and without belefe of that he should
afterward say* which words of saint Chrisostom well pondered and wayed,
should not only be sufficient, to stop ye mouths of questioners and
doubters, but also convert the hearts of those that hedlinge have tun
downewarde, to the miserable pit of the deuyls blindness, and become his
ministers, (...) ad Hedibiam
to persuade this abominable falsehode, to the world. Let us come now to S.
Iherome who Ad Hedibiam, writes thus. Nos audiamus panem, quem fregit Dominus,
deditque discipulis suis, esse corpus domini saluatoris, ipso dicente ad eos,
Accipite and comedite. Hoc est corpus meum, and calicem illum esse, de quo
iterum loquutus est. Bibite ex hoc omnes hic est sanguis meus noui testame^ti,
qui pro multis effundetur, lste est calix de quo in propheta legimus. Calicem
salutaris accipia^. Matt. 26. Mar. 14.
Et alibi. Calix tuus inebrians, quam praeclarus est? Si ergo panis qui decoelo
descendit, corpus est domini, Psalm. 115. Psalm. 22. Io. 6
and vinum quod discipulis dedit sanguis illius est noui testamenti, qui pro
multis effusus est, in remissionem peccatorum: Iudaicas fabulas repellamus, and
ascendamus cum domino coenaculum magnu^, stratum atque mundatum, and accipiamus
ab co sursum, Luc. 22.
calicem noui testamenti, ibique cum eo pascha celebrantes, inebriemur ab eo
vino sobrietatis. Non enim est regnum dei, cibus and potus, sed iustitia and
gaudiu^ and pax in spiritu sancto: Romans 14.
Nec Moses dedit nobis panem ueru^, sed d^^s Jesus, ipse conuiua and
conuiuium. Ipse comedens and qui commeditur. Illius bibimus sanguinem, and sine
ipso potare non possumus, and quotidie in sacrificijs eius, de genimine uitis
uerae and uineae So rec, Mat. 26. Luc. 22.
quae interpretatur (electa) rubentia musta calcamus, and nouum ex hijs uinum
bibimus, de regno patris, nequaque in uetustate litterae, sed in nouitate
spiritus, cantantes canticum nouum, quod nemo potest cantare, nisi in regno
ecclesiae, quod regnum patris est. Let us here this, that the bread which
our Lord brake, and gave to his disciples, is the body of our lord, our
Sauyoure he him self saying unto them. Take ye and eat this is my body, And
the cup is that whereof he spoke again.

Drink of this all, This is my blood of the nevve testamente, which shall
be shed for many This is the cup of which we read in the prophet. Psalm.
115. Psalm. 22.
I shall take the cup of the savior. And in another place. How excellent is
thy cup, that is so plentifully filled. If the^ the body of our lord, be the
bread that descended from heaven, and the wine that he gave his disciples is
his blood of the new testament which is shed for many in remyssyon of
sins, let us put away the Jews fables, and let us ascend with our
lord, Luc. 22.
into the great chaumber, strowed and cleansed, and let us take of him alofte
the cup of the new testamente, and keeping our Easter let us with him be
made drunk, with the wine of sobernes. For the king dome of God, Romans 14.
is not meat and drink, but justice, joy, and peace in the holy ghost, Nor
Moses did not give us ye true food, but our lord Jesus him self, being the
geste, and feast it self, him self that did eat and is eaten. His blood we
drink, and without him can not drink, and daily, in his sacrifices, we
press out read must, new wine of the grape, of ye true vine tree, the vine
of Sorec, which is interpretate, chosen, and hereof we drink new wine, of
the kingdom of the father, not in the oldenesse of the lettre, but in the
newenes of spirit, syngyng the new song, that no man can sing, but in the
kingedome of the church, which is the kingdom of the father. Now ye have
herd s. Iheromes words, full of mysteries, but so to the point to testify
the mystery of the sacrament of thaulter, as the more could not be desired
for our instruccion, in the true understanding or rather, a true Echo of that
is truly understood. For the original truth, proceeds of Christ's words,
the true sound whereof, redoundeth in good men's breasts, being apt and mete to
receive the same, and so render the noise, as they received it from the
mountain of truth, our savior Christ, by ye holy ghost, taught, uttered
and spredde abroad, by whom good men be led into all truth, like as evil
men, by the devil and his aungelles, be led into all falsehed and lies, Of
whom beware, and regard not Joy, Bale, Turnoure, Frith, whom their own
malice, with the deuylles suggestion has subverted. Regard not, what perverse
obstinacy works in refusinge god, and resisting his powers of the world,
thexample whereof has latelye appeared in such as suffered, who being
overcome with intolerable presumpti^^ on and disperate malice, obstinately
continued in their peruersitie to the end openly. The devil has his witness as
s. Austen says, and froward obstinacye in falseheade, has in the world,
counterfeted the constancy of martyrs as vice, with ypocrisy in many, has
resembled virtue. Therefore in Christ's true martirs, not the pains only,
wherein they were tormented, but therewith the cause, wherefore they were
persecuted, was specially regarded. For else as werynes of this life has
wrought among many, a vehement desire to be hence esteming no pains, to achue,
their entente, and therefore have most cruelly devised their own death, and
many times let, have wilfully continued in prosecutio^ of the same: so has
froward stubbernes mixte with vaineglory, done the like, as among many in our
time, has manifestlye appeared. In which the Anabaptis^es, and
Sacramentaries, have with a deuelysh pertinacy maintained their heresies, whose
wilful death in obstinacy, if i^ should serve for an argument, to prove ye
truth of their opinion: the truth of gods scriptures, should be brought in much
perplexite, and men drawn hither, and thither, as perverse malice should lead.

But god that is merciful suffers not man, to be tempted with these
arguments more the^ may be borne of man's infirmity, And if such as lately
suffered, were seuerallye considered, there may appear tokens sufficient,
besides the condition of the matter, they suffered for, to declare their zeal,
not to have proceeded of the spirit of god, but of arrogaunt pride and
presumption, and the spirit of ye devil, which is no time to speak on now,
but I shall add what saint Austine says, the readyng whereof is fruitful,
and leave the remembrance, of these monstruouse proud people, whose doings
be unfruitful, to them self and other. S. Austen says thus upon the.xcviii.
Psalm, in thexposition of this text, Et ad^srate scabellum pedum eius, quoniam
sanctum est, worship ye fotestole of his seat, for it is holy. Quid habemus
adorare? Scabellu^ pedum eius, Suppedaneu^ dicit^ scabellum, quod dicu^t graeci
((...)) dixerunt Latini scabellum, and alij dixerunt suppedaneum. Sed videte
fratres, quid nos iubeat adorare. Alio loco scriptura dicit. Esa. 66
Coelum mihi seeds est, terra autem scabellum pedu^ meorum, Ergo terram iubet
nos adorare, quia dixit alio loco, q sit scabellum pedum dei? Et quomodo
aborabimus terra^, cu^ dicat aperte scriptura, Deuteronomy. 6. Lut. 4.
Dominum deum tuum adorabis, and hic dicit, Adorate scabellum pedum eius?
Exponens autem mihi quid sit scabellu^ pedum eius, dicit: Terra autem scabellum
pedum meorum. Anceps factus sum, timeo adorare tertam, ne damnet me, qui fecit
coelu^ and terram. Rursum timeo, non adorare scabellum pedum domini meiquia
psalmus mihi dicit. Adorate scabellum pedum eius. Quaero quid sit scabellum
pedum eius? Et dicit mihi scriptura, Terra scabellum pedum meorum. Fluctua^s
conuerto me ad Christum quia ipsum quaero hic, and inuenio quomo do sine
impietate adoretur terra, sine impietate adoretur scabellum pedum eius.
Suscepit enim de terra, terram, quia caro de terra est, and de carne Mariae
carnem accepit, Et quia in ipsa carne hic ambulauit, and ipsam carnem nobis
manducandam, ad salutem dedit nemo autem illam carnem mandu^cat, nisi prius
adorauerit, inuentu^ est quemadmodum adoretur tal^ scabellum pedum domini, and
no^ so^lu^ non peccemus adora^do, sed pe^cemus non adorando. What have we to
worship? The stole of his feet, for so we call, that stays under the
foot, That the greakes call ((...), the laten men call Scabellum, But let us
see brethren what we be bydde to worship. In another place, the scripture
says. Heaven is my seat, and the earth, is the stool of my feet, Ergo
then god byddeth us to worship the earth, for he told in another place, what
was the stool of his feet. And how shall we worship the earth, seeing the
scripture says euidentlye. Thou shall worship thy lord God, and here he
says, Thou shalt worship the stool of his feet. Expoundynge moreover
unto me, what is the stool of his feet, says. The earth is ye stole of my
fete, Here I am in a daubte, I am afraid to worship the earth, least he
should condemn me, that made heaven and earth. Again I am afraid, not to
worship the stole of my lords feet, because the Psalm sayethe unto me*
Thou shalt worship the stole of his feet. I ask what is the stole of his
feet? and scripture tells me. The earth is, says god, the stole of my
feet. Being thus tossed to and fro, I turn my self to Christ, for him I
seek here and find, how without violatyon of gods honor, the earth may
be worshypped, and so without vyolacyon of gods honor, the stool of his
feet, may be worshypped. Christ took of the earth, earth, for the flesh
is of the earth, and he took flesh of the flesh of Marye, and because in that
flesh he walked here, Christ gave the same flesh to be ea^^ of us.
and gave the same flesh to be eaten of us, for our salvation, no man again
eats that flessh, but he first worshyppeth it. It is so found out how the
fotestole of our lord, should be worshypped, and therewith also this that not
only we should not sin in worshippynge of it, but contrary wise, we should
sin, and we should not worship it. Thus speaks saint Austen, of the
Sacrament of thaulter, and thus speaks he of the worshyppynge of it, so
plainly, as the devil has no point of sophistrye to iuggle in it, but to
say, saint Austine was a man, which is one of the general shyftes in an
extremite, and an other, that the work (if the place make against him) was not
his, it is named to be. But this work is saint Augustynes without any
suspicion to the contrary. Mary a man, I must confess, he was, and so were
all tho I have spoken of before, whom I have not brought to prove the truth of
the natural body of Christ, in the sacrament of thaulter, For the few words
of scripture spoken of christ him self, when he said, This is my body, to
good men prove that sufficiently, and any other studied corroboration, to good
men, neadeth not, and to evil obstinate men, is superfluouse. According
whereunto saint Basyll instructed his scolers, with what fear, faith, and
affection, they should come to the holy communion. B^. sillius.
He bad them learn fear of saint Paul, saying to the Corynthyans: He that
eatethe unworthily, 1. Cor. 11.
eats judgment and condemnatiou. He bad them learn faith of Christ's
words, Matt. 26.
when he said. Take ye, and eat ye, this is my body, And as for devotion and
affection of mind, he bad them look of the love Christ bare to his church.
And therefore I travail not herein to learn me^ faith by authority of men,
but because I see, what a company they be, that impugn our true faith, with
lies and sophistrye: I have taken pain to rehearse these, that ye may read of
another company that mainteyned the true faith with the truth, which were so
no table clearkes, so great learned men, so exercysed in scriptures, so
rychelye endued with the special gifts and graces of god, as men should have
more comfort, to keep company with them, in the open light of truth, gods
high way, then to lurk in dark corners, or follow the leadynge of such, as
being blind of the right eye, for want of grace and learning, and more
blind on the left eye, with malice and envy, fall them self in the pit of
gods indignacion and draw other after them. One thing I will note, which
is worthy notynge, that there has not ben, in any time, any one Master
teacher, or otherwise, the deuylles stout champion, to impugn our true
belief in the sacrament of the altar openly, but he professed therewith,
some other opinion, so euidentlye abominable, as he might be known, by that
other lie, to be sent from the devil, And first that we read of, be the
Maniches, whose detestable opinion, is universally abhorred, Second the
Messalyans, who said, the sacrament did neither good nor hurt, much like
Fryth, who after all his conflicte, would gladly have come to this, neither to
grant the sacrament, nor deny it. Now these Messalyans professed this for
truth also, that it was an evil thing to labor with their hands, and gave
them self only to sleep, and called their visions in there dreams,
prophecies, and pretended to be saved by only prayer as Luther affirms by
only faith Were not these men marked on both sides (trow ye) to be known for
naught? Wyclefe denied the Sacrament of thaulter, and on ye other side
affirmed, all things to come to pass, by mere and absolute necessitye, with
which opinion all such be infecte at this day, as impugn the sacrament. And
is not that an evident mark, that god has suffered them to fall ( in reprobum
sensum) so as they speak, Romans 2.
they wot not what, specially when they wax angrye, as some do, that men
will not follow them, when by their opinion, the same necessytie, that makes
them to speak so angerly makes other also if they so do (and it be as they
say) by ye same necessity to laugh them to skorne. And further if absolute
necessite reigned over man, then should a thief or a murderer, be as much made
of, and commended for playenge his part, according to his place of
necessity, as he that lives soberlye. For both work by necessite. And if
they will by this opinion, resemble god, to ye directour of a play (as they do
in deed) appoyntynge every man a part to play, as lyketh him: then because to
live viciously and abhominably, is more troublouse, and fuller of vexacion, and
the busier part, then to live well and virtuously which has less care in
deed, because he has a busier part appointed him, that is necessitate to
live evil, then he that is necessitate to live well, the same playenge his part
aptely, as he can not do otherwise led by necessity should in that rule be
more rewarded, then he that lives well if any thing might be called well. And
if there were any difference between vice and virtue, vice should be preferred
virtue, and more rewarded becaue it is the more laborouse part to play, and so
should all be overthrown, as in deed all shall be, where the holy sacrament
of thaulter is neglected. Whereunto such other opinions, such malice, such
envy, such hatred is joined as works in it self the subversion of al. Whereof
god gives evident marks and tokens, if men neglecte them not, and the devil
shewethe him self so openly, as al may se him, that be not wilfully blind.
And much more euidentlye, the same shall appear unto you, by consideracion of
these good virtuous holy men's writings, in this matter, which I have
reherced, and myndinge to be short, pass over the great number, that is to
say, in this place al, that syns these. Myeres, have been teachers, and written
for the edificacion of Christ's church, besides a great many of them that
wrote before.

THyrdely let us consider how the devil tosseth the words, and first theword,
sacrament, whereby he would it seemed, that by that name, it was ever mente, that
it is only a sign and toke^, of an invisible grace, and in as much as it is
a sign, it is not the thing it self, as the church teachethe: For a sign,
and a thing, whereof the sign is, must neades differ.

Whereunto* I say, that the word (Sacrament), (as many other words in
speech, have the like) has three significations, to our understanding. One
most general, in which it signifies any secret hidden thing, without
difference, whither the same hydden thing, be holy or no. And after that
acceptio^, it is applied to many secret matters and mysteries, both godly, and
natural. Another acceptio^ is specyal, and is restrained to signifi the seven
special holy misteryes in our religion, which we call and be, the.vii.
sacraments, unto which ye name sacrament, is in the comen speech only
applied, whereunto this diffinitio^ is truly attribute, a sacrament to be a
visible sign of an invisible grace. Another acception, is in a most special
signification, when we speak of the sacrament of the altar, which does us
understand, a special difference of excellencye from the other sacraments,
as wherein is present, the plentye of all grace, and the purchacer of all
grace, received in the other sacraments, Christ him self. Whereof when men
be thus learned and taught, and the thing so set forth, truly (as it is in
deed) it is then mere sophistry, to resort, to disputacion of the word,
wherewith, to overthrow, the truth of the thing. After which sort they daly
also, that make foundation of argument to prove ye substance of bread, to
remain in the most blessed Sacrament, because S. Paul calls ye sacrament,
bread, and yet in deed saint Paul calls it this bread, which imports a
special understanding, and to such as truly believe, the miracle of christ's
consecration, of his most preciouse body, turnynge by the omnipotency of his
mighty word the substance of bread, into the substance of his natural body
to such men of true belefe, ye, thing remains as it is ne is in their
conscience altered, with expression of ye name of that it was. And that which
before the consecration was commen bread, with the natural substance of
bread, is now by gods special miracle, in his secret operation omnipotent,
the only substance of the body of our sauyoure Christ. And so may be
called with an addition wherewith to mark the mystery, this bread. But why
should the name, travail us when we read so often in scripture, things to be
named not as they be, but as they were? and the rod turned in to a serpent, by
gods miracle, before Pharao, still to be called a rod when it was a serpent,
Exo. 7.
but the rod was converted by gods power into the serpent and still called it
a rod, when it was not so. But why should men be so scrupulouse in names?
After god had signified to the patriarche Jacob that he should be called no
more Jacob but Israel, Gene. 32.
yet afterward the same scripture testifies how god spoke to Israel. ad
puteum iuramenti, Gene. 46.
and called Jacob, Jacob: Here if a man would trifle, in the sound of the
word, Jacob, should he not make an argument to improve the truth of that god
had spoken, wherewith the devil might inueigle the presumptuouse ignorant,
that estemeth him self so much, as he measures al knowledge by his rude
capacity. But here thexercised senses in learning, can consider how names be
of two sorts, sometime they do only signify any little token of the thing,
whereunto they be added, and then we may not make foundation of the name as
declarynge hollye the thing signified, or to be demed the propre name, After
which sort, Christ was called sin, because he dyed for sin, and yet had
not sin in him, as the word should import. And when we speak thus, that
Christ saves sinners, we sygnify by the word (sinners) such men as were
sinners, and be by Christ, washed, and purged from sin, mete to be received
to salvation. For as Saint Paul says to the Ephesians, Christ purges his
church, and leaves neither spot, ne wrincle. And when we call noughtye men,
christen men, we signify not by the name, what they be now in deed, for they be
the deuyls men, and not Christen men, but calling them now Christenmen, we
signify yt they were ones in the state of grace, at the time of their
baptism. We call a man's writing also his hand, only because his hand wrote
it. In which sort of naminges, the significacion extends no further, for
declaracion of the thing named, the^ the pointing or direction of a ma^s
finger, with a part of speech called a pronowne, as this or that.

Mary other names that be added to give light and knowledge of the substance,
nature or chief quality of the thing, those be so joined and knytte to the
thing, as they do not only point it, but open it also, and be not only an
out ward mark of the thing, but present to our understandings, what is
contained in the thing it self. And therf^re as the name Jacob, was only an
outward mark of the corporal man of the patriarche. So Israel declared the
special favor of God, whereby Jacob saw god wh^che the word Israel does
signify the continuau^ce whereof god promised, saienge he should no more be
called Jacob, but Israel. According whereunto after the bread is consecrate
by ye preiste, gods minister, and by the omnipot^cye of Christ's mighty
word is converted into the body of Christ, the name that ^ignifieth the
substance of that sacrament, is the body of Christ. And therefore the same
sacrament, can no more be called bread, but the body of Christ, as Jacob
should no more be called Jacob, but Israel. And yet as scripture says in the
hystory o^ Jacob, God called after that Jacob again, by the name Jacob without
prejudice of the truth of gods word, spoken before, that he should be no
more so called. So Saint Paul calls the same holy sacrament, bread,
because it was so, before the consecracyon, and yet so he calls it, without
prejudice of the truth, that it is in deed, being not bread, but the very
body of Christ, at the time, when it is by him nevertheless called bread, As
Jacob was in deed Israel by gods favor, when he was after by gods mouth
again, called Jacob which latter calling of Jacob, did nothing preiudicate
the truth of gods word uttered before. Forasmuch as this last manner of
calling, was not a through namynge of him, but only, as it were a pointing to
distinct outwardly the man, and because he was ones Jacob, is called Jacob
again, As the sacrament, because it was ones bread, is called bread again.
And now I returned to this that if men's faith were such, as is required of
christen men, they would be wiselye deefe, as the serpente, that stoppethe her
ears; and nothing be altered, with the deuyls intricacions or incantacio^s in
words and names even as we believe certainly, Esa. 5^. Psalm. 11. Apoc. 5.
that Christ, is perfytte god, and perfyt man, what so ever names, be attribute
in scripture unto him, as he is called a sheep, a worm, Joan. 14.
a lion, and many other. And although Christ says him self, his father is
greatter then he, yet this is true, that his father and he be equal, and yet
(equal) and (greater) be in apparaunce contrary. And so beleuynge, as every
good Christen man must believe, that Christ is equal to his father in
substance and deity, we believe the contrary in apparaunce, to senses
vnexercysed of that Christ said him self. But these notwithstanding, how so
ever thapparaunce of words be in scriptures, we believe the truth taught us by
ye church, and as every man lerneth to spell that sometime (c) with a ^yttell
spelleth, est, and in another place (e) with a title, spelleth / en/as when we
write / Ame^,/and another time e / with a title, spelleth / em/as / me^
brum/which variety, goes by rule in place, whereunto an humble scoler
obeys, and not by reason, as an arrogant wit would require: So in all the
secrets, and contractions (as we might call them) and mysteries hydden of our
religion, good men have ever leaned to the rule of teachinge in christ's
church, and taken a title, some time for, n, and sometime for, m, as they were
taught the place to require, and not to spell after their own judgment, as
every man weneth it should be, after his vehement reason of his own divise.

Does not s. Paul (says he) call it bread? and be not these words of
scripture? And be any words truer or better, then the words of scripture? Of
whom I ask this question again. Has not the church had, and understood
these words of scripture, that ye so vehementlye allege? Has not the
church delivered those words unto us? And has not the same church
notwythstandynge, taught this truth, how the bread, by consecratyon, is
converted into the precyouse body of Christ? and condemned those that would
affirm, bread to remain, and with that their condemnation, retained and
kept in honor, saint Paul who wrote these words, that ye make so great
matter of? The church has condemned the Arryans, that denied Christ, to be
equalle with his father, and yet the same church, has stylle kept in
honor the Euangelyst, that wrote how Christ said, his father was greatter
then he.

And yet the Arryans said, they spoke none other, then the Euangelystes,
testyfyed in plain words, Io. 14.
as some will say now a days, they speak none otherwise then Saint Paul
does. But such heretyques, will heddelye spell as they list, and not follow
the rule of right understanding, without which, men must neades waver and
swerve in their own conjecture, being the conjecture, the rule of lead that
men now a days sensually follow, pliable to their fansyes eue^ so fondely as
some, like worshipful clerks have taken the words of scripture, written by
the evangelists, for god him self, and those have given thanks, to the lord,
for their high knowledge, acheued by continual reading, by them self alone,
and having a new testamente, by their gyrdell, whereby they have bosted them
self, delivered, from the greatte ignorance, wherewith other were blinded for
by their own devise, i^ their wise imagination, they had seen god, and hard
god, even face to face, by hearing and saying, the words of scripture, which
they fansied to be god him self, because of the words of saint Ihons gospel
where it is written. The word was god. Io. 1.
I do not herein feign, reader, but writ the matter in deed, and in diverse
men deprehended and found, which fond error has been engendered of blind
arrogancye amongst those that think the^ self able to wade through the
scriptures, without direction of such teaching as the church taught by ye
scripture of god, has gathered of ye same scryptures. Damascene, Defide
orthodo^^^
of whom I have before spoken, has this good lesson, that as it is signified
to us by scripture that we shall be all taught of god, so by the same scripture
we be admonished, to ask of our elders, Interrogama iores and dic^e ti^i.
and they shall tell us, which declares a manner of reachyng, not to be
co^tempned of men, who despisinge al other men for teachers, as they solysshly
unawares learn other to contemn them: so do they despise god, according to
Christ's words, Lui. l^
Qui vos spernit, me spernit. He that despises you, despises me Here may come
in percase in this high matter a scoff with, a question which you? And then,
why shall not I teach you, as well as you me? or rather I you, For does not
Christ say? I knoweledge to the father, thou haste hydden these things from
the wise, Matthew. 11.
and showed them to the yongelinges? And Paul says the wisdom of the
world, 1. Cor. 3.
is folysshenes before god? And then an other question, in what university was
saint Peter made doctoure, And so shall arise the controversy, which the
devil engenders, who shall teach other? who shall be the scoler, and who the
master? without each man should play both parts, as of some number each
ma^nowe a days would play alone al parts, and every man be master to him
self, and to himself scoler also, with request to god that he will vouchesaue
to teach him secretelye by often reading and spelling after his fashion, for
he may not be instruct by man, nor for shame submytte him self to his fellow,
to make his mate his master, to have power over him, according to Saint
Paul's words (as he raketh them) where he is fashyoned to say to the
Corynthians, ^. Co^. 12.
I will be under no man's power. For so thenglysshe has, although the sense
be otherwise. And this conclusion, do these questions engendre, where every man
must be so answered, as his sensualite may be contented, which is impossible.
But to the purpose. The church is a body distinct, as saint Paul says to
the Corinthyans, 1. Cor. 1^.
wherein every member, has not one office confuselye, but some be prophets
and some be pastors and teachers. etc. And where some be appointed to reach,
Ephesians. 4.
some other must also be appointed to be taught, howebeit to avoid this
contentyon, between this questyoner and me, and to eschew all comparyson, for
this time, I am content to be with him in ye place of a scooler, and ask with
him of other, that is to say, of those that have been, before us accepted and
allowed for teachers, and of their scoolers alsoo, good christen people, who
have accepted humblye their teachinge, in the truth of the preciousenes and
substance of the most blessed sacrament of the altar, and take the^
altogether, representynge Christ's church, for scoolemaisters in this matter,
And yet there is no cause to ask, which should seem to implye matter of
doubt, but constantly to continue in that we have here in truly received,
without whyes, or whattes, which engendre altercation, without edificacion or
fruit Shall we, after, xv.C. year, begin to inquire, whither the state of our
relygyon, be establyshed in mere ydolatrye, as they do now a days term it
blasphemouslye? Can we take such a search and examinacion, otherwise, then to
be a quarrel moved to the hole, to prepare the way to Mahomete? of whose laws
some in some things write now abroad indyfferentelye. For (as I said before)
if reason, or rather unreasonableness, may now conquer our faith herein, the
vyctory will hardely be stayed from conqueste in the rest, which
punisshemente we may se in other, if we have grace to consider it. Let us
stand ferme therefore in our faith, received in the most blessed sacrament,
and keeping our self in sauegarde, by the strength of the same faith, note
how the devil assaulteth the simple, to overcome them, in the same. The devil
(ye know) is but plain (Iwys) and where playnnes may deceive, makethe his
pretense to speak plainly, and professes simplycytie, speaking always (as
his postles say) of this sacrament, as S. Paul spoke, and call it bread. And
albeit (as I spoke before) of spellynge with one tyttle diuersely: so likewise
one word is taken diuersely: yet the devil pretends symplycite, and will
have one word taken but one way, which is a craft to lead men out of the way.
For if in saint Iohn^s gospel, where it is written, that Christ was in the
world, Io. 1^.
the world was made by him, and the world knew him not, if there the word
(world) should have one signyfycation, it should engender a meruaylous confuse
sense, And in the word (bread) when Christ said. He was the bread that
descended from heaven, the word, bread, may not there signify the same it
does, where the gospel spoke of five barlye breades. And therefore to the rude
can be nothing more daungerouse, then to be entangled, Io. 6*
with this the deuyls sophystrye, insygnificacyon of names, the dyscussion
whereof, requires learning, and the conceiving of the true faith by gods gift
only simplicity to believe, without howes, as is preached unto the by the church
of christ. But besides this point of sophistry, comes in another of ye rude
ignorant, and suddenly forgettyng the name of the holy mass, only pretends
knowledge, of ye lords supper. And herein is much a do, and the name of the
mass rejected, all is applied to the lords supper, and yet they would steal
away the precyouse food, of the body of our savior Christ, and in the end
make it a bare drinking, of only bread and wine. And where they will pass
noone of their own private suppers, even on the greattest fasting day,
without flesh for deintyes: yet in this supper of the lord (as they call it)
they deuyse a deity without delicacies, to have nothing present but bread and
wine, A merueilouse matter of the inclination of man's nature, for declaracyon
of instabilitie to be fond of innouacions. nouacions. What the word (mass)
means they can not tell, and so re^u^e they wot not what, by their own
confession. And the name (supper) they allow, with a little knowledge what they
say, calling it a supper, but only because it varieth from the name of the
Mass. For that which in the first institucion, was called, Coena domini, and
the supper of our lord, by reason the word ( Coena) because of the time,
toward euenyng, signified a supper, Now the church has ordered all men,
to receive their holy communion before all other meats fasting: it should now
more conveniently be called in English, the feast of our lord, or the
dinner, then a supper, wherewith the word Coena, will agree, and requirethe not
any such translacion in specyal to be called a supper, but coena domini may be
called. Conuiuiu^ sacrum, as the church syngeth devoutly, wherein Christ is
received, and therewith a memory celebrate of his most blessed passion, and a
pledge is left with us, of life everlasting. And Gregory Nazianzene notes,
that albeit in this holy communion, ye church changes the time, yet the
thing is all one, which he speaks after this sort. (...) (...).

Quandoquidem and alia multa, aliter tum prodita fuere, quam ut nunc se habere
conspiciuntur. Veluti Ieiunauit christus paululum ante tentationem, Matt. 4.
nos vero ante Pascha^ Quod ad ieiunia attinet, utrobique idem, temporum uero
utriusque ieiunij, non modica discrepantia.

Christus enim ieiunium, tantquam propugnaculum adhibuit contra tentaciones,
nobis uero ad id ualet, u^ Christo co^moriamur, and ite^ purgatio quaedam est,
quae festu^ praecedat Porro christus ieiunauit dies quadraginta, erat enim
Deus, nos vero ieiunium, ad facultatis nostrae modum attemperauimus, etiamsi
quidam zelo affecti, Mar. 14^
no^nihil supra uires conati sunt. Rursum christus sacra Paschae mysteria, cum
discipulis celebrat in coenaculo, et post coenam and pridiequam pateretur, nos
vero in aedibus orationis, and quide^ ante coenam, ac post resurrectione^
Surrexit item Christus post triduu^ nos autem post multum temporis, neque tamen
co^mittu^tur cum illius nostra, sed neque ad temporis rationem coniungantur,
quatenus uero ad exemplum eorum quae nos age remus tradita sunt, exacta^ per
omnia similitudine^ effugerunt. The sense whereof is this in english. There be
many mo things, other wise set forth, the^ they appear to be now. Christ
fasted a little before his temptacion: we fast before Easter. As touching the
fast, that is all one, but in the times of the fastes: there is a great
diversity. For Christ used fasting as a defense and bulwark against
temptation, and in us, fasting avails, that we might dye with Christ, and it
is a clensynge and purgation before the feast. Christ fasted forty days, for
he was god, we have measured our fasting with our power, although some moved
with zeal do attempt herein above their power. Christ kept his pascal feast,
with his disciples in a chamber after supper, and the day before he suffered:
we do the same in houses of prayer, before supper, and after the resurrection.
Christ rose after, three days, and we rise ageine after a long time. And yet
that we do, in ye mysteries, repungneth not with Christ's doings, but they be
not conjoined in times. And in as much as they were delivered unto us, to be
our example, their through lykenes and similitude in every part was not
observed. These be Gregory Nazianzenes words, the sentence whereof I have in
this place, reherced, to this purpose, to show how the church has altered the
time, in the receiving of our holy communion, I might have in fewer words
reaported it, but because thauctour is very notable for learning and virtue,
and a famous clerk of ye Greake church, and of auncientie above.xii.c. years.
I have here inserted his words at length, as they be in greake, and have added
a translation both of laten and englysh to the intent I might note unto the
reader, such fruitful lesso^s, in other matters, as ye same conteyneth.
Whereof one is of the auncientie of the feast of Christ's fast, in the time we
call in englysh, Lent, which Christen men have used to observe, before Ester,
wherewith to purge them selves against theaster. And I doubt not but in some
men's ears, it sounds merueylouselye in this time, to call fasting a
purgation, which word (purgation) should only appertain to Christ's
blood, wherein and wherewith men be purged, whereof this author was not
ignorant, and therefore I note unto ye, how he yt can tell what he says
speaks thus, which has a good catholyke sense and understanding where
Christ is taken for the foundation, whereupon and in whom, and by whose help,
this fast is celebrate For in christ's faith, it purges, and thereunto men
should be so exhorted For there is a kind of devils, Math. 7.
christ said, ye is not cast out, but in prayer and fasting, which good men,
know by understanding and experience, but yet I can not pretermyt, what
sophistry the devil has used to induce men to eat, and so to eat, as though
men lived to eat and so diligently as though saint Paul had written
affirmatively, Regnum dei, Romans 14.
esse escam and potum And then comes in comparison and the true fast is
extolled, to thrust out the bodily fast. Fast from sin (quod he) that is
the true fast, that is the excellent fast, that god commands. And so the
devil sets good things at contention, one to face out another and one to
put another out of the doors: For he may abide no company of virtues in
degrees, one under another, one serving to and there, one helping another, or
belonginge to another, but he will have all alone, according to the foot of
the song, which was faith alone. In fasting therefore, they shall extol and
commend moderacion, and worthelye, for it is the chief point of bodily ^aste,
but this moderacion shall be much made of, whereby to drive out at the doors
abstinence from flesh. And so that which is done of knowledge, for an
inductio^ to sobernes: to abstain certain days from eating of flesh, that
is called superstition, and by the name condemned. I call fast (says he)
forbearinge of a man's pleasure and shall therein speak religiousely, but the
conclusion is that fisshe fast may be done away and for declaration that the
other were but pretenses, to bring thenterprise to pass, where flesheating
has fre course, sobernes, moderation, and the fast of the soul, be clearly
bannished and exiled, and the belly enioyethe the conqueste without let or
interruption, and for a more triumph therein, when we should specially dye with
Christ (which this author says is theffecte of fasting) some have had
upon good friday, notable and special bankers, with pretense to rejoice in
Christ's mercy, wroughte with us, that day. And it is good in deed to rejoice
in gods good tidings, but necessary therewith to remember his justice, and
with what te^perature thereof, he ministers his mercy, and whiles thou
learnest one thing, forget not another. God made al thing in weight number,
and measure, and we should learn, how to use them, after their estimation,
without such comparison and contencion, as the devil makes, ever with one
better, to expelle another, not so good, whereof must needs ensue the confusion
of all. Fast therefore the chief fast of the soul, to abstain from sin
with the bodily fast, to abstain from meats, with moderation and sobrenes,
taking scarcity of that is necessary, in such form also, of forbearinge
certain meats, as the church has without superstition observed and
accustomed. Al which will agree together, if thou will agree with them, and so
they will be profitable, and a purgatio^ mete and requisite before the feast as
Gregory Nazianzen wrytethe calling it, (...). In whom, I will also note unto
the how at those days, their places of assembly (for which use, we have our
churches) were called, houses of prayer, and Christ when he kest out the buyers
and sellers out of the temple, he alleged scripture to show it should be the
house of prayer. Matthew. 21.
Domus mea, domus orationis uocabitur. My house shall be called the house of
prayer. I will not increase my book with accumulation of places, to conferme
the commendation of prayer, for I trust it needs not, but as saint Paul
said, 1. Timot. 2.
Volo viros in omni loco orate. 1. Ch^s. 5.
And in another place, Orate sine intermissione, So Chrysostom notes prayer
is much effectual in the time of mass, where christ is present, by whose
mediacion all our prayers be acceptable and heard of god. This is not out of
my purpose intended, to show in this point the deuilles sophistrye to
diminishe and extincte prayer, with temptacion of atteininge knowledge by study
and sermons. So as now among many, the house of god, which Christ called the
house of prayer, has (as many practice it) changed ye name with yt thing* For
many if they come to church, either it is to hear one talk and rail after
their fansye in a pulpet, which they call a sermon, and learn only thereby
other men's faults and care nothing for their own, or else in readinge or
musyng of that they understand not, but would learn, they spend all the time
they tarry there. A sermon is good, and so is study also to atteine knowledge,
but Gregory Nazian. said. (...) Good is not good, when it is not well done, to
which well doing, time is a special circumstaunce, Eccl. ^.
Every thing has time says Salamon. And in thactes of the apostles, it
appears they had their times appointed to prayer. Act. 5
For Petrus et loa^nes ascendebant in templum, ad hora^ orationis nonam, Peter
and Ihon ascended into the temple, at the.ix. hour of prayer, which
destinction of time, has no supersticion in it, but a conueniente order and
distribution of the use of time, which with a certain appointement, is
necessary in a body united and congregate, as christian men be, that we might
declare the same unite, by conformity of operation, at one time. Col. 2.
Wherein saint Paul's text forbyddinge distinction of days. is not offended,
who condemned only the supersticion, and left the use of distinction,
indifferente to be received for good order and semelines, with a signification,
also of our mysteries. And therefore Gregory Nazianzene, has his sentence, in
his sermon, (...). There be other things of ye Jews, perfited with them in
figure which be restored again unto us, in mysterye, So as all the things
used in tholde law be not utterly reproved and condemned, not to be done,
but not to be so done, for the figure ceassethe when truth is come, and the
law and prophets were unto saint John baptistes time, as Christ said, Never
thelesse as Gregorye Nazianzene says, ye same things may be now restored
mistically, not at every private man's pleasure and devise (as saint
Augustyne writes, ad Ianuarium) but by teaching of the church and orderinge
ye same, Agust. ad Ianuarium.
not for ^uperstition, but direction, as thapostelies did in the beginning,
when they decreed it by inspiration of the holy ghost, that men should
abstain, Act. 15.
from that was strangled, and blood, which repugned not with the vysyon to
saint Peter, that all t^ynge was clean, Act. 10.
to them that in cleannes received it, ne dissented from christ's teachinge,
that not to defile the man that enters in at the mouth, but it was a
dispensacion of the truth, Math. 15.
between the ceassynge of the law and springyng of the gospel, with such a
te^perame^t, as the change for compassion of weak consciences, should not be
sudden and at ones, but by little and little, as the day springs and the
night goes away. Upon which consideration ye same things were in the church
of Christ forbidden, yt were before for another end, forbidden in Moses law,
only the cause of prohibicion varied, but the thing was alone. But to return
to the purpose whereupon this was brought in. Distinction and order in time, is
not supersticiouse, but necessary, and therefore with sermons or study (which
both be in their time good) to interrupte the time of prayer, that is not
good, and greatly worse, when the sermons be such, and so fashyoned, as they
maintain talk and communication, and be not directed to stir the peoples
dulle and sluggy endeavor to follow virtue and flee vice, and leaving a part
matter of contention or reformacion, to be ordered by the high powers, to tell
the audience of their special faults; and to diswade them from the same, by
always and means. Such were the sermons, in the primative church. So
preached Saint Chrysostom. Saint Augustine, So preached Gregory Nazianzene,
and where in a sermon he made of the feast of Ester, he had entered to speak
of the secrecye of god, left that matter with this speech.

(...) I purpose not, says he to dispute or reason of god now but to dispense
his truth, that is to say, distribute it conuenie^tly with all circumstaunces
mete, of which office in cyrcumspecte distribution S. Paul calls the chief
mynystres, dispensatores, and him self sometime, 1. Cor. 4.
fed them with milk and sometime with stronger meats, which is not every
man's gift and therefore has been in the church committed to few, and in
respect of the number, very few, and of late over few, and over many also
Over few of them that cries out of men's manners, and ouermany of those, that
flatter the multitude, with vtteringe such matter, as the number of nature
variable, is glad to here. Now many now a days be so trauayled in them self,
with hearing the sermon, as they weep and wail, and say. Quid faciemus uiri
fratres? Act. 2. Jonas. 3.
Who preaches like Io^as to warn men of their destruction, both in body and
soul, if they amend not their manners and living, In a miserable state of
iniquity and sin, some would have nothing preached but mercy, with only
Christ, and how he bears all sin, pays all, purges all, and cleanses
all which is true, and (...) of it can not be blamed, The divinity.
but (...) has a great fault. The steward dshyp
For albeit this be truth, and is good meat: yet it is not well distribute,
for it would serve better at supper, then at dinner. To men lusty, drowned in
the world, and overwhelmed with sin, and in the mydde day, whiles there is
time of waking the justice of god, is to be cried out. Christ's second coming
to be beaten in peoples ears, his terrible judgment to be laid before men's
eyes which is a truth, as the other is, and profitable to be learned, taught,
and thought on, whereupon men should be exhorted to confess their sins to
god and his mynyster, to do penance for sin, to fast for sin, to pray for
sin, to do alms for sin, to wayle for sin. Dauyd confessed and felt
gods mercy and yet cried. Amplius laua me ab iniquitate mea and a peecato meo
munda me, Psalm. 50.
quoniam iniquitatem meam ego cognosco, and peccatum meum contra me est semper,
and therewith said, Psalm. 6.
turbatus est a furore oculus meus, his eye was troubled with gods
displeasure, at the time he mystrusted not gods mercy, and therefore said.
Laboraui in gemitu meo lauabo per singulas noctes lectu^ meu^, Ibidem.
he travailed in wailing and washed his couche with tears. But now so be men
enueigled by the deuylles sophistry, as mercy extolled and set forth, with
only faith, and only savior, and ommisufficie^t nisufficie^t savior,
serves to make men forget gods justice, and wax wantons (as they be termed)
babes and youngelynges, and clearly fall from dread and fear of god, which
where it wants, sin must needs increase and ouerflowe, and by custom
men's consciences so blinded, as they discern them not to be sins and
faults, And thus much I have spoken of sermons, which and they were never so
well made and conceived, yet so to use them, as they should occupy the time
of prayer requisite, (...)
S. Gregory in an Omilie notes not good And therefore on Christemas day, when
the church has three masses, he said he could not spend so much time with his
audience that day, as he was wont to do. And yet sermons at those days, as
appears by ye sermons they made, were not long. But long or short, as they
be good wholesome and requisite, and in the church, at their time necessary, so
having not their time, but with iusteling an other good thing out of order,
that is not well, and much less study to be used in time of prayer, which
prayer and study as they have a distinct nature: so they should be in time
distinct.

And theunomians opinion, by contrary exercise reproved, to think that
readinge, is the only way to heaven. But herein I have tarried over long, as
some will find fault at me, and ask what is prayer and fasting to the
sacrament of the altar? and much less sermons or study in time of prayer?
Whereunto thus I answer, that having occasion mynystred, by this great
clerk, Gregorye Nazianzene, I have spoken of them.

And because the devil entendeth to subuerte all: I show also, his so
phistrie in lower matters, then is the sacrament of thaulter, toward
destruction whereof he made him self and entry, by overthrowing that might
stand in his way, and so the more facyly to assault the highest, as he has
done, and therein (as I have said) makes a great matter of the name of the
mass, and will have it called our lords supper, wherein he will have all
observed, as christ ministered it, which this Gregory Nazianzene says, is not
necessary. But we should here in give credit to our mother the church, the
pillar of truth, and who truly teaches us, that is truth. Who forasmuch
as with the observation of this feast, in receyuyng eating and drinking
Christ's most preciouse body and blood, Malachi* 1.
is also celebrate, the perpetual only pure sacrifice, prophesied by the
prophet Malachie, to be observed and kept, continually in the church of
Christ, which sacryfyce, is the body and blood of our savior Christ. The
same church has received one word of Hebrewe, to signify altogether, and
used in the latin ( Missa) and in englyssh (mass) wherein besides the
gloriouse presence of the body and blood of Christ the holy circumstaunces
used, and ceremonies done, be also many godly and most devout prayers,
spoken and uttered by the preiste, as a common minister to the hole church,
for and in the name of the hole church, by which church, Christ, as head is
offered, and the church also, as member of his mystical body, is offered to
god the father by him, as Saint Augustine sayethe. Ipsa per ipsum, and ipse
per ipsam, suetus offerri. The church by him, and he by the church, accustomed
to be offered. So as the mass conteininge the hole supper, that is to say, the
hole feast, with the continual oblation of the church, is by the deuylles
invention assaulted diverse ways. Some deny the mass, because they read not
the word mass in scripture, which and it were a good cause of denial, it
should serve to renew the Arryans heresye, and to put out of the creed, called
Symbolum apostolorum (which all Christen men receive without contradictio^)
where filius is called consubstantialis patri. Other allow mass they say, but
not priuye masses, as though there were two sorts of masses, where in deed
the mass being but one, and always executed in the name of ye hole church,
may by reason of the place, be called private, as it may be by reason of
saying, called a low mass, and so differ from a mass sunge, but else, the
church by the common mynystre the priest, executes the mass her self, how
few soever, or how many be present, and whyther it be done at church
before ye multitude, or in an oratory before few. And yet with the name of
private masses, and denial of them, the unlearned be slaundered as some be
also with request of communion under both kinds, as necessary, and not to be
pretermitted In which point the devil goth about, craftily to seduce the
simple, adding a wordly instigation of envy, as though the preistes had
withdrawn the one part of ye Sacrament, of very dysdaine to put a
difference between the state of preistes, and the state of lay men where in
deed, the obteyninge of communion under both kinds, should serve the devil
only, for an introduction, to subuerte ye true belefe, in the most blessed
sacrament Which matter only he entendeth, and leaves nothing untouched to
obtain ye same. For where the church teaches truly, yt under each kind, is
contained hole christ, and therefore now under the one kind, each man receives
as much as under both upon which ground good devout me^, have abstained from
communion under both kinds, and co^te^ted them self with one king, of their
good devout mind: if now upon grudge of such as content not the^ self with
the order they find in the church, ye church should grant communion under both
kinds, to satisfye the false complaynt of necessite, it must needs engender a
slander in the truth of the faith, as though hole christ were not under each
kind, which by the denil is only intended And in this matter of communion
under both kinds, it was never denied but all states of men ever might and al
state of me^ in the beginning have communicate in both kinds and among them
children also, n^ there has been any law made to ye contrary, as the devil
surmyseth. Only this has been, that good christen men being certainly
persuaded under each kind of bread and wine, to be contained hole christ All
such christen men, as well preistes as other, besides the preiste that
celebrate, have been content to receive their communion under one kind,
Which devout custom, when the devil by his ministers has gone about to
improve, there was ones a law made to maintain ye good custom against the
deuilles enterprise, as in this realm* the hole perlyament has made the like,
whereby those be only put to silence, that say, communion under both kinds
is necessary, which is an opinion damnable, and worthelye reproved, but else
that by order of ye church, all men might communicate under both kinds, no
man contendeth, For first in the devout custom of communion under one kind,
wherein was professed the truth taught by the church in the sacrament of
thaulter, only charity was the rule, whereby good men were moved for a
semelynes and decency in the church, and eschewynge that they saw sometimes
unseemly chance, of th^mselfe, without constraint of a law, to forbear that
they might have required, and no man by law expelled, from that he might have
asked. Which charity, because it is now waxed cold and some men for
singularite would differ from the rest, it is for conservation of order well
provided by the law, that no man shall presume to require further then is
necessary, to the slander and offense of his neighbor, but with humility
contain him self within the limit^es of common order, which is the beauty
and comelye state or every number assembled, being so much regarded of saint
Paul, as he willed men to forbear to company with any brother that walks
out of order. But here will be replied that christ's order is to be preferred
all other devises. And here comes in the common place of scripture. Math. 14:
Frustra colunt me doctrinis hominum, Mar. 7.
They worship me in vain with the teachynges of men. And these good me I spoke
of, shall be called good fools, the which had, zelum dei, sed non secundum
scientiam, Romans 1*
the zeal to god but not according to true knowledge, which now appears
(they will say) when men se clearly Christ's institution of this sacrament,
which when it is used according to Christ's institution is the sacrament, and
otherwise as they say, not. And this word (institution) is often repeted, and
yet ye same word (institution) is not in scripture by those syllables, but
Saint Paul speakethe of tradytyon, of the use of this Sacrament, as he
received it of our lord. Ego enim accepi a domino, 1. Cor. 1^.
quod and tradidi uobis. I have received of our lord, which I have by
tradition delivered unto you. Whereby and by that follows. when he says.
Cetera cum venero disponam. I shall order the rest when I come: Ibidem
it appears he had taught the Corrinthians, the sum of this high mystery,
and the use of it, without writing before, and would add more when he came,
whichmore, he taught and yet we have no writing of it, but the church has
not forgotten it, but has taught it without writynge, as she received it. And
it appears in that epistle of S. Paul that rehersynge such tradicion as
they had received of him, he blames and reproves them, for the not
observation of it. And thus much, for the word (institution) that pleases,
which scripture has not and the word, tradicion, abhorred, that scripture
has, so as words go but by favor, as this matter is handled. But ye matter
of this objection must be answered seriousely, which is grounded upon the
text of scripture, Frustra colu^t me doctrinis hominum, They worship me in
vain, with the doctrine of men, the true sense whereof, is all out of this
purpose, and the use of this scripture, as it is mysvnderstanded, serves to
ouerturne all, For the church is congregate of men and women, which both be
comprehended under that word (men), And all the outward teaching in this
church, has been by men. All thappostles sent to teach the gospel, were
me^. Saint Paul at his conversion from darkness to light, Act. 9:
when it was said to him yt it should be told him what he should do, then was
Ananias by god ordered to go to Paul, and declare what he should do. Moses,
leader of ye synagoge ye figure of our church, was a man. And the prophets
were men. So as if god be worshypped in vain, by teachinge of men: Inanis est
fides nostra, Romans 10.
our faith is a vain thing, which is, ex auditu, of hearing, and taught us
by men, men I say, as ministres to god, whereof god is thauthor, a quo omne
datum optimum Jacob. 1.
et omne donum perfectum, and Christ said. Sine me nihil potestis facere. But
hereby appears yt this text, has another understanding, and the word (men)
not to signify the hole number of men, so as it should comprehend each man
thoroughly, how so ever they be qualified, but only the corrupt state of man,
severed from god and his church in christ, of which hole state not endued with
gods grace, Psalm. 11^.
it is said Omnis homo mendax. All men be liars. That is to say, all such as
have not put upon them Christ, who is truth. And frustra colunt me
doctrinis hominu^. They worship me in vain, with the teachynges of such as
remain in the state of men only, and then teach their own, and of them
self. For all such teaching is like the teacher, that is to say, carnal.
For the carnal man, 1. Cor. 2: Io. 4.
non percipit ea quae sunt spiritus, and deus est spiritus, and in spiritu
adoratur, and therefore god is worshipped in vain with the teachinge of men.
For it has the pretense of worship, and is not directed to him, but only
devised to uphold worldelye polycye Such devises had Numa pompilius, with the
Romans, and before him, Licurgus, with the Lacedaemonians, and of late,
Mahomete with the Turks, and more lately all such as have taken upon them to
understand the scriptures alone, and them self alone devised, how they would
have god worshipped, after their fashion, without noise or brute, without the
compass of our ears or eyes, only by reading that they understand not,
saving some be so full of knowledge, as they encombre the company more with
their harse rude voice in prattelynge, then the parysshe clerk with his horse
breast, in singinge. Of all these sorts of men's teachinges, which be men's
devises, severed from Christ's church, may be said frustra me colu^t
doctrinis hominum. But such men as be members of Christ's mystical body, in
his church, and have the place of ordering and teaching in the same, unto
whom other, are bound to obey and give ear unto them, such men be
comprehended in this text. Frustra colunt me doctrinis hominum, But he that
co^temneth those things that they teach, agreablye to the truth received: 1,
These, 4. Heb, 13, 1 Reg, 15,
non hominem spernit, sed deu^, who says, Obey such as have the order of you,
and obedience is preferred al other sacrifices, wherwt god is worshipped not
invaine, but meritoriouselye. And therefore that text alleged, against the
teachinge in christ's church, is as grossly abused, as a key to cleave
logges. For if the doctrine be not repugnaunt to the scripture, or the custom
such as hyndreth not gods glory, it can not be in vain that makes to our
edificacion, and proceeds from authority, which has power to rule and lead
us, whereby we be all directed, to do one thing, to declare and set forth,
that we be one body, wherein god is glorified, according as Christ said.
Matthew. 5.
Vt videa^t opera vestra bona, and glorificent deu^, qui in coelis est. And so
when S. Paul ordered the women to be covered in ye church, 1 Cor. 11.
to signify her subjection, and that she had ones offended, in her
preuarication against her husband and god, and with presumption to have
knowledge, was the ruin of mankind, and further ordered her, to keep silence in
ye congregation: this text of frustra colu^t me doctrinis 1. Timot. 2.
hominum, if it had been then written, would not have served the women to replye
and say, These were small matters, which god regards not, and therefore
said. Frustra colunt me, doctrinis hominum. They worship me in vain, with
the doctrines of men. For saint Paul was not in the number of these men (as I
said before) and his authorite was of god, and the things ordered for a godly
purpose, wherewith god is in the decente semely order of his people, duly
worshipped and also pleased. This matter I have now spoken, will be called a
digressio^, and out of the matter of the sacrament, and in deed, it is not all
together in it, but toward it, for I trust hereby, that commen weapon shall be
laid aside, of frustra colunt me, doctrinis hominum, which many had in their
mouth, as they have a blunt dagger by their side, to be seen to speak
scripture, though it be nothing to the purpose. And now I will com to the
institution of christ of the holy sacrament. And here men must take heed that
they be not deceived, in the word (institution) as signifieng further unto them,
then the scriptures do testyfye. For if by the word (institution) should be
signyfyed a precise order, set forth with all the circumstaunce in the nature
of a precyse law, signifienge that it must be from thenseforth, so observed
and none otherwise, which matter, the word (institution) seems to include,
and soundethe so in common reason: there appears not in scripture, any
institution of this nature, For we read not in scripture, that Christ did
prescribe, any such precyse order of receiving or ministryng* but as in his
supper he in deed consecrated both kinds, and ministered both kinds, Luc, 24,
whereby appearethe that all might receive both kinds, as all sometime have
done: So likewise when he mynystred the sacrament to his disciples in Emaus,
Act. 2^
and other among the apostles, who understood Christ: we read of the
ministracion of the one kind, whereby appears, that the one kind under form
of bread may be ministered alone. And therefore of any such institucyon, as ye
word (institution) does sound at the first hearing, is not testified in
scriptures. But if we mean, by institution, the first consecration of it,
when by gods mighty word the miracle was wroughte in the conversion of
bread and wine, in to the body and blood of christ, with commandment to the
church, to do the same till he comme: Of this the evangelists bear witness,
which the church has received. And as s. Paul said. Ego accepi a domino,
quod and tradidi vobis: So the hole church may say the same words, with like
credit by whose mynystery, the same feast is daily prepared for ye hole church
with consecracion of the body and blood of Christ, whereof good men
reioysynge them self, with the presence of the hole mystery, which they se in
the mass, at which time good me^ also spiritually eat and drink the same,
with the common mynystre, and beleuynge the hole to be in each kind: have by
example of christ's disciples in Emaus Luc. 24*
contented them self in the sacramental communion with the one kind, not
repelled as unworthy to receive the other kind, but forbearynge of them self
reverently, for the more semelye distribucion, and order among them, which
the church has allowed, as our mother and nourse, who contynually feadeth us,
with the food of truth. And therefore seeing we be assured, that as Christ did
institute the sacrament, so he instituted the church, to be fed with the same
sacrament, and to have the ministracion, distribution, and order of it, till he
came. And unto this day, we be only ascertayned by tradicion of the church,
in the true understanding of theua^gelystes, of our order in co^secracion of
the said sacrament, and the cyrcumstaunce of the pronunciation of christ's
words, whereby the same is wrought. What can it mean but confusion, to wrangle
with the church in this matter, and by cauilacio^ of words, trouble ye simple
understandings? What a word is (institution) with the understanding they give
it, to astoine the rude ears? For who can suffer, to here spoken that Christ's
institution, should be broken or altered? considering the word carries with it
a sonnde of precysenes, and commandment in Christ of this or that order,
which can not be verified, speaking of the institution of the sacrament, and
the word well understood, may be suffered sygnifienge the first exhibicion
and ministracion of it, And so some write, that as Christ did in the syxte
of John^, promise the institution of the sacrament, saying.

Panis quem dabo uobis, caro mea est, pro mundi vita. Ioa^, 6.
The bread I shall give you, is my flesh, for the life of the world: So did
he institute the same in his last supper of which institucion men would now
make a precise law, as the order should be taken away from the church mother
of truth, which following Christ's example, and the apostels, has suffered
communion under one kind, and has rejected such, as would improve the same,
as men only studiouse to impugn an establyshed order, which fault is now
much spread abroad, both in this high matter, and also in ceremonies, and
namelye such as garnisshe Christ's religion, wherein the devil uses a
merueilsouse point of sophistry, by division, and examininge parts alone
which parts so considered seuerallye, Note this difference, how things may
be called and be necessary in relation, which else might be omytted.
be nothing, and yet joined together, be somewhat, and very necessary, and
here I say necessary for our estate, although not necessary, in respect of
the pryncypall thing.

I will open this point of sophistry which consystethe in dyuysyon, in which
the smalenes of the part divided from the rest, and considered alone, is in
respect of the hole, called nothing. And in comen speech it has obtained to
call that nothing, which by comparison of a far greater, is very little. As
if one were asked, whither a farthinge would make a rich man? A simple man
would answer.

Nay, and in deed a farthing considered alone is nothing regarded, and yet of
such little farthinges, in number set together, riches co^systeth, and by the
same disseuered, is induced poverty. A quantity may be so minutely divided,
that his parts be accounted nothing and yet those same together joined, make
the great mass, and have an estimation. And therefore in the dyscussion of
ceremonies, semelynes, and orders, the devil frames his questions by diuysion,
and asks of each thing alone, disseuered from the rest. As for example.
Whither a shaven crown makes a preiste? where unto a man must answer, as
he would do to the question of a farthinge before moved, and say, Nay. Well
quod the devil, then away with your crown, and calls it a fleshmarke
because he will with a nycke name deface it. Then he asks whether a long
gown makes a priest, of that color or that fashyon, and then it must be
answered, Nay. And then there must be a song made of it, with away with it.
Then the devil comes to the ceremonies in ordres geuinge, and asks of
ceremonies seuerallye alone, whereunto as he disseuereth them, ye answer must
be no, whereupon he concludes. Ergo they be nothing requisite, After which
sort, he shall also divide you the sacramental words, and ask of every
word of them alone, And as it is granted, how that one word does it not, that
word is laid aside, And so he will peruse all, and by sophistrye in division
wipe out all, as nothing. And in other matters likewise frame this question,
for example. Shall forbearinge of meats save a man? The answer must be. No.
And then, Ergo eat all day long. Does watchinge bring a man to heaven?
Nay, Ergo sleep and spare not. Is ye place cause why a man's prayer is good?
The answer must be, Nay, And what nedeste thou comme to church then, says
the devil, onles it be to hear my false teaching set forth. And thus by
these subtle questions the devil robs simple men, even of the substance by
degrees of true religion, as parasites and flatterers rob wanton heirs of
their worldlyge substance, by alluring them to prodigal and wastefull
distribution of their go^des and lands, in several little portions, with these
questions to the wise young man, what is this to you sir? a small matter in
your purse, and nothing to your substance But by such nothinges, we have
seen young heirs, suddenly brought to nothing, and made very beggars, As we
se likewise, by the deuylles sophistical entisementes by several inquisitions,
of the validity of this or that ceremony alone, ceremonies so contempned of
many, as the substance of our religion, is among many prodigal children,
wasted and consumed, and by contempt of the priest and his garments aparte,
by small regard to the place, and other ceremonies neglected: Christ him
self in the sacrament of the altar is despised mocked and skorned, with
such toys and terms, as the Jews devised not more spiteful, even when they
saluted him, with Aue rex Iudeorum, Matt. 27. Mar. 15. Joan. 19.
and spette in his teeth: But after the same sort reverence decaieth toward
all estates and innocencye, as one writes, departs from man by degrees, no
man begins with the greatest abhominacion, but where small faults be not
duly corrected, the great and abominable shall never be eschewed. The
marchaunte that will thryue, estemeth his farthynge, and is therein throughlye
wyttie to match with the deuylles sophistry, and can espy that although a
farthinge considered alone is nothing, yet he is therein as wise as Hesiodus,
who for a lesson of thriuinge says, Little to little, makes a great heap. So
wise be the children of this world in their generation, to order ye wicked
Mammona, And for conservation of our religion, which should for ever conserve
us: we be so foolysshe, to be deceived with the deuyls false sophistrye in
division, and call all nothing, that contain not the hole su^me, whereof
ensues the dissipation of all among many to the destruction of body and
soul, for ever, as we have latelye seen in a few yt died most miserably, to
the terrible example of other, to beware by them. The wrath of god has lighted
on them, but they only were not in fault. Esa, 55,
Derelinquat impius uiam suam and uir iniquus cogitationes suas. Belief has been so much talked on, and with talking, men fallen into such ydelnesse of
works, that the devil has taken his opportunity, to spoil men of their
true belief, for only belief wa^teth that has been so much tratteled of,
only to suffyse. Cato the Roman as a worldely, wise man uttered a prudent
sentence, that he feared the youth of the Romans, should leave their
valyaunte acts after they began ones so much to talk of them. The speech
was not the cause thereof, for then we should say, learning were not good,
but yet we often see them concur together, whereby appearethe such corruption
in manes nature as speech in a common wealth, should be committed to few, and
the multitude in silence, to speak of virtue with their deeds. According
whereunto saint Paul said. 1, Cor, 14^
Two or three of the prophets, should speak in the congregation, and the
rest hold their peace, and none speak again, unless he had a new
reuelacion, If men wax as wanton in their speech, as women why should not
such, be under the precepte of scylence, as well as women, and if they be
desirouse of knoweledge, ascend to the mountain, where it is placed by such
degrees, as Gregorye Nazianzene speaks of, very necessary to be observed?
For else in the tongue and knowledge, is much loosenes and temeritie, oneles the
same be ordered and stayed by the fear of god. For where is the fear of god,
there is keeping of his comaundementes, Where the comaundementes be kept the
carnal part is purged, Eccle 2.
which else makes man's soul cloudye, and suffers it not to se clearly,
ye beam of godly light. Where is such purgynge: there is clearenes, which
causes much desire evermore to ascend. from virtue to virtue, which is the
stay of knowledge, and confirmacio^ of it, and so by these degrees, doing is
the way to knowledge. But this order is pretermytted, Doing is the mean
^waye to knowledge 1, Cor, 8.
whereof follows such effect of knowledge as saint Paul speaks of. How
knoweledge swells and puffethe up men's stomachs, the fault whereof is not
in learning, but in the indisposicio^ of such, as presume unto it, which
fault, god of his infinite mercy amend, for he only can and will, when his
pleasure shall be, which our behauyour toward him may haste or delay. If
request, intercession, and desire to all, enterlaced, with sharp punyshmente
to some, and mercy plentifullye mynystred to other, can refourme yt is amysse,
all has been assayed and attempted on the kings majesty's behalf. As he is a
prince furnyshed with knowledge and power, gods special gifts and great: so
he has used both for the reformacion of his people. The conservation of true
belefe is only desired, for the maynetenaunce of gods glory, wherein ye devil
also pretends to labor and travail, but deceytfullye and also
sophistycally, as I have purposed to declare unto you, which how I would have
done for the releif of other, I know, and how I have done, shall leave it to
your judgment, which god direct, to the atteyninge of al truth, which is only
in our savior Jesus christ, and by him, whom all good christen me^ have from
the beginning, and do still believe, most assuredly, to be present really, in
the sacrament of thaulter, without leauinge his seat in heaven, where he is
also continuallye our advocate, to relieve our infirmities, as he is in the
sacrament of thaulter, to feed our weak bodies and souls, whereby to make us
strong to come to him, and live without end.

Amen.
Prynted at London in Aldersgate street, by Ihon^ Herforde, at the costs and
charges of Roberte Toye, dwelling in Paul's churcheyarde, at the sign of the
Bell. 1546.


