Great Brittans little Calendar: OR, TRIPLE DIARIE, In remembrance of three
days. Divided into three Treatises.

1. Britanniae vota: or God save the King: for the 24. day of March, the day of
his Majesty's happy proclamation.

2. Caesaris Hosts: or, The Tragedy of Traitors: for the fifth of August: the
day of the bloody Gowries Treason, and of his Highness blessed preservation.

3. Amphitheatram Scelerum: or, The Transcendent of Treason: the day of a most
admirable deliverance of our King, Queen, Prince, Royal Progeny, the
Spiritual and Temporal Peers and Pillars of the Church and State, together
with the Honorable Assembly of the representative Body of the Kingdom in
general, from that most horrible and hellish project of the Gun Powder
Treason. Nouemb. 5. Whereunto is annexed a short disswasiue from Popery.

By SAMVEL GAREY, Preacher of Gods Word at Wynfarthing in Norff.

LONDON, Printed by John Beale for Henry Fetherstone, and John Parker. 1618.

NOBILISSIMO, ET Honoratissimo Domino, GEORGIO Marchioni Buckingamiensi, Baroni
de Whaddon, Regio Hipparcho, praenobilis Equestris Orcinis periscelidis Sodali,
a Secretioribus Regijs Consiliario etc. Pietate, and virtute clarissimo,
Bonarum Artium admiratori, and Patrono, Domino mihi vnice colendo.
INter praeclaros Dominos quos Anglia plaudit,
praecipuum retines ordine, honor locum.
Nobilis es animo, virtute notabilis omni,
dotibus excellens ingenij, and genij.
Omnibus heroum Splendescis laudibus, omnes
admirantur, amant, magnificant que, colunt.
Inter praecones, quorum sacra buccina cantat
lauds condignas, infimus ipse sono.
Primus at in votis, sipossim, posse sed imus,
in votis primus, voce sed imus ego,
Primus an imus ero? placida cape mente laborum
primitias, humili dat mea musa manu.
Honori Tuo addictissimus, Samuel Garey.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, George Lord Marquess of Buckingham, Master of his
Majesty's Horse, Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, etc.
LYeurgus enjoined the people to offer little Sacrifices unto their Gods, for
(says he) they respect more the inward affection, then the outward Action: So
in a Dedicatory imitation, I presume to present this little sacrifice of my
future service, (oh were it worthy of your Honors acceptance) unto your
Honorable self, hoping your Honor will more regard the inward devotion, then
the outward Oblation: and happy is this little labor, if it may merit the
portion of your Noble protection, much more of your Approbation, that so being
graced with the mild aspect of so propitious, and Noble a star of Honor, it
may be the more welcome to the world; and others invited to read it for your
Honors sake, though not for the work sake.

And under whose Honorable shadow may this Treatise, Britanniae vota, or, God
save the King, more surely, and safely shelter, then under yours, who night and
day devoutly say, and pray, God save the King: whose approved fidelity in
Kings-seruice has moved God and the King to promote you to great dignity,
which you grace with such Christian, yet Courtly humility, that both in Church,
Court, and Country, you are highly and worthily honored: Herein your Honor
follows those Noble patternos Celarinus, and Aurelius of whom S. Cyprian
writes, Epist. 34.
In quantum gloria sublimes, in tantum vereoundia humiles, dum nihil in honor
sublimius, nibil in humilitate submissius. Proceed (most Honorable) with such
pious Graces, and Christian virtues to adorn your eternal mind. Emeliore
luto finxit praecordia Titan.


Your excellent eminency in the endowments of Nature and Grace, in whom virtue,
valor, beauty and bounty, Arms and Arts are conjoined, has made all men
joyfully congratulate the amplification of your deserved Honor, whose merits
march with your pursuits: So that not only genus, but genius, makes you
Nobilem, and Notabilem. Vndemagis, magtsque viri nunc gloria claret.


The world bestows upon you that worthy, not undeserved, Character of virtue,
free from the aspersion of Court stains, that I may borrow the Poets verse to
put you on in your virtuous progress: Quo tuate virtus ducit, ipedefausto,
Grandia laturus meritorum praemia. --


Accept into your Honorable Patronage according to your accustomed gentleness,
this weak Work of your devoted servant, who craves pardon for this ambition,
in desiring to obtain your Noble favor and protection, imitating Aeschines to
Socrates having; no meet thing to gratify your Honor withal, I am willing to
give that I have, even my self: who will always desire to be at your Honors
service, -- Donec haurietomnes
Xanthi Phoebus aquas.


And ever will pray to God, to give you happy increase of favor with God and
men, and that your Noble name and same, may long flourish on earth, and be
eternally blessed in heaven. Stet Domus hac, donec fluctus formica marinos
Ebibat and totum Testudo perambulet orbem.


For which multiplication of grace in this life, and consummation of glory in
the other, my humble prayers are, and ever shall be powered forth to God for
your good Honors great happiness in either World.

At your Honors service, and commandment Samuel Garey,

TRI -- VNI DEO Votiua Britannica Tria.
QVod varijs Triplicem Regem (Deus alme) periclis
incolumem liberes in columen patriae:
Caelesti vt Regitriplices tria munera Reges Baron: annal. tom. 1* ad an. 1.
fol. 53.

Math. 2. 11.
Aurum, Thus, Myrrham, Symbola sacra ferunt:
Sic (ter-Magne Deus) tua magna Britannia sacrat
officio summo Trina sacrificia:
Aurum, firma fides; Thus, est tibi victima laudis;
optima Myrrha tibi, flere, dolere mala.
Aurum, Thus, Myrrham: Credendo, precando, dolendo:
Turba Britanna sonat, credo, precor, doleo:
Credo, precorque Deum gentis peccata dolenda
condonare? fides, laus, dolor: ista Deo.
Samuel Garey.
24 Martius, 5 Augustus, notusque 5 November in annos,
omnibus Angligenis candida festa bonis:
Martius, Augustus, quintusque Nouembris ab Anglis
sint semper precibus festa sacrata pijs.
S. G.
To the Christian Reader, saving Grace.
READER, accept this imperfect work with as thankful an hand, as it is
offered with afaithfull heart: if any thing in it please thee, give God the
praise; let none of his glory cleave to us earthen Instruments. Si quid in hoc
(Lector) placet, assignare memento Walafri^: Strabo lib. de rebus Eccles.

Id Domino, quicquid displicet, hocce mihi.


I cannot expect, or hope for in this critical Age, but that this Book will
fall into the hands of Carpus, as Paul left his Cloak, Books, and Parchments
with him at Troas: 2 Timothy 4. 13. Yet against the scourge of maleuolent tongues,
I am armed with patience, and do put on the resolution of Epictetus, Si recte
facis, quid eos vereris qui non recte reprehendunt, If thou do well, what
need thou fear them who say ill? and as Martial said to Laelius; Carpere
vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.


And there are many envious drones, who neither like to labor themselves, or
love that others should bring any honey to Hiue: but, Vindico me ab illis Solo
contemptu: Among the Popish Sectaries this work will find an harsh encounter;
yet God is my Record, I have not (to my knowledge) wronged them, their own
writings, Axioms, and Actions, have (as it were with a line) chalked me out
the way, wherein I have walked. The Romish Jesuits I know will rail, and rage
at it, whose censure I regard, not as Cicero censured of a Gentlewomans
dancing; The better the worse: but of their censure I say, The worse, the
better: Malis displicere, laudari est says Seneca, Epist. 77,
to displease ill men, finds praise with good men.

Only I crave a favorable and friendly acceptance of the judicious, sober,
and indifferent Reader, acknowledging this labor required more maturity,
retired, and second thoughts, then my public and private pains in my
ministry could afford me: so that, Festinans canis caecos parit catulos; This
work is not (as it were) Elephantis partus Long in conceiving, breeding, and
bringing forth. It is rather vrsi partus, An unformed Embrio, some bred, and
brought to light. Whatsoever it is, read it over, before you judge; and then
say with the son of Syracke, Ecclu^. 24. 39.
Behold, I have not labored for my self only, but for all them that seek
wisdom. If men lack this labor, it shall not much hurt me; if praise it,
their praises are but Apocriphal: 1 Cor. 4. 3.
for I pass not for man's judgment; if the Lord praise it, it will be then
praiseworthy. Bonum est laudari, sed praestantius est esse laudabilem, says
Le moribus.
Seneca; It is good to be praised, but it is better to be praiseworthy.
Farewell, and help me with thy mutual prayers, and follow it with thy
practice; and so I commit it to thy Christian Conscience, and thy Conscience to
God.

Thine ever in the Lord,

Ad Authorem.
CAelica vota Deo pro Rege inserta Libello,
Omnibus insculpat mentibus illa Deus.
Summa Salus Regis, Regni sacra vota Britanni,
Vt long Laehesis regia fila trahat.
Fundunt vota Patres, proceres, plebs, vine Iacobe,
Dulce Decus populi praesidium patriae:
Hoc diadema diutene as cum prole perenni,
Nati and natorum Sceptra Britanna regant.
Prodiat hic labor, and si liuor mordeat illum,
Liuoris dentes frauget and iste labor.
Prodiat hic Liber, and si liuor perdere tentet,
Ipsum liuorem destruet iste Liber.
S. W. Sacrae Theol. Doct.
Britanniae Vota, OR God save the King. For the Kings day, the 24. day of March.
This is the day of our King.

Hosea 7. 5. This day is a day of good tidings, and we hold our peace.

2 Kings 7. 9.
CHAP. I.
IOASH the son of Ahaziah, being hid by Iehosheba the daughter of King
Ioram, six 2 Kings 11: 3.
years in the house of the Lord; because bloody Athaliah, the mother of
Ahaziah, whom 2 Chr. 22. 9. 10. 11.
Iehu killed, had destroyed all the Kings seed of the house of Judah, excepting
only Ioash, whom Iehosheba the wife of Iehoiadah the Priest had preserved: In
the 2 King. 11. 4,
seventh year Iehoiadah the Priest seeing Athaliah to usurp the Crown,
calls forth the Captains, and gathers the Levites out of all the Cities of
Judah, and the chief Fathers of Israel to 2 Chr. 23. 2.
Jerusalem: and having first bound them with an 2, Kin. 11. 4.
oath of Allegiance, then presents unto them the sacred spectacle of their
Regal Sovereign; Ecce filius 2 Chapter 23. 3.
regis regnabit, Behold, the Kings son must reign. He sets a 2 King. 11. 6.
11.
watch, and guard to secure and safeguard him. Lo how dangerous is the chair
of State: all like officious Subjects stand to withstand the treachery of
Traitors; then in a regal Solemnity they bring forth the Kings Son (the joy
and Jubilee of al their hearts) the wished and welcome progeny of Iehoshaphat,
descended longo de stemmate regum, of an ancient line of Princedome: they put
the Crown upon his head, they give him the testimony, they 2 Chr. 23. 11.
make him King, 2 Kin. 11. 12.
Iehoiada and his sons anoint him, they all clapped their hands for joy, and
with their hands their hearts, and with their hearts their tongues, till their
many, yet united voices even reuerberate the air with this heauenpiercing
echo, this eucharistique gratulation; God save the King.

So when the days of that admired A queen over men, a queen over her self
for a maiden queen.
Queen (O quam te memorem virgo?) were on earth concluded, our late deceased
Sovereign Queen Mundi totius vna decus: Beza Epigram: in class: hisp: Anno
1588.
Elizabeth (of most famous and blessed memory) then the Foxes of Babylon, who
had lain in ho^es XLIIII years, began to threaten, as Esau did his brother,
Genesis 27. 41. Ad certum tempus sunt Christiani, postea peribunt, and redibunt
Idola: verum tum cum expectas miserinfidelis vt transeant Christiani, transis
ipse sine Christianis, Aug. in P s. 70
The days of mourning for my father will come shortly, then will I stay my
brother Jacob: the day of her death the dawning of their desire: for then they
thought, like Bustards in a fallow field, to raise up themselves vi turbinis;
the Papists hoped then to have raised their religion by a whirlwind of
rebellion, but our pacator orbis, which was Constantines praise and title,
frustrated their bloody hopes: and as Paterculus says of the Roman Empire
after Augustus death, that there was great expectation of much troubles, but,
tanta fuit vnius viri maiestas, vt nec bonis, neque contra malos opus foret
armis; there was so great a Majesty in one man, that there was no use of Arms
for good men, or against bad men; So the great Majesty of our succeeding
Sovereign King James, as learned, virtuous, and religious a Prince as any
under Quo nil praesta^tius orb; nobiliusque nihil nostro sol aspicit aeuo.
the roof of Heaven, calmed all the storms, and imaginary tempests which were
feared and expected; so that the world did see, Sol occubuit, nox nulla secuta
est:
Our Sun did set, and yet no night did follow: the enemies Mortua regina and
quasi non est mortua, quia reliquit similem, plus quam fimilis hic.
of England saw it then to their grief, who hoped that when the Sun went
down, some erraticall star should shine; but still the Planet keeps his
course, Phoenix-like a new, and yet the same renewed: So that Pythagoras
transmutation herein holds, eadem anima in nouo corpore, an alteration in sex,
yet of the same condition: both peerless Paragons, and princely patterns for
the perfection of Princes. To leave the one, who now lives a glorious Queen in
Heaven, behold our dread Sovereign, the Augustus of this latter world; --
praeteritis melior, venientibus author: a King not only virorum, but sacrorum,
a defender of men, and Defender of the Faith, Rex idem hominum, Christique
sacerdos.


Now to our great joy, and comfort of great Britannye, his Majesty's happy and
auspicious day of that most welcomed and applauded proclamation (God save King
James) has annually xv times rowsed, and revived -- toto diuisos orb
Britannos. The Quem beneficia accepta memorem non reddu^t, is grauius
suppliciu^ meretur. Chrysostom, de Sacerd. lib. 4.
remembrance of the blessings it has brought by Gods great mercy with it, both
spiritual and temporal, should move all that live under the wings of his
peaceable dominions, to lift up hearts and hands to the King of Kings, to
multiply his days as the days of Heaven, to save him from all conspiracies,
treasons and rebellions, to pray for him, as the Christians prayed in old time
for their Kings yet heathens, wishing them vitam prolixam, imperium securum,
domum tutam, exercitus fortes, senatum fidelem, as Tertullian writes, Tertul.
in Ap^log. c. 30.
A long life, a quiet Empire, a safe Court, strong Armies, a faithful
Counsel; yea with David Psalm 132. 18.
, that God would clothe all his enemies with shame, but upon him his Crown to
flourish. Let the united voices of his Majesty's populous Kingdoms send up to
Heaven their cordial and continual acclamations, God save the King; let the
echo resound in Heaven as seruently, as the noise of the Romans did in
applause of Flaminius, generally calling him, Savior, Savior; the noise
whereof was so violent and vehement, that (as Plutarch Plut. in vita Flaminij.
writes) it made the fowls of the air fall down dead: or as the 1 Kin. 1.
people of Israel did to Solomon, when he was created King in Gihon, and
anointed there by Zadock with an horn of oil taken out of the Sanctuary, the
1 King. 1. 40.
people piped with pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rang
with the sound of it, 39.
blowing their trumpets and saying, God save King Solomon. So let all the
people within his Highness Dominions lift up their hearts and hands, blow their
trumpets, ring their bells, frequent their Churches, saying and praying,

God save the King Corporally, Spiritually, Politically.

CHAP. II.
AND surely we are fallen upon the times, wherein Proditor est martyr, coeli
certissimus hares.
by some, rebellion is counted a spice of devotion; Traitors encalendred for
Saints or Martyrs: -- vis proditoria nomine vocatur nou^,
Romana virtus.


In the Jesuits School nothing is so rife as the theoricke and practicke of
Princes Murder. Mariana Mariana de reg. lib. 1. c 7.
prescribes to Traitors rules and cautions for poisoning Kings, and highly
commends King-killers, praeclare cum Maria. p 60. Vid: orat: sixth: Qt habit: in
consistoria, and Saunders: Fra: de Verone: Azorius: Philopater: Allen, and aly:
rebus humanis ageretur si multi etc; It were a merry world if there were many
of that kind: so Six^us Quintus makes a long oration to praise that Friar who
killed Henry the third the French King, stiling it rarum, inanditum, memorabile
facinus. Dolman, Cymanea, Rosseus, Fewardentius, Bellar. Becanus, Suares and
others hold the like traitorous assertions, Subditos posse depriuare reges a
Papa excommunicatos, vita and regno: Subjects may deprive Kings of their lives
and kingdoms; thinking of Kings royal blood, as Maximinus Tertul: in Apol.
said of Christians blood, Christianorum sanguinem dijs victimam esse omnium
gratissimam; the Christians blood is the most acceptable sacrifice to God: as
Seneca falsely Spolia opima Joui: Sen. Prosperum scelus vocatur virtus.
thought, that there is no sacrifice more acceptable to God then a Tyrant
offered in sacrifice; and most wickedly Guignard called the murder of Henry the
French King by poisoned knives, committed by two Iacobin Friars,
heroicumfactum, and donum spiritus sancti, A most heroycall Act, and the gift
of the holy Ghost. So that the vpstart Champions of the Church of Rome, having
contemned Gods precept, Nolite tangere etc. 1 Chr. 16. 22.
Touch not my anointed, and both by pen and practice laboring to be the
Devils empericks to let out the blood of Kings; it is the duty of all good
Subjects duly and daily to pray unto God, to reveal and revenge all the
mischiefs and machinations of the sons and servants of the purple whore Reu.
17. 46.
which is drunken with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs
of Christ Jesus; Machau: Princ. c. 11.
Purpurati pontificij omnium matuum authors sunt, etc. The purple Romanists
have bin the prime instruments of most pernicious actions. And therefore let
all the people of great Britanie join as their loyal obedience binds them to
their necessary service) both in hearts and voices to almighty God, (the
protector of Kings) to Psalm. 21. 8. 9.
find out all his enemies and make them like a fiery oven in the time of his
anger, to confound all their conspiracies, making them like the grass Psalm.
129. 6.
on the house tops, which withers before it come forth; saying and praying;
God save the King.

CHAP. III.
THE causes and motives to induce all good subjects to this Christian service
and loyal duty (to pray continually for the preservation of the King) be many
and manifold; I will but touch some of them, and leave the rest to Christian
rememberance: for Breuitas sermon tenexda.


The first is the Apostle 1 Timothy 2.
Paul's precept, ante omnia, before all, that Supplications, Prayers and
Intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for Kings etc, and renders a
powerful motive to persuade all, consisting of three benefits Tribus
argume^tis ostendit orandu^ esse proregibus, quorum duo sumpta sunt ab effectu
vtili: Pisc: in locu^.
arising from it: 1. a quiet and peaceable life: 2. in all godliness and
honesty: 3. this is good and acceptable in the sight of God; The Kings
preservation is our preservation, his welfare is the weal of our
Commonwealth; reip. foelicit as non potest esse absque Principis foelicitate,
says Pliny, Plin: 2 Panegy. ad Traianum.
A Country is unhappy under an unhappy King; so that if people desire to live
a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, let them like
dutiful members pray for the prosperity of the supreme head, for if he fall
upon the rocks, they are like to come to ruin: Rex sapiens est stabilimentum
populi. Wisd. 6. 24.
Vt ratis in scopulos errat peritura latentes,
Nullus vbi celsa puppe magister adest:


As a ship whose Pilot perishes, is driven upon the rocks, and so is cast
away; even so, how can the ship of State sail with a prosperous wind, whose
regal Pilot suffers ship wrack? Regal adversity is the harbenger of popular
calamity, wherefore if Subjects desire to be happy themselves, let them
continually pray for the happiness Rex si bonus est, nutritor est tuus, si
malus, tentator tuus est: Aug. ser. 6. de verb. dom. secund: Math.
of their Soueraign, whose prosperity is the Axis or Cardo, the very foundation
of their temporal felicity.

2 Motive is the great difficulty in the right managing of the regal office,
and therefore had need to be assisted with the frequent and fervent prayers of
the people, imploring divine wisdom, to direct the heart of their Sovereign,
for it is Ars artium, the Art of Arts, rightly to rule Bellua multorum capitum:
homine nullum morosius animal nec maiori art tractandum: Seen.
and govern commonwealths; this many-headed multitude so divided in Faction
and action, scarce two, quibus vna vox, aut votum, of one mind or mould; Peace
pleases Cato, War Pompey: the Soldier cries Arma virumque cano; The
Merchant, da pacem Domine: Brutus desires a Commonwealth, Caesar a Monarchy,
Ciceroes counsel is, seruiendum tempori, but Lentulus thinks that the voice
of a flatterer; in the Quot capita tot sententiae, quot homines tothumores,
quot humores tot mores: Lipsius.
popular sort, as many heads as hearts, Scinditur incertum Studia in
contrariavulgus:


So that to reconcile, and to reclaim to unity and unanimity this Babell of
men, had need of Exodus 18. 19.
Iethroes head; Be wise O ye Kings, and learned ye that are Judges of the
earth, Psalm. 2. 10.
says David: they had need of great wisdom who are rulers of such popular
flocks; and therefore Solomon showed himself wise, who in the entrance into
his regal throne 2 Chr. 1. 10.
craved of God wisdom, and knowledge to judge the great people; that I may
say with the son of wisdom, Wisd. 6. 21.
If your delight be then in Thrones and Scepters, O Kings of the people, honor
wisdom, that you may reign for ever. David's prayer should be the
supplication of all Kings; difficilis est gubernatio mea, ne me deseras domine
senem. The office of a King as it is glorious, so it is Magna seruitu^ est
magna fortuna, nam ipsi Caesari cui omnia licent, propter hoc ipsu multa non
licent. Seneca consolat. ad Polybium. Reges vigilant, cum Subditi dormiunt: etc
Plut co, ad principem indoctum.
laborious; Caesar sleeps not all the night but makes a Tripartite division of
it; one part to rest, the second part to study, the third part to military
matters; Agesilaus had no leisure to be sick (as he said) such was his regal
employments; The regal Diadem is subject to sundry cares, which moved
Tigranes King of Armenia, to say that if the perils and perplexities which
accompany it, were duly weighed, Nemo coronaem humi iacentem tolleret: None
would lift up the Crown to the crown of his head. Indeed the Crown brings
content, command, pleasure, profit:

Iuvenal: Quicquid conspicuu^ est pulerumque ex aequore toto resfisciest,
vbicunque natat:
What delicates soever the world affords, the Crown D^adema spinaru, and
gemmarum. Miseros esse principes si intelligent sua mala, miseriores si no^
intelligu^t: Erasmus.
commands, but withal, many perils and cares wait upon the Crown, night and
day troubled with public affairs, to prevent foes abroad, and foes at home;
we of the inferior rank take our rest, when as they that sit at the stern
of State have broken sleeps. And therefore as the Ephesians. 6. 18. 19. Preces sunt
arma caelestia quae stare faciunt, and teldiuina omnes hosts vincere. Cypr.
lib. 1 epist. 1.
Apostle desires the Ephesians, to pray always with all manner of prayer and
supplication in the spirit, and watch thereunto with all perseverance and
supplication, for all Saints, and for himself, that utterance may be given
unto him, to open his mouth boldly, to publish the secret of the Gospel; so
ought all good subjects to pray always with all manner of prayer and
supplication in the spirit, that God would enlarge with heavenly wisdom, the
heart of our Sovereign (and the Kings Prou. 21. 2.
heart is in the hand of the Lord) and furnish him with all blessed gifts,
suitable to perform his royal Task, making him as wise as 2 Chr. 1. 21.
Solomon, as religious as Psalm. 27. 4.
David, and as zealous as the good King 2 King. 22. 19.
Josias; defending him from all foreign, or domestical conspiracies; saying
and praying, God save the King.

CHAP. IIII.
AND truly there be five things (to name no more) which all good Subjects owe
unto their Sovereign: 1. is Prayer. 2. Obedience. 3. Honor. 4. Service. 5.
Tribute. And if any subject deny any one of these, the King may take him by
the throat and say Math. 18. 28.
Solue quod debes, Pay that thou owe.

1. First is Prayer; to pray for the Kings preservation on earth, and salvation
in Heaven. The heathen Chaldeans may learn Christians this lesson, who cried
to their King Dan. 3. 9.
Nebuchadnezar, O King live for ever. As King 1 Kin. 8. 34. 36.
Solomon prayed for his people, so ought his people pray for him, saying of
their Lord the King, as King David speaks of the Lord of Israel, Blessed Psalm.
106. 48.
be the Lord God of Israel for ever and ever; and let all the people say Amen:
saying to the King as Amasa and his company said to David. 1 Chr. 12. 18.
Thine are we O David, and with thee O son of Ishai; peace, peace be unto thee,
and peace be unto thy helpers, for thy God helps thee. That tongue that will
not pray for the peace, prosperity, and preservation of their anointed
Sovereign, is such a tongue as the Apostle James Iam. 3. 6.
speaks of, fire, and a world of wickedness, and is set on fire of hell: for,
Iustus nunquam desinit orare, nisi desinit iustus esse, says Austin, the just
man never ceases to pray, unless he cease to be just: much less should he
cease to pour forth fervent and faithful supplications for the King, that
under him we may lead a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. Such
ungodly and undutiful subjects as will not unloose the strings of their
tongues to pray for the safety and felicity of the King, we wish that they
were like the men at the river Ganges, who (if we credit the report of Strabo)
have no tongues: Math. 5 29.
better it is to enter into the kingdom of Heaven losing a member, then having
such an ungodly member to be cast into hell fire. But herein many times the
tongue is more officious then the heart; with tongue they cry Hosanna Matthew.
21. 9.
, but in heart, like Jews wish crucifige; with a verbal service many abound
crying and cringing, Aue Rex; but withal Aue Maria, and that will never make a
good prayer. A King had need call to his subjects, as God to his servants,
Prou. 23. 26. Quod cor non facit, non fit.
da mihi cor, give me thy heart; the world is full of fair tongues, but false
hearts: none but the great searcher of the heart, has a window in the heart to
see who honor with lips, and their hearts far from him. So that Kings had
need examine their Subjects as John* 21. 15.
Christ did Peter thrice, diligis me? do thou love me? The world has bredde
so many professors of the Popish doctrine of devilish equivocation, and so
many Parasites profound in the Art of dissimulation, that many men are like
Goodwin Sands, in dubiopelagi terraue, doubtful whether belong to sea or land;
temporizers or neuters, like the Reu: 3. 15.
Church of Laodicea neither hot nor cold, either Prince or Pope please them,
they will hear a Mass next their heart for their morning sacrifice, and our
Churches Sermon or Service for their evening Incense, like the Camelion --
tetigit quoscunque colores:
Assume any shape fashionable to the time: to whom God will one day say,
Because thou art Reu: 3. 16:
lukewarm, neither cold nor hot, I shall spue thee out of my mouth. I have
read Lipsius Politic. 3. c. 20.
how a certain King of Tartaria, writ to the Polonians then wanting a King,
that if they would choose him their King, he would accept it upon these terms,
Vester pontifex, meus pontifex esto, vester Lutherus meus Lutherus esto; but
the Polonians rejected the request of this Lukewarm King (and yet in Poland
arc sundry religions, so that if a man have lost his religion, he may find it
there) with this wise and worthy answer, Ecce hominum paratum omnia sacra, and
Deos deserere regnandi causa; behold a man ready to forsake both God and Grace
to get a Kingdom. Such as these study Machiauell more then the Gospel,
Machiau: princ. c. 3.
temporis liberalitate fruendum esse, fashion themselves to the favorable
fortune of the time, and think themselves happy (as he Match: prin: c. 25.
counts those Princes happy, illum felicem principem existimo, cuius in
administrando consilia temporum conditioni respondent, whose counsels are
successively correspondent to the condition of the times.) The prayers of such
temporizers (whose tongues may flame, but their hearts are as cold a a stone)
are abominable in the sight of God: Esto religiosus in Deum, qui vis illum
Imperatori esse propitium, says Tertullian Tert. Apol. c. 34.
. The Lord is far off from the wicked, but he hears the prayers of the
righteous, says Prou. 15. 29.
Solomon; God will not hear the prayers of these Church-neuters, no more then
the Idolatrous Jews, Ezech. 8. 18.
Though they cry in my ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them. And
therefore that we may perform our first bounden duty unto the King,
acceptable unto the King of Kings, in making hearty and humble prayers for the
protection and preservation of his Majesty, let all the people in his Realm
from high to low, from great to small, do this comfortable and Christian
service fe^uently, feelingly and faithfully unto the Lord night and day crying
and craving, God save the King.

The Lord has commanded this duty to pray not Orate pro regibus etiam ijs
qui gentititer vixerunt. Optatus Mileuitan: lib: 3.
only for good Kings, but even for badde Kings. When Paul gave that
Apostolical counsel, 1 Timothy, z. 1. 2. to pray for Kings, Caligula,
Claudius, or Nero, most bloody Pagan Emperors then reigned. Baruc. 1. 11.
Pray for the life of Nebuchadnezar King of Babylon, and for the life of
Balthazar his son, that their days might be on earth as the days of heaven;
So the Ier. 29* 7. So Abraham prayed for King Abimeleck. Ge^. 20. 27. So Jacob
blessed King Pharao. Genesis 47. 10.
Lord commanded the Jews to pray for the peace of the City of Babylon, where
Nebuchadnezar reigned. If then the Lord charge and command to pray for such
Governors as were Pagans, Persecutors, Idolaters, Infidels; how devoutly and
deeply are all loyal subjects bound to pray and to praise God for the blessed
government of Zealous and Christian Kings, and to beseech Pro se orare
neoessitas cogit, pro alijs charitas, pro regibus fidelitas: Chrsyost.
God with prostrate souls to defend their Sovereigns from all the treacherous
traynes and rebellious plots of foreign foes, or homeborne parricides,
corner-creeping Jesuits and Iudasses, and to implore the hand of Heaven to
sentinel over them; and to endue them from above, with the gifts of knowledge,
prudence, justice, temperance, fortitude, clemency, with fervent zeal of Gods
glory, love to the Gospel, and neuer-ceasing care for the general welfare
of their public charge? Let us spend our spirits day and night in these
prayers, that a gracious blessing may be evermore upon our Sovereign and his
Seed, to prolong his days with health and honor on earth, and with immortal
happiness in Heaven.

Amen.
CHAP. V.
THE second general duty of all subjects, is Obedience, and that before God 1 Samuel 15. 22.
is better then sacrifice Obedientia victimis praeponitur, quia per victimam
aliena caro, per obedientia^ volu^tas nostra mactatur. Greg. lib. 35. mor.
The enemy opposite to Obedience is rebellion, compared by 1 Samuel 15. 23.
Samuel to the sin of Witchcraft, the very Chaos of confusion, containing
nothing else but mischief and murder, discord and desolation, -- congestaque
eodem
Non been iunctarum discordia semina rerum: Ovid.
As rebellion is most odious and detestable, so is obedience commendable and
acceptable, and this is

of three sorts: 1. Obedire Deo per hominem, 2. Obedire Deo, and homini, 3.
Obedire Deo, potius quam homini.

First obey God by man. 2. Obey God and man. 3 Obey God rather then man. We
need not write how God is to be obeyed before all, and above all; nullius
prohibitio diuinis valet obuiare praeceptis, nullius iussio praeiudicare
prohabitis: Gods Precepts may not be cou^termanded by man's prohibitions, nor
Gods prohibitions, prejudiced by man's precepts: God is to be obeyed in every
thing, simpliciter; man is to be obeyed, secundum quid, respectively, so far as
his commands be consonant to Gods Laws. St Austin gives al a good rule for
obedience; bonis in malo scienter no^ obedias, nec malis in bono co^tradicas,
willingly and wittingly obey not good men in the performance of ill, nor
disobey ill men commanding things good; but God himself commands obedience to
his Rex est animata Imago Dei.
breathing Images, whom he himself styles Psalm. 82. 1. 6.
Gods; the mortal pictures of immortal God; Dexteri digiti diuinae manus,
quae regit orbem, the right fingers of that heavenly hand which rules all:
Reges sunt homines ante deum, Kings have a three fold image of God in them. I
in their birth of freedom: 2 in their baptism of Christianity: 3 in their
place of Sovereignty.
dei ante homines, says Lactantius, Kings are men before God, and Gods before
men.

Astra Deo nihil maius habent, nil Caesare terra, Great is the glory of that
God, who makes these Gods Kings are Gods 1 by Analogy. 2 by Deputation. 3 by
Participatio^ A King differs from his people in use, not in stuff. Basil:
Doron lib. 2.

. Quantus Deus est, qui Deos facit? Austen. Imperator omnibus mayor est, dum
Deo solo minor est, says Tert: lib: ad Scapulam.
Tertullian. The Emperor is greater in dignity then all mortal men, only
inferior to the immortal God; and as Epist: ad Theod: prefixa lib: aduers:
Julian.
Cyrillus writes to Theodosius the younger, vestrae Serenitati nullus status
est aequalis, No mortal state equal to your Excellence; or as Paraenet. number:
21.
Agapetus to the Emperor Justinian, Se non habere quenquam in terris altiorem,
None on the earth higher then himself: for as Lib: 3. contra Parmen.
Opiatus, Super imperatorem non est nisi solus Deus qui fecit imperatorem,
Above the Emperor is none, but only God that made the Emperor: or as St
Chrysostom Hom: 3. ad pop: Antioch.
speaking of the Emperor Theodosius; Non habet parem vllum super terram
summitas and caput omnium super terram hominum, He has no equal upon earth,
the supreme head over all men on earth. Lo, now you Popes of Rome, where were
your triple Crowns? your Miters, if you had any, then stooped to the Scepters:
then Romans 13. 1.
Paul's precept was in date with you, Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers, which since you have rejected, or neglected as Apocryphal: then Greg:
9. lib 1. decret: tit. 33. c. 6.
Gregory's allegory had been a fond hyperbole, Ad firmamentam coeli, etc. in
the firmament of heaven, that is, in the universal Church, God made two great
Papa a Deo constitutus est super gentes and regna, vt euellat, and dissipet,
aedificet and pla^tet, and quanta est inter solemn and Luna^ differentia, tanta
est inter pontifices and reges. Innocent in c: sollicitae: 6. de mayor: and
obed. Vide Bonif: 8. extrauag: council: tit: de mayor. and obedi.
lights, that is, two great dignities, Pontifical and Regal; that which rules
the day, that is, spiritual things, is greater then that which rules the
night, that is, carnal or temporal things: as great a difference as is twixt
the Sun and the Moon, so great is there twixt Pope and Kings, says Gregory.
Indeed of latter times the Popes have claimed a triple Crown, Celestial,
Terrestrial, Infernal, intruding into the regal Chair: forgetting Ber: de
consid: lib. 1. c. 6.
Bernards counsel to Pope Eugenius, Your authority stretches unto crimes, not
unto possessions, wherefore do you thrust your sickle into another harvest,
or incroach upon others limits? now they usurp and arrogate a place of
pre-eminence above Kings and Emperors: Diuisum imperium cum Jove Papa tenet.


Forgetting S. 1 Pet 2. 13.
Peter's rule, though boasting of Peter's right, Submit your selves unto all
manner of ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King, as
unto the superior etc. subijci domino temporali, propter dominum aeternum, as
excellently Austen, Aug: in Ps. 124.
To submit themselves unto Temporal Lords, for the eternal Lords sake. But
leaving the favorites and followers of that Reu. 17. 1. 2.
great whore which sits upon many waters, with whom have committed fornication
the Kings of the earth, and which has shaken off the yoke of obedience from
the Kings of the earth; Let us look upon that place of S. Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
exhorting all to obedience, Submit your selves etc. propounding certain
arguments or reasons to enforce it: Vide Piscat: anal, in locum.
1. propter dominum: for the Lords sake, Vt honoremus Deum, qui hanc
obedientiam nobis praecipit; that so we may honor God who has commanded this
obedience. 2. vt euitemus poenas violatae iustitiae ciuilis, that we may avoid
the punishments of disobedience to the Magistrate, sent ad vltionem
maleficorum, for the punishment of ill doers, v. 14. 3. vt adipiscamur laudem
ac protectionem contra iniustos, that we may get praise and protection against
the wicked by our obedience; ad laudem recte agentium, v. 14. to the praise of
them Romans 13. 3.
that do well. So the Apostle Paul in that excellent Lecture of obedience,
foreseeing that City would be the mother of rebellion, and that her Governor
like the Prince of the The Roman city first taking her original from a
traitor to his country, afterward founded with murder, has spilt more blood,
then spent mortar, etc. Lanquet Chron: fol 35. Every soul without exception,
reservation, or equivocation.
Air should bear rule in the children of disobedience, lays down a general
and substantial foundation for obedience, Let every soul etc. No Si quis
tentat excipere, conatur decipere, Ber: epist. 42. ad Archiep. Sen.
exception or exemption of Pope or Priest, Omnis anima subiecta essee debet
potestatibus super eminentibus, ergo Papa debet esse subiectus Caesari, etc
Pisc: anal. super locum.
omnis anima etc. etiamsi Apostolus, Euangelista, Propheta, says Saint
Chrysostom upon that place; though an Apostle, an Evangelist or a Prophet, yet
let him be subject to the higher powers, which Augustine, Chrysostom, and the
best Ancients confess and affirm to be potestates saeculares, the secular
powers, and so acknowledged by the Jesuit Disp: 10 in Romans 13. v. 1. rations
ductae ab honesto, vitili, iucundo. Vti Gorran: in locum.
Pererius, to be temporal powers: and the Apostle enforces all to this
obedience by three reasons. 1. Drawn, a causa procreante, the efficient or
procreant cause of government, For there is no power but of God, and the powers
that be, are ordained of God, verse. 1. 2. Drawn, ab effectu pernicioso, from
the pernicious effect of disobedience, Whosoever resists power, resists the
ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves
condemnation, or judgment, v. 2. 3. Taken A beneficio, or ab effectu vtili,
from the benefit or profitable effect of obedience, For he is the Minister of
God for thy wealth, v. 4. Concluding that obedience is necessary, Non solum
propter timorem sed propter conscientiam, v. 5. Not only for fear, but for
Conscience sake. So again the Apostle Tit. 3. 1.
Paul lays down his Apostolical lesson to his son Titus. Put them in
remembrance, or admonish them, that they be subject to Princes or
Principalities and powers, and that they be obedient etc. Nay indeed it is,
naturae thesis, The beasts obey the Lion, the birds the Eagle, the fishes the
Whale, etc. Rex vnus est apibus and dux vnus in gregibus. Cyprian de vanit.
Idol: The Cranes have their Captain, quem ordine literato sequuntur. Hieron.
epist, ad Rusticum.
natures theme to obey Princes, and of this theme Grace is the Hypothesis.

Look upon the silly Bees, the best emblemes of obedient Creatures, painful
in their labor, dutiful in their life, their king being safe, they are all at
unity, Rege incolumi, men's omnibus vna;
Amisso, rupere fidem, constructaque mella destruere. --
So long as their King is well, they follow their work; but being lost, they
leave and loath their Hony-combes, and when their king waxes old and cannot
fly, fert ipsum turba apum, they carry him on their wings, Et si moritur, Pet:
Chry. in Policrat. lib. 7.
moriuntur and ipsae: And if he die they die with him, as some write. Behold
how nature has stamped obedience by instinct to Bees, to be subject to a
superior in their kind; how much more should nature, reason, and grace,
stamp obedience in the hearts of Christians, knowing that without a kingly
government, Kingdoms are thraldomes, remota iustitia quid sunt regna nisi
magna latrocinia, says Aug. de ciuit. des lib. 4. c. 4.
Austen, Take away Justice, and what are kingdoms but dens of thieves? Take
away obedience to government, and that were miscere terris Tartara, make earth
and hell all one, but only in name. There is not wanting divine precepts, or
divine patterns, to allure loyal obedience: take two in stead of many; the
first and best of all, our Savior Christ, Math. 3. 17.
in whom God is well pleased: and the second, David, 1 Samuel 13. 14.
a man after Gods own heart: Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ (yet God and
man) in the days of his flesh disdained not to obey such as were in authority,
Math. 22. 21.
commanding to give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, and paying Math. 17. 27.
tribute to Caesar for himself and Peter, by the hands of Peter, though Peter's
supposed successors will pay none. And though our Savior Christ received
manifold injuries and indignities from unjust and faithless Governors, yet he
never moved rebellion or resistance, but digested all with patience and
obedience, knowing that the powers that be are ordained of God: telling Pilate
that unjust Judge, that his power was John. 19. 11.
Datadesuper, given him from above; for the Wisd. 6. 3.
rule is given of the Lord, and power of the most high: Deo obediendum est
propter se, tanquam summo domino, magistratui propter deum tanquam illius
ministro; says one, Piscat. anal. in Matthew. 22. 21.
God is to be obeyed for himself, being chief Lord, the Magistrate is to be
obeyed for God, as being Gods Minister or deputy. So that the pattern of
Christ's obedience to temporal powers, Omnis Christi actio est nostra
instructio.
must be our platform of instruction in the duty of obedience. 2. David's
obedience to King Saul is very commendable and remarkable: Saul was a A Tyrant
by abuse of power, not by vsurpatio^.
Tyrant, and sought without cause or color to kill David; yet David often
hazarded his life and limbs against Saul's enemies the Philistines, evermore
testifying his prompt obedience and service to his Sovereign; and when this
King Saul (like that other Acts. 9. 1.
Saul) breathing out threatenings and slaughter against David, following him to
the wilderness of Engedi (where David used pia fallacia, hid himself in a 1 Samuel 24. 4.
Cave) and had opportunity to cut off Saul's head, as well as the lap 5
of his garment; or if he were timorous to dip his hand in blood, as once a
Gregory Greg: lib. 7. epist. 1.
willed Sabinian to tell the Emperor, exciting him against the Lombards, Timeo
Deum, and metuo habere manum in sanguine alicuius, I fear God, and am afraid
to have any hand in blood: (oh that Popes had now hearts like Gregory,
fearful to Pope Julius the second by his means in 7 years destroyed 200000
Christians. Geneb.
shed blood) if I say David had such a qualme of fear come over his heart,
lo, the 1 Samuel 24. 8.
hands of his servants ready to have done it, and scarce could be kept from it,
only David does terrify them from doing it: 7
The Lord keep me from doing that thing unto my Master the Lords Anointed, to
lay my hands upon him, for he is the Lords Anointed. Dum timuit oleum seruauit
inimicum, as excellently Lib. 2. aduers: Parmenianum.
Optatus, in fearing the anointing, he preserved his enemy. But after this
obedient fidelity performed by David to King Saul, behold the sickness of that
Tyrant, suspicion moves Saul still to persecute David, the Ziphims 1 Samuel 26. 1.
tell Saul, David hides himself in the hill of Hachilah. In a word, David
might have killed Saul sleeping, or if he would not himself do it, 8
Abishai offered his service, I pray thee let me smite him once with a spear to
the earth, and I will smite him no more; but still see how obedience holds his
hands and moves his tongue, Destroy 9 Principem occidere piaculum est.
him not, for who can lay his hand on the Lords Anointed, and be guilt less?
And afterward Saul being slain, and a certain Amalckite hoping to have been
a happy Post in telling 2 Samuel 14.
David, Saul is dead, and showing David that he hasted 10
Saul's death, (though 1 Samuel 31. 4.
Saul himself had acted the Prologue of his own death, this made the Epilogue
of his life) and brought the Crown in his hand, (a tempting bait to get
praise or pardon) yet all in vain: how wast thou not afraid to put forth thy
hand to destroy the anointed of the Lord? says 2 Samuel 1. 14. 15.
David; and commands his servant to give him legem talionis: to kill this
King-killer, though by consent and entreaty. Sic pereant, and qui moliri talia
pergunt.
So let them perish, who such deeds do cherish.


What do all these particulars summed up together, but infer this Ecce, John
1. 47
Behold a true Israelite in whom is no guile; Behold a good Subject in whom is
no treason? David was not sick of the Kings evil, Treason: he was not like
the Popish Jesuits, who dispute against Kings altogether in Ferio; laboring
to verify Iuuenals verse, Ad generum Cereris sine caede, and sanguine pauci --
descendunt reges. -- All their arguments and actions like Dracos laws, bloody:
but David was not matriculated in the School of Traitors; ever obedient and
loyal to his Sovereign, faithful in his obedience, aduenturing his body and
blood for the service of Saul, in defense against his enemies, and might truly
say with Scaliger in his warfare, for King Saul's welfare: Pugnaui pedes, eques,
adolescens, iuuenis, miles, praefectus, certamine singulari, in obsidionibus,
in campo civilly, in excursionibus, in exercitibus saepius vici: aliquando
victus sum, corpore, non animo, non virtute, sed facto, etc. As virtuous and
valorous Scaliger writes of himself: so David oftentimes fought against Saul's
professed enemies, Goliath the Philistine, the Amalekites, etc: as from the
seventeenth Chapter of the first of Samuel, almost to the end of that Book,
is the very muster Book of David's wars for Saul's welfare: so that I may say
with Lucianus in Scytha.
Toxaris, who seeing his Countryman Anacbarses in Athens, told him, that he
would show him all the wonders of Greece at once, viso Solone, vidisti omnia:
so I may say, viso Dauide, vidisti satis. The obedience of David to King Saul
is sufficient to instruct a Subject. Lucanus -- Quid satis est? si Romaparum?


If this be not sufficient, nothing will suffice; but the enemies of Caesar's
will peradventure reply and say; God save good Kings, but for bad Kings (say
they) we pray God, or good men send them to their graves: and this doctrine de
depositione regis, dispositione regni, aut depriuatione vitae, to depose a
King, or dispose of his Kingdom, or deprive him of his life, if he be not (as
they count) Catholic, the resolute generation of martial Ignatius Loyola
Hassenmull: lib. de ord. Jesus. Pope. Paul. 3. established the order, An. 1540.
Ignatius Loyola the first named in the Bull. Pet. Maffe. vit. Loyol. lib. 2. c.
12. Potestates quae sunt, a Deo ordinatae sunt: hic est vt gentilem in
potestate positum honorificemus, licet* ipse indignus sit, qui Dei ordinem
tenens, gratias agit Diabolo. Potestas enim exigit, quia meretur bonorem,
August. quaest. ex vet. test. c. 35. Malus magistratus, est dei vicarius: Aret.
Comment: in 13. Romans
, (their first Founder) modern Jesuits, do with all might and maine labor
to maintain, and quod nequeant calamis, aut calumniis, veneficijs and
parricidijs tentant: Where their Pens fail, their Pikes and Poisons follow; we
will but touch it now, for we shall handle it more at large hereafter.

It is an easy task to show, that loyal obedience is to be performed to
wicked Kings, as our former instances of the best note, Christ's obedience, and
David's obedience to Saul, make it manifest; it is due to them, omni iure
naturali, civilly, morali, municipali, diuino; by the law of nature, civil,
moral, municipall, divine: we will only prove it due by the last, by divine
law; if that prove it, who dare deny it? The Apostle Romans 13. 1, makes the
matter plain. Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, for there is no
power but of God, etc: from which place I argue thus. All Powers that are
ordained of God, must be obeyed: The higher Powers (be they good or bad) are
ordained of God. Ergo -- to be obeyed.


We may corroborate these two propositions by manifold places, as Proverbs 8.
15: By me Kings reign, etc. Reges in solio collocat in perpe^, Job 36. 7: he
places them as Kings in their thrones for ever. Sometimes God suffers the
hypocrite to reign, Job 34. 30. I gave thee a King in my anger, and took him
away in my wrath, says the Deus regnat per se, reges per Deum. Deus coeli and
terrae vere proprietarius, reges coloni and Emphyteutae Iunius Brutus quaest:
3, vind. contra Tyrannos.
Lord to Israel, Hosea 13. 1^: Thou could have no power except it were given
thee from above, said Christ to Pilate, John 19. 11: Give ear all you that
rule the People, all your power is given of the most High: Wisd. 6. 3. Touch
not mine anointed, 1 Chronicles. 16. 22: be they good, be they bad, touch them not;
Rom* 12. 19.
vengeance is the Lords, not man's. Man must not meddle in Gods matters, Who 1 Samuel 26. 9*
can lay his hands on the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless? Though they grow
defective in their high office, yet still remain Kings, because enthroned by
God. Cuius iussu nascuntur homines, eius iussu constituuntur Iraen. lib. 5 con.
haeres.
principes, says Iraeneus: Inde illis potestas, vnde spiritus, says Tertul.
Apologet. c. 30 Omnes sub rege, and ipse sub nullo, nisi tantum sub Deo.
Tertullian; the Kings Commission is sealed by the hand of God, and though it
run, Durante diuino beneplacito, yet man cannot, nay must not cancel it, for
that were Bellare cum dijs, War with God: -- Princeps, seu bonus seu malus,
a Jove;
ornes, si bonus, sin malus est, feras:


Says the wise Heathen. The power of good Kings Bracton: sieve iubente sieve
sinente deo: Aug: cont: Faust. Manich. lib. 22, c. 7
is by the special ordinance of God, of evil by his permission; the first are
insignia miserecordiae, badges and pledges of his mercy; the second are
flagella vindicta, the scourges of his fury. So Esaias 10. 5 Or as one of the
Fredericks, malleus orbis, or Otto, Pallida mors.
God called Ashur the rod of his wrath, and Attyla called himself flagellum
Dei, the scourge of God: and Tamberlayne in his time termed Ira dei, terror
orbis; the revenge of God, and terror of the World. Saul was a tyrant King,
yet David 1 Samuel 24 6
trembled to touch the skirts of his garments: what greater tyrant then King
Pharao? yet Moses neither had, nor gave any commission to the Isralites to
rebel; he makes no law, or Book, De iusta abdicatione, either to dispose or
depose him from his Kingdom. Nabuchadnezar a wicked and idolatrous King, yet
God Ierem: 25. 9
calls him his servant, and though he commands the three children to be put into
the fiery Dan. 3: 21 Aliud est seruitus animae, aliud corporis etc. vid. Aug.
de vera relig, c. vl. timo.
Oven, they offer no violence or resistance, Dant Deo animam, corpus regi:
Commend their souls to God, and committing their bodies to the King. Horat:
Tollere tentat illustres animas impune and vindice nullo:


Saint Baro: Tom. 11 An. 45
Peter who wrote his first Epistle in the time of the reign of that wicked
Emperor Claudius, as Baronius coniectured, exhorts all people to fear God,
and to honor the King, 1 Pet. 2. 17: and that for the Lords sake, v. 13. Yet
this Claudius was a most wicked Emperor, maintaining many Ethnicke
superstitions and worship of Idols, he was (as Suetonius Sueton. c. 34
writes of him) Natura saeuus, sanguinarius, and libidinosus, 33.
by nature cruel, bloody, and libidinous; yet to this Emperor a Tyrant and an
Infidel, Saint Peter exhorts the faithful Jews to obedience: Saint Paul who
lived under the same Emperor (as Rhemist. in tab: Paul.
some do think) writes to the Romans the Emperors Subjects, exhorts all to
submit themselves, not in any colorable or dissembled obedience, but propter
Conscientiam, v. 4: for conscience sake. Let us hear a voice or two of the
ancient Fathers that lived in old time: Tertullian (who as In Catalog:
scriptor: Eccles.
Jerome says) flourished under the reign of Seuerus the Emperor, who was a
great Tyrant, an Infidel, and an enemy to Christianity, who in the fifth
persecution after Nero, troubled the Christian World, Saeuissima persecutione,
with most cruel persecution (as Baron, An. Christi 205.
some write), yet teaches that all Subjects should both Been velle, been
dicere, and been facere, wish well, speak well, and do well for the Emperor,
the which threefold Been comprehends all loyal duties: The first Ad Cor. 2.
Ad Linguam: 3. Ad opus; as the Iansen. c. 40: Concord.
Jesuit rightly teaches, in thought, word, and deed, to be obedient. So
Justin Apolo 2: Ad Anton: Imperat.
Martyr, in the name of all Christians speaks to the Emperor Antoninus, an
infidel and a persecutor Bellar: in Chronol:
, in these words; Nos solum deum adoramus, and vobis in rebus alijs laeti
inseruimus: We worship only God, and in other matters are joyful to serve
you. So Saint Ambros. Epist. lib. 5. Epist. 33
Ambrose would not wish the people of Millan to disobey the Emperor
Valentinian, yet a favorer and follower of the Arrian Heresy: If the Emperor
(says he) abuse his imperial Iulianus Imp: Apostata habebat sub se Christianos
milites, quibus cum diceret producite aciem and obediebant ei^ cum autem dicit,
producite arma in Christianos, tunc cognoscebant imperatorem caeli: Ambros: 11
quaest: 3: Can. Iulianus.
authority to tyrannize thereby, here am I ready to suffer death; we as humble
suppliants, fly to supplication: if my Patrimony be your mark, enter upon it;
if my body, I will meet my torments: shall I be dragged to prison or death? I
will take delight in both; Oh Theological voice, Oh Episcopal obedience.
These were the voices of the holy Fathers in the ancient times: I but, will
some Popish Adversary to the regal supremacy reply, the times must be
considered, the people wanted power to resist. No, no, that was not the matter:
when Julian did dominere, who was an Apostate and an Idolater, as August: in
Ps. 12^.
Austin; yet his Soldiers, who were for the most part Christians, did obey him
without resistance in all military matters and public services, yet they then
had power to have resisted him; for most of Iulians Army did consist of
Christians, as their Socrat. lib. 3. ca. 22
voices to Iouinian his Successor declare, Omnes vna voce confessi sunt se esse
Christianos, as Ruff. lib. 2. histor. c. 1 Regi ethnico fidem non praestare
nefas.
Ruffinus records it; with a general voice they all confessed themselves
Christians: So Constantius and Valens wicked Emperors, and favorers of the
Arrian Heresy, yet we do not read of any of the Orthodoxe Christianity, that
disobeyed them by rebellion or resistance. Then Bellarmines Bellar: lib. 5 de
Romans Pon: c 7
doctrine was not in date, Non est legitimum, etc: It is not lawful for
Christians to tolerate an heretical King: his reasons I take to be (as De
Rom: Pontif. lib. 5, c. 7
he writes) because Reges coronas and sceptra ab hominibus recipient, and
adeoru^ placita tenent, Kings do receive their Crowns and Scepters from men,
and hold them at their pleasures. Strange stuff: for Kings receive their
Crowns Ego vnxi te in regem super Israel. 2 Samuel 12. 7
from God, as Ps. 20. 3, and are enthroned by God, By me Kings reign, Pro. 8.
15: They receive their throne from God, as Queen 2 Chro. 9. 8 Patriarchae vel
alij. Reges vnctia Deo, ante vnctione^ materialem: Aug: in Ps 140. Deus est Rex
omnis terrae: Ps. 46. 7 and Dominatur in Regno hominum, and cuicunque volucrit,
dat illud, Dan. 4. 22
Sheba tells Solomon; Diadema regis in manu dei, Esaias 62. 3: Sedebat Solomon in
thron^ dei, 1 Chro. 29. 23: Reges in solio collocat in perpetuum, Job 36. 7;
the anointing is Gods, With my holy oil have I anointed him, Psa. 89. 20. The
Crown, the Scepter, the Throne, their anointing, all from God; styled by God,
Vncti dei, Gods Anointed; Where is the Popes or Peoples claim? what interest
have any (except God) in Kings Crowns? who can remove whom God appoints? who
can deprive whom God approues? yet these absurd Non tenentur nec debent
Christiani, tolerare regem infidelem, quia de iure humano est, quod hunc aut
illum habeamus regem Bellar. de Romans Pont. lib: 5.
errors (formenta romanae Cathedrae, the corrupt leaven of Romes Pharisees and
Popes Parasites) are molded out by the mouths of Cardinals, that I may say
with the Poet Iuuenal; Adscelus atque nefas, quodcunque est. purpura ducit:


Sat. 13. The purple servants or scarlet sinners of that purple woman, are
become as Trumpeters to the World, to sound forth false alarums of disobedience
to encourage peoples rebellion. Tantum relligio potuit suadere malorum?
Quaepeperit, scelerosa atque impia facta.


But to leave these proud Cardinals (enemies to Caesar's) who think their red
Hat equal to a Regal Crown who yet of late from a small beginning Resp: Epi:
Eliens. ad M. Tort. in initio: Molineus in Senatuscons: Eran: number. 58.
(Origin parochi tantum sunt, manipulus Curatorum) or raised specially by two
Popes, Innocentius the fourth, and Paulus the second, to such an height, that
now, Capita inter sidera condunt.


They will write with Cardinal Wolsie, Ego and Rex, I and the King; and are too
busy about Kings, either to animate Traitors, or alienate Subjects from
obedience unto Kings: Let us I say, leave them a while, and listen to Solomon
(who was wiser then all of them,) My son ( Pro. 24. 21. 22.
says he) fear the Lord and the King; and meddle not with them that are
seditious; for their destruction shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin
of them both? Let us learn this lesson from our Math. 22. 21.
Savior, to give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's: to give loyal obedience,
for it is Caesar's royal due. So our Savior Math. 23. 2. 3.
again commands the multitude that they should obey the Scribes and Pharisees,
who did sit in Moses chair, to observe and do what they did command. In all
things (not repugnant to Gods Laws) we must and ought to Pietatis interest, vt
pij debitam magistratibus obedientiam deferant: Aret. in Rom: 13.
obey Kings; yet if they command contrary to Gods commands, then we must
follow the Acts 4. 19.
Apostles rule and practice, rather to obey God then man; and to remember S.
Aug: 11. quaest: 3. Ca: qui resistit. Hic contemn potestatem, timendo
potestatem. Aug. ser. 6. de verb. dom. Secund. Math. Immensa est iurisdictio
Dei; regum dimensa, illa est infinita, haec praefinita, Jun: Brutus.
Austins counsel, Si Deus aliud iubeat, aliud Imperator? quid iudicas? mayor
potestas Deo, da veniam o Imperator, tu carcerem, ille gebennam minatur: If God
command one thing, and the Emperor another thing; what iudgest thou to be done?
Gods power is greater, give leave o Emperor, thou do threaten prison, but God
hell. God that made these gods ought to be obeyed before them, and duty binds,
that God who is the King of Kings, the maker and master of al Kings (omnes
Reges eius pedibus subiecti, all Kings subject, and subjects of that great
King,) should be obeyed by them all, and before them all.

Yet for all this we must not rebel against a King, if he command contrary to
Gods Laws, but imitate the three children: Daniel. 3. Regis voluntas fiat aut
a nobis, aut de nobis.
obey in body, and resist in spirit; Regi qui potestatem habet super corpora
nostra, corporaliter subiaceamus, sieve sit Rex sieve Tyrannus, nihil enim hoc
nobis nocet, vt spiritualiter been placeamus Deo spiritu, says Theophy: in
Lucam c. 20. Agents, if good Princes, Patients, if bad.
Theophylact: we must prostrate our selves to the King, who has power over
our bodies, be he a King or a Tyrant, for this nothing hinders us spiritually
to please the God of our souls. Indeed it may happen that Potens, the Ruler,
is not of God, as the Osee 8. 4.
Lord complains; They have set up a King, but not by me, they have made
Princes and I knew them not, As also the manner of getting Kingdoms is not
always of God, as Aquinas upon the 13. of the Romans rightly determines it,
or as Aretij comment. in 13. Romans
Aretius; multa a Deo sunt, quae tamen non confirmat, sed quodammodo obiter
ingrediuntur, Deo tamen sic disponente, at tamen non ordinat, hoc est, non
approbat, Many things are by God which he does not confirm, falling in as it
were by the way upon the world by Gods permission, yet God disposing so, but
not ordaining, that is, not approving them. For example, Balaeus in vi^. Alex.
6. vide Match. princ. de hoc Alexandro c. 18. and Guicciardine hist. lib. 2.
Alexander the sixth obtained the Popedom by giving himself to the Devil;
Tileman in 13. Romans
Phocas by sedition got his Empire; Richard the third came to the Crown of
England (as Polyd. virg. hist: Anglic. lib. 25. Potentia a Deo, abusus a
Diabolo: Musculus. Difference twixt Persons and Powers, Persons may be
intruders, but Powers have God for their author. Theoph. in Romans 13.
some write) by killing his Nephews and other of the royal blood; and so of
many others that have aspired to thrones, viribus and fraudibus, by force and
fraud: such are Rulers, rather Usurpers, yet not of God; for God effects
nothing but he effects it by good means, so that there is a difference twixt
Potens and Potentia, twixt Rulers and Powers: bad Rulers are by the permission
of God, not by the ordination of God, as the Apostle says, Romans 13. 1. And
there is no power but of God; if they be godly powers, then I may say with
Austin, Aug. epist. 166. Caesari vices, and imaginem Dei in terris gerenti nos
vero cord subijcere: Chrytreus enarr. in Mat. 210
Quod iubent Imperatores, iubet Christus, quia cum bonum iubent, per illos quis
iubet nisi Christus? What Emperors command, Christ comma^ds, for when they
command good, Christ commands by them: and the contempt offered to such good
Rulers is a contempt of God, as the Lord said ^o Samuel, They have not cast
thee away, but me, ne regnem super illos, 1 Samuel 8. 7. lest I should reign
over them: Contemptus magistratuum redundat in contemptum Dei: The contempt of
Magistrates is a contempt of God, says. Aret. com in 13. Romans
Aretius: and so the Apostle, Whosoever resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God, qui vnum laedit, alterum laesit. To conclude, this second
duty of Obedience and Allegiance to Kings, is by all true subjects faithfully
and loyally ever to be performed, being a duty necessary for two Necesse est
subijci necessitate institutionis diuina and necessitate naturae, quae
ordinauit vt sa ieates stultis praesint: Aret: com. in 13. Romans
respects: 1. Necessitate praecepti: 2. Necessitate finis: First God by
manifold precepts commanded obedience to be given to Rulers and Kings.
Secondly, by the benefits government affords, without which all Commonwealths
were mothers of common woes, and would become the very shambles and
slaughter-houses of Christian blood, if that obedience were not given to Rulers
that bear the sword. The kingdom of hell (which is the kingdom of confusion)
could not stand, Mark 3. 22. 26. Diaboli regnu^ admittit principatu^ sine quo
non constaret. Corrumpitur and dissoluitur imperantis officium, si quis id quod
facere iussus est, non obsequio debito perficit. Gell: lib. 1. Ps. 45. Psalmus
Propbeticus continens Prophetia^ de Christo, cuius figura Solomon. Pisc, Ibidem.
being divided, (wanting Beelzebub their Prince) but should presently, as one
day it shall most certainly, come to desolation. Seeing therefore obedience to
Kings is a duty so necessary for all subjects, acceptable unto God, profitable
to our selves, without which Kings nor Kingdoms cannot stand, Church nor
Commonweal cannot long continue; Pura conscientia praestemus, quae propter
conscientiam praestanda sunt: Let us perform and practice this duty of
obedience with a pure conscience, which for conscience sake must be performed,
evermore honoring and obeying our dread Sovereign, (the golden head of great
Britain) beseeching God to prosper him in his glory, and to pierce with sharp
arrows, the hearts of his enemies, as the Psalmist of Solomon, Psalm. 45. 5.
evermore obeying and praying, God save the King.

CHAP. VI.
THE third duty of Subjects to be performed Regum cibus est ^enos: Alphonsus.
to the King, is Honor; S. Pet. 2. 17.
Peter commands all Subjects, Fear God, honor the King. S. Romans 13. 7.
Paul exhorting all to submit themselves to the higher powers, concludes,
Give honor to whom ye owe honor: so the Lord himself in the fifth
Commandment charge all to honor Father and Mother; in which precept as most
Nomine parentum intelligu^tur omnes superiores aut quicunque nobis praesu^t.
Vrsin: Catech. in quinto praecepto.
old and new writers well observe, Kings and Magistrates are understood, being
political Fathers, Patres patriae, Fathers of the Commonwealth, Nutricij
patres, Esaias 49. 23.
Nursing Fathers of Gods Church and people. And this duty (to honor the King)
obliges all by a threefold bond, Ex Praecepto By Commandment, Ex Maledicto
By Punishment, Ex Praxi: By Practice.

First by Precept, God in his Law has commanded it. Math. 22. 21.
Secondly by Punishment; for God has put a sword in their hands to cut off
such as dishonor them. Thirdly by Practice, our Lord and Savior with his
Disciples did preach and practice obedience, honor, and reverence, evermore to
be given to Kings and Potentates. And this word honor, signifies all that duty
whereby the renown, dignity, reverence, and high estimation of the King may be
preserved and unblemished, and it reaches unto our thoughts, words and
works: 1 to honor him in our hearts and thoughts: Curse not the King, no not
in thy Qui de cord non venit honor, no^ honor sed adulatio est: Ber. in Cant:
thought, for the fowls of the heaven shall carry thy voice, and that which
has wings shall carry the matter, says Ecc e. 10. 20.
Solomon. 2 Honor him in thy words, seek not by bad and wicked speeches to
disesteeme the dignity of their sacred persons, for they are Gods deputies,
and he that despises the deputy, despises him that appointed the deputy:
wherefore God made an express precept; Exed. 22. 28.
Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people. And St. Jude 8.
Jude has marked those for filthy dreamers, Qui dominationem spernunt,
Maiestatem blasphemant, Who despise government, and speak ill of them that be
in authority. Beware of unseemly, vnreuerent, or contemptible speech; which
might diminish or distaine the excellency of Gods Lieutenants; much less
revile, mock, scoff, or curse them; abuses most disloyal, dishonorable, and
worthy of Such were Parsons, ^ozius, Reynolds, Gifford etc. sla^derous Rebels
of Queen and state.
death. It was a wise and worthy answer of Count Charles Estate of Engl. fugit.
to one at dinner, disparaging our late Queen (of famous memory) saying, his
Table never gave privilege to any to speak irreverently of Princes; Male de
me loquuntur homines, quia been loqui nesciunt, faciunt non quod mereor, sed
quod solent, says Seneca, Epist. 77. 3. Honor the King in all thy actions, to
be ready to defend the honor and renown of our gracious Sovereign, both by *
Tacitus said to railing Metellus, Tu dedicisti maledicere, ego maledicta
contemnere. St. Austin wrote these verses over his table: Quisquis amat dictis
absentum rodere vitam, hanc mensa^ vetita^ nouerit esse sibi: Possidon in vit:
August: Genesis 18. 2. Next God, we must honor those who are in the place of God:
Herman: explicat: Decalog.
word and sword. In his presence use all lowly reverence, (bowing thy self as
Abraham to the three Angels) down to the ground. It was a rare act and royal
speech of Don John King of Arragon, Father unto Don Ferdinando King of Castile,
both meeting at an assembly in Victoria; the Father King would not suffer his
son to give him the upper hand, saying: Son you are the chief and Lord of
Castile, whereof we are descended, so that our duty toward you as our King
and superior, is far above that duty of the Son unto the Father: -- Regem
--
semper honorandum sic dij voluistis habere.


And indeed all good people did ever honor their anointed Sovereigns; David,
Solomon, with the rest of the Kings of Israel, how honorable and glorious ever
accounted in the eyes of their Subjects. Vbi honor non est, ibi contemptus est,
says Jerome, where honor is absent; there contempt is present, and to contemn
these regal children Psalm 81. 6.
of the most High, is to contemn the most High himself. And truly the most
dishonorable contemners of Regal Diadems are the flattering Pseudoli, the
parasiticall magnificoes of the Papal Miter: for to extol the one, they
extenuate the other; they honor, yea rather dishonor their Pope with
blasphemous titles, Gratian: can. 17.
Dominus noster Deus Papae, Our Lord God the Pope; or Aluar. Pelag. de planctu
Ecclesiae: lib. 1. c. 37. Vid: Greg. lib. 6. ep. 30. and lib. 4. epist: 34. and
38. 39. and 36 Papa dicitur caeleste habere arbitriu^, and ideo etia^ naturam
reru^ immutat substnatias vnius rei applicando alteri, and ideo de nihilo
potest aliquid facere gloss. libri decret, Tit. 7. c 3. Extra ius, contra ius,
and supra ius omnia posse. Decius.
Papa participat vtramque naturam cum Christo; or vice-deus, supreme head of
the Church. Which title one of the Gregory's, named the first, called Titulum
stultum, superbum, peruersum, scelestum, prophanum; and styled John the Bishop
of Constantinople, who affected this pontifical sublimity, Lucifer, supra
astra caeli exaltabo solium; and of all flattering Sycophants (the
trencher-wormes and platter-friends to Popes of Rome) were some of the
clawbacke Canonists, who by hypocritical and hyperbolicall praises, were the
first dreamers of Popes supremacy; and since them many Friars and Jesuits
have beat their brains to make the Regal Scepter stoop to the Popes Miter,
stiling their Popes superiors to all Emperors, supreme vice-gods, Gods on
earth, Kings triple crowned, Judges of all the earth, heads of the faith, the
high Bishops, Monarchs of the whole world: so that Bellar: in resp. ad Gerso
co^sid. 11.
Bellarmine says, it is hard to describe what the Pope is, such is his
greatness; Yea sacrilegium est disputare de potestate Papae, says Victor
relect. 4. de pot: Papae: and council: propos: 16.
Victoria, It is a kind of sacrilege to dispute or argue about the power of
the Pope: Potestas spiritualis, and temporalis in vno eodemque summo pontifice
est vtraque in summo, says Sylu: de Papa par. 2: Non de potestate Papae
inquirendu^, cum primae causae nulla sit causa: Baldus in cap: Ecclesia.
Syluester, Spiritual and Temporal power in our high Pope, is in the highest
point and degree. Nay it was not only the base flattery of mercenarie vassals,
and private Proctors and Promoters of the Chair of Rome, but also practiced by
councels giving the Pope, the sublimity of the true Antichrist: as the last
Council of Lateran In 9 and 10. sess.
gives to Pope Leo the tenth, Omnem potestatem in coelo and in terra, etc.
verifying S Paul's description 2 These. 2. 4. Vid. lib. sanct ceremon lib. 1.
sect. 7. c. 6. To the Pope as to Christ, let every knee bow: Capiststra: de
author. pap. and council. page 94.
of Antichrist, exalting himself above all that is called God, and fitting as
God in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God. It was strange
impudency of that Imposter and crouching Parasite Gabriel to add a fifth
Evangelist to the four, and to offer this title (Quintus Euangelista) to
Clemens the eight; and it was as great arrogancy in Clemens not to reject it.
Tom. 6. in append.
Baronius acknowledges it, and puts it into his Annals. It would make a man
wonder to read the immodest and immoderate folly The Pope has an heavenly
judgment, and makes that to be the meaning which is none: for his will is a
Law; De transtat: episc c. quanto in glossa. Omnes principes orbis terraru^
pontificem honorant and colunt vt summum deum. Blondus lib 3. Romans instaur.
and flattery of Popes parasites; saying, That though the Pope should carry
many souls to Hell, yet, Nemo poterat dicere Papae, cur ita facis? Did. 40.
c. si papa. And again, Benedict: a benedict: praefat: ad antithes.
Papa volens nolens errare non potest, Though he would he cannot err; or as
Canus says, Priuilegium infallibilitatis habet, He has the priuiledg of not
erring, which yet is incident to Humanum est errare.
humanity: in the Popes breast is erected the Monopoly of the infallible spirit
of our Savior. Or again, Papa potest conficere nouum symbolum, and
multiplicare articulos fidei, and in omnibus articulis multa addere, says Sum:
De excel. pont. q 59. art 2.
Austinus de Ancona, The Pope can make a new Creed, and add more articles to
our belief. Thus, thus, these paltry and palpable parasites would have their
Pope like the Esaias 14. 12. 13. 14. The Pope has the same power that Christ had
to rule over all nations and kingdoms. D. Marta. part. 1. page 45. de
iurisdict Athanes epist: ad solit. v^ti agentes.
son of pride, which cast lottes upon the Nations, saying, I will ascend into
heaven, and exalt my throne above beside the stars of God: I will ascend
above the highest of the clouds, and I will be like the most Highest. So they
go about to make him as proud as Typhoeus the Giant, who would have an higher
firmament under which he might walk, and bigger stars to give bigger light,
otherwise he would pull them down and fight with Jupiter. So that he is grown
to that height of pride, as Constantius the Emperor once said of the Pope,
Quod ego volo, pro canone sit, What I will, shall stand for a commanding Canon;
veryfying a Tyrants voice, like a Nero, or a Nimrod, Sic volo sic iubeo, stat
pro ratione volunt as. And indeed the Popes of Rome are so proud, that they
would have Kings kiss their feet, or hold their styrrop, or crown Emperors
with one foot, and Polychronico^. lib. 7. Frederick, Barbarossa, Henry 4. and
Rich. 1. basely used.
strike it off with the other: tread Naucl: page 8^6.
upon their necks, abusing that place of Psalm 91 13. Gregory the 7. sets
down these among the Popes privileges, that Princes must kiss Popes feet,
etc. Baro. Anno 1078. n* 32, Greg. 7. epist. l. 2, ep, 55.
Scripture, Thou shall walk upon the Lion and Aspe, the young Lion and the
Dragon shall thou tread under thy feet. Henry the fourth walked three days at
the Popes gate in frst and snow bare footed: Abbas Vrsp. Platin, in vit.
Gregor. 7. Dishonouring Gods high Lieutenants, debasing that dignity which is
the highest upon earth, seeking to have the superiority above them, to depose
them from their Kingdoms, and deprive them of their lives; witness the Bull
of Pius Quintus against Queen Elizabeth of happy memory, wherein as Gabutius
a popish writer says, In vita Pij 5. de Angl.
Cogitabat Pius reginam e medio tollere, Pius did think to have made Queen
Elizabeth away; or as Catena: page 113
Catena another Papist, Pius omni studio faciendum curauit, vt incolaru^ animos
ad Elizabethae destructionem facta rebellione commoueret, Pius took care and
study to bring to pass, to move by rebellion the minds of the inhabitants of
England to the destruction of Queen Elizabeth. So as we may say of Popes, as
the people of Pilate, John. 19. 12
You are not Caesar's friend; loath that they should wear a Crown of gold, and
therefore would give them a Crown of thorns, and crucify to death Vnctos
Domini, the Anointed of the Lord, at the Jews did Vnctum Dominum, the
Anointed Lord. The times were, you gave Emperors and Kings more honor, more
obedience, when as you acknowledged your selves their vassals, and reverenced
and obeyed Waltram: Theod: Aniem: de priuil: Imperij.
them for your Lords; as for a long time the Popes did to the first Christian
Emperors: yea the Election of the Pope was a long time in the Emperors hands,
who had the right of choosing the Pope confirmed by a Synod of the Popes to
Charles the great: Liberat. breuiar.
Leo the first with many of his Bishops, used their knees, entreated the
Emperor and his Wife for a Synod. And then no doubt but you gave them honor
and homage too, and you also were forced to pay then money to the Emperor for
confirmation, and this lasted 700 years after Christ, as Historians Sigeb: in
Chro: ad ann. 683 and Luitprand: in vit. Agathon and Anast, in vit. eiusd:
Agath: and Herm: Conrad: ad ann 678.
write; nay not only elected by Emperors, but also rejected and deposed from
your Popedomes (if the Emperor found any good cause for it,) as the Luitpr.
hist. lib. 6. c. 10. 11.
Emperor Otho deposed Pope John the twelfth. Marian Scot. Sigeb. abbas Vrsp. ad
ann. 1046. and Platin. in vit. Grego 6.
Henry the third, Emperor, deposed 3. Popes, as Benedict the ninth, Syluester
the third, and Gregory the sixth, and other Emperors have done the like.

Then the Spiritual and Temporal sword was not in the power of the Pope, (as
since Gregory In C vna^ Sanct. extr. de mayor. and obedien.
the eight said:) the Emperors had it in their own hand, and then you feared
them, if not honored them as you ought. But after that Gregory the seventh,
otherwise called Heldebrand, began bacchari in Caesarem and Caesareos, to play
his hellish part, to seek to deprive of his Empire Henry the fourth: for this
Heldebrand was the first that ever attempted such a Luciferian pre-eminence, if
the Otho. Frisingens. lib. 6: cap. 35
Historian do write true: Lego, and relogo, says he; Romanorum regum, and
imperatorum gesta, and nusquam inuenio quenquam eorum ante hunc a Roman
Pontifice excommunicatum, vel regno priuatum, I read over and over the Acts of
Kings and Emperors, and I find no where any of them before this, excommunicated
of the Pope, or deprived of their Kingdom: but this Popes enterprise had a
suitable success; for by the Council of Brixia he was dejected out of the
Popedom for it, and Concilium Brixiense: 1083. Abbas vspergensis: Sigeber. An.
1084. Antoninus. Sigeb. ad Ann. 1085. Vsperg. in Anno, 1089. Suadente Diabolo,
vt supra. vid. card. Benno: in the life of Gregory 7.
being in extremity, calls one of his best beloved Cardinals to him, and
confessed to God, Saint Peter, and the whole Church, that he had greatly
offended in his Pastoral charge; Et suadente Diabolo contra humanum genus iram
and odium concitasse, By the Devils persuasion he had raised up wrath and
hatred upon Mankind. Well, this Heldebrand (whose Orator was the Devil) was
the first that attempted to depose Emperors; and since, that Prince of the
Air, who bears rule in the children of disobedience, has moved Peter's false
friends, and Kings foes, to follow the hellish steps of proud Heldebrand,
seeking to depose Kings, to dispose of their Crowns, and deprive them of their
lives, to excommunicate them, to free subjects from their allegiances, to
excite Arms against them, to make Martyrs of King-killers, every way
laboring to disparage their sacred Persons, diminish their Regal rights,
encroch upon their Prerogatives, altogether contemning Peter's Precepts, yet
arrogating Peter's Place; Honor the King. How dishonourably and contemptibly
(that Milo who bare the Pope on his shoulders) Cardinal Bellarmine writes of
Kings; That they are rather slaves then Lords: De Laicis, c. 7. Not only
subjects to Popes, to Bishops, to Priests, but to Deacons: Depontifice, lib. 1.
c. 7. That Kings have not their authority immediately from God, nor his law, but
only from the law of Nations; De cleric: c. 28. That Churchmen are as far
above Kings, as the soul above the body, De Laicis. c. 18. That Kings may be
deposed by their people for diverse respects; De pontific. lib. 5. c. 8: That
obedience due to Kings, is only for certain respects of order, and policy;
De clericis. cap. 28: His works are full of such foul and false assertions;
base, bald, and blockish Paradoxes, repugnant to al Scripture, right, and
reason: that he may say with the Poet; Hoc equidem studeo bullatis vt mihi
nugis,
Pagina turgescat. --


Many of his propositions so dishonorable, and injurious to Kings, that to
confute them, Non opus est verbis, sed fustibus: Arms, not Arts should beat
and break in pieces such pernicious Paradoxes.

But to leave these Machiauelismes of the Conclaue, (dethroning Kings to
enthrone Popes) let us learn of God, with what honorable titles, and high
prerogatives in the Book of God they stand possessed: There they are called
Ps. 82 6
Gods, and Children of the most High: The Chr. 4. 18
Lords Anointed, The 2 Samuel 14. 20
Angels of God, 2 Samuel 21. 17
The Light of Israel 2 Samuel 3. 1
Sitting in Gods Throne, Romans 13. 1. 4
The Higher Powers, the Ministers of God, Luke 22. 25
The Kings of Nations that bear rule; every where with variety of such high
and stately Titles, great Prerogatives, commanding every Romans 13. 1
soul to be subject to them, that he who should go about to empaire their
honor, must first infringe the Book of God. Unworthy is that Creature to
breathe the Air, which denies honor to the breathing Image of God, his
anointed Soueraign, or with vnreuerent action, or elocution, enterprise to
debase their sacred Soueraignety; such tongues are worthy with Dives to be
tormented, or with Progne to be cut out, or with Nicanors to be divided in
crummes for Birds, that will not honor with tongues, and honor with hearts
their anointed and appointed Kings, the earthly pictures of the King of Kings.
And not to travel so far as foreign Climates, to teach them (to honor
Kings) let our speech be bounded within the circumference of his Highness
Countries, People (above all other Nations) bound to honor and obey our
gracious Sovereign. We blessed with a King of incomparable wisdom, Rex natus
and ad Regna natus, descended of blood royal: Eccles. 10. 17
A blessedness to a Kingdom, when a King is the Son of Nobles, and much more of
noble virtues, prudent in a peaceable government, complete in the perfection
of Learning; ears may overcome eyes, to hear the wisdom of our Solomon: and
which is most of all, and best of all to be extolled, sincerely, and soundly
religious, laboring to make his Kingdoms, by advancing Euangelium Christi,
Regnum Euangelij: A trusty defender of the true Faith, Tam Marti qua^ Mercurio,
both by Pen and Pike ready to defend Religion against superstition; Calamo and
cuspide.
often has he entered into Theological disputes, and foiled Romes most
illustrious Car. Bellar. Card. Perron.
Cardinals: Yea, his Majesty's dinners like Salomons Table, making Auditors say
with Pro. 16. 10
Solomon; A divine sentence shall be in the lips of the King; or with wisdom
her self, Pro. 8. 6
Hear: for I will speak of excellent things, and the opening of my lips shall
teach things that are right. A Patron of the Church, and a Promoter of the
Gospel; as Cic. in Hortens.
Hortensius raised up eloquence to Heaven, that he might go up with her, so
our dread Sovereign aduances the Gospel, the Jacobs ladder to climb to Heaven
by it. Macte virtute: sicitur ad astra.


I am unable and unfit to make the Map of our Kings perfections, De ipso
ipsiloquuntur Antipodes; not any Zone habitable wherein his glory has not
habitation: and they say, We must praise a King as we honor God, Sentiendo
copiosius quam loquendo; and herein such plenty of praise is offered, that --
Inopem me copia fecit.

Xenophon might see that in our virtuous King James, which he wished in his
King Cyrus: O fortunatos Anglos bona si sua norint; Oh happy we, if we be
thankful for our happiness: Nihil his bonis accedere potest, nisi vt
perpetua sint, Nothing can augment our earthly joys, but to make these
lasting: and thanks be to God, our Sovereign has, I think, already
out-lasted the Regency of a dozen Popes. Hominum breuis, regum breuior,
pontificum vita brenissima, says Petrarcha; Of all men the Popes have shortest
lives, but God grant our Sovereign Nestors days, wishing for him as Martial
did for Traian, Lib. 10. Epig. 34. Dij tibi dent quicquid (Princeps Auguste)
mereris,
Et rata perpetuo quae tribuere, velint.


Long may this glorious Candle of Israel last, who as upon this day was
proclaimed with infinite joy, received with peaceable entry, enthroned with
glorious inuestiture, and has hitherto governed with admired wisdom, comfort
and content of all good Subjects; so still to continue in all Princely
prosperity, and to hold the Scepter of great Britanny with a tripled addition
of years to come for the years past; wishing in desire, though it cannot be
indeed Da spatium vitae, multos da Jupiter Annos Iuuen. Sat. 10
His egonecmetas rerum, nec temporapono,
Imperium sine fine dedi: --


Add to his days of the days of Heaven, that he and his posterity may here
sit upon the regal Throne, so long Et caeptis non decrit fas^hus hares.
as the Sun and Moon endures. -- Haec regnd tenere,
Et natos natorum and qui nascentur ab illis:


That all his Subjects may ever pray for him, obey him, and honor him; as well in
deeds as words, hea^ts as tongues, saying and praying; God save the King.

CHAP. VII.
THE fourth duty of Subjects, to be duly rendered and tendered to their
anointed Sovereigns, is loyal and faithful service, thinking themselves (as
Tiberius said of his People) Homines ad seruitutem nati, Men borne to do them
service: And therefore it was a commendable order (as Praef: Com. in Epist: ad
Romans Quireip. hostis est; is ciuis esse nullo modo potest. Cic. in Cat. 4
Melancthon records it) that every Citizen did swear, taking a corporal Oath,
Pugnabo pro sacris pro legibus, pro aris, and focis, and solus, and simul cum
alijs; and ne patriam meam deteriorem qua accepi, posteris tradam, omnibus
viribus enitar, I will fight for Religion, for our laws, etc: alone and with
others, and I will with all my might rather endeavor to better, then to make
worse my Country to posterity; acknowledging themselves servants to their
Country, and vowing their best endeauours to do her faithful service. So all
true subjects are bound by the Laws of God and men, to be faithful servants
to their Sovereigns: and if they neglect or reject this duty, I may say to
them as 1 Samuel 26. 15. 16
David did to Abner, Ye be worthy to die, because ye have not kept your Master
the Lords Anointed, because you have not been faithful servants to your
anointed Sovereigns. If any Ester 2. 21. 22
Bighthan or Teresh seek to lay hands on our gracious Sovereign, with
faithful Mordecai and Ester speedily prevent it by revealing it: If any 2 Kin.
6. 12
King of Aram takes counsel with his servants against the King of Israel, with
faithful Elisha reveal it to your Caesar, even the words he speaks in his
Privy Chamber; nay, not only reveal it, but revenge it; In reos Maiestatis
and publicos Hosts omnis homo miles est (says Ter. Apol. c. 2
Tertullian) against Traitors and public enemies every man is a Soldier; yea,
in this kind and sense, we may and must in fortitudine nostra sumere cornua,
with 1 Kin. 22. 11
Zedekiah make horns of iron, to push these treachercus Aramites until we
have consumed them, give courageous resistance to treacherous violence, until
they may receive deserved doom by Justice. And for the performance of this
loyal service to their appointed Sovereigns, no condition of men under the
Sun can plead immunity, neither Popes, Priests, nor People; the Pope cannot
plead privilege, if he will stand to his own and Humilitas in voce, superbia
in action, Greg. Seruus seruorum, Tyrannus Tyrannorum.
old title, Seruus seruorum, A servant of Servants: but he carries himself now
adays as if his Prentiship were out, and would change his style to be Dominus
Dominorum, A Lord over his Lord; as the old Illyric: Poem de corrup. stat.
Ecclesiae.
Poet tells us, Roma tibi quondam fuerant Domini Dominorum,
Seruorum serui nunc tibisunt Domini.


For he disclaimes in action his old appellation, the servant of servants, and
never uses it but by way of equivocation. But to let him go: for Senex
psittacus non capit ferulam, Ita aequivoci, vt vniuoci raro.
He is too old to learn, and happy are those Kings, that have least part of
his service; but if it please the Pope to be like the High Priests, (and I
think that title is high enough for him) they were content to call themselves
servants unto Kings, as Abimilech accounted himself Saul's servant; 1 Chro 29.
22: 7 1 Samuel 22. 15
Let not the King impute any thing unto his servant, etc. And Zadocke 1 Kin. 1.
33
the High Priest, called by David his servant: So Exodus 32. 22
Aaron to Moses, Ne indignetur Dominus meus, Let not the wrath of my Lord wax
fierce. In a word, Summi sacerdotes regibus subdebantur, says their Salmero^
in tract. 63, de potest: Eccle. and secular.
Jesuit, Their chief Priests were subjects and servants to Kings in the Law:
and the chief Apostle even Saint Peter, from whom they would fetch their
Pedigree of Primacy, enioynes all in the Gospel to submit themselves for the
Lords sake, whether it be unto the King, as unto the 1 Peter 213
superior. So that their freedom from service to the Princes of the Earth,
has no warrant, except from the Prince of the Air, to whom Rome dedicates her
scepter and service. And this loyal service of the members unto the royal and
Princely Head, ought to be dutiful, faithful, and perpetual: that is the
happy service, which comes from an hearty obedience; many things may seem so
in appearance, which are not so in eslence: It is the practice and very Nulla
est pestis capitalior quam eorum, qui tunc cum maxim fallunt, id agunt, vt
boni viri videantur: Cic. lib. (...), offic. Ephesians. 6. 5, 6
prayers of the wicked to cry thus: Hor. 1. Epist. 16. Da mihi fallere, da
iustum, sanctumque videri,
Noctem peccatis, and fraudibus obijce nubem.


If they seem trusty in show though treasonable in heart, they care not, like
bad servants, not in singleness of heart, but with service to the eye, as
men-pleasers, obey they their regal Masters. This Age is full of such
treacherous hearts, as deceiptfull as 2 Samuel 3 27
Ioab to Amasa, who took him aside to speak with him peaceably, and smote him
under the fifth rib that he died; or like Judges 16. 18 Malum sub speci boni
celatum, dum non cognoscitur, non cauetur Chrysostom. super Math. 7 Veritas est
temporis Filia,
Dalilah to Sampson, with fair words, and weeping to betray him to the
Philistines: No treason but in trust, Decipimur specie recti; The fained voice
of Fowlers catches the Partridges, and Plouers: The Mother of Error puts on
her mask, to be taken for the Daughter of Time, truth: The Wolf in sheeps
clothing, scarce known from the sheapheards dog. 1 Macchab 16.
Ptolomie the son of Abusus, under a fair vizard of love and kindness
feasting Simeon and his two sons, killes them in his banqueting house:
Herodes deuotionem promittit, sed gladium acuit: Chry. sup. Mat. 2
Herod when he would play the wolf, he counterfetted a Fox: Math. 2. 8
Go and search diligently for the Babe, and when ye have found him, bring me
word, that I may worship him; his meaning was to worrie him: So Math. 26. 49
Nunquam te fallant animi sub vulpe latentes: impia sub dulci melle venena
latent. Foris Cato, intus Nero; totus ambiguus.
Judas comes with his Aue Rabbi, Hail Master, betraying him with a kiss: Do'i
non sunt doli, nisi astu celas. Plautus. So many a perfidious Traitor will cry,
Aue Caesar, God save the King: but it is with such an affection as Antoninus
Caracalla said of his brother Geta, Sit diuus modo non viuus, Let him be a
Saint or a King in Heaven, so he be not a King on Earth. Beware of dissemblers,
parasites, and equiuocators; His nomina mill -- mill nocendi arts: Such are
full of fraud, full of villainy; believe them as the people of Rome believed
Carbon, swearing never to credit him. They are like to Polypus, have Et Leo
pars prima est, draco media, ipsa Chymera.
various shapes, changing themselves into Angels of light; but Malus vbi se
bonum simulat, tunc est pessimus, A bad man when he counterfetteth to be good,
is worst; Simulata Aug in Ps. 63
sanctitas est duplex iniquitas, A counterset holiness is a two fold
wickedness. Let us perform according to our place, faithful, hearty* and
trusty service to our dread Sovereign; and though the wicked labor Virtutis
comes invidia: Cic. 4: ad Here.
to darken with a cloud of slander our fair and faithful service, yet at
last that eclips of envy will vanish of it self, and our own innocence and
fidelity will animate us like that Roman Marius, who being accused by the
Senate of Inuidiam far aut fortis, aut foelix potest: Seneca.
Treason, in a passion tears his garments, and in sight of them all shows
them his wounds received in the service and defense of his Country, saying;
Quid opus est verbis, vbi vulnera clamant, What need of words, our wounds
declare, our blood was shed for your welfare? Faithful service is laudable
before men, and acceptable before God; it may be by the wicked sometimes
blamed, but it cannot be shamed: though it be not always rewarded on earth, it
shall be sure to find rewards in Heaven, as they Tacit: Hist. lib. 2
once complained, Penes caeteros imperij praemia, penes ipsos seruitij
necessitas, that others found the sweet preferment, and they had horse and
heavy burden for their service; yet virtue is a reward to it self: bonorum
laborum gloriosus fructus, the service of the Ecclus. 35. 7:
righteous is accepted, and the remembrance thereof shall never be forgotten:
Ipsa quidem virtus sibimet pulc herrima merces. Sillius Italicus.



And this service due to our King and Country (if need require) must reach
vsque ad aras, prodigal of labor, limb, or life, to defend both; the safety
of both, either King or Country is so inseparable, that the service done to
either is always commendable and honorable. We have famous presidents in
this kind to press us to perform the utmost of our service in love to our
Country, in duty to our King: the 3 Decij. Zophirus, Cn: Scipio, ^uluius
Nassus Anchurus filius regis Midae, pro Salute patriae in profundissimum chasma
sese praecipitem dedit.
etc. all offered to sacrifice their lives in love for their Country: Hor 3.
car: od. 2.
Dulce and decorum est pro patria mori:


The Val: Max: l. 5. c. 6
story is most famous of Quintus Curtius a noble Roman, who hearing by the
Oracle, that the safety of the city of Rome consisted only in the sacrifice of
one of her best affected children, valiantly and voluntarily leaped into that
devouring gulf, and so preserved the City. Ardua per praeceps gloria vadit
iter: Ovid.


Hor. ad Flor. Hoc opus, hoc studium, parui properemus and ampli, Si patriae
volumus, si nobis viuere chari.

A spectacle of love and loyalty, a sacrifice of high obedience, that is
presented upon the wings of death; I will not ^y worthy of imitation: because
like unto self sacrifiing of Cleombrotus, they were Martyrs stultae
Philosophiae, Martyrs of their fond Philosophy, yet notwithstanding worthy to
stir up great affection for Subjects to love as truly their King and
country; and the King and Country to love such Subjects, that for them
adventure their lives. Naturally every one loves his Country, Nemo patriam
diligit quia magna est, sed quia sua est, says Sen: de remed. fort:
Seneca: No man loves his Country because it is great, but because it is his
own: Ovid: Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos Dulce solum patriae est:
Virg:

ducit, and immemores non sinit esse sui:
The Persians did bear such love to their Country, that they must swear by
the Sun rising, never to become Jews, Grecians, Romans, Egyptians, but ever
to remain Persians: They counted no fault more foul, then to be a foe to his
own Country. It was an excellent saying of Aulus Fuluius, who finding his
son in the conspiracy of Catiline, tells him, Ego non te Catilinae genui, sed
Patriae, I did beget thee not for Catiline, but for thy Country. They that are
Traitors to their King and Country, may fitly be compared to Vipers: The Vipers
are conceived (as Not. hist: lib. 10. cap. 62.
Pliny writes) by biting off the Males head, and borne by eating through their
Mothers belly; So they would Decapitare Caput, destroy the King their head, and
lacerare matrem, tear the bowels of their mother, their native Country. Our
English Fugitives are the spawnes of these Vipers, Parsons, Saunders, etc. who
because they could not eat through her bowels and belly with their teeth, in
revenge rail at her with their tongues; to whom I cannot give a fitter answer
then that which the Estate of English fugitives.
Spanish Verdugo gave to Sir William Stanley, railing against this his native
Country; saying, Though you have offended your Country, yet your Country
never offended you.

These Iesuited fugitives, who at Rhemes or Rome do now -- Juuen: sat 3. Val:
Max: lib: 5.
Caluo seruire Neroni, unnaturally forsake their King, Country, Kindred, and
deuote their lives and labors to give all homage to the chair of Rome; and
though they color their treasonable plots and proiects of confusion under
pretense of conversion, yet bloody is that faith, that Cain-like will kill
their native brothers, and Nero-like rip up their dearest Mother; Conuersio
animae praetenditur, subuersio regis, reip. and Ecclesiae intenditur, They
pretend religion, but they intend rebellion and desolation. But to leave these
Vipers, of whom I may say as the Soldiers at the death of the son of
Maximus, Non debet seruari vnus Catulus, Not any of their young ones worthy to
be kept up for store; let us in an example or two, behold the deep affection
of Kings loves unto their Subjects. The story is common of King Codrus the
Athenians King, who being assaulted and assailed by enemies, received this
Oracle, That his army should prevail if he would suffer himself to be slain
of his enemies; which news when it came to the ears of his adversaries, they
made an edict, Nemo tangat Codrum, None might touch Codrus: Codrus then changed
his habit: see the fire of love; he went to his enemies thus disguised: mark
the flame, there was he slain: look upon the ashes, the vrne of Codrus, what
do they say, but*

Hor. Quo nos cunque feret melior fortuna, parents ibimus o socij, comitesque
--

So King Leonides sacrifices his dearest blood at Thermopilas, fighting
valiantly in defense of his Country and kingdom:

Cic. 1 Tusc. Dic hospes Spartae nos te hic vidisse iacentes, dum sanctis
patriae legibus obsequimur.

In a word, I never read of any King (unless such as Vnam populo ceruicem
optant quam vno ictu amputare possunt.
Nero and Caligula) that did not wish well to his own Country and kingdom:
For, Principis est consulere omnibus, prospicere saluti patriae, says Epist.
ad Q. Fratrem lib. 1.
Cicero, It is the office of a King to take care and counsel for the welfare
of his people: Princeps suorum subditoru^ velut sui ipsius corporis membrorum
curam gerit, says Agapetus, A Prince takes care of all his Subjects, even as
the members of his own body. And so Alfonsus a King had his symboll; (a Type
of his true love) a Pelican with her bill pricking her breast, feeding her
young with her blood, with this inscription, pro lege and pro grege; declaring
Emblematically, That Kings with continual cares wast their lives to provide
for their Alijs micans meipsum consumo, alios alens meipsu perdo: aliud est
esse in lege aliud sublege: qui est in lege secundum legem agit qui sub lege
secundum legem agitur, ille liber est, iste seruus: Aug in Psa.
peoples welfares: For good Kings will say with Hadrianus Caesar, Sic se
gesturum principatum, vt sciant rem populi esse, non suam; They will so govern
that all men may see they aim more at the public good, then any private
gain. It is their office to protect their people, provide for the welfare of
the commonwealth, maintain good Laws, execute Justice, defend the Faith, and
promote the Church. So we Sleyd. lib. 1 and 2.
read that when the Emperor is crowned, the Archbishop of Colen propounds
several demands, An Ecclesiam defensurus? Iustitiam administraturus? Imperium
conseruaturus? viduas, orphanosque protecturus etc. Whether he will defend the
Church? Administer Justice? Preserve the Empire? and protect the widows,
fatherless, and friendlesse? The Xenophon de reb. Lacaed. Solon being demanded
what was the chief safety of a Commonwealth: answered, if the Citizens obey
the Magistrate, and the Magistrate the Laws. Publicanimirum res tum sibi
co^stat, and aequu^ imperiu^, cum Rex quod iubet, ipse facit. Actius epig. lib.
1.
Kings of Sparta at their Coronation did swear to reign according to Lycurgus
Laws: and I think it is the order of most Christian Kings at their Coronation
to swear to rule according to Justice, and to maintain the laws and
liberties of their kingdoms; for far be it from Kings thoughts to say with
Thrasymachus, Principum vtilitate and libidine omne ius definiri, All Law to be
defined by their pleasures and profit: for that is to say with the Mother of
Antoninus Caracalla, to him quodlibet licere, any thing to be lawful for him;
or with Caracalla himself, Imperatores leges dare, non accipere, Emperors give
Laws, but do not live by them. The foundation of well-gouerned Kingdoms has
two supporters (says* Match: prin. c. 12.
Machiauell* bonas Leges, bona Arma, good Laws, and good Arms: And that
famous Emperor Praefat. Iustinia^. instit: in initio: Ciuitas subsistere
nequit, quae legibus non est firmata; Arist. lib. (...). politic.
Justinian says, Imperatoriam Maiestatem non solum armis decoratam, verum
legibus oportet esse armatam, Imperial Majesty not only to be adorned by
Arms, but also armed by Laws; and then the Laws will be best obeyed, when
the Lawmakers obey themselves. It was a woe our Savior denounced against the
Luke 11. 46. Digna vox est Maiestate regnantis, legibus alligatu^ se principe^
profiteri. etc. Imperat: Theod. and Valent, Caes.
Interpreters of the Law, because they did lode men with burdens grievous to be
borne, and they themselves touched not the burdens with one of their fingers:
Promulgers and publishers of Laws ought to be practisers of the same. It was a
royal speech of the Emperor Traian, when he delivered the sword, praefecto
praetorij; saying to him, Si been imperauero, prome; sin contra aduersus me
stringito; If I rule well, draw out that sword for me; if otherwise, against
me: and happy is that Kingdom whose supreme head gives good Laws to others,
and lives by them himself, it animateth all to obey. Regis ad exemplu^ totus
componitur orbis: Claudian.


Ad te oculos, auresque trahis, tua facta notamus, nec vox missa potest
Principis ore tegi.
Principis vita est censura ciuium, says Plin. 2. Panegy. ad Traian.
Pliny, The life of King, the life of imitation, his good life as powerful to
draw people to goodness, as good Laws:

Claud: -- non sic inflectere sensus Longu^iter per praecepta, breue per
exempla: Jeron: Plebeia ingenia magis exemplis qua^ ratione capiuntur. Macrob:
lib. 7. Satur. cap. 4. Augustus filled the world with Scholars, Tyberius with
Parasites, Constantine with Christians, Julian with heretics. Imperio
maximus, exemplo mayor: Paterculus: lib. 2. In vulgus manant exempla regentum:
Cypr.
Humanos edicta valent, quam vita regentis:

The Rulers godly life, like a good Gloss upon a Text, makes a perfect
commentary upon the Law to move vulgar obedience. O then let virtue and piety
flame in the breasts of Princes, cherish these (O sacred Potentates) at your
high Altars, and then your excellent actions will produce exemplar imitations.

Persius. Regibus hic mos est centum sibi poscere voces, Centum ora, centum
linguas --

Many millions of men are your spectators, nay the world is your stage wherein
your actions are even axioms to draw that many-headed beast, the multitude,
either to virtue or vice. What a glorious and most applauded of all the Saints
of Heaven, is your well-acted task and office, if you render up your Crowns
to him that is the King of Crowns and Scepters, with a commended plandite?
then indeed you shall worthily

Pers. Sat 1. Os populi meruisse, and Cedro digna locutum linquere --

Leave happy monuments on earth, of your immortal same, and at your farewell
from your earthly thrones, leave a lamenting and bewailing world, but attended
unto heaven with the prayers of your people, with an army of Angels to welcome
your arrival, And herein how are the people of great Britain bound to render
perpetual praises to Almighty God? who has blessed them with such a godly
Pietas est verus Imperatoris ornatus. Euagr: hist: Praefat: ad Theod:
and gracious King, who with his life, laws, and labors, by his public
example in the true service of God, by the integrity of his life, industry in
sacred studies, clemency in government, delight and diligence in hearing
Churchexercises, making his Court, as it was said of Eusebius* de vit: Constant.
lib. 4.
Constantines, Ecclesiae instar, like a Church, their public Service and
Sermons devoutly performed, and religiously accepted and embraced, laboring
Regis ad exemplum totum componere regnum: by a Kingly pattern of devotion to
excite all to an holy imitation: So that we ought to give God more thanks
then Plato did, who yet thanked God for three things: 1. pro ratione: 2. pro
natione: 3. pro eruditione: for his reason, nation, and learning: 1. for his
reason, being made a man, not a beast: 2. for his nation, a Grecian, not a
Barbarian: 3. for his living, in the days of learned Socrates, of whom he
reaped great knowledge. We ought also to thank God for these and other
blessings, being not merely men, but Christian men, living under the reign
of a most Christian King, a Defender of Faelix resp: in qua qui imperat timet
deum. Cominaeus: Justin.
the Faith, and cherisher of the Gospel; a lover of Peace: that we may truly
say, as the people did at the death of Pertinax the Emperor, Dum illeregnabat
tranquille viuebamus, and neminem metuebamus, While he reigned, we lived
quiet, and feared no enemies, So now every man may sit in peace under his Vine
and Figtree, and bear a part in the song of those heavenly Soldiers, Luke 2.
13. 14.
praising God and saying, Glory be to God in the high heavens for our peace on
earth. We enjoy that blessing promised to Solomon, I 1 Chronicles. 22 9. Tale bonum
est bonum pacis, vt in rebus creatis nil gratiosius soleat audiri, nil
delectabilius concupisci, and nil vtilius possideri: Aug.
will send peace and quietness upon Israel in his days, A blessing worthy of
thanksgiving: So that we may in a Christian peace serve the God of peace, and
praise him for our peace, and pray to him for the preservation of the happy
instrument of this our peace: for peace is a nurse of Religion, but bloody
war the mother of misery, mischief, and abomination; for, Lucan:
Nulla fides pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur.
In time of War the God of peace neglected,
True faith and Pity is then rejected.


Let all from head to foot, from our Solomon in the Throne, to the poorest
member in the kingdom, prostrate their humble souls to the throne of God, (the
giver of all blessings) and in all faithful obedience, tender him their
dutiful service, Psalm. 2. 11.
serving the Lord in fear and rejoicing in trembling; ascribing all praise and
thanks to God, saying, Psalm. 3. 8.
Salvation belongs unto the Lord, and his blessing is upon the people;
Gratias August: in Ps. 47. Optima beneficiorum custos, perpetua est co^fessio
gratiarum: Chrysostom: Super Math. hom. 25.
agere Deo possumus, refer non possumus; giving God all possible thanks for
his blessings, the least whereof is more worth then all our thanks; yet,
Ascensus gratiarum descensus gratiae, the ascending of our thanks do bring
descending graces. And with our best and faithful service to our good God, the
King of Kings: let our loyal and dutiful service be never wanting to his
virtuous vicegerent, his anointed deputy on earth, our high and dread
Sovereign, Zechar. 2. 8.
Qui tangit eum tangit pupillam oculi ipsius, as the Lord speaks of Sion; He
that touches you, touches the apple of his eye: beseeching God to be
Protector Saluationum Vncti, the defender and Psalm 28. 8. Augustus lamented for
Varus death, being asked why; he said, now, now I have none in my Court to tell
me the truth. Sen. lib. 6. de benef. c. 30.
deliverer of his Anointed, to give him prosperity, peace, and plenty of all
things: yea, plenty of it, which Jews the eleventh the French King complained
he only wanted in his Court; and being demanded what it was, he said truth,
a Diamond fair and fit to adorn a Diadem, commendable to God, acceptable to
Kings, profitable to Common wealths; He is the Kings and Countries best
servant, that brings in his mouth a message of Truth. I have Gregor. Dialog.
read how a certain poor man coming to see Constantine (an Emperor renowned
through the world by Fame and Fortune) and that poor man fixing his eyes upon
him, said thus, Putabam Constantinum aliquid praeclarius and mirabilius fuisse,
sed iam video eum nihil aliudesse praeter hominem, I had thought Constantine
had been some rarer and more admirable Creature, but I see he is but a man; to
whom Constantine gave many thanks, (being both plain and true) saying, Tu
solus es, qui in me oculos apertos habuisti Thou art only the man that have
looked upon me with open eyes; others did flatter him, making him believe that
he was not, but this man honestly and truly told him what he was. Like
Nazian. trip. hist c. 32.
Macedonius the Eremite, who said to the officers of Theodosius, Dicite
Imperatori non es Imperator solummodo sedetiam homo: Tell the Emperor he is not
only an Emperor, but also a man: For though in Scripture they be called Gods,
it is in sensu modificato, Mors sceptra (...) nibus aequat.
a qualified sense, Gods by deputation, earthly Gods, not by nature, but by
regiment: they shall dwell in the Lords Tabernacle (and are worthy to be in
Kings Courts) Psalm. 15. 2.
who walk uprightly, work righteously, and speak the truth from their
hearts: Qui verit atem occultat, and qui prodit mendacium, vterque reus est;
ille quia prodesse non vult, iste quia nocere desiderat, says Lib. de Agone
Christi.
Austen, He that hides the truth, and he that tells a lie, both be guilty: He
because he would not profit, this because he would have hurt. The Lord and
lover of Truth evermore bless his Majesty with trusty John 1. 47. Veritas
minime peruia regum auvibus Alex. Sever. dictum.
Nathaniels, in whom is no guile: Such are the best servants and secretaries to
King and Country, who like one of those three servants to King Darius, the
keepers of his body, come with this sentence, laying it under the Kings pillow,
Esdras 3. 12.
Truth over comes all things: But keep from him (O King of Kings) all
flattering Doegs, crafty conspiring Achitophels, rebellious Shebas, treacherous
Zimries, unfaithful Zibas, false Ioabs, and Romish Iudasses, who honor him
with their lips, but their hearts be far from him. And let all true subjects to
his gracious Highness, faithfully perform all loyal service to this our 2
Kings 23. 2.
Josias, who restores the book of the Law and holy Scripture; who like 2 Samuel
6. 15.
David, fetches home the Ark of God and his sacred Gospel; who like 2 Chr.
14. 3. 4.
Asa puts down Idols, and commands all to seek the Lord God; who like 2
Kings 10.
Iehu, not kills, but Non vita^ adime^s sed nidos destruens
banishes Baals Priests, the Romish rout of Seminaries and Jesuits, waiters
and worshippers of the Papal Moloch (an Paul Fagius paraph. Chald. in Leuit.
18: 21.
Idol having hands always to receive gifts.) Our Sovereign loathes these
locusts, and labors -- has terris and templis auertere pestes:


To free the Church and Country of these plagues; so that it makes our hearts
leap for joy, and cry aloud, Psalm. 85. 1. (...)
O Lord how favorable have thou been unto our land in placing religion,
learning, virtue, and honor in one seat, Quam been conueniunt cum vna sede
locantur,
Maiestas, and virtus --


An admirable spectacle to behold virtue and honor, in the royal Throne: What
fires of zeal, love, and service should it kindle in the hearts of subjects,
in thankefulnes to God, to serve the Lord in fear, and come before his
presence with a song of thanksgiving falling down before the Lord our Maker,
in soul, in body, all within, and all without? He gives all, and must be
praised of all, prayed to of all, for he is all in all. He Psalm. 147. 20
has not dealt so with every Nation; and therefore let us with the Psalm 145. 1
Psalmist say and sing, O my God, and King, I will extol thee, and praise thy
name for ever and ever. Let Psalm. 149. 2
Israel rejoice in their King: and to conclude with the words of Musculus, M^in
Psalm. 118, 26
Acceptus, foelix, and gratiosus sit iste, quem Dominus nobis regem dedit;
Welcome, wished, and most worthy is he, whom God has set up to reign over us,
who happily succeeded a Virgin Anuntiation of B. Virg. Mary.
Queen. and proclaimed a day before the Festiual of the Queen of Virgins, (a
fair Prologue of much joy) who now with great felicity, and tranquillity, has
reigned 15 years in this great and flourishing Kingdom; many more years we
continually pray to be multiplied, Addat e nostris annos in annos Deus; Make
him full of days and full of Trophies of honor, and grant him loyal
Subjects, faithful in obedience, and dutiful in all service, saying in tongue
joyfully, in heart truly; God save the King.

CHAP. VIII.
THE fifth duty of Subjects to be duly and truly paid and performed to their
sacred and dread Sovereigns, is Tribute, which is (as Vipian says) Neruus
reip. The strong s^ew of the Commonwealth, without which, King, nor Kingdom
cannot stand: And therefore our Savior first by Christ paid Tribute to
Tyberius Caesar. Mat. 17. 27 Si censum filius dei soluit, tu quis tantus es,
qui non putas esse soluendum? Ambrosius.
president paid Tribute, and also by precept, resolving the Disciples of the
Pharisees, demanding, whether it was lawful to give Tribute unto Caesar, or no?
told them peremptorily, Math. 22. 21
That they must give unto Caesar that which was Caesar's: Reddendum est
tributum, honor and obedientia in omnibus, quae non pugnant cum verbo Dei,
says Piscator, upon that place; Tribute Honor, and Obedience, is to be given
unto the Magistrate in all things, not repugnant Reddenda esse Caesari, quae
sua sunt, illa solum dici, non debita, quae pietati ac religioni nihil
officiunt: Chrysan c. 22 Mat. Hom. 71
to the word of God: for this cause (says Romans 13. 4. 6
Saint Paul) ye pay Tribute, because the King is the Minister of God for thy
wealth, applying themselves for the same thing: Custodit te Princeps (says In
Lucam: c. 20
Theophylact) ab Hostibus, debes itaque ei tributum: The Prince keeps thee safe
from enemies, thou do owe him therefore Tribute; and as he speaks still in
that place, Nummum ipsum quem habes ab ipso habes, The money which thou have,
thou have from him, and therefore, Verbo reddendi, Significat debitum quod
inexcusabile subditis impositum est: Theophyl, in 13 Romans v. 7
Non date, sed reddite, Not give, but pay; not a gift, but a debt, which all
Subjects owe to him. Non damus sed reddimus, quiequid ex officio cuiquam damus,
says Beucer; We do not give, but pay that which of duty we owe: Tributes,
Subsidies, and Taskes, etc: are not gifts, but debts, which of necessity they
must and ought to pay. Hoc Scripturae approbant, hoc leges ciuiles communi
gentium omnium consensu recipient (says Hip. in Romans 13
Hiperius): This do the Scriptures allow of, (writing there of the payment of
Tributes) this do the Civil Laws, with the common consent of all Natious
accept, and approve: Ius pendendi vectigalia apud omnes gentes fuit semper
receptissimum (says the same In Romans 13. 6
Hiperius) The Law and right of paying Tribute, among all Nations has ever
been accustomed: for how could Kings maintain their States, defend their
Countries, reward their faithful servants, undergo so manifold expenses,
which belong to a regal reckoning, unless their Subjects with Tributes,
Taxes, and Subsidies, help to sustain the common charge? And therefore Calu.
in instit. lib. 4. c. 20
Calvin writes well, that Tributes and Taxes are the lawful revenues of
Princes; which serve to maintain their royalty, and the Commonwealths
tranquillity: Tributa necessaria sunt reip: sine eis, nec quies, nec arma,
haberi possunt, (says Tacitus) Tacit. lib. 4 Hist.
Tributes are so necessary for the Commonwealth, that neither peace, nor
war, nor weapons, can be without them: for war cannot be maintained without
men, nor men without money, which is Neruus belli, The sinew of war; Tributis
and vectigalibus nulla resp: aut imperium nedum magnum carere potest, (says
the same Tac. lib. 13: Annal.
Tacitus) No Country, or Kingdom, be it never so great, can lack the payment
of Tributes, etc. In regnis been constitutis certum constitutum est, Tributum
(says Herodotus Herod. lib 3 Histor.
) In well governed Kingdoms, there is certain Tribute to be paid. Luke 2. 1
Augustus Caesar taxed all the World, that is, all the Regions and Provinces
then subject to the Romans, (as the learned interpret it); and this was as
Calvin notes, Annuum Tributum, Piscator in locum: Calvin: Harm. in locum.
sed non quotannis fiebat descriptio; A yearly Tribute, though not every year
put in wrighting: And the Jews (though at first) they did aegre far
mentionem discriptionis, Hardly away with this yearly taxing, Non tamen
reluctatos esse pertinaciter, as Joseph: antiq. Iudaic: lib. 18. c. 1. Suasu
pontificis Ioazari censeri se passos esse. Josephus.
Josephus writes, They did not obstinately resist it, but by the persuasion of
their High Priest, they suffered themselves to be taxed. Solomon could not have
been so rich if his people had not paid him Tribute; but the weight of gold 2
Chro 9. 13. 24 David over the Tribute set Adoram. 2 Samuel: 20. 24 Solomon over
the Tribute placed Adoniram: 1 K 4. 6
they brought to Solomon, in one year was six hundredth threescore and six
Talents of Gold. This duty of paying Tribute, Subsidies, and Taxes, etc: by the
subjects to the Sovereign, is by the law of God, and laws of men, and common
customs of most Nations commanded and approved, and that for four principal
causes.

First to maintain that royal estate which God has given to Kings: the
glorious patterns of Kings magnificence, may be fully seen in royal Solomon:
Look but upon There was not the like made in any Kingdom: Imperij finis est
populi vtilitas, and tranquillitas
his Throne, 2 Chro. 9. 17, and you may judge of all the rest of his royalty.

Secondly, To defend the Commonwealth, both in peace and in war, which
requires a great Treasury. A great Bird had need of a great neast: That High
Head which cares for all the politic body, and night and day studies to
preserve their welfare, must participate of their wealth, without which the
public peace and security cannot be effected: for it is, Status insolidus qui
earet solidis.

Thirdly To contestate and acknowledge their homage and subjection to their
Sovereign: for Tributum dare, est imperatori subiici, and signum seruitutis,
say the Canonists, nonists, Extra: de exact: and cens. c. 5, and quaest. 8.
can. Tributum.
, to pay Tribute is to be subject to the Emperor, and a sign of servitude,
confessing all duty and loyalty to be due, to their anointed Sovereign, who
has power to command them, their Part reges, partem patria vendicant.
goods, Nehem. 9. 37
lands, and lives, for the service of the Kings and Countries preservation.
Look upon the Israelites (when King Saul was dead) coming to elect and
annoint David in Hebron, to be King over Israel, 1 Chro. 11. 1 Tuitione non
fruitione. Tributum vocant Turcae populi sanguinem: Postel. li. 5 de reb. Turci.
Behold we are thy bones and thy flesh, meaning (as I take it) that their lives
and all, were at his service and commandment: for Tribute is not only of
money, but Sudor and sanguis populi, The sweat and blood of the people, if such
need require to defend their King and Country, is a Tribute due from them,
willing and ready to adventure their lives and limbs, to give repulse and
resistance to foreign or domestical violence.

Fourthly, To testify their grateful affections to their gracious Princes, in
thankfulness for the great benefits by their prudent, provident, and
politic government, reaped and received. So David in lamenting Saul's death,
remembers the benefits his subjects received by him in his life time, 2 Samuel 1.
14
Ye Daughters of Israel weep for Saul, which clothed you in scarlet with
pleasures, and hanged ornaments of gold upon your apparel: So Lament. 4. 20
Jeremy of the good King Josiah, lamenting his death, The breath of our
nostrels, the Anointed of the Lord, was taken in their nets, of whom we said,
Under his shadow we shall be preserved among the Heathen. A good King, brings
many blessings and benefits unto his people; and therefore when such as are in
authority, be righteous, the people rejoice, says Prou. 29. 2
Solomon. 4.
A King by judgment maintains the country, By a man of understanding and
knowledge, a Realm endures long, says the same Pro. 28. 2
Solomon; yea, (as wise Plato well said) Beatas fore resp: cum aut
Philosophentur reges; aut regnent Philosophi: When as Kings were Philosophers,
or Philosophers Kings, then such Commonwealths should be happy. And indeed all
earthly happiness which is derived to the members, proceeds from the Head,
(next under God, the primary Author of all good things) by whose direction,
discretion, circumspection, care, counsel, and continual vigilance, they are
preserved in peace, and prosper in plenty: for there are six external earthly
helps, necessary for the temporal prosperity of any Kingdom. 1. A King to
rule. 2. A Law to judge, 3. Policy to guide, 4. People to inhabit, 5. Power
to defend, 6: Riches to maintain it, and which is the Alpha and Omega of all,
and above all, and before all, the Lord and King of all, to prosper and
preserve all, without whose protection these must come to ruin all. Psa. 127. 1
Except the Lord keep the City, the keeper watches but in vain; Except the
Lord govern and guide the ship of State, it runs upon the rock: Therefore
Prince and people ought duly to say with the Psalm. 44. 4, 5
Psalmist; Thou art our King, O God, send help unto Jacob, Through thee have
we thrust back our enemies, through thee have we trodden down them that
rose up against us, etc. Rise up for our succor, and redeem us for 26.
thy mercies sake. Well, Tributes, Subsidies, Taxes, etc: are a good means to
help to support the state of Kingdoms; and as they be the public Tribute of
the Commonwealths, so should they be employed about the public tranquillity.
Let no Theudas herein deceive you, or any Judas of Galile (who in the days of
the Tribute, drew away much people, as Acts 5. 37
Gamaliel speaks) delude you; for he perished, and all that obeyed him: Si
quis putat non esse vectigal soluendum, aut tributum aut honorem exhibendum, in
magno errore labitur, says Aug. in lib. ad Romans proposit. 72
Austen; If any one think Imposts, Tribute, and honor, ought not to be paid
to them, he falls into a great error: Iure debemus, and nisi facimus,
peccamus in iustitiae regulam, says B: Aretij Comm. in 13. Romans v. 7 Moses
found Subjects ready in this kind, for when a voluntary contribution required,
they brought so much as they cried, Sufficient, it is enough: Exodus 36.
Aretius; We owe them by right, if we do not pay them, we offend against the
rule of Justice: Nay to pay them is so necessary for all, (as the same Aretius
there) Nisivelint fortunis, and bonis, adeoque ipsa salute spoliari, Unless
they would be deprived of their fortunes, wealth, and welfare: Therefore pay it
truly, and do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men; not grudgingly,
as if compelled by necessity, but cheerfully and voluntarily in humble
testimony of your hearty fidelity, love, and loyalty. But herein may arise a
question; The Cyrus Subjects in their voluntary gifts at one Subsidy did
exceed the long heaped treasure of rich Croesus. Fiscus Dei Caesaris Fisco
nihil adimit.
Laity ought to pay Tribute to their Sovereign Kings, but whether the Clergy?
And the chief pillars of Popery have already passed their verdict, that they
ought not to pay Tribute; and he that was then foreman of the grand Jury, I
mean Boniface the 8, came not forth with an Ignoramus, but with a Definitive
Decreuimus Decreeing, that no Clergy man should pay tribute: And since a late
Jury of Popish Doctors, that have been empannelled upon that case, have passed
their verdicts, that Clergy men are exempted, not only from Tributes, but also
from all trials, or punishments, to be inflicted by secular Courts. So Bar. in
paraenesi: ad Venetos: page 47
Baronius in his Paraenesis to the Venetians writes, Senatum venetum contra
sacerdotes vel enormissime delinquentes, nullam habere iurisdictionem, quia
scriptum est, Tu quis es qui indic as alienum seruum? etc. The Senate of Venice
has no jurisdiction against Priests, never so foully offending, because it is
written, What art thou that iudgest another man's servant? he stands to his
Master, or falls; and the Venetians doing contrary, he compares to be Instar
monstri, and portenti Luciferi, Like that monstrous portent of pride, Lucifer.
Know ye not that we shall judge the Angels? So Baronius; So De clerici: c. 28
Bellarmine, sing the same song, that Churchmen that are borne, and inhabit in
sovereign Princes Countries, are notwithstanding not their Subjects, and
cannot be judged by them, although they may judge them: And again, that the
obedience, which Churchmen give to Princes, even in the meanest and mere
temporal Ibidem.
things, is not by any necessary subjection, but only out of discretion, and
for observation of good order and custom: These two Cardinals, like Sampson,
sweat in the Philistians mill, to grind to powder the power of Princes over
the Clergy; thereby the more to advance the, usurped might of the Papal Miter.
What should I record the paltry verdicts of others, who live upon Bellarmines
and Baronius scraps and fragments, as the Poets did upon Homers Basin? and will
wright and fight, yea -- Iurare in verba Magistri,
Swear to defend the foulest errors of their false Oracles: --
Quos penes arbitrium est, and ius, and norma loquendi.


If Bellarmine and Baronius, the one in controversies, the other in Histories
(men indeed deep, and famous in knowledge, if it were sanctified) if they have
once beat their brains about any point, then the Ignatian brood, (a society
like to Liuie.
Hannibals Army, gathered Ex colluuie omnium gentium, Of the dross, and dregs
of every Nation, will tooth and nail defend it; as if Chrysippus had bred
them, who used to boast, Diog. Laert: in Chrysipp.
That if once he had the opinion, he never wanted arguments to defend it. Read
but Mariana de rege and regis instit. lib. 1 c. 10: page 88: or Francis. Bozius
Princeps nominem ex sacrato ordine, supplicio quamuis merito, afficiat etc.
Maria: ibidem.
de temp. Eccl: Monar. lib. 2, c. 1, page 264, and 265: or to be brief,
Catechis: Jesuit, lib. 2, c. 26, page 235: you shall find how they concur and
conspire like Simeon and Leui, to draw the Clergy out of the yoke of obedience
from secular Powers, to inthrall them to a base bondage to the Pope; and indeed
it was a policy used long ago among the Popes, the better to raise the
pontifical Hierarchy by degrees, to decree Clericall Immunities from secular
Authorities, as we Nullus Iudicum: 2 De foro: compet.
read in diverse places; Nullus iudicum saecularium Presbyterum, Diaconum, aut
Clericum vllum sine permissu pontificis condemnare praesumat, etc. Let no Judge
Secular, presume to condemn Priest, Deacon, or Clerk, without leave of the
Bishop; if he do, let him be sequestered from the Church: Donec reatum emendet;
Till he has mended his fault. C. si diligenti, 12: Eod. tit.
And again, Episcopi, Diaconi, and quilibet Clerici, sieve in criminali sieve in
civilly negotio, seculare iudicium non possunt subire: Bishops, Deacons, or any
Clerks, may not undergo judgment; either in any criminal, or civil
business, or proceeding: And so c. 1, etc. Clericos 3. de immunit: Eccl: in 6.
again, Ecclesiasticis mandatur sub depositionis poena, vt laicis
imperatoribus, regibus, principibus, comitibus, etc. Talias, collectas, nec sub
adiutorij; mutui, aut subsidij, vel doni nomine, licet promissas soluant: It is
commanded Ecclesiastical men, under pain of deposition, or deprivation, that
they shall not pay to Lay Emperors, Kings, Princes, or Rulers, Taxes, or
Tenths, under the name of helps, lendings, subsidies, or gratuities, although
promised. What a cautelous decree is this, as if it were like sacrilege to pay
tribute to Kings, as Christ did; or to give them any thing by way of
gratuities, which all may do without control? Eugenius I, was one of the
Volater: Chro.
first that did Potestatem gladij ciuilis rapere, Snatch into his hands the
power of the civil Sword, for he decreed, that Episcopi haberent carcerem ad
plectenda delicta clericorum; Bishops should have a prison to punish the
faults of Clerks And so Hadrian the first, Ne clerici extra suum forum in
iudicium traherentur; That Clerks should not be Chron. Chron.
drawn out of their own Courts. And so Platina.
Syluester, Laicis clericum in ius vocare interdixit, He interdicted Laycks to
call Clerks into their Courts: So Fabian decreed, Sacerdotes causam dicere and
mulctari in sacro, non prophano foro debere, That Priests ought to plead their
cause, and to Sabellicus.
be punished in the sacred, not profane Courts. So Julius the first, decreed,
Ne sacerdos alibi, quam apudiudicem Ecclesiasticum dicat; That no Priest should
plead his cause, but before an Ecclesiastical Judge. And so many other Popes,
Anacletus, Alexander the first, and second; Eusebius, Platine.
Gregory 7, called Heldebrand, and since him, all have rightly Heldebrandized,
arrogating the spiritual and temporal Sword, as Boniface did, who when
Krantz. Sano: page 225.
Albert the first, sent to him to confirm his election, he refused, saying;
that he was both Emperor and Pope: and so in that present Iubile, did show
himself, the first day in his Pontifical Platin. in Bonifac. 8.
robes, and the next day in the habit of an Emperor, saying; Behold, here are
two swords: and ever since they have used all their skill, plots, and
policies, to claim a supremacy over Emperors, Kings, and Princes, not only
in spiritual, but also in temporal matters: Read but Page 52. Vid. Sand: de
visib: Monar. li. 2 c. 4.
Bozius Book De temporali Monarch: who there labors to defend, that the
supreme temporal jurisdiction belongs to the Pope; so that he is the
universal Monarch of all the World: and that the Emperor holds his Empire of
the Church of Rome, and may be called the Popes Vicar, or Official, as Tract.
de consil: in sin. vlt c. page 778.
Iacobatius Writes: Agreeable to the doctrine and propositions of Bellarmine,
Bell: de pont: lib. 1. c. 7^
that Kings are subjects to Popes; Lib. 3. c. 16:
and have degraded Emperors, and thereupon they challenge both swords, and
strive to free themselves, and Revel. 12. 4.
Dragon-like with their tail would draw the third part of the stars from all
obedience and allegiance, from the Kings of the earth, denying all suites and
service, tributes, trials, or secular punishments to be inflicted upon them,
exempting all their Clergy from temporal subjection: Contrary to the Precepts
and practice of the Priests and Prophets of the Law, and Christ and his
Apostles in the Gospel: yea contrary to the practice of the purer times, even
in the Church of Rome, when as their Bishops acknowleged their service and
fealty to Caesar's, and paid them tribute.

Episcopi dederunt, tributa potestatiregiae non resistentes, etc. says Eusebius:
hist. ecclesiast. tripart. lib. 7. c. 9.
Eusebius, The Bishops paid their Tributes, not resisting regal power: yea let
their Urban. pa. 23. Quaest: 8. can. Tributum.
Pope Urban speak, tribute was found in the mouth of a fish, Peter fishing,
Ecclesia tributum reddidit, then the Church paid Tribute: yea Extra de exact:
and Cens. c. 2.
Tributarium nummum debetis dare, quo vos indicatis obedientiam vestram, You
ought to pay tribute money, by which you ought to declare your obedience. But
peradventure they will allege King 1 Esdras 8. 23.
Artaxerxes commission given to Esdras, in which it pleased the King to
command, that no Tribute or tax of the Priests, Levites, holy Singers,
Porters, Ministers of the Temple, or workmen of the Temple should be taken, or
any had power to tax them in any thing; the answer is easy. First, this
immunity proceeded, ex mera gratia and beneplacito, from the mere favor and
pleasure of the King, the better to encourage them in their work at Jerusalem.
Secondly, they possessed no lands, but lived by oblations and sacrifices; being
herein like the Druides among the Frenchmen (who paid no Tribute) as Caesar
writes; the reason was, because they had nothing, and where nothing is, the
King loses his right. Thirdly, a particular favor or example makes not a
general law: Indeed Cod. tit. de Clericis: and in alys tit: legis.
Justinian the Emperor has granted to the Clergy special privileges, and
freed them from military or martial employments, personal officers, and from
many exactions; but all this proceeds ex beneplacito, out of an Imperial
favor, and royal grace, which all virtuous Kings bear unto Gods Ministers,
non ex praecepto, or praxi; for practice Math, 17. 27.
Christ himself paid Tribute for himself and Peter; and by Math, 22. 21.
precept, Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's: telling his Disciples, Math,
20. 25.
The Lords of the Gentiles had dominion over them: And S. Rom, 13: 6. 7.
Paul commands every soul to be subject to the higher Powers, to pay Tribute,
and to give Tribute to whom they owe Tribute. To them therefore that challenge
immunity from the performance of these public debts of tributarie duties to
their Liege Lords and Kings, I may say to them as Dioclesian to the
Philosopher; Thy profession differs from thy petition, thy profession teaches
thee to give Caesar his due, and not to rob him of his right. Bishop Latimer
calls such thieves that rob the King of his due debt, Subsidies, Tributes, or
Taxes. Rather imitate that Ambros. contra Auxen: 11. quaest: 1, Can: si
tributum.
Ambrose the famous Bishop of Millan, who teaches thee a better lesson: Si
tributum petit Imperator, non negamus, agri Ecclesiae soluant tributum; si
agros desiderat Imperator, potestatem habet vendicandorum, tollat eos si
libitum est; Imperatori non dono, sed non nego; If the Emperor demand Tribute,
we do not deny it, your fields of our Church shall pay tribute; If the
Emperor demand the fields, he has power to challenge them, let him take them,
I neither give them nor deny them in no case, arguing obedience in ordinary,
or extraordinary exactions: agreeing fully with Luther, Luth: in Math: 22, 21.
If thy substance, body, or life should be taken from thee by the Magistrate,
thou may say thus, I do willingly yield them unto you, and acknowledge you
for ruler over me, I will obey you, but whether you use your power and
authority well or ill, see you to that: For Kings must one day give account of
all their works, to the King of Kings; and if they have abused their power by
Tyranny, cruelty, or any bad government, an hard judgment Wisd. 6. 5. 8.
shall such have that bear such rule, for then abides the sorer trial, as the
Son of wisdom speaks; The power is from God, the abuse of it from
themselves, and they will find it, when God and it calls them to reckon. The
chain of gould is not made the worse because an harlot wears it about her
neck: it is Luth: in Math. 22. 21.
Luthers comparison in this case; so still Kings must be obeyed, for conscience
sake, if not commanding contrary to Gods commandments. Let us in these follow
the steps of faithful Fabricius, of whose fidelity Pyrrhus boldly speaks,
Difficilius Fabricius a legalitate quam sol a suo cursu vertipossit; Let the
Sun first turn from her course, then we from the course of loyal obedience,
and allegiance: always remembering that Christian saying of the Martyr Ignat.
epist. 2. ad Magnesianos.
Ignatius, No man ever lived unpunished, which lifted up himself against his
betters, superiors, his Princes; disobedience brings infamy, disgrace, death,
yea hatred after death, that the sorrowful Son may say of his treacherous
sire, Genesis 34. 30.
Ye have troubled me, and made me stink among the inhabitants of the land, as
Jacob said of Simeon and Leui. Let us always from the bottom of 1 Prayer.
our hearts^, pray for the Kings safety, corporally; for his salvation
spiritually, and preservation politically. Let us 2 Obedience.
obey him because he is the Lords anointed, appointed by God to be his
vicegerent, representing the person on earth, of the King of Kings in heaven:
Let us honor him 3 Honor.
not with lips only, but with hearts truly, because he is the Father of our
Country, the constant Defender of the Faith, and so worthy of double honor:
Let us be ready 4 Service.
to perform at his command our best service, being his native and natural
Subjects, born and bound by Allegiance to all Christian duties of subjection:

Let us be willing to pay Tribute, a public purse must 5 Tribute.
help the public peace, Multorum manibus grande leuatur onus.


Yet let us pay him his duty: Tribute to him, for we owe him Tribute; Custom
to him, for we owe him Custom; Fear, Honor, Obedience Service and all other
loyal services and performances of duties belonging to good subjects in their
several degrees and places; humbly to tender them, and render them unto our
gracious and high Soueragine Lord the King, whose Sword, Crown, Scepter,
Throne and Person justly requires all these duties: the Sword exacts obedience,
Crown commands honor, Scepter service, Throne tribute, and Person prayer;
always pouring forth to God this prayer and petition,

God save the King: Corporally. Spiritually. Politically.

CHAP. IX.
First Corporally.

AND if ever Prayers needful in this kind, now is the time; Nolite tangere,
abhorred Non solum iure, sed cu^ laud and gloria perimi possunt, etc Marian.
de Instit: reg page 61. Quid interest ferro, an veneno perimas? Venenoquod fit,
minori periculo, and maiori spe impunitatis. Marian: p. 65. 67.
of Heathens, is now applauded and defended of false Christians. Religion and
superstition now comes forth with her knife, ready to cut Kings throats, it
being the general rule of them, Occide haereticum, Kill an heretic, make
away with him, give him an Italian posset, poison him though it be in the
Sacrament, Stella fasicul. tempor: Naucler. Genebrand. vid: Westo^ lib. 3. de
Tri: hom: offic.
as Henry the seventh, Emperor, poisoned in Sacramental bread; Victor the
third, Pope, in the Sacramental cup; and yet they say that Christ's blood is
really in the wine, how then comes that poison of death mixed with that sacred
substance of life?

The Patrons and Proctors to plead for King-killers, I mean the Jesuits with
their adherents, make this for a conclusion; That any private man may be an
executioner of a King excommunicated and deposed by the Pope: and Anno 1089. n.
12
Caesar Baronius alleges and commends out of Iuo a breue of Pope Urban the
second, wherein it is pronounced, that they are no homicides who kill such as
are excommunicate; for we do not judge them to be murderers, who burning
with the zeal of their Catholic mother, against such as are excommunicate,
happen to have killed any of them. And so Defens. fid: Cath: adu: Angl: sect.
erro: lib. 6. c. 4. n. 18.
Suarez the Jesuit in his last book against our King writes, After sentence
condemnatory is given of the King, etc. then he that has pronounced the
sentence, or he to whom it is committed, may deprive the King of his kingdom,
even by killing him if he cannot do it otherwise; and the very Cannibals are
not more thirsty of blood then these false Catholics, commending and
commanding murder, the murder of Gods Anointed Kings, (which any heart, not
stupefied with Atheism, or reprobate sense, would tremble at it) and
appropriate the doing of that deed only to Papists; for so Suarez vbi supr:
Suarez says, If his lawful successor be a Catholic, and so that he be a
Catholic that succeedes in the right, challenging the right of committing so
execrable villainy, to appertain to none but only to Romish Catholics;
disdaining that any should have an hand in so horrible and hellish mischiefs
against the King, but only a friend and follower of the Popes religion;
true-borne children of their bloody Mother the whore of Babylon, the mother of
murder, Reu. 17. 6.
drunken with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Christ
Jesus. If the Pope cries against any King, with the Luke 19. 14.
Citizens in that parable, Nolumus hunc regnare, We will not have this man to
reign; presently policy, villainy, mischief, and murder, fraud and deceit,
Armata impietas: art pellere, vt mart tollere.
all shall conspire to accomplish the Popes desire: If poison and policy
fail, power shall ^reuaile: like to him when entreaty could not move, laid his
hand on his sword Conn: Julian ex hist. hisp. Diffidens clauo Petri, arripit
claua^ Herculis.
saying, At hic faciet, but this shall do it; if Mercury be too weak, Mars
shall second him, then leave Apolloes harp, and take Hercules club; both pens
and pikes, heads, hearts, and hands are too nimble to hurt Kings: Sanguiuolenta
est men's, Sanguinolenta manus:
A bloody heart must have a bloody hand.


How many Princes of Christendom has that Sea of Rome swallowed and devoured?
A Sea indeed, nay a red Sea of blood, or Mare mortuum, wherein that Job 41. 22.
Leuiathan makes his Sea, (as the Lord tells Job) like a pot of ointment: Sed
mors in illa ella, Death is in the pot. Out of this Sea creep those
Crocodiles, I mean Jesuits, Seminaries, and men usually troubled with the
Kings evil, Treason: These Romish rats creep into regal Palaces, at last
take and task their own bane, like the spirits of Devils (of whom S. John)
Reu. 16. 14.
work miracles to go unto the Kings of the earth, and those whom they cannot
draw by their collusion, they would devour by effusion. I may Hoc discunt
nostri ante Alpha and Beta, Papistae.
say of them as Polymnestor speaks in the Tragedy of Hecuba, Hastifera,
armata, equestris, Marti obnoxiagens, They are well weaponed people, dagges and
daggers, charms, poisons, powder, all tragical and traitorous engines and
instruments they have to touch Gods Anointed, the Kings of the earth
corporally. In old time scarce any treason without a Priest, in our time
scarce any without a Jesuit: As Judas was the antesignanus of traitors (chief
Captain of the cursed crew) so since him the false styled Jesuits, but the true
Iudaites, are the chief Shibas, to blow aloud the trumpet of rebellion. And
there was a wicked man named Sheba, the son of Bicri, a man of Iemini and he
blew the Trumpet and said, We have no part in David, nor inheritance in the
son of Ishai. Every man to his tents O Israel, 2 Samuel 20. 1. And there are
many of Israel that follow these Shebas, but 2 Samuel 20. 2.
the men of Judah claue fast unto their King, from Jordan even to Jerusalem.
All good subjects will cleave with the men of Judah faithfully to their King,
and will go with Ioab to pursue these Shebas, 13. 22.
until their heads be cut off and thrown to them over the wall. These Shebas
make Kings the marks of their murder; saying with treacherous 2 Samuel 17. 2.
Achitophel, I will smite the King only: or with the King of Aram, 1 Kings 22.
31.
Fight neither against small or great, save only against the King of Israel.
Feriunt summos fulmina montes. The highest mountains most exposed to Thunders:
And to perpetrate such crying and capital murders, they will hazard the peril
of their lives, and loss of their souls: and (but Psalm. 91. 11.
that the Lord has given his Angels a charge over his Anointed to keep them
in all his ways) the attempts of such desperate miscreants were deadly
dangerous: for as Seneca, Vitae tuae dominus est, quisquis suam contempsit, He
is Master of thy life, who contemnes his own. Cato when he had got a sword,
(though therewith to kill himself) cried out, Now am I my own man. So these
desperate villains who run with desire to their own deaths, are their own
men to act murder: but God does bring to naught their desires and devices, and
raises up for his servants in extraordinary dangers, extraordinary
deliverances. The Herodotas.
imminent danger of King Croesus, yet a Heathen King, opened the mouth of his
dumb son to tell it. Plutarch.
Bessus his parricide discovered by the chattering of Swallows; verifying
Salomons Eccl. 10. 20.
words, The fowls of the air carry that voice; God can cause every foul of
heaven, and every creature on earth to find a tongue to tell treason, to
deliver his Anointed. Our gracious King is a speaking map of many wonderful
deliverances in extraordinary dangers; still we cry and crave with David, Psalm.
20. 9.
Domine saluum fae Regem, Lord save the King, cloth Psalm. 132. 18. Psalm. 2. 9.
all his enemies with shame, and break them in pieces like a Potters vessel:
Let thy hands O Lord, find out all that hate him; make them like a fiery oven
in the time of thine anger, and Psalm 21. 9.
destroy them in thy wrath: Deliver his soul from the Psalm 22. 20. 21.
sword, and save him from the Lions mouths: confound all Shebas that would
stir up Israel against David, and all Adoniahs that gape to take the kingdom
from our Solomon; all like them, let them perish like them. Then will all
loyal subjects rejoice when they see the vengeance, they shall wash their feet
in the blood of the wicked. Let our fervent prayers be daily powered forth unto
God, to defend him from all Traitors, to reveal their plots and revenge their
purposes, that they -- qui volunt occidere regem, posse nolunt:
That they who would kill a King, may never have power to perform it: that no
danger may assault him, no treachery may endanger him, give thine Angels charge
O Lord to sentinel over him: make his chamber like the tower of Cant. 4. 4.
David, built for defense; a thousand shields hang therein, and all the targets
of the strong men; and his bed Cant. 3. 7, 8.
like Salomons, threescore strong men round about it of the valiant men of
Israel, they all handle the sword, and are expert in war; every one has his
sword upon his thigh, for the fear by night, that so no enemy may oppress
him, nor the wicked approach to hurt him; to destroy his foes before his face,
and plague them that hate Psalm. 89. 22. 23.
him; his seed long to endure, and his days as the days of heaven. So shall
the Lord be gracious to his Servant, and merciful to us his people who
continually pray, God save the King, Corporally.

CHAP. X.
2. Spiritually.

GOD Save the King Spiritually, God ever keep him constant and courageous to
maintain the true profession of the Gospel, and to labor to purge Gods
Church of all superstition, and to plant in it Gods true religion. Our Kings
own saying, viz.


This is the first duty of Kingly service unto God, to cleanse his Church of
all idolatry and superstition. It is the chief duty of King to settle first
Gods service and Church affairs before their own.


The good Kings Ezechias and Josias, were careful in this behalf: Ezechiah
when he came to the Crown of Judah, 2 Kings 18. 4.
he took away the high places, brake the Images, and cut down the groves, and
brake in pieces the brazen serpent, etc. that is, rooted and raced out all
Idolatry. So 2 Kings 23.
Josiah puts down all Idols, and Idolatrous Priests, who defiled the Temple.
So 1 Kin. 15. 12. 13.
Asa took the wicked Sodomites out of the land, and deposed Maacha his Mother,
because she had made an Idol in a grove. So 1 Kings 6. 2.
Solomon installed in his kingdom, built a Temple for service and worship of
the Lord. It is the office of a King specially to take care to provide, that
God may be religiously worshipped, that his 1 Samuel, 12. 24.
people may fear the Lord, and serve him in the truth: for the happiness of
King and Kingdom consists in the truth of their religion; For that nation and
kingdom which will not serve the Lord shall perish and be utterly destroyed,
says the Prophet Esaias 60. 12.
Esaias. Est boni Principis religionem ante omnia constituere;
says Liut: decad. 1. l. 1.
Liuie, It is the part of a good King, first to establish true religion; for
that is the very fountain and foundation of all felicity. Plutarch. de ciu:
administr.
Beneficentia quae fit in cultum Dei maxima gratia. That love and care which is
declared toward the true worship of God, is most commendable: for true
religion is Cardo or Axis, the very Pillar of all prosperity, the soul of
Tranquillity, the total sum of true felicity: Propter Ecclesiam in mundo,
durat mundus, says Luther, Christ's Church on earth is the cause of the
continuance of this earthly world: without the light of the Gospel, Kings and
people live in thraldom, in the Egypt of woeful blindness: it is but painted
happiness, a vain flourish, nay a dangerous ship of state, where God sits not
at the stern. As all kingdoms stand luteis pedibus, upon clay feet: so that
Kingdom cannot stand at all, which wants the foundation, true religion. It is
the speech of an Plato lib. 4. de legibus.
Heathen, but may be the lesson of a Christian, Religio vera est firmamentum
reip. etc. True religion the foundation of a Common wealth, and the chief care
ought to be, to plant the same. So 1 Chr. 15.
David reioyces in nothing so much as in the Ark of God, desirous rather to be
a dore-keeper in Gods house, then to rule in the tents of the ungodly. Like to
that good Emperor, who gloried more to be membrum Ecclesiae, then caput
Imperij, a member of Gods Church, then an head of a great Empire. Solomon 2 Chapter
2. 1.
begins well, first in building an house for God, knowing nothing can prosper
without God: Except the Psalm. 127. 1. Psalm 2. 4. 10
Lord keep the City, the watchman watches but in vain. In vain do the Kings
of the earth stand up, if they assemble against the Lord, for then he laughes
them to scorn, and shall have them in derision. Be wise now therefore 11
O ye Kings, serve the Lord in fear, be wise in Divine matters, serve the Lord
in fear; for his fear is the beginning of wisdom, to direct you to rule
your selves and people in the service and worship of his holy name.

We read it recorded of Gregor: Nazia^z: orat. funebr; in laudem Athanasij.
Constantinus the Emperor, that when he died, he did much lament for three
things which had happened in his reign. First, the murder of Gallus his
kinsman: Secondly, the liberty of Julian the Apostate: Thirdly, the change and
alteration of religion. And surely there cannot be a greater cause of
lamentation, then an innovation or alteration of religion: yea then a
tolleration of a contrary religion. It had been a hard matter to have had
obtained a tolleration of such a thing as a Mass at Moses hands with a mass
of money. A godly Prince may not suffer any religion but the true religion in
his Dominions, and this we may prove by diverse reasons. First the exercise of a
false religion is directly against the honor and glory of God. Ergo. Secondly,
consent in true religion is vinculum Ecclesiae, the chain and bond of Gods
Church; for Ephesians. 45.
there is but one faith: therefore a difference and dissension in religion, is
a dissolution in Gods Church; but no Prince ought to have his hand in
dissoluing Gods Church, for Kings are Esaias. 49. Oportet Principem esse ante
omnia Deicolam.
nursing Fathers of the Church. Thirdly, it is the Princes duty to provide for
the safety of the bodies, much more for the safety of the souls of his
Subjects. Now true religion is the food, but false the bane of souls; and you
know, Qui non seruat periturum, cum potest, occidit, He that does not help one
ready to perish, being able to help, kills him. Fourthly, the Revel. 2. 14. 15.
Angel of the Church of Pergamus is reproved for having such in Pergamus as
maintained the doctrine of Balaam, and the doctrine of the Nicholaitans; and
the Church of Revel. 2. 20.
Thiatyra reproved for suffering Iezabel to teach and deceive. Fifthly, the
Lords Judge. 6. 25. 26.
Altar and Baals Altar must not stand together: Quae concordia Dei and Belial?
No agreement twixt God and Belial. Indeed the Papists have been very earnest
to supplicate for a Tolleration for their corrupt religion, and yet themselves
never allow it. The Pope never afforded such favor to Protestants, witness
their Inquisition: Nay De laicis, lib. 3. c. 19. etc. 21.
Bellarmine does confess, that the Papists would not suffer any among them,
Qui ostendunt vllo signo etiam externo se fauere Lutheranis, Who do declare by
any sign external that they favor the Lutherans; but they do mittere illos
mature in locum suum, send such quickly to their last home. Read but Lencaeus
the Louayne professor c. 21.. 2.
in his book Devnica religione, or Pamelius in his book De diuersis
religionibus non admittendis, Who both with might and maine dispute against
Tollerations. It was a great commendation in the Emperor Constantino, who
would not suffer Idolatry in any part of his Dominions, as Eusebius. lib. 4. de
vit: Constable.
Eusebius writes of him. And it was commendable in Amphilochius Trip: hist: l.
5. c 25 Vid. Theod: lib: 5. c. 16.
a Bishop, who reproved Theodosius the Emperor, that he so long winked at
Arrius, and suffered him to spread his pestilent heresy over the body of the
Church; and it was commended in the Emperor, who was not angry with the words
of just reproof, but forthwith banished Arrius, and gave him some part of his
just deserts. Sozom. lib. 7. c: 12.
But herein we need not seek out foreign histories, we have examples at
home, who never would yield to tolerate corrupt religion. Edward the sixth, a
Prince most famous and virtuous, was solicited by Carolus the Emperor, Mr.
Fox in Acts and Monuments.
and his own Counselors, to permit the Lady Mary to have Mass in her own
house; his resolution negative, saying, he would spend his life, and all that
he had rather then to agree and grant to that he knew certainly to be against
the truth.

The late Queen Elizabeth (of blessed memory) could Dr. Abbot in his answer to
the reason vi. of Dr. Hill in the latter end.
never be persuaded to tolerate Popish Religion, who after innumerable dangers
and manifold persecutions, with unspeakable courage, notwithstanding many
difficulties at home, of Princes abroad, and of the Devil euerwhere, professed
to maintain the truth of the Gospel, and to deface Idolatry and superstition,
which with singular constancy she continued all the days of her life. And now
this our great and gracious Sovereign follows the steps of those religious
Princes, not all the World can change his constant resolution in Christian
Religion, his ears and hearts abhor their charms, who are Petitioners in
this kind; for the granting of such a request, might much disquiet the
Christian Church, State, and Gospel. God ever keep and bless the King, in
this his holy and spiritual perseverance in the truth of the Gospel; make his
heart like Mount Sion, never to be removed: A King so constant in profession of
the Gospel, and so learned and profound in all spiritual knowledge, that he
is able to confute, and convince with sound arguments the enemies, of the
Gospel: and thereupon it was (as I take it) that Suarez the Jesuit said; That
Learning did disparage the royal dignity, because the Champions of Rome see
that they are not able to encounter with his Highness matchless knowledge. And
surely if learning grace any man, it must be more gracious O faelicia
antiquorum tempora, in quibus ipsi imperatores mundum regentes, seipsos
philosophiae dederunt, vt de Alexandro, de Julio Caesare, de Ptolomaeo rege
etc: Hug. in dicasc lib. 2.
in a Monarch, a Man of Men. What made Solomon so famous and so renowned, but
specially his wisdom and knowledge? Julius Caesar, Constantine, and Charles
the Great, Justinian, Leo, Palaeologus, Cantacuzaenus, the Alphonsi, and many
more? Naucler. Posseuin. council. Mediol. 1. sub. Borrhom:
Sigismund the Emperor, commended for playing the Deacon at the Council of
Constance. Henry the eight writing for the seven Sacraments, whose Book
subscribed with his own hands, the Popish Priests glory to have it in their
Vatican. The Cardinal of Millan thinks it the highest commendation he could
give the late King of Spain, In eius regia dignitate, vt verbo complectar,
sacerdotalem animum licet aspicere: In his regal dignity, to comprize all in a
word, we may see his sacerdotall heart: Iuuenal. Haec opera, atque hae sunt
generosi Principis arts.


And in the sacred studies of divine Learning, our dread Sovereign may carry
the Palm, and wear the royal Crown, who has delivered to the World better
Principles of Theological knowledge out of his Chair of State, then the
Mitered Pope did ever e Cathedra; for a King to descend to the Preacher, is a
work of piety, as Eccles. 1. 12.
Solomon did, I the Preacher have been King in Jerusalem; but for the Priest
to climb into the Kings throne, is to play the Popes part, the part of
Antichrist. Our royal Sovereign has made it his last delight, to delight in
the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate Psa. 1. 2.
day and night: In which spiritual labor, he has so profited himself and
others, that he has taken Princely pains to publish the truth of Christ; and
to proclaim to the Potentates of the world the errors of Antichrist: So that
all people have cause to pray, God save the King spiritually. That a Pro. 16. 10
divine sentence may be in the lips of the King, and his mouth shall not
transgress in judgment, who like the good Emperor Constantine, labors to
decide matters of Religion, by the true rule of Gods word: for so Theod: Hist
lib 1 c. 7.
Constantine commanded the Bishops to order all points by the Book of God,
which Book he placed for the same purpose in the midst of them: And even so
speaks our dread Soueraign, In his Apology for the Oath of Alleagiance, pa. 36,
line 13.
whatsoever I find agree with the Scriptures, I will gladly embrace; what is
otherwise, I will with their reverence reject; godly and golden words. The Lord
evermore bless his body and soul spiritually, and enlarge the great Talent of
his Princely wisdom, giving him as great a measure of knowledge, as was given
to Solomon 2 Chr. 1. 12
; yea, such riches, treasures, and honors, as none had before him, or after
him; and as his Majesty has taken manifold pains to reduce the Popish
Sectaries, out of their spiritual blindness, that they who will not be
wakened out of their slumbers of ignorance, by the voice of so royal and
religious a sheapheard, may be compelled by the Sword of Magistracy to depart
out of Babylon, or out of his Dominion: But herein it becomes not me to give
counsel; rather fall to prayer, that the Lord, whose cause it is, would take
the cause into his own hand, and stir up the hearts and hands of all
Christian Kings, to compel all people, who will not be moved by the word of
Gods Ministry to come out of Babylon, might be forced by the sword of
Magistracy Reu. 18. 4
to depart from her, least they receive of her plagues. Qui phreneticum ligat,
and lethargicum excitat, ambobus molestus, ambos amat, says Aug. Epist. 48
Austen: He that binds a frantic man, and awakes him that has the
lethargy, loves both, though he be grievous to both: And as the same Father
Aug contra 2. Gaudentij Epist: lib. 2, c. 17 Ad caenam tanti patris familias si
sponte non vultis intrare, compellimus: Aug contra 2: Gaudentij Epist. lib. 2,
c. 28
in another place, Quod autem vobis videtur, inuitos ad veritatem non esse
cogendos, etc. Whereas you think, that men are not to be compelled to the
truth against their wills, ye err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of
God, which makes those willing, though they be compelled against their wills:
Go into the high ways, and compel them to come in, says Luke 1. 4 23
our Savior Christ: whereupon Saint Epist: 204.
Austen says; Qui compellitur, quo non vult, cogitur, sed cum intrauerit, iam
volons pascitur, He that is compelled, is compelled against his will to enter;
but when he is entered, he is fed willingly.

The Lord for his mercy sake by the power of his word, draw all Christ's flock
to unity in Religion, and give to all Kings faithful hearts, to favor and
follow the same; and specially, O Lord, bless from Heaven, thy dear servant,
our dread Sovereign: give him all graces and gifts suitable for his Princely
calling, knit his heart unto thee, that he may ever fear thy name; and let all
them that love the Gospel of Jesus Christ, night and day pray; God save the
King, Spiritually.

CHAP. XI.
Thirdly, God save the King Politically.

AND to induce all loyal subjects to this acceptable and dutiful service,
many causes concur both divine and civil, (whersoeuer we turn our thoughts)
which may englad our hearts, and move them to burn in affectionate flames, in
the oblation of this devotion. For under him we lead a peaceable and a quiet
life, free from foreign fears, or domestical troubles; that we may say by
his gracious government, in our Lard; Mercy and Truth have met together,
Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other: And again with the Psalm. 43.
6, 7 Caesariae domus totum relege and reuolue progressum, and inuenies quod
breui perijt memo^^a little, quoniam a se scientiam Domini repulerunt, and ipsi
repulsi sunt. Chryso.
Psalmist, The Scepter of thy Kingdom is a Scepter of righteousness; thou
love righteousness, and hate iniquity; wherefore God, even thy God has
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. We have and hear
peaceably and plentifully the welcome tidings of the Gospel, (the voice of the
Turtle is heard in our Land) enjoying a settled peace among our selves, and with
other Nations, having traffic and commerce with them; a sovereign benefit to
enrich these Realms. The admirable peace, plenty, and prosperity, by a
Christian, and political government his Highness People do enjoy, has made
other Nations envy our felicity: The French have sworn, that this Land (in
respect of peace and plenty long continued) was the Land of Promise, and their
Kings hitherto have had Moses punishment, to stand upon their Towers, (as Deuteronomy.
34. 1
he upon Mount Nebo) to see the clifts of this Canaan, but not permitted to
enter; that we see that verified, which Solomon long ago delivered, Pro. 29. 4
A King by judgment, maintains the Country: or with wisdom Wis. 6. 24
her self; A wise King is the stay of the People: or to speak of our
Sovereign in the words of the Princely Psa. 79. 70. 72
Prophet, The Lord chose David his servant, etc: to feed his People in Jacob,
and his inheritance in Israel; so he fed them according to the simplicity of
his heart, and guided them by the discretion of his hands. So that we find the
saying of In 2 part, c. 49, In fine: de victo: Carolo.
Cominaeus true, Foelix resp: in qua qui imperat, timet Deum; That is an happy
Commonwealth, in the which the King fears God; or with Eccles. 10. 17
Solomon: Blessed art thou O Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles, and
much more of noble virtues. How happy was the Throne of Government, how
successefully Religion propagated, when virtue honoring Constantine was
inthroned. The like in other Christian Emperors: then Justice was exalted,
virtue rewarded, piety enlarged, vice punished, superstition discouraged. Of
all temporal blessings, none more incomparable, then to be blessed with a good
and godly King. Woe to thee O Land, when thy King is a Child, says Eccles. 18.
16
Solomon, unable and unapt for that high function, the Art of Arts, and Office
of God; far more intricate and difficult then any other kind of ministration
on Earth: But thanks be given unto God, who has given unto us a pious,
prudent, and peaceable King, experienced Rex reip: gerendae gnarus artifex.
in the regal Art, yea, learned in all good Arts, endowed with judgment,
prowess, wisdom, bounty, justice, temperance, clemency, and compassion, who
may truly say with the Orator; Natura me clementem fecit, resp: seuerum
Remissius imperanti melius paretur: Seneca. Benigni Principis est, ad
clementiae commodum transilire terminos aequitatum, cum sola est miserecordia,
cui omnes virtutes, honorabiliter cedere non recusent: Cass.
postulat, sed nec natura, nec resp. crudelem efficiet, Nature frames him
merciful, the Commonwealth requires severe, yet neither nature or
Commonwealth can make him cruel, that I may apply that to his praise which
the Poet appropriated to Caesar. Ovid: de pont. Eleg. 3. Est piger ad poenas,
Princeps ad praemia velox,
Quique dolet, quoties cogitur esse ferox:
A Prince to punish slow, yet swift to give;
And when he must be cruel, much does grieve.


Yet he keeps a golden mean in the mixture of Mercy and Justice, that his
Tribunal is not like to Cassius Tribunal, Reorum Scopulus; Neither a Rock,
or refuge to the Meliores quos dirigit amor, plures quos corripit timor;
Claudian.
guilty Malefactors, but spares some in mercy, and for example cuts off others
in Justice -- Truncatur and artus, vt liceat reliquis secure viuere membris.
And which is great praise in a Prince, and powerful to do much good in the
politic body, is the edification of his Majesty's examplar life, acknowledged
by his own enemies the In a supplication for a tolleration in the beginning.
Papists, and forcible to move his subjects to imitation; for the people, like
Labans sheep, conceive by the eye, and are obseruant of Princes virtues or
vices, and as In consul. 4, Hono: Panegy.
Claudian to the Emperor Honorius; Vt te totius medio telluris in orb
Viuere cognoscas, cunctis tua gentibus esse
fact a palam: --


They act their Princely part upon the open Theater of the world; and
oftentimes taxed by the secret censures of malapert and malignant spirits, when
they are free from any faulty reprehension; as Cymon Plutar. in praecept. reip:
gerend. Tanto conspectius in se crimen habet, quanto mayor qui peccat, habetur:
Iuuenal Satyr 8. Vt in corporibus, sic in imperio grauissimus est morbus, qui a
capite diffunditur. Seneca.
at Athens taxed that he drank wine; Romans find fault with Scipio for his
sleep, with Pompey for scratching of his head: And indeed deminitiue faults in
Princes are counted superlatiue, because of the public example; for sin is
made worse three ways: 1. Ratione loci, 2. Ratione Temporis: 3. Ratione
personae: In respect of place, time, and person, which commits it. In sailing
(says Agapetus) the error of an old ordinary shipman causes little detriment,
but the error of the Steers-man or Pylot hazards the whole voyage: So the evil
examples of great persons draw multitudes, and their errors cause terrors,
and troubles to the Commonwealth: Quic quid delirant reges, plectuntur Achiui.


Yet ever was there such a flattery of the Regal Scepter, that sometimes vices
passed for virtues, and few there be that dare with that bold Aug. de ciuit:
Dei, cap. 4, lib. 4
Pirate, tell Alexander, because I do it in a Fly-boate, I am called a Pirate;
thou do the like in a great Navy, and called an Emperor. But herein, (let
our enemies be judges) that our Sovereign may truly say with Leonidas; Nisi te
fuissem melior, non essem Rex, As far above all in virtue, as he is above
them in place: for Pueri, Rex eris, aiunt si recte facias, etc. Hora and
Guicciard: lib. 16
though Popes usually are praised for their goodness, when they surpass not the
wickedness of other men, as the Historian tells us; yet our gracious King may
in the integrity of his upright life, boldly and truly say with good and just
Samuel, 1 Samuel 12. 3
Behold here I am, bear record of me before the Lord, and before his
Anointed, whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I
done wrong to? or whom have I hurt? etc. And all the People of Britanny must
answer with the people of Israel there; Thou have 4
done us no wrong, nor hurt us, nor taken ought of any man's hand; the Lord is
witness. His Highness special Summum in regibios bonum est iustitiam colere,
ac sua vnicuique iura seruare. Gregor.
care and gracious desire is, to have Gods Religion sincerely embraced, Justice
executed, Virtue promoted, Vice punished, Gods Laws, and the good Laws of the
Land generally maintained, and observed: so that the Church finds him a true
Defender of the Faith, the Commonwealth a Talis Rex, qualis esse deberet.
Father, the proud a powerful Prince, the meek and humble, a merciful
Governor: All find him a most religious and virtuous King, careful of the
good of Church and Commonwealth, that all the politic members of this
Princely Head, may 1 Timothy 2. 2
lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. These Princely
properties and sacred graces, will procure his Majesty an eternal Crown of
glory in Heaven, as God has promoted him to a soueraignety and supremacy here
on Earth; and may truly move all sound members of this politic body, whereof
his sacred Highness is supreme Head, to pray with the Psa. 72. 1 2 7
Psalmist; Give thy Judgments to the King, O Lord, and thy righteousness unto
the Kings son; then shall he judge the people with righteousness, and thy
poor with equity: In his days shall the righteous flourish, and abundance of
peace shall be so long as the Moon endures; yea, to pray like the Isralites
Baruck. 1. 11.
for the life of our King, and the life of his royal Queen, his Princely
Son, the County Palatine of Rhene, with the Princess Elizabeth, and their
Progeny, that all their days may be upon the Earth as the days of Heaven, and
that God would give 12
us strength, and lighten our eyes, that we may live under their shadow, and
may long do them service, and find favor in their sight: That God would
confound all their enemies, and put them to a perpetual shame: That the Lord
of Hosts may be ever with them, and the God of Jacob may be their Refuge, to
protect and direct them, to Psa. 64. 2
hide them from the conspiracy of the wicked, and from the rage of the workers
of iniquity; that God may ever bless them, and preserve their going out and
coming in, from henceforth and for evermore. So we thy people, and sheep Psa.
79. 13
of thy Pasture (the loving and loyal subjects and servants of the Lords
Anointed,) will praise thee for ever, and pray unto thee from generation to
generation;

God save our King Corporally, Spiritually, Politically.
Peroratio.

I will draw these lines to the maine Center of all, making our conclusion
short and gratulatory: First to your Grace (sacred Sovereign) the mighty
Monarch of these 1 To the Kings Majesty.
flourishing Kingdoms; shall I that am Genesis 18. 27 32.
but dust and ashes prefume to speak unto my Lord and King? Let not my Lord be
angry though I speak once: and how happy shall this poor Embrio be, if ever
it be graced with the mild aspect of your Princely eyes, and once but touched
Si libet exiguis rebus adesse Ioui?
with your Regal hands, which holds the Jacob. staff, to measure the height
of all learning. Give patient leave and license to your unworthy and unable
vassal, prostrated in all submissiue obedience at your Highness feet, to
celebrate and congratulate the happy day of your Majesty's entrance into this
kingdom: A 2 Kings 7. 9.
day of good tidings, and who can hold his peace? A day which was the beginning
to multiply and advance our chiefest joys on earth, making us sing with the
Psalm. 118. 24.
Psalmist, This is the day which the Lord has made, let us be glad and rejoice
in it. O Lord I pray thee save now, Lord preserve him whom thou have given: 25.
give him (O King of Kings) good success, peace and prosperity, multiply these
good days, grant him many of these happy years, Annos vt annis addat e
nostris Deus.


Eusebius the Bishop of Caesarea thought himself much honored, that he was
appointed to preach at the inauguration of Constantinus the Emperor: so I take
it as my great joy, that I (the most weak of all our tribe) am one of the
first in this kind to write the aniuersary of Englands happiness by your
Majesty's entrance, to put them in a perpetual remembrance, to rejoice with
thankfulness. And if I should remember in your presence the innumerable
benefits and blessings your subjects of great Britain enjoy by your Princely
coming to this Crown, I might be judged a flatterer (a creature most odious
in your Graces eyes,) modesty compels me to be silent. I will only say that
which I have read the Painter Zeuxes did, who being to make the portraiture of
Juno, chose out certain amiable Virgins, and put the several beauty of them
all into that picture: so indeed the wise Creator of all, has made you such a
King, the living picture of all earthly perfections; and as it was an old
saying, That in one Austen there was many Doctors, in one Julius Caesar many
Captains; so in one and our King James, many Kings, the very perfection of
most Kings.

But I will turn our praises into prayers; remembering Antaloides saying to a
certain Orator making a long oration of Hercules praises, cut him off thus,
Quis eum vnquam sanus vituperauerit? Who ever in his right wits discommended
him? So, who dare, nay who can, (except the seed of the serpent) dispraise your
Highness, whose virtues find favor with God and men? every tongue pronounces
your name with joy, and every heart affects your Majesty with content and
comfort. As God has given you power in hand, so have you pity in heart,
Clementia Regis est quasi imber serotinus, says Prou. 15. 16. Regis Clementia
virtus, claudian.
Solomon, The pity or favor of a King is like the latter rain; and your
princely delight is not in sono catenarum, in the noise of chains, but like
the good Emperor, Theodosius: malu^ est delectari in sono catenarum: Seneca.
rather desirous to call the dead to lise, then put the living to death. So
that I may say to your Grace as Mecaenas said of Octauius Caesar, Omnes te
tanquam parentem and seruatorem suum intuentur, te moderatum, vita inculpata,
and pacificum amant, etc. All people fix their dutiful eyes upon you, as upon
the public Father of the Commonwealth, loyally loving you, being mild and
merciful, holy in life, and peaceable in government.

So that though at last, there must be a translation to an Pallida mors aequo
pede pulsat pauperum tabernas regumque turres.
incorruptible Crown in Heaven, yet all your Subjects pray the time of that
transmigration may be long dedeferred.

Horac: Serus in coelum redeas, diuque, Laetus intersis populo Britanno.

I need not here play the part of King Philips Page to cry at your Princely
chamber door, Memento te esse mortalem, Mors sceptra ligonibus aequat, nilme
potentum sceptra minacium possunt verendo flectere: Crinitus.
Remember you are mortal: or with the Artificers of the Emperors tombs, at
the day of the Emperors Coronation, offer a lap full of stones, with these
verses: Elige ab his Saxis, ex quo (Augustissime Caesar)
ipse tibi tumulum, me fabricare velis.
Of these same stones (most mighty Caesar) take,
Of which I may thy tomb begin to make.


Your Highness needs not these aduertisements, the memory whereof presage our
lamentations; though it shall bring you in present possession of perpetual
glorification, who live, and labor to pass off this worlds Kingly Theater
with that approbation, Luke 19. 17.
been, fidelis serve, Well done, faithful servant, enter into thy Masters joy.

Our hearty and humble prayers shall ever be powered forth to the King of
Kings, from the bottom of our souls, that your Highness may still reign
many happy years on earth, in prosperous health, Kingly honor, and all
happiness, and may often renew and revive our hearts with these annual joys;
and when the last period comes, that God may make you as glorious a Saint in
Heaven, as you are a great, gracious, high, and happy King on earth: and leave
behind you the succession of your loins, to sit upon the Throne to the worlds
end; and all your faithful servants and subjects will join with me in this
prayer, and say Amen, Amen.

Next to your Honors (most grave and wise Senators.) 2. To the most honorable
Lords of the privy Counsel. Plutark. in epist. ad Traianum.
the politic Statists of the land, who represent Romanos rerum dominos
gentemque Togatam;
The most honorable Counsel to the royal head, whom for fidelity I may
compare to the heart of England: to you by right of office, place, and charge,
this faithful service principally appertains to procure and pray for the
Kings safety, who is (as it was said of Judith 15. 9.
Judith) the exaltation of Jerusalem, the great glory of Israel, the great
rejoicing of our Nation: That he may enjoy many Alcion days, and reign many
golden years in safety and security:

Virg: Aurea securi quis nescit saecula regis?
It is your noble task carefully to consult in the prevention of public
mischiefs: and though we may now say with Agamemnon, Seneca in Agamem. Act.
4. Malum dum non videtur, non timetur:
Victor timere quid potest? What need the Conqueror fear? yet Cassandra will
tell us, Quod non timet, fear that you do not fear: fear procures
precaution, precaution prevention; fear the plots and proiects of the Numb*
13. 34.
sons of Anak, the Popes Giants, traitorous Jesuits, of whom I may say as
Ammianus Histor. lib. 14.
Marcellinus writes of the Saracens: Nec amici nobis vnquam, nec hosts
optandi: si amici, perfidi, si hosts, foedifragi; We need not to wish them
to be our friends, or foes: if friends, they will prove treacherous, if foes,
perfidious. Circumspect precaution is the life of policy: for stultum est, cum
sit is fauces tenet, puteu^ fodere; for that is like the Phrygians, sero
sapere, to be wise too late. But why do I like an inexpert Phormio, dispute of
wars in Hannibals presence? you are the Nestors of this kingdom, wise as
Math. 10. 16.
Serpents, but innocent as Doves; be careful to take the Cant. 2. 15.
Foxes which would destroy our Vine. Faber cadit cum ferias fullonem, neither
state nor statute free, till the Realm be freed of them; being like Nouatus,
whom S. Cypr: epist: 8. l. 2.
Cyprian describes in these colors, Saepe blandus, vt fallat, aliqua^do
saevus, vt terreat; semper curiosus, vt prodat, nunquam fidelis vt diligat,
Always flattering, to deceive; sometimes cruel to terrify; always curious
and cunning to betray, never faithful to love. But your Honors know best how
to prevent the mischiefs of such miscreants who desire the ruin of King and
Country, for you can best tell how to do it:

Propert: lib. 2. Nauita de ventis, de tauris narret arator, enumeret miles
vulnera, pastor oues.
I will not meddle with your high affairs; rather follow mine own duty, fall
to prayers for you, that God may ever be present and president at your
Counsels, giving you the spirit of counsel, and of courage, wisely to foresee,
and happily to prevent all misfortunes and miseries intended against our King
and Country, and that our 1 King. 4. 25.
Judah and Israel may dwell without fear, every man under his vine and
figtree, from Dan even to Beersheba all the days of our Solomon: That God would
still multiply these happy years, and grant that our high and princely Cedar,
with all the fair and goodly branches may long flourish in this land; and that
all his subjects high and low, may safely shelter under the shadow of his
gracious government; blessing your Honors, the very supporters of the state,
the pillars of the land, with grace and wisdom from above: to prosper your
Counsels, and ever direct you to consult for the glory of God, the good of the
King, the comfort and welfare of Church and Commonweal.

To you also the bright stars of Court, blessed with the daily 3 To the Court.
beams and influences of the Regal Sun, who like orient Pearls, serve to
adorue the golden Diadem; to you I may fitly tender these present meditations,
who no doubt daily do meditate upon this Theme, to say and pray, God save
the King.

You fair flowers of honor, who flourish in the courtly Canaan, a place which
flows with plenty and pleasure, the Mundus iste blandus periculosior est, quam
molestus, and magis cauendus, cu^ se illicit diligi qua^ cum admonet, cogitque
co^temni: says Austin, pointing at the Court. epist. 144.
very garden of delight, (where the Be gathers honey, and the spider poison)
where you may reap all earthly pleasures, which are like Jonas Gourd, content
a while, but not continue; your eyes behold the subject of our prayers, the
ornament of our land. Nay I may say with the Poet, Hor. lib. 4. od. 14. and od.
2. O qua Sol habitabiles
Illustrat oras, maxim Principum,
Quo nil maius, meliusue terris
Fata denavere, bonique diui
Nec dabunt, quamuis redeant in aurum Tempora priscum:
Upon no shoares the Sun does shine,
Blessed with a King more divine.


The fire of your fervent prayers for the welfare of the King should
perpetually flame at the high Altar of deep devotion, being graced with all
kingly favors, and advanced with honor and rewards; if you should prove
disloyal or undutiful to the King, he might rightly use the Proverb,
Mercedes locat in pertusum sacculum, Put his rewards in a broken bag, and
might justly frown on you (and his Prou. 19. 12.
wrath like the roaring of a Lion) and even strike you dead with a Quos ego? If
you desire the Kings favor, which is the way to honor, be faithful and
loyal: This raised Mordecai Ester. 6. 8. 11. Ester. 10. 2. 3.
to ride on the Kings horse in royal apparel, a Crown of gold on his head,
etc. and to be eternized with the eternal Crown of truth. It raised Genesis 41.
43.
Joseph to ride in the second Chariot of Egypt: Dan. 5. 29.
Daniel to be clothed in purple, and a chain of gold about his neck. Look
upon 1 Kings 2. 7.
King David's gratuitie for Barzillays loyalty, who commanded Solomon on his
death bed to let the sons of Barzillai to eat at his table: This is the only
way to win the Kings favor, which if you lose, you are but falling stars,
your Fame obscured, your Names contemned. Macro salutes Vide hist. Dion. lib.
58. and Xiphilin. in vita Tiberij.
Seianus no longer then he is in Tiberius favor: Actum est, ilicet, peristi.
But your faithful service to your Sovereign will be commendable to God and
men, serving in soul the King of heaven, and serving Caelopraefertur Adonis.
loyally the King on earth, not to prefer earth before heaven, to say with some,

Mart. lib. 9. Seek others for to feast with Jupiter above, I here on earth
my Jupiter will love.

But Math 6. 33.
first seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness and this will teach you
to serve your King with faithfulness, and to pray for his preservation in all
humble and hearty diligence and obedience, saying, God save the King.

Also to your Honors (right noble Peers) this task belongs, 4. To the
Nobility of the Land.
always to pray, God save the King: being noble by birth or place, this will
ennoble your persons more, if you say faithfully as Judith did to Bagoas
concerning Holofernes feignedly, Judith 12. 14.
Who am I that I should gain say my Lord? surely whatsoever pleases him I
will do speedily, and it shall be my joy unto the day of my death; then your
names and fames shall ever stand registered in the Chronicle of honor, free from
the black Characters of disloyal infamy. And though Fortunes image be made
of glass, brittle and mutable, yet your honorable Fama post fata superstes.
memorial shall never perish; Death, which is the true Herald of Arms,
blazoning man's pedigree to be but genus lutulentum, a picture of dust, be he a
Prince in his palace, or a beggar under a bush, yet Job. 17. 14.
corruption is their Father, and the worms their mother and sister. Their good
works Apoc. 14. 13.
following them, but their Psalm 49. 17.
pomp left behind them; only their sanctity to God, and service to their
King and Country shall make them glorious in heaven, and famous on earth:
Posterity will hold them worthy of honor, and desire to reserve a Catalogue of
their names, and will say, These were the Noble men that loved their God, their
King, and Country, Prou. 31. 29.
Many have done virtuously, but these surmounted them all.

Archidamus told King Philip after his victory at Cheron, Rhodig. lib. 8. cap.
26.
that if he should measure his shadow, he should not find it an hairs breadth
bigger, or longer then before; so let no vainglory fill you with empty wind,
it cannot make your shadows bigger or longer: glory more in your own virtuous
actions, then in your renowned Ancestors, Virtute decet, non Sanguine niti.
Claud.
for though some do boast to be, A love tertius Ajax, yet, -- Quae non fecimus
ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voca: Ovid.


It is the honor of a noble man, when he does excel in Ego meis maioribus
virtute praeluxi. Cicero.
virtue his forepassed Ancestors, when he is religious, to fear God, and to
honor the King; saying of his Sovereign, as Genesis 27. 29.
Isaac said to Jacob; Cursed be he that curses thee, and blessed be he that
blesses thee; and wishing with the Gal. 5. 12.
Apostle, would to God they were cut off which do disquiet him: always loyal
to his Sovereign, and loving to his Country, willing to adventure in their
service his limbs, or life, ever wishing and praying; God save the King, and
Country.


Likewise to your Fatherhoods (most right and reverend 5 To the Clergy.
Fathers) the Heads and loving Brethren of the Tribe of Leui,) whose place and
office bind you in all duty to be loyal to the royal Tribe of Judah; to you I
may without offense proffer this poor present, who spend your spirits at Gods
Altar, to offer a morning and an evening incense of seruent prayers, for the
preservation of Gods Anointed, exhorting with 1 Timothy 2. 1. 2.
Paul, that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of
thanks, be made for Kings, and for all that be in authority.

And indeed, before all, and above all, we of the Church, (the vital spirits
of the politic body) have manifold motives to pray for our Sovereign, who
unto us, against Ad eius vexillum Ecclesia conuolat.
the tempest of these times, is a refuge, an hiding place from the wind, and as
the shadow of a great rock, as it was said of King Esaias 32. 2.
Ezechiah; His Majesty is a Defender of the Church, as he is a Defender of the
Faith; and against the 2 Timothy 4. 14.
Atheists and Alexanders of these days, that would do us much wrong, he
stands to plead our cause, to grace our calling, that we may say with the Poet;

^unen. Sat. 6. Et spes, and ratio, studiorum in Caesare tantum, Solus enim
tristes hac te^pestate camaen as -- respexit:

Though the Church be made black, black by customary contempt, and continual
oppression and persecution, Cant. 1. 4.
yet the King kisseth her with the kisses of his mouth, Cant. (...). 1. 3
and his love is better then wine; we will rejoice, and be glad in thee, we
will remember thy love more then wine, the righteous do love thee. And herein
(if we may boast in any thing,) we may boast in this, That our Church was never
the Author of Treason: (The Mother of Souls should not be the murderer of
Kings) members inclined to rebellion, were never well possessed of Religion; As
we have hitherto been faithful, obedient, and loyal, so still ever be: from
the Church Sit procul omne nefas. Let the mother of blood and treason, still
dwell under the roof of Romish Babylon, the Reu. 17. 5. 6. Oh ignominia, si
esset domus Domini!
mother of whoredoms and of these abominations, drunken with the blood of
Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus Christ; which cloak these
murders and massacres, under the mantle of Religion; like the Rulers of
Ephesus, distressed with a terrible battery in that Seige her Governors tied
with ropes Poliaen.
the walls and gates to Dianas Temple, that so being consecrated to the
Goddess, that enemy should assault them at his peril: Even so the Popish
policy is, to tie every thing to the Temple, Conspiracies, Murders, Treasons,
all tied In nomine domini incipit omne malum.
to the Church, cloaked under a color of Religion, that I may say with their
own Leo. Epist. 8. 9.
Leo, Ecclesiae nomine armantur, and contra ecclesiam dimieant, They arm
themselves with the name of the Church, to fight against the Church, and to
destroy the pillars of the Church: Hi Christum simulant, sed Sathanalia vivunt.


Well, let our preaching and praying tend to this end, Aut pareas, Aut pereas.
to give Caesar obedience, to fear God, and to honor the King; knowing that
all must submit to the Higher Powers, for Romans 13. 5.
conscience sake, and for the 1 Pet. 2. 13.
Lords sake: and they that will not do it, they are none of Gods Clergy, none
of the Heritage of the Lord: They have neither conscience nor calling; like to
certain Bishops in Ambros. lib. de pastore.
Ambrose days, of whom he writes, Quod dedit cum episcopus ordinaretur, aurum
fuit, quod perdidit, anima fuit, cum alium ordinaret, pecunia fuit, quod dedit,
lepra fuit: That which he gave when he was made a Bishop, was gold; what he
lost, was his soul; when he made another, it was for money; what he gave, was
a leprosy. But these Bishops live beyond the Alps, I hope there is none in
Albion. It is our comfort and our Crown, that our calling and conscience is
such, which burns in zeal and duty to God, and loyal obedience to our
graciour Sovereign; Morning and evening, at noone and at night, at bed and
board, praying; God save the Church, God save the King:

To you the wise and worthy Judges of the Land, who 6 To the grave and reverend
Judges.
are the eyes and ears of this politic Body, who well know Scita patrum,
leges, and iura, fidemque, deosque:


To you I may dedicate and appropriate these our labors, whose places and
pains serve to this purpose, to serve the King and Country, and to help to
preserve the welfare of the King and Kingdom: Your public pains and private
prayers speak to the World these words; God save the King. You are sworn to
this service, and sweat in it; never more Malefactors in this kind, and as Paul
tells 2 Timothy 3. 1. 4.
Timothy, In the last days shall come perilous times, for men shall be
Traitors, heady, high-minded, etc. You know the Nilus, where these Crocodils
are bred and fed; use all good diligence to catch them, spread your nets, not
Vulpina retia, Foxes nets; but Regni retia, The Laws of the Land: if you can
take them, you shall do God, and the King good services. Spare none of this
kind, who dare Nulla mayor causa mali, quam licentia mali.
lift up their hand against the Lords Anointed, for they are worthy to die;
Bonis nocet, qui malis parcit, He hurts the good, which spares the bad; yea, in
all your loyal and legal service, let neither fear, or favor, flattery, or
bribery, blind your eyes, or deaf your ears, remembering that you exercise not
the 2 Chro. 19. 6.
judgment of man, but of God; and think upon this verse in your Judgment
seat, Hic locus odit, amat, punit, conseruat, honorat;
Nequitiam, pacem, crimina, iura, bonos.


Far be that leprosy from the Judges of our Land, which so corrupted them
in Cic. in Verr. 1. Act. Non terminantur negotia, donec euacuata sunt marsupia.
Innoc. de vita huma: conditi.
Ciceros days, that he could say; His iudicijs quae nunc sunt, pecuniosum
hominem non posse damnari: In these judgments which are now, a monied man
cannot be condemned. But bribery fowls not your hands, who to corrupting
Simons say with Acts 8. 20. Si Niceas non sit reus, dimitte hominem, si reus,
mihi dimitte. Cambyses Sysamnem iniqu^ Iudicem excoriari fecit, in terrorem
aliorum. Gratior Deo est nimia miserecordiae, quam nimia seueritas. Dum
parcebatur lupo, mactabatur grex Christi.
Simon Peter, Thy money perish with thee. Neither let any of Agesilaus letters
move you, who writ to a Judge for his favorite in this style, Si causa bona,
pro iustitia, sin mala, pro amicitia absolve; If his cause be good, dismiss
him for Justice sake; if bad, for friendship sake. Let Justice be impartially
executed, yet tempered with lawful pity; think upon that Christian caveat,
Duo sunt nomina, peccator, and homo, quod peccator, corripe, quod homo,
miserere: These are two names, an offender, and a man; as an offender, punish
him, as a man pity him; be not too severe with Draco, Ne superet medicina
modum, Least the medicine exceed the malady: nor too remiss with lenity; for
that is a kind of cruelty, Tam omnibus ignoscere crudelitas, quam nulli, says
Sen. de clem. lib. 1. c. 2. Quosdam necare clementia, and quosdam seruare,
crudelitas est.
Seneca, To pardon all is cruelty, as well as to pardon none. But, Sus
mineruam, You know best to keep the mean, and -- Medium tenuere beati: So
shall you perform laudable service to God, King, and Country, if you execute
Justice, punish disobedience, which is the falling sickness of a corrupt
Commonwealth; Command all to give * Caesar his due, repress all his enemies
by force of laws, and cut them off with the Ense recidendum est, ne pars
sincera trabatur. Ovid.
sword of Justice, that their exemplary punishments may terrify all others
from such attempts, and be like monitors and remembrancers to all people,
crying; Discite iustitiam moniti, and non temnere diuos: Virg. Paena ad vnum,
est terror ad omnes: malefici non pereunt, vt pereant, Sed vt pereundo, alios
deterreant. Seneca.



Let others harms admonish thee, and learn not to despise these supreme
powers, for which offense, so many Traitors dies. Seauenthly, to the
Commonwealth.


Last of all to you, the inferior, yet sound members of the supreme Head, the
native and national children of our common Mother, whom I may fitly compare to
the hands and legs of this politic body, to fight and stand strongly for
the defense and welfare of our King and Kingdom: To you I hope this little
Book will be welcome, and therefore say to you, as the Reu. 10. 9.
Angel said to John; Take this little Book and eat it; and if you be good
Subjects, it will be sweet in your mouths, and not bitter in your bellies: for
you cannot be true Christians, unless you be true Caesarians, there is no true
Religion in that heart, which entertaines a motion to rebellion; it is a rotten
member that will not be obedient to the regal Majesty. And consider with your
selves the happy blessings you enjoy by the merciful providence of God, in
giving to this Realm so godly and gracious a Sovereign to reign over you;
and it will make you cry forth with the Psa. 3. 8.
Psalmist, Salvation belongs unto the Lord, and his blessing is upon the
people: O Lord, how favorable have thou been unto our Land, in placing over
us so religious and renowned a King, so absolute and complete a Prince in
wisdom, learning, and religion! and it will stir up all thankful hearts to
say with the Psa. 67. 3.
Psalmist; Let the people praise thee O God, yea, let all the people praise
thee: Psalm. 47. 6. 4
Sing praises to God, sing praises, sing praises unto our King; for he has
chosen our inheritance for us, even the glory of Jacob, whom he loved. If we be
not truly thankful for so great benefits, it may be truly verified of us,
which was said of Numb. 13.
Canaan, Bona terra, sed gens mala, A good Land, but in it there be bad people.
O unthankful and ungrateful Britains, if ever you forget so great
blessings, Vae vobis propter ingratitudinem, Woe be unto you for your Vae
aetati nostrae propter ingratitudinem, etc. Ber.
ingratitude: Ingrata patria, Ungrateful Country, it is an infamous name,
odious to nature and Nations. Gratiarum actio, est ad plus dandum inuitatio,
Giving of God thanks for favors received, is a kind of supplication and
inuitation to obtain more. The Anatomists tell us that every creature has
four muscles about the eyes, but a man five; four serve to turn about the
eyes, the fifth serves to lift up the eye, and look upward to Heaven. Man
should not with other brutish creatures look altogether upon the Pronaque cu^
spectant animalia caetera terram, Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque videre.
Ovid.
earth, but lift up his eyes, hands, and heart, to Heaven, to give God due and
true thanks for his daily and fatherly favors and mercies bestowed upon him
The Esaias 1. 3. Danti rependi quicquam gratius ab accipiente non potest, quam si
gratum habuerit, quod gratis accipit: nam spiritui gratiae contumeliam facit,
qui beneficium dantis grata mente non suscipit. Ber.
Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib; yea, the Rivers are
tributary to the Sea, from whence (some say) they first come, and again
return: All Creatures seem in their kind to be grateful debtors to their
courteous Benefactors, except the Swine, whose mast makes him forget the tree
from whence the Acornes fall; or the Moon which being at the full, (by
interposition of the earth) darkens the Sun, from whence yet she borrowes
all her light. It was Isreal's sin, unthankfulness, I pray God it be not
Englands sickness, Nihil est quod indignationem Altissimi prouocet, sicut
ingratitudo; est malorum prouocatio, and meritorum exterminatio. Petr. Raw.
ungratefulness to God: Woe unto us, if we scant God of our fruits, who has
not scanted us of his favors. Psa. 29. 2.
Bring presents to the King of glory, give unto the Lord glory due unto his
Name, worship the Lord in his glorious sanctuary. Psa. 115. 1. 14 18.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the glory, for thy
loving mercy, and for thy truths sake. Be ever thankful to God, and then he
will ever be mindful of you, to bless you; the Lord will increase his graces
toward you, even toward you, and your children; therefore praise the Lord from
henceforth and for evermore: for he has not dealt so with every Nation; and if
our deserving were put into the lottery of other people, we should be
rewarded with a blanke.

Gods love and gracious favor to us, is Ber. Epist. 11.
ignis accendens, fire to set us on fire: Let our thankfulness to God be,
ignis accensus, a fire flaming to God in all zeal, love, duty, thanks,
service, and devotion. God has set England as it were upon an hill, a
spectacle to all Nations, Insuperabiles, nisi separabiles.
strengthened by sea and land, ad miraculum vsque, to the admiration of all
people, blessed it with an extraordinary peace and prosperity of long
continuance; we are the worlds envy, let us not become their declamation.
Nothing but our Gratiarum cessat decursus vbi recursus non fuerit, etc. Ber.
sermon. 35.
unthankfulness to God, our licentiousness in life, our disobedience to his
Word, our security in sin, our contempt of good means and mercies offered,
can work our overthrow: and these (if we do not drown them quickly in the
rivers of repentance) so one may breed and bring our woeful downfall. The Lord
has blessed this land with great and gracious blessings: in it the golden bells
of Aaron are powerfully rung, the word by faithful teachers mouingly
delivered. Oh let our perpetual Gratiarum actio est pro gratia suscepti
muneris, munerantis laudati^. Tullius.
prayers, praises, and thanks ascend to heaven, because Gods graces and mercies
plentifully descend to earth. Et si desint gratiae, quia nos ingrati, If any
grace be wanting, it is because we want grace to be thankful for this our
happy government, having a prosperous peace, and that which is the procurer of
peace with God and men, that blessed passage Religio remp. pacatam, and regiae
potentiae morigeram reddit: Match. princ. c. 5.
of the Gospel. Si totum me debeo, pro me facto, quid debeo, pro me refecto?
says a Father, If we owe God our selves, for our creation, what do we owe
unto him for our regeneration, preservation, and salvation?

We therefore that have tasted of the great cup of Gods mercy, let us with
David take the cup of salvation, and give thanks, and praise the name of the
Lord; let us praise God for these abundant mercies, and ever pray unto him to
preserve the happy instrument of manifold benefits and blessings to us, our
most dread and dear Sovereign: duty binds us to this task, our own
welfare mooues us to this duty; for his prosperity is our tranquillity, his
safety is our felicity, the blessing redounds to us; and if he should miscarry,
(which God forbid) we should be partakers of his misfortunes. Therefore be
always obedient and diligent to serve our royal Head, (golden in all virtues
and Propugnaculum quovis alio firmius est, multitudinis odio carere. Match.
prin. c. 20.
princely perfections) in all loyal and Christian duties, loving his
Highness in our hearts, which is the best earthly defense for a King,
Inexpugnabile munimentum est amor ciuium, says Seneca, The love of the people
is an invincible munition: and as that great Rabbi of policy Match. prin. c.
19.
Machiauel has set it down for a sure rule, Contra regem, quem omnes
magnifaciunt, difficilis coniuratio, oppugnatio and irruptio, Against that King
whom all highly esteem and reverence, conspiracy or treachery is very
difficult, or if attempted, seldom succeedes. Let us be in pace Lepores, but
in praelio Leones, in peace like Hares, timorous to offend his Grace in any way
of disobedience; but like Lions fight for him against all his enemies with an
unwearied courage, undaunted magnanimity, joining with our fighting hands our
fervent prayers to God, like faithful Israelites, against all rebelling
Amalekites: Oration coelos penetrat, and hosts in terravincit, says Origin,
Prayers pierce heaven, and overcome enemies on earth, plus precando quam
praeliando, more by praying then by fighting. 1 Samuel 17. 45.
David's encountering with Goliath in the name of the Lord, was more powerful
then his fling, and five stones. Let us make it one part of our daily prayers
to God to keep Psalm 17. 8.
our King as the apple of his eye, and hide him under the shadow of his wings,
to save him from all enemies bodily or ghostly; Psalm 59. 13.
to consume them in his wrath, consume them that they be no more, and let them
know that God rules in Jacob even unto the ends of the world: beseeching God
of his great mercy ever to prosper this most peaceable and puissant Monarchy
of great Britain: Psalm. 132. 9. 10.
Arise unto it, as unto thy resting place: Turn not away thy face from thine
Anointed, who has now happily to our immeasurable joy, worn the imperial
Diadem of great Britain these 15. * years. 15 years curra^t. Vota nostra,
Vita longa.
Many more happy and prosperous years we pray to be continued, prolong his
days, O Lord, as the days of heaven, and grant that his Highness and his
Princely posterity may in these kingdoms reign so long as the world endures:
Enlarge and enrich his royal heart with all Regal gifts, and Divine graces,
suitable for his high calling: Save and defend him from the tyranny or treachery
of all foreign and Antichristian power, and from the plots and proiects of
domestical adversaries; Let them Psalm. 109. 29.
cover themselves with their confusion, as with a cloak. Bless his most
gracious spouse and bedfellow, Queen Anne, let Amen.
thy Angels O Lord encampe about her to guide and guard her in a safe
protection: and ever continue thy most heavenly hand of benediction upon the
high and mighty Prince Amen.
Charles, the famous Prince of Wales, the second joy of great Britain: Lord
look upon him from heaven, Psalm 72. 1.
Give thy judgments unto the King, and thy righteousness unto the Kings
Son. Teach him O Lord in his tender years like a good Josias to learn, and
love thy true religion, the way to win the eternal Crown of life. Be
gracious O Amen.
Lord to the County Palatine of Rhene, Frederick, Prince Elector, and to his
most virtuous and gracious wife, Princess Elizabeth, with their Princely
progeny. O Lord preserve them with thy mighty and outstretched arm, give
them a most happy peace and prosperity in a Princely Amen.
honor and felicity all the days of their lives. O Lord Job 5. 12.
scatter the devices of the crafty that their hands may not accomplish any
wicked thing they do enterprise. Confound all them that have ill will at Sion,
that repine at the peace of the Church, the welfare of great Britain, the
prosperity of his Majesty and his royal progeny; that howsoever they have
shift of faces, and mask unknown, yet let us pray that that Dan. 2. 34.
stone which is cut without hands may break the Images of such Traitors in
pieces, giving him victory over all his enemies: Psalm. 132. 18.
Cloth them all with shame, but upon him let his Crown flourish, and grant
him an happy multiplication of many prosperous years, to renew with many
returns, these our cordial and annual Joys, long to sit upon his Throne,
and make his foes his footstool. And let high and low, rich and poor, young
and old, yea let Heaven and earth, with the Monarchy of great Britain, and
all good Christians, professors of the Gospel, be devoted Suppliants to the
King of Kings, with joyful tongues, and zealous hearts, to pray and say, God
save our King, God save King JAMES.

Viuat valeat, vincat.
God save the King: Corporally. Amen. Spiritually. Amen. Politically. Amen.

Tlo.
Gloria Tri-vni Deo in secula.
Caesaris Hosts: OR, THE TRAGEDY OF TRAITORS: For the fifth day of August: The
day of the bloody GOWRIES Treason, and of our Kings blessed preservation.

I will sing a new song unto thee, O God, and sing unto thee upon a Viole, and
an Instrument of ten strings: for it is he that gives deliverance unto Kings,
and rescueth David his servant from the hurtful sword.

PSALM. 144. 9. 10. Dum iniusti saeuiunt, iusti saluantur, and vtilitati
bonorum militat potest as prauorum.

Gregor in Moral. By SAMVEL GAREY, Preacher of Gods Word.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN BEALE, for HENRY FETHERSTONE, and JOHN PARKER. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Sir FRANCIS BACON Knight, Lord Chancellor of England.
(Right Honorable Lord:)
IT was the saying of St Hierome to Celantia, Summa Epist. 37.
apud Deum nobilitas est, clarum esse virtutibus. Yea the wise Moralist,
unchristened Seneca could say, Nobilitas animi, generositas est sensus,
nobilitas hominis est generosus animus: The which true Nobility of the mind is
your inherent, and hereditary honor, famoused for Piety, Justice, Learning, and
Liberality, so that the world sees you write not your desires in the dust. We
bless God, and wonder to behold in you so admirable a pattern of true
Nobility, and moves us to say with K. Lemuel, Pro. 3. 29.
Many have done virtuously, but you surmount them all, in your great perfection
of Arts, and happy progress in Grace, the world can number but few such.
Vereor ne violem frontem tua^, sedem honoris, testem verecundiae: I know the
sound of the trumpet of your praises is no music to your ears, neither do I
love such strains: the land in general echoes your renowned applause, and
God who has so blessed you, and by the Kings Majesty promoted you to so
honorable a Place, continue you an happy instrument of much good to Church and
Commonwealth, and prosper your noble proceedings according to the promise of
your admired entrance. And now (most honorable Lord) I humbly crave your
pardon, in presuming to present so simple a Present, unto the view of so
approved a judgment, who have Mercurium in lingua, and Minerua^ pectore: yet
although not the manner (being mean and homely) yet the matter handled may
justly merit your noble acceptance, being a description of the heinous sin of
Treason, the fall and Tragedy of Traitors (plagues which the Arch-traitor to
mankind has added to the world;) and also a seasonable subject for the Time,
August the fifth, against which day it was, and is prepared as an annual
object. And I know there is none within the compass of Great Britain poures
forth more hearty prayers to God with a more fervent and faithful soul, then
your Honor does, for the preservation of our most dear and dread Sovereign,
and for the detection and destruction of all pestilent and truculent Traitors.
Wherefore in a hopeful affiance of your honorable acceptance, I humbly offer
this little labor, (a Testimony of my great observance) with my self
perpetually to your service, not after a ceremonial submission, but from a
serious agnizing and feeling of mine own imbecility, every way so obscure and
weak, that ingenuouslie I confess, -- Et scripfisse pudet, quia plurima cerno,
me quoque qui feci iudice, digna lini.


And of all others I know your Honors censure and judgment is most
substantial, yet my weakness thus far encourages me, that your Honor will
like my willing mind, commend the matter, though not the manner; and I hope
will favorably accept this Mite, and put it into your richer Treasury, and
countenance it with your worthy protection, which will be like Ajax buckler to
shield it safe against detraction. Ringanter, rumpantur, liueant, improbent
maledici; si Honori tuo arriserit, instar mill, Platonis calculus: I would not
be a monster to please all but some, and say with the Poet Lucilius, Me paucis
malle a sapientibus esse probatu^.

So giving my farewell to this feeble Infant, saying as Iakob did when he
parted with his beloved Benjamin, * Go, and the Lord Genesis 43. 13
show thee favor in his sight: and sovpon the bended knees of my prostrated
heart to God, I shall ever incessantly pray to the Lord Keeper of Heaven and
Earth, to make your paths every way prosperous, blessing your Honor with happy
preservation, and a longioyfull life on earth, and grant you an eternal Patent
(sealed by the everlasting Decree of the sacred Trinity) of immortal
possession of a glorified life in Heaven.

Your good Honors ever to be commanded

Caesaris Hosts, OR The Tragedy of TRAITORS.
Now these are examples to us.

1 Cor. 10. 6. If thou have any enemy, or Traitor, send him hither, and thou
shall receive him well scourged.

2 Macch. 3. 38.
CHAP. I.
THE memory of Gods great and glorious works, either of judgment upon his
enemies, or mercy toward the Church, ought to be preserved with a thankful
remembrance. So the Ester 9.
Jews being preserved by the means of Queen Ester, 17
and godly Mordecai, from the intended plot by Haman, 22
kept the foureteenth day of the month Adar, yearly with feasting and joy. So
when God had delivered his people of Israel from the tyranny of Tryphon, by the
means of Simon their Captain, he 1 Macch. 13. 52
ordained that the same day of their deliverance, should be kept every year
with gladness. So when the Nehem. 8. 9. 18.
people of Israel were delivered from the captivity of Babylon, and restored to
Gods true Religion, they kept a Feast seven days together to the Lord with
rejoicing and thanksgiving.

The Feasts Deuteronomy. 16. 1.
of the Passover, Pentecost, Tabernacles, were commanded by Moses to be kept
holy, in remembrance of great benefits received at Gods hands.

Hence it was, that in times past, the Patriarks, Prophets, and people of God,
would not forget any memorable act of Gods providence, without setting some
remarkable Memonto upon it, that so it might remain fresh to succeeding
generations; that Psa. 78. 6.
the children unborn might tell it to their children.

That 2 Chr. 20. 26.
valley wherein Iehoshaphats adversaries were overthrown, was called Beracah,
a valley of blessing, that so the Name might present to their minds to praise
God for their marvelous victory. Genesis 28. 19.
Jacob did call the place where God appeared to him, Bethel, The House of God,
which before was called Luz: and 1 Chr. 13. 11.
David the place where Vzza was smitten, Perez. vzza, i. the division of Vzzah;
and Genesis 22. 14.
Abraham the place where Isaac was delivered from the bloody knife,
Iehouah-ijreh, i. The Lord sees, or provides; and the Jews Ester 9. 26.
called those holy days which they solemnized for their deliverance from
Hamans device against them, Purim, by the name of Pur, i. Lot, or lots, in
casting lots for their destruction. 1 Samuel 7. 12.
So Samuel pitched a stone (the Philistines being overcome) and called it
Eben-ezer, Lapis adiutorij; Hitherto has the Lord helped us.

These and many other examples (whereof the Scripture is plentiful) are
sufficient to stir up Gods people to remember with humble thankfulness the
great works of Gods most merciful deliverance And herein as becomes
faithful servants to God, and loyal Subjects to his Anointed, let the People
of Great Britanny holily celebrate with devout prayers, and praises to Almighty
God, that solemn Anniuersary day, The fifth of August, the day of our gracious
and religious Kings preservation from that bloody intended destruction of the
wicked and wretched Traitors, Gouries of Scotland. In which deliverance, Gods
might and mercy did so wonderfully appear, that we may cry with Exodus 14. 13.
Moses, Stand still, and behold the salvation of the Lord, which he showed this
day: Saying with the Psa. 14^. 10.
Psalmist; It is he which gives deliverance unto Kings, and rescueth David
from the hurtful Sword; and moves our High Sovereign to say with that Kingly
Prophet, Psa. 94. 1^*
If the Lord had not helped me, my soul had been put to silence: and
therefore his Majesty in a thankful acknowledgement of Gods mercy does
religiously observe in hearing prayers, and preaching of Gods word, every
Tuesday in the year (it was Dies Martis, almost Mortis.) Two most admirable
deliueries upon that day from two abhorred Treasons, in both which I may cry
with Ier. (...)
Iererie; It was the Lords mercies that we were not consumed: and may say with
Aug. de^ c. 6.
Augustine, He that sees not Gods mercy in this, is blind; he that sees it,
and praises it not, is thankelesse; he that hinders him that praises it, is
mad. And therefore to add a little fuel to the fire of our general devotion
to God, for this his merciful and marvelous preservation of our dread
Sovereign, worthy to be written with eternal Characters in the hearts of all
good People, perpetually to praise God for the same; I have enterprized to
write this little Treatise, hoping that others, who have greater Talents, will
labor to eternize the memory of this renowned work of God to all posterities.
In handling of which Subject, I shall not write the History of it, it is
already Gouries conspiracy: yet the chief substance is related in the end of
this subject.
published to the World: I shall only discourse of Traitors in general, with
some application in particular, declaring the woeful and Tragical ends of
Traitors, with such occurrences, Vt quorum exitus per horrescunt, eorum facta
non imitentur, That as their woeful deaths, so their wicked deeds all men
should abhor: and as St Ambros. de Naboth Je^.
Ambrose closes up the Story of Achabs and Iezabels fearful end thus; Fugies
huiusmodi exitum, si fugies huiusmodi flagitium, Escape their sin, and thou
shall escape their end. So hate Treason, and never fear a Traitors end, whose
ways is the gallows, death, or hell. In the description of the punishment of
Traitors, and their ends, their infamy in the World, the greatness of their
sin, being hateful to God and Man, dangerous to Kingdoms, dreadful to
Kings, and damnable to themselves, (the devil and his adherents* the only
Agents in such enterprises) if the Tragedy of them past may work so well upon
the hearts of all, present, or future, as to detest Treason both in action and
affection, because it brings wounds to their consciences, ruin to their
Families plagues to their Countries, and punishments to their carkases; how
happily shall this little labor be bestowed, if hereafter in great Britanny no
Traitor may be found to his King or Country? Then shall the Lord Psa. 90. 17.
bless the works of our hands, O Lord bless thou our handy work.

CHAP. II.
AS the highest mountains are most subject Feriunt summos fulmina mentes. Sola
miseria caret inuidia:
to thunder and tempests, so the greatest Potentates exposed to dangers. Envy
and Treason, never aim at misery, but flies an higher pitch, and like unto the
Pro. 30. 28.
Spider, lives in Kings Palaces, and looks with blood-fallen eyes upon the
royal hands of him that holds the Scepter to bring him down to his Sepulcher.

This has befallen to many Kings, both good and bad, Christian and Heathen in
all ages. Not to recite a long catalogue of this cursed crew of Traiterous
miscreants, whose memorial is perished with them, who have attempted Treason
against the Lords Anointed: David a man after Gods own heart, yet loc 2 Samuel
20. 1.
Sheba, the son of Bichri blows his Trumpet, saying; We have no part in
David, neither have we any inheritance in the son of Ishai; nay, not only
strangers, but his own son 2 Samuel 15.
Absalom proves a Traitor, and seeks his Kingdom. So, many others of the
Kings of Israel, found Traitors to endanger them; yea, our Savior himself had
a Judas to betray him: King Assuerus King Benhadad his Hazael to strang^e him.
2 K. 8. 15. King Antiochus his Tryphon to kill him. 1 Match. 13. 21.
had his Bigthan, and Teresh, Traitors: Ester 2. Ezech^as had his Shebna: Esaias
22. 15. Look upon the reigns of Heathen Kings, and you shall find Histories
full fraught with many examples. Sueton. c. 19.
Augustus a famous Emperor, ten times assaulted by treacherous villains.
Julius Caesar found a Brutus and Cassius to kill him. Vespasian made totus ex
clementia, All of mercy, as the Historian tells us, yet for all that, Sueton. c.
25.
Machinationes nefariorum assiduas expertus est, He found daily Treacheries
attempted against him; and his Princely son Titus, graced in those days with
Amor, and deliciae generis humani, the love and delight of all mankind, yet had
Sueton. c. 16
a Traiterous Cecinna to assault him. Antoninus had Traitors to trouble him,
Cassius, Titianus, and Priscianus: Berengarius the Emperor found Flambertus a
Traitor, whom yet he highly advanced, and used in the secrecies of State, and
familiarity; Sed eo magis aestuaret innocente^ tollere regem, So much the more
he was set on fire to destroy the innocent King, says Cuspinian in ^reng.
Cuspinian. What should I rehearse the troop of Traitors, which in former Ages
have lift up their hands and hearts against their royal Masters? This last
Age, prophesied by 2 Timothy 3. 1 4
Saint Paul, to be perilous times, wherein men shall be Traitors, has
fulfilled that prediction. These last days have swarmed with such desperate
and devilish wretches, who by all means of mischief have labored in these
attempts, not to play the part of a Notary or Recorder in foreign Nations, in
publishing the names of Traitors, who have infested their Kings or Countries;
we have had too many in our native Country (whose names are registered in the
Popes Calendar of Martyrs, or the Hangmans Book) who have assaulted in late
times, our late dread Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, of blessed memory; and our
most gracious and virtuous King: two as famous Princes as ever here reigned,
and both admired of all the Monarkes under the Sun. How many Traitors swarmed
in Queen Elizabeth's days, how frequent were conspiracies of ungodly persons,
Parries, Lopusses, Babingtons, Campians, etc? and the roaring Pius Q. An. Do.
1570. In qua declarauit reginam hereticam, and regni iure prtuatam, and
subditos omni dominij fidelitatis, and obsequij debito perpetuo absolutos, etc.
Bulls came from Rome with thunderbolts of excommunication, deprivation; and all
this was but Sonitus spinarum ardentium sub ^lla, Like the noise of thorns
burning under the Pot, as Solomon, Eccle. 7. 8. And therefore these
fulminations were again confirmed by Pius Quintus his successor, Gregory the
13. Yet all these plots instar vaporis euanuerunt, vanished away like smoke
proceeding out of that smoaky Kingdom of Antichrist: and her Crown, and
person by the favor of the Almighty, under whose shadow she was protected,
safely defended, and reigned forty and four years, four months, and eight
days, a Virgin Queen, and died in peace, in a full and glorious age; so
beloved, so honored, and so esteemed of her subjects at home, and Princes
abroad, as never any Queen more: so that it was verified of her truly, which
the Psa. 2. 1. 2. 4.
Psalmist of Christ typically; Why did the Heathen rage together, and the
People imagine a vain thing? The Kings of the Earth stand up, and the Princes
assembled together against the Lord, and against his Anointed: but he that
dwelled in the Heavens did laugh them to scorn, the Lord had them in derision:
for there Pro. 21. 30.
is no wisdom, neither understanding, nor counsel against the Lord.

And this our dear and dread Sovereign, (whom the Lord of mercy still
preserve) has been subject to sundry dangers by wicked Traitors, as his
Majesty does His speech the Parliament after the Gunpowder treason. Page 2.
witness it himself, not only since his birth, but before his birth, even in
his Mothers belly; but especially to two most horrible Treasons, this in
Scotland attempted by the bloody Gowries, the fifth of August, and the other in
England, the fifth of November, the Gunpowder Treason, from both which
barbarous and monstrous proiects, (the latter no age can parallel the like) the
great King of all Kings in his great mercy graciously protected him; that both
King and subjects may say with Zachary, Luke 1. 74. 75
Being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we may serve him without
fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our lives.
So that our King may use the Psalm. 27. 2.
Psalmists words; When the wicked, even mine enemies and my foes came upon me
to eat my flesh, they stumbled and fell. The Lord did 28. 4.
reward them according to their deeds, and according to the wickedness of
their inventions. Therefore give Psalm 29. 1.
unto the Lord O ye sons of the mighty, give unto the Lord all the glory for
your deliverance.

CHAP. III.
TREASON has been always accounted an heinous sin, and by F: Tit. ad legem
Julian. Ma. l. 1.
Justinian ranked next to Sacrilege, Crimen laesae Maiestatis proximu^
Sacrilegio, etc. Treason is next to Sacrilege, the one a robbery of God, this
is (...) a fighting with God: so odious that the sole intention, without action
or execution, is death: for Voluntas reputatur pro facto in Et patitur paenas
peccandi sola voluntas: Hor.
causa proditionis, The will is accounted for the deed in Treason. Principis
in rehus and voluisse sat est.


And therefore there was a statute made in the reign of Edward the third, That
whosoever shall imagine the Kings death, are guilty of rebellion, and high
treason. This statute touches all Jesuits, who are perduellionum signiferi,
the ringleaders of Rebels to animate them to rebellion, under a color of
religion.

If the mere intention of Treason be so capital, what then is the Action?
Clamitat im coelum vox sanguinis:
The Genesis 4. 10.
voice of blood cries to heaven for revenge. What does the voice of royal
blood spilt by the hands of execrable Parricides, destroying Gods own image,
the Lords Anointed? May I not call such, as Polycarpe called Marcion, Iraeneus
lib. 3. c. 3
Daemonis filiolos, the Devils children? and say as our Savior did to the
Jews, Ye John 8. 44.
are of your Father the Devil, he has been a murderer from the beginning.

Nay, the very Heathens (void of Gods word) did greatly abhor Traitors, and
severely punish them.

Traitors among the Greeks were brought to Delphos, and they did offer them a
quick sacrifice to Apollo. The Persians did bury such quick: and the Romans
brought such to the public Theaters, where they were hewed in pieces per
gladiatores, by the sword-players. Cn: Pompeius the Great, made a Law (as De
Roma. legib'.
Pomponius relates it) to punish Parricides, destroyers of Fathers or Mothers
in this kind, To put them into a great vessel or tun, or such like
instrument, enclosing with them in it a Dog, a Viper, a Cock, and an Ape,
and to cast them into the Sea. What then shall be done to the public
Parricides, destroyers of Kings and Countries? Our Laws of Stanford pleas of
the Crown. lib. 3. c. 19.
England has provided for them a fit punishment, which is this: A Traitor
convicted, has his punishment to be drawn from his prison to the place of
execution, as being unworthy any more to tread upon the Mother earth, and that
backward, his head downe-ward, as having been retrograde to the natural
course of obedience, after hanged up by the neck twixt heaven and earth, as
deemed unworthy of both: his privy parts cut off, as unfit to leave any
generation behind him: his bowels and entrails burned, which in wardly
conceived and concealed Treason: his head cut off which imagined such
mischief: and last of all, his body quartered, as a prey for the birds of the
air: and In cruce pascere corues.
as it was said of a traitorous Jesuit: Sic been pascit aues, qui male pauit
oues:
In life he had no care the sheep to feed,
And now his carcass serves the fowls in need.


The Apostle Romans 13. 2.
Paul says, That they that resist shall receive to themselves judgment. The
greeuousnesse of judgment should be proportionable to the heynousnesse of the
crime; for if the law Exodus 21. 23. 24.
requires an eye for an eye a tooth for a tooth, life for life; what death
sufficient for a 2 Samuel 18. 3.
Traitor that kills a King, a murderer of many, who is worth ten thousand of
us, so that he cannot be sufficiently punished of man, but God also will
punish him who is a revenger of such sins. Never did I read of any Traitor
Sequitur hos a tergo vltor Deus, vel homo:
that did ever escape both the hand of man, and hand of God.

Look upon Absalom a double Traitor, to his Father, and his King, his end
suitable: First, his chief Counselor and plotter 2 Samuel 17. 23.
Achitophel hanged himself: 2 Samuel 18. 7.
twenty thousand of his adherents were slain in battle: Last of all, Absalom
2 Samuel 18. 9.
by the hand of Heaven was hanged up by the hair of his head, in stead of an
halter, upon an Oak tree in stead of a gallows or gybbet.

Sheba 2 Samuel 20. 22.
that traitorous Rebel lost his head for his treason against David.

King 2. Chron. 33: 24. 25.
Ammon, the son of King Manasses, an evil King, was slain by his servants,
who conspired against him, and slew him in his own house: but this bloody fact
of King-killing was so odious to the people of the land, that they slew them all that had conspired against King Ammon.

Treacherous 1 King. 16. 18.
Zimri slew his King, but the people hearing of it, made Omri King, to take
Zimri; who fired the Kings house, and died in the fire.

Bigthan Ester. 2. 21. 22. So that Amalekite that hasted Saul's death, yet
wishing and willing it, was put to death by David. 2 Samuel 1. 15.
and Teresh, who sought to lay hand on King Assuerus, were both hanged on a
tree.

The Scripture is plentiful in such examples. In profane histories there is a
cloud of witnesses to verify the punishments of Traitors.

Brutus and Cassius, who killed Caesar, never enjoyed good, till blood was
requited with blood.

We read of Trip. histo. lib. 9. c. 45.
Eugenius that rebelled against the Emperor Theodosius, whose rebellious army
the Lord dismayed, so that Eugenius was forced to fall down at the feet of
Theodosius, and had his rebellious head cut off from his shoulders.

So of Trip. hist. lib. 7. c. 15.
Procopius, who rebelled against the Emperor Valens, who being taken, had for
reward his two legs tied to two young trees growing near together, bowed
down by strength; which being suddenly let rise, rent the body of Procopius,
who would have rent the body of the kingdom.

So of Lib. eccl. 10. c. 15.
Magnensius, who rebelled against Constans the Emperor, who never enjoyed good
day after, till he was destroyed by Constantius the Emperors brother.

Annibal Match. prin. c. 19*
Bentiuolus, chief Ruler of the Bononians, was killed by Cannensis, who
conspired against him; but presently the multitude were stirred up with the
sight of that bloody fact, and destroyed with death all that stock and family.

The same Match. prin. c. 8.
Author tells us of the bloody and treacherous murder of that butcherly Monster
Oliuerot, who sending letters to John Foglianus, that he might be honorably
received at Firmanis, and being nobly entertained, treacherously pretends a
great Feast, inuiting Foglianns, and the chief men of the City; after the
banquet, by his Soldiers appointed in secret places, kills them all that were
present: a most barbarous and devilish stratagem: but afterward he paid the
price of blood, for Fracta gula interijt vbi supra.
his throat was cut and so he died: Misere pereunt, qui male perdunt, Blood
calls for blood. Caines Conscience so pricked for murder, that he thought Genesis
4* 14. Clytus Ghoast terrifies great Alexander: and Agrippinas Nero.
every man that met him would have killed him: if they escape (which yet is
rare) the hand of man, never the hand of Divine Justice.

Herod no parricide, or Regicida, but Puericida, a murderer of children Math.
2. 16.
from two years old and under, by his greatness scapes mortal revenge, but
not Divine Justice on earth; for he died most miserably, and I will set it
down in Theoph. enar. iu 2 Math.
Theophylacts words, Amara morte perijt Herod, febri, dysenteria, and scabie,
and podagra, and putredine verendorum, generatione vermium, spirandi
difficultate, and tremore, and contractione membrorum malam absoluit animam.
Alike was the end of that bloody Tyrant Antiochus, whom 2 Macch. 9. 5.
the Lord punished with the pain of the bowels that was remediless, and sore
torments in the inner parts, and all his members bruised with a great fall; so
that worms came out of the body of this wicked man in abundance, and 7. 9.
his flesh fell off for pain, and all his army grieved at the smell, so that
no man could bear him because of his stink, 10 12 28
no not his own self: Thus that murderer suffered most grievously, and as he
had entreated other men, so he died a miserable death: for with what Math. 7. 2,
measure men mete, it shall be measured to them again.

This is so clear a Truth, that murder never goes unpunished on earth, by God
or Man, as that divine and humane histories, and common experience affords
pregnant proofs and examples: then how much more will the Lord revenge the
murder of his own Vicegerents, whom he has given a general precept, not 1
Chr. 16. 21.
to touch them, no Eccl. 10. 2^,
not to curse them in thought, much less to hurt them in deed, as Traitors
do, or desire?

Hor: epod. 7. Quo, quo scelestiruitis, aut cur dexteris Aptantur enses
conditi?

What mean you (o ye monsters of men,) are you 2 Samuel 1. 14.
not afraid to put forth your hands to destroy the Anointed of the Lord? Can
you lay your hands upon them and be guiltless? Remember Ignat. epist. 2, ad
Magnesianos.
Ignatius godly counsel, No man ever remained unpunished which lifted up
himself against his Prince. Though they want power to accomplish their bloody
actions, yet are they odious Traitors in the eyes of God and man.

Look upon the tragedy of those Traitors whom Heldebrand the Pope stirred up
against It Is Emperor vexed by; Popes H^ld^brand, Vr^ and T^balis.
Henry the fourth the Emperor. First he stirred up Rodulphus, then Hermannus,
and afterward Ecbertus, all servants and subjects to their Lord and Master the
Emperor. And when these failed, his successor Pope Vrbane Ipsias V^ni
auyhoritate regnis aduersus patrem i^ Lombar^ ^pit: Sigon. reg. (...). p. 384.
raised up Conradus, and Henricus, the Sons against the Father; all labored
to their power in this project of rebellion, mark the issue and end.

First their Author and ghostly Father in this Treason the Roman Achitophel,
Gregory the seventh, alias Heldebrand, not like Achitophel hanged himself, but
for his bloody and bestiall life was forsaken of his people, eiected out of his
Sigeber. Anno 1084.
Popedom, and died in sorrow, misery, and infamy.

Secondly, Rodulph had his right hand cut off in a skirmish, and fetching deep
sighs, ready to give up the ghost, said to certain Bishops, Behold this is
the right hand wherewith Vspergen. in Anno 1080.
I swore fealty to Henry, and lo now I leave his kingdom and my life.

Thirdly, Hermannus had his treacherous head by a great stone cast down by a
woman, deadly broken, so that his brains dashed in pieces, running about his
ears: which did affright his army, and scattered them with fear.

Fourthly, Ecbertus did fly out of his Throne into a sinkehole, and hoping to
save his life, lost it.

Fifthly, Conradus the elder son, rightly dis-inherited, did end his days
miserably. Sigon. page 387.


Sixthly, Henry the younger son by perjury and cruel treachery against his
Father, gate the Crown, but with Nau^^er. page 801. Vit. Hen. page 49.
little comfort.

And since many of the Popes of Rome have Heldebrandized, raising up Subjects
to rebel against their Sovereigns; whose success has bin suitable to their
attempts.

The Chronicles of every Nation have too many examples Tormenta maloru^ s^nt
exempla multorum.
of Dukes, Earls, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and others of inferior sort,
proving Traitors to their anointed Governors, whose treacherous acts have
found tragical ends.

Traitors are odious even to their Abettors and Masters, Proditores etiam 1,
quos anteponu^t muisi sunt.
who first moved them to that villainy: and, as it was said of Antoninus, Odit
Tyrannum, non tyrannidem, They may like the treason, but they loath the
Traitor. Alexander the Great (as Justin says) at his Fathers obsequies,
commanded public justice to be done upon those, whom he had before secretly
employed to kill him.

And Nero the monster of men, as Tacit. 1. Annal.
Tacitus says, disauowed his Commission given to asouldier to kill Agrippa.
Such agents are abhorred of their Adiutors, and if possibly they can, they will
be their executioners, for fear they should disclose their conspiracy: for
both are Nihil interest, an faueas sceleri, an illud facias? Seen. Nulla est
excusatio ^ccati, si amici ausa (...): (...) in L^o.
Traitors, and both worthy of death. Some desperate wretches, who for love of
the trencher, or for hope of reward, or for some other respects, will be
wagered and hired to enterprise hellish and horrible designs; who being
debosht vassals, bankrout of grace and goodness, to purchase love or living (as
they hope) of them of whom they have dependence, whose hearts are died in a
deep tincture of disobedience, will hazard life, lands, yea hell it self, to
atchieue the proiects of their animating superiors. So said Restalrig, that
Exam: of George Sprot: page (...).
is, a perfect Traitor or Gowrie, for they two in this conspiracy had but one
heart; My Lord, I am resolved (says he) to peril life, lands, honor, goods,
yea and the hazard of hell shall not fray me, though the scaffold were
already Si timor Dei non tenet, teneat timor Iudicis, m^tus gebennae, laque^
mortis, dolores inferni, etc. Hugo. lib. 3. de Anima.
set up. A miserable resolution with a miserable confusion. But he had his
demerits though not in so high a kind as he deserved: and bloody Gowrie
strooken stone dead in the place where he intended, and striued to act his
Treason: Lipsi^es de Constable. lib. 2. c. 13.
Cognatum, imo innatum omni sceleri sceleris supplicium: The fruits of Treason,
shame and death: That it may be said of wicked Gowries and their adherents, in
the words of the Psalm. 9. 6. 15.
Psalmist; O enemy, destructions are come to a perpetual end, their memorial
is perished with them. The heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made,
in the net that they hid is their foot taken.

CHAP. IIII.
But not to insist thus in general in the declaration of Traitors punishments,
I will specify some part in particular; which though they be commonly known,
yet may be propounded to good purpose, as precautio^s to posterity, to fear to
follow their bad examples, lest they find their woeful punishments.

The punishment of disobedience and treason is of two kinds. 1 Punishments by
God. 2 Punishments by man. Punishments by God are threefold; external,
internal, eternal. I will not take upon me to be a Judge in the heavenly
Assizes, I will be as a Clarke to read their punishments registered in Gods
book: First external, and they are of two sorts; either ordinary, or
extraordinary. Ordinary as Jeremy denounces them. The Ier. 27. 8.
Nation and kingdom which will not serve Nebuchadnezzar King of Babell, and
will not put their necks under the yoke of the King of Babell, the same
Nation will I visit (says the Lord) with the sword, with famine, with
pestilence, until I have wholly given them into his hands.

Extraordinary, as Numb. 12. 10.
Miriam for her murmuring against Moses was made leprous: the murmuring Numb.
11. 1.
Israelites punished with fire. Numb. 16. 32.
Core, Dathan, and Abiram were swallowed up of the earth, Absalom 2 Samuel 18. 9.
with his own mule drawn under an Oak, where he was hanged up by the hair
of his head.

2 Internal, and that specially tormented with the Nulla grauior Paena
conscientiae Paena. Isidor. lib. 2. soliloquior.
worm of a guilty Conscience: for it is a fearful thing when malice is
condemned by her own testimony, and a Conscience that is touched does ever
forecast cruel things, says Wisd. 17. 10. Nullu^ consciu^ peccatorum tuoru^
magis timueris, quam temet ipsum; alium enim potes effugere, te nunquam:
Seneca. lib. de moribus.
Wisdom her self: this inbred monitor, and notary of the soul, signs every
bill of Indictment, with Test meipso; which is in stead of a thousand
witnesses. A guilty Conscience who can bear? It makes the wicked cry with
Tiberius, Dij me perdunt: God and their own conscience begin to confound them,
remembering with Judas, how they have sinned in betraying the innocent blood. --
Quos diri conscia facti, Nunquam securus est reus animus, men's enim mala
conscientiae proprijs agitatur stimulis: Isidor.

Iuuenal. Sat. 13.
Men's habet attonitos, and surdoverbere caedit,
Occultam quatienti animo tortore flagellum:
The conscience of foul ^acts their souls affright,
And scourge with restless torments day and night.


Eternal: But those I leave to the Judge of all, who holds in his hands the
Keys of Heaven, and Hell; for no Tantae pietatis est dominus Jesus, vt ipsi
Iudae donaret veniam, si Christi expectasset misericordiam. Ambros.
sin, never so dangerous* and damnable in it self, (except the sin against
the Holy Ghost) but upon true contrition grounded in a true Faith, may receive
remission.

2. Punishment of Traitors by the Laws of Men; and that four ways: 1. By
bodily death: 2. By want of burial: 3. In blood and posterity: 4. In loss of
living.

1. By a violent death; the manner of it I described in In body.
the Chapter before, how woeful to run such a wicked race, as that body and
soul must be divorced before their In Body. Read Aeneas Syla^us hist. de
Europa, cap. 4. 6. of the murder of James the first of Scotland, and the
punishment of those Traitors, whereof he was an eye witness.
time: life ended, before the line of life naturally finished: and that by a
shameful death, hanged upon a Tree, or the head cut off, which conspired
against the supreme Head: all men rejoicing at their deaths, and point at them
with their fingers; -- Ille crucem sceleris pretium tulit: All Men saying that
truly, which they did of Christ most falsely; Mat. 26. 66. Except the Princes
mercy forbear this punishment.
He is worthy to die.

2. In burial; yea, rather in defect of burial, their bodies dismembered, and
their quartered parts fixed upon gates and walls of Cities, spectacles exposed
to all beholders, and reserved for remembrance to all Subjects, to learn by
their mangled and unburied limbs, to lead more dutiful and obedient lives.
It was a great punishment to Ieholakim, that he should be buried as an Ass is
* Ier. 22. 19.
buried, none to mourn for his death; saying, Ah Lord, or ah his glory, but to
be drawn, and cast forth without the gates of Jerusalem: But a Traitors
burial is worse then the burial of an Ass; for the dogs, or beasts of the
field soon devour them, and so are forgotten: but these live in shame in the
relickes of their dead carcasses, as monuments or mappes of their misery, and
mischief. These want the sweet perfumes and balmes, the honor of Funerals,
the Sepulchrum quasi seorsum pulcbru^.
fair Tombs of their Ancestors, they lie inglorious; and on their graves (if
they have any) it may be engraued as it was written upon Pope Alexanders Tomb,
Iacet hic and scelus, and vitium: Whereas others, if they have been loyal,
they go to their graves in peace, resting in their natural lodging to the
last day; and if they have been of honorable Race and Rank, they usually
are graced with some sumptuous Monument, to witness to the World their
singular virtues to their succeeding generations.

Aen. 6. Nampius Aeneas ingentimole sepulchrum Imposuit, suaque arma viri,
remumque, tubamque, Monte sub aerio, qui nunc Mysenus abillo Dicitur,
aeternumque tenet per saecula nomen.

Whereas Traitors are used, as I have read how the Soldiers used Zisca, the
Commander of the Hussites, who being dead, they did flea him, and took his
skin, giving his body to the wild beasts; and of his skin did make a
military drum, that his enemies who feared his sight alive, might fear the
sound of his skin being dead: so these infamously are dismembered, their heads
set upon poles, or high places, to terrify all men from traiterous attempts.

3. In Blood and posterity: Their names and honor attained, as Pro. 10. 7.
Solomon; The name of the wicked shall rot. The names of Traitors and Rebels
give an ill sent and savor in the Land, stayning and dishonouring all their
Progeny; leaving behind them an unhappy and disgraceful memory: so that the
living issue of so lewd a Progenitor may say, as Jacob said of Simeon and Leui;
Genesis 34. 30.
Ye have troubled me, and made me stink among the Inhabitants of the Land.
What more odious names to all true Britains then the mention or memory of Kett,
Cade, Straw, Lopus, Parrye, Gowry, Fawx, with those Agents in the Powder Plot;
their names branded with contempt? The portion of the wicked (says Job 24. 18.
Job) shall be cursed in the Earth, and they themselves are gone, and brought
low, they are destroyed and cut off as the top of an ear of corn: for
deceitful 24
and bloody men do not live out half their days; they hasten death upon
themselves, and shame to their posterities. And as their names be disgraced, so
their posterity deprived of the honor and pedigree, where before their fall
they were interessed and lineally invested: for although Traitors in England,
are not used as they were in Persia, that every one of the Family should be put
to death; or as in Macedonia, five of the Traitors nearest Kins-folke suffer
with him; yet are they punished here in name and posterity, deprived of their
lands, livings, goods, offices, blood, and honor; which is the fourth grief
that might (if it were possible) even vex a Traitor in his grave, to behold
himself to be naked and destitute of all the goods of nature, Fame and
Fortune, and by his fall to have deplumed all his Progeny, not only of
Pedigree, but of Patrimony, left them to the mercy of the Prince, and the
mifery of Time? What Parent, though like Romulus nursed up with a Shee-wol^e,
or as stony-hearted as a Myrmidon -- Aut duri miles vlyssi? Yet must be moved
with immeasurable mourning, (though senseless of his own sorrows, which are
great and grievous, as loss of liberty, living, life, goods, and good name)
and when pain on earth is past, yet still to be punished in his Issue and
Posterity: Maiorum culpas luere nepotes, His children bred of his own loins,
by his lewd life disinherited of their liuelihood; and can challenge no more
for their own: -- Nisi pontus and aer,

Who cannot but be moved with the love of his own Natis sepulchrum ipse est
parens. 1 Seneca.
children, and especially when they are ruinated hy his own fact and folly.
Quis si non genitus duris e cautibus horrens
Caucasus? vt stirpis modice moueatur amore:
Who, if not bred upon a stony Rock?
But fancy moves to love his filial stock.


To behold his wife and children (Pignora chara amoris) exposed to all storms
of time and contempt, deprived of all riches and respects; who though he be
regardlesse of his own fall, yet in this case must needs Luke 23. 28:
weep for himself, and for his children: or if he have neither of these to
weep for, yet may he justly weep for having an hand, or heart in so foul a
sin as Treason is; for which he must suffer an ignominious death, and have
his capital offense recorded, Ad perpetuam eius infamiam, To his eternal
infamy: or if he regard not Fame, or Name, yet ought he to regard Duo
necessaria tibi, fama and conscientia.
his Conscience, which must needs accuse him for such a sin; and beholding
the eternal Iam. 5. 9.
Judge stand before the door, able to cast body and soul into hell fire, and
there Greg. lib. 4. Dialog.
Vnusquisque quantum exigit culpa, tantum illic sentiet poenam: according to
the greatness of his sin shall there find the grieuousnesse of his punishment.
And therefore to conclude this with Saint Cyprian, Si quam turpem cogitationem
in mentem tuam venire animad^^rtis, suscipe sta^im iudicij extremi salutarem
commemorationem, If thou once perceiuest any filthy thoughts to enter into thy
mind, straight to call to mind the day of doom, and last judgment. So let all
men daily think of the manifold judgments and punishments which Rebels and
Traitors on earth have suffered, and received, and without deep repentance,
and divine mercy must needs suffer at their final doom, when Christ shall say;
Luke 13. 27,
Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity.

CHAP. 5.
THus having in part set down the fall, and punishment of Traitors; next let
us observe the corrupt causes which produce these cursed effects: for though in
Treason the Devil is always primus motor, being an Arch-Traytor to God and
Man, and reigns in the Children of disobedience, and John 13. 2.
puts into the heart of Judas to betray Christ; yet are there also procreant
causes in themselves to allure and procure the wicked to such wretched and
woeful motions. And the Mother of these mischiefs usually is Ambition, whose
Daughter 1 Cause of Treason is Ambition.
is superbia, Pride; which Saint Austen calls Cathedram pestilentiae, The Chair
of Pestilence. Ambition is a dangerous malady, and as Saint Ambros super Luc.
lib 3.
Ambrose speaks of it, Quos nullapotuit mouere luxuria, nulla auaritia
subruere, facit ambitio criminosos, habet enim for ensem gratiam, and
domesticum periculum; and vt dominetur, alijs prius seruit, dum vult esse
sublimior, fit remissior; Though Luxury, or covetousness could not move them,
yet Ambition makes them sinful, hunting for popular applause, and having
domestical danger; and that they might rule, they will first serve, and to be
high, they will seem humble. Saint Bernard paints Ber. in ser. quadrages.
out Ambition in perfect colors, Ambitio secretum virus, pestis occulta, doli
artifex, matter hypocrisis, liuoris parens, vitiorum origo, tinea sanctitatis,
excaecatrix cordium, exremedijs morbos creans, ex medicina languorem generans,
Ambition is a secret poison, an inward plague, the contriuer of deceit, the
mother of hypocrisy the parent of envy, the original of vice; the moth of
sanctity, the blinder of Quid ambitio est, vide; cum scieris, fuge.
hearts, creating sicknesses of salues, and of medicines maladies.

The World is now much infected with this plague, and we may see, and say with
Bernard; Ber. de consider, ad Eugen. lib 5.
Limina Apostolorum amplius ambitio quam deuotio terit, and vocibus eius tota
die resultat palatiu^, Ambition rather then Devotion possesses many in every
State, gaping for promotion; Honores ambiunt, qui onera non sentiunt, Though
their deserts small, their desires great, and are never content with their
present estate: so that we may say with Pro. 30 15. 16*
Solomon; There be three things that will not be satisfied, yea, four that say
not, It is enough: The grave, the barren womb, the earth, and fire; and among
many more, I will add two more, an ambitious man, and a covetous Lawyer, the
one with honor, the other with money, will never say; It is enough.

Ambition lives in every Climate, and loved of every Tribe: In the state
political, the poor man would be a yeoman; the yeoman after the death of his
wife, or dearth of corn, would be a gentleman, and will give arms, if the
Herald will accept of Angels: the Squire would be a Knight; the Knight a
Baron, the Baron an Earl, the Earl D. Boys.
a Duke, the Duke a King the King Caesar, and is the worlds Emperor still
ambitious? The Poet tells us,

Iuuenal: Vnus Pellaeo iuueni non sufficit orbis, Aestuat infaelix angusto
limine mundi:

One world is not enough for Alexander, and therefore he weeps, and is
discontent; as if he wanted sufficient Valerius Max. lib. 8. c. 15.
elbow room.

In the State Ecclesiastical, Ambition finds favorites; Maiora eupimus, quo
maiora ^rint (...). Seneca. de Benefi^.
The Mendicant Friar, would be the Master Prior: The Prior the Abbot the Abbot
a Bishop, the Bishop an Archbishop, the Metropolitan a Cardinal, the
Cardinal Pope, the Pope God; nay, that is too little, above all that is called
God: 2 Thessalonians, 2. 4. Bern. de consid, lib. 3.
Ambitio ambientium crux, quomodo omnes torques? and omnibus places, says
Bernard; O Ambition, how painful is thy pleasure, which has been the
overthrow of the Angels in Heaven, and our Parents in Paradise, and many men on
Earth? Potestatis ambitio Angelum faelicitate angelica priuauit, etc: and Euam
promissi honoris ambitio illecebrosa decepit, An ambition of power, deprived
Bern.
the Angel of Angelical happiness, and the enticing ambition of the promised
honor (to be like Genesis 3. 5.
God, knowing good and ill) deceived Eve, and she Adam: and ever since all the
sons of Adam have been deceived by her, hoping of a rise, have found a fall.
Excellently Seneca, Ambitio Fortunes Motto, Fauere videor, nocere sentior.
non patitur quenquam in ca mensura beatorum conquiescere, qua quendam fuit
eius votum: nemo agit de Tribunatu gratias, sed conqueritur, quod non est ad
Praeturam vsque perductus: si Consulatus, nec etiam sufficit, sivnus est,
vltra: cupiditas non vndevenerit, respicit, sed quo tendit: Ambition will not
suffer any man to rest in that measure of state, which once he Relinque
ambitionem, timidares est, vana, ventosa, nullum habet terminum. Sen. Ep. 88.
wished: none will give thanks for a Tribuneship, but complains because not
raised to be a Praetor; or if a Consul, yet that suffices not; if alone
supreme, yet would rise higher: for this insatiable ambition, looks not from
whence they came, but whither they would, still repining at others higher
advancement: Heu melior quanto* sors tua sort mea est? The Poets did very
well, and wittily figure the fall, and folly of Ambition, by Phaetons chariot,
Icarus wings, Ambition is like a Centaure begotten of a cloud.
and Ixions wheel, who as they had a great desire to rise, so they found a
grievous descent and fall:

Iuuen. Sat. 10 Haec Crassos, haec Pompeios euertit, and illum Ad sua qui
domitos deduxit flagra Quirites:

Ambitious Appian. lib. 2. de bello civilly: Nec regna socium far, nec taedae
sciunt.
Crassus, Pompey, and Caesar, accorded to the overthrow of all the rest; and
Crassus dying, Pompey could not endure an equal, nor Caesar a Superior: Lucan.
-- Nec fert Caesar ve priorem,
Pompeiusve parem:


But their Ambition brought both to a bloody fall. Diod lib. 46. 47.
Lepidus, Antony, and Octauius, reared up to kill their enemies a Triumuiratus,
till at last they fell out for the chief place. Hall. Hollingsheed, and Stew,
in Richard 3.
Richard the third an usurper, and the ambitious Duke of Buchingham, conspired
against King Edwards children and friends, till they fell out in the end to
their own subversion.

All Histories and Chronicles afford many presidents, how ambitious men hungry
of supremacy, have brought themselves to misery.

Yet such a Siren Ambition is, that it tempts many to hazard Caesar wished
rather to be first of a Village, then second at Rome.
their fall, in hope of their rise; liquorous to rule, and had rather be King
of a Molehill, then Lord of a Mountain. These hungry Aristot. l. 5. de animal.
Vultures, which follow the Army, watching for the prey before it fall, and do
praesagire caedem, Foretell a slaughter, that like Genesis 41. 3.
Pharoes seven lean Kine, they might devour the fat: so these ambitious
vultures use all policy, stratagems, devises, mischiefs, and Machauelismes,
waiting for 2 Ki. 3. 23.
Moab ad praedam, Moab to the spoil; these State-anglers fishing with deadly
hooks in such troubled waters, desirous of change of Rulers, that so they
might chance to rule, serving all times, and turns; Treacherous Timists,
unworthy to be trusted, varying into all forms, and fashions; Regnandi causa,
To get superiority. They are like Theod. lib. 2. c. 24. Prope omnium criminum
fonte^ c tria monstrantur esse genera vitiorum, gula, iactantia, and Ambitio.
Ambros. super ^cam. lib. 3.
Leontius Bishop of Antioch, who being in heart an Arrian, covered his Religion
by dissimulation, and joined with the Council of Nice, in the outward
profession of the Truth: His soul was led by the devil, and his body by the
world, and so are they, tempted with the Devil, and temporizing with the
world: Iniquitas pulsat animum, ambitio continet manum, colludunt ad inuicem
matter and filia, iniquitas and ambitio, haec vendicat sibi publicum, illa
secretum, says Innocent. de vilit. condit. hum.
Innocentius, Iniquity knocks at the heart, Ambition contains the hand for a
time, the Innocentius ^bi supra.
Mother and the Daughter dally together, Iniquity and Ambition; the one would
seem in public good, the other in secret is most wicked.

The ambitious would seem virtuous, yet is vicious, humilitatem simulat,
honestate^ mentitur; affabilitatem exhibet, benignitate^ ostendit, subsequitur
and obsequitur, cu^ctos honorat, vniuersis inclinat, frequentat curias, visitat
optimates, assurgit, and amplexatur, applaudit and adulatur, Counterfeits
humility, seems honest, shows himself affable and courteous, crouching and
creeping, honoring all, tractable to all, frequenting Courts, visiting great
men, rising up, and reuerencing, applauding and flattering all degrees,
laboring to be popular; which yet is an imperfection in a Politician,
according to Math. prin. c. 8 Hoc^ro^^rbium, locum habet in ciui, etc.
Machiauels rule, qui populari in^tur aura, domum in luto extruit, He that
relies upon popular affection raises his house upon a muddy foundation. So
Absalom (that double Traitor) seeking to aspire to his Fathers Throne, how
plausible he is, 2 Samuel 15. 5.
putting forth his hand, and taking them, and kissing them, his lips drop
hony-combes, Oh that I were made a Judge in the land, etc. that I might do
Justice: stealing 6.
away the hearts of the men of Israel, hoping they would adhere to him, when
he had made an head: And as Tacitus, Leaud men, misdoubting the present, and
expecting change, prepare aforehand friends. O ambition, how many Traitors have
thou bred, and shortened the days of many Emperors and rulers! The Chronicles
of every particular Nation furnished with frequent examples. What caused Henry
the Ambitio, and inuidia fons cladium. Cypr. ser, de liuore, and zelo.
fifth the Emperor by force to deprive his Father from his Empire, and to keep
him in prison till he died there, but abominable ambition? What moved Mawfroy
the Prince of Tarentum to strangle his own Father Frederick the Emperor, but
traiterous ambition? Ambition caused Antoninus son to the Emperor Seuerus,
to stabbe his brother Geta with a dagger: and tempted Solomon King of the
Turks to strangle his own son Sultan Mustapha. Octauius Caesar by the treason
of his wicked wife Liuia, impatient to tarry the inthronizing of her son, (as
is the nature of Ambition, the nearer the goal, the faster it runs) took
away his life at Nola: Tiberius Caesar poisoned by his ambitious Nephew Caius:
Claudius poisoned by his ambitious and incestuous wife Agrippina, that her
son Nero might reign: Galba killed by ambtious Otho: Titus brought to his
grave, not without a vehement suspicion of his bloody brother and successor.
Yea most of the Caesar's killed by the treachery of their ambitious Competitors,
or procurements: The Italian figs of ambitious Cardinals, hoping of the
Popedom at the next vacancy, have poisoned many a proud Pope.

This traitorous ambition has robbed many a King of his Crown and life, and
sometimes has raised ignoble and obscure men, like Agathocles, who ex figulo
factus Rex: or like Am. Marcell. lib. 14. in fine.
Adramit tenus, who being borne of poor Parents, yet Regali Sceptro
honoratus, was honored with a Regal Scepter, when the right heir by
miserable fate factus faber, was feign to be a Smith, as Dyonisius was feign to
be a Schoolmaster.

When once proud ambition has enchanted them with this charm, aut Caesar,
aut n^llus, either a King or no body; then though their royal Master and
Sovereign should say to them as Pharaoh Genesis 41. 40.
to Joseph, Thou shall be over my house and at thy word shall all my people be
armed, only in the Kings throne will I be above thee; yet that will not
content them: yea though they should be raised so high, that as Seneca, Nihil
foelicitati eorum deest, nisi moderatio eius, Nothing is wanting to their
happiness but moderation, and discretion to use it; yet still ambition eggs
them with Dulce regnare, O what a sweet thing it is to rule, to Ferrum
mortemque timere, ambitionis amor nescit.
be second to none, to command all; and therefore to obtain this affected
Soueraignety, use all desperate and diabolical policies, yea many giving over
themselves to Necromancy, and to contract with the Devil to have his help to
come to regal authority, and at last like Lucifer are brought low, Thy Esaias
14. 11. Cito ignominia fit superbi gloria: Seneca in Proverb.
pomp is brought down to the grave, the worm is spread under thee, and the
worms cover thee: Quem vidit veniens dies superbum,
Hunc vidit fugiens Dies iacentem:


To day Ester. 3. 2.
all knees bow and reverence Haman, and lo shortly Ester. 7. 10. Calippus
would have stabbed his friend Dion, but the same dagger stabbed him.
Haman was hanged on the gallows that he prepared for Mordecai: -- neque enim
lex iustior vlla est,
Quam necis artifices art perire sua:
A iuster Law there cannot be,
Then punish blood in like degree.


These ambitious climers seldom escape without a fall, and then (as well Ambr.
in suo pasto: quanto altior ascensus, tanto grauior casus: The late fall of the
great Marquess d' Ancre in France is a fit example for ambitious Courtiers.
a Father) Non est tanti gaudij excelsa tenere, quanti moeroris est de excelsis
corruere, It is not so great a joy to be exalted, as to be again dejected,
and especially by their own action and ambition.

And therefore (O ye noble and promoted Peers) beware of this bewitching
Circe, a false and unfortunate Siren, Ambition, which would ever tempt and
temper with you to aspire higher: which infirmity is incident to greatness, and
as Tully in Offic.
Tully, Est in hoc genere hoc molestum, quod in magnanimis and munificis
saepius incidit potentiae cupiditas, In this kind this is most troublesome,
that in great men, valiant and liberal, this desire of power and rule is
incident: which aspiring fancy has overthrown many a noble family, when as
others content with their lot, be it prope, or procul a Jove, have been procul
a fulmine: accepting with thanks their room and rank allotted to them, have
finished their race on earth in a comfortable peace with God and men, And
surely if men had eyes in the hinder part of their head, as they have before,
to observe how many inferiors Inuidia est odium alienae felicitatis, respectu
superioru^, quia eis non aequa^tur; respectu inferiorum ne sibi aequentur,
respectu parium, quia sibi aequatur: August.
they have, who would be glad to be blessed with the tithe of their fortunes,
they would not be ambitious, or have envious eyes to repine to have a few
superiors; but would thankefully say with the Psalmist, My lot is fallen unto
me in a good land, I have a goodly heritage; and would never beat their
brains, or flatter their souls with ambitious dreams, and charms of pride,
like him who said, Esaias 14. 13. 14. Discordiarum ca^s procurare sapientis est
ducis: nulla natio, quamuis sit minima, potest perdeleri, nisi proprjis
simultatibus seipsam consumpserit. Vegetius de re militari. lib. 3. cap. 19.
I will exalt my throne above beside the stars of God, I will ascend above
the height of the clouds, I will be like the most High: or crook in their
nails to keep them sharp for a day, hoping by some commotion to come to
promotion, or enterprise to undermine King and State by treachery, hoping by
some strange stratagem to intrude into Caesar's chair, and though they should
possess it but an hour, yet would adventure all, to sit one hour in a regal
throne. Lucretius:
O caecas hominum mentes, o pectoracaeca.


But the shame of such treacherous and vain glorious spirits have ever
exceeded their glory, and their punishment Gloriam, and honorem bonus and
ignavus aequam sibi ex optat, bonus vera via nititur, sed ignauus, quia bonae
arts desunt, dolis atque fallaciis contendit. Salust.
greater then their advancement. In a word; if you affect true honor, enter
the gate of humility, and pass the gate of virtue, and that is the right way
to honor: aspire by honorable and commendable means, and let your merits make
you exalted, and be not ambitious with proud Icarus to mount too near the
Sun, lest your wings be scorched: for Prou. 16. 18.
pride goes before destruction, and an high mind before the fall: therefore,
let him that 1 Cor. 10. 12.
stands, take heed lest he fall.

CHAP. VI.
I Might in the next place propound Pride (as chief mouer of Treason) which as
Hugo victorinus lib. 1. de anima.
Hugo writes, rides in a Coach drawn with four horses, Ambition, Vainglory,
Contempt, and Disobedience; all ready to run the race of Treachery, if the
reins be loose: Or I might mention Envy, Coffeehouse of mind upon some
inward corruption, or outward vexation, or desire of revenge, misliking the
punishment or disgrace of their most affected friends, or some other sinister
causes which some traitors may harbor in their hearts; and if I had Momus
wished window to look into their breasts, I might the better discover and
discourse of them. But to pretermit these and many others which might be
alleged, I will only insist upon one (because I will be the larger in it)
the very radical and efficient cause of cursed treachery in these latter
days, namely the seditious doctrine, or rather Pace bonoru^ virorum dictum
sit, nouitas ista, ne dicam haeresis etc. Auentin. p 470. and Sigeber. chrono
in An. 1088. p. 129.
heresy, of Jesuitical and modern popery, teaching that the Pope may depose
Kings, absolve subjects from Allegiance; or to use the words of their own
Carerius potest. Romans pontif. lib. 2, c. 9. p. 131.
Carerius, Papa habet potestatem remouendi, reuocandi, corrigendi, and
puniendireges, etc: Et hoc tenendum vera fide, tanquam naturalis, moralis, and
diuina lex Dei, The Pope has power to remove, reuoake, correct, and punish
Kings; and this is to be holden with a true belief, as the very Natural,
Moral, and Divine Law of God: and therefore the Jesuits have made it an Art.
55.
Article, Do you believe that the Pope can put the Queen from her authority?
Ans. I do believe it. From the seed of this serpentine doctrine, the Doctrine
of Devils it is, That the Pope can excommunicate Kings, depose Ab omni debito
obedientiae etc.
them from their Thrones, free Council. Trident. sess. 14. c. 7.
Subjects from obedience; and if they do excidere, fall from them, the next is
occidere, to kill them, for deponere a throno, is exponere periculo, to depose
them from their throne, is to expose them to deadly peril; capitis diminutio,
to deprive them of their kingdom, is as much as capitis obtruncatio, to cut
their throats. Si Paparegem deponat, ab illis tantum poterit expelli, vel
interfici quibus ipse id commiserit, says the Jesuit Ies. Suarez lib. 6, cap.
4.
Suarez, If the Pope depose a King, of them only he is to be expelled or
killed, to whom the Pope shall commit that business: and adds after, That if
the Pope shall declare a King to be an heretic, and fallen from his kingdom,
without further declaration touching the execution, then the lawful successor
being a Catholic, has power to do the feate, or if he refuse it, it
appertains to the body of the kingdom. The cruel Cannibals may become
prentises to these Jesuits, the Masters to teach rules to murder Kings, the
ring; leaders of rebellion, and trumpeters of treason, telling and teaching the
people, That Subjects are released from the oath of Allegiance given to
Princes, if the Pope denounce them excommunicate, and may drive cut heretical
Kings from their kingdoms, as Wolfes, says Bell. de pont. lib. 5. cap 7. Be a
King never so virtuous, if he refuse to stcope under the Popes primacy,
presently he is an heretic, liable to be deposed, deprived, dethroned, and
decapitated. Vide Saunders lib. de Monarch. visib.
Bellarmine; or if they be not apparent, but secret heretics, says Symancha:
yea not them only, but their son, and followers are to be rooted out, as
Creswell agrees with Symancha, by any means whatsoever, says Saunders, either
by open force, as Iezabel by Iehu, or by craft as Holophernes by Judith, say
Raynoldus and Bourchier; or by knife and dagger, whereby Vide Guliel. Reynoldum
de iusta abdicat. Hen. 3. Gal. reg.
Henry the third and Henry the fourth were murdered for favoring them, whom
they term heretics. Yea before any sentence denounced against them: or by
dagges and poison, as Queen Elizabeth assaulted, as Walpoole and Comensus
persuaded: or by Gunpowder, as lately appeared, ratified by Jesuits and popish
Priests, Garnet, Gerard, Oldcorne, Greenewell, etc. So that I may rightly say,
Jesuitical Papisme is the Catechism of Treason, teaching Subjects, that their
Emperor or King may be deprived by the Pope, and the right of their kingdom
conveyed over to others: and if they will not acknowledge it, they must be
constrained by Arms, either of their own Subjects, or other Catholic
Princes, if the Pope will have it so, yea even to part with their kingdom and
life also, says Francis Bozius, lib. 2. c. 14.

Yea that the Pope is directly Lord of things temporal, the Ruler and Monarke
of the world, says Boz. de temp. eccl. Monar. lib* 1. cap. 3. fol. 98.
the same Bozius, and so consequently to have power to depose Kings, and
dispose of kingdoms; so that I may truly affirm that which once one of the
kings of America said to a Spaniard, telling him of the division and
disposition of Pope Alexander the sixth, concerning the newfound part of the
world, the King answered, That the Pope was not the Non vicariii boni Dei, sed
diaboli etc
Vicar of a good God, but of a Devil, who would give that to others which did
not belong unto him: and surely in nothing does the Pope more lively show
himself to be Satan's Vicar, then in meddling with the kingdoms of the world,
and the glory of them, and arrogating the Devils title, All Math. 4. 9.
these will I give thee if thou will fall down and worship me; yet Christ
would not be a John 6. 15.
King, or a diuider, for his John 18. 36.
Kingdom was not of this world: nor Peter would not cast Nero out of his
throne by the Thunderbolt of excommunication, or deposition; nor any of the
Apostles take from Caesar his Scepter, or Subjects, or Kingdom, or life: yet
he that brags he succeedes Simon Peter, Simonem Romae nemo fuisse negat, Owen.
Epigr.
(Simon, I grant, but not Peter) will by his excommunication bind Kings that
they may not reign, and Subjects that they may not obey, which is (to use
Vrspergensis words) a devilish Art, which has brought in treachery under the
cloak of religion, dangerous to Kings, and damnable to Subjects. But it has
been the Popes policy a long time, to make discord among Kings, and rebellion
among Subjects: for it is well observed, that four things specially have
raised the Pope. 1 The division of the Empire. 2 The departure of the Emperor
out of Italy. 3 The dissension of Kings. 4 The rebellions and treasons of
people. And the special motive of this fourth Monster, Rebellion, has been
the diab olicall doctrine of seditious and bloody Romanists, not Mass, but
Mars-Priests, teaching and tempering with the people, that all the dominion of
the world, both divine and humane, was in Christ as man, and so now it is in
the Pope the vicar of Christ, as Carer. de potestat. Romans pontif. p. 111.
Carerius writes: That Christ committed to Peter (the key-keeper of eternal
life) the right of earthly and heavenly government, and that in his place the
Pope is universal Judge, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, as an Isid.
Mose. de maiestat. p. 27.
other writes: and by virtue of this pretended claim of Peter's successor, and
Peter's primacy, that they may do any thing; and as Platina writes in the life
of Gregory, that he accustomed to use these words, Nos, nos, imperia, regna,
and principatus, and quicquid mortales habere possunt, auferre posse etc. We
are able to take away Empires, Kingdoms, Principalities, or whasoeuer mortal
men can have: for the Pope cries like Plintes frogge, -- Mihi terra, lacusque:
Both earth and Sea belong to his See: nay Purgatory is part of his patrimony.

And all this Pope like Majesty is derived from Peter, (yet he loathes his
mantle, and puts on Aarons miter) Peter (says he) was a Primate of all, I
succeed Peter, therefore may excommunicate Kings, and then depose them, free
Subjects from obedience unto them, and by virtue of the words in S. Acts 10. 13.
Peter's vision, Arise Peter, kill and eat, that is, as In paraen. ad remp.
venet.
Baronius does fondly gloss it, Go Pope, kill and confound the Venetians: or
as the same In sentent. sua contravenetos.
Cardinal, to provoke Paul the fifth against the Venetians, says; Me thinks
I see sitting in Peter's chair Gregory the seventh, and Alexander the third,
both issuing out of the City of Senes, whence your Holiness takes your
beginning: whereof the one did bring under Henry that obstinate Emperor, the
other Frederick etc: You must take in hand the same quarrel. Thus make they
their Lord of the seven hilled City, a bloody Bishop, a 1 Timothy 3. 3.
striker, and a fighter, contrary to Paul's Canon, a man of blood and a warrier;
and all this must be cloaked under the color of Peter's chair, (this
holy water sweetens the Harlots cup) as if religion and rebellion sprung out
of one blade, as if faith had a knife to kill, and to teach grace to destroy
nature. Thus these impostors, not Pastors raise rebels, and preach the murder
of Gods Anointed, inuenting opinions' of excommunication of Kings deposition,
absolution of subjects from obedience; which questions are all like spirits,
sooner raised then put down, being patronized by the devoted Champions of the
Popes chair, Bellarmine, Allen, Carerius, Perron, Symancha, Suarez,
Philopater, Saunders, Creswell, Reynolds, Parsons, Becanus, etc. laborious
vassals to ambitious Popes, whose publishing of these pernicious errors, has
overthrown many popish Families, brought a torture to their Consciences,
punishment to their karcasses, infamy to their progeny, scandal to their
religion, for attempting treason under pretense of their Romish profession. But
let us consider (though by way of digression) how and by what means this
ambitious Antichrist has aspired to this arrogant altitude, to set his chair
above Kings thrones, and to challenge a power to deprive Kings, and to make, or
unmake temporal Monarkes, a matter which requires a large volume, if we should
fully describe their policy in rising, and ruling; but I will but epitomize it,
contracting it into a short Compendium, it being by many learned Divines in
their several works more amply discovered.

CHAP. 7.
THE exaltation of Popes above Emperors Vide Franc. Duar. de Sacr. Benef. lib.
1. c, 10.
and Kings, did first especially begin in Pope Boniface the third, who obtained
of Phocas, that murdered his Master and Emperor Mauritius, to be created the
universal Bishop. So that the Pope is indebted to a King-killer for the glory
of his kingdom, and ever since he has made much of King-killers. Thus he
obtained to be Head-Bishop, and together with the Lombards began to rule the
City of Rome: after that the Lombards challenging the City of Rome again, Pope
Zachary stirs up Pipinus, deposing Childericus King of France; and his son
Carolus magnus, to put down Aistulphus King of the Lombards, translated the
Empire to France, and divided the spoil between them; France to have that
which belonged to the Empire, and the Pope possession of Rome, with such
donations as they now call S. Peter's patrimony, and ascribe the grant to
Constantine the great.

After in tract of time, their liberal benefactors being dead, Pipinus,
Carolus, and Lodouicus, and the Kings of France affections being somewhat cold
to assist the Pope against the Princes of Italy, Oras some say by Leo the 3.
and others say, the Empire was not translated to the Germans by the Popes
Decree, but by the people of Rome.
Pope Gregory the fifth practiced with the Germans to reduce the Empire thither,
referring the election to seven Princes Electors of Germany, reserving to
himself the negative voice, the first of which Emperors was Otho. But in
process of time the Germane Emperors began to resist the Popes of Rome, and
therefore some they accursed, some they deposed, some they destroyed. The
chief author, actor, and patron of all pride, presumption, and tyranny, was
Pope Gregory the seventh, alias Hildebrand, who labored to make all temporal
regiment subject to his spiritual jurisdiction. It were a long story to
rehearse the devilish practices of this proud Pope against Henry the fourth,
Emperor, excommunicating him, deposing him, making him with his wife and
child, barefoot, and barelegged in a frosty winter to Platina. Benno.
Nauclerus.
wait three days and three nights at the gates of Canusium to crane his
absolution: the said Emperor could never be quiet from the tragical vexations
of that Pope, till the Abbas vspergensis.
Council of Brixia deposed that Pope for a Sorcerer, Necromancer, Concilium
Brixiense. 1083.
and abominable life. And afterward Pope Alexander the third does the like
against Frederick the first called Barbarossa: so that it is observed,
Baptista Egnati^.
that Henry the fourth and this Frederick did fight above threescore battles
in defense of their right against Popes and enemies of the Empire stirred up by
Popes; yet this Pope at last makes this Emperor submit, and treads upon his
neck in the Church of Venice. And after him Henry the fifth his son, with
his Empress Constantia, are content to be crowned by Pope Celestine the third,
receiving the Crown from the Popes feet, and being set upon the Emperors head,
presently with his foot struck it off again, declaring he had power to depose
him, if he deserved. So again Philippus brother to this Henry, by Popes
accursed; and Otho Duke of Saxony placed in his seat, and the same Otho not
long after by Popes again dispossessed.

Frederick the second, the son of Fredericus Barbarossa the Emperor, was
much persecuted by three Popes, Honorius the third, Gregory the ninth, and
Innocent the fourth, and by them accursed and deposed: and by this Innocents
the fourth devilish circumuention, was poisoned returning into Apulia, whereof
when he seemed to be recovered, he was choked in his bed with a pillow by
Maufred Cuspin. in Freder. 2
his bastard son.

Conradus son to this Frederick, by the Bishops of Rome, raising up the
Lantgraue of Thuring against him, drive him to Naples and there died.

Conradinus son to Conradus Prince of Swevia, and King, of Naples, by the
Bishops of Rome, raising up Charles the French Kings brother against him, was
taken with Frederick Duke of Austria, and by the Popes procurement both
beheaded.

I need not recite the proud practices of Popes against this Realm: The
tyranny and injury of Pope Vide Polydor Virgil histor. ^ornalens. de rebus
Anglo.
Alexander the third against King Henry the second, and of Pope Innocent the
third against King John his son, giving away his kingdom to Lodovicus the
French King, is commonly known: Nay what King till Henry the eight but were
subject to the usurped domination of these Luciferian Popes, insomuch as some
(as Math. Pariens. writes by King Henry the third) were feign to stoop and
kiss their Legates knee?

Thus we have a little touched the practices of these Romish Prelates, in
exalting themselves above Emperors, and Kings, and seeking by all means to
advance their Papal Hierarchy above imperial and regal dignity, that we may
now style the Pope by another name, Flaccus Illiric. prefat. Cent. 10.
Papa-Caesar, or Pompifex, non Pontifex, as Berengarius: for he is honoris
h^lluo, a greedy gaper for vainglory, and to exalt himself in the Temple of
God above all that is called Coster. de praefat. de morib. haeret.
God, 2 Thessal. 2. 4. We have touched his practices, next observe his policy
in arrogating a pontifical Primacie.

CHAP. VIII.
Diverse ways have the Popes of Rome labored to exalt themselves above all
mortal men, and to deifie themselves, teaching their flattering birds (the
Popes parasites) like Psapho to cry, Max. Tyr. Sermon.
Psapho est magnus Deus, Psapho is a great God. Their Decrees, Decretals,
Extrauagants, Pontificials, Clementinee, Bulls, etc. with their clawbacke
Canonists, Monks, Friars, and late Jesuits extolling to the skies the Papal
Monarchy, have been the Or like Jupiters Priests to Alexander, flatter with a
Jove late.
Cages whereout these notes are sung, Papa est Deus, The Pope is a God; herein
following the policy of Mahomet, who to establish his Alca on, feignes this
fable: That three Angels took him into a mountain, the first ripped his breast,
and washed his bowels in snow; the second opened his heart and took out a
black grain, which was the Devils portion: the third closed him up again and
made him perfect: then they weighed him in a balance, and ten men being not
able to counter-poise him the Angel bad, Let go, for no number of men should
be able to weigh against Cuius ad effigiem non tantum meiere fas est. Iuuen.
sat. 1.
him. So they tell the world that no man must reprove the Pope, though he
should Bonifac. did 40. ca. si papa.
carry innumerable souls by heaps to hell, yet no man must be so bold or
presumptuous to reprove him, or to say to him, Glos. extrauag. de sede vacant.
ad Apostolat.
Domine cur ita facis? Sir, why do you so? Strange folly and flattery, yea
stupidity; teaching the world, That it stands upon Bonifac. 8. extrauag de
Mayor. and obed. c. vnam.
necessity of salvation for every humane creature to be subject to the Pope of
Rome. And to make men believe it the better, they fetch their dignity and
domination a far off, from Distinct. 21. ca. decretis Aaron.
Aaron and his sons, which (say they) prefigured the Pope and his sons, all
other Bishops to be under him, and that the Church of Rome has not obtained
the primacy, as preferred Pap. Pelagius. distinct. 21. c. quamuis.
by any general Council, but only by the voice of the Gospel, and the mouth
of the Savior. This Pap. Lucius. 24. q. 1. cap a recta.
Church is the holy and Apostolic Mother Church of all other Churches of
Christ, from whose rules it is not Pap. Calixtus. did. 12. cap. non decet.
meet that any persons should decline, but like as the Son of God came to
do the will of his Father, so must you do the will of your Mother the Church
of Rome, the head whereof is the Pope. Whosoever understands not the
prerogative of Papa Gelasius, did. 96. cap. Duo
Our Priesthood, let him look up to the firmament, where he may see two great
lights, the Sun and the Moon, one ruling over the day, the other over the
night: So in the firmament of the universal Church, God has set two great
dignities, the authority of the Pope, and Emperor, Greg. 9. lib. 1. decret.
tit. 33. cap. 6.
of the which two this our dignity is so much the weightier, as that we must
give account to God for the Kings of Ibidem.
the earth, and for the Laws of men. Wherefore know ye Emperors, that ye
depend upon the judgment of us, and we must not be reduced to your will; for
Innocent. de Mayor. and obedi. c. Solitae.
look what difference there is between the Sun and the Moon, so great is
the power of the Pope ruling over the day, that is, over the spiritualty, above
Emperors and Kings ruling over the night, that is, over the Laity. Now seeing
then the Glossa ibidem.
Earth is seven times bigger then the Moon, and the Sun eight times greater
then the earth, it follows that the Popes dignity many degrees does surmount
the estate of Emperors. And although Constantine: the great writing to a Pope
alleged the words of Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every humane
creature, as to Kings, Innocent. Gloss. ibidem.
etc. Yet in their Decretals they expound the mind of Peter, to exhort all
subjects, and not his successors to be subject, proouing the Priesthood to be
above Kings, by the words of Ier. 1. 10.
Jeremy, Behold, I have set thee over Kings and Nations, etc.

Neither must Kings and Princes think it much to submit Iddem Innocent. 3 de
Judicijs cap. Nouit.
themselves to my judgment, for so did Valentinianus the Emperor, and also
Carolus: For my power is not of man, but of God, who by his celestial
providence has set me Master and governor over his universal Church, Ibidem.
whereby all criminal causes, as well of Kings as all other, to be subject to
my censure.

For my P. Nicolaus did. 22. c. omnes.
Church of Rome is Prince and head of all nations, the Mother of the Faith, the
foundation cardinal, whereupon all Churches do depend, as the door does upon
the hinges. The P. Anacletus disti. 22. c. Sacrosanctae.
first of all other seats, without spot or blemish. Lady mistress and
instructor of all Churches: a P. Steph. did. 19. enimvero.
glass and spectacle to all men to be followed in all, whatsoever she
observes. Against P. Nicolaus. did. 22. omnes.
which Church of Rome whosoever speaks any evil, is forthwith an heretic:
yea a very P. Gregor. did. 81. c. siquis.
Pagan, a witch, an Idolater, and Infidel: having fullness of power only in
her own hands in ruling, deciding, absoluing, condemning, casting out or
receiving in. To which Pa. Julius. cause. 2. q. 9. Arguta. item. c. ad Romanam.
Church of Rome it is lawful to appeal for remedy from all other Churches;
and although it was decreed otherwise in the Council of Carthage, that no man
should appeal over the Sea under pain of excommunication, yet Gratians gloss
can help that with a limitation, Nisi forte Romanam sedem appellauerint,
Unless they appeal to the Sea of Rome. Of the which Church of Rome the P.
Pascalis. did. 63. c. ego.
Pope is Head, the Vicar of St. Peter, yea not the Vicar of St. Peter properly,
but the Vicar of Christ, and successor of Peter: Rector of the universal
Church, * Pop. Bonifac. proem. Sext. Lecretal. ib. sacrosancta.
and directer of the Lords universal flock, chief Magistrate of the whole
world, Lex animata in terris, A living Law in the earth, having all Laws in
the chest of my breast: Yea, Proem. Clem. gloss. Papa stupor. mundi.
Nec Deus, nec homo, quasi neuter inter vtru^que, Being neither God, nor man,
but the admiration of the world, and a middle thing twixt both. The P. Bonifac.
extrav. de Mayor. and obed, cap. vnam.
Pope has both swords in his power, both of Temporal and spiritual
jurisdiction, able by his own Sext. decret: de sentent: and re. c. ad
Apostolica. Item in gloss. Ibid.
power alone without a Council to depose the Emperor, to transfer his
kingdom, and to give a new election, as he did to Frederick and diverse
others; to whom Pop. Gelasius did. 96. c. duo.
Emperors and Kings be more inferior then lead is to gold: for do you not see
the Idem ibidem.
necks of Kings and Princes bend under our knees, yea and think themselves
happy and well defenced if they may kiss our hands?

What do we talk of Kings? The Pope is above Angels, as his Clarke Anten. in
tertia part. Summae Maioris.
Antoninus writes, That he is greater then Angels in four things. 1 In
jurisdiction. 2 In administration of Sacraments. 3 In knowledge. 4 In reward.
And so in Bulla Clementis, the Pope commands the Angels of Paradise to absolve
the soul of man out of purgatory, and to bring it into the glory of Paradise.

Who is able to comprehend the greatness of my power and seat? For by me only
P. Marcellus did. 17. ca. Synodum.
general Councels take their force and confirmation; and the Did. 20.
Decretales ibidem.
interpretation of the said Councels, and of all other causes doubtful must
stand to my determination; yea my Letters and Epistles Decretall are equivalent
to General Councels: and Symmach. 9. q 4, aliorum.
whereas God has ordained all causes of men, to be judged by men, he has only
reserved me, that is, the Pope of Rome, without all question of men, unto his
own judgment: and whereas P. Innocent. 6. q. 3. ca. nemo.
all other Creatures be under a Judge, only I which am Judge of all, can be
judged of none; neither of Emperor, nor the whole Clergy, nor of Kings, nor
yet of people: For Ibidem.
who has power to judge upon his Judge? so that I differ in power and
maiority, and honor reuerentiall from all degrees of men. For the better
declaration of it, the Ex. 3. part. sum. Mayor. B. Antonini
Canonists make three kinds of powers in earth. 1. Immediata, which is mine,
immediately from God. 2. Deriuata, which belongs to other inferior Prelates
from me. 3. P. Innocent. (...). de Sacra unction qui venisset.
Ministralis, belonging to Emperors and Princes to minister for me: for the
which cause the anointing of Princes, and my consecration differ, for they are
anointed in the arm, or shoulders, and I in the head.

This order of P. Nicolaus. did. 22. cap. omnes.
Priests, Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarchs and Cardinals, the Church of Rome
has instituted, following the example of the Angelical Army in heaven, and
the Apostles on earth: For P. Anacletus. did. 22. c. Sacrosancta.
among them there was a distinction of power and authority, albeit they were
all Apostles, yet it was granted to Peter (they all agreeing to it) that he
should have superiority over them all, and Ibidem. Petrus non a Petra sed (...)
ducitur.
therefore had his name given him Cephas, that is, say they, head or beginning
of the Apostles; whereupon the order Did. 21. cap. in nouo.
of Priesthood first in the new Testament began in Peter, to whom it was said,
Thou art Peter, and upon thee will I build my Church: Math. 16. 18. And I will
give thee the keys of the kingdom of Heaven, Whatsoever thou shall bind upon
earth, etc. v. 19. Seeing then such power is given to Peter, and to the Pope in
Peter, as his successor; who is then in all the P Nicolaus in tantum, did. 22.
world, that ought not to be subject to my Decrees, which have such power in
heaven, in hell, in earth, with the quick, and also the dead? whereupon Pope
Clement in his Bull of lead sent to Vienna, granted to all such as died in
their peregrination to Rome, that the pain of hell should not touch them: And
all such as took the In Bulla Viennae in Scrinijs priuilegiorum.
holy Cross upon them, should every one at his request not only be delivered,
but also deliver 3. or 4. souls out of Purgatory.

And again, Christ said to Peter: I have prayed for thee that thy faith shall
not fail; having Did. 21. cap. decretis.
such a promise and assurance, who then will not believe my doctrine? So that
all they that P Nicolaus. did. 22. cap. omnes.
believe not my doctrine, or stand against the privilege of my Church of Rome,
I pronounce them heretics; for Ibidem.
he goes against the Faith, which goes against her who is the mother of the
Faith. And moreover to show the strange virtue of the Popes keys, his School
Doctors have a twofold distinction: Gabriel. Biol. lib. 4 did. 19.
1. Clauis ordinis, the key of order, having authority to bind and loose, but
not over the persons whom they bind and loose: Petrus de Palude.
which authority they take not immediately from Christ, but from the Pope the
Vicar of Christ. 2. Key is Clauis Iurisdictionis, the key of Jurisdiction,
which the Pope has from Christ immediately, as being his Vicar, having not
only power to bind and loose, but also dominion over them on whom this key is
exercised. By the jurisdiction of which key all are subject to the Pope, the
Did. 96. cap. Imperator.
Emperors ought to subdue their executions to him. Only the Pope is subject
to no creature, no not to himself, Gabr. Diel. lib. 4. did. 19.
except he list, in foro poenitentiae, to his ghostly father, submitting
himself as a sinner, but not as a Pope, the papal majesty ever remaining
vnminished.

No Did. 40. cap. si papa.
man must judge or accuse the Pope of any crime, as murder, adultery, simony,
etc. but as the Aug. de Ancho
Jews were commanded to obey the High Priest of the Leuiticall Order, so are
all Christians bound to obey the Pope, Christ's Lieutenant in earth. Concerning
whose obedience or disobedience, read Deutron. 17. 12. where their ordinary
Gloss pays it home saying, That he who denies to the Priest obedientiam,
obedience, lies under the sentence of condemnation, as much as he that denies
to God his omnipotentiam, his omnipotence.

The greatness of the Popes priesthood began in Melchisedech, Antoninus.
solemnized in Aaron, continued in his children, perfectionated in Christ,
represented in Peter, exalted in the universal jurisdiction, and manifested in
Syluester; etc. So that in regard of this priestly pre-eminence, it may be
verified of the Pope which the Psalmist writes, Psalm. 8. 6. 7. etc. Thou have
put all things under his feet, all sheep and oxen, the beasts of the field,
the fowls of the air, and the fish of the Sea, etc. which place his own
Summae maioris 3. part. disti. 22.
Antoninus has applied to the Pope, and with a clearkely Paraphrase has
expounded, thus, By Oxen are signified the Jews and heretics: by the Cattle
of the field, Pagans: by Sheep all Christian men, Princes, Prelates, and
people: by the Birds, Angels and powers of Heaven: by the Fishes of the Sea,
the souls departed in pain or purgatory, as Gregory by his prayer delivered
the soul of Traiane out of hell: By them which pass through the paths of the
Sea, are signified such as are in Purgatory, and stand in need of others help,
and yet be in their journey, Viatores, and de foro Papa, passengers, and belong
to the Court of the Pope, and may be relieved out of the storehouse of the
Church by the participation of Indulgence.

And though it be truly doubted that pardons have no power to extend to the
departed, yet Romes Doctors can help that; for though it was said to Peter,
Whatsoever thou shall loosevpon earth, and so being not on earth, they cannot
Antoninus. August: de Ancho.
be loosed, yet they will dissolve that doubt by a distinction Thomas part. 4.
upon, super terram, upon the earth, that may be taken two ways, either to the
looser, and so a Pope being dead cannot loose; or to the loosed, which must be
upon the earth, or about the earth.

But what do I talk of the Popes power in such points, the whole Quire of the
Popes Clergy in their books, tractations, distinctions, glosses, summaries,
etc. sing altogether such notes.

The Pope (say they) being the Vicar of Jesus Christ, throughout the whole
World, in the stead of the living The Romish quire to flatter Antichrist.
Baptista de Salis. Bonauentura. Campensis. Coclaeus Durandus in speculo. Driedo
de Eccles. Scripturis, and digmat.
Lord, has that dominion on earth which Christ would not have, (yet had it in
habitu, and gave it to Peter in Actu) that is, the universal jurisdiction,
both spiritual, and also temporal, which double jurisdiction is intimated by
the two swords in the Gospel; and by the wisemens offering of Incense and Gold
to Christ, to signify that the dominion spiritual and temporal belong to
Christ, and his Vicar.

And as Christ says; All power is given to him both in Heaven and Earth, so it
is holden inclusiue, that the vicar of Christ has power on things cclestiall,
terrestrial, and Edw. Pouelus contra Lutherum Ecchius in Enchirid. Franciscus
Fulgo. Gabriel Biel. Gaspar. Gratianus in decretis. Gerson de Eccl. po*
testate. Hugo Cardinalis in postilla. Hostiensis. Holkott. Hosius. Io. Andrae.
Innocentius. Joan. de Turrecre: de Ecclesia.
infernal, which he took immediately of Christ, and all other take it mediatly
by Peter and the Pope. And they that say; The Pope has only dominion in
spiritual things, may be compared to the Counselors of the King of Aram, 1
Kin. 20. 23. Their Gods are Gods of Mountains, and therefore they overcame us;
but let us fight against them in the plain or valleys, and doubtless we shall
overcome them: So Counselors flatter Kings, saying, Popes and Prelates be Gods
of Mountains, that is, of spiritual things* but not of valleys, that is, of
temporal things: Therefore let us fight against them in the valleys, in the
power of temporal possessions, and so we shall prevail over them. But what
says God? v. 28. Because the Aramites have said; that the Lord is the God of
mountains and not God of the valleys, therefore will I deliver all this great
multitude into thine hands, and ye shall know that Lanfrancus contra Wiclef.
I am the Lord.

Which place (though very impertinent in this point) they urge with great
importunity, to prove the Popes power over all mountains and valleys, that is,
say they; over spiritual and temporal matters: and so very unthankfully
Constantinus Syluestro reddidit unjust detentum: 10. Gerson de potest. Ecc.
Concl. 12. part: 3. Magister Sentent. Raymundus in Summa de Casibus. Rabanus
super Math. cap. 16.
they regard Constantines gift of their patrimony to Syluester, saying; It was
not so much a Donation, as a Restitution.

Yea (they say) the Pope is superior to Emperors, yea, superior to Laws, and
free from all Constitutions.

Who is able of himself, and by his interpretation, to prefer equity being
not written, before the Law written.

The Faith, Supremacy, Chair of Peter; Keys of Heaven, power to bind and
loose; all these be inseparable to Vide Joan. Driedo de dogmatibus variis. lib.
4.
the Church of Rome, being presumed that God providing, and Saint Peter
assisting the Diocese of Rome that it shall never fall from the Faith: and
though the Pope be not always good, yet the merits of Saint Peter be
sufficient for him, who bequeathed a dowry of merits, with inheritance of
innocence to his posterity. And if the Pope be an Homicide or an Adulterer, he
cannot be accused, but Hugo. in Glossa. did. 40. c. non nos.
rather excused by the murders of Sampson, the thefts of the Hebrews, the
adultery of David; or if any of his Clergy be found embracing of a woman, it
must be presupposed, Glass. in cause. 11. q. 3. absit.
that he does it to bless her. To be brief: All the Earth is the Popes
Diocese, and he the Ordinary of all men, having Glos. in c. 11. q. 3. si
inimicus. Hostiensis in cap. quanto: de transl. praebe
the authority of the King of Kings upon Subjects: yea, God and his vicar have
but one Consistory, and can almost do all that God can do, Clane non errante:
Having an heavenly arbiterment, able to change the nature of things,
Substantialia vnius rei applicando alteri and de nihilo Glos lib. 1. decret.
tit 7 cap. 3.
potest aliquid facere, Applying the substantial parts of one thing to
another, and of nothing make something. His Doctors according with his decrees,
and boasting with Pope Nicolaus, that Constantine the Emperor sitting in the
general Council of Nice, called the Prelates of the Did 96. c. satis, and
Cause 11. q. 1. cap. Sacerdotibus.
Church, all Gods. If Prelates by Constantines voice be Gods, what is the
Pope, the Prince and primate of all prelates, above all Gods? So that his
usurped exaltation has verified Saint Paul's prediction, Boasting himself
above all that is called God; dispensing with Gods precepts, making it no
murder to kill them that be excommunicate; P. Urban. 2. cause. 23 q. 5. C.
excommunicatorum.
dispensing with Matrimony in prohibited degrees, and such like Antichristian
power in papal dispensation, which cases and causes may be found in his
darling Hostiensis, Et apud Fratrem Astesanum Doct. in Summa Confessionis.
de effi^. Legit. So that by the immodest and immoderate extolling of himself,
seconded by his Canonical Parasites of old time, glosing upon the Popes
decrees, and corrupt constitutione, enacted in the ignorance of times, and
arrogance of Popes, to magnify the man of sin, the pragmaticall and
dogmaticall Antichrist, the succession of Popes: making Emperors to hold their
bridles and stirrups, Lib. 1. Sacraram Ceremoniarum.
and Kings going before them, and to surrender their Crowns unto them,
crowning them with their feet, and to kiss their toes, and to kiss their
Legates knees, and to wait upon them at their Palace gates bare footed; to
excommunicate Kings, to deprive them of their Sovereignty, and to absolve their
Subjects from Allegiance, with such like Pope-like policy, have been the
stratagems to exalt the papal Chair above the Imperial Throne; and at first
under the femblance of humility, have ascended to this sublimity, temporizing
with the world, being darkened with the mist of ignorance, yet affected to a
blind devotion, and charmed to this Chair of superstition, have made this
Serum Seruorum, A Servant of Servants, to be Dominus Dominorum, a Lord of
Lords; making Kings his vassayles, and do him homage, debasing the Lords
Anointed, * The Pope undertakes to deal States and Kingdoms, as Gods
Legacies, and yet God never made him his Executor or Administrator.
deposing them at his pleasure, and disposing of their Kingdoms, freeing their
Subjects from all obedience, and exciting them to violence and villainy in
rebelling, which has been the chief procurer of the shedding of much royal
blood, the massacres of men and mischiefs, and miseries of most Times; which
we shall elsewhere more plainly demonstrate: I will in the next place touch a
little, (which yet has been handled by elaborate and accurate pensels) this
point of Popes deposition of Kings, the very fountain of Treason, founder of
Rebellion, and confounder of Religion, where it is practiced or believed. I
will very briefly wright of it, least I should seem to make Iliads after Homer.

CHAP. IX.
THE Roman Church, or rather Court of Rome, wholly degenerated, and arrogating
a temporal Monarchy, swelling with a forged puff of pride and primacy
appropriated to the Papal Chair, challenge an exorbitant and usurped power of
deposition of Kings, and of absolution of Subjects from alleagiance to them;
which twofold power is termed the principal warders of Saint Peter's Keys,
without which the Bulla Pij Quinti.
Church could not have been well shut, or opened.

This power of excommunicating, deposing, and depriving Kings, and of absoluing
Subjects from obedience to them, they principally assume from a pretended
primacy belonging to the Pope, over all spiritual and temporal men or
matters, derived to them (as they plead) from a supremacy in Peter, (whose
Successorship has entitled them to such a power and priority) two points often
alleged, yet never proved; yet this primacy of Popes (as their Bellarmine
says) is the chief point of Catholic Faith, and the foundation of all
Religion.

For which power the Champions of Rome stoutly stand, and among the rest, the
statizing Cardinal, Romes-Rabbi, Bellarmine, the most expert Gamester at the
Popes Primero, in Tract. de potest. Sum. pont. Contra Gul. Barel. page 97.
several works, yet specially in his fifth Book De Romano Pontifice: The
whole sum of it, containing arguments, and examples to prove, that the Pope
may by his Imperial power, (though indirectly, and in order to the
Spirituals,) depose Princes from their States and Thrones.

And as the same Bellarmine, personating Tortus, says; Conuenit inter omnes,
posse Pontificem maximum iure deponere, It is agreed upon among all, that the
Pope of Rome may by right and law depose Princes: which speech was too
general; for many popish Watson, quodlib. 8. art. 7. 8 Barclayus, de authorit.
Papae. c. 2. and Rog. Widdrington. Apol. pro iure Principu^. Sl eldonirationes
generales, etc.
Doctors doubt of it, and deny the papal intrusion into Caesar's Chair; and
some that did hold it, have recanted it, as Tanquerellus commanded so by the
Court of Paris, Florentinus Iacobus, and Thomas Blanztus, the two last, holding
this for a proposition, Pontificem in omnes habere temporalem potestatem, That
the Pope has a temporal power over all, but they came to recantation; nay,
Heart (an hearty lover of the Pope) yet his opinion different from Bellarmines,
Whosoever make the Pope above Kings, as a temporal Lord, Nihil habere
rationis, aut probabilitatis, to have neither show of reason, or probability,
says he.

Yet I confess, the general voice of modern Papists, and among the rest, the
Jesuits, who dispositiue, naturally are inclined to disobedience, and
pragmatically, and dogmatically, declare the same: These are the chief
Instruments, but Treason, consummatiue, comes from the Pope, first deposing,
then commanding, and warranting disloyalty, and conspiracy against them.

Sum. de eccl. potest. q. 40. art. 1.
Augustinus Triumphus says, The Emperor of Heaven may depose the Emperor of
the Earth, in as much as there is no power but of him: but the Pope is invested
with the authority of the Emperor of Heaven, he may therefore depose the
Emperor of the Earth, and as the same says; Art. 3.
The Emperor is subject to the Pope two ways, 1. By a filial subjection in
all spiritual things, 2. By a ministerial subjection in his administration of
temporal things: for the Emperor is the Popes Minister, by whom he administers
temporal things: so he.

In like sort says De planct. eccl. lib. 1. c. 13. p. 3.
Aluarus Pelagius, that the Pope has universal Jurisdiction over the whole
world, not only in spiritual things, but in temporal things; albeit he
exercise the execution of the temporal sword and jurisdiction, by his son
the Emperor, as by his advocate, and by other Kings and Princes of the world.
The Pope may deprive Kings of their kingdoms, and the Emperor of his Empire.
So he.

De pap. and conc. author. p. 65.
Capistranus agrees with him, The Emperor, if he be incorrigible, for any
mortal sin, may be deposed and deprived: the sentence of the Pope alone
without a Council, is sufficient against the Emperor or any other. It is
manifest therefore how much the Popes authority is above the Imperial
celsitude, which it translates, examines, confirms, or infringes, approoues,
or reiects: if he offends, he punishes, deposes, and depriues him. So he,

22. q. 12. art. 2.
Thomas of Aquine in this is also very popish. Any man sinning by infidelity,
may be adjudged to lose the right of Dominion as also sometimes for other
faults: and again, So soon as any one for apostasy from the Faith, by
judgment is denounced excommunicate, ipso facto, his Subjects. be absolved
from his government, and from the oath of Allegiance. And the Cardinal Cited
by Allen answer to the book of Engli. Just. p. 68.
Tolets Gloss upon his words, Note, that albeit Thomas named only an
Apostata, yet the reason is all one in the Princes case that is excommunicated;
for so soon as one is denounced, or declared as excommunicate, all his
subjects be discharged of their obedience: which exposition his brother
Cardinal Allen applaude in these words, Thus does this notable Schooleman
write, neither do we know any Catholic Divine in any age say the contrary.

De Cath. inst. tit. 23 n. 11. pa. 98
Simone Pacensis ioynes forces with these fellows, saying, If Kings or other
Christian Princes become heretics, forthwith their Subjects and vassals are
freed from their government. Tit. 45. nu. 25. p. 209*
If any Prince be unprofitable, or make unjust Laws against religion, or
against good mannera^, or do any such thing to the detriment of spiritual
things, the Pope observing due circumstances may apply a fit remedy, even by
depriving such a King of his government and jurisdiction, if the cause require
it.

Tom. 3. page 444.
Gregory of Valence is harping upon the like notes: If the crime of heresy, or
apostasy from the Faith, be notorious that it cannot be covered, then, even
before the sentence of the Judge, the aforesaid punishment (meaning deprivation
from his dominion) is in part incurred, so far that the subjects may lawfully
deny obedience to such an heretical Lord.

Where note by the way, that now many of them do hold, that all heretical
Kings, (and such they account all protestant Rulers) are deprived of their
dominion, before their Pope in his de^itiue sentence has so denounced. Indeed
their own Cai^tane in this was not Catholic, denying Subjects to be absolved
before sentence publickely denounced: and therefore Allen contradicts him,
saying, i^se fact, Kings be deprived so soon as they do appear heretical:
followed also by Philopater, saying, it is an opinion of the Faith; agreeable
to Apostolical doctrine, that every Christian Prince, if he fall from the
Catholic religion, falls presently from all his power and dignity, by the
force of Gods Law and (...) and that before sentence of the supreme Pastor
denounced.

And the fiery Fo^e Gu^ Reynold^, approues the murder De iusta ^^di^. Hen. 3.
r^ (...).
of Henry the third the French King, because be favored Heretics, before
any excommunication published: his Lib. 23. sect. 11. Institut.
reason is, Public griefs do not attend for legal forms.

Simancha goes further, That a secret heretic not only is to be
excommunicated, but his son also: his reason is, Heresy is a leprosy, and
leprous sons begotten of leprous parents: and therefore seems to infer not
only a deprivation, but also a deprivation of all succession: Atque patrem,
and prolem inre priuare suo. I need not recite the general verdict of popish
vassals according with these to maintain the Popes infolency in attempting the
deposition of Kings repugnant to his laws and liking. Who knows not, that
have read the works of these, Saunders Vide Fra: B^zi^ de tempo. eccl. Monar.
visib. Monar. Suarez def. fid. catho. adv. Angl. sect. err. lib. 6. Francisc.
Victor. relect. Depotestate ecolesiae: Becanus, Rossaeus, Bellarmine, Allen,
Ferron, Parsons, Creswell, Carerius de potest. To. pontif. Mosco. de may.
mil^t. eccl.
with many dozens of prostituted hirelings? who being fed fat at the Popes
high Altar, and gaping for, or gaining the purple Hat, have studied to extol
the papacy; which they could not do more pleasingly to the Pope, or profitably
to themselves, then by ascribing to the Pope a power over Kings, to deprive
them if they break their good behavior to him, and to free subjects from
allegiance to them being blasted with the fulminations of excommunication;
making their master Pope, an absolute Lord of the Temporals, turning the
Crosier staff into a Scepter, yea a commander of Scepters, making their
Church an humane body politic, to overrule all, yet under a painted pretense
of Peter's primacy to overthrow all Princes supremacy. Egregiam vero laudem, and
spolia ampla tulistis.


Thus this spurious spawne of the old Serpent, by this serpentine policy
erecting the papal primacy of Popes above Kings the Diana of Romes religion,
have raised the Pope to this pontificiall domination. But the chief pillar
whereof they boast, and would build this point of the power of Popes deposition
of Kings, if they be not Catholic Kings of the Roman size, is the Decree of
the Laterane Council, held about three hundred years since, consisting, 3.
Canon of the 2. Lateran Council.
as they say, of seventy Patriarchs and Archbishops, and four hundred and
twelve Bishops, and eight hundred other eminent Prelates, who did decree that
the Pope had this power over Kings. To which we answer, Thar the Decrees of
men ought not to take from Kings that power which God has given them: But the
Lateran Council was a Conuenticle of Mercenary men, and vassals to the Pope,
who to please Innocent the third, their Lord and great Master, were willing to
gratify his Holiness with unholy Decrees: yet we may doubt of that too, if
Platina be credited, who faith, That in that Council many things were offered
to consultation, yet nothing determined, because the Pope suddenly departed, to
pacify a sedition then raised, and died in his iourny* Yet grant it were a
lawful Council, and this matter so there decreed, what of that? shall a few
proud Prelates assembled to flatter the Pope, infringe the Laws of God,
commanding obedience and subjection to Kings? shall Gods commands be
countermanded by Councels? which so often have erred, nay have confirmed
heresies; as the Council of Arimium held with the Arrians; yea Ephesus
Seleucia, and Remino concluded with them; which made Saint Dialog. aduers.
Lucifer. and Vincent. Cyrin. c. 6.
Hierome complain* The whole world groaned and wondered to see it self
Arrian. The error of the Council of Carthage in rebaptizing is well known.
The Council of Chalcedon fowlly erred, giving to Leo then Bishop of Rome, the
title of the* Gregory the first said, To consent to this wicked name, what is
it else but to lose the faith? lib. 4. cp. 39.
Universal Bishop, which name he rejected, though others embrace it. In a
word, the late Council of Trent brought forth to light a world of errors,
that I may say with Ep. ad Procap. page 346.
Nazianzene, he never saw any Council have a good end. Yea as their own
Turrecrem. sum. de eccl. lib. 3. c. 60. Panorm. de elect. and elect. pot.
writers say, Councels have erred, and may err, which in these latter times
must needs be so: when as the Pope is both party and Judge, which matter of
the erring of Councels Significa.
has so often and so soundly been by our Dr Willet Synop. Cen. 1. err. 33.
Divines manifested, that I need not insist upon it.

But how vain it is to obtrude for undoubted proof, the erroneous decrees,
and novel opinions of clawbacke Dr White in his Way to the Church. lib. 2. c.
47.
Papalines and parasites to the Pope, to infringe the power of Kings given them
in Gods word, commanding Romans 13. 1.
every soul to be subject to these higher powers, which place of Saint Paul,
the Champions of the Popes power to depose Kings, (as their Cardinal of Perron
pleades for them) do expound to be a prouisionall precept, or caution
accommodated to the times. A strange error of stout Champions: and as the royal
pen of our In defense of Kings, and independency of their Crowns.
sacred Sovereign, taxing the Cardinal for robbing the Scripture of
authority, by making Gods precepts temporary prouisoes, lays down an
infallible rule, That Apostolical instructions, which inform manners, are not
changeable, but give a standing and perpetual rule, permanent for all people,
and not fashionable to the quality of Times: But the Roman Church which teach
disloyalty and disobedience against Kings, deposing Kings from their thrones,
and then authorizing subjects to take Arms against them, had need accommodate
Text to time, whose obedience to Princes is temporary, that is, till they have
a fit season and place, (as a vault under a Parliament house) and then as
Aeneas Syluius said of the Monks, Non audet stygius Pluto tentare quod audet
Effraenis Monachus --


Then they are without humanity, unnatural, impious, cruel murderers, as Pro
Athan. lib. 1. page 65.
Lucifer Calaritanus to the Arrians, and I may say to Iesuited Priests, being
bloody minded and deceitful men; and therefore many of them do not live out
half their days, dying bloody deaths for acting, or affecting bloody deeds.

Let us in the next place observe how before these latter times (I mean before
Popery was Heldebrandized, and Iesuited) whether this point of Papal power to
depose Emperors or Kings, was either broached or believed in the Church.

CHAP. X.
IT should seem not to be believed, or broached, by their own writers; for
Lib. 3. cap 35.
Otho Frisingensis says, Rego and relego, etc. I have read over and over the
Acts of Roman Kings and Emperors, and I can find none before Henry the fourth
Emperor excommunicated by the Bishop of Rome, or deposed, which was first
assayed by Gregory the seventh, called Heldebrand, Anno Dom. 1066.

And In Anno 1085.
Vrspergensis says, That the Bishops that had taken arms with the said
Gregory against the Emperor, were cast out of their Bishoprics by the Synod
of Mentz, Chron.
where the Popes Legates were present. And In Anno 1088. p. 129. Auent. p. 4.
70.
Sigebert says, This nouelty, that I may not say heresy, did not as yet
appear in the world, that Priests should teach the people, that they ought to
show no obedience to wicked Kings; and though they have taken an oath of
Allegiance, yet owe no f^alty, neither are to be called perjured, if they have
such minds against Kings. And In spec. hist lib. 1^. cap. 84.
Vincantius Lirinensis agrees with him in the same words.

Yea many eminent Roman Catholics did utterly dislike Gregory's deposition
of Henry the fourth, and denied the authority of the Apostolic See to depose
him, or to absolve his subjects from their oath of obedience: yea the Gregor*
7. epist. 21. lib. 8^ apud Souer. ad Conc.
Bishop of Mentz, Gregory's friend and favorer, writ to the said Pope to
furnish him with those reasons wherewith he was moved to depose the Emperor,
to provide him with answers against all gain sayers.

Yea the Bishops of Rome themselves in the purer times acknowledged all
obedience to Emperors and Kings, challenging no such prerogative to meddle with
their Crowns or persons and for 300. years, until Siluester, they performed
passive obedience to Heathen Emperors, and so before and after Boniface for
500. years they performed active obedience to Christian Emperors, submitting
themselves unto them in all loyal subjection, and acknowledging them (as their
own Bishop Meltiades did to Constantine the Great) to be supreme Head not
only in Temporal, but also in Spiritual things, as Eusebius records it, lib.
1. c. 5.

But peradventure some Papist may reply and say, that I do not reckon aright,
in making Gregory the seventh, the first Pope that deposed an Emperor, which
yet is affirmed by their own writers: for Leo the third Emperor was
excommunicated by Gregory the second, and deprived of all his Temporalities he
held in Italy; and the Greek Emperors were removed from the Empire by Leo the
third, Bishop of Rome, and so of some others. Which objection is so frequently
answered by our Divines, who have written about this point of the Popes power
in this kind, that for breuity I will pass it over in a word, That Gregory
the second did not deprive Leo the third Emperor of his temporalities, but
only was an agent, or as the head of rebellion in the revolt of the Italians
from the Emperor, not by his universal authority now claimed, but by a popular
sedition then raised. And to the second, That the Greek Empire was translated
by Or as some write, by Gregory the fifth.
Leo the third to the Germans, is much doubted: for Vrsperg. in anno 718.
Sigebert. in Anno 731.
some historians write, it was translated by a Decree of the people of Rome,
not by the Popes keys; yet probably he might have his head, hand, and heart in
it: for as Pope Adrian the sixth said, All mischief came from the chief Bishop
of Rome into the whole Church, and by his Legate Cleregatus promised
reformation to the Germans.

The Popes of Rome have a long time labored to rise to this primacy of pride
by degrees: first above Bishops, as in Boniface the third: after above Kings
and Emperors, specially in Gregory the seventh and his successors: yet those
aspiring wings clipped by Councels, Worms, Papia, Brixis, Mentz; till at last,
two of the worst Councels, the Laterane and Tridentine, did lift up the Pope to
the top of the pinnacle, not only above Kings and Councels, but above Gods
counsels the sacred Scriptures: Tantae molis erat Romanum surgere papam.


But let us a little look upon this question (which yet is like a Spirit,
sooner raised then put down,) of the papal power of Kings deposition.

A spiritual power in the Pope of primacy I know none, temporal much less,
but this same pretended Ecclesia Romana est priuatiua, non primitiua.
privative power least of al: for it is not in any place to be found, that God
has given to the Pope, yea to any man, power to make or unmake temporal King
(...) for he that can depose a King, must be above a King; but regal power
is the highest power on earth, post Deum secundus est, and solo Deo A King is
not bound to give an account to Popes or people, but God.
minor, as Tertullian of Kings, next after God, and inferior to none but God:
Super quem non est nisi solus Deus, as Optatus Mileuitanus, above whom there is
none but God alone. So King Psalm. 51. 4.
David, Tibi soli peccaui, against thee only have I finned. So that I may say
with De potest. regia, and papali. c. 10. Otho deposed John 22. Pope. etc.
John of Paris, In the Emperor is invested a power to depose the Pope, (as
formerly many have been) if he abuse his power, because he is his superior;
but not in the Pope, for he is, and ought to be his inferior: and with this
John Mayor agree many other, Almaine and Occam, as Quae. 2. de potest. eccl.
and Laic. c. 12.
Almaine alleadges Occams opinion, and makes it his own conclusion, That the
Pope has no power either by excommunication, or by any other means to depose
a Prince ftom his royal dignity; and further c. 9. 10. 11.
affirms with Occam, saying, The Emperor is not bound to swear allegiance to
the Pope, but the Pope if he hold any temporal possessions, is bound to swear
allegiance to the Emperor, and to pay him tribute. The Scripture recites 19.
Kings of Israel, and 14. of Judah, who brake the covenant made with the Lord,
yet none deposed by Priest or Prophet for that cause.


But the Champions of the Popes power in this kind, allege some presidents
of the Priests in the old law, who (as they say) by virtue of their Priesthood
have deposed and deprived Kings from their seats, which power they labor to
derive and appropriate to the Popes office: I will name but two of them in two
examples.

1 Cardinal Defens. Angl. Catho. c. 5. 2 Chronicles. 26.
Allen alleges Azarias the high Priest, who with ^o other Priests put down
Ozias, smitten with leprosy, by force out of the Temple, and deprived him of
his regal authority: Ergo (say they) it is lawful for the high Priest, that
is, the Pope, to drive heretical Kings, that is, spiritual Leapers, out of
the Temple of Gods* Church, and Territories of their kingdom, by
excommunication, which is a separation; and then by deposition, which is a
final deprivation of them, and deputation of some other Regent, as Azarias
committed the kingdom to be then governed by Iotham his son.

We answer (as some of our Church have answered) That Azarias did not deprive
Ozias of his regal power, for he held it to his dying day; only his son
Iotham as a kind of Viceroye was surrogated, because the immediate hand of God
had smitten him with leprosy: for his leprosy he was punished to live apart,
a private life, not to 2 Chro. 26. 20. Visa lepra Sacerdotes regem leprosum ad
festine egrediendum monent. Caietan. in 2. Paral. 26.
be deprived of his inheritance. Ambition, covetousness, yea all sin is a
leprosy (has not the Pope such a contagion?) why then he may as well be
deprived of his Miter, being a grand sinner, and so a great leaper, as any
other. Indeed Ozias, or Vzziah greatly sinned in presuming to usurp the
Priests office, transgressing against the Lord, in going into the Temple to
burn incense upon the Altar of V. 16. Sacerdotis est tantum arguere, non
mouere arma. etc. Chrysostom. 18 Leuitic. 13.
incense; and Azariah with the other Priests withstood Vzziah the King, telling
him, it pertained not to him to burn incense, but to the Priests, the sons
of Aaron consecrated to offer it: and was smitten of the Lord for it with
leprosy, and so lived apart according to the Law, yet still was King in esse,
though not in execution.

2 Cardinal Bellarmine alleges Iehoiada the High 2 Kings 11.
Priest, who commanded Athalia the Queen to be slain, and Ioash to succeed;
implying an inference, that so it is lawful for Popes to do the like.

We answer, that Athalia an usurper and murderer, killing all the royal seed,
excepting only the secretly preserved Ioash the undoubted heir of the Crown,
being proclaimed and anointed King with a general consent of all; Iehoiada
by the authority of the King, and not as High Priest, but rather tanquam regis
patruus, and Protector, as his Kinsman and Protector, the King being in his
minority seven years old, and Iehoiada being his Allye, having married the
Kings An^, and so bound by the Law of Nature and Nations to defend the Kings
right, and to revenge the tyranny of a bloody Queen against the Kings killed
progeny: and Iehoiadaes commandment was confirmed by the Kings authority, and
with the common consent and Counsel of the land, not as being High Priest, but
as chief of his Tribe, to revenge the crying blood of the royal offspring
murdered by usurping Athalia, to deprive her of her usurped regiment and life:
what is this to depose a lawful King by the authority of the Pope? Kings shall
anguste sedere, as Tully said to Caesar, have quaking Scepters, unquiet seats,
and narrow limits, if the Pope have power to deprive them of their power and
state. But to pass over other the like examples alleged by Romanists in this
kind, I will touch those four things which they object, and say, do dissolve
regal right, and make Kings who are culpable of such faults, to forfeit their
Crowns. 1. Tyranny. 2. Infidelity. 3. Heresy. 4. Apostasy. The Popish
assertions herein run in the affirmative, that all, or any one is sufficient
to deprive a King of his Crown. The opinions of Protestants run in the
negative, that none of these are sufficient to make a King forfeit his dignity
and Diadem.

To begin with the first: Tyranny does not cut off a King from his sovereignty.
Who a greater Tyrant then King Saul, who 1 Samuel 24. 12.
hunted after David's soul to take it: yet who was so 1 Samuel 22. 14.
faithful among all his servants as David? confessed by Saul's own mouth, To
be more righteous then he, for thou have rendered me good, and I have rendered
thee evil: yea this 1 Samuel 24. 18.
Saul such a tyrant, that he commanded Doeg to 1 Samuel 22. 18. 19.
fall upon the Lords Priests, and Doeg at his commandment flew sounescore and
five persons, that did wear a linen Ephod, and did smite Nob the Priests
City, with the edge of the sword, both man and woman, child and suckling, ox
and ass, and sheep with the sword.

Yet David, no private, or plebe^an subject, but a man by Gods commandment
designed for the Kingdom, chief Captain and Coronel of Saul's Army, and heir
apparent to the Crown; and having opportunity to deprive Saul of his life, and
importunity of his followers to do the deed, yet hear his voice, The 1 Samuel
24. 7.
Lord keep me from doing that thing unto my Master the Lords Anointed, to lay
my hand upon him, for he is the Lords Anointed: and the same David to Abishai
Destroy 1 Samuel 26. 9.
him not, for who can lay his hand upon the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless?
O heavenly voice of holy David, how different are Popelings from David's
resolution! Occasionem victoria David habebat in manibus, incantum and securum
aduersarium sine labor poterat iugulare, advictoriam opportunitas hortabatur:
sed obstabat Diuinorum memoria mandatorum: non mittam manum in vnctum Domini,
repressit cum gladio manum, and dum timuit oleum, seruauit inimicum, As most
elegantly, and excellently writes Lib. 2. co^tra Parmenianum. Volebam hostem
vincere, sed prius est diuina praecepta seruare, etc. Ibidem Optatus. Their
unction makes them sacred, so that their fatal touch, makes the Subject
sacrilegious.
Optatus, David had a present occasion of security of victory, and might
without any difficulty, or danger have killed his unkind and inconsiderate
enemy; opportunity might have pressed him to it, but the remembrance of Gods
commandments stay his hand, Touch not my Anointed: This keeps back the hand
and sword, and fearing the regal oil, favors a dismal enemy.

Now Tyranny may be of two kinds, either of usurped regiment and dominion,
without any civil title and interest having no titular foundation, but violent
usurpation; and herein subjection is not necessary, Quoad obedientiam, if Quoad
Sust^ntiam: Herein patience more requisite then obedience. 2 Kind is, when
ordinary and lawful power degenerates into tyranny and cruelty by abuse; and
herein Read Tollett, de occidendo Tyranno lib. 5. c. 6. Mariana. Fra de Veron
etc.
Papists give liberty, Tyrannum occidere licet, It is lawful to kill a Tyrant,
contrary to David; God forbid that I should lay mine hand upon the Lords
Anointed; 1 Samuel 26. 11. Meaning Saul, a Tyrant by abuse, but not by
usurpation: but we have handled this before, and therefore In the former Book
c. 5. of Britan. Vota.
leave it.

2. Infidelity does not deprive a King of his regiment: Oh but replies the
Papist, All title to Dominion, has foundation in the grace of Justice,
Charity, and Piety; so Vid. Quaest. Armenic lib. 10. c. 4.
that by impiety or infldelity, they make forfeiture of their authority.
Answer: It is providence, not grace, that disposes civil titles; grace, not
providence, that makes them comfortable: In a spiritual sense, impious and
unfaithful men, are usurpers, I mean by a spiritual right; (for 1 Timothy 4. 8.
godliness has the promises of this life) yet have they a civil and sure
title among men, by birthright, succession, election, or other acquisition, by
which titles such rights are deuolued to them, that we say with Saint De ciuit
dei. lib. 5. c. 11.
Austen; Qui dedit Mario, ipse and Caesari, He that gave dominion to Marius,
the same gave it to Caesar; he that to Augustus, the same to Nero; he that to
gentle Vespasian, the same to bloody Domitian; he that to Constantine the
Christian, the same to the Apostate Julian: for the Psalm. 22. 28.
Kingdom is the Lords, and he rules among Nations, the most High has power
over the Kingdom of Men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, and appoints
over it the most abject among men, says Dan. 4. 14.
Daniel; and suffers for the sins of the people, a Kingdom Ecclesiasticus
10. 8.
to be translated from one people to another, yea, an hypocrite, or infidel to
reign over them; neither must man seek to displace or dispossess an Infidel
King, but say with 1 Samuel 26. 10.
David; Either the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to die, or he
shall descend into battle, and perish: knowing the saying of the son of
Syrack to be true, Ecclesiasticus 10. 10. 11.
Tyranny is of small indurance, and he that is to day a King, to morrow is dead.

3. Heresy is not sufficient to deprive a King of his temporal Inheritance.
Popish Divinity is herein known, let De Romans Pontif. lib. 5. cap. 7.
Bellarmine be the mouth of all the rest: Christians are not bound, nor may,
with the evident danger of Religion, tolerate an unbelieving King: when Kings
and Princes become Heretics are deprived of all right of rule, either
natural, oeco^cal, or civil. Fr. Ouand. 4. d. 13. p. 347.
heretics, they may be judged of the Church, and be deposed from the
government, neither is there any wrong done them, if they be deposed.

If any Prince of a sheep become a wolf, that is to say, of a Christian
become an Heretic, the Pastor of the Church, by excommunication may drive him
away, and withal command the people that they follow him not, and so deprive
him of his dominion over his Subjects: so Subjects are freed from all
obedience, and allegiance to them. Turrecr. Sum. de eccl. lib. 2. c. 11. 4.
far goes the Cardinal. Now who are Heretics? All those Kings which
decline from the Papacy, and deny his Supremacy. The Cardinal thinks as
much: Regnante Constantino florebat fides Christiana, etc. While Constantine
reigned, the Christian Faith flourished; when Constantius ruled, Arrianisme,
when Julian, Ethnicisme; when Henry the eighth and Edward the sixth,
Luthenarisme, when Elizabeth, Caluinisme prospered: All Protestant Princes by
the verdict of the Pope and his Parasites, be Heretics, and so consequently to
be deposed, if this their heresy (which yet is the Catholic verity, and
sincere and sound profession of the Gospel) be accompanied with the Popes
excommunication: and yet it is a great question, and never yet proved by the
Scripture, that Kings are subject to this censure of excommunication; it is
disputed much both ways; and let it be yielded for argument sake, Ex
abundante, That Saint Theod. histor. Eccles. lib. 5. c. 18.
Ambrose did justly with Theodosius in that abstention; for I doubt whether it
was a complete excommunication: for a King is subject to the presbyteriall
Cure, not Court; to be informed in his conscience in the Pulpet, not to be
corrected in the Consistory by punishment; to be directed, not judged, or
removed from the company of his faithful Subjects, much less to be deposed,
or deprived of his regiment over them; yet let it be granted for argument
sake, that Princes may be subject to the censure of excommunication, which yet
is sparingly to be used against Princes, as Contra. Epist. Parmen. lib. 3. c. 2.
Austen counsels: yet though the sentence of excommunication be direful,
making them for a time as Ethnicks, Sit tibisicut Ethnicus, says our Math. 18.
17.
Savior, Let him be unto thee as an Heathen Man or Publicane: It is tanquam,
nonplusquam, as an Heathen man, not worse then an Heathen Man. Loyalty and
obedience to Ethnicke Kings is to be performed, as the precepts and presidents
of Christ, and his Apostles plainly teach all: The spiritual sword only
depriues of spiritual rights, to deprive him of the Sacrament, not of the
Scepter: shuts out of the Kingdom of Heaven, not meddles with the Kingdom of
Earth.

Excommunication is not an extirpation, it serves not to take away any man's
temporal goods of body, or life, or Kingdom on Earth; it has power over
sins, not over possessions, as De Consid. ad Eugen. lib. 2.
Bernard to Pope Eugenius: It serves to tame the soul, not to terrify or
destroy the body; it cannot bind Kings that they should not reign, or absolve
Subjects that they should not obey, or depose Kings from their regal
authority, by which pretense of devilish policy, in challenging a spiritual
power of Kings excommunication, the Pope has plagued the World with many
temporal rebellions.

4. Apostasy takes not away Sovereignty. Julian an apparent Apostate, and
wicked Idolater, as Saint Aug. in Psalm. 124.
Austen calls him, yet as the same Father speaks of it, Milites Christiani
seruierunt huic Imperatori infideli: and quando dicebat, producite aciem, i^ra
illam gentem, statim obtemperabant: The Christian Soldiers served this Infidel
Emperor, and when he called to produce the Army, or to go against any Nation,
they presently obeyed; not because they wanted power to resist: for his whole
Army for the most part were Christians, as their voices to Iouinian Iulians
Successor testify, Ruff. lib. 2. hist. cap. 1.
Omnes vna voce confessi sunt se esse Christianos, They all confessed with one
accord, that they were Christians; but their obedience grounded upon Saint
Aust. vb, supra.
Austens reference, Subjects fuisse, propter Dominum aternum, Domino
temporali, Subject to their temporal Lord, * Ala. contra execut. Angl. just.
pa. 167. Bellar. de romans pontif. lib. 5. cap. 7.
for the eternal Lords sake. And though some of the great Divines of Rome,
say; that the Apostles were subject to Infidel or apostate Princes, and many
Martyrs obedient, because they wanted power to resist; and that they might have
lawfully resisted, if they had had strength: when rather I may say with Tertul.
in Apologet.
Tertullian, that they had power, but might not lawfully resist. The Apostles
were no Temporizers, to command to pray for Nero, if the time, and not the
truth, had not moved them to do it for conscience sake: Shall Subjects, for
Heathen or wicked Kings be 1 Timothy 2. 1. 2.
enjoined to pour forth prayers and supplications, and withal be willing (if
they have power) to pour out their Sovereigns blood? The Prophet Jeremy
exhorted the exiled Jews to offer up their prayers for the life of the King of
Babylon: he would not have willed them to have prayed for their persecutor, if
it had been a duty contrary to Christian profession, or for lack of power, to
fall to supplication. When King Ester 3. 13.
Assuerus had made a decree to kill and destory all the Jews, both young and
old, children and women in one day, what do they? rebel, or rise up in arms
to resist with violence? No, no, sorrow, Ester 4. 3.
and fasting, weeping, and mourning, sackecloth, and ashes, are their weapons.
When Julian the Apostate, threatened the Christian World; Lachrimae vnicum
medicamentum aduersus eum, says Orat. 1. in Iulianum.
Nazianzene: Tears the only medicine against his mischief, tears were their
Spears, Orizons their weapons; They knew that they Romans 13* 2.
that resisted power, resisted the ordinance of God, and they that resist,
shall receive to themselves damnation. These had not been catechized in the
Popes School, teaching Subjects that the Pope has power to deprive Kings, if
they be defective in their regiment, or not pliable to his commandment; but
were obedient, as the Apostle Romans 13. 5.
exhorts, Propter conscientiam, for conscience sake.

Oh but will Master In his censure upon the Apology.
Parsons reply, We hold this point, that a Prince is to be obeyed Propter
conscientiam, for conscience sake; but not Contrae conscientiam, Against his
conscience: And he is so stiff in this assertion, that he says, If one
authority, example, or testimony out of Scripture, Fathers, or Councels,
contradict it, we then speak to purpose. We answer; Against Conscience
rightly instructed, and warranted by the word, It is true: but there is
Asinina, lupina, or leprosa conscientia, A foolish, woluish, or leprous
conscience, which vicious or erroneous conscience is not rightly called
conscience, but error, and perverseness, and therein it fails. If a King
command things expressly contrary to Gods word, the Acts 3. 19.
Apostles rule then is plain, We must obey God rather then men; yet not fall
to violence, or outward resistance in body, but in spirit; submitting our
bodies to suffer with patience what shall be inflicted, like the three Dan. 3.
21.
Children to Nabuchadnezar; but in our souls to show our selves more then
Conquerors for our Conscience sake.

Thus do we see, that the four forenamed crimes, Tyranny, Infidelity,
Heresy, Apostasy, (yet great, and grievous sins) are not sufficient to
deprive a King of his regal Inheritance, or to free his Subjects from their
obedience.

CHAP. XI.
I VVil in the next place briefly consider the goodly Harmony of the holy
Doctors of Rome, in the managing and maintaining of this new Doctrine of
deposition of Kings by making their Quem penes arbitrium, and ius and norma
regendi.
Pope an absolute Lord of all Temporalties, and of the Spiritualties; by virtue
of which vaste omnipotency of power, as being the Supreme spiritual, and
temporal Prince of all, and over all, they ascribe unto his Holiness this
plenitude of power, to have the jurisdiction of both swords; and so may pass
against Kings (if they be faulty by tyranny, infidelity, heresy or apostasy;
or not Roman Catholics) Sentences of Excommunication, Breues of Interdiction,
Deprivation, Bulls of Absolution of Subjects from Alleagiance; yea, give
License, and Indulgences of pardon to misereants to Such Kings may be killed
when it please the Pope. Baron. Ann. 1089. (...). 11.
murder them: and yet this is not to be counted King-killing, for a King
excommunicated, or deposed, is no King in Popery:

Let us see the consent of these Doctors, or rather hear the confusion of
their tongues in building of this Babell.

Some of the chief pillars of Popery defend the direct, ordinary, and inherent
authority of the Pope; whereby as Lord of the whole World, in all temporal
matters he may at his pleasure depose Emperors, and Princes: The chief of
these is Cardinal Baron. Annal. Tom. 1. An. 57. pa. 423 and 433.
Baronius, and to allege his reasons I omit, his Books are common, and
extant in the world. And this opinion, that the Pope is Lord of all the
Temporalties, and that the supreme Jurisdiction both in temporal and
spiritual matters, belong to Peter's Successors, (which was the brainelesse
assertion of old blockish Canonists, and exploded of all sober Papists,) is now
renewed, and passes for Catholic Doctrine. Your De temp. Eccl. Monarch. li.
1. 1. 3. fol 98.
Francis Bozius defends it, that the Pope is directly Lord of things temporal,
and is the Ruler and Monarke of the whole world. So Rodericus Episc. Zamo:
alleged by Carerius. De potest. To. pontif. page 131.
Sancius, a Bishop of theirs goes further; It is to be holden, according to the
natural, moral, and divine Law, with the right Faith, that the Lordship of the
Roman Bishop is the true, and only immediate Lordship of all the world, not as
concerning spiritual things only, but also as concerning temporal things;
and that the imperial Lordship of Kings depends upon it, and owes service
and attendance thereunto, as a means, minister, and instrument; and that by
him it receives institution and ordination, and at the commandment of the
papal Lordship, it may be removed, revoked, corrected, and punished: In the
government of the world, the secular Lordship is not necessary either of pure,
or mere, or expedient necessity; but when the Church cannot. Resolving this
Article therefore, we say; That in all the world there is but one Lordship, and
therefore there must be but one Universal and Supreme Prince, and Monarke;
who is Christ's Vicar, according to that of Daniel, Dan. 7. 14. Which place is
proper only to Christ, the Bishop expounds of the Pope.
He gave him dominion, and honor, and kingdom, and all people, and languages
shall serve him: In him therefore is the Fountain and original of all
Lordship, and from him the other Powers flow: so far goes this Popish Bishop.

And diverse others agree with him; It is judged that no Christian Monarke has
his Crown wholly given him from Heaven, unless it receive firmness and
strength also from Christ's Vicar the Pope, so Posseuir. bib^. othec. select
(...). 17.
Possevine. Christ committed to Peter the Key-keeper of eternal life, the
right of earthly and heavenly government; and that in his place the Pope is
the universal Judge, the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords; says Isid. Mos. de
May. milit. Eccl. page 27.
another: yea, the holy Writer in the old law made the Priesthood an adjective
to the Kingdom, but Saint Peter made the Kingdom an adjective to the
Priesthood, faith the same Isid. Mos. page 22. de May. milit. Eccl.
writer.

Carerius a Doctor of Padua, in his Book De potestate Romani Pontificis, which
he made specially to confute Bellarmine, who denied the ordinary and direct
power of the Pope in the Temporalties, does in many places and pages Page 9.
maintain, that all dominion as well in spiritual things, as in temporal, is
fetched by Christ, and the same is committed to Saint Peter and his Successors:
that Christ was Lord of all these inferior things, not only as he was God, but
also as he was Man, having at that time dominion in the Page 111.
Earth: and therefore, as the dominion of the world, both divine, and humane,
was then in Christ, as man; so now it is in the Pope the vicar of Christ.

That Christ is directly the Lord of the world in temporal things, and
therefore the Pope Christ's vicar, is the Page 112.
like; and this power given to Peter, is set out, by the sole coming of Peter
to Christ upon the water, for universal Page 151.
government is signified by the Sea.

As God is the Supreme Monarke of the world, productiuely, and gubernatiuely,
although of himself he be Page 145.
neither of the world, nor temporal: so the Pope, although originally, and
from himself he have dominion over all things temporal, yet he has it not by
any immediate execution, and commits that to the Emperor by an universal
jurisdiction.

It would weary a man to read over this work of Carerius, wherein he sweates
and toils himself, striving with arguments, and laying a curse upon his
adversaries, that shall gainsay him, or deny the ordinary and direct power of
the Pope in the temporalties: which he writes, as his Vide Saund. visib.
Monarch, and de claue David. Melina. tract. 2. de Institut. Becanus, etc.
Preface speaks, against the Politicians, and heretics of the Time; and
indeed specially against a greater Clerk then himself, Bellarmine, both
temporizers to flatter Popes with power in temporalties. To omit all the rest
of this rank, who inclineto this opinion, That the Pope has a direct,
ordinary, and inherent power in Temporalties: let us on the other side, behold
these Madianites, or Cadmeyes Brethren, warring and wrangling with an
opinionate opposition and contradiction.

The principal, and Coriphaeus of all the rest, is the Cardinal De romans
pontif. lib. 5. c. 6. Non potest papa, vt papa, ordinary temporales Principes
deponere, etiam iusta de causa, tanquam Iudex ordinarius, nec ordinary
iudicare de temporalibus.
Bellarmine, who overthrows that ordinary, direct, and inherent government of
the Pope in temporalties, as left by Christ, with scripturall arguments very
soundly, and sufficiently; yet to gratify the Pope like a good servant, he
restraines it to limitations, and distinctions: Although (says he) the Pope be
not Lord of all Temporalties directly, neither has inherent and ordinary
authority as he is Pope, to disthronize temporal Princes, yet he is Lord of
the Temporalties indirectly, in order to the Spirituals (Bellarmines usual
phrase) and has an extraordinary and a borrowed authority, as he is chief
spiritual Prince, to alter Kingdoms, to take them from one, and to give them
to another, if it be necessary to the salvation of souls, i. in order to the
Spiritualties. Wherein observe how politic these papal Parasites be,
disputing about a power of Popes, in disposing Temporals or Regals, one fort
deriuing this power directly, and ordinarily from Christ, and Saint Peter; the
other side indirectly, and only in order to the Spirituals, when as their Pope
never had any direct, or indirect power in that kind from God, and from Saint
Peter.

But mark how the sonnes' of this Kingdom be divided: The Pope has either
ordinary and direct power to depose Kings, as he is Pope; or he has no
authority at all, faith Carerius: But he has no direct, and ordinary, as he is
Pope, by Bellarmines opinion, Ergo, He has none at all. Thus their division
has made a true conclusion, that their Pope has neither ordinary, or indirect
power in disposition of Temporals: but least Bellarmine should prove an
Heretic in this point, and be ungrateful to his great Master the Pope, of
whom he is graced with the purple hat; he comes with his qualification, and
modification, That the Pope is Lord of the Temporalties indirectly, in order to
the Spirituals; which strange distinction has no foundation: for Peter could
Extraordinaria potestas non transit i^ Successorem.
transfer no power but ordinary, and the Pope is no otherwise chief
spiritual Prince, but as he is Pope; so that if he cannot depose Princes
ordinarily from their Temporalties as Pope, he cannot depose them
extraordinarily, and indirectly as chief spiritual Prince: which Carerius
enforces, Either (says he) he is not the vicar of Christ, or else he deposes
inferior powers as Pope; but he deposes them not as Pope, says Bellarmine: he
is not therefore the vicar of Christ by Carerius conclusion. Thus Bellarmine
has deprived his Pope of the Temporalties, and his opposite Carerius has not
left him Lord of the Spiritualties: The one denies him a deposing Pope, the
other inferres upon it, no Deputy or vicar of Christ; both assertions very
true, though they deliver them by way of altercation. Thus these wrangling
spirits have brought their Popes imaginary power in great hazard to be lost.

The one making their Pope Am not I thine Ass, which thou have ridden upon
since thy first time unto this day? Numb. 22. 30. Exodus 18. 18. ^anto oneri
ceruix (...) sufficit vlla. ^apa sed non vt ^pa, habet aliquo ^odo, sed modo
indirecto, potestatem quandam, tempo^alem, sed non me^e, nec absolutam, ^d ad
aliquid rela^, nec perpetu^, sed casualem, (...) Eliens. Bishop most
excellently (...) his answer to ^^tus, page 27.
Satan's Ass, loading him with a boundless burden of power, too heavy for
any to bear, to have the direct dominion of all the Temporalties in the world
absolutely, and ordinarily: Onus Aetna granius, A burden heavier then the
weight of the Mountain Aetna. Iethro said, that Moses his task was too heavy
for him; and Job, Curuantur qui portant orbem, They that support the world, are
crooked: yet these Ingrossers of greatness, would lay upon their Popes
shoulders the unsupportable weight of the dominion of the world, to be Lord of
all the Temporalties directly, and ordinarily.

The other gives him not so much weight of authority, yet gives him too much;
To depose Kings if need require, taking a middle course, denying the infinite
power of Inherent and ordinary government; yet reserving an indirect and
borrowed authority belonging to the Pope, yet not as Pope, but as the chief
spiritual Prince, conditionally, if Kings become tyrannical, heretical, or
apostaticall, then the Pope is to conjure them into the circle of religion, by
counsel and admonition; and after if they prove refractary, to confine them
out of their dominionby deprivation and deposition: and all this is pretended
to be done by power of a spiritual right indirectly to the temporalties, yet
to a spiritual end, and in order to the spiritualties.

The first to all men's eyes appear most gross and egregious parasites,
besotted with palpable folly and flattery: but Bellarmine more smooth and
cunning, long acquainted with dissimulation, (the very Genius of Romes
Court-Cardinals) bedawbes his works with oily mortar, with holy honey, (if it
be for the salvation of souls, in order De pont. lib. 5. c. 6.
to the spirituals, tending to In ordine quide^ ad bonum spirituale etc.
spiritual good,) then Si meruere (Pater) tunc dira tonitruamitte,
Percutient summos reges, nec fulmina cessent.
If they deserve, let Papal thunder cleave
These Regal Cedars, and of Crowns bereave.


These are Boanerges, sons of thunder, yet would seem Barnabasses, sons of
comfort, tempering and qualifying their fiery thunderbolts of deprivation with
a pretense of spiritual good, tending to souls salvation. Vide Ioh. Mayor.
Doctor. parisi. did. 24. quaest. idem, Comment. in l. 4. sent. did. 24. fol.
214.


But there is a third sort of Papists on the other side, men of more humble
minds, disliking this statizing Iesuitisme, and papal intrusion into Caesar's
chair, confessing that the Pope has no temporal power over Kings directly:
as Gul. Barclayus de authoritate Papae, against whose opinion herein Bellarmine
writes a Treatise, De potestate summi pontificis contra Gul. Barclayum: 8.
Arti. 7. 8.
Watson in his Quodlibeticall Book, Sheldon in his general reasons, Roger
Widdringtons humble supplication to Paul the fifth Pope, which work a late
Condemned in that Decree which was chiefly intended against the Archb of
Spalato. The University of Paris, and the Sorbone School acknowledge the Popes
nullity of power in temporal authority over Kings.
Decree of Romes Cardinals prohibited, repining to see Popes temporal
encroachments by Romanists contradicted, good reason therefore to clap their
hand upon his mouth, and to commit him to the dungeon of suppression: Stephen
Gardiners book, Bishop of Winchester, De vera obedientia, with a preface of
Bishop Bonners adjoined to it, De summo and absoluto Regis imperio, published
by M. Bekinsaw, Devera differentia regiae potestatis, and Ecclesiae: Bishop
Tonstals Sermon, Bishop Longlands Sermon, Tonstals letter to Cardinal Poole,
and many others in Latin and English in this kind of Roman Catholics, all
overthrowing this point of modern Popery.

Thus as many Papists openly deny; and I presume many Vide Tract. inscript. le
Franc. discourse. An. 1000. The nullity of Papal power in the Temporalties and
Regalities of Kings will fully appear in the 6. Volume of the Archb. of
Spalatos Book, de rep. ecclesiastica. Marsilius and Occbam did write against
this Popes pretneded supremacy.
of the other do inwardly believe, (being acquainted with their equivocations,
and mental reseruations) so it may make all men marvel, who are not
prepossessed with preiudicate opinions, or preposterous affections, upon what
sufficient, yea probable inducements, and motives they might build this
Pontifician power, either of spiritual, much less of temporal authority over
Kings, either directly or indirectly, by way of deposition of Kings, or
disposition of their kingdoms.

The Basis or pillar of this power, yea pride, they fetch from a primacy (as
they say) of Peter, which is diuolued to the Sea of Rome by right of
succession: in both of which points they have been lamentably soyled, and it
were folly in me to rub over the incureable wounds they have received in this
conflict.

I will stand but as a spectator or relator of this skirmish: first in Peter's
primacy. First, we request them to choose out a place for the foundation of
it. And the Cardinal De sacram. Chr. leg. l. 3. p. 103.
Contarenus answers, That in his judgment it was chiefly given in the 16. of
Matthew, when the keys were given him.

But his Brother D. Pontific. lib. 1. c. 12.
Bellarmine, and the Rhem. Annotat. Job. 21. 17. Jansen. Concord. c. 14^. (...)
Vbi supra. p. 104.
Rhemists deny this, and say, The koyes were not then given, but only
promised, and with the keys the supremacy; the Gift was in the 21. of John,
where Christ said, Feed my sheep. But (...) Contra^ replies again, Let not
the subtilty of some more ye that say thus, for they speak more subtly then
truly: thus in the very ^ore from they begin to stagger, and vary among
themselves.

But because the place of Math. 16. commonly alleged to prove Peter's
supremacy, is their most evident Locus valde illustris, vbi Christus came
authoritatem verbis amplissimis D. Petro promisit. Greg. Valent. tom. 3. page
185.
place, there we insist, and object, that herein Peter had no more given him
then the other Apostles, and all made equal with him: for Peter had no more
but to be the rock, and to receive the keys; but this is common to the other,
ergo, etc. For all the power of the rock and keys is included in binding and
loosing, retaining and remitting sins, as Bell. de romans pontif. li. 1. c.
12.. verum haec. Iansen. harm. c. 66.
themselves teach: but this power was given to all the Apostles, Math. 18. 18.
John 20. 21. Therefore all the power of the Rock and Keys common to the
other. To reconcile this point and dissolve this knot, they skirmish among
themselves: Caiet. Tract. de instit. pontif. c. 5. Sad primum. Greg. de Valent.
tom. 3. p 109.
Some denying, that the keys contain more then binding and loosing: Others,
that Christ in the 18. of Matthew, gave not the Apostles the whole power of the
keys, making a threefold sort of keys, of Primacie, of Order, of
Jurisdiction: But Vbi supra.
Bellarmine condemns that, saying; It was never heard that there were more
keys in the Church then two, of Order, and of Jurisdiction: by which
assertion, in giving the other Apostles the same keys of Order and
Jurisdiction, he confirms our conclusion.

The highest authority that can be assigned, is contained in the keys say Per
claues supremam potestate^ gubernandi ecclesiam Christi, etc. Iansen. concor.
cap. 66. Eman. Sa. Annot. Math. 16. 19. Rhem. annot. Mat. 16. 19. If that were
true, the Apostles should have bound and loosed in Peter's name.
they, and the keys were given the other Apostles, Math. 18. John 20. 23. as
well as Peter; therefore Peter has no supremacy by the Text, or by their
expositions.

The common answer of them is, That albeit the Apostles had the same keys and
power that Peter had, yet with a difference, that Peter had it before them, and
as their Ordinary, but they after him, as his Legates and subjects: which is
untrue; for in the 20. of John, 21. they all had their power and commission
from Christ's own mouth, not from Peter: And Mark. 16. 15.
Christ said to all, Go ye and preach the Gospel to every creature; so that
seeing they had all their Commission immediately from Christ's mouth, it does
imply a contradiction to say, they had it under and from Peter: herein they
implicate themselves in diverse turnings: some Caiet. de autho. pap. and council.
c 3.
say, they received all their authority from Christ immediately, but this was
because it pleased Christ by special privilege to exempt them: wherein mark
how they contradict themselves: first saying, they had their authority from and
under Peter, and presently, they should have Oportet mendaces esse memores.
had it, but that by special grace they were exempted.

2 Sort say, the Apostles had two offices: first, of Apostleship: secondly, of
Bishoply dignity: the former they had from Christ; but the latter by and
through Peter: Staplet. Prin. doctr. lib. 6. c. 7. p. 215. Dom Iacobat. de
council. lib. 10. art. 7.
Victoria, saying. They received all the power they had immediately from
Christ, in that he made them all Apostles, for to the Apostleship belong three
things: first, authority to govern the believers: secondly, faculty of
teaching: thirdly, power of miracles: inferring that all the Apostles had the
authority of Order and Jurisdiction immediately from Christ. And Sum. mora: p.
403 Dom. Ban. in 22. Tho. p 234.
Henriquez says, There is no likelihood in their opinion, that say the
Apostles received their Jurisdiction of Peter: Bosius de sign. eccl. lib. 18.
c. 1.
other determine the doubt thus, That the difference of Peter's power from the
rest was, that he alone might use the keys, but the rest might not without
him: and Visib. Monar. lib. 6. c 2. page 153.
Saunders says, The other Disciples had the same keys, but after Peter, to
teach them that Peter had them by ordinary right as Prince of all, but they by
Christ's special delegation extraordinarily. Tom. 3. p. 191.
Gregory of Valence otherwise, that Peter had the keys from Christ, and over
all the Church for ever to continue in his successors, which the other Apostles
had not. Relect. 2. de potest. eccl. nu. 11. page 87.
Victoria decides this power into four parts. 1. That Peter's power was
ordinary, the rest extraordinary. 2. That it was to continue in the Church, the
others not. 3. His power was cuer them, theirs neither over him, nor over one
another. 4. Their power was subordinate to his, so that he might over rule it.
De autho. pap. and council. c. 3.
Cai^tan cuts it into five points: 1. In the manner, Peter received the power
ordinarily, they of special grace. 2. In the office, Peter Christ's Vicar, they
but delegates. 3. In the object, having power over all, they not over one
another. 4. In continuance, Peter's perpetual; theirs determined with their
life. 5. In the essence, Peter's preceptiue to command, theirs executiue to do
what he commanded Bibl sanct. 1. 6. Annot. 269.
Senensis deuides it into three parts: 1. of Order. 2. of Apostleship. 3. of
Monarchy.

What a weak and doubtful foundation is here to build up Peter's Primacy,
which they make an Article of their Faith, so inuolued with nice distinctions,
and perplexed with difficulties, and mutual contradictions?

But perchance some Papist may reply and say, the chief place to prove Peter's
primacy, is John 20. 16. where Christ Cum Petro dicitur, ad omnes dicitut, amas
me? pass oues meas. Aug. de agon. Christi. c. 30.
said thrice to Peter, Feed my Sheep; why does he examine Peter of his love
more then the rest, but that he intended him more authority? No such matter:
Peter had thrice denied Christ, which none of the other had done; and therefore
he had a threefold confirmation, and made a threefold confession for his former
abnegation. Oh but some of them have again argued, Feeding is ruling with
fullness of power, but the other Apostles were part of Christ's sheep,
therefore he must feed them. Ans^ Feeding is to edify by the word and
example, so Peter Gal. 2. 11.
fed the Apostles, and the Deus doeuit Petrum per posteriorem Paulum. Aug.
cp. 28.
Apostles fed Peter, as Paul fed him at Antioch by reproof. So all Christ's
Ministers are commanded to feed the slock of Christ (which is as large as feed
my sheep) but the Pope does not thus feed the sheep, but rather Baron. tells
Pope Paul that there is a two fold ministry in Peter, Feed my sheep, and kill
and eat.
feed upon the sheep: Non pascit oues, sed pastus ouibus: in this point,
Peter and the Pope are no more alike, then an Englishman is to a blackeamoore:
they agree better in fishing then in feeding: Math. ^7. 27.
Peter with his Angle caught a fish that had money in the mouth; so the Pope
fishes more for money then for men, and cannot abide to be like Peter, or to
succeed Peter, when he Acts 3. 6.
says, Paulus honor par Petro, ne di c^ amplius. Chrysostom. in epist. ad
Galath, (...) Prior, non superior. Si Petrus primus, Paulus praecipuus. Eusebius.
emissen. hom de natiu. Petr. and Pauli.
Silver and gold have I none:

Platos Common wealth, Tullies Orator, Moors Vtopia, and Peter's supremacy are
alike. The government of Christ's Church is rather Aristocraticall, with many
under one Christ, then Monarchical under one visible Head: no Primacy of
power, or Jurisdiction among the Apostles; if of order? Petrus primus, non
primas; for there was a parity of power among the Apostles: yea as their Ser.
2. in, natiu. Petr. and Pauli.
Leo, Electio pares, labor similes, finis facit aquales, Their election makes
them alike, the labor alike, the end equal; or Cyprian de vnitate Ecclesiae.
as Cyprian, Pari consertie praediti, and honotis and potestatis: Like fellow
ship, honor, and power. But let us suppose; (for impossibilities may be
supposed) that Peter had a supremancy over the Apostles, or more, that Peter
was Pope of Rome, how comes this special privilege to the Pope? They will
answer, by way of succession. To which we reply, that true succession stands
in holding the same true faith; but the Pope departs from Peter's doctrine, 1
Pet. 2. 13.
Submit your selves unto all manner of ordinance for the Lords sake, whether it
be unto the King as unto the Superior etc. Not only Precept, but President of
Peter is disliked in paying tribute for Christ and himself: But what if Peter
Math. 17. 27.
was chief of the Apostles, must he therefore be above Kings? and must his
imagined successor be above Emperors?

But let us fee how the Papists prove Papal succession of Peter in this
imagined supremacy: Canus does Locor. Theol. lib. 6. cap. 8.
confess, That it is not written in the Scriptures, that the Pope succedeth
Peter in the supremacy: and Controu. 4. q 5. de pontif. finitae An. 1578.
Bellarmine acknowledges it in these words, Licet Romanos Episcopos Petro
succedere in sacris lobris non habeatur, etc. Although it be not written in the
holy Scripture that the Roman Bishops succeed Peter, yet we have it by
Tradition from Peter.

The Rhemists and many other would yet prove it by Scripture, when as their
chief Champion confesses it to Staplet. in 16. of Math. 18.
be an unwritten tradition.

But De Divine. institut. pontif. c. 13.
Caietane proves it another way: The Pope succeeds Peter in as much as he is
Bishop of Rome, and there Peter made his feate, and died at Rome. To prove
this; they allege a sew humane stories subject to error, as themselves are:
and I think it being a matter of so great moment as they make it, that all are
damned unless they obey their Pope as Saint Peter's successor, and by virtue of
this succession believe his authority in matters concerning soul and
conscience, this life present and the future; it had need to be proved by
pregnant places out of Scripture, De successione po^tificum nihil fere iure
diuino cautu^ inuenitur. Simanc. institit. 45. n. 18.
and not by any fallible or doubtful history.

But I would feign be resolved of this point by a school Papist, If the Pope
succeeded Peter immediately after Peter's death, who it was that succeeded him?
whether Linus or Cletus, or Anacletus, or Clemens? it shall be in their choice
to name the man.

Clemens Romanus an old new Father, whom some say, was the Popes own child,
writes in his Lib. 7. cap. 47.
Apostolical Constitutions, That Linus was the first Bishop of Rome made by S.
Paul, and that Clemens after the death of Linus was the second ordained by
Peter; If this relation be true, the Pope sits not in the chair of Peter, but
in the seat of Paul, who appointed the first Pope.

Antuerp. Anno. 1578.
Franciscus Turrianus in his Apologeticall annotations upon the text of Clemens
answers, that Linus was not Bishop of Rome, but Suffragan, or vicar general,
executing it in S. Peter's non-residencye: So Ex epist decret. Leo. 2.
Marianus S^otus in the life of Peter says of Cletus: contradicting the Roman
Martyrology, which makes Linus and Cletus both absolute Bishops of Rome; and
Baromius in his Annotations upon their Martyrdomes and Ecclesiastical Tom. 1.
Annals, reckons thus, Linus the first, Cletus the second, and Clemens the
Ibidem.
bird Bishop of Rome after S. Peter: the sameus Baronius thinks Cletus and
Anacletus were all one: but De Romans Pontif. lib. 2. c. 5.
Bellarmine does gainesay him: others hold that Clemens was the fourth Pope
after St. Peter: some write he was first, some second, some third, some the
fourth; make the music in this mystery. But De Pontif. Romans lib. 2* cap. 5..
caeterum Petr. mortuo* and sequenti.
Bellarmine labors to reduce these iarring fractions to a better harmony:
Indeed (says he) Clemens by right was the first Pope, but he suffered out of
his humility Linus and Cletus to execute his office so long as they lived: yet
Bell. ibidem.. neque multu^ me mouet.
Damasus, and Sophronius, and Si^eon Metaph^^stes affirm, that Linus died
before Peter: here the Cardinal contemnes these writers, which In Catalog.
Theolog. annex. Tom. 24 controu.
elsewhere he commends for learned and Catholic Authors. In a word, let it
be granted that Clemens suffered these his competitors to live, yet if three
Popes were alive at once, who was the true successor of Peter, whether Lord
Cletus, Lord Linus, or Lord Clemens? I would feign be resolved of this question
by them who so eagerly maintain the Pope to have from S. Peter his succession:
surely they cannot assoile this demand, who so vary among themselves, and so
stammer in their own talk, uncertain who was the first, second, third, or
fourth Pope of Rome: that the Lord Esaias 19. 2.
has done to them which he threatened to the Egyptians; I will set the
Egyptians against the Egyptians, so every one shall fight against his brother,
and every one against his neighbor, city against city, and kingdom against
kingdom, one against another, and God and the truth against them all.

Thus I have a little diuerted into this point of Peter's pretended supremacy,
and the imagined succession of Popes after him, whereupon this usurped power
over all, the Pope principally challenges. I know this matter has bin largely
handled by the choice Divines of our Church, and the Papists have been put to
desperate and woeful shifts: I did not purpose to be large in it, only but to
touch it, because our Lay-Papists have a great fancy to it, and do beloeue any
thing, because they know little or nothing; and according to Hieren. ad Nepot.
Nazianzene, the rude vulgar wonder at that they do not understand, and think
their learned Guides prove this very authentically, when as there is no point
more weakly proved, and wherein they themselves are more distracted. And but
that their popish tutors presume upon their simplicity and ignorance, they
would be ashamed to argue thus to prove it: as first, Christ said, Thou art
Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church, Ergo the Church is built
upon Peter and the Pope: or again, The gates of Hell shall not prevail
against the Church, Ergo, Peter and the Pope are the Church, against which the
gates of hell shall not prevail; or, I have prayed for thee Peter that thy
faith fail not; Ergo, the Pope cannot err: or, Feed my sheep; Ergo, Peter
was the supreme head of the Apostles.

What a silly and simple kind of arguing is this, void of Divinity and
Logic, which the learned hiss at? which yet goes for current arguments among
ignorant Papists, who in the Infancy of their knowledge have no skill and
judgment to discern these things; yet are so ouercarried, yea, infatuated
with a doting fancy to believe any thing, which is cloaked with a pretense of
Catholic Truth, or Doctrine of the Church of Rome; that with great applause
they will accept of these, or the like, unlearned follies: being like unto that
Frenchman in Geneua, of whom Epist. ante Miscellan.
Zanchius speaks, that he protested, If Saint Paul and Calvin should preach at
the same hour, that he would leave Paul and go to Calvin. So these will even
deny Scripture, to believe, and cleave to their Doctors; and they know how to
seduce them well enough, making them firmly believe, that Peter was the
Primate, and Prince of all the Apostles, and that the Pope succeeds him in all
his prerogatives, and sits in Peter's Chair. So that we may say with
Nicephorus. lib. 13. cap. 28.
Simeones; Who when he saw Arsacius an unlearned and unworthy man, placed in
Chrysostomes room, cried out in these words, Prohpudor? quis, cui? Oh shame;
who, and whom? So we may censure the Popes sitting in Peter's Chair, Oh shame,
who, and whom? Peter was careful to teach and preach; but for the Popes, many
of them cannot, and all will not, preach the Gospel. Their Bennet that was
Pope, when he was not ten years old, and John not above sixteen, as their
dear Ann. 1033. Nu. 6 Bar. 955. Nu 1. 2. Their Archbishop of Rhemes at five
years old. Bar. An. 925. Nu. 9 Vide Speculum Romanorum pontificum: per
Stephanum Szegedinum. Page 91. to 111. Carranz. in Marcellin.
Baronius says; oh then how worthily was Peter's place supplied, how able they
were to feed the universal flock, and to be the Supreme Heads of the
Christian World?

And many of their Popes have been condemned, and convicted heretics by
themselves, as * Marcellinus for idolatry, worshipping Pagan Gods, Athan. Ep.
ad solita. Fascicu. Tem. An. 353.
Liberius for Arrianisme.

Honorius the first, was a Monothelite heretic condemned for it in three
general Councels: Gregory Theod. Niemens. de scism. lib. 3. cap. 44. p. 91.
Scriptum de Bonifacio octauo, intrauit vt vulpes, regnauit vt Leo, mortuus est
vt canis. Successio in Petri culpa, non Cathedra.
the 12, and Bennet the 13, deposed for notorious heretics, and
schismatickes, and many others; oh then how was Peter's Chair adorned, his
place supplied, the universal flock governed, the Supremacy managed, the
Church edified? Pro^pudor? quis, cui? How is Peter's Chair disparaged by a
pretense of such vile Successors: yea, how opposite is the Pope to Peter, or if
you will, this Sir Peter, or Pope-Peter to Non vnus pilus Petri est in pontifice.
Saint Peter? light and darkness are not more dislike. Preaching Peter
commanded all, 1 Pet. 2.
Fear God, Honor the King, Submit your selves etc. Not only to the good and
17 18 19
courteous; but to the froward; for this is thank worthy, if a man for
conscience sake toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully: But princely
Pope-peter vnlooses men at his pleasure from their alleagiance and obedience to
Adrianus dixit. To. pontifices succedede Romulo in parricidijs, non Petro in
pascendis ouibus. Antonin. tit. 17. 6. 9.
good, and gracious Princes (if they will not bow their Scepters to his Miter,)
and will deprive them of their Crowns, and if he can, of their lives too,
being blasted by excommunication; then proceed to deposition, and to make it
take better effect, he will authorize murder and rebellion: yet all this,
under a fair vizard of spiritual good, and for the salvation of souls: but
Quic quid id est, timeo Danaos, and dona ferentes.


Beware of these same Pope-pilles, sugared over, yet full of deadly poison.
Peter his precepts and pattern compared Petrus aliter iussit; aliter gessit.
with the Popes practice, argue a plain separation or secession, no succession.

Peter commanded and performed obedience to Princes, excommunicated none,
deposed none, deprived none, freed no Subjects from alleagiance, or excited
them to any resistance, but suffered (if we may credit their Linus de passione
Petri, and Pauli, in biblio. ss. Patr. tom. 2.
Register, to prove his being at Rome) as a Martyr: yet these Princes were no
Catholics, yea Heathens. Was it because he wanted power, (as some have
dreamed?) why, he had the power of Miracles, he could do that which never any
Pope did, or shall do; Surge, and ambula: Acts 3. 6: Arise, and walk; which
had power to heal a creeple from his Mothers womb. Acts 9. 40.
He raised the dead to life, yea, sont the living Acts 5. 5.
to death, could with his 15.
shadow heal the ^icke: Wanted he power? no, rather he wanted this pride and
impiety, wherewith the Pope swells and abounds: he knew, that his Kingdom
promised by Luc. 22. 29.
Christ, was not of this World; here the Kings of the Gentiles should reign
over him, and his fellow Disciples: but hereafter in the heavenly Kingdom,
they 30.
should sit upon seats, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel.

But this Pope-Peter, or prince-like Pope, fearing his Kingdom is not of that
world, would feign erect up his Monarchy in this world, and would sit upon his
seat or chair, to judge all the Tribes of the world; and would feign be a
Judge over the Tribe of Judah, to make Kings be subject to his Ferula, and Rod
of correction; and so then surfeit them with his cup of corruption: and if they
will not submit themselves to his domination, he will by censure, and sentence
of excommunication seek to dethrone them and depose them, free their subjects
from the yoke of obedience and oath of alleagiance to them, and arm and
animate them to take up arms against them; and all this pestilent power he
would derive from Peter's Chair, making it a Chair of pestilence, to arrogate
such a pernicious supremacy, by which means he has been the primus Hic
motor scelerum primus, fraudumque cheragus.
motor, the chief agent of all the mischeefes, murders, and massacres,
treasons, and rebellions, in these latter times. So that I may conclude, that
papal excommunication of Kings, and Doctrine of deposition of them, have been
the chief nurseries of most treasons and rebellions. And this has moved me to
take a little survey of it, diuerting out of the intended Road of my
discourse; for which former prolixity, I will requite my Reader with following
breuity.

CHAP. XII.
I Have thus far discoursed in general, now I will make our conclusion a
connection, with some particular relation of the unnatural and bloody
conspiracy of these Traiterous Gouries, attempted against the Kings Majesty,
August the fifth, Anno Dom. 1600: with the manner of his delivery, and happy
preservation; as also the end and Tragedy of these Traitors, receiving in part
a due doom for their Treason.

His Majesty lying at Falkland, and going out in the morning to recreate
himself with his pleasure of Buck-hunting; before he was on Horseback,
Alexander Ruthwen, second brother to the late Earl of Gowry, hasted to meet
his Highness, who after a low courtesy, bowing his head under his Majesty's
knee, (Beware of such Creepers) drawing his Majesty apart, (as 2 Samuel 3. 27.
Ioab took Abner aside in the gate to speak with him peaceably) does begin a
strange discourse to the King:

Virg. lib. 2. Aen. Dixerat ille dolis instructus, and art Pelasga.
How he chanced in the evening before, walking alone without the Town of Saint
Iohnstoun, where his brother dwelt, recountred a suspicious fellow, who upon
some conference became amazed, and his tongue faultred; and uncasing him, wrapped
up in a cloak, and finds a great wide pot under his arm, full of coined gold
in great pieces: whereupon he brought the fellow back, and privately, without
the knowledge of any man, bound him in a privy house, and locked many doors
upon him, and his pot with him; and so hasted by four of the clock in the
morning, to advertise his Majesty according to his duty, and desirous that the
King in his person privately would be pleased to behold this spectacle. To
this perfidious Sinon the King gives a Princely audience, Ignarus scelerum
tantorum, artisque Pelasga: Virg.
Returning to him at first this answer; That he would send back with the
said Alexander a servant of his own, with a warrant to the Provost, and
Bayliffes of Saint Iohnstoun, to receive the alleged fellow (a man in the
Moon) and the money supposed, till his further pleasure was known. To be
brief: his Highness importuned by the in sinuations of this faire-spoken, yet
false Judas, resolves Freu^^ nulla fides.
(the chase being ended, and not dreaming that his Princely person should have
been hunted, by such a fawning, yet bloody hound) to go to Saint Iohnstoun,
to see with his Princely eyes the news which this meale-mouthed Traitor had
related to his Graces ears; and so rides thither with a very little Train,
and they followed after, among which was the Duke of Lennox, and the Earl of
Mar. The King coming to Saint Iohnstoun, he was met by the late Earl of
Gowry, a Judas, with an Aue Rex, and some three or fourscore men accompanying
him; the Kings Train not above fifteen persons, and all unarmed; yet his
Majesty by the way upon occurrences of discourse, and stupide behavior of
Alexander, requesting the King to stay the Duke and Earl from following him,
began to suspect some treasonable device. Well, the King having been there
partaker of a bad dinner, and the said Earl standing pensive, and with a
dejected countenance; Oh quam difficile est, crimen non prodere vultu:


And not welcomming his Majesty, or showing any hearty form of entertainment;
and the Noblemen, and Gentlemen of the Court, being now set at dinner,
Alexander rounding in his Majesty's ears, and said; Now is the time to go:
This is your Luke 22. 53.
very hour, and the power of darkness. The King accompanied only with the
said Alexander, goes up a Turne-pecke through three or four chambers,
Alexander locked behind him every door he passed, (a brother to 2 Timothy 4. 14.
Alexander the Coppersmith, which had done Paul much evil) until at last, his
Majesty passing through three or four sundry houses, and all doors locked
behind him by this Cerberus, his Majesty entered into a little study, where he
saw standing with a very abased countenance, not a bond man, but a free man,
with a dagger at his girdle: Now me thinks I here that desperate voice,

Virg. Heu quae nunc tellus, inquit, quae me aequora possunt Accipere? aut quid
iam misero mihi denique restat?

Or as 2 Samuel 24. 14.
David said to God; I am in a wonderful strait: fallen into the hands of
bloody men, O God, Psa. 70. 1.
have thee to deliver me, make have to help me O Lord: O my Psa. 59.
God, deliver me from mine enemies, defend me from them that rise up against 1
2^ 3
me: deliver me from the wicked doers, and save me from the bloody men: for
lo, they have laid wait for my soul, etc. Thus this vile Alexander having
brought the King into this close Closet of his intended death, Recte coll^cat
aretia expectant praedam:


Now this Traitor changes his countenance, puts his hat on his head, and draws
the dagger from the girdle of the other fellow, holds the point to the Kings
breast; Horresco referens. Whither bendest thou thy sword (thou monster of
mankind?) as Clytemuestra said to her wicked son Orestes: A Monster, and no
Man, to desire to murder a Monarke of Men. Viscera sunt vobis crudelia, pectora
ferro
Durantur, silicesque rigent praecordia circum,
Qui tantum sceleris potuistis, velle patrare:
Nam patrasse, supergreditur genus omne loquendi.


Behold this cursed, and Copper-Alexander, facing the King with a brazen
impudence, says; Now it did behoue the King to be in his will, and uses him as
he list; swearing bloody oaths, That if the King cried out, or did open a
window to look out, that dagger should presently go to his heart. Surely some
Nero with heels forward borne,
Sire to this slave so bloody, and forlorn.


The Prou. 21. 1.
Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, and he will preserve it against the
hands of such devilish Traitors. This bloody villain opens his black mouth,
and tells the King; That now he knew his conscience was troubled for murdering
his Father: Lo, this Caine talks of conscience, yet makes no conscience to
attempt to kill a most innocent King.

His Highness wondering at so sudden an alteration, and standing naked, as an
innocent Lamb before a ravenous wolf, like the Revel. 12. 4.
woman standing before the red Dragon, begins pathetically; and powerfully to
dilate to Alexander, telling him how horrible a thing it was to meddle with his
Majesty's innocent blood, a drop whereof could not be shed without revenge
from Heaven, and Earth: for the Genesis 4. 10.
voice of blood cries for vengeance to Heapen, and God had on Earth given his
Highness children, and good Subjects, which would revenge it; yea God would
raise up stocks and stones to punish so vile a deed: protesting before God,
that his conscience was not troubled for the execution of his Father; he being
then a Minor of age, and then guided by a Faction which ouerruled his Majesty
and the rest of the Country, and what was done to his Father, was done by the
common course of Law and Justice: Appealing to the said Alexanders own
conscience (a sinful and seared conscience) how well his Grace had at all
times since deserved at the hands of all his race, restoring them to their
lands and dignities, freely and voluntarily of his regal clemency, bringing up
two or three ofhis sisters, as it were in his own bosom, by a continual
attendance upon his dearest bedfellow in her privy Chamber: and if all these
had been too little, he would have given him, as it was said to David, such,
and such things: but here in them verified, which Sen. Epist. 48.
Seneca delivered, Quidam, quo plus debent, magis oderunt, etc. Certain men
being bound to love for some benefits, rather the more begin to hate: Quid
autem miserius, (says the same wise man) cui beneficia dantur, gratias agere
iniurijs; What more wretched thing, then having received benefits, to reward
the giver with injuries? These are Esops Snakes.

His Majesty promised him on the word of a Prince, that if he would spare his
life, (a Sovereign a suppliant to a subject an abject, begges mercy of this
miscreant, to spare his life) he would never reucale it to any flesh living,
what was betwixt them at that time, nor never suffer him to incur any harm,
or punishment for the same: A speech able to make a Cannibals heart to relent,
being uttered with such feeling as accompanies such fears. This his Majesty's
perswasiue language some what amazed and calmed this terrible and truculent
Traitor, so that he swore the Kings life should be safe, if he would behave
himself quietly, without noise, or crying; and that he would go down, and
bring in his brother the Earl to speak with his Majesty; And so goes down,
and locks the door after him, leaving his Majesty with that man was there
before, whom this Alexander appointed the Kings Keeper till his return.

Then his Majesty demanded of that man, who was a servant to the late Earl of
Gowrie, and his name Andrew Henderson, whether he was appointed to be the
murderer of him, and how far he was upon the counsel of that conspiracy; who
with a trembling, and astonished voice, and behavior, answered with solemn
and deep protestations, that he was never acquainted with that purpose, being
put in there perforce, and the door locked upon him: and indeed all the time
of Alexanders menacing the King, this Henderson trembled, and requested him for
Gods sake, not to do the King any harm. The King commands him to open the
window on his right hand, which he did: for Alexander had made the King swear
not to cry out, nor open any window.

Wherein behold the miraculous providence of almighty God, that he who was put
in there to use violence on the King, should be an Instrument for the Kings
safety, and upon Dan. 5. 6.
the sight of the King, as Belshazzar did, when he saw the hand writing on the
wall, trembling and quaking, rather like one condemned, then an executioner of
such an enterprise. While the King was all this while like Dan. 6. 16.
Daniel in a Lions den, and by the 2 Timothy 4. 17.
Lord so assisted and strengthened, that afterward he was delivered like Paul
out of the mouth of the Lion; his Majesty's Train rising from dinner, the
Earl of Gowry with them, one of the Earl of Gowries servants comes hastily,
saying; His Majesty is horsed, and away through the Inshe; which the Earl
reporting to the Noblemen, and the rest, all rush forth in great haste; and
enquiring of the Porter which way his Majesty went, the Porter affirmed, the
King was not yet gone: whereupon this Gowry reuiles the Porter, and turning to
the Duke, and Earl of Mar, said; He would presently get certain word,
whether the King was gone, or no? and so ran through a close, and up the
stairs; having a purpose to speak with his Brother. Presently the Earl
returns, and runs to the Noblemen, telling them the King was gone out at the
back gate, to which place all of them repaired.

This inhumane wretch Alexander having had a little pawse and parley with his
bloody brother, comes back again to the King; Ingrediturque domum, luctus
comitatur euntem,
Et pauor and terror, trepidoque insania vultu:


Casting his hands abroad in a desperate manner, said, he could not mend it,
his Majesty behooved to die. Traitors have bloody hearts and hands, they will
not abstain, Leuit 3. 17.
a sanguine, and suffocate, from blood, and strangled; not one word falls from
his foul mouth but dismal: he had promised before to preserve the King safe,
but they who have made a league with hell, will never keep league or promise
with any on earth: neither great gifts, or good turns can turn their minds
to mercy; oportet mori, is the foot of the fatal song: the death of
Patroclus, says Achilles, the death of my Father, says Alexander, will not
suffer me to think of mercy.

Therefore this treacherous Philistine comes with a garter to bind our
Sovereign (as the Judge. 16. 21. Bis mori est, alteri^ arbritrio mori. Seneca.
Philistines bound Sampson) swearing, he behooved to be bound. Accursed
caitife, to threaten the King, descended from as royal predecessors as any
Prince living, with an inglorious death: he must not dye by the hand of a
woman, which Judge. 9. 54.
Abimelech held dishonorable, and therefore willed his Page to run him
through with his sword: he must not die fighting cominus and eminus, hand to
hand; but he would have him die as a condemned Malefactor, or as a Prou. 7. 22.
fool goes to the stocks, bound hand and foot, though he ruled with glory,
yet go to his grave with ignominy. It behooves you to be bound, says this
abhorred wretch; but died 2 Samuel 3. 33. 34.
Abner as a fool dies? Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet tied in fetters
of brass, but as a man falls before wicked men, so did thou fall.

His Majesty hearing this villain talk of binding, said he was borne a free
King, and should die a free King. Behold the work of the Lord, animating our
King James as the Lord did Joshua 1. 9.
Joshua, Be strong and of good courage, fear not, nor be discouraged, for I
the Lord thy God will be with thee, etc. He Leuit. 26. 8.
can make five to chase an hundred, and an hundred to put ten thousand to
flight: little David to kill Goliath; our Solomon void of weapon to overcome
anned Gowrie; and indeed how can he fall in fight, whom heaven and earth
assists? God and his Angels beheld this fray, and heard the secret petition of
our Sovereigns soul, Psalm. 7. 1. 2.
Save me from him that persecutes me, and deliver me; lest he devour my
soul like a Lion, and tear it in pieces while there is none to help. The
Lord did Psalm. 20. 1.
hear him in the day of his trouble, the name of the God of Jacob did defend
him; delivering his Psalm. 22. 20.
soul from the sword, his desolate soul from the power of the dog.

This Alexander, degenerating in nature from the signification of his name,
which signifies (as Jerome) auxiliator virilis, an helper of men; he rather to
be termed with his Masters Title, Revel. 9. 11.
Abaddon, or Apollyon, destroying; and comes to his Majesty, griping him by the
wrist of the hand to have bound him: his Majesty relieved himself suddenly of
his gripes; whereupon as he put his right hand to his sword, his Majesty with
his right hand seized upon both hand and sword, and with his left hand clasped
him by the throat, like as he with his left hand claspt the King by the throat,
with two or three of his fingers in his Majesty's mouth, to have stayed him
from crying out. In this struggling the King perforce drew him to the window
which Henderson before opened, and under the which passed (O rare and most
singular providence of God) the Kings train, and the Earl of Gowrie with
them: The King holding out the right side of his head, and right elbowe, cried,
They were murdering him:

Virg. Aeucid. lib. 2. -- Quaev^n vt vo^it ad^^re^ Obstupuere animi, gelidus^
perima (...) Ossa Trem^^ --

The Kings voice instantly heard, and known to the Duke of Le^no^, Earl of
Mar, and the other Courttraine; no winged Pegasus could poast more speedily,
to do their best service for their Sovereigns safety: all of them then like
Asahel, 2 Samuel 2. 18.
as light on foot as wild Roes; but Gowrie the unworthy and wretched Earl
ever asking what it meant, taking no notice of any voice heard. The Duke of
Lennox, and Earl of Mar run to go by the passage his Majesty went in at:
but Gowrie better acquainted with his own den, made with his servants for
another way up a quiet turne-pecke, which was ever condemned before, and only
then left open (as it appeared) for that purpose.

In the mean time, his Majesty with striving and struggling with this base
Traitor -- impar congressus Achilli; had brought him perforce out of the study,
the door being open, and got Alexanders head under his arm, and himself on
his knees, his Majesty driving him back perforce hard to the door of the same
turne-pecke: and as his Majesty was throwing his sword out of his hand,
thinking to have stricken him therewith, and shot him over the staire, the
other fellow Henderson, standing behind the Kings back, and doing nothing but
trembling all the time; that euer-honoured man Sir John Ramsey, now
meritoriously graced with more noble titles, finds the turne-pecke door open,
follows it up to the head, the first that did enter into the chamber to help
the King.

Virg Primus ibi ante omnes, summa decurrit ab arce,
As the Poet of Laocoon; it was his happy fortune to have that glory, and the
King his first help: they are very happy subjects that are a means to
preserve Kings from traitors; for therein they stand in stead of Gods Angels.
This valiant and noble Lord instantly took his dagger, and strikes Alexander
twice or thrice, his Majesty still keeping his hold on this traitor: and
immediately this Alexander by the shoulder taken, and shot down the staire;
who no sooner was shot out of the door, but he was met by Sir Thomas
Erskinne, who ended this vile wretch, and traitor there: a just punishment for
so bloody a miscreant, who attempted to kill the Lords Anointed. This Arch
traitor may well be placed in the black Calendar of bloody traitors in the
first rank, whose name is odious and infamous to the whole world.

Thus the King being thus happily preserved from the assault of this butcherly
Assasinate, and Sir Hugh Hereis, Sir Thomas Erskins, and one Wilson, being got
into the Chamber where the King was; instantly before they could get the door
shut, comes the insolent and bloudy-minded Earl Gowry, having a drawn sword
in each hand, and a steel bonnet on his head, accompanied with 7. of his
servants, having each a drawn sword; the Earl at his sirstentry cried out
with a great oath, They should all dye as Traitors. The King seeing the Earl
come in with swords in his hands, sought for Alexanders sword, having no sort
of weapons of his own, But the loyal love, and immortal fidelity of his true
Subjects there, rather desirous to hazard their lives in the fortune of that
fight, then any more to endanger the King, gat him back into the little study,
and the door shut upon him, and so put him in safety, re-encountred the
Traitor Earl and his servants, where after many blows on all hands, it
pleased God in his great power and pity, to give his Majesty's servants the
victory; Sir John Ransey did strike dead with a thrust through the heart the
Traitor Earl, the shame of Nobility, and scandal to Christianity: who as he
lived wretched, addicted to Necromancers, and after his death had in his pocket
found Magical Characters and words of enchantment: so at his last gasp never
named God; vix been moritur, quimale vixit, as De Doctr. Christiana.
Austen: much more in this case, he cannot die well who lived so ill, who did
so ill, and died so ill; yet I may not touch his eternal doom, only say with
Cicero, Cicero in Paradex.
Mors terribilis esti^s, quorum cum vita omnia extinguuntur, Death is terrible
unto them, with whose life al things be extinguished: for all temporal things
lost with him, his heirs by Act of Parliament deprived for ever of his estate,
name, same, and fortunes goods with him from his for ever vanished. The rest of
the confederates in this fray were dung over the stairs with many hurts; as
also Sir John Ramsey, Sir Thomas Erskin, Sir Hugh Hereis, (a true Triumviri of
right Noble, Valiant, and spirited Knights, famous for ever for this service)
were sore wounded in this chamber-conflict: yet they grudged not their blood,
had it been spent to the last drop in so good a cause, for the defense of
the King being in so perilous extremity. But all the time of this fight, the
Duke of Lennox, and Earl of Mar, and the rest of the Court were striking
with great hammers at the utter door, where his Majesty passed up to the
Chamber, and being a double door could not be broken open the space of half
an hour and more; so that though their faithful hearts and fervent prayers
poured out to God for the King, which were effectual to help in this peril,
yet their hands could not, as they all desired, be present in this service. But
having at last made a way, and finding his Majesty (beyond their expectation)
delivered from so imminent a death, and the chief conspirators slain,
infinitely rejoiced. And his Majesty immediately kneeling down on his knees in
the midst of them, did most heartily praise the Lord for his delivery,
assuring himself that God had preserved him from so despaired a peril, for
the perfecting of some greater work, for the glory of God, and good of his
subjects committed to his charge.

Thus I have set down the chief substance of the story of this conspiracy,
and the manner of the Kings delivery, with the two chief Traitors death and
tragedy. Unnecessary it is for me to recite the end of Bour and Logane, etc.
conspirators dead and devoured of worms, whose memorial is perished with
them: only behold the power and providence of God in opening the mouth of
Sprott, haling him to the Ministers of Justice, and causing him to be his own
accuser eight years after, when no mortal creature could detect him (all the
confederates dead) except the guilty conscience of his own breast. And as Lib.
de moribus.
Seneca gravely, Nullum conscium peceatorum tuorum magis timueris, quam
temetipsum, altum enim potes effugere, ^e autem nunquam, nequitia enimipsa est
suipoena: Thou may not fear any who are privy to thy sins, more then thy
own self; for thou may fly from an other, yet never from thy self, sin is
a punishment to it self; and Ecclus. 14. 2.
Blessed is the man who is not condemned in his own conscience; for a Pro. 15.
15.
good conscience is a continual feast; but it is a fearful thing when Wisd.
17. 10.
malice is condemned by her own testimony, and a conscience that is touched
does ever forecast cruel things. Aug. in Ps. 31.
Conscientia mala, bona sperare non potest. What the vltimate end was which
Gowrie aimed at, it is not known certainly; yet sure he looked for more then
the life of an innocent King, and proiected more then the bare revenge of his
Fathers death; his traveling into Italy, into those parts where they would
give sundry folks Breues, as his follower Rind confessed; his intimate
conference with Jesuits, men dangerous to Kings and States, his plausibility
with the people (an harbinger of ambitious thoughts;) These with other
practices he used, as being addicted to Magiche, are like the bleating of 1 Samuel 15. 14.
sheep in Samuels ears, and may all say, What mean these things? we may
conjecture something, yet determine nothing: for this Traitor was a Politician
who held this Maxim; Rind does relate it in his re-examination.
That he was not a wiseman, who having intended the execution of an high and
dangerous purpose; did communicate the same to any but himself.

Thus we see how the Lord verifies David's words; Psalm. 37. 28.
He forsakes not his Saints, they shall be preserved for evermore, but the
seed of the wicked shall be cut off. Psalm. 18. 50.
Great deliver ances gives he unto his King, and shows mercy unto his
Anointed. And if all antiquity should awake, it could not relate a more Divine
delivery in so dangerous and deadly extremity. And it does minister immortal
and immatchable motives of perpetual praises, and thanks giving to God: to
sing with 145. 3. 4.
David, Great is the Lord, and most worthy to be praised, and his greatness is
incomprehensible: Generation shall praise thy works unto generation, and
declare thy power. The Lord preserves all them that love him, but he 20
will destroy the wicked.

This day, the fifth of August, the commemoration day of this Conspiracy and
Delivery, commanded by regal authority to be religiously observed, wherein we
should do that which the Lord spoke to Moses after Isreal's victory over
Amalek, Exodus 17. 14.
Write this for a remembrance in the book, and rehearse it to Joshua, for I
will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek from under Heaven. And Moses
built an Altar, and called the name of it, Iehoua-Nissi, that is, the Lord my
Bauner. So the great King of Kings having given the King of our English Israel
an happy victory over Amal^k, put out the remembrance of them from Occidit illa
dom', sed enim dom' illa perire digna fuit.
under heaven. All, from the King in his Throne, to the poorest member and
Subject of great Britanny, should write in the tables of thankful hearts (the
best book of remembrance) this most happy and heavenly deliverance, and go to
the public Altar, the house of prayer, and offer up a service and sacrifice of
humble and hearty prayers and praises, as sweet Incense unto the Lord, singing
and saying, Iehoua-Nissi, the Lord is my Banner: Exodus 15. 2.
The Lord is our strength and praise, and is become our salvation. 6.
Thy right hand O Lord, has bruised the enemy; 2 Samuel 22 50. 51
Therefore will I praise thee, O Lord, among the Nations, and will sing unto
thy name: He is the Tower of salvation for his King, and shows mercy to his
Appointed, even to David, and to his seed for ever. All glory, honor, thanks
and praise
be given to God alone,
The Father, Son, and Holy ghost,
three severally in one.


Laus Deo.
Amphitheatrum Scelerum: OR THE TRANSCENDENT OF TREASON: For the fifth of
November, THE DAY OF A MOST Admirable Deliverance of our King, Queen, Prince,
Royal Progeny, the Spiritual and Temporal Peers and Pillars of the Church
and State, together with the Honorable Assembly of the representative Body of
the Kingdom in general, from that most horrible and hellish project of the
Gunpowder Treason.

PSALM. 11. 22. Forloe, the wicked bend their bow, and make ready their arrows
upon the string, that they may secretly shoot at them which are upright in
heart. For the foundations shall be cast down, and what has the righteous
done?

By SAMVEL GAREY, Preacher of Gods Word.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN BEALE, for HENRY FETHERSTONE, and JOHN PARKER. 1618.

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS and Right Honorable Lords, Spiritual and Temporal, the
renowned Peers, Prelates, and Counselors to the High and famous Court of
Parliament; SAMVEL GAREY an unworthy Minister of JESUS CHRIST, with his most
devoted observance, humbly offers this short Treatise, in a perpetual
remembrance of all dutiful thankfulness to Almighty God, for your Graces and
Honors happy deliverance from the intended Gunpowder Treason, November the
fifth, Anno Domini, 1605.
(Most Reverend, Honorable, and right Noble Lords)
MAy it please your Graces and Honors to behold the woeful picture, and
lamentable protect of your earthly Downfall intended, (the contemplation and
cogitation whereof can never cause you to bury it in oblivion) wherein the
professed enemies to God, King, and Country, endeavored and attempted with one
blow and blast to make your Mittimus, and send you all to another world. But
Gods most admirable mercy disappointed their most abominable mischief, and
does move your Graces and Honors to say thankfully with the Psalmist, Psalm. 44.
7.
Thou have saved us from our adversaries, and have put them to confusion that
hate us: Therefore will we praise God continually, 8.
and will confess thy name for ever. In which prodigious practice, and
merciless Massacre, your Graces and Honors may behold your selves, how you
should have Primae impressionis Flagitium.
been, not rebaptized, but have been buried in fire and flames; and by Gods
gracious deliverance have received a kind of resurrection from a plotted
sudden death: and this popish powder of a future fire-worke, which should
have been the martyrdom of the kingdom, removed and discovered, before
these dangerous, ai^ellish, and Purgatory-Vulcans could bring one spark to
enkindle it: still the Regal Sun and Moon shines with a bright and
beautiful luster in the Royal firmament, who by these foul monsters, and
fiery Meteors should have been finally eclipsed: Charles-wayne is still in our
Horizon, and God grant it may be said of our King James, as Jacob said of his
Judah, Sceptrum non auferetur a Judah, Genesis 49. 10.

Your Graces and Honors the fixed stars of Church and State, still keep your
station, and retain your powerful influences, who by these Miscreants should
have been sent from the stately Parliament to the starry firmament, and though
not then your mortal limbs, yet your immortal souls should have flowen
higher. But lo, * The Lord was 2 Chronicles. 15. 2.
with you, while you were with him, and preserved you in safely as reserved
instruments for his further service and glory, to the unspeakable comfort of
his Church, and happy welfare of great Britanny. Which incomparable work of
Gods infinite mercy in this most gracious and general deliverance, as it can
never beforgotten, so it cannot be too ofr reuined: which poor oblation (a
commemoration of your Graces and Honors preservation) as it is very seasonable
for the time, November the 5. against which day it was and is prepared as a
yearly present, and poor Tribute of true thankfulness, so I heartily wish
it weresatable to merit your most honorable acceptance: Yet Cum desint vires,
tamen est laudanda voluntas:


Your renowned worthiness will, I hope, accept my willingness, and protect
this Treatise (the Transcendent of Treason) under the favorable countenance of
your most honorable patronages; so shall it be safe from all backbiting
vermin, and vipers of our Church and Country. And as some say, The Sea-Vrchin
arms himself with some stones against a tempest, so I against all the windy
tempests of ill tongued Jesuits, and railing Popelings, who take things with
the left hand which are offered with the right, as Ariston once said, will I
suppose contemn and condemn this work, wherein their treasonable practices
and precepts are in part discovered: yet being armed with your Graces and
Honors defense, as with precious stones built upon the chief cornerstone and
Rock, Christ Jesus; though floods from the Sea of Rome should come, or the
winds of wicked Jesuits blow upon this book with their infecting breath, and
would beat it down with a storm of words, yet. Math. 7. 25.
Non cadet, quia fundatur super petram. I fear to be tedious, and therefore in
all dutiful and submissiue reverence, I cease my hand: yet my heart, till
death, shall never cease to pray for all your prosperous happiness and
heavenly success in your holy and high affairs for the Church, King and
Country; for which Divine blessing shall be duly and daily powered forth the
poor devotions of your

Graces and Honors Samuel Garey.

Ad Gloriam Dei, Sionis gaudium, and malorum luctum,
MAgnae Britanniae immortales Gratiae
Pro salute Britanniae, quinto Nouembris,
Ab horrenda proditione Anglo-Papistarum,
Qui pull vere bombardico Parliamenti domum
Euertere sunt machinati,
Hoc Aniuersario commemorantur.
In libre diligenter exara illud, and erit in die nouissime in testimonium
vsque in aeternum. Esa. 30. 8.
Amphitheatrum Scelerum, OR, The Transcendent OF TREASON: For the 5. day of
November.
Son of Man, write thee the name of the day, even of this same day, for the
King of Babel set himself against Jerusalem this same day. Ezech. 24. 2.
CHAP. I.
AS Deuteronomy. 4. 32.
Moses did speak in another kind to the people of Israel, Enquire now of the
days that are past, which were before thee, since the day that God created man
Ethnicismus tale facinus ignorant. Quodque attentatu^, vix aetas postera credet.
upon the earth, and ask from the one end of Heaven unto the other, if there
came to pass such a great thing as this, or whether any such like thing has
been heard: So I may say, Enquire of the Times past, and search the Records of
all Antiquities, and you cannot find such a damnable and devilish project
(the very model of all mischiefs, and Miscellan of all massacres) the
intended Powder Plot, the Quintessence of all impiety, and confection of all
villainy: the like never An. Dom. 1605.
de ficto, much less de facto; in which these prodigious and barbarous
monsters, not men, but loathsome lumpes of mire and blood, (in whose
proditorious breasts the spirits of all expired traitors by a kind of
Pythagoricall transmigration were enclosed) intended to have destroyed the
objects of Englands earthly glory, the glory of succession, yea succession it
self, to extinguish the whole light Grex cu^ rege, Arae cum focis, lares cu^
penatibus perijsset.
and life of the land, vno actu, tactu, ictu: by one blow and blast of powder,
-- Tollere
Rem, Regem, Regimen, Regionem, Religionem.


Furious Phaetons, in one day, yea hour; with a dismal fire-worke to burn
all to ashes; of a glorious Monarchy to make an Anarchy; to offer our most
gracious King, royal Queen, virtuous Prince, and hopeful Progeny, with right
Noble personages of honorable place and birth, the reverend Clergy, with all
the rest of that wise and flourishing assembly; to offer them all as a quick
and living sacrifice (not powdered with salt, or salted with fire, as our Mark.
9. 49.
Savior, but) salted with powder, to make such an Holocaust or burnt offering
as should be the general martyrdom of the Kingdom, to bereave us of our 2
King. 2. 11.
Eliat, and Horsemen of Israel, and take them away in a whirle-winde and
chariot of fire. Quot mortes in vna morte? How many deaths in such a death? to
cut off Esaias 9. 14.
caput and caudam, head and tail, branch and rush, Prince, Priest and people
from our Israel in one day: Quomodo inaudito potuit manus impianisu
Tam dirum fabric are nef as? Respublica in vno
Funere tollenda est, vno tumulanda sepulchro?
With such an hellish deed for to desire
To bury King and Kingdom in a fire?


How ought the heavenly and happy delivery from such an horrible and hidcous
Tragedy, excite all continually to thank, and magnify our most merciful God,
for such a miraculous preservation: And though the crying sins of the Land
had deserved such a Doomesday of fire, yet the Lord in mercy has delivered it
from that desolation, and secured by his outstretched arm of power and pity
the Royal Head, and loyal members of great Britanny from his and our enemies,
who Psa. 83. 3. 4.
took crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy secret
ones. They said; Come, let us cut them off from being a Nation, and let the
name of Israel be no more in remembrance: but they perished at Endor, and were
dung for the Earth. Shall 10.
Psalm. 88. 12.
such wondrous works as these be known in the dark, and thy righteousness
in the Land where all things are forgotten? Can such a deliverance from such a
dismal danger, so villainous in the Agents, so dolorous for the patients, so
craftily contrived, so eagerly pursued, so nearly effected, the watch of a
night, and turning of an hand between us, and so deadly desolations; can such
a gracious work be ever buried in oblivion? Indeed it was The Israelites
danced after the drowning of Pharoh, yet within three days after murmured at
the waters of Marah. Exodus 15. 22. 23.
Isreal's error, whose prayers and praises ended, so soon as they had passed
the Red Sea: and shall we that have escaped, not that Red Sea of water, but a
Red Sea of fire, shall we end our prayers and praises to God, because that
danger is past? Oh how unworthy shall we be of future favors, if so
unthankful for past blessings? And truly herein the Land is faulty, in
forgetting these benefits, in a cold, and Beneficia dei omnibus horis
consideranda sunt etc. Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. c.
not continual acknowledgement of their humble thankfulness to God for
these, and other unspeakable benefits. And at the first all peoples hearts did
burn within them (like those two Luke 24. 32.
Disciples) when they did but talk of the Powder Treason, admiring and
acknowledging the infinite mercies of God, in the preventing this most abhorred
massacre and with heart and voice magnified the Lord with Psa. 1 24. 1. 2. 3. 6.
David's Psalm: If the Lord had not been on our side, may Israel now say; If
the Lord had not been on our side, when men rose up against us, they had then
swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us. Praised be the
Lord, which has not given us as a prey unto their teeths but a few years
being past, they begin to slacken this duty and are cold in praising God for
so blessed Beneficij memoria est breuissima.
a deliverance. Perchance pondering Parsans words, Will you never give over
(says he) your clamors and exaggerations. The Powder Treason, the Powder
Treason? No, we should never give it over, to pour forth our perpetual
praises to God, for protecting us from so prodigious a plot, and practice. Our
Eucharisticall devotion to God for the prevention of the downfall of the Land,
should not be so momentary, and like a morning dew, as if the renewed
remembrance of so great deliverance should become wearisomenesse unto our
spirits, or the wonderment of the Lords mighty work being past, our
gratulation to God should be out of dare, unseasonable, and more then half
forgotten: No, the delivery from this flagitious, and most bloody designement,
(as it were a resurrection of this Kingdom from the dead) claims not a
vanishing, but a continual and constant joy; which joyful thankfulness to
God if we forbear or forget, because the time of that danger is past, we shall
be like them, who seeing Ioh. 5. 35.
John to be a shining and a burning light, reioiced for a season in him; or
like the Luc. (...).
Pharise, Thank God in tongue and countenance only. And I fear there are
many in this public joy and thanksgiving, assume the face, and fashion of
reioicers, like Ruf^, who came to Vitellius after his victory, carrying (as
Histor. lib. 2.
Tacitus writes, Latitiam and gratulat ionem vultu ferens, sed animo anxius,
etc.) Ioyfulnes in tongue and heaviness in heart: These if any such, may
witness against themselves. That Psalm. 146. (...).
the Lord has done great things for us, wherefore we rejoice. The better to
awaken our flumbering affections to this perpetual service of thankful
reioicing, and to provoke us to imprint an eternal Momento in the Calendar of
our hearts forever, of the marvelous mercy of God in keeping us from that
intended destruction, I have enterprized to ^ouze up and revive the languishing
spirits of the Land, with the renewed remembrance of so joyful a work, and
with a fresh Lamps laudis Dei.
supply to refresh this fainting and expiring Lamp, which though it has been
cherished with the oil of many helping hands, yet begins to fail in light,
and had need that both Pulpet and Press should preach and publish a continual
Hallelu-Iah, for so great and gracious a mercy of delivery. For earthly men are
hardly moved to this duty of praising and thanking God; of ten Luke 17. 15.
Lepers but one returns to give thanks. Pharao being plagued, can send for
Moses and Aaron, and say; Exodus 9. 28.
Pray ye unto the Lord for me; but being eased, never say, Praise the Lord with
me: wherein (if the latenesse of our gratulation to God) shall find a cold
entertainment with the unthankful Children of Men; as if this work were out
of date, I say with the Psalmist; Psa. 102. 13.
This shall be written for the generation to come, and the people which shall
be created, shall praise the Lord.

In handling of which Subject, I will discourse principally of four general
things: 1. Of the plot and project it self: 2. Of the Persons: 3. Of the
Causes, or motives: 4. Of the ends. By these four marks I will guide my self
in the description of this Chaos of confusion.

CHAP. II.
1. Of the Plot.

IN the declaration of this direful, and detestable Quorum Sceleri non inuenit
aetas nomen etc. Iuv. Sat. 13.
Powder Plot, I may begin with the words of Aeneas, relating to Queen Dido
of the fall of Troy, yet with a little Inuersion: Aenead. lib. 2.
Anglorum vt opes, and lamentabile regnum
Eruerent Danai --
Quanquam animus (...) horret, luctuque refugit,
Incipiam --
My heart does shake with trembling fear amazt,
How famous England, a rich flourishing Land,
By Papists Powder Plot had been defaced,
And Troynouant, like Troy, in Haec facics Troiae, cum caperetur, erat. Ovid.
fiery ruins stand,
Had not the Lord put forth his saving hand.


As Treason is a work of darkness; so these working Traitors wrought in
darkness, their plot of hellish policy and impiety concealed in a place of
darkness, Subterraneum foramen, A place under the Earth, they wrought under
the ground, beginning their Mine the eleauenth of December 1604, near to the
wall of the Parliament house. -- Itum est in viscera terrae.
Atque oculis captifodere cubilia talpae: Ovid.
These blinded Pyoners to the Prince of hell.
Labor in darkness, and in darkness dwell.


Deep politicians to undermine a State: what depth in devising, cunning in
contriuing, cost in preparing, sweat in laboring, closeness in conueying.
Ingeniosa crudelitas ad poenas; Men of cruel wits to crucify their Country:
but the Lords potent wisdom eluded the profound policies of these monstrous,
and mischievous Earthwormes.

In which damnable Malorum Ierna* Rem tam secretam esse, vt necesse sit. eam
prius peragi, quam discerni, as some say their Garnet did write to the Pope.
plot, two points considerable: 1. Their secrecy: 2. Their cruelty in it:
Secrecy both in the Act, and Agents: 1. Under the Earth, the bosom of all
secrets: 2. In the Agents, who swear, and take the Sacrament for secrecy.
Strange impiety: to take the Sacrament, the Seal of Grace, to commit not a
crying sin of blood, but a roaring, and thundering sin of fire, and
brimstone: This is Popish practice, usually to tie themselves for performance
of their desperate deeds, by taking the Sacrament, in which they hold Christ's
body and blood really present; and thereupon make a bargain to shed real, yea
royal blood. -- Nullus s^mel are receptus
Sang^ f^nces.


I may say of them, as Jacob of Simeon and Leui; Brethren in evil, the
Instruments of cruelty are their habitations: (...) Genesis 49. 7. 6.
into their secret let not my soul come. These Gun-powder-Traytors, first in
their mine consulting with the Prince of Darkness, (the president of their
plot and counsel;) and the combining and conspiring with themselves in the
deepest secrecy for the perpetrating this inhumane villainy: and having from the
eleauenth of December, 1604, unto Candlemasse next, Labor improbus.
labored under the ground, and brought their wicked work through half the
wall of the Parliament House, upon a new opportunity leave their undermining
work, Daemonum opus, The Devils work; and hire the Vault or Cellar, under the
Parliament house. And as before these Devils Iourney-men labored under the
Earth, so now framing, and machinating sub Senatu, under the Parliament House,
to make a final dissolution there, which is the famous place of public
reformation: and therefore secretly do convey great store of powder thither,
about 36 barrels of powder, covered over with store of wood and billet; and to
use Psa. 11. 2. 3.
David's words; Lo, the wicked bend their Bow, and make ready their Arrows
upon the string, that they may secretly shoot at them which are upright in
heart: for the foundations shall be cast down, and what has the righteous
done? And as the same Psa. 64. 5.
Prophet, They encourage themselves in a wicked purpose, they commune together
to lay snares privily, and say; Who shall see them? but the Psa. 33. 10.
Lord did break the counsel of the Heathen, and brought to: naught the
devises of such people. Blessed be his holy name for ever.

2 Is the cruelty of the plot, which appears specially in two respects: 1. In
the general extent: 2. In the grievous device.

The extent large, plotted for the general destruction of Cruelty in the
extent.
the King and Kingdom. Cum subit illius dirissima mortis image,
Vltima quae Regi, regnoque, bonisque fuisset,
Horribilis quatit essa tremor: --.
A dismal day, in which they did intend
Of King, and Kingdom for to make an end.


These Powder-papists then dreamed to have had a Roman Regiment, that Tuesday
at night here; like Hamilcars dream, the General of the Carthaginiani, laying
siege to Syracusa, an Image appeared to him in his dream, and told Hamilear,
he should sup the next night in Syracusa; and so he did, yet not as a
Captain, but Captive: or like Julius Caesaers dream, who the night before he
was slain in the Senate house, dreamed that he sat hard by Jupiters seat: So
these alreamed of high matters, and imagined wicked things; but the Lord Psalm.
2. 4. 9.
did laugh them to scorn, the Lord had them in derision, and caused them to be
crushed with a Scepter of Iron, and broke them in pieces like a Potters vessel.

I cannot apprehend the hundredth part of the misery of that Iliada malorum.
mischief, in attempting not only to make our Kingdom headless, but
memberlesse; and may cry Quis cladem illius facti, quis funera faudo
Explicet?


For they intended with one thunderclap of powder to have cut off our Princely
and politic Head, our Anointed Heu cadit in quenquam tantum Scelus?
King, gracious Queen, hopeful Prince, with the blessed branches of the
Regal Race; the most reverend Clergy, Right Honorable Nobility, faithful
Counselors, grave ludges, the greatest part of our worthy Knights and Gentry,
wise Burgesses; the learned Clerks of the Crown, Counsel, Signet, Seals,
and of every principal Judgment seat: the choice Lawyers, with an infinite
number of the common people. Nay, this patternelesse project had not only
extinguished the best of Christians, but had demolished all the chief
ornaments, and monuments of the Land, the House of Parliament, the Hall of
Justice, the Tombs of all former Princes, the Crown, with other marks of
royalty, the Records of the Kingdom, the ancient Charters, Presidents, and
Evidences of preserved Antiquities. In a word: The Head and Body of the State
in general, with the chief ornaments of all our Land, had been comprehended
under that fearful and final Chaos, and may them us to borrow the Poets
verse, In Chaos (...), (...).


But the Lord in mercy delivered all from this barbarous butchery, this Babels
confusion, the most Tragical example of damnable Treachery, praised be his
Majesty and mercy for ever.

2. Cruelty is in the devise, by a pile of fire and fagots, ironbarrs, 2
Cruelty in the devise.
timber pieces, and huge stones, with thirty six barrells of Gunpowder, at one
volley to have blown them up; and not only with powder to burn them, but
lest (Salamander like) they should live in that fire, with wood, stones and
Iron to beat them to powder. That I may say with Genesis 49. 7.
Jacob, Cursed be their wrath, for it was fierce, and their rage, for it was
cruel: A most cursed and cruel form of practice: for as by three means
mankind may be put to death, first, by man, the most mild and merciful way:
secondly, by unreasonable creatures, more unnatural, yet some resistance may be
made, or pity found, and as Dan. 6.
Daniel in the lions den, parcere prostratis scit nobilis ira leonis.
Thirdly, by insensible, and inanimate things* and among all the most cruel,
the two elements of water and fire, and of those two, the fire most merciless
and miferable. And in this intended corporal death they desire to dispatch
all, not sensim, to prepare them by little and little to call to God to keep
them from the second death, Vt iugulent homines, surgunt de nocte latrones.
Horat.
(worse then a thousand bodily deaths:) But sine sensu, at vnawarns,
unprepared, to send them away, with one blast to blow up all: they make no
distinction of sex, exemption of person, young, old, great, small, man or
woman, Parcit cognatis maculis similis fera Iuuen. Leonum feritas inter se non
dimicat. Serpentu^ morsus non petit Serpents, ne maris belluae. ac pisces,
nisi in diuersa genera saeuiunt. Plin. Hist. 7. Philo apud Centuriast. cent. 1.
lib. 1. c. 3^ Macrob. Saturna. 20.
high low, rich or poor. Omnibus est eadem lethivia: They must al pass the
fiery trial, be they their frinds or followers and welwillers (wherein no doubt
but they had some of good place,) yet all of them must be blown up together.
Wherein they showed themselves worse then the wild beasts; who are kind to
their own kind, a quality even naturalized in a brutish breast: but these to
satisfy and satiate their bloody minds, will exceed the bestiall ferocity,
and following the bloody steps of that Butcher Herod, who in the Bethlemiticall
murder, to make all sure, did not spare his own son, as some write: which
moved Augustus to say; Praestat esse Herodis percum quam prolem, It was better
to be Herod's swine the^ son; to this practice of Papists may make us say, It is
better to be the Popes beast then Barn, dog, then Darling. And indeed these
kind of people (as this Plot with others is a fit demonstration) Habemus
e^sinu* Testes: not only thiust living men out of the Church, but also the
dead out of the Churchyard. D. Boys.
many of them be of very cruel and bloody dispositions, Powder, Poison, and
Poniard, the Typical marks of their profession; nay their malice so
inueterate and immortal, that it cease not with death, but the bones, and
ashes of their martred enemies, must be disturbed in their graves, as Fox. in
Martyrolog.
Wicliffe, Bucer, and Phag^^s, are famous witnesses.

And as it was an old proverb, (...), meaning Cappadocians, Cilicians and
Cretians, to which we add Romes Catholics, Crudeles, er Cruciferos, cruel
crucifying Catholics; in their plots of cruelty they will carry the picture of
a crucifix, or an Agnus dei in any foul fact; like the Iacobites, or 2 Macch.
12. 40 Vrsinon saeuiunt in cadauera.
Iamnites, who had under their coats their golden gods when they went to
battle: Pictura Dei in opere diaboli, The picture of God in the work of the
devil. Yet to dig up dead men's graves is a point of cruelty, for -- molliter
essa quieseant.

And as Josias said to his people concerning a Prophet buried in a scpulcher,
let 2 Kin. 23. 18. It was Vitellius cruelty, Olere hostem mortuum. Arist. lib.
5. politic. c. 11. and Sueton. in vita.
him alone, let none remove his bones. But if this were all, alas the cruelty
were but small, Parua queror: These are poor reuenges of malice to martyr the
bones, when they have murdered the bodies: No no, their cruelty shall not only
descend to the Sepulcher, but ascend to the Scepter: kill a King, poison a
Prince, blow up a Senate: fire up a Parliament, Spoil a Nation;

Inven. Sat. 1. Aude aliquid breuibus gyaris, et Carcere dignum, Si vis esse
aliquis, etc.

As Catesby to his companion said, Will thou be a Traitor Like Herostratus, who
burned Dianas Temple, to be infamously famous.
Tom? venture not thy self to small purpose; if thou will be a Traitor, there
is a plot to a greater advantage, and such an one as ca^ never be discovered:
what a fiery spirit is here not like Luke 9. 54.
James or John, to command fire from heaven to consume them, but to fetch fire
from hell (or purgatory fire out of the vault) to consume all.

Such a bloody minded man was their Cardinal Farnesus, of whom it is Apud.
Sleyd. li. 7.
written, that he said he would make his horse swim up to the belly in the
blood of Protestants: we know not what Spirits they are of: for as there be
three kind of Spirits,

Holy. Humane. Hellish.
So these possessed with the last, an hellish spirit, in an hellish work, to
destroy our general Father, and common Mother, King, and Country, with a
Mentioned in that letter the means of the discovery.
terrible blow; which cruelty may make us more astonished, then the witchcrafts
of Isis and Osyris amazed Apuleius. -- Bella, horrida bella,
Et Tamisin multo spumantem sanguine cerno:
The wars and woes (if this their work had stood)
Had made the Thames and Temples swim with blood.


Oh let this monstrous Monument of superlatiue impiety stand like Genesis 19. 26.
Lots wives pillar of salt, to season all posterity with detestation of such
inhumane cruelty. Triste exemplum, sed in posterum salubre, as Liu lib 8.
Liuy in another kind: A fearful In Sionis gaudium, and papistarum luctum.
example, worthy to make us more thankful to God, more dutiful in our lives,
more careful of Gods Laws, who out of his infinite love and mercy preserved
us from this general and diabolical massacre. And as I have read, how the
Romans in detestation of the name of proud Tarquinius, who tyrannized over
them, banished a good Citizen, only because he had that name; so let the name
of the Powder Treason, work such detestation in the hearts of all Papists,
that they may never hereafter think of any treasonable plots against King or
Country, but banish for ever all such intentions or inventions out of their
hearts, which I pray God give them grace to do. And let all from high to low,
fall down upon the knees of humble and thankful hearts, and cry with David;
Psa. 136. 3.
Praise the Lord of Lords, for his mercy endures for ever: let Israel now
Psalm. 118. 2.
say; that his mercy endures for ever: who delivered his people, when like
Izaacke, almost the knife at Genesis 22. 10.
their throats; and when they had prepared their fire, wood, powder, to offer
up Prince, Peers, and People, like 2:
Isaacke as a burnt offering; when they purposed Psalm. 7. 5.
to persecute their souls, and take them, to tread our lives down upon the
earth, and to lay our honor in the dust: then 6.
did the Lord arise in his wrath, and lift up himself against the rage of our
enemies: so that they who 15. 16.
made a pit, and dug it, fell into it themselves; their mischief returned
upon their own heads, and their cruelty fell upon their own pates. The Psalm.
9. 16.
wicked are snared in the work of their own hands, and may move all to cry
aloud; Psalm. 66. 5. 7.
Come, and behold the works of the Lord: he rules the World with his power,
his eyes behold the Nations, the rebellious shall not exalt themselves. Praise
our God ye people, 8.
and make the voice of his praise to be heard: 150. 2. 9.
Praise him in his mighty Acts, praise him according to his excellent
greatness: let every one that has breath; praise the Lord, for this great and
gracious mercy, in the means of our marvelous and merciful delivery.

CHAP. III.
The discovery of the Plot:

IN the discovery of this Archtrayterous plot, I may truly repeat Liuies
words, who in a great case of joy says; Maius gaudium suit, quam quod
vniuersum homines caperent, It was a greater joy then men are able to
comprehend, by an unusual discovery to have a general delivery from so dismal
In their Letter.
Tragedy. For when they had thought and writ, that God and Man had concurred to
punish the wickedness of the time, God, and Man consented to reveal the
wickedness of their treason, and makes us hope well of that Prophecy we do
read in Telesphorus, Lib. de Tribulatione. p. 31.
Antichristus non poterit subiugare Venetias, nec Parisios, nec Ciuitatem
regalem Anglia, Antichrist shall not be able to sub due Venice, nor Paris, nor
the Kingly City of England, London. The principal instrument, and humane
means of the discovery of this devilish treachery, was a letter (like 2 Samuel
11. 15.
David's letter to Ioab, which Vriah carried for his own death) sent some ten
days before the Parliament should have begun, privily and cunningly conveyed
by an unknown man to one of the Footmen of that Right Honorable Lord,
(worthy of perpetual honor for his fidelity) the Lord Mount-Eagle, charging
him to put that Letter into his Lord and Masters hands; which Letter that
thrice-honoured Lord receiving, wondering at the strange contents thereof, and
perplexed what construction to make of it, like a most dutiful Subject and
divine Eagle, concluded not to conceal it; but for all the latenesse and
darkness of the night, repaires presently to his Majesty's Palace at
White Hall, and there delivered the same to the late deceased Earl of
Salisbury, Sir Robert Cecil, a very vigilant Counselor, and wise Statesman,
then his Majesty's principal Secretary: which said Letter being afterward upon
the Kings return to White Hall presented to his Majesty, (ever Wise as an
Angel of God. 2 Samuel 14. 20.
fortunate in his Princely judgment in clearing obscurities, and doubtful
mysteries) did upon the instant interpret, and apprehend by the dark phrases,
(yet contrary to Drammaticall construction) that it must be done by blowing up
the House of Parliament by Gunpowder; commanding a search to be made, by which
the matter discovered, and Agents were apprehended. Whereas if his Majesty had
not accommodated his interpretation to this kind of danger, no worldly
provision, or prevention, could have put back this lamentable destruction. So
that is here verified, which Proverb. 16. 10.
Solomon delivered, Divination in labijs Regis, A divine sentence shall be in
the lips of the King: The Prou. 25. 1.
glory of God is to conceal a thing secret, but the Kings honor is to search
it out. In this Gunpowder Treason, our King was Regi^ (...), Kingly Prophet,
inspired by God in deciphering and declaring the dark meaning of their
ambiguous, and mystical Letters: It was the Lords mercy to put into the Kings
mind the dark meaning of this dangerous mischief: for, Philo.
Ibi incipit diuinum auxilium, vbi deficit humanum, When humane helps are
ready to fail, God will come in the very point and article of time, to deliver
his servants; and will raise up some means either ordinary or extraordinary,
to discover and defeat the devices of the wicked. As indeed did divinely
appear in this delivery; first that a Letter should be writ; secondly a
gloss or commentary made upon it by the King, contrary to common construction,
yet that was the second means (under Tutelaris Deus.
God, whose might and mercy was above all) of our preservation. Telenus
prophesied to Cyclops, his eye should be put out, but he was incredulous to
believe it, contemned this advertisement: Risit, and o vatum stolidissime,
falleris, inquit.


So some might have thought this letter to have been Scintilla neglecta magnum
excitat incendium.
the euaporation of an idle brain; but our Teltroth Cassandra, sacred
Sovereign, presently presaged the truth, knowing Traitors to be like Judge. 15.
4.
Sampsons Foxes, to have fired tails, and to be firebrands of fury,
presupposed it to be a plot of fire: for Traitors are Flagellarci^. Flabella
seditionis, scourges of Commonwealths, Bellows of sedition, to inkindle
fireworkes of destruction: they are like cruel Surgeons, that always lance
and sear, and use the cutting knife and fire, no gentle Remedium morbo
deterius.
Remedies: as their heads, like the head of Occuluitque caput, quod adhuc
latet: Ovid. Non interest quis occidat si innocentem aliquis occidendum esse
desiderat. Cassio. sup. psalm. 62.
Nilus unsearchable; so their hearts in cruelty insatiable, and hands in
execution infatigable, as their bloody heads, hearts, and hands appear in this
bloody business. These gunpowder Traitors, plotting so abhorred a Particide,
though God frustrated their inhumane attempts, and brought the wheel upon
themselves, yet were they most accursed murderers in the sight of God. Saul a
murderer in mental affection, in hunting after 1. Sam. 19. 1.
David's life, though he failed in manual action and execution: So Ester 5. 14.
Hamax in plotting the death. of innocent Mordecai, was a murderer in heart,
and had a murderers reward. Never drop of innocent bloodshed, but it cries for
vengeance, therefore Job 16. 18.
Ioh, O earth, cover not thou my blood. A murderer is the very Image and
picture of the Devil, who was a murderer from the beginning, as our Savior
Ioh. 8. 44.
says; and they that practice, or do purpose to murder men, poison Princes,
destroy Countries, blow up Cities, fire up Parliaments, are of their Father the
Devil, and led by his Spirit. And truly this practice, as it was of
extraordinary ascendencie, so it had a rare discovery, by a letter of their
own, dark, doubtful, and Sphinxian, delivered strangely; and when accepted,
it might have been thought to have been an idle gull, or pasquill, and never
further have come to light, or being further examined, they might have missed
the mark in the interpretation God has chosen the foolish things of the world
to confound the wise, etc. 1. Cor. 1 27.
of the mischief; but God so ordered, that this foolish letter (as it might
have bin judged) was the means to discover their treachery, and confound their
villainy. And further though a Treason suspected, yet nothing detected, till
the very night before the day of their intended slaughter: they had almost
brought it to this pass, Psalm. 94. 17.
Paulominus in inferno habitasset anima nostra, Our soul had almost dwelt in
silence: yea they Psalm. 119. 87.
had almost consumed us upon the earth: we were in articulo mortis, not only
as men appointed to dye, but at the point to dye; but God who is Psalm. 9. 9.
adiutor in opportunitatibus, a refuge in due time of trouble, did Psalm. 124. 7.
break the snare, and we were delivered.

It pleased God to permit the Devil to feed these his true servants with
false hopes, let them go on freely without rub, till they had fully wouen their
Spiders web, and come to the very point of execution, and delivery of that
deuillish monster whereof they had so long travailed, and might say with those
mourning messengers of King Ezechiah sent to Esaias, 2. King. 19. 3.
the children are come to the birth, and there is no strength to bring forth:
when we were albicantes ad messem, John 4. 35.
white for the harvest, and ready to be cut down, and wanted nothing but
thrusting in of Falx, their sickle to cut us down: or Fax, the fire to burn
us up: or Faux, even Guido Faux, or Faux Erebi, hellish Faux to swallow us up:
when we might say with 1. Sam. 20. 3.
David, there is but a step betwixt us, and death: being at the mouth of the
pit, then the Zechar. 3. 2.
Lord takes us as brands out of the fire: or as Amos 4. 12.
Amos, like firebrands plucked out of the burning.

When our enemies thought they had the prey in their hands, and all had been
sure, when the danger was most deadly, and delivery desperate, then the Lord
did fight against them in our cause: Now Esaias 33. 10. 11.
will I arise, says the Lord, now will I be exalted now will I lift up my
self: Ye shall conceive chafe, and bring forth stubble: the fire of your
breath shall devour you: as you have Prou 22. 8.
sown iniquity, so shall you reap affliction: ye have Hosea 8. 7. Qui
operantur iniquitatem, and semirant dolores, metu^t eos. Job. 4. 8.
sown the wind ye shall reap the whirle-winde. Then did the Lord dash their
devices in pieces, and made their Sun set at noone, as Amos 8. 9. or rather
caused their sin to be discovered at midnight. All the former part of the
night their hellish factor Faux was about his work of darkness, in preparing
all his Engines and snares of death ready for the morning; and yet before the
morning watch, I say, before the morning Psalm. 130. 6.
watch, they were disappointed and discovered, and their chief Agent* By that
noble and trusty Knight Sir Thomas Kneuet employed in that search and service.
Faux apprehended.

Sorrow might endure a night, but joy comes in the morning. -- Redeunt
spectacul^ man^.

When these Romish Idumeans (enemies to our Israelites) had said like them in
their hearts, Who shall bring Obad. 3.
us down to the ground? then did the watchman of Israel who Psalm. 121. 4. Yet
they say, the Lord shalnot see, neither will the God of Jacob regard it. Psalm.
94. 7
neither stumbers no^ sleeps bring the devices of the wicked to light,
manifesting their mischief, detecting their conspiracy, saying to these
sinners as to the seas, Job 38. 11.
Thus far shall ye go^ and no further: Psalm. 68. 1.
E^ Deus, and (...), When God arose, his enemies were soon scattered, they
also that hate him, shall fly before him to make all to say with Esaias, Esaias
33. 13.
Hear ye that are a far off, what I have done, and ye that are ne^e know my
power; when the wicked had said in their hearts, Let us destroy, Psalm* 83. 8.
them altogether, (...) Psalm. 78. 65. 66.
Lord awake as one out of sleep; and as a Giant refreshed with wine, and smote
his enemies in the hinder parts, and put them to a perpetual shame; praised be
his blessed name for ever.

And that no heart of man should presume to detract or defalke any part of the
glory from Gods entire and plenary praise in the work of this deliverance; or
sing like them, 1 Samuel 18. 7.
Saul has slain his thousand, and David his ten thousand: Consider the
gracious and wonderful providence of God, that the malefactor and
Powder-Monster Faux, was taken when he was new come out of the vault from
working his fire-worke, having three matches, and all other instruments ready
in his pocket; whereas if this Sinon had been taken while he was enclosed in
his Equo ne credit Teucri. Virg.
Trojan Horse, he confessed he would not have failed to have blown up the
house, Like Nero, Me mortuo ruat mundus.
himself, and his takers all together: for as the Poet well writes of such
Iuvenal. Sat. 6.
-- Nihil est audacius illis
Depraensis, iram, ac animos a crimine sumunt:
Such wretches taken, and their deeds once seen,
Harden these hearts, and do increase their spleen.


Yet such was the ouer-ruling power and Vbicunque fuerit prouidentia
frustrantur vniuersa contraria. Aug.
providence of God herein, without any secondary causes, that the party
assigned for the deed should be then without, who if he had been within, had
done the deed in part, and in stead of touching the parties had ouerturned the
place. To move all, King and Subjects, not to Hab. 1. 16.
sacrifice to their own nets, as if any worldly policy could have prevented
this wretched impiety, but that alone the sacred goodness and providence of our
most dear and blessed God might triumph in this deliverance. Psalm. 115. 1.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory. Thou
Revel. 4. 11.
art worthy, O Lord, to receive all the glory, honor, and power; and let all
the Creatures in Heaven, and Christians on earth fay, Revel. 5. 13.
Praise and honor, and glory, and power be unto him that sits upon the
Throne, and to the Lamb for evermore; who has delivered us from this ocean of
misery, this odious Massacre. And should move all, Head and members, to cry
with Ezra 9. 13. 14.
Ezra, Seeing that thou our God have stayed us from being beneath, and have
given us such a deliverance, should we return to break thy commandments, and
join in affinity with the people of such abominations? Seeing the Lord in
this extraordinary work has declared such lively marks, and express
Characters of his divine majesty, might and mercy toward us, shall we not
magnify the Lords mercy with Miriams melody, Exodus 15. 21.
Sing ye unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously, the horse and his
rider has he ouerthrown in the Sea: He has confounded the barbarous immanity,
and inhumanity of these bloodthirsty Traitors even emancipated to cruelty, by
a noble and notable delivery; and shall we not render unto him a cordial and
continual thanksgiving of our lips, joined with a real thanksgiving of our
lives? or shall we praise him with our mouths and provoke him with our sins?
Lip-labor is lost labor, except with an internal thankfulness, there goes
an entire obedience. Consider Christ's caveat, John 5. 14:
Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. Let our newnes of life
express the greatness of our thankfulness. God will not accept the
sacrifice of mouth-praisers proceeding from unsanctified livers. Let this our
commemoration and recognition of Gods mercies past, provoke us to all obedience
in the reformation of our lives to come. So shall we make an holy use of so
happy a delivery: Singula illius mala erunt nobis singula bona, Their Ignis
deuorationis excitaret ignem deuotionis.
banefire of powder, our bonefire of praises. And withal to make us more Finis
vnius mali est gradus futuri.
vigilant to vn-earth these foxes, who will creep into holes under the ground
to work our overthrow: foresight is the wise man's Beacon, Melius est
praecauere, quam pauere: Cantic. 2. 15.
Take us the foxes, the little foxes which destroys the vines; for they are a
part of that generation of whom speaks Solomon, Prou. 30. 14.
Whose teeth are as swords, and their jaws as knives, they Prou. 6. 34.
will not spare in the day of vengeance, and like the whorish woman Prou 6. 26.
will hunt for the precious life of man. Remember therefore the counsel of the
son of Syrach, Ecclus. 36. 26.
Who will trust a thief that is always ready?

And let this our true thankfulness to God be a durable service, not like
H^se. 6. 4.
a morning dew, and cloud that goes away, or a Widows joy, oritur and
moritur, gotten, and forgotten in an hour, a suddainefit, or momenta^y
passion, or entertained like an annual guest, as if the force and fruit of
our thankful joy should be confined to one day, or like a common retainer
should have but a yearly acceptance: no, I Ezech. 4. 6.
have appointed thee a day for a year, even a day for a year, says God to
his Prophet: but this of ours, est Dies pro omnibus annis, a day to thank God
all the years of our life: always to say and sing with Deborah, Judge. 15. 2.
20. 31.
praise ye the Lord for the auenging of Israel: yea even the stars in their
course fought against Sisera: So let thine enemies perish O Lord. And thou (O
Lord) which did keep Psalm. 64. 2.
us from the conspiracy of the wicked, and from the rage of the workers of
iniquity, by discovering their villainy, to thee (most mighty, and merciful
God) we offer up our bodies and souls as a living sacrifice, desirous to do
thee all prostrate service, in body and soul, which thou have preserved in
peace, appointed by the wicked to have perished in powder; we will never forget
Nulla Dies rerum tantarum obliuiaducat.
this mercy, or forbear our humble thanks to thee for our delivery, but so
long as the Sun and Moon endures, we with our posterities, (till time
shall be no more) will cherish the remembrance of it with an immortal
thankfulness, saying to thee with holy Melchi-sedecke after Abraham's victory,
Genesis 14. 20.
Blessed be the most high God, which has delivered our enemies into our hands;
to which King 1. Tim. 1. 17.
everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God only wise, be all the honor, and
glory for ever, and ever: Amen.

CHAP. IIII.
A description of the Persons.

THe Romish professors, who teach They that with their teeth will tear their
breaden God, would eat up Gods people as bread. psalm. 14. 4.
the people to eat their God, and kill their King, were the chief instruments
in the Powder Treason: all the Actors, and adherents were great Recusants. Lay
Recusants, Catesby, Percy, Winter, Tresham, Wright, etc. devised the plot, and
then the lesuits fell in with them: allowed, and ratified by Garnet, Gerard,
O^^corne, Greenewell, etc. Jesuits, and Popish Priests. Garnet imparted the
Popes Breues to Catesby, a right Catiline, whereby he was stirred up to devise
some way to work a general overthrow. This Catesby was the inuentor of this
Villainy: Virg:
Accipe nunc Danaum insidias, and crimine ab vno disce omnes.
Learn by this Traitors odious fault, and fall,
Ye Papists to abhor Treason in general:


This Si hi Sancti, qui Scythae? Si hi sunt Catholici, qui Cannibales?
Canniball, or Roman-catholicke Catesby, having bethought him of the
powder plot for the blowing up of the Parliament house, in general rearmes
breaks the case to Garnet: What if in some case the innocent should be
destroyed with the guilty? He answers, they might, so that it were for a good
able to recompense the lo^se of the innocent. And afterward the plot plainly
propounded to him, not by way of confession, as his Procters plead for him,
but in conference about it: as he voluntarily confessed before his death, that
Greenewell with this Catesby was heard of him, not confessing, but consulting:
yet if it had been by way of confession (for his own confession proves the
contrary) he should have revealed the plot, if not the parties, yea the parties
also, if he would follow the example of his fellow-confessors. Bodin Libro 2.
de ^epub. c. 5.
does relate an example herein, how a Norman had a purpose to kill King
Francis, yet afterward changed his mind, (these far from such thoughts) and
opens this sin in his confession to a Minorite Friar, of his former, yet
forsaken purpose: the Friar does enioine him penance, and grants absplution:
yet declares all to the King, and the Judges of the Court of Paris cause him to
be executed. But these who before had turned them from the true religion, and
tutored them in the School of rebellion, were so far from revealing, as that
their heads and hearts were with them to (...) well of the accomplishing:
Gerard gave the Traitors the Sacrament to kind them to secrecy: Hammond in
(...) house absolved the Traitors, the Treason revealed: Oldcorne, alias Hall
defends the plot being discovered, and wills the Catholics not to be
discouraged.

Tesmond plotted with Garnet, and goes up and down to raise up Arms. The
public writings of our state and Ex Actis public is Henrici Garnetti Londini
editis.
records herein, with some of their own confessions, examinations, and
subscriptions, are invincible witnesses against all the cauels of deprauing
Papists, who labor to clear these their polyprogmaticke Priests, from having
an hand in so hellish a plot, by desperate, and notorious untruths. But it is
manifest by the mouth of Time, and Truth, Vide edictum regium promulgatum 15.
lanua. Anno. 1606. vbi expressum Iesuitas esse Auctores, and inuentores illius
proditoriae Machinationis.
that these Priests were privy to the Powder plot, against all Popish
calumniations suggested to the contrary: and these Lay Recusants having first
sucked the pestilent poison of this unheard Treachery out of the ill humors of
Popish doctrine, infused into them by the treasonable Tribe of Jesuits, who
teach Treason, and cause Traitors to be canonized in Romes Calender: Ovid.
Meta. lib.
Proh Superi, quantum mortalia pectoracaecae
Noctis habent: ipso sceleris molimine Tereus
Creditur essepius, laudemque a crimine sumit.
O Lord, what hearts possessed with the night
Of deepest ignorance, deprived of saving light,
Can grace with praise such deeds of darkness right.


These politic Priests, knowing these their Lay-disciples Quis tulerit
Gracchos de seditione querentes?
to be of turbulent, and treasonable Spirits, imitated Gracchus striplings,
stirring up such as be offended already, making them their Captains and
Standard bearers, while they might with security expect the hoped issue of this
fearful Treachery. So that these Priests, next to the Prince of the Air,
(who caused these children of disobedience to work under the earth) may
challenge the chief place, and precedencie in the Plot: and may say, da locum,
give us the place, you were the Actors, we Authors, commanding you to do all
service for the Catholic cause, to adventure your life's and blood for
replanting our religion, to spare neither head, or mebers, but to strike at the
Root, to make such a confusion as might beget a new alteration; to labor with
Esop: frogs for a Cico^ia, an Italian Storke, and stranger to rule here, so to
suster no Protestant ruler, nolumus hunc regnare, we will have none such rule
over us, and for the effecting of it, you know our Doctrine, and practice.
Flectere sinequeo superos, Acheronta mouebo:
If we cannot prevail with God above,
As low as hell shall our inventions move.


And because some may think I do them wrong, in giving such badges, and
aspersions to the Iesuited Aequiuocans animal, penitusque Sinonia proles:
doctum mancipium, tuba, fax, and Machina Martis.
flock, in making them the Trumpetors of treason, and procurers, and
practisers of King-killing, (an Art highly commended in their School) I will
take upon me briefly to declare, how welcome Traitors be to that Tribe, and
how highly by them they are commended, who of all the world beside are loathed,
and abhorred.

CHAP. V.
Popish applause of Traitors.

IT is commonly known, that Iacobus Clemens a Friar vowed to kill Henry the
third, the French King; this his treason he imparts to Father Comelett, and
other Jesuits: addunt calcaria, they spur him on to this villainy, by
promising Abbacies, Bishoprics, etc. Aut sidefecerit, aut non successerit, if
fail in deed, which he did follow in desire, then to be graced with the glory
of Martyrdom, and Papal Canonization, and to have a place above the (...)
Sext. Q. panegyr. in Consist. An. 1589. O pulchum, and Sanctum facinus
Scholatota sona bit.
Apostles in heaven. The Traitor proceeds in his hellish project, and killes
the King, and Et calo donare scelus, superisque bear.
Sextus Quintui (the head of Rome) spoils his brain, and spend his tongue to
commend it, rarum, inauditum, memor abile facinus, etc. A rare, unheard,
memorable exploit: a rare, unheard Panegyricke to commend a murderer for
shedding* Royal blood. Cacillus that great undertaken for Verres would be
ashamed to Causa patrocinio non bona peior ^^rit.
patronize such parties: but Popes are past shame, and have no blood in their
cheeks, who will commend the shedding of blood: We Rod. Botter. comment. page
109. and 106.
read, that when Chastell that wounded the French King, was examined, by whose
teaching, and persuasion he had done it; answered, that he heard many say, that
the murder was lawful, because they called him a Tyrant: and being demanded,
whether the Jesuits used to say so, he said, he had heard many of them say,
that fact was lawful, because he was out of the Church, and excommunicated.

And one of them has written a book namely Fran. de. Apol. pro. Io. Chastell.
Veron. Constant. calling it, an Apology for John Chastell, maintaining Page
133. Et page 40. read Card. Allens apology for Stanlies Treason.
Chastells deed: In which work, (he says) if Harmodius, and Aristogiton,
Scaeuola, and Brutus only for love of their Country, having no other lights to
go before them, cast themselves into such danger by murdering Tyrants; what
think you ought a Christian, and a Frenchman, and one that burns with the
zeal of Phinees, Ehud, and Elias, to do for the Catholic Church, for which
Christ died, and in which we are sure of salvation? And agreeably with him
writes Amphithea. page 101.
Bonarscius, otherwise called Carolus Scribonius, has the Pope (says he) no
power against the French King? shall Dionysius, Machanidas Aristotimus,
Tyrants, Monsters of the world oppress France, and shall no Pope encourage up
a Dion, a Timoleon to dispatch them? shall many monsters hold the Commonwealth
in bonds, and shall no Thrasibulus move his hand? shall no man play the
Soldier upon this beast, meaning the French King?

So the Jesuit Derege.
Mariana highly commends King killers, Praeclare cumrebus humanis ageretur, si
multi, etc. It were excellent, if many such, meaning King killers could be
found: and commends such greatly, and prescribesto them also rules, and caueats
in the poisoning of Kings, not to poison them by meat, or drink, least the
King taking it with his own hand be guilty of self fellonie; but rather to be
poisoned by his chair, apparel, robes, after the example of the Mauritanian
Kings, to be poisoned by sent, or contact: O hell hound, sprung from cursed,
and cruel Caine, art thou a tutor of Parricide? how comes it that the Pope
has nor called in this work of that wicked wretch, and yet has called in
some others of his books? it argues King killers please him well, and he makes
great use of them.

To pass over foreign Stories of famous Kings, destroyed by them (which in
the next Chapter shall be touched) how was D. Parry encouraged, and animated
(the appointed slaughterman of Queen Elizabeth) by letters to prosecute his
intended mischief, and that from no mean, triuiall, or forlorn fellow, but
even from one of the Popes Cardinals? The tenor of which letter fellows: Sir,
the holiness of our Lord the Pope, has seen your Letter with credit
enclosed, and cannot but praise your good disposition, and resolution, which
you writ, holds to the service, and benefit public. Wherein his Holiness
exhorts you to continue, and to bring to pass your promise: and that you may
be the better aided by that good Spirit, which has induced you to this, his
Blessedness grants you full pardon, and forgiveness of your sins, and his
Holiness will further make himself a debtor to you, to acknowledge your
deseruings in the best manner he may: put in act your holy, and honorable
thoughts, and look to your safety: and I wish you all good, and happy
success: from Rome. 30. of January. 1584.

Yours to dispose, N. Cardinal of Come.

By which letter we may see their liking of such works, and workers, even
their Pope praising such for their good disposition and resolution, which all
godly Christians call abomination, and rebellion. Non sie mor det ouis, non
sunt hac facta columbae,
Sedlup a dilauiat, maretrix ^mat improbe caedes:
No lamb so bit as, no such deeds likes the Dove,
But wolf* will worry, barlot bloodshed love.


It is well said of In Romans 2. Defensio peccati duplicat peccatum: vitia quia
amant defendunt, and malunt potius excusare, quam excutere. Sen. epist. 116.
Primasius Nemo per^, peccat, quam qui peccat, none sin more dangerously, then
they which defend their sin: how deadly then sin they, who not only defend
it, but commend that crying sin of blood, promising pardon of sins, for
perpetrating most horrible sins: So that it puts me in mind of the saying of
the painter to the Duke of Vrbine, who being hired by a Cardinal to paint the
picture of Paul and Peter, painted them with an high color: the Cardinal
thinking they were too high colored, the painter answered, that indeed Paul
and Peter while they lived, were dead colored, and pale with preaching, but
since they were dead, they were high colored, blushing at the wickedness of
their supposed (and but supposed) successors, ashamed of the Doctrine, and
practices of your Church of Rome, and that this shame had altered their color.
And sure all Gods servants, who have the fear of God before their eyes, are
ashamed, and abhor such abominable practices. The cause (as Bodin says)
which moved Tacitus Quaesiui Romam in Roma, and non, inueni Romam. Facta est
iam Roma lupandi: or Roma Radix omnium malorum. Orci vicaria Roma.
to exclaim against Christians was, quia Christiani affectarunt crimina, quae
Ethniti abhorruerunt, Because Christians affect those sin, with the Ethnickes
do abhor: if Tacitus were now alive, how would he exclaim against the
Church of Rome, for animating people to commit such villainies, which all
Ethnickes, (except savages or Cannibals) abhor, and condemn?

Behold how Roma nocens nocet, atque viam docet ipsa nocendi: iamque dol^nt
cecidisse minus faeliciter ausa.
Rome is degenerated from her primitive State; time was, she loathed such
deeds, either to commend, or canonize Trators. Facta haec Roma olim, nec
sancta, nec Ethnica, nouit.
Such works in ancient times this Rome did hate,
In her first Christian, yea in Ethnicke State.
But now, Quod natura nefas odit, doctrina capescit:
Which nature most detest, Doctrine defend.


Yea, have not some of them labored to extenuate the deuillish devise of these
superlatiue Powder-traytors with these words, Alas it was the attempt of some
few, and unfortunate Gentlemen: unfortunate as they count, because they failed
in performance: or as others of them, These Catholics held the King, no King,
or not their King; and expectanda erat diuturna persecutio, a perpetual
persecution was to be expected: and Eudemen a Jesuit has write to defend
Garnets Treason, and rightly played the Demon: and have not some others
excused the fact of Rauilliacke (one of Marianas Scholars) who stabbed Henry
the fourth, the late famous French King, (whose death never sufficiently to be
lamented, and never of Kings sufficiently revenged) with these pretenses, Fuit
stolidit as regis ob susceptum haereticorum patrocinium, It was the folly of
the King for patronising these heretics, meaning Protestants?

So that I may define these Jesuits to be, Wiclef. Tria log. p. 14. 3.
as one did define a Friar to be, cadauer mortuum e sepulchro veniens, missum a
daemone inter homines, a dead Carrion coming out of his grave, sent of the
devil among men: and truly such are rather monsters then men, who will
commend, or command murder, applaud murderers, and Traitors, who are portenta
virorum, viri portentorum, monsters of men, or men monsters, viri sanguinum,
men of blood, viri occisionis, slaughter men: and though in all professions
some are bad, A Cham will be in the Arc, Saul among the Prophets, and Cum Jesus
Judas, cum Simone fur Ananias, in Templo Christi semper sunt quatuor isti.
Illyricus.
Judas among the Apostoles, some may fall into murder, or Treason etc. Yet
when such come to their end and punishment, they usually confess their fault
to be in their nature, not in their religion, excepting only Roman
Catholics, who seek to fetch poison from heaven, and to prove murder by
the Scripture: * Only I make a difference betwixt a Macheuillian Jesuit, and
an ignorant Papist, who though he be not a sound member of the Church, may be a
faithful Subject to Caesar, per possibile.
Dogmatis atque Scholae sunt haec, non crimina morum.


So that these cannot say with Cassiodorus, follow my doctrine, but not my
manners, for both precepts, and practice treasonble.

And that I may give a little taste, or touch of their practices in this kind
(least I should seem to condemn them without cause) I will in the next
Chapter demonstrate, how that many Popes of Rome, (who are the heads of Popery,
which is the 2. Thessa. 2. 7.
mystery of iniquity) have caused, and procured many Emperors, Kings, Princes,
and worthy men to be greatly persecuted, and grievously killed. So that we may
say to them as our Savior to the Luke 11. 49. 50.
Pharisees, I will send them Prophets and Apostles, and of them they shall slay
and persecute, that the blood of all the Prophets (with many Kings, Princes,
and learned men) may be required of this generation.

CHAP. VI.
A short Catalogue, or rehearsal of certain Emperors, Kings, and famous men,
who have been persecuted by the Antichrist of Rome.

I Cannot nor will not enterprise to declare all the particular persecutions of
the Church of Rome against several Kings, and Potentates, who distasted, and
in some sort opposed themselves against their corruptions; for that would
require a long Vide the tragedy of Traitors. cap. 7.
Tractate to discover the miserable mischiefs of the whore of Babylon, Reu.
17. 6.
drunken with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus
Christ: for that were an endless work, and the Spirit of truth might say to
me, as to Ezechiel, Ezech. 8. 15:
Turn thee again, and thou shall see greater abominations then these; I will
confine my self to a few examples.

The Emperor Philippicus Bardanius, because he commanded 1. Emperors.
all Images to be removed out of the Churches, by the counsel and consent of
John Patriarch of Constantinople, was denounced an Heretic, publicly
excommunicated by Pope Constantine, and commanded no gold Vrspergens.
nor silver to be stamped with his Image, nor any mention made of him in their
common prayers.

Lodouicus Pius the Emperor, eight hundred years after Christ, was thrust out
of his Kingdom by the French Clergy and the Sollicitato in patrem Gregorio
po^tifice Romano: Papir. Masson. annal. page 104.
Pope.

Philip the Emperor by the procurement of the Pope Innocent the third, who
said, Vrspergens. p. 319
Either he would have Philips Crown, or Philip his Miter; continually opposed
himself against him, and stirred up Idem. p. 324.
Count Otho against him, who miserably did slay him at Bamberge in his privy
chamber.

Henry the seventh oppressed by the Naucler. p. 990.
Pope and his Cardinals. Auentin. p. 597.
stirring up enemies against him, was at last poisoned by Idem. p. 598.
a Monk in the Sacrament.

I omit to speak of the other Henry the 1. Henry the 4. Henry the 5. etc.
Emperors.
Henry's, tragically vexed by tyrannical Popes, the extreamities and
indignities whereunto they brought them, have replenished the world with
plentiful histories: The Emperor Frederick the seventh truly complaining,
Pet de Vin. lib. 1. cp. 31.
That the happiness of Emperors was always opposed by the Popes envy.

Neither have the Kings of the earth found better use, some of them by Popes
deposed from their Kingdoms, as 2 Kings.
Papir* Masson. annal. in Child. page 83. Bell. de Romans pontif. lib. 5.
Childericke the French King by the Pope deposed, under pretense of stupidity,
and thrust into a Monastery: Philip the first for matrimonial causes. Philip
called the fair for collating of benefices: Rachis King of the Lombards by
Pope Zachary put into a Monastery, with many others which might be named.

Nay not only by Popes deposed, but of their lives deprived. Manfred the King
of Naples and Sicily, had the Duke of Anien Naucl. p* 946.
armed against him by Pope Vrbane the fourth, by whom he was slain. So
Conradinus King of Naples and Sicilye, being taken prisoner by Charles, brother
to the French King, Paral. ^sperg. p. 11.
was miserably put to death by the Popes Counsel.

King John of England Math. Par. p. 223
was vilely vexed, and deprived of his Kingdom by the Pope and his Bishops,
and the French King set up against him, and at last was See Acts and Monum.
prope finem.
poisoned by a Monk.

Ioane the Queen of Naples was Paud. Colle^. p. 221
deprived of her Kingdom by Pope Vrbane, who consented to Naucler. p. 1024
her murder.

Gemin Otto the brother of the great Turk, being prisoner, was poisoned by the
Guicciard. hist. page, 66.
Pope, hired thereunto by a P. Joui. hist. lib. 1. page 25.
promise of two hundred thousand Crowns, and the seamelesse coat of Christ:
This Pope was Pope Alexander the sixth, of which thing read Cuspinian in
Bajazet the 2.

Henry the second of England was by the Popes Mat. Par. p. 125.
appointment whipped of the Monks.

Julian and Lawrence the Dukes of Florence, by the Popes Conscio, and adnuente
pontifice. Volater. page 51.
practice were assaulted in the Church at the time of the elevation of the
host, and the one grievously wounded, the other murdered.

Henry the third of France, after many treasons of the Sorbonists against him,
Meter. Belg. hist page 494. 490.
was at last murdered by a Dominican Friar, which murder the Pope in a solemn
oration extolled to the skies.

Henry the fourth his successor, first wounded by Chastell, a Disciple of the
Jesuits, for which they were then banished the Realm: and afterward
treacherously murdered by a popish miscreant Rauilliacke. This Henry assaulted
by six Popes, Gregory the thirteenth, Sixtus the fifth, Vrbane the seventh,
Gregory the fourteenth, Innocentius the ninth, Clement the eight, the last
having brought the King to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, Liber qui
inscribitur, de victoria Clemen. 8. de Henrico 4. gloriose triumphantis.
triumphed over him; and yet this King thus their own, because he seemed to
favor the Protestants, must die a bloody death.

The Prince of Orange lamentably murdered Dinoth. de Bell. ciu. belg. p. 398.
by a Papist, who for the said Parricide is highly commended by the Friar
Comment. rerum. in orb gest. p. 1122.
Surius, his name was Balthazar Gerardus.

Our late famous Queen Elizabeth (of happy memory) since the tenth year of
her reign, (about which time Pius Quintus excommunicated her,) till her dying
day was not free from the treasons of Papists, Parries, Campians, etc. the
Popes with their adherents raising up invasions, and so far as they were able
labored to have wrought her destruction.

Our high Sovereign that now is, has had experience in Scotland of Popish
treason, and in England this Powder Plot makes it perspicuous.

I need not produce other examples which in all nations 3. Princes and Subjects.
abound, of high personages and Peers destroyed by popish hands. The Viceroy
of Rauenna under Leo the third Emperor, with his son slain by the Popes
faction. The Prince of Condie poisoned. William Prince of Aurance slain by a
Popish villain. Charles the King of Spaines Frederick the 2. Emperor by
poison, or by a pillow, destroyed by Manfredus, by the means of the Pope. who
daily devised to destroy him. ^usp. in Freder. 2. and there writes that not
long before 4. Conspirators apprehended, who should have made away the Emperor,
confessing that the Pope did set them on work.
son, because he was thought to favor Protestants, made an end of by their
inquisitors. In a word; let the Supra 30000. homines trucidati. Jacob. Aug. in
hihistor. Anni 1572.
Massacre in Paris, in which were destroyed in a night and few days, many
noble and religious Protestants, among the which Noble Caspar Colignius slain.
Let the fires and faggots in England in Queen Mary's reign, in which were
cruelly burned many zealous and devout Christians, who for the Gospels sake
sacrificed their blood in fiery flames, and won the glory and Crown of
Martyrdom. Let this Power-Treason invented by Popish people, ratified by
popish Priests, in which they intended to have made a general martyrdom. Let
the Spanish Inquisition which has put to death with exquisite torments many
thousand people. Let these four speak for all, and surely they will speak
that, or more* then that which Eberhardus the Archbishop of Saltsburge, a good
old man, once spoke, who when he had known ten Roman Bishops, and had
diligently marked their practices, under Frederick the first, Henry the sixth
his son, and Frederick the second his nephew for fifty years together,
deciphered or described the Pope for a ravenous Their spiritual Father fatted
both with the milk and blood of the flock.
wolf under a Shepherds weed, compounded wholly of Avarice, Luxury,
Contention, Wars, Discord, and desire of Rule, with such like attributes:
whose oration at large is extant in Annal. lib. 7. fol. 683.
Auentine a Roman Catholic writer. Or will speak that which the Poet Massaeus
writes of Pope Julius the second, as great a blood sucker as ever reigned in
Rome, by Genebra. Guicciardine says of Pope Alexander the 6. he never did
what he^said, and his son Borgia never said what he (...) to do.
whose means in seven years 200000 Christians were destroyed of this Pope
the Poet has this Epitaph; Genua euipatrem, gen^tricem, Graecia, partum
Pontus and vnda dedit, number bunus esse potest?
Fallaces Ligures, and mendax Graecia, pont^
Nulla fides, in te singulasolm habes.
Thy Father Genoan, Mother Grecian borne,
In Ocean Sea, can goodness thee adorn?
Genoans are full of fraud, Greece lies maintain,
In Sea no trust, all these in thee one reign.


So that I will end this point with this observation, that Mahomet, Phocas, and
Boniface the third, who first had the style of universal Bishop, lived all
about the Magdeburgens. Cent. 7. col. 21. Anno. 607.
same time: So that Mahometisme, Popery, and murdering of Christian Kings
began all at once, and now conjoined in one. And all the people of Great
Britanny have cause to thank God that they are free from this Head, the Head
of these mischiefs, and I would the land were free from all his members; yet
they are among us, as Labans Idols Genesis 31.
in Jacobs tent upon Record, not by allowance: and many wish that such a voice
might echo in our Sovereigns ears (who is a merciful King) as once came
from Oath. meland.
the Smiths forge to the hearing of the Landgrave of Hesse, a mild Prince, the
Smith striking his iron said, Duresce inquam, duresce, vtinam and Langrauius
durescat, wax hard, wax hard, would to God the Landgraue would wax hard: So
it might be wished that the Oramus gladium Domini, and Gideonis nostri. The
Harlot Theodote checked Socrates, saying, her power was greater then his, for
she allured many of his Scholars, he none of her lovers. so this popery is a
Theodote or Dalila.
sword of Justice were sharper against seducing Jesuits, that their haunts and
harbors were stopped, places of entertainment scoured, and the femall Hierarchy,
which breeds many, were put down: for these serpents will first tempt Eve,
the weaker vessel; and women soon induced, hardly reclaimed. So should God be
served with more holy devotion in true religion, and our King and Country be
freed from treason and rebellion.

CHAP. VII.
I Have a little touched the persons, as well Authors as Actors, showing that
originally and ordinarily this sin of Treason flows from the sink or sea of
Rome, because Cardinal In his letter to Blackwell.
Bellarmine would outface the world with, It was never heard of from the
Churches infancy, that any Prince, though an heretic or persecutor, was
murdered by the Sixte iaces tande^ nostri discordia sacli.
Popes command or allowance: when it is showed that not only allowance or
recognizance, but consent, content, yea head, heart, and all have joined
together in the destruction of Princes: so that I may say to him, Tute-lepus
es, etc. He has delivered many treasonable positions, of deposing, degrading,
exciting Arms, etc. and can a traitor be unwelcome to him? it may be so, for;
Proditores etiam ijs, qui mercede cond^cunt, inuisi sunt, Traitors are hated of
them who hire them, but they like the treason, if effected, and many times the
St. Becket, St. Saunders, both Traitors. Baron. Martyrolog.
traitors too, and even canonize them for good members, whose pedigree in the
hangmans heraldry is known to be base murderers, and abhorred traitors; it Is
very strange, (...).
Si fur displiceat Verri? homicida Miloni?


I had rather say with the Prophet Hosc. 6. 9.
Osee, As thieves wait for a man, so the company of Priests murder in the way
by consent, for they work mischief: and may say of their Priests as an old
Poet speaks of their Pope. Illyric. vet. Poemat.
Qui fore debuit gratia datinus,
Factus est ecclesia ablat^^us:
Of Grace who should be the Dative case,
Is now become the Ablative of grace.


A Bishop or Priest should be no 1 Timothy 3. 3.
striker or fighter, no warrior, no man of blood, no tutor to Traitors, no
teacher of rebellion, to publish doctrine of King-killing: Oh but will some
Jesuit reply, It is abominable to kill a King: mark their evasion, or
Aeq^iuocatio simulatio (...) ^.
equivocation: but a King excommunicated, or at least deposed by the Pope, is
no King, no King in popery: then if he command, take Potentiores, cum rogant,
iubent. Cuiuis potest accidere, quod cuiqua^ potest.
him by the throat, presently In hunc Tarba (...) ^sa --


They will have some desperate Rauilliacke, Chastell, or Gerard, to touch the
Lords Anointed. Jesuits will compass Sea and land, Sollicitando, pollicendo,
as Simo charge Crito in the Comedy, soliciting, promising, and persuading,
no obedience is to be given to Kings excommunicated or deposed, as Parsons and
Campian did after the Bull of Pius the fifth, and what follows? Rebellion in
the North. Haec Cornua quibus ventilabis Israel, These are the horns which
proceed from Papal Bulls, rebellion, treason; which if at any time it
succeeds according to their expectation, they triumph in it, and say, Hic
digitus Dei est, It was the Lords work: and as Prou. 2. 14.
Solomon of the wicked, They rejoice in doing evil, imitating Dyonisius, who
after the robbing of a Temple, finding the wind and weather Prosperum scelus
vocatur virtus.
favorable to his ships, burst forth into this hellish voice, Ecce dij
approbant sacrilegium, Behold the gods approve of our sacrilege: but let them
know, that at last, Faux his speech, It was not God, but the Devil that
hindered the work.
though perchance too late, they shall find and confess, Inven: sat. 13.
Nec surdum, nec Tiresiam quenquam esse deorum.
God is not deaf, or blind, he sees all sin,
Abhors all sinners, who delight therein.


And therefore (you of the Church of Rome) who are, or should be guides for the
blind, Romans 2. 20.
iustructers of them who lack discretion, teachers of the unlearned, hate and
abhor your former doctrine, the doctrine of Devils, in teaching disobedience
to Gods Anointed, or to be your selves actors, authors or fautors of so
abominable practices, as King-killing: for know this, Religion with blood
builded, will be in blood buried: and that voice from heaven concerning this
Babylon shall be verified. Revel. 18. 6.
Reward her even as she has rewarded you, and in the cup that she has filled
to you, fill her the double: For the Lord will condemn this great whore, which
corrupts the earth with her fornication, Reu. 19. 2.
and avenge the blood of his servants shedby her hand.

And you who style your selves Lay-Romane-Catholikes, behold the persons,
plotters of this treason, brought to a miserable confusion. Consider, ortum
scelerum obitum sceleratorum, the birth of their treason, the death of these
traitors, God confounding both scelera; and sceleratos, the Nemo impune malus.
actors and their actions; Gods eyes are pure and abhor such practices, and
likes not such who walk in the counsel of the ungodly: for both the works
and the Psalm. 1. 6.
way of the wicked shall perish. As for the final and eternal doom of the
Judge of quick and dead, upon these dead Malefactors, it belongs not to us to
search after it; and say with Greg. lib. 32. moral. Pope Innocent the 4. herd
this voice a day before his death, Veni miser in iudicium Dei. So these.
Gregory, Diuina iudicia nesciuntur, non audacisermone discutienda sunt, sed
formidoloso silentio veneranda, Gods judgments are unknown to us, and are not
rashly to be spoken of, but with fearful silence to be reverenced: he Romans 9.
18.
will have mercy upon whom he will have mercy. They that were apprehended,
satisfied Justice on earth, (yet mixed with mercy) so that for the persons I
have no more to say, but end this in the Apostles words, 1. Cor. 10. 6. 11.
Now these are examples to us, to the intent we should not lust after evil
things, as they lusted; and are written to admonish us, to beware of sin, and
above all, such capital and crying sins as these. Sequitur Rebels vltor a
tergo Deus, Gods plagues and punishments hang over Rebels heads, Sen. Prou.
ruina praecedentium docet posteros.
Ex vitio alterius sapiens emendat suum, and therefore let others harms make
all beware to fly from this sin of treason, as from a serpent.

CHAP. VIII.
3. The Causes.

THE motives or inducements which provoked these Practisers and Conspirators to
invent this Tragedy, was only, and merely Nequitiae classes candida vela
ferunt.
religion: they were no bankerupt persons, or discontented upon occasion of any
disgraces done unto them; for then it might have seemed a work of revenge: but
it was only (as they confessed) the cause of religion, which moved them to
this Treason. A deplored and desperate religion Ecclesid non propagatur armis,
sed propugnatur. Bloud-red murder, and black conspiracy in white robes of
religion. Preces, and patie^tia olim Christicolis arts, haec arma fuere.
which must stand for a stawking-horse to practice rebellion. This color of
religion, like the Fowlers glass and feather, serves to draw some within the
reach and net of treason, to lay snares to catch the children of God, and bring
them to destruction. Grace uses no sword, Faith no knife, the Church no bloody
tools, Non mactando homines, Christumque fidemque docere:
Ecclesia arma ara, non laniena macelli,
The Church by force the faith did never plant,
Her Altar-prayers her Arms, she shambles want.


But the They make their Church Acheldama a field of blood.
Church of Rome uses these tools, when their prayers can do no good they fall
to weapons, and would seem to do the Lords work, in the destroying of the
Lords people: far better were it for them to follow the counsel of 1 King.
18. 24.
Elias, to try themselves whether they be Baals Prophets or no? to call upon
the name of their God, to prepare a sacrifice, and see if the Lord will send a
fire from heaven, as he did for 38.
Elias to manifest the truth of their cause and religion: but their prayers
are so bad, inuocating dead Saints, and adoring dumb Images, that though they
cry like Baals Priests from 1. Kings 18. 26.
morning until noone, not a voice or word can they get from their wooden
gods, no fire from heaven; then they will fetch fire from hell, the hope of the
plantation of their Romish religion shall be the ruin of an whole nation: for,
Non stetisset A cruel and carnal religion sauouring of a reuengefull, spirit.
nostra Troia, si cecidisset noster Priamus, for our Land could not have stood
happy, if our Priamus, Prince, Peers and Parliament had been destroyed, as
they intended. And indeed a long time these Pope-Catholike men have used a
pretense of religion, by which goodly vizard they have practiced most horrible
butchery, cruelty, and abomination. It is lamentable which is of late Polanus:
Non est humano sanguine cretus, illum sed genuit praeduris cautibus horrens
Caucasus, hyrcanaeque admorunt Vbera Tygres. Virg. Aenead.
reported of Ferdinandus Mendoza a Spanish Catholic, who with his cruel
company in Westphalia, spared neither sex nor age, no not them which submitted
themselves: ripping up women's bellies, taking out their infants, and hung them
about their Mothers necks, compelled the men with long famine to eat their
own children, with such brutish butchery as is abominable.

And so the Pope when he sent his secular arms the Spaniards among the
Indians, under a fair errand to win Read Dr: White way to the Church. 1.
part. page 360.
them to religion, they used them in an heathenish, yea hellish cruelty; roasted
them with fire, worried them with dogs, etc. so that in forty years space they
destroyed (as Polanus ex Bartholo. Casa. Span. Colo. page 2. 13. etc
some write) fifteen millions of men, that is, 150 hundred thousand, wasted
and unpeopled five times as much ground as all Spain contains: But woe to
them that build up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity, says Micah.
3. 10.
Micah, Whose Esaias 59. 3.
hands are defiled with blood; the Lord will prepare them unto blood, and blood
shall pursue them; except thou hate blood, even blood shall pursue thee, says
the Lord by the mouth of Ezech. 35. 6.
Ezekiel.

But these imitate Julius Caesar, (the first Emperor of Rome) who held a sword
in one hand, and a book in the other, with this Motto; Ex vtreque Caesar: So
these Romanists will hold a sword in one hand, and a Bible in the other,
changing the word, the sword of the spirit, into a material sword to murder
men's bodies: but Caesar who shed much blood abroad, had his own blood By
Brutus and Cassius in the Senate house of Rome.
shed at home. Yet Caesar was far of a more merciful mind; for as Austen.
ep. 5.
Austen speaks of him, He gloried in nothing so much, as in pardoning his
enemies, and gratifying his friends.

Or they follow blood-thirsty Cyrus, who at last was slain by Queen Tomyris,
and his head cut off, and put into a vessel of blood, with these words;
Sanguinem sitijstit, nunc sanguine saturatus esta, Thou have thirsted for
blood, now drink thy fill: so these thirst for blood, Quem babit hic auide,
quam bibit ante merum:
As greedily he drinks men's blood,
As men do wine, and thinks as good.


But David, because he was a man of blood, might not build God a material
Temple, and will you build Gods spiritual Temple with bloody hands? God
abhorres blood-thirsty and deceitful men: Deus non est author eius, cuius est
vltor, God is a revenger of such villainies, and what he affects, he will effect
by good means. And therefore though Papists color this treason under the
cloak of Religion, and for the good of the Catholic cause, the Lord Luke 13.
27.
will say to them; I know ye not, Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity. Then
Psa. 109. 29.
shall they cover themselves with confusion, as with a cloak. And truly these
fiery and furious Iesuited Roman Catholics, mask and shroud their faction
and treason under the cloak of Religion, as the Dominicans lurk under our
Ladies frock; crying out, The Catholic Cause, and for the good of the Church;
so that we may say, as once wittily Erasmus demanded, What is Charity?
answered, It is a Monks cloak, for it couers a multitude of sins: So what
is Popery? It is a cloak to cover a multitude of sins; and (as they say)
Puritan sohismes are sown together with Sisters-threed, so Popish schisms are
patched together out of the cloak of Rebellion, yet under the mantle of
Religion: yet so far are these people from being ashamed of these things, or
reclaimed from such practices, much less to repent for them, as that being
apprehended for them, or having accomplished their devices, they are still
insensible of sorrow, contrary to all other Malefactors; for as the Poet, --
quid fas,
Iuv.
Atque nefas, tandem incipiunt sentire peractis
Criminibus: --
How good, or bad, their deeds were, they then see;
When once their mischiefs accomplished be.


But these would with Nero laugh, and leap to see our Bloodthirsty men do hate
the righteous. Pro. 29. 10.
Cities on fire: and as Guido Faux, the foreman of this fiery stratageme, being
demanded, what he would have done, when as he had put fire to the powder,
said; Go see the sport in the field: A voice fit for a villain, or a cruel
Vitellius, who said, as Tacit. Hist. lib. 3.
Tacitus records it; Sepauisse oculos, spectata in imici morte, nempe Blaesi^
He did feed his eyes with the dead spectacle of his adversary Blesus. But
Caesar wept when the head of Pompey his enemy was presented to him, saying;
Plutar. in Caesar: id em dixit, non mihi placet vindicta, sed victoria.
Ego Pompeij casum deploro, and meam fortuna^ metuo I lament Pompeys fall, and
fear mine own fortune: but the enemies of Sion, as they have Crocodile eyes
to weep and laugh at murdered objects, so they have devouring mouths, and
teeth to water after such preyes. I will not judge all of them to be of so
bloody a disposition: for I presume some Jesuits, and Priests, and Monks, are
like Aristippus, look for nothing but meat for their belly, and a maid for
their bed; little busy their brains with other matterrs: or some may follow
their study, which yet is not usual, especially among the secular Priests,
whom the Quodlibet 1. Art 2.
Jesuits call; Ebrios, stultos, illiteratos, Ecclesia excrementa, Drunkards,
Dolts, Dunces, the excrements of the Church: and the same secular Import.
Consider. page 3.
Priests brand the Jesuits with infamous marks, Statistas, Atheistas,
Machiauelistas, quot Iesuitae, totidem Iudae, Statists, Atheists,
Machiauclists, So many Jesuits, so many Iudasses. But indeed the least medlers
in these matters are the Monks, and therein to be commended; who if they were
as careful to feed their brains, as their bellies, I should think them the
best of the bunch: but herein they are faulty, being only as the Poet, Epicuri
de grege porcos: Horat.


Most of them sordide and stupide fellows, without any Natos homines abdomini.
industry in labor, or generosity in life. And as long ago it was written of
them, Liber Pater praeponitur libro patrum;
Calicibus epotandis, non codicibus emendandis, Rich. Dunelm. Philobibl. c. 5.

Indulget body studium Monachorum,
Cantus ludentis, non planctus lugentis,
Officium efficitur Monachale.
Greges, and vellera, fruges and Horrea,
Porri, and olera potus and patera,
Lectiones sunt hodie, and studia Monachorum:


In a word, thus: One Bacchus more they love, then Muses nine;
They fat their bellies, while their brains do pine.


But to leave these, whom the Pope least loves; for the Jesuits are his Pulli,
and puppi, His Minions and Darlings, he knows them by their hands, as the
Eagle knows his young ones by the eyes; a pen in one hand, and a poniard in
the other, to write for him, and to fight for him. We will accuse no more, but
the parties in view, whereof Faux should have been the Executioner; and as
they say, An hangman must have a cruel heart: so this appointed wretch had a
cruel heart, to count such a sight as this Faux speech, that the Devil, and
not God was the discouerer of it.
should have been a sport: and when he was apprehended, he discovered no
fignes of sorrow or repentance, except only that he repented for not being
able to perform it. Nil Christus Domini, nil illi proxima Coniux,
Nil Princeps Carolus charus, spes altera Regni,
Vtraque nobilitas pietate insignis, and armis;
Maiestasque loci, veterum tot Curia regum,
Nil haec crudeli potuere obstare furori?
Our royal King with his illustrious Spouse,
That Prince Henry then living. Decus olim, nunc dolor orbis, as Huntindon.
Hist. lib. 7. said of Henry the first of England.
Phoenix gone unto a better place;
And next succeeding hope, Prince Charles his Grace,
The noble Peers, the Prelates of Gods House;
And other Monuments, which might well rouse
More fear, then fury: yet this vile Consort
To blow up all with powder, counts it sport.


The virtues (indeed vices) which were in Tigellinus, Neros Secretary, were, as
Tacitus names them, Cruelty and Luxury: so these abounded with the first, if
not with the second. And yet they had no cause to move them to such cruelty:
One of the specials of them, Percy, a Pensioner Improbus a nullo flectitur
obsequio.
in an honorable place; the others with worship and wealth in the
Commonwealth, no penal Laws urged upon them, with many other prouocations to
peace, and amity. -- Quorum si singula duram Some being about wicked purposes,
do bow down their heads, and their inward parts burn with deceit. Ecclus.
19. 25.

Flectere non poterant, potuissent omnia, mentem:
If some of these could not, yet all conioind;
Might well have turned to love, a Lions mind.


But all could not: for howsoever they made a show of obedience, it was
counterfeit; Ore tenus, Honoring with lips, not hearts. They surely had
received the Present of their Pope, long ago sent to his dear Children here,
namely, the five wounds of Christ with this poesy; Fili da mihi car tuum, and
sufficit: My son give me thy heart, and it suffices. Rome had their heart,
England their hate; and we might of them have complained (had not the Lord
helped) with the Prophet David; Psalm. 60. 2.
Thou have made the Land to tremble, and have made it to gape, heal the
breaches thereof, for it is shaken: Thou have made us to drink 3*
the wine of giddiness.

Yet these could flatter with Judas, Auc Rabbi, Hail Master, or, Mat. 26. 25.
Adulatio fallax crudelis est. Aug. lib. 2. contra. lit. Petil.
Master is it I? Yet for all Syren-songs, let us look to our selves; for Vi^
fidus affectus, quorum diuersa fides, says Chrysostom: Whose faith is
different, their fidelity is doubtful: Their words sweeter then honey, yet
Vnlpina cauda semper prominet, rictus, and rugitus Leonem prodit; The Fox may
be known by his tail, the Lion by his jaws, claws, and roaring: Math. 7.
20. A Equiuocationem esse vtilem autem, and bonam prudentiam, and idea Martinus
Nauarrus Azpilcueta tract^tum de aequiu^catione, in gratiam Jesuitarum scripsit.
By their fruits ye shall know them. Trust not their iugred speeches, for they
have learned the language of the Low Countries, I mean of hell; their art of
equivocation, to speak one thing, and mean another: and you know by
equivocation, Judas and Jesuits, may be taken for honest men.

And how can their fidelity be good? (I mean them of their Clergy) for as
every popish Bishop is sworn obedience to the Pope, and Sea of Rome, and to
defend to death Rogalia Sancti Petri; The Regalities of Saint Peter: so in the
English Nauarr.
College of Rome it is a Statute Law, or papal constitution, that whosoever
do enter into it, he is q Consil. lib. 3. de Regular. cons. 1.
bound to swear, after certain years (being perfectly Iesuited) to return
into England for the defense of the Catholic Faith, and there publicly or
privately to preach the same. Now their Faith, which they call Catholic,
grants to their Roman Church, power to free subjects from all duty of
obedience, as does appear in the fourteen section, and seventh Chapter of
their late Council of Trent, from which fountain flows: T^: So that they
will not submit themselves to any Protestant King in any loyal and faithful
(...), as did in somelately appear in refusing the Oath of Alleagiance;
wherein his Majesty specially aimed, Separare pretiosum a v^, As the Lord by
Ier. 15. 19. Occasioned to exact this lawful oath upon this Powder Treason.
Jeremy, to separate the precious from the vile, to discern and distinguish
the Pseudocatholickes of this Climate, from others of his sound and faithful
subjects: And how I pray you was this oath impugned, by the Popes Briefes, by
Bellarmine, and others, accounting it unlawful, prohibiting all Popish
Sectaries to accept it? which oath yet specially touched their alleagiance to
the King against the Popes primacy pretended in temporal things, and but
little the supremacy in spiritual things: so that they who are thus rooted,
and immovably grounded Clerks have nothing to do with Crowns: Religion
turned into Statisme, will prove Atheism. B. Lincoln.
in all the mysteries of the Church of Rome, believing the Pope, the supreme
Head of all, having power to excommunicate Kings, to deprive them, to absolve
subjects from alleagiance, to give authority to kill Kings, and accounting such
deeds done meritorious, are Clancularij proditores, Clancular Traitors,
Schoole-Traytors; who though they live Vespertilionum instar, Like the
night-birds in obscurity, and never reduce their Theoricke into Practick, yet
are they Traitors in Esse, though not in Actu. But to leave these, and to
return again to our Powder-men, Traitors both in fore, and fieri; Claneular
at first, their Chamber was a Mine under the Earth, but being discovered, then
they showed themselves, Damonesmeridiani, Noone day Devils, and were Psalm. 91.
5.
Sagittae volantes in die; Arrows that fly by day: for perceiving their
purpose discovered, and treachery prevented, and disappointed of their private
blow and blast, which should have been acted in Dolus Apochryphus.
secret; now they resolve to run a desperate race, and practice a public
rebellion: And so gathering their Catholic Company, and pretending the
quarrel of Religion (which they thought had had the virtue of a snow ball, to
increase their number by tumbling up and down) and having gotten such
provision of Armor, Horses and Powder as time would permit; they ranged about,
as open, and auowed Rebels: The story whereof I omit to rehearse, because it is
vulgarly known, and in a Called A discourse of this late intended Treason.
Book at large rehearsed.

Well, the Catholic cause moved these to this cursed Treason, in which
impiety behold their policy; for if their villainy had succceded, (which God in
his mercy prevented) they had devised to have laid all the blame upon the
Puritans. The poor Puritans must have the shame of Papists Quicquid delirant
reges plectu^tur Ach^.
impurities and impieties: Here in they showed themselves to be Neroes brats,
who when he had set fire on the City, laid the fault upon the Christians, as
Tacitus writes of him; or as in old time, in the days of the ten persecutions
of the Primitive Church, if any thing had befallen the world, even by Gods
hand, as plague, or famine, etc. all reproaches were put upon the Christians,
and crying out; Christianos ad Leones, Cast the Christians to the lions: A
shameful and shameless shift, to translate the infamy of so odious a fact
upon the innocent: but it verifies the Proverb, Hoc calciamentum consuit
Hystiam, Aristagoras induit, Hystaus has sown the shoe, and Aristagoras
Adagium in eos, qui callide sua malefacta in alios, reijciunt. Erasm.
puts it on: but thanks be to God, Inciderunt in foueam quam fecerunt, The
fact and fault, was known to be their own, and brought these delinquents to a
shameful fall.

Another policy they had pretended, appointing an hunting match against the
time of this treacherous design, thinking with Esau to have brought dainty
Venison to their Father, not Isaacke, but Antichrist, and to have surprised the
person of the Lady Elizabeth (now the Princely wife to the County Palatine of
Rheine): Thus they showed themselves right Nimrods, Genesis 10. 9.
who was a mighty hunter, and in name also Nimrod-like, (who is by
interpretation a Jerome.
Rebel) rebellious hunters, or rather Fowlers to lay such snares, but yet all
may say with the Psalmist; Psalm. 91. 3. Escaped out of the snare of the
Fowlers, the snare is broken, and we are delivered. Psa. 124. 7.
The Lord has delivered us from the snare of the hunter, praised be his
goodness for ever.

But to pass over their policy in this work of impiety, painted over under a
pretense of restoration of religion: Is murder and massacres the seed of Rome,
from which these seedes-men would fetch Religion? will the darnell of death
produce the seed of life? For the public good Gods servants have wished
themselves to be anathematized, but never others. Can Gods Church be won, or
woed with swords, and arms? Indeed Phil ostratus.
Phillip of Macedon led an Army against Bizantium, and said; that hearing of
the beauty of the City, he was come to make love to her: but the Otator tells
him, It was not the manner of Lovers to woo with instruments of war, but
music. The City of Gods Church will be won with no warlike Engines, the
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, 2 Cor. 10. 4.
says Paul; The Church of Christ was never planted by blood, except passiuely;
and so Tertullian. Quo magis sanguinis effusum, e^ magis effloruit Ecclesia.
Cyprian.
Semen Ecclesiae fuit sanguis Martyrum, The blood of Martyrs, the seed of the
Church: But these parties would build up their Church with blood actiuely, as
if lately they had passed from Deuteronomy. 11. 29.
Mount Gerizim, to Mount Eball, to curse, and consume all. It is a weighty and
worthy work to plant the Gospel, the glad tidings of peace, and no better way
to do it, then by prayers and peace: but in this work the Papists ever used
the wrong tool, laboring Theologi Romani argumenta ferrea, and ignea Spirant,
no^ Scripta atramento, sed Sanguine.
to make men Haeredes vineae, exhaeredes vitae: Dispossess them of life here,
howsoever hereafter. If their arts fail, their arms follow: fit soldiers for
Bacchus, who is described with Bulls horns, Semper paratus ad feriendum,
Always prepared to strike, and fight; but it is a pretty saying of one; Nemo
ita tenetur inter duo vitia, quin ei exitus patet absque tertio, No man is so
included betwixt two vices, but he may get out without making a third. If these
men were so confident of the truth of their Religion (and none more confident
then the ignorant) why did they not follow the Counsel of truth it self,
Math. 10. 23.
if they persecute you in this City, fly into another: yet they had no cause
to say so truly; why did they not forsake all, and fly to Rome? there were
their hearts, what did their bodies here? or if Luke 9. 59. 61. Valedicere jis
qui domi sunt
with him, they would first kiss their Father and Mother, before they would
follow Christ, had a natural affection to the things on earth; yet why were
they not willing with the Apostles to submit themselves to the higher Powers in
bodily obedience, but in spiritual service, to say with Acts 4. 19.
Peter and John; Whether it be right in the sight of God to obey you, rather
then God, judge ye.

But how comes it to pass, that such Lay-Papists of small knowledge, and less
grace, should take upon them to be reformers of Religion? Were they
extraordinarily called to this work, as Judge. 3. 15. 21.
Ehud was to be a Savior to Israel, in destroying King Eglon; or as 2. King.
9. and 10.
Iehu in killing Ioram, and the stock of Achab? had the Lord said unto them,
as to Joshua, Josh. 1. 2. 9.
Arise, go over this Jordan, fear not, nor be discouraged; for I the Lord thy
God will be with thee, etc. They write indeed, that God and man had concurred,
rather the devil and his Angels had consented, Judas heart, Esawes hand, and
Achitophels head had all conspired. Concurrere homines, sed quales? quippe
profani,
Impuri, infames, scelerati, sanguinolenti,
Horribiles medici, funesti, seditioss,
Tales demissi coelo censores?
A crew combind, but who? profane, impure,
Infamous, wicked, such as all would cure
With blood, and fire, Physicians that with powder
Would blow up all diseases: cry yet louder,
Heralds from heaven these sent the Church to plant,
If God sent such, then God good men does want:
If such be good, in hell ill men are scant.


But the Lord gave such no Commission, for, such wicked, and Psalm. 11. 5.
him that loves iniquity does his soul hate: the Lord Exodus 23. 7.
will justify no wicked men: nor employ them in any wicked action. But these
had their Commission from the devil, and were at his command set to this
work, and might say with Chrysalus Plautus in Bacch.
in Plautus. Insanum, magnum molior neg otium,
Ver^ possim rocte vt emolier.
A mad piece of work I go about,
And fear I shall not do it as Iought.


And because they failed in the performance of it, therefore manus manum
fricat, one Traitor bem^nes an other, Must mutuose scabunt.
alas unfortunate Gentlemen, grieuing that it was their ill fortune to have
their hopes frustrated: for it is very true which Sueton. in vit. Domit.
(...) obscrues, conspiracies discovered, will not be credited, or will be
impaired by report, (...) occisi^ principibus, unless the Princes (the objects
of their mischief) be slain: which if at any time it Then ready to cry with
Liuie in another kind, Dij, hominesque illi affuere pugnae. lib. 7.
come to pass, and the conspirator escape, how highly he is magnified,
imitating a people of whom I have read, who worship Judas for a God, because he
did betray Christ to the Jews to be crucified, by whose death comes salvation.

Thus this Catholic cause should have produced a Catholic curse upon our
Common wealth, but when they cursed us, God blessed us, defeated the devises of
the wicked, dispersed these fogges, and mistes of Satan's spirits, and made it
manifest to all the world, that both their cause, and course was bad. Causa
mala est, fructus edidit illa malos.


For a Matthew. 7. 17. 19.
corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit, and therefore were they cut down
with the axe of Justice, and were not Gods mercy above all his works, cast
into fire.

CHAP. IX.
Fourthly the Ends.

WE are come to the last act of this intended Tragedy, the ends of it, which is
almost without end. In their expectation, (though frustrated in the execution)
they had set up Hercules Pillars, Nil vltra, no humane malice or mischief
could reach any further: Hoc Scelus Abyssus, and ex Abyssu natum, A boundless
prodigy sprung from the bottomless pit: I will not, nay cannot fully finish
this task, only touch it. Magnum opus hoc moueo: mayor reliquis datur ordo
Nec recitare, nec reticere possum.

Perficere in captum. --
This point I only touch, and leave the rest
To them, who are with greater gifts possessed.


And so many learned men by Preaching, and Printing have labored in this
work, and still out of the store of matter this Subject affords, will annually
spend their breath in the declaration of this deuillish mischief, and delivery
by Divine mercy, that I may forbear any large discourse. And truly if all of
us, were as (some say) the seauenty Interpreters appointed by Ptoloms, were
put, in diuersas cellulas, ^aman sio diuisi, eadem scriptitarunt, into several
Rooms, yet all separated, they writ the same things: which Praefat. Hier. in
Pentateuch. Moysi. and Authore^ allegat Aristaeum, and Josephum, qui dicunt,
eos in vna Basilica congregatos, etc.
S. Jerome thinks a fabulous figment: So if all of us were put apart, herein
we should agree, and sing Song of the three children. Verse 88. Verse. 89.
with Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, Bless ye the Lord, praise him, and exalt
him above all things for ever: for he has delivered us from the hell, and
saved us from the hand of death, and delivered us from the furnace, and burning
flame (of powder) even from that fire has he delivered us. Therefore, confess
unto the Lord that he is gracious, and his mercy endures for ever: wherein for
better order sake to touch the Tragical ends, and dismal effects of this
confused Babell, a monstrous, and multiplying Hydra of horrible desolation;
(had not Gods power and pity prevented this their intention and invention) we
will part it into three Heads: all directly tending to overthrow:

1. The Temporal estate: 2. The Political estate: 3. The Spiritual estate of
our flourishing Church, famous King, and fortunate Kingdom. O (...) in terris
anima, and caelestium inanes.
Oh crooked minds, void of celestial grace,
Who with such ruin would our land deface.


I will begin with the two first; It would have subverted the Temporal and
Political estate of the Kingdom.

The effects of this Powder treason would have exceeded those mischiefs, which
Caesar reckons to be the Salust, Qua data porta, ruunt caedes, Scelus, vndique
Sanguis.
fruits of Catilins conspiracy, Rapiuntur virgins, etc. Virgins deflowred,
Matrons made the objects of the victors lust, children killed in their parents
bosom, houses burned, men murdered, all places full of weapons, carcases,
blood, and lamentation: So who can tell, what mischief, what murder, what
rebellion, what invasion, what rapine, destruction, and desolation would have
been the fruits and effects of this barbarous Treason? it would have proved
carnificinaregni, the very death, and downfall of Facinus aeterna flamma
vindicandum.
the Kingdom, and therefore may be called officina scelerum, the shop of all
mischief, the vault of all villainy.

Quid Rex, quid Regina comes, quid regia proles,
Quid proceres, Sanctique patres, populusque fidelis,
Quid tantum meruere mali? committere tantum
In vos quod potuere Scelus? potuistis in vnam
Funera tot cumulare struem? tot corporalaetho
Congerere, and tantum moliri caedis aceruum?
What has our King, his Queen, and Princely son,
Our Peers and Prelates, and the people done
To merit such a mischief? what offense
Against them justly can you now commence,
Which might provoke your malice to devise
To murder them, as you did enterprise.
No age can produce a project, proportionable to this Nulla ^s vidit, audiuit,
cogitauit.
immanity: Tyrannorum carbones, eculei, rotae, funes, fustes, cruces, gladij
etc. nihil si ad haec comparentur: The exquisite torments of Tyrants not
comparable with the fury of this truculent Tragedy. The destruction of Troy was
lamentable, by fire and sword in the night:

Virg. In^adunt vrbem somno, vinoque sepultam.
They invade the City buried in sleep, and wine, and at Fraus quam vis
odiosior. Cicero.
unawares set upon them by a perfidious Treachery: yet there they might fight
for their lives, and make resistance to revenge themselves.

Idem. Aut versare dolos, aut certae occumbere morti.
But herein these Traiterous Architects had so contrived their work, and
world of woes, that with one blast, or blow, all to be consumed, and yet
Treshams letter. Ictu oculi omnes, and omnia cuerti.
not to see who hurts them: with a floude of fire to devour the choicest
flowers of the world, the Cant. 2. 1.
Rose of the field, and Lillies of the valleys, the royal Rose with the rest
of the regal stem: the noble Lillies of the land. Flos delibatus populi,
Suadaeque medulla.


The flourishing Nobility, most reverend Clergy, prudent and politic
Gentry, all to pass the fiery region of corporal combustion, when as this
fire should come out of the Judge. 9. 15.
bramble to consume the Cedars of Lebanon. So terrible a blow or blast it would
have been to the Temporal welfare of the state of this Kingdom in general,
to be 2. King. 2. 12.
deprived of the father, chariots, and horsemen of Israel, (rapt up in a
whirlewind of fire) that it could leave nothing but lamentations to posterity,
and wish with weeping Ier 9. 1.
Jeremy for an head full of water, and eyes fountain of tears to weep day
and night for the slain of them: and none but monsters of men, habituated in
villainy, and radicated in cruelty, would have an hand in so heavy a calamity:
Then we all might always meditate of mournful Elegies and make large
Commentaries upon Ieremies Lamentations, and cry with him, Lament. 1. 1.
How does the City remain solitary that was full of people? she is a widow:
she that was great among the nations, and Princess among the Provinces, is
made tributary: she weepeth continually: she dwells among the heathen, and
finds no rest; her 2. 3. 4.
persecutors took her in the Straits.

The ways of Sion lament, because no man comes to the solemn feasts: all
her gates are desolate; the Priests sigh, her Virgins are discomfited, and she
is in heaviness, and might ingeminate a doleful ecce; Behold, and see if 12.
there be any sorrow, like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me.

I cannot apprehend the hundred part of the miseries of Vmbratilem eius speciem
depingere nequeo.
this intended mischief: for it would have made our land in face, though not
in fashion, like the land Job speaks of, Job 10. 21. 22.
Terram ten^brosam, and opertam mortis caligine, terram miseria, and
tenebranum, vbi v^bra mortis, and nullus ordo: A land of darkness, and shadow
of death: a land of miscry, where is no order, but horror: That day intended
had been to our land, Joel. 2. 2. Thetraytors with Titus Vespasian cried,
amici, dicus perdidi: vti refert S^ in ^ius vita.
a day of darkness, and of blackness, a day of clouds and obscurity, none
like it from our beginning, neither shall be any more (as we hope) unto the
years of any generations.

Our land had then been like a ship forlorn, her Pilot, Master, and Mariners
gone; Her Top-gallant taken away, and they who sat at the Stern to guide,
drowned in the Ocean; and then a tempest beating upon the ship, the wind, and
weather driven her to the Rocks, in what peril and perplexity are all her
mournful passengers? and might particularly cry. In medijs lacera puppe
relinquor aquis.


We are left in a torn and tottering ship, covered with waves of woe, no
earthly comfort comes, only we pray to Christ, Matthew. 8. ^5.
Master save us, we perish.

This day intended would have proved a black, and bloody day to the
Commonwealth of England, when as her principal pillars had been perished.
The Esaias. 3. 2.
strong man and the man of war, the Judge, and the Prophet, the Prudent, and
the aged: they had laid their Matthew. 3. 10.
Axe to the root of the Trees, to hew down and cast into their fire, the
chief Cedars, to stretch over us 2. King. 21. 13.
the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab, wiping England, as
the Lord does threaten Jerusalem there, as a man wipeth a dish, which he
wipeth, and turns vpside down: and so they would have wiped, or washed with
blood our Jerusalem, turning it vpside down, that there should have been a
general ruin of our flourishing Kingdom, Neque rex, nequelex, neque religio,
resp. Salua. King, Nobility, Church, Government, Commonwealth, all perishing
in this prodigious powder confusion: First our King, the Lament. 4. 20.
breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord, should have been taken in
their nets, of whom we said, under his shadow we shall be preserved alive among
the heathen: and then his most Princely Queen, posterity-male, the hopeful
blessing of perpetual peace, the famous Peers, and Counselors of state, with
all other most noble Lords, Spiritual, and Temporal, the wife and worthy
Judges, Knights, Burgesses, and whole body of the Parliament house, (the head
heart, eyes, brains, and vital spirits of the politic body of the Kingdom)
all cut off at one blow, the kingdom left headless, heartlesse, hopeless,
deprived of her directing Iethroes: Dij, quibus imperium hoc steterat. Virg.


The pillars, and supporters of this Christian Monarchy, and changed it to a
confused Anarchy, then prevailing as Garnet the Archpriest, and Archtraytor
prayed, Auferte gentem istam perfidam de finibus credentium, Take away Non
pacem petimus, superi, date gentibus iras. Oration Garn.
this perfidious nation, meaning us Protestants, from the borders of true
belieuers, understanding Romanists: vt lauds Deo debitas alacriter
persoluamus, that we may praise God for the same joyfully.

But such prayers of the Pro 15. 8.
wicked is an abomination unto the Lord; and though Esaias 1. 15.
they make many prayers, the Lord will not hear them, because their hands are
full of blood: the enemies to our King and Kingdom, Lament. 2. 16.
opened their mouths against us, saying; Let us devour them: Certainly this
is the day that we looked for; yea, which they longed for: wherein they hoped
to have Psalm. 124. 3.
swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us, to have
overthrown the temporal and politic estate of our Kingdom, by the ruin of
the royal Head, and the most noble members of the same; but the Lords eyes
were Psalm. 101. 6.
upon the faithful of the Land, to shield them under the shadow of his wings,
when as the 140. 5.
proud had laid a snare for them, and spread a net with cords in their way, and
set grins for them; then did the Lord deliver them from those evil men, and
preserved them from those cruel men, and Psalm. 4. 23.
recompensed them their wickedness, and destroyed them in their own malice: to
move all Gods people in great Britanny to say with Zachary; Luke 1. 74.
That being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we should serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our
lives.

Yea, this pernicious project had not only procured a fatal disturbance, and
destruction of the temporal and 3. Spiritual estate.
political welfare of the Kingdom; but also aimed to alter the State of our
Religion, and to set up the abomination of desolation in the holy place, to
establish the corrupt profession of popish superstition: this was the Helena
for which these Greeks contended.

Then all of us might with the children of Israel led captive to Babylon, cry
like them, By Psalm. 137. 1.
the rivers of Babylon we sat down and wept, when we remembered thee O Sion:
for then we should have lived in captivity to the Romish Babylon, and have
sung the songs of Sion in a strange land and strange tongue. Then England
should have been again, (as once Math. Paris.
one called it) the Popes Ass, to bear his burdens in a miserable bondage.
Those debosht and banished Popelings, Jesuits, Seminaries, and Mass Priests,
who can cry to their Images like Baals Priests, 1 Kin. 18. 26.
O Baal hear us: lo, then Genesis 21. 14.
Hagar and Ismael, not long since cast out with bag and baggage, reen tring
again, insolently insulting over honorable Dame Sara, and would drive her and
Isaak out of the family. What heart zealous of the glory of God, and
religious to the pure Gospel of Christ, that would not with David Psalm. 6. 6.
every night water his couch with his tears, to behold the Candlestickes of
our Church, who hold the light of the word, broken in pieces, I mean, the
spiritual laborers in the word, to be thrust out of the vineyard of the
Church, and the loyterers of Rome, (haruest-men for Antichrist) to take the
howses of God in possession? So that with David we might cry, *O God, thine
enemies are come into thine Psalm. 79. 1.
inheritance, thy holy Temple they have defiled, etc. Romes Hic dolus est
magnus, lupus est qui creditur agnus.
wolves in sheep clothing worrying the Lambs of Christ; Satan's Foxes
running upon the mountains of Sion, and stealing away the souls of the
simple, making them drunk with the dregs of the Romish grape enchanted with
their Circes cup, in which is the Revel. 17. 4.
wine of infection, spiritual fornication, and abomination. The people then
should have been deprived of the pure river of the water of life, and for
lack of the bread of life compelled to complain in the famine of their
souls, like the distressed Jews in the famine of their bodies. Lam. 2. 12.
Where is bread, and drink? where is the Manna which once was tasted? the
word of grace wherewith we once were feasted? where are the painful Pastors
of our souls who once refreshed us? fed our hearts with bread from heaven,
and filled our cares with comfortable tidings of peace; who prayed for our
souls with zealous spirits, and spent themselves like unwearied messengers in
the work of the Gospel: Oh the Priests lips Mal. 2. 7.
which preserved knowledge, they are silenced and sent to their graves,
expelled the Church, or put in prison, or turned to ashes in Popish flames;
their Lam. 4. 19.
persecutors are swifter then the Eagles of heaven, who pursue them upon the
mountains, and lay wait for them in the wilderness; they hunt their steps
that they cannot go in the streets, their end is near; for 18.
their days are fulfilled, their end is come. Oh this is come upon us for our
cold love, and churlish entertainment of the Gospel, when we had free liberty
to call one another; Esa. 2. 3.
Come let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the God of Jacob and he
will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths; but then we stopped
our ears Psalm. 58. 5.
like deaf Adders, against the voice of those charms most expert in charming;
they Matthew. 11. 17.
piped unto us but we would not dance, we then regarded not those songs of Sion
and now both harpes and harpers are Psalm. 137. 2.
hung upon the willow trees: our souls are starued with Latin Masses, we
have no English Bibles, wodden blocks are called the Laymens books, we
cannot see the way we should walk in, but must like blind men be guided by
the spectacles of purblinde guides: we must believe as they believe, and yet
do not know what they believe: all ready to repeat that wishing voice of Job,
Job 29. 2. 3.
Oh that we were as in times past, when God preserved us; when his light
shined upon our heads, and when by his light we walked through darkness: all
saying with Valerius, (though not in the same case) who when Caligula that
monster was killed, and it could not be found out who had done it, Noble
Valerius rose up, and said, vtinam ego, would to God I had killed that monster:
So will they cry, vtinam ego, would to God we had killed that monster (which
whisome we indulgently cherished in our bosoms) Ingratitude and Contempt of
the Gospel, then while we had the same in plenty, and purity without
commixtion of dross and darnell, trash and tares, we began with the Israelites
to loath this Manna, Number. 11. 6. and 21. 5.
We can see nothing but this Manna, our soul loatheth this light bread: and
now, Verbum amissum quaerimus inuidi. We Amos 8. 12.
wander from Sea to Sea, and from the North to the East, to seek the word of
the Lord, and cannot find it. Now the Lords complaint is verified upon us,
Hosee. 4. 6.
My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: the seeds-men of the word
sent from the blessed Math. 13. 3.
sower, who broke up our stony hearts, and made them flexible, and did labor
to Dan. 12. 3.
turn many to righteousness; they are taken from us, and now Virg. Fclog.
Impius haec tam culta novalia miles habebit,
Barbarus has segetes --
Not Mass, but Mars-Priests in the Churches field,
Possess the fruits which others labors tilld:


These and more pitiful mones would have been fresh, and frequent in this
land, crying with Jeremy, Lam. 5. 15. 16. 5.
The joy of our heart is gone, our dance is turned to mourning, the Crown of
our head is fallen, woe unto us that we have sinned; our necks are under
persecution, we are weary, and have no rest.

Our King, a Esaias 49. 23.
Nursing Father to the Church and Commonwealth: Our Lamen. 4. 2.
Noble men of Sion comparable to fine Gold: Our reverend Prelates and Pastors,
the Math. 5. 13. 14.
salt of the earth, and light of the land: the chief Judges, and choice Gentry
of the Kingdom, who were as Job. 29. 15. Custodes vtriusque tabula perijssent.
eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame. All the pillars of Church and
Commonwealth, maintainers of the Law and Gospel, had perished in this
intended Massacre: So that the Math. 26. 31.
shepherd being smitten, the sheep will be scattered; yea, sheep not having
a shepherd will fall into the hands of wolfes, who will devour their flesh
and their fleeces.

And look still further, and behold these powder-traitors (men nourished with
Tigers milk) who enterprised not only to procure a temporal, political, and
spiritual overthrow of Church and Commonwealth, but also so far as in their
power they could, seeked to procure the eternal death of body and soul,
unawares Vide Luther postill. mayor. in Mat. 13. 24.
by force of fire to part unprepared souls, and blow up with a fiery Dimittis
bodies and souls before they could have time to say feelingly, Inmanus tuas
Domine, O Lord into thy hands we commend our souls: herein showing themselves
desirous to be bloody murderers, to murder the body with death temporal, and
also to make away the soul with death eternal, which second death worse then
millions of corporal deaths, Continet Myriades mortis: Prima mors animam
dolentempellit de corpore, secunda mors anima^ nolentem tenet in corpore, as De
ciuit. Dei. lib. 21. cap. 3.
Austen: The first death drives the pained soul out of the body, the second
death keeps the unwilling soul in the body; for then men shall seek Reu. 9.
6.
death, and shall not find it: for in life there is some ease, in death an
end, but in the second death neither ease, nor end: Mors sine morte, finis sine
fine.

So that to draw all to a conclusion (which should have been the conclusion,
yea confusion of us all) I may supply my defects in the description of this
immatchable treason, with the Poets excuse, Virgil.
Non mihi si centum linguae sint, oraque centum,
Ferreavox, omnes scelerum co^prendere formas,
Omnia poenarum peccurrere nomina possem:
No tongue can tell, no pen descry
This Map of mischief, the Powder-Tragedy.


The Lord of Hosts, who Psalm. 120. 4.
neither slumbers nor sleeps, who in pity and providence prouides for the
safety of his Church and Children, beheld our English Israel and Popish
Amaleck, the members of the Church militant, and malignant, the one secretly
plotting to blow up the other; but the Lord, against Pro. 21. 30.
whom no wisdom nor understanding, nor counsel can prevail, became an
impenetrable shield, suffered not one of his servants hairs to be burnt with
fire, but besotted these Traitors to communicate their counsels, though darkly
to others; by which means they were discovered. And we are persuaded and
confirmed of the all-sauing protection of our good God toward his dear
Servant, and our dread Sovereign; with the rest of the religious assembly
congregated for the glory of his name, and good of his Church, in that
Honorable House of Parliament: that if the Lord had suffered them to have made
a further progress to the instant of that disastrous and dismal action, that
he would have disabled the party, who with his unhappy hand should have
kindled that fatal fire, as he did the hand of infamous 1 Kin. 13. 4.
Jeroboam, in the very act of stretching it against the Prophet, it withered:
or like the hand of Sext. Aurel.
Valens the Emperor, when he took his pen to confirm the sentence of Basils
banishment, stricken of God, shook, and shrunk, not able to hold the pen: So
surely the Lord would have benumbed that accursed hand, which sought to
overthrow Christ's Church among us: for it is as easy to pull Christ from
Heaven, as to put his Church out of the Earth: Christ cannot be a bodilesse
Head, nor the Church an headless body; and though outward means of
deliverance to us may seem defective, yet stand comforted and courageous, for
the Math 16. 18.
gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church. It is a lame and halting
confidence, which cannot go to God without the stilts and crutches of
external means: for 2 Pet. 2. 9.
the Lord knows to deliver the godly, and in the very point and article of
time, will be a present help in trouble. God came to Genesis 3. 15.
Adam with a promise in the time of despair, to Abraham with Genesis 22. 15.
supply in the time of sacrifice, to Isaacke Genesis 26.
with relief in the time of famine and danger, to Joseph Genesis 41.
with honor in the time of exile, to 1 Kin. 19 5.
Elias with comfort in the time of persecution, to Judge. 7. 2^.
Gideon with help in the time of battle, to Dan. 6. 22
Daniel with safety in the Lions den, to Jonas 2. 10.
Jonas with release in the Whales belly, to Histor. of Susanna, v. 45.
Susanna with life condemned to death, to Dan. 3.
the three Children with a protecting Angel in the fiery Furnace: yea, to this
Kingdom of England with a most merciful preservation, near the time of the
appointed Powder-destruction, to make all our English Israel always in all
distresses and dangers, say with Moses; Exodus 14. 13
Fear not, stand still, behold the deliverance of the Lord; which he showed
unto you this day: -- -- Dies
Ista Salutis erat, candore notabilis ipso.


The Lord would not have this Powder-proiect to have power to burn one Dan. 3.
27:
hair of his servants head, or any smell of fire come upon them; yet caused
some of these vault-pyoners to be wounded, and disfigured with powder; In quo
peccarunt, in eodem plectuntur, Wherewith Wis. 11. 13. Calix mortis multis
praeparatus, perpetuus esset calix Benedictionis.
they sinned, by the same they were also punished. So that all these
extraordinary mercies of Almighty God summed up together, should have more then
a Magneticall attraction, to draw all Christian hearts ever to praise his
infinite goodness, and continually inuit and induce all to a serious
consideration and conservation of this admirable delivery from this intended
miserable calamity: agnizing God, the sole and supreme cause in preventing of
it, and therefore ascribing all the glory to him; who has preserved still his
Church in tranquillity, our King in glory, the State in safety, the Realm in
prosperity. Iutuere rupem, and erige ratem.


The snares of death and destruction prepared by the wicked, were by the
wisdom of our gracious God escaped, and the wicked Psalm. 9. 10. Non est
speciosa laus in ore peccatoris.
were snared in the work of their own hands: A delivery deserving eternal
Trophies of Triumphs: to glorify God with our prayers and praises, with our
lips and lives; and never follow them, of whom the Apostle, who Romans 11 21.
glorified not God, neither were they thankful: but may continually call up
our hearts to this duty, and cry with the Psalmist, Psalm. 56. 13.
Come and hearken all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what he has
done to my soul: for he has Psalm. 56. 13.
delivered our souls from death, and our feet from falling, that we should
walk before God in the land of the living. Therefore, Psalm. 66. 8.
praise our God ye people, and make the voice of his praise be heard; and say
with the children of Reuben, Gad, and Manasses, Joshua 22. 29.
God forbid that we should rebel against the Lord, and turn this day away from
the Lord, etc. And as the children of Israel after their return from the
captivity in Babylon, and hearing Nehem. 8. 3.
Ezra read the Law (the joy of their souls) Ezra 6
praised the Lord the great God, and all the people answered, Amen, Amen,
lifting up their hands and bowing themselves, worshipping the Lord with their
faces toward the ground: and Nehemiah with Ezra and the Levites tells the
people, 9
This day is holy unto the Lord your God: so let our English Israel delivered
from the intended bondage of Babylon, hearken to their Ezraes in the 4.
Pulpit, made for the preaching of Gods Law (whereof they should have been
deprived) and with their Priests praise the Lord, our great and good God,
answering Amen, Amen, bowing themselves in all humility at the footestoole of
Gods Majesty, annually celebrating the fifth day of November, with praises of
thanksgiving, and saying, This day is holy unto the Lord our God. This Exodus
11. 14.
day shall be unto us a remembrance, and we will keep it an holy feast unto
the Lord throughout our generations: we will keep it holy by an ordinance for
ever; to remember this marvelous work of Englands deliverance from the
plotted powder-destruction, to Psalm. 106. 47.
praise Gods holy name, and glory in his praise, singing and saying cheerfully
with our tongues, and devoutly with our hearts, Blessed Psalm. 106. 48.
be the Lord God of Israel for ever audeuer, and let all the people say, Amen,
Amen.

To the ternall and eternal glorious Godhead, Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
one and the same God in nature, and number indivisible, invisible, invincible,
our sole and sovereign protector, and preserver, God over all, blessed for
ever, be all praise, power, faith, fear, glory, and majesty yielded by us, by
ours, and by all his redeemed, for all his mercies in general, and for this
special deliverance in particular, humbly, heartily, holily for ever and ever:

Amen.
Glory be to God in the high Heavens and peace on earth, Luke 2. 14.
FINIS.
A SHORT DISSVVASIVE FROM POPERY: To all Lay-Papists, who desire to be true
servants to their Savior, or good Subjects to their Sovereign.

1. Kings 18. 21. How long halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God,
follow him: but if Baal be he, then go after him.

Tert. de resurr. carn. Aufer haereticis quae cum Ethnieis sapiunt, vt de
Scripturis solis quaestiones suas sistant, and stare non poterunt.

Hugo de Claustro anim. lib. 1. Superstitio dicitur verae religioni superaddita
falsa religion.

Melancthon. Ex malo dogmate, and malis moribus, dignoscuntur lupi.

By SAMVEL GAREY, a Preacher of Gods Word and a perpetual petitioner to God
for your happy conversion to Gods holy Truth.

LONDON, Printed by John Beale for Henry Fether stone, and John Parker. 1618.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Philip Kni^et Baronet, and his worthy Lady, The
Spirit of Grace, Truth, and Wisdom be multiplied.
Right Worshipful,
I Am bold, upon experienced acquaintance with your generous qualities, and
gentle favors toward me, to send this unworthy Treatise to your worthy view.
I know whose judgment it must pass, yet am fearelesse: not in a gross
stupidity of mine own weakness, but in an hopeful presumption of your
usual Gentleness: a disposition even naturalized in your courteous breasts,
whereof I acknowledge with gratefulness the acceptable fruits of your long,
and large love toward me, and for which I ever rest your thankful friend,
and engaged debtor: in part of requital whereof, I have presumed to offer to
you this Handful of my duty, and hearty love toward you, and under your
worthy name to send it to the world, that they who are bettered by it, may
thank you for it. A short Disswasiue from Popery, necessary for these Times,
wherein you may behold in part some points of the corrupt Doctrine of the
Romish Church, which is the common Mother of corruption and superstition: For
that Church must needs be a Chapel of errors, which enlarge the sacred Canon
with Adferunt haeretici Apocryphorum Librorum multitudinem, vt stupefaciant
amentes, etc. Iraen. lib. 1. c. 17.
Apochryphalls, diminish Cum ex Scripturis arguuntur, in accusationem
conuertuntur Scripturarum etc. ^raen. lib. 3. c. 2. Popery is a witchcraft of
religion, teaching her people to eat their God, kill their King, subvert the
Scriptures, adore Idols, Deifie the dead, equalize their Pope with God, etc.
the authority of the Scripture with Traditions, overthrow the Original with
Translations, and pervert the Text with Glosses: as the Romish Church does. Yea
to maintain her errors, she conceales the light of Truth, the Scripture, from
Lay people under the curtain of the Latin language; and even in the Schools
among the learned she is put to poor shifts, often forced to conclude
arguments out of mere Allegories, lame Similitudes, fained miracles, naked
names of Fathers, hired Testimonies of Schoolmen, and other deboshed vassailes
and proctors of the Roman Court, who with all artificial policy labor to
adorn the Roman Harlot with painted trimmings, whereby the unwary young age
of many (more credulous, then judicious) is deceived, and deluded. The whole
subject of our former work, well perused, and indifferently weighed, does give
good light (looking upon her corrupt precepts, and cursed practices) to
discover that smooky Kingdom of Antichrist: but perchance you may say to me
with Seneca, Ep. 49.
Quidme torques, and lacer as in quaest^bus? Subtilius est contempsisse, quam
(...), Why do you trouble me with such questions? it is more subtilty to
contemn them, then to confute them. Worthy Sir, it shall not be, I hope,
labor lost, if to your private contemplations you shall adioyne these short,
and sacred speculations, specially penned for your service, and published for
the be^e of all who are willing to open their eyes to walk in Truth. I give
all but a small kind of taste in these points of Popish fragments; if any man's
appetite long for it, I dare promise him hereafter more full dishes.

The Lord give unto you a Christian care in the profession of the Truth, which
with a sincere heart I have preached unto you; and perfect your first Progress
in the grace of God, to the holy Sanctification, and happy Salvation of your
bodies and souls for ever. For which mercy and grace, to be bestowed on you, I
shall ever unfeignedly pray to God, and rest,

Your Worshipes poor Orator in Christ. Samuel Garey.

A SHORT DISSVVAsiue to all Lay-papists, who desire to be true servants to
their Savior, or good subjects to their Sovereign.
I Having finished, yet in great weakness, our former work, wherein I do
humbly crave of all sorts a friendly and favorable construction and
acceptance: and there still remaining a few pages unwritten, I thought it not
labout lost, if I did annexe some common, yet courteous direction to the
Lay-papists of the land to dissuade them from the corrupt Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, unto the which they are induced by the inchaunting allurements
of Popish Priests; men whose learning and wits are tempting baits, yea bawdes,
Genesis 38. 14, etc.
Thamar-like prostitute themselves, so that they may have children, they will
deceive their own father Judah; as also by the ignorance of these
Lay-disciples, whose right eyes of knowledge they thrust out, as 1 Samuel 11. 2.
Nahash the Ammonite would have done to the men of Iabesh Gilead; depriving
them of the word of knowledge, the Scripture, and saying, It Mart. peers. de
Trad. page 44.
was the Devils invention to permit the people to read the Bible, as one of
their fide writes: and therefore the Index lib. prohib. Reg 4.
Church of Rome forbids the reading of it among the people: By which means,
oh woeful means, and to cry with their own ^mman. Sa. Aphor: verbo parochus.
page 298. Com.
Doctor to their Clergy for it, (woe to our Parish Priests, woe to our
Bishops, woe to our Prelates) they have brought in such a flood of prodigious
ignorance, as that many of them are as ignorant, as that Knight was; of whom
Claudius In 2 Timothy pa. 118.
Esp^ncaem tells of, who being demanded his belief touching the holy Ghost,
answered, he knew not whether there was an holy Ghost, or no. So that their
followers being so blind, not able to judge of colors, and wanting the word of
Truth, the Scripture, Scripturarum authoritate res cum re, causa cum causa,
ratio cum ratione concertet. Aug. contra Man. lib. 3. c. 14.
in the tongue they understand; which is the lapis Lydius, the touchstone to
try the truth from error, diuina statera, as De Baptis. contra Donatist. Henry
the second of England, said to the Popes Legate, having killed a Stagge in
hunting, Look Lord Legate, how fat the Stag is, and yet did never hear a
Mass.
Augustine calls it, the divine balance to weigh truth from falsehood; it is
easy to wind such into selfelosing labyrinthes, and to drive them with their
painted clothes like woodcockes into their nets, and to go with them with
Domitius Chalderinus (yet he learned) who when he should go to the Mass,
accustomed to say, Eamus ad communem errorem, Let us go to the common error:
So these are content to go to Mass, the common or Catholic mother of all
Bastard errors.

The attractiue motives which draw many to fancy and follow the religion of the
Church of Rome, may be reduced to three Heads. 1. The Antiquity: 2. The
Universality: 3. The Unity of that Church: which three (if they could be found
there) were of powerful consequence to move reverence; but neither of these
can be found there: for the modern Roman Church, which coins so often new
Bulla Pij 4. Super forma iuramenti professionis fidei.
Creedes, and Articles of faith, and is revolted from herself in substance of
doctrine, is no more like herself in her primitive State, then Lais the
Curtizan is an honest woman. I could demonstrate this I say without
controulement, if I were purposed to write a common-place-booke of
Controversies in this point; but it has been handled so largely, and
learnedly by other Divines of our Church, The Church of Rome is ancient, not
her errors: neither do we differ from it, wherein it is not departed from it
self.
that I may at this time forbear any long discourse. I will but touch it: and
instance this I write, how the modern Church of Rome is swarued from herself,
not only from the Truth, which primitive Rome embraced, but also varied from
herself, declining into heresy, innouating those Articles, and dogmaticall
points of faith (as they count them) which in the process of her fall she
professed: it might be specified in most of the points of Doctrine she
maintains at this present time, but I will rest with these few, for I write
but an Epitome.

1 Example shall be in the Sacrament.
At Geo: Cassand. defen: lib. de offic: Pij viri.
the first the people received the cup, as well as the bread, for the space of
a thousand years: yea, afterward, the Romance Church commanded the wine to be
consecrated, that the lay people might fully communicate, says Lib. de Eccle.
obseruat. c. 19. page 388.
Micrologus: most and the best Papists liked this well, that the people should
communicate in both kinds; but afterward, the Council of Sess. 13.. item ipsa.
Constance forbad it, and after that, the Council of Bohemis concessit eam
facultatem: test Aen. Syl. in hist. Bohe. c. 52. Pope Gelasius calls the
taking away the Cup from the Laity, Sacrilegam mutilationem, A sacrilegious
mangling of the Sacrament.
Basil released the decree of Constance to some; and after that, the Council
of Trent, the mint of errors, confirmed it again, and deprived the Laity of
the Cup: Sect. 21. c. 2.

So that this point of Doctrine, now maintained in the Church of Rome, can
plead no antiquity, being now so often renewed, put up, and put down; and their
most ancient Liturgies show, how the people received the wine, as well as the
bread: and this custom (says 3 Part. Thom. qu. 80. Art. 12. q. 3.
Caietan) endured long in the Church, and as Ouand. 4. p. 221.
one of their Church say; It were better if this custom were renewed again.

2 Example in Transubstantiation.
Transubstantiation lately brought into the Church, and made a matter of faith
by a silly Pope Innocent the third, in the Lateran Council, within these 400
years: and the Soto. 4. d. 9. q. 2. Art. and 4. Suar. tom. 3. d. 5.. 1.
Papists themselves say, this opinion is very new, and lately brought into the
Church, and believed only upon the authority of the Lateran Council; and
speak so uncertainly, and inconstantly in this point, and do so stagger, and
enterfere in their opinion herein, Scot. 4. d. 11. q. Bell. Eucher. lib. 3. c.
23.
confessing that there is no Scripture to convince it, unless ye bring the
Church of Romes exposition; so that hitherto we can see no great antiquity, nor
good universality in their doctrine.

3 Example in Popes supremacy.
The Council of Sess. 4 and 5.
Constance, and Sess. 2 and 18.
Basil decreed. That a general Council was of greater authority then the
Pope: but long after that, the Councels Con. Later. sub Leon. Sess. 11.
of Lateran and Trent decreed contrary. The Councels of Act 16.
Chalcedon and Sext Synod. in Trull. can. 36.
Constantinople, make the Bishop of Constantinople equal with the Bishop of
Rome: yet now he arrogates a supremacy above Bishops, above Councels, above
Kings above all; his title no less then universal Bishop: yet L. 6. Ep. 30.
Gregory who * A papa ad concilium non appellan dum: Iacobatius de Council: lib.
1. Art. 1. Nu 36.
was Pope of Rome, says; I hat he dare confidently say, He is the forerunner
of Antichrist in his pride, whosoever he be that calls himself universal
Bishop: but this smoaky pomp of pride the Pope now likes well enough, and
makes it an Rulla Pij 4* super forma iuramenti professio fidei: in fi^e.
Article of Faith to swea^e obedience to his primacy; and he that denies this,
denies Fidem Catholicam, The Catholic Faith, faith Bellarmine.

I might here produce other examples of Popish Doctrine, crept in by degrees;
as their abominable Imageworship brought in by the second Act. Zonar. Tom. 3.
page 9.
Council of Nice: the first restraint of Priests marriage by Pope Siritius,
the doctrine of the merit of works lately by the Schoolmen, as Sacrament:
tit. 1. ca. 7. p. 30.
Waldensis writes: Their prayers to the dead, Popes pardons, Purgatory, (a
Platonicall, or poetical fiction) Auricular confession, with other like
triuiall trash, which if they have any color of antiquity, yet they have no
color of verity. And what is antiquity without verity? Saint Cyprian: Ep. 74.
Cyprian tells us; Consuetudo sine veritate, est vestustas erroris, Continuance
without truth is the antiquity of error: And syp. lib. 2. contra gentes.
again, Non hom ines consuei ^dinem sequi ^porter, sed Dei veritatem, We may
not follow the custom of men, but the truth of God: for as Lib. de veland Virg.
Tertullian, Quodcunque contra veritatem sapit, hoc erit haeresit, etiam
consuetudo, Whatsoever is contrary to truth, is heresy, even custom and
antiquity.

Epist. ad, Philadelphias.
Ignatius writes, that he heard some say; Nisi Euangelium in ^nt quis inuenero,
non credam Unless I find the Gospel among the Ancients, I will not believe it:
P^gani (says Aug. nou. and vet. test. qu. 114.
Austen) Antiquitatis causa, se verum tenere contendunt; The Pagans for the
cause of antiquity, contend they hold the truth: If antiquity might carry it,
the Jews Bellar. de Eccle. milit. lib. 4. c. 5.. in omni: ex Judaeis coepit
Christiana religio.
might carry it from the Christians. The Church of Antioch from the Church of
Rome: for so says Lib. 2. de romans pontif.
Bellarmine; Petrus Antiochiae Cathedram suam aliquandiu tenebat, priusquam ad
Romam eam transtulisset, Peter did set his Chair at Antioch, before he
translated it to Rome. Indeed the woman of John 4. 20.
Samaria pleades antiquity to Christ, our Fathers worshipped in this mountain,
and ye say; that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship: so say
our Lay-Papists, Our Fathers worshipped God with Images, with the Mass etc.
But Christ will say to them, as to that 22.
woman; ye worship that which ye know not: Away with your wicked and
will worship, I will be worshipped according to my word. The great hinderance
(says the Jesuit De salute Indorum: lib. 2. cap. 18.
Acosta) to the plantation of the Roman Faith among the Indians, Ex inueterata
consuetudine proficiscitur, proceeds from their ancient custom, wherein before
they were inured, and from it hardly reclaimed: and as the Jesuit Lib. 4.
epist. 1. Rochardus King of Frizeland by Wolfranius persuaded to be baptized,
having one foot in the Font, asked, whither went most of his Predecessors? To
Hell, said Wolfranius, then he Rectius est plures, qua^ pauciores sequi: The
very answer of many Papists. Fulg. lib. 3.
Xauerius says; Indi, ne Christiani fierent, hanc causam afferebant, so a
maioribus suis semper cultores extitisse, etc. The Indians, that they should
not be made Christians, alleged this cause, that they had always been
worshippers according to their Forefathers. The same is the answer of many
Papists. We serve God as our Fathers did, and yet the Lord says to all, Ezech.
20. 18 19
walk not in the ordinances of your Forefathers, neither observe their
manners, nor defile your selves with their Idols: I am the Lord your God, walk
in my Statutes, etc. Men should not do, as the most do, but as they must do:
God does not say, walk as others do; but, Esaias 30. 21.
Haec est via, ambulate in ea, This is the way, walk ye in it Truth is not to
be tried by antiquity, or universality, but by the Scripture: Nabuchadnezars
idolatry graced with Dan. 3.
universality, only three do gainesay it. In a word with Cyprian, Multitude
errantium non parit errori patrocinium, An erring multitude does not patronize
error.

It has been a long time the calumny and reproaches of Popish Priests (men
who have an infirmity to void excrements at their mouth) to defame our Church
with an Where was our Church before Luther lay with Bora? cry these Catholic
calumniators: Our Religion a ragge torn from their coat.
vpstart nouelty: where was your Church before Martin Luthers time? We do not
fetch our Religion from Martin Luther (a worthy man) but from the Scripture,
from Christ and his Apostles: we want no antiquity, having the Scripture; your
Greg. Valent. Analys. lib. 1. c. 16.
Jesuit will tell you so much, Sanctarum Scropturarum summa est antiquitas,
etc. The Holy Scripture is of the greatest antiquity, and that Church, whose
doctrine agrees with it, is most ancient.

Yet Martin Luther is more ancient, then your Tridentine Fathers, and brood of
Jesuits, the Atlasses to support your falling Church. But many hundred years
before Luthers days, there wanted not famous and zealous men, who resisted the
corrupt doctrine of the Church of Rome, the persons, and the points, the time
when, in all Ages are compendiously recited, by a judicious and very learned
Doct. White: first part of the way to the Church. Digress, 52.
Divine of our Church, to whose Book for breuity sake, I refer my Reader.
The nakedness of the Roman Diana was discovered long ago, for which dscouery
many good men have been Acteon-like hunted by bloody hounds to death.
Corruptions spread by degrees, Et tanquam cancer See D. Willet: Com. upon 11
Chapter of Daniel. pa. 449.
serpit, as Espencaeus; creepes stealing like a Canker, infects one part, then
another. Such has been the malady of the Church of Rome, their creeping
corruptions canker-like, first one part, then another point, that it is hard to
set down the precise time, when these corruptions ingendered. The Greeks
debated long on this problem: The ship Argos, wherein Jason sailed for the
golden Flecce, after the Plutarke.
voyage ended, was laid up in the road for a Monument: where decaying by
degrees, it was repaired by pieces anew; in the end, the whole substance of the
vessel extinct, and nothing left, but only the reparations successively made.
Now the question was, whether-this ship (suppose it Peter's) were the same that
he sailed in when he lived, or an other renewed? and whether can any man tell,
when such a piece was added, such a part supplied? And if this cannot be so
precisely showed, does it follow infallibly, that it was the very Argosie:
wherein Jason sailed? So in this case, their ship, their Church, so often
peeced, so many new points added, every Pope almost changing his Predecessors
decrees, abrogating this point, and augmenting it with another, that it is
indeed a new ship, and can justly plead no great antiquity.

And for universality, and unity in Doctrine, no Church so much divided.

We do read, how Popes usually have condemned that, which other Popes have
confirmed: Councels contradicted that which others have concluded. Their
outcries in Schools, Pulpets, Consistories, one against another, makes their
division and difcord audible: That we may say of them, which Lucian in Timon.
Lucian of the old Phlosophers; With the noise of their disputations, they have
so filled the ears of Jupiter, and made him deaf, that he cannot hear their
prayers. How irreconciliable are the iars and contentions Vide Rhenanum
Papistam: Schol. in Luc: Senec. de morte Claud.. facilius inter Philosophos.
Corpore de Christi lis est, de sanguine lis est, Deque modo lis est, non
habitura modum.
of Scotus, Aquinas, Egidius Romanus, and others? that they imitate the
wranglings of the old Academicks, Stoics, and Peripatetickes.

Have they not Families of the Schoolmen, wherein every one professes his
particular Sect-Master? Thomas, Scotus, Occham Durandus, both Masters and
Scholars, have spent their lines and lives in opposition.

The Dominican and Franciscan Friars, many ages quarrelling about the
conception of the Virgin Mary.

Their writers sharping their pens one against another, Armachanus against the
Friars, the Jesuits, and secular Priests one against another: Catharinus
against Caietan, Catharinus and Soto one against another: Pighius, Gropper,
B^rus, Peresius, Cassander, Hosius, Almayne, etc great pillars of Popery, some
fourscore years ago, are now by late Jesuits contemned and confuted: who
knows not (says De gra. lib. 1 c. 3.
Bellarmine that Pighius in many points was miserably seduced by reading
Caluins Books? and of Gropper, and other Divines of Collen he De Iustif. lib.
3^ cap 3,
says; Their Books have need of the Churches censure.

Yea, are not the writers of the last stamp, even Bellarmine, Gregory of
Valence, Stapleton, Suarez, Vasquez, Molina, Egyptians set against Egyptians,
every one against his brother, etc. Esaias 19. 2.
Baronius, etc: up to the ears in contention and faction among themselves?
Bellarmine confuted by Bar^layus, Suarez, Carerius, Marsilius; yea, Bellarmine
has often confuted himself by contradictions. Suarez confuted by Vasques,
Baronius by Mariana, etc. Yea, this Kingdom is so Suis and ipsa Roma viribus
ruit: Hor.
divided among it self, that we presume, and this presage, it shall not long
stand. They that would further behold this Camp of the Judges 7. 22.
Midianites, sheathing their swords in their neighbors sides; let them read
the work of that learned and reverend Doctor, D. Hall, in his Book called the
Peace of Rome.

And yet the Papists with might and maine exclaim at factions in the Church of
England, to whom we may say with our Savior; Hypocrita, eijce primum Trabem de
oculo tuo, Math. 7. 5.
Hypocrite, first cast the beam out of thine own eye, sweep clean before
your own threshold, before you blame spots in others. They tell the World what
an implacable discord and dissension is betwixt the Protestants and the
Puritanes, (a name we scarce know, and is proper to none, but only unto
Jesuits, who think themselves so pure, that they will arrogate to be of the
society of Jesus:) But we may truly say, that which they shall never say; That
Cum Jesus Judas, etc.
in the Church of England there is universality and unity in substance of
doctrine and religion, and in circumstance we have, or hope for a general
uniformity.

But they want these, and yet of late they have a new policy, to purge and raze
many of their own dead Doctors, to speak that in their graves, they never
thought on in Many Popish Books are made right Anatomies
their studies; putting out that which they printed; and putting in that which
the Authors never purposed: Thus have they served Caictan, Gratians Gloss,
Ferus, Polydore, Lodonic^ Vines, etc. And to this end serve their Indices
Expurgatorij, Indices Expurgatorij of all sorts. ^^elgi: Hispan. Lo^, etc.
To purge away their best blood, and leave them nothing but skin and bones:
And thus have they served Andreas Mazius Comments, and Iansenius Harmony upon
the Gospel; yea, whom not, if he has touched never so tenderly the sores of
Rome, this is the medicine to help the malady. But I would this punishment had
been only inflicted upon their own Doctors, and that they had never laid
their correcting hands in corrupting the Fathers, of whom they have a long time
boasted, (the Fathers, the Fathers, are all of our side): but these are but
wind and words and as he said of the Nightingale, Vox est praeterea nihil, A
mere voice, and nothing else, for these will use the Fathers, as Solo^ his
Friends or as Merchants use figures in Accounts for hundreds, if they please
them for Ciphers, if they cross them and truly the ancient Fathers of the best
esteem spea^e little or nothing on their side in any fundamental points, and
difference twixt them and us except they have dieted and given them vomits and
purgations; except they have so done to them, as Clement the eighth did to his
Predecessor Sixtus Quintus, corrupting that his correction of the Bible by a
new Translation, which one called a new Transgression; and they have herein so
falsified many of the Fathers, and foisted in other counterfeit Fathers, that it
puts me in mind of a Popes Iester, Pogghius speaks of* who when he told the
Pope tales to make him sport, did it standing behind a cloth, for being
outfaced: So the Fathers, who speak for them, must stand behind a skreene,
mantled or mangled by their correction. So that taking away these desperate
shifts, which the Church of Rome uses, there will be found no great antiquity
universality, or unity in the Doctrine of the Church of Rome.

But to leave these and other motives (allectiues to many to love the Church of
Rome) for I did not intend to muster up all their motives, wherewith they fight
against us; for so I should send out a Ship, and not a Pinnesse; I will rather
mention a few marks and apparent tokens, whereby these children may justly
misdoubt their mother to be an harlot and in part palpably perceive her
corruption:

Her first whorish mark is, her blasphemy against the 1 Mark.
Scripture, being that woman in Saint John's vision. Reu. 17. 3^
sitting upon a scarlet colored beast, full of the names of blasphemy: and
that in four respects; first her blasphemy and contempt of the Scripture
appears, because the Church of Rome maintains, that all things necessary to
Diabolicum est, extra diuinarum Scripturarum authoritatem aliquid diuinum
putare: Theophilus lib. 2. Paschal.
salvation are not contained in the Holy Scripture; and that the best part of
true religion is known by unwritten traditions, and that these traditions are
to be received with the same reverence and affection, wherewith we receive
the Scripture, as the Sess. 4 decret. 1.
Council of Trent decreed.

Many things belong to Christian Faith, which are not contained in the
Scripture openly, nor obscurely, says Loc. lib. 3. c. 3. page 151.
Canus.

The greatest part of the Gospel is come to us by tradition, very little of it
is committed to writing, Confess. Petric. c. 92. page 383. idem Iac. Simanch.
Instit tit. 24. n. 36. and 37.
says Hosius: The D. 40: si papa. in Annot. Margin.
Canon Law, set out newly by Pope Gregory the 13. says, that men do so
reverence the Apostolical seat of Rome, that they rather desire to know the
ancient institution of Christian religion from the Popes mouth, then from the
holy Scripture.

Their works are full of such words, by which all may see their blasphemy,
comparing traditions of men with the infallible word of God.

2. Their mouths are full of bitter and irreuerent speeches against the
Scripture, calling it Censur. Colon. p. 112. Pigh. cont. 3.
a nose of wax, to be writhed this way, or that way; a dumb Judge, as Pighius
terms it, dead Peers. de Tradit. praefat.
ink, as another: yea Bellarmine Bell. de verb. dei lib. 4. ca. 4.
their great Doctor says, the Scripture is not simply necessary: or as Eck.
enchir. c. 1. prop. 4.
Eckius, we must live more according to the authority of the Church, then after
the Scripture: or the Scriptures without the Chem. exa. part. 1. page 47.
authority of the Church are no better then Aesops fables. And often they will
deny the Scripture it self, as Catharinus accuses Caietan their great
Cardinal, (called by Sixth. Sen. bibl. l. 4. in Tho. vius.
them an incomparable Divine, and the most learned of all his age) who does
charge him Cathar. aduers. nova dogmat. Caiet. page 1. and inde.
for denying the last chapter of Marks Gospel, some parcel of S. Luke, the
Epistle to the Hebrews, the Epistle of James, the second Epistle of Peter, the
second and third of John, the Epistle of Jude, all which are Canonical: they
will deny the scripture if it make not for them, and say with Eck. de ecclesia.
Eckius, Scriptura sine ecclesia authoritate non est authentica, The Scripture
without the authority of the Church, that is the Pope (for so Gregory of Disp.
theol. tom. 3. 1. page 24.
Valence says, by the Church we mean her Head, that is, the Roman Bishop) is
not authentical.

3. They make their Pope Judge over the Scripture; whosoever rests not on the
doctrine of the Bishop of Rome, as the infallible rule of God, from whom the
holy Scripture takes her strength and authority, he is an heretic, Syluest.
Prier. contra Lutherum.
says one of her side. The Pope Henr. doct. magist. sacr. palatij Romae. ad
legate. Bohem. sub Faelice Papa.
may change the holy Gospel, and may give to the Gospel, according to time
and place, another sense.

We are bound to stand to the Popes judgment alone; rather then to the
judgment of all the world besides, says De planct. eccl. (...) lib. (...).
art. 6.
Aluarus Pelagius.

The Popes Did. 19. in Canonic. and gloss. ibide^. The Council of Trent
forbids all other interpretation of the Scripture, then that which agree with
the Romish Church. Sess. 4.
rescripts and decretall Epistles are Canonical Scripture.

If any man have the interpretation of the Roman Church, (that is, the Pope)
concerning any place of Scripture, although he neither know nor understand,
whether and how it agrees with the words of Scripture, yet notwithstanding he
has ipsissimumverbum Dei, the very word of God, says De expresso verbo Dei.
Hosius: voices most odious to all the Fathers whom they boast of, to name but
one, S. Chrysostom Concio. 4. de Lazaro.
says, Scripturis sacris potius credendum, quam omnibus hominibus in mundo,
We must believe the Scripture before all the men of the world: and not to
cleave to the Popes exposition, for as the same Chrysostom. in cap. genesis 2. homil.
13.
Father, Sacra Scriptura seipsam exponit, and auditorem errare non sinit, the
holy scripture expounds it self, and will not suffer the hearer to err.

Their Cardinal Cusanus has written a book, which he entitleth, De
Authoritate Ecclesia and Concilij, supra, and contra Scripturam, of the authory
of the Church, and of a Council, above and against the Scripture; with many
others who have vomited out blasphemous speeches, and would infringe the
authority of the word of God, robbing it sacrilegiously of her
all sufficiency, and bestow it upon their Pope, the Master of the mystery of
iniquity and herefie.

4 They prohibit the people to read the Scripture, and odiously exclaim
against us, as Bell. de verbo dei, lib. (...) c. 15.
Bellarmine, and the Rhemists prefac.
Rhemists, because our translated Bibles be in the hands of every husbandman,
artificer, prentise, boy, girl, mistress, maid, man: and for the maintaining
of their practice to deprive the people of the word, they would color it with
certain paradoxes.

1 The Scripture makes heretics. 2 Ignorance is the mother of devotion. 3
Images are the Laymens Books. 4 They must believe as the Church belieues
implicitly.
Christ John 5. 39.
commands all, Search the Scriptures: but they say, The Scripture makes
heretics. Paul says, Let the (...) C^. 3. 16.
word of Christ dwell in you plenteously, but they say, Ignorance is the
mother of devotion: 1 John 5. 21.
John says, Babes keep your selves fram images, but they say, They are the
Laymens books: Habac. 2. 4.
Abakuk says, The just shall live by his faith, but they say, You shall live by
another man's faith: believe as the Church believes, and do not know what the
Church believes. Their doctrine to the Scripture is as opposite as heaven is to
hell, and therefore would not have the people acquainted with the Scripture.

It is lamentable to read how impiously they write in this kind, their great
Cardinal and president in the Trent Council, De expresso verbo dei. p. 91.
Hosius says, It was fitter for women to meddle with their distaffe then with
Gods word. So Confut. resp. Whitak. rat. 5. p. 148. They take away the word,
and give them dross, Infoelix lolium, and steriles dominantur auenae.
Durae^^ God has left them, not the books of the Scriptures, but Pastors and
Doctors.

They take away from the Christian Soldier his weapon, scriptum est, and in
stead thereof give him traditum est, a wooden dagger, pictures, legends, and
fables, Ier 2. 13.
forsaking the fountains of living waters, and dig them broken pits that can
hold no water. They imitate the malicious Genesis 26. 15.
Philistims, who stopped the wells of Abraham and filled them up with earth, to
put their memorial out of mind, so that they might challenge the ground: so
these stop the veins of life found in the Scripture, with the earthly dross
of traditions, legends, Satan's songs, to make a merchandise of ignorant
souls, and to starve them with a famine of Gods word, as if the contents in
If the light of the Scripture might freely shine, then Popery would soon
vanish. Spanish proverb. Potos sotos deuotos. Ignorance is the Grandame of all
error. Con. Tolet. 4. Can. 24.
the Scripture, were like the mysteries of the goddess Ceres, which might not
be revealed; making the bread of life like the shewbread, whereof it was
lawful for none to eat of it but the Priests only. To color this Gorgon with
a cleanly vizard they say, Ignorance is mother of devotion; Pessima matter est
(says Austen) itidem pessimae duae filiae; falsitas, and dubietas, illa
miserior, ista miserabilior, illa perniciosior, ista molestior, Ignorance is
the worst mother, and her two daughters worst, falsehood, and doubtfulnes; that
very wretched, this more miserable, that more pernicious, this more
troublesome: but they make much of this mother, for she is the vpholder of the
Popes chair.

Pythagoras said well, Above all take care to keep thy body from diseases, the
city from sedition, and thy soul from ignorance: But we may say to these
popish Interpreters of the Law, as our Savior did to the Pharasaicall, Luke
11. 52.
ye have taken away the key of knowledge, ye enter not in your selves, and
them that came ye forbad.

I have the longer insisted upon this mark (a red lattise to show the house of
the great Revel 17. 1.
whore, which sits upon many waters) by which sign I may say, Pulchrum est
digito monstrari, and dicier, haec est:


The second meretrician mark, is her outward face, 2 Mark.
pontifical pomp and government. How unlike is her Pope to Peter? Peter
arrogated no primacy, no Episcopal universality: painful to Acts 2 14. 3. 12.
preach the word, never meddling with the temporal sword: To feed Christ's John
21. 16.
sheep was all his joy: he never had Emperor hold his stirrup, or kiss his
toe: never deposed King from his Crown: never freed subject from obedience: he
gave himself no other title, but an 1 Pet. (...). 1.
Apostle of Jesus Christ.

He never gloried in these smoaky titles, Bell. l. 2. de To. pont. cap. 31.
Vicarius Christi, sponsusecclesiae, the Vicar of Christ, the husband of the
Church: Idem ibidem. Primo quia.
Vniuersalis Episcopus, and caput Ecclesia, Universal Bishop, Head of the
Church: or as others style him, lumen orbis, the light of the world, or
vice-deus, in the room of God, not a mere man, but mixed; with other
Luciferian titles, which by me are elsewhere touched: his usurped prerogatives
and power they may that will find in Bellarmines books de Romano pontifice:
yea as (some say) the Goats of Candie have al their eyes fixed upon the
canicular star when it arises in the Horizon: so all popish eyes fixed upon
this star of Rome, homagers to his chair, all their tongues saluting with
Gallinae fillus albae.

Peter and the Apostles were no fishers of Gold, as it may be said of these
Popes, praedam quaerunt, non animas, they fish for silver, not for souls:
Innocent the third, a Pope of Rome told Aquinas, being in his Gallery among his
gold, that Peter could not show so much gold when he said, Acts 3, 6.
silver and gold have I none: to whom Aquinas gave a good answer and said,
your Holiness cannot do that which Peter said, and did to the cripple, surge
and ambula, arise and walk.

How unlike are Romes Cardinals to Christ's Apostles? State, pride, ambition
and policy are their four cardinal Platina says in the life of Damasus the
second, that only ambitious fellows did invade S. Peter's seat, and he says
in the life of Siluester the third a Pope, that he who prevailed not in
learning and holy life, but in bribery and ambition, even he alone did obtain
the Popedom. Vide Dr. White 1. part. Way, digress. 53. p. 419.
virtues: Their style, ego and Rex, I and the King, their purple hat and
scarlet habit will scarce give way to regal robes. The pride, ambition, and
vainglory of the Roman prelacy has been taxed in most histories: yea their
own side has condemned them for these sins, and are branded with these
marks by Cusanus, Zarabella, Marsilius, Occham, Duareaus etc. Their selling of
Pardons, and symoniacal corruption has made it a common byword, -- omnia
venalia Romae,
Templa, sacerdetes, altaria, sacra, coronae,
Ignis, thura, preces, coelum est venale, deusque:
At Rome all sacred things are to be sold,
Temple, priests, prayers, heaven and God for gold.


Yea many of their great Popes symoniacall, heretical, boys, yea the feminine
Pope Ioane was no honest Pope: yea their own Ba^an. 908. n. 6
Baronius says, that a notable strumpet to Adelbert Marquess of Tuscia,
prostituting her daughters to the Popes, did create Popes at the pleasure of
the strumpets: and he cries An. 912. n. 8.
out: How filthy was the face of the Roman Church then, when most powerful,
and withal most sordide whores bare all the sway at Rome, and their lovers
were thrust into Peter's seat? At this day (as we read) the Pope has a
pension from the stews at Rome; Were he like Peter, he would abhor to foul
his hands with such stinking gain, or enrich his coffers with an harlots hire:
rather Acts 8. 20.
with S. Peter say, Thymony perish with thee: or with our Savior to the women
taken in adultery, John 8. 11.
Go away and sin no more; and not to give them a toleration or dispensation
for fornication.

To leave this point, as the Poet left Rome, with this verse: Roma vale, vidi,
satis est vidisse, reuertar,
Cum leno, meretrix, scarra, cinaedus ero.
Oh Rome farewell, I have seen, and seen too much,
Return I will, when turn, baud, whore, or such.


The third mark may be this, That there is no point of our faith, but many
learned in the Church of Rome approve 3 Mark.
the same; and no point of Papistry by us confuted, but some of the chief of
their Church have disliked, as well as we; that we may say to them as our
Savior did to that bad servant, Luke 19. 22. The Papists find this ttue, and
therefore have purged the elder Papists books, and corrected those points, or
wholly razed them out. Vide Indic. libr. prohibit. p. 25.. 3.
Ex ore tuo te iudico, of thine own mouth will I condemn thee. Thus the
division of the tongues and people of Babylon are a means of the plantation
and edification of Gods Jerusalem. This point has been demonstrated in the
chief questions betwixt them and us, by many learned Divines of our Church,
and excellently verified and declared by Doctor Morton, a singular ornament of
our Church, in many of his works, but especially in his first and second part
of his Catholic Apology, wherein he has ouerthrown the points of Popery of
the chiefest difference by the affirmations and assertions of the best learned
Papists, to whose labor in this point I refer the judicious Reader.

The fourth mark is this: That many maine points in 4 Mark.
popery are absurd, and even against common sense, and the light of nature.

What man endewed with mother-wit, can persuade himself, that the Pope is
Judge and Lord over the Scripture, Church, Councels, and all the world: and
that in his breast there is an infallibility of not erring, when as common and
continual experience speaks the contrary?

What likelihood is there in the doctrine of transubstantiation, Corpus
Christi, nec in quantum corpus, nec in quantu^ vnitum diuinitati hoc habet, vt
sit in pluribus locis simul. Aquinas did. 27. qu. 1. Vis excidere gratia? acta
tua merita. Aug. in Ps. 31.
that the Priest should pull caelum in caenam, Christ's body with all his
dimensions put in a little box, and the same body be in several places and
parts at one time?

What color of truth can there be in the doctrine of works of Superogation,
that a man can merit more then is needful for him, and that this his ouer-plus
of obedience, by the Churches dispensation, is beneficial to other, who want
this plenitude? when as our Luke 17. 10. Beggars craving an alms show their
wounds, and wants, but Papists their works to challenge heaven as a debt. Idem
est fingere multos deos, and sanctos mortuos inuocare Melanctho^.
Savior says, When ye have done al those things which are commanded you,
say, we are unprofitable servants.

To pretermit their ridiculous ceremonies which Kemnitius well terms Sarcasmi
Diaboli, as christning of Bells, sprinkling of holy water, Exorcismes,
Annealing, spitting in the baptizeds mouth, creeping to the Cross, praying
upon beads, etc. or their doctrine of praying to the dead, who can neither
hear nor help; or their many Non opus est patronis apud deum. Chrysostom. hom.
de profect. Euangel.
mediators and intercessors, when as Paul says, There is but one mediator
between God and man, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 2. 5. If any man sin, we
have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, etc. 1 John 2. 1.
or their Their souls they seem to gain to God, and sacrifice their bodies to
the Devil. shrift is turned to bawdry. Cor. Agrip. de vanit. c. 64.
auricular confession and absolution of their sins, yet the very Pharifies
could fay, Who can forgive sins but God only? Luke 5. 21. or that saying of
Mass, or singing Dirges for the dead, could benefit the dead? as well writes
S. Lib. de bono mortis. ca. 2.
Ambrose herein, qui hic non aocipit renaissione^ peccatoru^, illac non ha^, he
that does not receive remission of his sins in this life, shall not find it
in the life to come: and as S. Contra Demetrianum tract 1.
Cyprian, H^e vita (...), ^t tenetur, etc. Here life is to be lost or got,
after death, neither Masses, Dyrges, or Auc-Maries are available.

How repugnant to a good man's reason is their popish equivocation, to dissemble
the truth with a mental reservation. How do they follow the counsel of 1
Pet. 2. 1.
Peter (of whom they boast) who commands them to lay aside al dissimulation: or
as S. Ephesians. 4. 25.
Paul, cast off lying, and speak truth every man to his neighbor? but the
Father of lies will not have his children to speak truth: this doctrine none
but Atheists, Machiauelists or Jesuits can commend.

Not to touch all the fringes or fragments belonging to this whore, wherewith
she is apparelled, I will but handle four of her relickes, four points of
popery, which in my weak apprehension are dislonant to common reason, much
more to Christian religion.

1. Her Latin service: 2. implicit faith. 3. worshipping I will a littlelook
upon, scarce touch the poisonous pommell of the chair of pestilence.
of Images. 4. Popes pardons: a touch and away, not taste of her cup, for it is
full of poison, no not primis labris degustare, only look upon it, and see
how ugly it seems to common sense (excepting eyes, and ears, for therein
popery is a bewitching Lady, fair images for the eyes, and sweet music for
the ears) like the book given to Revel. 10. 9.
John, sweet in the mouth (sweet to carnal and natural men) but bitter in
the belly, very sour to the soul, which is sanctified and shall be saved.

1. Popish Latin service.

What possibility is there that Service or Prayers said in a tongue which the
people understand not should be profitable to them? As the 1 Cor. 14. 14. 19.
Apostle, If I pray in a strange tongue, my understanding is without fruit: and
the same Apostle, I had rather in the Church to speak five words with my
understanding, then ten thousand words in a strange tongue: and again,
Except ye utter words that Cap. 9.
have signification, how shall it be understood what is spoken? for ye shall
speak in the air, and the Apostle seems upon purpose in the whole chapter to
condemn this Ezra the Priest did read the Law to men and women to hear it,
and understand it, Nehem. 8. 2.
point, which chapter, 1 Cor. 14. I commend to all lay Papists to read it, yet
in their mother Tongue, except they understand the Latin.

To pray in an unknown tongue, is not to pray, but to prate like a Parrot: and
yet the Tridentine Sess. 22. c. 8.
Council decreed, Non expedire vt diuinum officium vulgari passim lingua
celebretur, not expedient that Divine Service should be celebrated in the
vulgar tongue, and they call it an intolerable Intolerabilis Lutheranorum
error, etc. Azor. Ies. instit. Moral. lib. 8. c. 26.
error of the Lutherans who think the contrary: And this doctrine of Luther,
who requires a known tongue in Divine prayers, Diaboli calliditatem sapit,
says their Senen. bibl. lib, 6 ann. 263.
Catharinus, sauors of the Devil; rather this speech sauors of the Devil. And
truly these Foxes in this chase have been so hunted out of all their blind
holes of ignorance, and unable to uphold this Babell of Barbarism, that they
are at last brought to a very desperate defense, to produce but two of their
Champions, who have drawn out their weapons for the defense of this cause.

Their Jesuit Salmeron, and Cardinal Bellarmine: In 1. Cor. 14. disp. 3^. 4.
obijcitur.
Salmeron says, Finis proprius diuinorum officiorum non est populi instructio,
and adificatio, sed potius cultus Deo debitus, The proper end of Divine duties
is not the instruction and edification of the people, but rather a worship due
to God: I will not vouchsafe an argument, but say with that reverend D. Morton.
2. part. Catho. Apolo. lib. 1. c. 24.
Deane, Hoc est causae perditissimae vltimum refugium, desperationis
plenissimum, omnis authoritatis, and rationis praesidijs destitutum, This is
the last refuge of a most wretched cause, full of desperation, and void of all
authority and reason.

Bell. de verbo dei. c. 16.. obiectio 4. and 2. obiectio.
Bellarmine says almost the same words, vsus precum praecipuus non est
aedificatio, aut consolatio populi, sed cultus Deo ab ecclesia debitus, the
chief use of prayers is not the edification or consolation of the people, but
a worship due to God from the Church, and so that God do understand the
tongue, no matter whether men do or no: a strange argument: God knows our
wants before we pray, why then should we pray at all? or make our petitions to
him, and yet know not the tenor of our petitions? Never did any Illam orationem
Deus non exaudit, cui bo^^, quando psallit, non attenlit. Gregor.
Church teach the people to pray for that which they do not understand, but the
Church of Rome.

Yet they themselves confess it, were better if the service were in the vulgar
tongue, yet will not suffer it: as Bell. supra.
Bellarmine, Est melius ad consolationem orantis, It were better for the
consolation of him that prays: melius ad instructionem vt preces
intelligantur, say the Rhemist. in nouum Testam.
Rhemists, better for instruction, that the prayers should be understood and
Caiet. in 1. Cor. 14
Caietan, better for the edification of the Church; ad fructum deuotionis
conducibilius, says Aquin. lect. 3. in 1. Cor. 14.
Aquine, more convenient for the fruit of devotion: and so their Cardinal
Christ. instruct. p. 212. and Tho. lect. 3. in 1 Cor. 14.
Contarenus says, The prayers that men understand not, want the fruit which
they should reap, if they understood them.

Yea themselves Hard. art. 3. sect. 28.
confess, That in the time of the Primitive Church the people in the vulgar
tongue did celebrate their divine service: In primitive ecclesia benedictiones,
and caetera communia fiebant invulgari, says Lyranus in the Primitive Church
benedictions, and other common duties done in the vulgar tongue: nay Bell. lib.
2. de verb. Dei. c. 16. Idem etiam.
Bellarmine goes further, Longo tempore post, tempore Chrysostomi, ac Cypriani,
ac Ieronymi, ea consuetudo valuit, long after that, in the time of Chrysostom,
Cyprian, and Jerome, this custom, to celebrate sacred things in the vulgar
tongue, prevailed.

The cause which the Trent Sess. 22. c. 1.
Council alleges, why all divine service should be in the Latin tongue, is
this, mos generalis ecclesiae habet, vt tantum tribus linguis, hebraica,
Graeca, and latina celebretur, The general custom of the Church has been,
that in these three tongues, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, it should be
celebrated: In the Primitive Church and long after, no such custom, by their
own confession: and if any tongue, rather the Hebrew, the most ancient; but
the Hebrew and Greek originals of the Scripture are by them little regarded,
and the vulgar Latin translation of the Scripture is by the Council of Sess. 4.
Trent canonized, charging all to use it, as the authentical text in all their
readings, disputations, sermons, and expositions, and that they do not reject
it upon any pretense whatsoever. Yea the F. Simen. bibl. Complut. in prolog.
Bishop of Toledo putting forth the Bible in diverse languages, printed the
Latin between the Hebrew and Greek, saying, he had placed them as the two
thieves on either side, but the Roman, or Latin put in the midst between
them, as Jesus Christ: and yet I think never did the sun see any thing more
defective and maimed then the vulgar Latin thus by them extolled. I could with
my finger point at gross corruptions therein, but I may spare that labor,
their own tongues shall tell it. Their own Bishop De opt. gent interpret li.
3. c. 1. 2. 4. 6. We acknowledge that there be many faults in our Latin edition
of the bible, etc. Sixth Senen. bibl. sanct. lib. 8. p. 365.
Lindan says, it has monstrous corruptions of all sorts, scarce one copy
has one book of Scripture undefiled: many points translated improperly,
abusiuely: with many other learned Papists, who might be named, complaining of
several additions, detractions, falsifications, deprauations, and barbarismes
of the vulgar Latin, now by them preferred above the Hebrew and Greek coppies.

Well, if the Lay people may have this Latin Bible read unto them, yet
understand never a word of it, and other Church prayers, they think this
service is sufficient which is but a little better then vox porcorum, or
mugitus boum, then crying of hogs, or the bellowing of bulls: for it is the
comparison of De summo bono, lib 3. c. 8.
Isidorus, Quid potest strepitus labiorum vbi cor est mutum? oration sine
deuotione, est quasi mugitus boum, what is the sound of the lips, the heart
silent? Prayer without devotion is like the roaring of oxen: what devotion or
feeling is in that mind which is senseless of the words of his mouth? a
senseless petitioner, who understands not the sense of his petition. If a
wavering minded man shall receive nothing of the Lord, as Iam. 1. 7.
James, what shall a filly sot obtain, who is both inconstant and ignorant how
to pray, and what to pray for? his Pater noster etc, or Credo indeum will stand
him in small flead: Satan Let every man make his prayer to God in his native
tongue. Origin. contra Celsum, lib. 8.
in all his shop of fraud has not a craftier guile to erect his kingdom of
iniquity, then this accursed policy: Therefore let all men who fear God and
desire his favor to hear their prayers, follow S. Paul's rule, 1 Cor. 14. 15.
Pray with the spirit, and understanding also.

2 Implicit says.

The Church of Rome which rocks her children in the cradle of ignorance, tells
them implicit faith is sufficient for them which is the faith of Asses, as
images are fit books for Idiots. The description of implicit faith I will
fetch from themselves who know best the true image of this their false Idol:
Implicita fides est credere, secundum quod credit Ecclesia, vnde non omnis
Christianus tenetur illos articulos fidei scire explicit, sed tantum clerici,
says their Jacob. de Graff. decis. lib. 2. ca. 8. nu. 16.
own writer, Implicit or infold faith is to believe as the Church believes,
so that it is not necessary for every Christian to know those Articles of faith
explicitly, but only Priests: a strange faith, only devised to suppress
knowledge, and to countenance ignorance: so Bell. de Justif. lib. (...). c. 7..
Iudicium autem.
Bellarmine, fides melins per ignorantiam, quam per notitiam definitur, Faith
is better defined by ignorance, then by knowledge.

In their Church a Layman may believe by a proctor, or by a Priest explicitly,
but he that thus belieues by a deputy, shall go to heaven by an Attorney.
Apolog. translat. by stap. par. page 53. This is implicit faith to believe in
general, all that our holy mother the Church belieues. Dionys. de 25. qu.
vnic. p. 215. and Altisiodorensis, sum. li. 3. tract. 3. c. 1. q. 5. This is
Card. Allens rule for the unlearned, to keep themselves in the faith of the
Catholic Church, though they know not that faith. Defense of pardons. In
princip.
Staphilus relates at large a Colliars faith, which Colliar at the point of
death, and tempted of the Devil, to know his Belief, said, I believe, and die
in the faith of Christ's Church: urged again, what the faith of Christ's Church
was? answered. That faith that I believe in. Thus the Devil receiving no other
answer was vanquished. This implicit faith, rather fancy, is that folly which
they would have their laity to love, excluding knowledge from the nature of
faith, and make a naked Assent sufficient for salvation. Thus these
Soule-thiefes do not only put out the Candle of knowledge, the Scripture, and
put it under a Bushel, least it should descry them, but would extinguish all
light of grace, their Creed, which does condemn them: To believe as others
believe, or as the Church belieues, and yet know not the belief of the Church:
a purblind faith to save the blind.

They teach the people not to trouble themselves with searching into the
mysteries of Christian religion, or points of faith, but say, (as their Rhem.
annot. Luke ^2. 11.
Rhemists tutor them) that they will live, and dye in that faith which the
Catholic Church teaches, and this Church can give a reason of the things
believed: a very quick way, if it were a good way: but God requires a distinct
knowledge of the points of our faith, to be able, and 1. Pet. 3. 15.
ready always to give an answer to every man that asks a reason of our
hope, and faith: not to have the particular knowledge of our faith locked up in
the Church-chest, but in our own breast: not to send to Rome, or the Pope for
an answer, to ground their faith on, for they may be dead, before their
message be delivered, or an answer returned.

This implicit faith was in no request in Dial. cum Tryph.
Iustines time, who writes, that such as could no letter on the book,
understood all the mysteries of faith: and indeed it is most necessary for all
Christians to know, and learn the fundamental points of faith, which in the
Church of Rome by the unlearned cannot be attained: for how should any know
that which is propounded to him in an unknown tongue? how should he understand
his Creed, that knows not a word in English of his Credo. It is expounded to
them, may some say: Worthily I do warrant you: when as many of their Priests,
and some of their Popes could not be Latin expounders. Their expositions like
their Legends (commonly-read by them in the Church to the people) full of
monstrous lies: Bar. an. 1028. n^. 5.
as, the Virgin Mary came down from heaven to visit sick S. Fulbert, and
gave him her breasts to suck; and Gold legend.
that Saint Francis used to preach to Birds, and instruct them, who did hear
him with great devotion, etc. Good:stuste, to be read in the Church, yet this
read in the mother tongue, that they might learn this apace; but the book of
truth, the Scrpture, read in an unknown tongue, to believe that implicitly:
still they labor to imprison the people in the dungeon of ignorance, and
superstition: It is heresy for a Layman to dispute in a point of faith, says
Naua^^. manual. cap. 11. (...). 26.
Navarre: Neither Magi^. Geograp. page 104.
will they suffer the people to read any books, which examine their religion.

If any write honestly against their errors, their congregation of Cardinals
serves on them a Prohibition, commit them to the prison of suppression: If Lara
speaks of Jupiters lust, her tongue must be cut out: the people may not look
upon their enemies in the open face; nay their these Bishops, and learned
Priests, who should know light from darkness, are not permitted this
privilege, without a Concedi ijs lecti onem, qui ab ordinario facultatem
obtinuerunt. Bell. de verb. dei. c. 16.. respondeo inprimis.
special License therein obtained: and their Authors must be of the Roman
stamp, or first purged, before they may peruse them. Whereas our Church gives
free liberty to all to read privately their books: Veritas non quaerit
angulos, truth seeks no corners: and were they not conscious of the guilt of
their own cause, they would never take this course: to deprive the people of
the word, and read it in an unknown tongue, or tell the people an implicit
faith is sufficient.

Thrirdly, worshipping of Images.

I am come to the third monster of this Reave. 13. 1.
Beast, and I am loath to touch it, for the very Jews abhor it, Their
worshipping of Images: the book of God every where cries Deuteronomy. 27. 15. Religio
nulla est, vbi simulachrum est: Lactant. lib 2. de origin. Erroris. ca. 19.
woe to them that worship any carved Images. Cursed are all such: and to show
the vanity, and iniquity of Imageworship, I first recommend to every Lay-papist
to read soberly, and diligently the Chapter of Esaias, namely the 44.

And whereas these Papists commonly excuse themselves with this answer, we
worship no Images, but only they serve us to put us in remembrance of God.
First let them know, that if they will follow the Doctrine of their Tutors, and
I fear they follow them too much, they must worship them with a divine
worship: the old schoolmen (says the Jesuit Vasq. lib. 2. de adorat. disp.
1. cap. 3. and ca. 8.
Vasquez) do say, Imagines Christi esse colendas adoratione latriae: The
Images of Christ are to be worshipped with the highest adoration: their Jesuit
Azor. Instit. lib. 9. ca. 6.. Tota haec.
Azorius says, Constans est Theologorum sententia, imaginem codem honor, and
cultu coli, quo colitur id, cuius est imago, It is the constant opinion of
Divines, that the Image is to be worshipped with the same honor and worship,
wherewith that is worshipped, whose Image it is. Is not this I pray plain
idolatry?

Bellarmines Lib. 2. de. trium. Eccles. c. 2. in princip. thesis stultitiae
plena.
proposition herein is this: Imagines Christi, and Sanctorum venerandae sunt,
non solum peraccidens, vel improprie, verum etiam proprie: The Images of
Christ, and Saints are to be worshipped, not accidentally, or improperly, but
also properly: yea the second Con. Nic. 2. Act 7.
Council of Nice decreed that Images are to be worshipped.

Their late Con* Trid. Sess. 25.
Council of Trent says, and commands all to do it with Divine honor: So that
we truly say, that whosoever is a true Papist, is a true idolater: yea their
own writers who write sparingly therein, testify as much: Dici non potest,
quanta Idolatria apud rudem populum alatur per Imagines, Says Cor. Agrippa.
lib. de vanit. ca. 57.
Agrippa and Lib. consult. art. 21.
Cassander, it cannot be expressed, what great idolatry is nourished among the
rude people by Images: Yea as Polyd. Virg lib. de invent. cap. 13. Magis
fidentes diuis, quam deo. Episc. Espens. i^ 2. Tim. 3.
an other, Sunt been multiqui Imagines colunt, non vt figuras, sed perinde
quasi ipsae aliquem sensum habeant, magisque ijs credunt, quam Christo, There
are very many, who worship images, not as shapes, but even as alive, and more
trust their Images, then Christ: Manifestidus est hoc, quam vt verbo
explicaripossit, Says Cassand. vbi supr.
Cassander, This is more manifest, then can be expressed in a word: Dum
imaginibus exhibent latriae cultum, Says Ioh. Gers quaest. de negligen.
praelat. number. 7.
Gerson, while they offer to images the worship of Latria.

Let not Praefat. lib. de Beatit. Sancto.
Bellarmine outface men with, Quis Catholicorum diuinum honorem imaginibus
vnquam detulit? Who of the Catholics ever offered divine honor to Images? no
true Catholics ever did it, but Papists do it: and he, with many others
teach it: Counsels, which they account general, have decreed it: indeed the
Synod of Frankford condemned the Nicene Council for it, (yet Papists feign
would shift that) but it is manifest against them: for all the learned know,
that Charles the Emperor did assemble a Council at Franckford to condemn the
second Council of Nice, which had brought in the worshipping of Images: as the
book Praefat. circa Med. Amplector Sanctas and venerabiles Imagines secundum
seruitium adorationis, quod consubstantiali Trinitati Emitto, and qui sic non
sentiunt anathemati submitto: lib. Carol. page 382. Anno. 1549.
of Charles the Great speaks. There was brought forth the question touching
the late Synod, concerning the adoring of Images, wherein it was written, that
they should be cursed, which did not give the same service and adoration to the
Images of Saints, which is given to the divine Trinity* This the fathers of
Franckford justly despised. This is acknowledged to be true by Hincmarus, Ado,
Vrspergensis, Rhegino, Aimon, Auentine, etc. their welwilling writers. The late
Sess. 25.
Council of Trent commands the same. Their schoolmen, and Divines teach the
same: as Tho. 3. p. qu. 25. art. 3. and 4. Siluest. v. Latria. n. 2.
Turrecremata. 3. p. de Consecr. Crucis. n. 2. and Waldensis, Caietan, Gregory
of Valence, Bellarmine, Turrian, Andradius, Posseuina, Saunders, etc. -- Magna
comitante caterua:


All worthy Writers for wooden worship.

But how odious are such idolatrizing Masters and scholars to God and good
men?

Irenaeus Lib. 1. ca. 24*
places this among the heresies of Carpocrates, and the Gnostickes, quod
haberent, and coronarent Imagines, that they had, and crowned Images: much
rather to Papists, who have, and crave, and crowtch to Images: and Haeres. 79.
Epiphanius taught that such were Heretics, Qui Imaginem B. Virginis
circumferunt, Who did bear and carry about the Image of the blessed Virgin:
And this Ep. ad Joan.
Epiphanius faith, It was against the authority of the Scripture, that any
Image should be in the Church: And Contra Celsum. lib. 7.
Vrigen says of his time, we worship no Images: the Clem. Alexand. hort. ad
gent. p. 14.
Christians in the primitive Church had no Images: In republica Iudaeorum,
Imaginum factor, and statuarum fabricator long abiectus est, etc. Says
Origin, in the Commonwealth of the Jews, a maker of Images or of Pictures is
far from them removed, least it should minister any occasion to Idolatry:
they that make them Psalm. 115. 8.
are like unto them, and so are all they that put their trust in them.

Thou Exodus 20. 4. 5.
shall make thee no graven Image, neither the likeness of any thing: thou
shall not bow down to them, neither serve the^, says the Lord: how guilty of
the breach of this precept, are these Image-mongers, who not only bow down to
them, but also worship them? The Reave. 19. 10.
Apostle was rebuked for offering to fall down, and to worship dead and dumb
stocks and blocks, which have Psalm. 115. 6.
eyes and see not, mouths and speak not, ears and hear not, noses, and
smell not: Bowing to a Crucifixe, or such a like piece of wood, and
worshipping, saying, Esaias 44. 17.
Deliver me, for thou art my God. I know they well reply, They worship no
blocks, stocks, or stones: why, if they will join Issue, Read Bezas Epigram
of the painter, and Baker, Pictor pingat, Pistor pinsat, Pastor iubet esse
Deos, etc.
we will try the case: Confess they must, their Cross, or their Crucifix,
etc. is a dead, and dumb thing, as a stock or stone, and has nothing in it
worthy of veneration: yet their Jesuits do teach them, that this Cross, or
Crucifix is to be worshipped, not accidentally, improperly, or by way of
representation, but properly. I will produce but three of their side (for in
ore duorum, aut trium stet omne verbum) three of their chief Jesuits, and
these are counted honest and sufficient witnesses among themselves: 1. Coster.
Enchir.
Costerus says, All the honor, that is due to the samplar, is given to the
Image: is not this to worship the Image? 2. Bell. de Imag. lib. 2. c. 21.
Imagines sunt proprie, and per se colendae, nulla ratione habita ad exemplar.
Bellarmine explaines it further, This honor is so given, that the Image
stays, and limiteth it in it self, as it is an Image, and not only as it
represents the samplar. 3 Is Tom. 4. 345.
Gr^ogory of Valence, who says, Images themselves after their manner, are to be
worshipped, in respect of the samplar, and thus the Images* of Christ must be
adored with divine honor per aliud.

This is the modern Doctrine of Rome, yet it sauors so ill in their own
smell, that Bell. vbi supra., ca. 22.
Bellarmine confesses, it is not wholesome for the Pulpet.

Their Masse-booke has a prayer, All hail O Cross, our only hope, etc. Thou
only art worthy to bear the ransom of the world, O faithful Cross, only
thou art the Noble tree among all etc. Is not this prayer directed only to the
Cross, which has so many (only) words to tie it fast to the Tree? so that
the Paynims of old did that which Papists now do, their Idolles were the
Images of the true God, and so worshipped by them, respectively, and with
relation to God: for the Acts 17. 23.
Altar at Athens dedicated to the same God, whom Paul preached: few or none
among them (says Peers. Tradit. part. 3. page 225.
Peresius) thought the matter of their Idolles so graven, to be Gods, and they
had many Idolles, whereby they represented the true God: nay some of the
Jesuits are not ashamed to write, that not an Image only or an holy thing, may
be worshipped with the same adoration that is given to God, but even any other
thing in the world, whether living, or without life: either Angel, man, Sun,
Moon, Stars, Earth, or lignum, lapides, de modulo straminis, etc. (says
Vasquez Vasque. Adorat. lib. 3. disp. 1. c. 2. and 3.
their Jesuit) wood, stones, or a little straw: this is as much as they are
charged by us, to worship stocks, and blocks. And moreover these
Roman-pseudo-catholickes maintain an other idolatrous superstition, the
Artolatria est Idolatria.
adoration of the Sacrament, an invention brought in among them by C. Sanct.
Missarum.
Honorius the third, like the idolatry of the Gentiles in oblation, and the
^sacrifices of Bread, and Wine to Mitbra: no other Iul. firmic. de errore
profan. relig. Justin. Mart. Apol. 2.
for substance, then that which the Gentiles offered: for the natural
substance of bread, and wine remains after the consecration, yet we believe
that to the faithful receiver, the body of Christ is infallibly conjoined with
the bread, by a sacramental relation. Yet no way to be worshipped, for we deny
the Real presence corporally, as they affirm: and it is very strange, that
they should adore that, who teach, that Cautelae missae.
a man having received his maker, may vomit him up again: or as Tho. 3. q. 80.
art. 3. ad 3. Suar. Tom. 3. d. 62. s. 2.
Thomas, that a brute beast, as a dog, may eat the Body of Christ.

Though we do not adore the bread and wine, yet we give more reverence to it,
and teach, that the wicked may take panem Domini, the Bread of the Lord, not
panem Dominum, the Lord as Bread, sauingly participate this sacred mystery of
the Redemption by the body and blood of lesus Christ.

So that to conclude this point, If it be unlawful pingere imaginem Dei in
forma hominis, to draw the Image of God in the likeness of man for which their
De Eccl. Trium. c. 8. haec opinio.
Bellarmine taxes Calvin, yet confesses that their Albul. Durandus, Peresius
hold the same opinion: for the Image visible of the invisible God, is the Lena,
the baud of the heresy Alph. de Castre. lib. 5. de heraesi^tit. Deus.
of the Anthropomorphites, who held, Deum ex humanis membris consistere, God
did consist of humane members: then how abominable is it to worship God under
the shape of an Image, and ascribe the same honor to the Image, as they do to
the samplar, (God as they say) by it represented^ So that to such, God will
say, as the Psalm. 97. 7.
Prophet speaks, Confounded be all they that serve graven images, or that
glory in Idolles: and as Esaias 42. 8.
Esaias. I am the Lord, this is my name, and my glory will I not give to an
other, neither my praise to graven Images.

And I wonder that any should be so bewitched as to delight in Images
(historical vsel deny not, but all spiritual use is fornication, and
abomination:) but more to creep, and croutch to them, the visible objects of
dust, or dirt, to Esaias 44. 19.
bow to the stock of a Tree, as the Prophet speaks, this is the basest thing
that almost the Sun ever saw, unworthy of man, whose knee should bow to his
Maker, and not to the stock that he has made himself: how odious is the
service, and sacrifice of such creeping and croutching Idoll-suppliants in the
Lords sight? he will Malaeh: 2: 3:
cast the dung upon their own faces, even the dung of their solemn feasts,
such fordide service, such profane, and heathenish sacrifice, which stinckes
in his nostrills, and say, I never required this wooden worship at your hands,
I never commanded you to buy these Books, which you say, shall put you in
remembrance of me; but you that cannot remember me without the sight of an
Image on earth, I will forget you, and shall never have a sight of my Image in
heaven.

Thus having spoken a little, yet enough, to satisfy a temperate and ingenuous
Reader, to behold the corruptions of Popery in the forepassed points, I will
come to our next promised part, Popes pardons, wherein I will be more brief,
because they are called by them. Bullae tantum revalent, quantum ^^mine (...).
Bullae, Bulls, or Indulgences, rather bubbles, something in appearance, empty
in the substance of proof, or profit.

Fourthly, Popes pardons.

Their Cardinal Allen in his defense of Popes pardons, says, that to impugn
the power of pardons, is to overthrow the greatest matters which life and Faith
do stand upon; and says that Luther; except one Witclife condemned in the
Council of Constance, was the first that contradicted them, from which point
did begin the toil and tragedy of these times: wherein the Cardinal speaks
not (...) Cathedra, for the Waldenses long before Witclife, and Bohemians
before Luther, did contemn and condemn this usurped power of popish pardons,
wherein the pith of popery is enclosed.

Indeed when it pleased the Lord to open Luthers eyes to see the truth, he
began first to find fault with the base inundation of picke-purse pardons,
though (as he says) then he did but fight in the dark: for when Pope Leo the
tenth had sent abroad his pardons which were preached by Terelius a Dominicke
Frier', Luther admonished the people of the abuses and deceits of the pardons
and pardoners, which long before his time had been reproved in the Councels of
Lateran and Vienna: and complained to the Archbishop of Mentz, to the Bishop of
Brandenburg, to the Provincial of the Augustine Friars, and to the Pope
himself: and Surius the Papist confesses that he did justly In Suppl. Nau.
complain; and afterward compelled by intolerable injuries, and neglect of
manifest truth and reformation, cast off the servile yoke and vassalage of
Antichristian captivity.

These Pardons have no ground in holy Scripture or Primitive Church, or Fathers
of the Church, for a thousand years after Christ, but are indeed the
impostures of this In principio nasce^tis ecclesiae nullus fuit Indulgentiaru^
vsus. Epis. Roffens. art. 18* contra Luther.
last age, delusions of Satan, and the temptations to Epicurisme and all vice,
when as such pardons for all kind of sins are proffered and prostrated to
all such as can provide money for them. For the Tax: Cancel. Apostolic.
Purgatory can have no rich me^ in it, but fools, and friendlesse.
Court of Rome has an order containing the price to be paid for all kind of
sins, as murder, incest, parricide, sodomy, sacrilege, etc. and they that
would see the particular sums of money for all kind of sins and offenses,
and what their pardon will cost in the Court of Rome for all capital and
horrible faults let them read Musculus common places in the title of the
Ministers of the word of God toward the end.

Some of their Antoninus 4. part. summae c. 7.
writers confess, De Indulgentijs nihil habemus, nec in Scripturis, nec ex
dictis antiquarum doctorum, we have nothing of pardons, neither in the
Scriptures, nor in the ancient Doctors: and their Lib. de indulg. cap. 2.
Gregory of Valence says, that Gratian and Lombard, who lived not above 400.
years ago, Nihil de indulgentis ^nisse, have recorded nothing of Indulgences:
And the same Lib. 5. de Indulg.
Jesuit says, Erant Catholici quidam ante Lutherum, quorum opinionem Thomas*
Part. 3. qu. 25. art. 5.
refent, qui indulgentias pias frauds esse duxerunt, There were certain
Catholics before Luther, whose opinion Thomas recites, who accounted these
indulgences holy fraud: rather lenocinia diaboli, the enticing impiety of the
Devil and the whore, to be so indulgent to their sons, as rather to cocker,
then correct them for their sins.

So Bonifac. 8. primus qui concessit plenarias indulgentias, and Jubileum Romam
visitantibus Tollet. Jes. lib. 6. Instruct. Sacerd. cap. 24. Iubilei nouitas
nobilis: and Agrippa. de vanit. Scient. cap. 61.
Pope Boniface the 8, the first inuenter of Iubily pardons, grants, Non
solumplenam, and largiorem, immo plenissimam omni^m suorum veniam peccatorum,
Not only a full and large pardon, but a most full pardon of all their sins;
and to give pardon for many hundred years to come, and that for doing a very
small service; as Pope Gregory who made a prayer about the length of a Creed,
which whosoever shall say devoutly, shall receive five hundred years of
pardon; quick work: yet provided that at the end of every verse he say a
Pater noster, and an Aue. Sometimes pardons for days, as Pope Innocent the
sixth, to them who say a short prayer about the scantling of an Aue, he shall
obtain pardon for twenty thousand days.

Pope John the two and twentieth, gives to them who say a short, Salith: primer
called Har^ B. Marie.
prayer, three thousand days of pardon of mortal sins, and twenty thousand
days of venials; and if that prayer too long, or pardon too short, let him say
five Pater nosters* before the Vernacle, and he shall have ten thousand days
pardon by that Pope.

Gregory the third gives a pardon to them that shall say a prayer as long as
three Aues, and kneel before a Crucifice, for six thousand, six hundred,
threescore and six days; just so many days as Christ had wounds on his body:
as some say: save that our Lord appeared to S. Briget at Rome, and told her
that his wounds were but five thousand, four hundred and fourscore: or as
others Ludolf. vit. Christi part. 2. c. 58. Eck. Ser. de passione.
tell it, five thousand four hundred fourscore and ten, excepting the pricks
of his crown, which Suare. Tom. 2. page: 347.
were threescore and twelve.

But some other Popes have been more liberal in the grant of these pardons:
Pope Sixtus the fourth granted to them, who say a prayer of his making, which
has not above five and forty words, forty thousand years of pardon. Read a
Bull of Confirmation granted by Pope Leo the tenth, Anno 1513. sept. id.
Martij, pontificis anno primo, the which Bull was granted, Hospitali sancti
spiritus in Saxia almae vrbis: in which is an approbation of all former pardons
obtained to the said Hospital, and the members thereof, as Innocent the third
grants to all that visit the said Hospital two thousand and eight hundred
years of pardon. Pope Alexander the fourth grants four thousand years, and
eight hundred Lents of pardon. Pope Celestine the fifth grants also to the
said Hospital and the members, an hundred thousand years of pardon. Pope
Clement the fifth grants also two thousand and eight hundred years of pardon.
Pope Boniface the eight, 2500. years of pardons. Pope Clement the sixth, 8000
years and 8000 Lents, and full remission of al their sins. Pope Innocent the
sixth, 2000 years, and 2000 Lents of pardons. Pope Benedict the 12, 3000 years,
and as many Lents of pardons. All which grants of pardons by the Popes
confirmed to the said Hospital and the members: if this were as good ware as
they make some believe, who would not go visit this Hospital? yea be a member
of it? Can any Papist go to the Devil who may have a Tesserae veniale^
vaenales. Budaeus. lib: 1: de ass.
pardon for a little money, and Vide Nicol: Salicet. Antidot Animae.
saying over a prayer or two? which prayers have such power, that when S.
Bernard said one before a Rood, it so pleased the said Rood, that it bowed it
self, and embraced him in the arms: Like the Rood of Naples which Anton:
Chro. part. 3. tit: 23* p. 206.
spoke so kindly to Thomas Aquinas: Or like the Sibi oranti crucifixi imaginem
inclinare caput a^pexit. Bar. Anno 1051. ^u: 1.
Crucifixe which nodded the head to the Monk Gualbertus. Indeed if Popes
prayers be like Amphions harp to move stones, Hor.
Saxa moueresono testudinis, and prece bland^
Ducere quo vellet --
The famous Amphion with his harp could play
To move the stones: so popish harpers pray.


If Popes can give so large pardons for sins, and have so good prayers, I
muse they cannot cure the Papists of bodily sickness: for sickness is the
punishment of sin. rather Popes do increase their sickness by procuring
Gods plagues and punishments to be inflicted upon them for affecting such
practices to have their sins pardoned of Popes, when as it appertains only
to God.

They who are Gods dearest Ministers (I fear the Pope is none) have no other
power herein, then to declare in Gods name forgiveness of sin, (not to make
them a pardon for money) if they truly believe in Christ, and repent, and so
release the band of discipline in open offenders, where the fruits of
repentance appear: and so the meanest minister of Christ by virtue of his
spiritual office may declare absolution of sins to the truly penitent; but
to forgive sins, none can or may do it, but God alone. I, Esaias 43. 25.
even I, am he that puts away thy iniquities for mine own sake, and will
not remember thy sins: Math. 11. 28. Luke 5. 21.
Come unto me all ye that are weary, and laden, and I will ease you; with a
thousand places of Scripture, exhorting all to come unto Christ, and apply his
blood unto their souls for the remission of their sins. Acts 4. 12.
There is no other way by which we can be saved, or our sins pardoned: ad
impetrandam nostris sceleribus veniam non pecunias impendere, sed hoc facere
etc. says In epist. ad Philem. hom. 1.
Chrysostom, To get a pardon for sin, money will not do it, but to believe
in Christ.

And indeed the Pardon-Procters are so dazeled in the defense of them, like the
sodomites smitten with blindness at Lots door, that they cannot tell how to
find any ground for them, but are compelled abruptly to say with Lib: 2. de
Indulg. and Iubil. c. 10. indulgentiarum pro^ane nouitas. (...)
Bellarmine, Sufficit ad Indulgentias, and Bullas defendendas Ecelesia authorit
as, The authority of the Church, alleged, not proved, is sufficient to defend
Bulls and Indulgences: a weak argument to defend wicked pardons.

But their Gloss upon that great Bull of Boniface the 8, says, Four things
concur as principal, to make a pardon effectual. 1 Authority in the
granter. 2 Capacity in the receiver. 3 Piety in the end. 4 vtility in the
work: But authority herein the Pope has none: idoneity, or capacity in the
receiver, namely that he be a true member Oportet quod capax indulgentiae sit
purgatus a culpa, quod sit in contritione paenitons, and etiam confessus:
glossa vt supra.
of Christ, and purged from his fault, the Pope cannot tell: Piety in the end
is none, for it opens a wide way to all impiety; vtility to the party none, for
he is robbed of his money, and deluded in his soul; the only vtility comes
to the Pope, to enrich his coffers; for by this device a world of wealth is
raised: for men who do believe these pardon-mongers, to be released out of the
pains of Purgatory, The Pope by his* power of Jurisdiction may spoil all
purgatory. Aug: de Ancona de potest. eccles^quaest: 32.
telling them what a grievous punishment it is to lie in Purgatory fire, which
is indeed ignis fatuus, or the fire of the Popes kitchen, to warm his back
and belly; they will willingly give their money to go to Heaven by a pardon.
Thus it is written of Theod: a Niem. de scism. lib. 1. c. 68. page 20.
Boniface the ninth, who sent into diverse kingdoms his Treasurers with
pardons, who extorted great sums of money from simple people, that in some
one Province they would get together above an hundred thousand florens, omnia
peccata relaxantes, releasing all offenses whatsoever. Math. 10. 8.
Christ, said to his Apostles, freely you have received, freely give: But here
no penny, no pardon, no pater noster: so that we may say of these Popes as
Bartholomaeus vuesthemerus.
one does of Gregory the ninth, O auarum cor, vbi Petri paupert as
quamiactatis? O covetous heart, where is Peter's poverty whom ye boast of? that
to play impostors to the world, will sell such ware as you fetch from the
Devils shop; to cozen the simple of their money, and bring them into a fools
Paradise, to hope of pardon of their sin by buying your mercenary
indulgences, and Bulls, the basest trash that can be invented; to sell for
silver remission of sins, and even salvation of souls, as Judas did for
thirty pieces his Savior. But herein let Gods children say to the Pope as
Dan. 5. ^7.
Daniel did to Balshazzer, keep thy rewards to thy self, and give thy gifts
to another: keep your paltry pardons to your selves, saying as David did to
the Prophet Gad, 2 Samuel 24. 14.
Let us fall into the hands of the Lord, for his mercies are great, and not
into the hands of men, (the Pope or his Priests) for the very Pro. 12. 10.
mercies of the wicked are cruel.

The invention of Popes pardons was to maintain their pride, the power
unlawful, the causes ungodly, the use abominable, and the end deceivable,
neither by the Scriptures, or practice of the Primitive Church warrantable.

I hasten to put this Piunace into harbor, weary with being on the Sea of
Rome; therefore to be brief, let all that desire to be faithful servants to
their Lord and Savior, who as yet halt betwixt God and Baal, being as one calls
them, Lunae vituli, Moone-Calfes, once a month come to the Temple, hoping to
walk to heaven with statute-legges: or others who are more settled upon their
lees, whose minds as 2 Cor. 4. 4.
yet the God of this world has blinded, that the light of the glorious Gospel
of Christ, which is the image of God should not shine unto them: let them all
know that these voices sound from heaven unto them, to their conversion and
consolation, if they accept them; or condemnation and confusion if they reject
them. 2 Cor. 6. 17. 18.
Come out from among them, and separate your selves, says the Lord, and touch
no unclean thing, and I will receive you, and I will be a Father unto you, and
you shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord. This voice is not the
voice of man, but of God, Reu. 18. 4. 5.
Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers in her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues: for her sins are come up into heaven, and God
has remembered her iniquities, as it is there prophesied of the fall of
mystical Babylon, which is Rome. Therefore let my exhortation be that unto
you which a reverend and learned Doctor gave as a farewell to his friends,
Commendo vos dilectioni Doctor Holland.
Dei, and odio papatus, I exhort you to love God, and leave the corrupt
doctrine of Popery, which is a form of Religion, yet, Non secundum Iesum
Christum, nec verbum, nec tenet cap^t, Not according to Jesus Christ or his
Gospel, nor does it rightly hold the head, making the Church a monster with
two heads, the Pope a visible Head on earth, and Christ in heaven the invisible
Head. We beseech you in the tender bowels of Christ to have pity upon your
own souls, open your eyes without partiality, or prejudice to behold the
truth and embrace it; and to move your hearts with Peter's words, 1 Pet, 2. 2.
as newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow
thereby: so shall you, and we have infinite cause to rejoice, and our Church
say with Peter, ye were as sheep going astray, but are now returned unto the
chief shepherd and cap. 2. 25.
Bishop of your souls: With which saving Grace the God of all grace and
goodness, Jesus Christ, enrich your souls withal, 2 Pet. 3. 18.
to grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, to him be
glory, both now and for ever.

Thus having declared in part the corruptions of popish Doctrine, which must be
rejected of all who desire to be faithful servants to our Savior, or perform
service acceptable unto him; for what concord has 2 Cor. 6. 15. 16.
Christ with Belial? what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? Take
heed of the Leaven of Rome, as our Savior Math. 16. 6.
warnes his Disciples of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadduces, their
pernicious doctrine full of errors, repugnant and decrogatory to Christ and his
Gospel.

It remains and follows in the next place to touch, That if you believe and
embrace all the points of modern Popery, now broached and maintained in the
Church of Rome, you cannot be dutiful and obedient Subjects to our and your
Sovereign: and since I have in my former Tractates, obiter, by the way,
promiscuously touched lesuiticall precepts, and practice in this kind, papal
depositions of Kings from their Regiment, and absolutions of subjects from
loyal obedience, applauding traitors by canonization and commendation for
treasonable attempts: I will not be large and liberal herein, only propound
a few positions, and propositions to your consideration to judge of them,
whether they be not opposite to all loyal obedience; which are maintained and
divulged to the world by your great Doctors and Pillars of the Roman Church.

And first you are not ignorant, that very lately, Anno 1606. Pope Paul the
fifth prohibited all the Roman Catholics (so termed) by his Breue, that
they should not take the oath of Allegiance, unto which they were enjoined by
the Kings Majesty; which argues he would have them refractary, in matters
which only, concern civil obedience: for the scope of that oath tended to
profess and practice a dutiful allegiance to the King in all loyal
submission. The like also did Pius quintus Pope, to the late Queen Elizabeth,
commanding her Subjects to rebel, and discharging them from allegiance. But
omitting these things as vulgarly known, I will go to the Jesuits school,
and hear how they teach you.

If a Christian King become an All Christian Kings counted Heretics, who are
not Roman Catholics.
Heretic, immediately his people are freed from his command and their
subjection, says, Lib: Instit: Cath: Sect. 11. c. 23.
Symancha: But all Christian Kings are esteemed Heretics, who are not
Catholics of the Roman size, Ergo.

The Jesuit Creswel under the name of Andreas Philopator, against the Decree
of the Queen of England, sect. 2. ^u. 157. delivers this proposition:
Principem, qui a Catholica religione deflexit, excidere statim omnipotestate: a
Prince who declines from their Catholic religion (rather superstition) falls
presently from his Regal power: But all Protestant Princes decline from that
religion: Ergo no King, or no power.

The same Jesuit, number. 160. says, Omnium Catholicorum esse sententiam,
obligatos esse subditos ad principes haereticos depellendos, qui sidei
Catholicae inuriosi sunt, si modo vires ad hoc habeant idoneas: It is the
sentence of all Catholics, that the subjects are bound to drive away
heretical Princes, who are injurious to the Catholic Faith, if they have
forces fit for this purpose. And again, number. 162. Sub^^ti ^di Principes suos
non tantum legitime possunt (...), sedetiam ad hoc praecepts divine, and
conscientiae arctissimo vincul^, ac extremo animarum suarum periculo tenentur.
Subjects may not only lawfully trouble such Princes, but are bound to do it
by Divine precept, and most strict band of conscience, and extreme peril of
their own souls: And the same Jesuit again, Si Imperator, vel Rex
haereticu^ fauore prosequatur, ipso facto regnum amittet: If an Emperor or King
favor an heretic, he shall lose his kingdom, ipso facto. Now Protestants in
their Calendar are branded for heretics. Ergo.

And to these accord and publish the like doctrine many others of their
writers. Ribadeneira de principe, lib. 1. cap. 18. pa. 177. etc. 26. page 172.
etc. Paulus Chirlandus de haeret. q. 3. nu 2. Conradus Brunus de haeret. lib 3.
cap. vltimo. Io. Paulus Windeck de extirp. haer. Antidoto 10. page 404. and
Antidot. 11. page 408. Stapleton in oratione contra politicos Duaci habita.
Baronius Card. in Epistola contra Venetos. Bellarmine the Cardinal full of
such stuff: He affirms, that Kings are subject to Popes, Bishops, Priests,
Deacons, and would prove this inferiority by Scriptures and Fathers: De laicis
lib. 3.

He holds many other propositions, disgraceful to Kings, undutiful for
subjects, and contradictory to all Creswell loco praedicto ait potestate^
regiam esse iuris ciuilis, ergo in arbitrio populs esse, rex quis fit, an non.
page 145.
Scripture: Secular principality is ordained by men, and has his being by the
law of Nations: de Romans Pontif. lib. 1. c. 7.. praeterea: a gross Assertion
for so great a Doctor.

In causes only Temporal Cleargimen are bound to obey Princes: and no longer
obey, then the Pope will: de clericis. lib. 1. cap. Per totum caput: So
ridiculous positions, as the very naming of them, is a confutation.

Simancha, and Creswell have concluded, that no heretic, (that is, a
Protestant) is capable of a Crown, and though a lawful heir, yet no just
possessor, having obtainedit. And to this effect Pope Clements Bull was, After
the death of the late Queen, whether by course of nature, or otherwise,
whosoever should lay claim or Title to the Crown of England, though never so
directly or nearly interessed therein by descent and Blood royal; yet unless
he were such an one, as would not only tolerate the Catholic Roman
religion, but by all endeavors, and force promote it, they should admit, or
receive none to the Crown of England.

And Samancha Tit. 64. Sect. 75. faith, The father may be deposed for an
heretic, and his son and heir also excluded from claim of succession,
unless he be a Roman Catholic. Thus they seek to dispossess Kings, who
are enthroned by God, and have their Scepters from the King of Kings: yea they
^ind Kings to their good behavior, if they do displease the Pope, then depose
them, and so no Kings. Molina says, The King can use his Temporal sword but
at the Popes beck: Tract. 2. de Institut. Di. 29.

Thus debasing Kings, the highest powers on earth, to be subjects to the Pope,
who yet in a counterfeit style calls himself, Seruus seruorum, a servant of
servants: Sonat humilit as in voce sed superbia in action, Says Gregory,
Jacobs voice; and Esawes hands: Hypocritical humility, is worse then manifest
pride.

And truly if the Pope had a spark of the spirit of humility, he would
condemn his Parasites Fra. Bozius Eug. de temp. eccl. monar. lib. 1. c. 3.
etc. 11.
voices, Papa est, per que^reges regnant, The Pope is he, by whom Kings reign:
Says Bozius: or Lib* 1. cere. rocur. Sect. 7. page 85.
Papa data est omnis potest as in caelo, and in terra, Dominatur amarivsque
admare, a flumine vsque adtermin os orbis: To the Pope is given all power in
heaven and earth, and reigns from one Sea to an other, from the stood to the
end of the world: or, C. sollicitae. 6. de mayor. and obedien.
Papa potest omnia facere, quae Deus potest, The Pope can do all that God can
do: horrible impiety, and intolerable flattery. And these tell the world, he
can make and unmake Kings, and the Popes like it well enough, excommunicating
Kings, deposing them, and disposing of their Kingdoms to others. So that it
moved Art (...) King of Peru to say (as Benzo, and Lopez tell it) Insigniter
fatuum esse opertere papam, qui quae non haberet, alijs liberaliter largitur,
vel carte impedentem nebulonem, qui eiectis veris possessoribus, alienas terras
peregrinis addiceret, and in mutuas cades mortale genus armaret: That either
the Pope was an egregious Sot, who would liberally give things which he had
not, or a very impudent companion, who expulsing the true possessors, gives it
to strangers, arming the world to mutual, yea mortal slaughters.

I will not trouble my self to behold the nakedness, rather wickedness of
these drunken Genesis 9 21.
Noes, uncovered in the midst of their Tents, vomiting out vile positions, full
of sedition, and disobedience against the Kings of the earth: it require rather
tears to bewail it, then a pen to report it: and the learned herein know
more then I write, and for the ignorant, it is good for them in this case to be
ignorant still: yet I confess I aimed most in this labor to inform the
ignorant, having no mind to meddle with seducing Professed pandars to the
Romish Curtezan, inuiolably fixed to her folly and fornication.
Priests (I cannot charm such deaf Adders:) if this little handful of my love
and labor presented unto you may be profitable to win any of you, I will say,
and end with the James 5. 19. 20.
Apostle James, Brethren, if any of you have erred from the Truth, and some man
has converted him, let him know that he which has converted the sinner from
going astray out of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a
multitude of sins.

The Lord, who is a God of Truth, for his mercy sake, and for Christ's merits
sake, open all your eyes to behold the Truth, and your hearts to embrace it,
that we may all hold one Head in unity, and have one heart in verity, that all
with one mind, and mouth may praise, and pray unto the Lord in the militant
Church on earth, and be thrice happy members of the Triumphant Church in heaven.

Amen.
Candido lectori: Humanum est errare, errata hic corrige (lector) quae penna,
aut praelo lapsa fuisse vides.
FINIS.

