LINSI-WOOLSIE OR TWO CENTVRIES OF EPIGRAMMES.

WRITTEN By WILLIAM GAMAGE Batchelour in the Arts.

Patere, aut Abstine.



LONDON, Printed by Aug. Mathewes for Henry Bell, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Bethelem without Bishops Gate, at the sign of the Sun.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE, AND my much honored Lady, KATHERINE* Lady MANSELL,
daughter to the Right Honorable Lord, L. Viscount de Lisle: Earths Glory, and
Heavens Happiness.
RARE PARAGON of vertne, affying, or rather presuming on your heroical
disposition, I have adventured to conduct to the open field of the World Two
Centuries of Epigrammes, which, if they be deigned to march under the Banner
of your Ho: protection, I doubt not, but that they may the safer, as they say,
Pass the Muste^. And the rather I build on your all-fauourable patronage by
reason of your Ladyships near affinity with that worthy, and Tres^ble Sir
Phillip Sidney, whose golden Pen vouchsae fed to Apologize the renowned art of
Poetry. If thimy Rural, and unacquainted muse Limm's no^ forth either in
Matter, or Manner the viue ^ort traitur of an Epigramme, your Ladyship may ea^
conjecture, that it was rather Cherillus Pen, and not Apelles Pencill that
shadowed it; but hoping the acceptance, with your Ho: protection hereof, if
not for the Work, yet for the names-sake, I ever rest

Your worthy Ladyships most devoted Votorie:

WILLIAM GAMAGE.

Ad Ingeniosum, and modestum amicum, G. Gamage de Epig.
ALpha Epigrammatewn per me sit noster Oenus,
Hic primum, aut nemo est, dignus habere locum:
Tuquotus es Gammagi? ex nominis indice, Gamma.
Sed te Musa facit Beta Epigrammatewn.
Ad eundem de eisdem.
GRata diu fuerant quae linea-lanea, nostris,
Gratatamen nostris tegmina, si qua diu.
Talia tu texis (Gamage) Poemata, plus quam
Lanea sunt vsu Linea deliciis.
Grata vt sint, dubitas, bruma atque aestate placebunt,
His delectari femina, virque queant,
Hoc tantum distant aestatem tegmina durant,
Aetates durant haec tua texta, vale,
Mo. Fortune in Art Mag. e Col. Ie.

Hexasticon. In fideliss. amici G. Gamage Epigrammata.
LAeta inuant releuando graves Epigrammata mentes:
Sunt tua laeta satis, sunt tua casta satis.
I^da ne metuas mordacis murmura Mo^:
Colla^det Mo^us, vel meliora ferat.
(...) documenta boni, ^ta futura
Posteritatis erunt, scribere perge, (...).
To Harris in Art Mag.

Ad Cordatum amicum G. Gamage de Epig.
FAecunda est aetas, multos tulit ista Poetas,
At tibi (Gamagi) non tulit ista parem.
Aliud ad Lectorem.
PErlege, quicunque es, decies repetita placebunt,
Aut tibi, quicunque e^, nulla placere queunt.
Hen. Atho, in Art Mag.

Ad amicum amantiss. G. G. in Epig.
LAudibus excelsis tua sunt Epigrammata salsa,
Digna, Legate Puer haec, haec legate ipse senex.
Quamuis es in^enis, tame^ experientia rerum
Ingeni^que b^num, te facit esse senem.
Sacre Sacra canis, reso^sque profana profane,
Vax quoque cuique rei qu^libet (...) s^at.
Apparet docta (...) lingua
(...), (...) coluisse Ch^ros.
Io. Vauhan, Art. Mag.

Idem ad Librum in Zoilum.
SI te quis Zo^lus rabido vult rodere dente,
Aetatem domini ponderet ipse tui.
In Epig. cognati, and amici explorati Gu Gamage.
SI^cine disparibus lusisti moribus orbem,
Innumeris Numeris (trux Epigramma) tuis?
Rustieus Vrbanus, quid vis? Bellosus, Amator,
Magmatibus nitidis Aulicus? hoc and habet.
Chair suum cuique est, nec vot^ ludimus vno,
His diuersa placent: quid culis? hoc and habes.
In Zoylum.
Tam been compactos calamos vult dente repelli
Zoylus edax nostrum? subfugat, hoc nec habet.
Uult Numeris nostris includi moribus? ecce
Rem teneat; numeret furcifer: hoc and habe.
Gul Hughes, in Art. Bacc.

Idem ad Librum.
EIa age per Genios faciles, Momosque per ignes:
Per vari^ rerum faeces, per saxa, per vmbras.
Tetra^ichon. Ad suum amicum Gu. Ga. in sua Epig.
LA^dabunt omnes Epigrammata docta priorum,
Hoc opus excultum vincit (amice) tuum.
Haec mandes Scriptis; es Cedro digna locutus;
Te presens aetas, posteriorque canent.
Hop. Price Gener.

Ad cognatum perchariss. G. G. in laudem Libelli.
HIc liber est parvus, non parui: gratia paruis
Est sua: sic libro gratia magna suo.
Pergas; quid densis latitas, Philo^use. sub vmbris,
Aspiret coeptis aura secunda tuis.
Io. Powel e Coll. Oriel.

To his friend, and familiar W. Gamage of his Epigrams.
Often have I fed on Epigrammes before,
With which my appetites I ouerprest;
Thy better wit has kept me these in store,
(...) a sweet banquet to digest the rest:
^'d in with plates of Crystal, scoured so clear,
(...) to each guest his picture may appear,
Another to the same.
If what Pythagoras has wrote be true,
Some antique Satyr lives in thee auew,
Nature and Art are with themselves at strife,
To whom thou have given greater praise or life;
On both alike, for Nature first began,
Then Art made perfect what from nature ran.
W. Hughes.

To my lo friend W Gamage in the praise of his Epigrams.
THy ouerlooking of the pleasant fields,
In sport abroad to spend some idle hours:
Has gathered fruit not of unfruitful weeds;
But set a Bank of sweet and fragrant flowers.
Continue then both earl'e and late to rise
To walk abroad, to use this exercise.
Another of the same.
In my conceit this thy conceipted Book,
Deserves the stamp of everlasting praise:
Fear no man's face that on his face does look,
His forehead shines with complementall rays.
Gamage thy name and of thy age the Game
Thou do deserve, tho not desire the same.
Matthew. Bennet.

The Author to the Praisers of his book.
IT feare^ me, that your kind heroical Lays
Are too transcendent for my humble strain:
And Load-stone-like draw to themselves the praise;
And so my Muse receive a dull disdain.
No force, I hope your lines will sooth some one
To read my Book, and descant thereupon.
Linsi-Woolsie. THE FIRST CENTVRIE.
Epig. 1. To his heroike, and splendent Patroness. Katherine, Lady Mansell.
THis stuff of mine, I grant, is ouercourse,
For your fine wearing Loadstarre of our Clime,
Yet let it serve, I pray, tho few be worse
As a course garment for this Winter time.
Ere Summer else, I do most highly fear,
That Momus will my Loome in sunder tear.
Epig. 2. On her Name.
C CEll of virtue thou art rare,
A Any with for to compare,
T That does dwell in Cambers Clime,
H Having ^oble Sydneys Line*
E Ever beautify thy name,
R Royal, worthy peereles dame:
I In virtue still let be thy dwelling,
N Never ill, in good excelling;
E Eternizing so thy fame.
M Might my prayer be accepted,
A Accept it, Lord, and grant her Ishue:
N Never none to be rejected
S Send her, children, cloath^d in Tishue*
E Erect her calling at thy pleasure,
L Let her life be virtues Treasure:
L Lead her soul where Angels are.
Epig. 3. To the worthy founder of our famous Oxonian Library, Sir Thomas
Bodley built in the form of a T.
THe forked Y, as learned Sages write,
Contains in it deep mysteries divine:
Thy target T if that I true endite*
Does shelter in it more many a sacred Line
Then all the letters of that * sage his name;
Such is the Glory of thy Vaticane. a Pythagoras.

Epig. 4. To the Reader of his Poemes.
SOme of these Poem, some will Satyrs call,
What tho some be grim Satyres-like, and tall?
Which Monsters be, pertaining to the Wood.)
These do molest the Bad, but please the good.
Epig. 5. On Zoylus, of his Book.
^Oets do style thee often a biting Mate;
Which argues thee the eater of some Books:
Eat this withal, but leave to Bark thereat,
So that in fine this Morsel quite thee choakes.
Epig. 6. A Courtizan, Etymologized.
A Courtizan most fit deriues her name,
By her conditions from a courteous Dame.
What Nature did to her so gratis give,
With this she will all such as beg relieve.
Epig. 7. The Noone-tide Walker of Paul's.
WHat makes thee stay? Well nie, since all be gone.
Thou telst me, cause some verses thou would make.
Is It so? thou mai'st since thou art most alone,
And cause all day thy Panch must empty quake.
Epig. 8. Garnet, with his Twelve Apostles.
Joseph, with his Apostles twelve first plants,
In Englands Soil, Religion pure to grow;
But thou, and thy twice six infernal Wants,
Did this endeavor to supplant; and Sow
Thy Popish D^rnell; but the season failed,
And thou with thine, to Tyburns post was nailed.
Epig. 9. The sickmans Dialogue.
Sickness what art? the Bodies schourging Rod;
What else? the queller of thy lofty blood.
Moreover what? the path unto thy God.
And what in fine? Deaths message for thy good.
Since thou art then the soul and bodies weal,
Come when thou will from thee I Will never appeal.
Epig. 10. On our Bacchanalians. To Magistrates.
THunder as anc'ient Poets fabulize,
Begat God Bacchus, Lord of all misrule:
No wonder then his Nephews, which Portize
Till they be drunk, use clamors like the Mule.
Remove the cause the effect soon take away:
Yee'll ask me how? lop down the Iuie Bay.
Epig. 11. To his dear interessed friend Mr. M Cradocke.
AS I thy ground did compass and o're-looke
I compassed well nie, this triuiall Book.
Epig. 12. (...) Bucci^s. To his (...). Mr Rob Lloyd.
ORe many are, as we may daily see,
That start too soon to Moses sacred ^eat;
Before they fit beneath G^aliels knee,
To suck the Nectar of his flowing Teat.
These Bro^hers be of schism and heresy,
Not skilling how to teach or edify.
Epig. 13. To the worthy Mecoenas of learning Mr. Anthony Guin, Esquier.
AMongst the Scythians Anacharsis sage
Was their sole Clearke, the Anacharsis ^ter Scytha^.
Proverb verifies.
I will not say, in this our learned age,
Thou art sole Phoenix, in arts Mysteries.
But this I Will say, in this our barren Clime:
Thou ^t the best Mecoenas unto thine.
Epig. 14. To the studious Gent, Mr. I. Carne.
THy s^dious Book, thy bla^ed fame shall ring:
When others pastime ^o great shame shall bri^
Epig. 15. Un^ (...). To his respective fr. Mr Row Harries, of pious, religious
scholar, Mr. Hop. Price, lately deceased.
SOme grave in years* in lore but childish yet,
In stud'ing, fleering, fleeting, fading toies.
But thou, young Price, had cert's a grauer wit
In conniug precepts of aye lasting joys.
Let these alone t'enioy their fruitless art;
Thou doubtless now have chose the Luca 10. 42.
better part.
Epig. 16. To our Modern Epigra^matists, of his Poems.
AL Arts, which latest come to common view,
Are commonly the best without compare;
But in these lines you cannot find this true,
Like timelesse fruits, vnmellowed right which are,
For you have gatherd all the Summers flowers.
Here are but leauings mixed with Hyems showers.
Epig. 17. One Mouns^er Elatus, deceased.
IT lately seemd by thy aspiring mind,
Thou total wast composed of lofty fire:
Which upwards tends, the place to it assigned,
But thy downfall unto the basest qui cadit in (...), non habet vnde cadat.
mire,
Betokens now thy substance was but clay;
Which should have stoopt thy loftiness always.
Epig. 18. A new Convert.
THy change was good, from bloody* killing sword;
To Preach and Teach the ever living Word.
Epig. 19. A rare Metamorphosis.
IS it not strange in this our iron Age?
To see one clime to Pulpit, from the Stage.
Epig. 20. The Epitaph of the studious Gent. Mr. Hop. Price, To the
worshipful, his loving Father Mr. Wm. Price, Esquier.
AS my true love was loyal unto thee,
Whiles that thou breathst within this valty Cell;
Which shall not end with thy mortality,
But in the grave with thee shall ever dwell:
So take these farwels as thy only due,
Of thy dear friend, thy death which does (...).
Farewell, bright Gem of learnings worthy grace;
Farewell, great hope of all the Muses nine;
Farewell, sweet Impe, with thy Angellike face;
Farewell embracer of the Word divine.
Farewell, dear Price, whose price I cannot count:
Farewell, until we meet in Sions Mount.
Epig. 21. Duke Humfrey (...).
THy Tomb has gratis more spectators e're
Then those of Westminster for Coin I wot;
It Is strange, therefore they do not pay more dear,
But as I guess, they be not worth a grote.
Epig. 22. Gullus, Grillus.
Gu: HOw goes the world, my Grillus, now with thee?

Gr: Comrade, my life naught is but slavery;

Gu: How so, a Freeman for to be a thrall?

Gr: Free borne, but yet, Don Magnus Tenis Ball.

Gu: Cashiere his yoke cast of his servile Badge.

Gr: Oh, no, for fear of his most furious rage.

Gu: What World is this? must you be Rombus slave?

Gr: Yes; else for such, just nothing we can have.

Epig. 23. To I G.
THy Crosses were full many in account;
But, ay, one Ins^ia.
Many, does these many moun^.
Epig. 24. Tillage. To his fr. Mr. Ie. Cradocke.
TIllage is good, the Husbandmans true badge;
While youth remains, still fructifies, Till Age.
Epig. 25. The Symp^hie of Law, and Logic. To his Academ^ Cosen, Io. Powel.
THe subtle Logic, and the crafty Law,
Most equally within one yoke does draw.
Both use (...).
Deceipts, the one for glory vain,
The Other does abuse it for his Gain.
Both Brawlers be, and do for ever jar.
The One at School, the other at the Bar.
But of all (...) we must choose the less;
And from Impostors us for ever bless.
To Logicks quipping tongue, I Would rather stand:
Then to Laws cruel, shearing, shauing hand.
Epig. 26. Quicquid in (...) venerit. To Mi^r Futilis.
THy Siuie breast can keep no secrecy,
But force^ all things there^ut for to ^e:
If there were vent to gable lie, or truth;
Thy breast should be in lieu of open mouth.
Epig. 27. Fides so^ (...). To Mr Wadams, the worthy founder of a new Co^ ledge
in Oxford.
THe Popi^ sect fair Colleges did (...)
Whereby they tho^ themselves to ^tifie;
But sole true Faith we see does now adays,
Produce Good daughters, works of (...).
Which caused, I think our Wadam so to wade,
In building Columns, which shall never fade.
Epig. 28. On Cur^s, and C^riosus.
I Did forcee thee present my faultlesse B^ll,
And praid there^ thy hand to vnder-write;
Thou toldst ^ay; for that it was framed ill,
^d why? thou s^st, cause faults it did not cite.
Thou differst then from Curiosus quite,
Which will subscribe to all but to the Rite.
Epig. 29. To M^nsier After.
AFter, in what? in name, sure not in Lore,
For most Sr. John's thou wentest bold, Before.
Epig. 30. To King James, Britains royal Monarch.
THe Vnico^e, and Lion join in love,
Which props the Arms of our most Gracious King;
Tho enemies in all things else they prove
Themselves unto themselves; a wondrous thing;
That beasts should be more humane in their kind,
To (...) pearl; then men's Divisions blind.
Epig. 31. To the ^st illustrious Brothers, the Earls of Pembroke, and (...).
WAles styles you Both with titles great of fame:
You pay 'ir alike, your Greatness mounts (...) Name
Epig. 32. To the learned and ingenious Divine, Mr. D. Hall, of his Uowes Cent.
SOme vow, and break; thou vowstand do fulfill;
Such is the difference 'twixt good, and ill.
Epig. 33. In the praise of Brasen-nose Coll.
THy Nose more famousis, though it be of Brass,
Then many a head of many a golden Ass.
Epig. 34. To his loving fr. Mr. Ie. Price. Batch of Divinity.
Well may we liken Gods most Sacred Writ,
Unto the form of Alcibiades:
Which outwardly looked plain, and nothing bright,
But inwardly, most like fair Goddesses:
So does Gods Word seem rude, in outward face;
But the clear Spirit yields a shining grace.
Epig. 35. On perfidious Carle, the Loue-maker.
CArle will not keep promise, wot ye why?
He thinks by Law all Suitors well may ly.
Epig. 36. To his friend and Physician Mr. Wm. Voyle.
MY friend thou have a grief in Phisicks art,
Called, Me noli tangere, by name;
For being touched it forthwith yields smart.
How caust thou then to this a Medicine frame?
Each grief, I think within thy His Study.
Bookish Cell,
With this griefs name will be contented well.
Epig. 37. To his golden Gildus.
THe feigned Vtopian Ex Mo. Vtopia.
wears in his ear
A ring of Gold in lieu of infamy;
But, Gildus thou, Gold eare-rings still do wear,
Which is thou sa^st, thy self to glorify.
What glory is it? it serves to hide the sore,
Which in thy ears the Pillorie did Bore.
Epig. 38. To sober Mr. Beuans.
Sobriety thou count'st a sin, and why?
Because thou seldom live soberly.
Epig. 39. The Sheepheards Calenders Arithmeticke.
THou Calendar of Sheepheards far did err^,
In numbering Gods Commandments by rote;
When Nine for Ten for Truth thou did auerre,
Leaving the second out, not least of note.
This thy substraction serves no other Sheep
But thine; which basely to the Image creep.
Epig. 40. Perkin^.
THou sweet, profound Divine, with one sole hand,
Did raze more buildings of the Popish frame,
Then many a one, that seeks to withstand
With both at once the Gunshot of the same.
Here does the Maimed, (a wonder) as we see
The whole o're-match, in Christ his Soulderie.
Epig. 41. To Sr. Io. Stradling, Knight and Baro^et, of his learned Epig.
THy Muse fits not the vulgar in effect:
For reading, s^ns conceit, is to neglect.
Epig. 42. Jewel, the Hammer of Heretics.
THou Jewel wast a jewel rare indeed*
Of value more then is the Ophir gold:
For this does only deck the bodies weed;
But thy most heavenly words most sweetly rowld
Do deck the soul; and thy keen English Pen
Did cut H^dings.
his throat, that sung the Popes Amen.
Epig. 43. D. Rainolds Ghost.
What made thee Atlas of our Church divine?
For to decline so under thy light paise:
Which never stoopst to any Popish shrine
In all thy life; but loth'st such Trash always.
Thy answer is hereto most right I doom,
Burning to us thou did thy self consume.
Epig. 44. To Mr. Blable the Tale-teller.
DAme Nature gave thee two ears and two eyes,
My wheel-tongu'd Gemy) which does seldo^e stay,
And but one mouth (through her foreknowledge wise)
That thou should more both hear, and see, then bray.
But thou do blab against Minerua's Law
More then thy Ears did hear, or Eyes ere saw.
Epig. 45. To the H^: and most virtuous Lady, Barbara, Vicecountesse de Lisle,
the Omega of the Gamages.
AL Rivers that do run to Neptunes Vast,
Do loose their names let them be never so great:
So thy great Gransiers names in thee at last,
Do loose their style, and Coyties royal seat.
What tho? is not the sea of more renown
Then Rivers, which in him themselves do drown?
Epig. 46. Gabriel Goodman, heretofore Deane of Westminster.
GOodman wast hight, (and less I miss to scan)
Thou wast indeed a zealous right good man.
Epig. 47. T^ Baccho, quam Vulcane. To Hugh, the Ale-Draper.
THou art a Crafts-man good; yet all thy Craft
Cannot detain thee from too deep a Draft.
Epig. 48. To the noble heroicke Gent: Sir William Sidney Knight of the place
of his Nativity.
ZEland did blaze thy birth, be like thy name;
Then Sea, and Land, shall Trump thy Golden fame,
Epig. 49. To Zutphen, a Town in Gilderland, at the Beleagring of which, the
renowned Sir Phillip Sidney was killed.
I Wist not which thy fame or infamy,
Does more exceed, in causing Sidney: fall:
But yet, I rather think thy fame, for why?
Before that time thou had no fame at all.
Epig. 50. On Elizabeth's Emblem, late Queen of England, Tanquam Outs.
THou wast a Sheep, and Wolves thy Shepherds were;
How did thou then escape Deaths bloody hand?
Another Psalm. 23. 4.
shepherd which does rule the Sphere,
Did these fell shepherds wondrously withstand.
Epig. 51. (...) Du Bartas praise, and his Transsator.
RIght well Du Bartas may we call thy name,
For God.
D^ in Welsh betokens more then Man.
So wast, I think, when thou thy Lays did frame,
Such Heaunly Muse sole Man could scarcely scan.
And Iosuah thou that tookst this verse in hand
To turn; for ere thy Ios. 10. 13.
sun of praise shall stand.
Epig. 52. To wise Lusca
I Wonder, Lusca, of thy foolish Pate,
Which to thy husband have so wise a Mate;
He should have powered into thy self being One
Linkt to himself, some wisdom long agone.
But, as I guess, thy head is farc'd so full
With folly, that no lore can pearce thy scull.
Epig. 53. To public Lata, alias, Wh.
Why do men call thee, Public? for I ween,
What thou commit'st is not in Public seen.
Epig. 54. On Fabius, to the Readers.
THou did resign thy Office, wot ye why?
Because thou sai'st thou hardst a Rat to Squeake:
None would have wondered at thy foolerie,
In leaving it, if thou had hard her Speak.
Epig. 55. Pilling and Poling, to Damon, and Damon.
Da HOw is it Comrade? we both profess the Law,
Therefore we should in one yoke equal draw.

Da: We do; but in the Manner we disioine,
I civil do, thou common do Purloine.

Da: No force, our Manners both shall Manours buy;

Da: Why then I Will shave, and sley thou Equity.

Epig. 56. To the most learned, and Heavenly Divine, Doctor Holland, Doctor of
the Chair, lately Deceased.
THy sacred Chair did often from Earth thee Mount:
No marvel; for of Earth thou naught did count.
Epig. 57. To Sir Hebes, the (...) Empericke.
What difference twixt the Papists Unction,
And thine? for both we see be quite extreme;
No great; they use it when all help is gone,
And thou hereby more kill'st then cursed, I deem.
Epig. 58. To his loving friend Mr. Ie. Mayos, Preacher of Gods Word.
IN the Church primative, Act. 4. 35.
devoted men,
Did lay their Treasures at the Apostles feet;
But the Derivatiue, alas, since then,
Allowance poor allots to Preachers meet.
But like their brother Ananias, they,
Yield their poor Pastors, but a Act. 5. 2.
part of Pay.
Epig. 59. To his friend R. Love.
Love often is taken for blind Cupids Game,
So is allloue, that's only but in Name.
Epig. 60. To the Illustrious L: Viscount de Lisle, brother to Noble Sir Phil.
Sidney.
THough not in Name unto thy brother dear,
Yet thou in Nature art his worthy peer;
His fame extolled, blazed forth his name,
Thy name exalted, Trumpets loud thy fame.
Epig. 61. To the worthy Mecoenas of learning, Oliver, Lo: St. John, Baron of
Bledso.
WE Scholars may, St. John, thee style right well,
Which gratis give to Ephesians. 3. 8.
Saints what others sell.
Epig. 62. The Gilden Mile.
IF that same Mile were farced full with Gold,
That Is Gilden called, for her smooth-silken face;
Then would our Money Miners sure be bold
Her path faire-superficies to deface.
Then should she right her Gilden name forsake;
And for the same a gauled name might take.
Epig. 63. Ius, and Iurista Robbing poor Luscus.
Ius: HOw is it colleague? how goes Don-Luscus case?

Iur: Clean backwarts; sans of Angels bright a brase

Ius: These heavenly be, how then can thou then have?

Iur: Friend, thou mistak'st the earthly I do crave.

Epig. 64. On Thrasc^o, the kill Cow.
I Meet percase Dell Thrasco at the shore,
As he came fresh from Irelands dismal war;
I asked what news? He told me all, and more,
How he himself did thousands kill, and skarre.
I him believed, for he did bear about
Whole multitudes of the Pediculos.
rebellious Rout.
Epig. 65. To his loving friend Mr. R. Tho.
Spiritus, and Car^.
THese seem in peace to live in Gal. 5.
midst of war,
So blind we judge when with 2. Cor. 4.
our selves we iar.
Epig 66. Britains Burse. To the famous late Earl of Sarisburie.
FVll fraught with store shall be thy famous Bursse,
When p^nilesse shall be the Misers purse.
Epig 67. To the ingenious Epigrammatists Io. Owens, and Io. Heath, both
brought up in
THough you were both not of one Mother bore,
Yet nursed were you at the self same New Coll. in Oxenford.
breast:
For fluent Genious, and ingenious lore,
And the same Dugges successively have pressed.
It Is true ye are but Fosterers by birth,
Yet brothers right in Rimes conceiptfull mirth.
Epig. 68. To Blincke, the Archer.
Cupid is blind, yet never miss the white:
But thou do see, yet never shoot'st aright.
Epig. 69. On frantic Fiscus.
THe Proverb is, Pecunia potest omnia.
Dame Money can do All;
It instigates the Thief to kill and steal.
It Spurs the Merchant On, to Round the Ball
Of this vast Orb, to'enrich his Commonweal.
What can it not? It causes us run mad,
And Fiscus too, being therewith ouerclad.
Epig. 70. The capring Cord. To theeuish Lato, and Clownish Leto.
What would have done with that strong, halter Nick
Which, Lato thought t'exchange for thy Gold
Thou in it would have shown a capring Trick,
And stretch thy Neck in that Rack, long of old.
But since thou scap'st, give Lato's Cord again,
His right, it is pity from him to detain.
Epig. 71. On the Worldlings question.
THe common question now a days does pass,
Not what she is* but what sweet Mopsa has.
Epig. 72. One the Nativity of Q^ne Elizabeth* borne ^n the Eve of the
Nativity of M^.
THy Virgin Birth upon a Virgins Eve,
Did true Presage thou should a Virgin Live.
Epig. 73. To our Nauigators, seeking hear the Port of Rest.
Ye Neptunes Plowmen, year clean astray,
Which seek on Earth the Port of quiet Rest;
Direct your course unto Olympus Bay,
This of all other Capes is sure the Best.
But your calm sea must be the liquid Air,
Your ships, your sails the wings not of Despair.
Epig. 74. A pair Royal of Fiends:
IF friendship true did ere in Bad ones stay,
It did remain in Bengfield, Winchester,
And Constable, three men of Hels array,
Which sought Elyza'in in her Prime to smoother.
I may not term these pair of Royal friends
But rather pair of most disloyal fiends.
Epig. 75. To his loving Cosen Mr Rees Myricke.
THou shall now light on many a complete fry,
That will thee call, most loving Cousin, kind,
Which never skilled it by arts Heraldrie;
^ake heed, this Cousin, mai'st a cousner find.
For Iudas-like he will Hail thee with a kiss;
And to betray, such Cheaters seldom miss.
Epig. 76. On Fu^ke, the Gor^diser. To his Cosen Row: Vaughan, student in
Physic.
Physicians sav, all sickness does proceed
From over abundance, or Vacuitie;
Whereof, the first thou verifi'st in deed
My Fuske, by gorging thy profunditie.
And before that nature should a Vacuum grant
Within thy Panch; Death-Surfeit thou will haunt,
Epig. 77 On an Inn, Graced with the Flower-de-Luce.
Thou Art bravely decked without, with Fra^nce fair Arms,
But stained within with her most loathsome Harms.
Epig. 78. Coytie Castle, and Radyr house exclaiming on Time.
WOrld wasting Time, thou worker of our woes
Thou keen edged rasor of our famous name,
That antique was but now obliuious grows,
The subject almost of contempt and shame.
Yet do thy worst, our names shall live for ay,
Although our fame thou buried have in Clay.
Epig. 79. Alms Deeds. On Pinch-Peny, Tent.
SOme Treasures cast into the poor man's Box,
Some slender Mites according to their state;
But thou did never (Tent) once o'pe thy Locks,
Thy Mydas muck for to anihilate.
But stuff'st his maw with Roundings for to eat,
To still his cry, which did for coin entreat.
Epig. 80 To the studious, and noble Gent Sir R. Sidney knight of the Bath.
THe waters give thee Titles; but the earth
Shall add great Trophies to thy greater Birth.
Epig. 81. Lalus, and Lelius.
LAlus presuming on a dram of Lore,
Did Lelius daughter for his Mate implore.
Tush Princocke proud who scornefully repli'de,
Think thou to have my Darling, for thy Bride?
La: I am a Scholar, so I may grow great,
And may hereafter sit in princely seat.

Le: What do profess? what is thy faculty?

La: I study sacred deep Divinity.

Le: Tut, what a Priest? a Tenant but for life?
Pack hence thou getst not my joy for thy wife.

La: Be patient Sir, let me win your good will,
I am a Lawier, full of Playdons skill.

Le: Is It so? why then I Will instantly thee wiue
Unto my child, for thou art like to thrive.

Epig. 82. On Prudentius, a Christian Poet.
It Is not thy name makes thee deal prudently,
But thy profession, Christianity.
Epig. 83. To the most Reuer in Christ. Francis: B. of Landaffe on his
THough no Record shall Register thy fame,
Catalogue.
Thine own Records enrowled have the same.
Epig. 84. The Crab Tree.
OF all the Trees, the Crab Tree, I think best;
The Oak is strong great buildings to erect,
The Fur Tree fair to frame thereof a chest,
The Ew most fit an arrow to direct)
But this has in it a precious Baulme to cure
The poys'ned stings which women's tongs procure.
Epig. 85. On our fleering, fawning, treacherous Gnathoes.
THe temp'rat Zones, as 1. Meta.
Naso testifies,
Participate of heat, and cold commixt.
Herein I think, he vents out truth, not lies;
Because that many in these Climat's fixed,
Do, as the Proverb says, in either hand,
Both carry Water, and a burning Brand.
Epig. 86. On Golden Simonie. To his dear affectiue Cosen, Mr. I. Pralpth.
AT first, I know, our ghostly Simonie,
His name derived from Simon Magus, just,
But now adays, I think it verily,
It took his name from See-money accursed.
Hereby Sir John gets him a living fat,
That never knew the Latin for his hat.
Epig. 87. Heavens Diadem. To his fr. and familiar, W. Io.
MOst wonder will to hear a beggars brat
Should have as good, as large an heritage,
As the rich heir of some great Potentate,
That whilome was, or is in this our Age.
But so it is, the Heavens Hirarchie
To Spade belongs, as well to Scepter hie.
Epig. 88. Perkins cases, the Divine.
THy sacred Cases conscionable be,
And why not Fips because he nips the Fee.
Epig. 89. To the most Reuer. Father in Christ, Anth. B of St. David's. Of his
learned conceits painted in his hall.
SOme Pen conceips their ingine sole to show,
But thine do wit, and sacred Lore contain:
Which tho domesticke be, for private view,
Thy fame to publish yet, they do pertain.
If any question why they secret lie,
I say because the Pencill cannot fly.
Epig. 90. On his Brother buried in Zealand.
What though thy corpse, as is the Genesis 49. 33.
custom old,
With thy forefathers does not lie ingrau'd?
I trust thy sonte with theirs be safe enrowl'd
Within the Apoc. (...).
Book of life, most certain saved.
Epig. 91. To the hypocritical Papist, wearing the Gospel of Saint John about
his neck.
THou well this Book about thy neck mai'st wear:
For, this, I know thy heart it comes not near.
Epig. 92. To his cordial fr. Mr. Moore Fortune, heretofore a Traveler. Of
Virginia.
THe Natural Ex lib. Aug. Nau.
Virginianist's believe,
All creatures, both visible, unseen;
That were, or shall, or do on earth now live,
To be composed of light water green.
A light belief, more light then is the water;
To deem that all was made of such a matter.
Epig. 93. In ^edio virtus. To his friend Rich. Iohnes.
Virtue they say 'twixt two extremes does stand,
To separate Superlatiues in ill:
Which true we find in Brodefoord with her Strand,
That parts Lauryddian, against Lanellies will.
Else sure the bibbers of these famous Towns,
Would meet full often to crack their giddie crowns.
Epig. 94. To the learned, honest, and Pious Gent. Mr. Th. Leysons, Physician;
of the Bathes.
YOur Bathes partake of waters cold, hot too,
A wonder 'twere, but that they wonders do.
Epig. 95. On the Orchadians with their Bestiall fellowship.
IT ill befits for Man and beast to lie
I^ one self room without partitions shreene;
Which the Orchadians hereof testifies.
(...) match ill made together as I ween.
Unless it be for love of buggerie,
The worst of kind with beasts to multiply.
Epig. 96. To the Censurers of these vulgar Poesies, Epigrams.
SOme carping Critics doubtless will auerre,
This kind of rhyme to have a common hew,
And therefore harsh, because it does infer
No novel form; like to the fashion new;
No marvel, for it is the worlds true guise,
The new to love the ancient to despise,
Epig. 97. To ingenious Ben. Johnson.
IF that thy Lore were equal to thy wit:
Thou in Apollo's chair might justly sit.
Epig. 98. The Tra^ller,
COsting Catita, it was my chance to meet
Alumnus poor, whom kindly I did greet:
And asked what news? who, sighing, did impart,
Which to unlace, said he, torments my heart.
But hoping, friend thou will condole with me:
I will unfold what I too common see.
The underling in Church, and Commonweal,
Must travail, trudge, of bondage the viue seal;
And when his sorry Sallarie would game,
He often receaues his labor for his pain.
The Poor Pedant, who lives a servile life,
Which ever toiles, turmoiles in endless strife;
Must be to all, yea to the Clown a Slave,
And for his own, with cap and knee must crave.
The needy student wanting means to live,
Detesting by the former ways to thrive:
The Ocean furrows, being quite out of hope,
And either serves fierce Mauors, or the Pope.
Alas, quoth I, is this the best reward?
That good deserts reapes in this fertile soil?
Yes certs, said he, but for the souls regard,
It Were better far at the Plow's tail to toil.
Epig. 99. To long Megge of Westminster.
ALl called thee, long Megge, true; they did not miss;
If broad Megge too, they had not failed, I ^is.
Epig. 100. To the kind Reader, of the Censure of my Book.
SOme will, no doubt, thee ask of this my Book,
Whither't be good; perhaps thou wilt say; so, so.
Thy judgment give not so, I pray thee, look:
But hereof rather answer him; no no.
Then i will be sure to shun each curious fry:
That naught but faults in Writings can epsy.
The end of the first Centurie.
Patere, aut Abstine.
THE SECOND CENTVRIE.
Epig. 1. To his worthy Ho: Patroness, Catherine, Lady Mansell.
THy splendent name, I do not know right well,
Or blazed fame, in praise does most excel;
But both unite, and both shall equal be,
Such is thy praise, sans partiality.
Epig. 2. On our vulgar Pie-Poets. To the Readers.
AN Epigram, I grant is common grown,
Squis'd out of Cobblers, Tinkers, base of Trade;
(Whereby of yore the learned well was known,
Whose warbling songs was not by Coopers made.)
Such sordid stuff we should cast of in have,
And will Sr. Suitor not to pass his Last. a Ne Suter vltra cripidam.

Epig. 3. To the learned Divine Mr. Francis Sydney.
SOme of thy name do brave Trill Pallas Lance;
And thou most grave her Laurel do advance.
Epig. 4. On the Merciless Niggard. To his decre Cousin, Edm. Basset.
THe Base we see do commonly admire,
And high esteem the Baslings of this Earth:
As Silver Gold, Brass, Iron Lead, and Wire,
So that if famine falls, or pining Dearth,
Scarce will they spare, yea to themselves one crum,
Much less to Others, to their Doors which come.
Epig. 5. To his lo: friend Mr. M. Hopkins.
WIth doleful sighs right well may we compare,
The Leuit's living pared on either side;
By greedy Patron thence which culs his share,
And Dunstus dumb, in learning little tri'de:
Unto the Cheese, which Banbury does yield,
Which looks most poor, on both sides cleanly peeld.
Epig. 6. The Naturalized Dutchman. To his kind Comrade, and lo: Cousin, Mr.
William Hughes.
WE say, one fault marres somes good qualities;
But Contrary in the right Flemming borne,
One Good'mends all his superfluities
Of bad conditions, to be ere forlorn:
His Bibbing, Rashues, Mercenary fight;
But worthre praise, for A pure Protestant.
serving God aright.
Epig 7. On the worldlings Avarice. To his lo: friend Mr. Io: Roberts,
alaborious Preacher of Gods Word.
THe faithful Abr'am for his Heritage
Did rest content with promise of a Land:
Whereto the faithless Bastards of our Age,
Words naught avail without performance-Band.
Yet see the difference 'twixt the Sons, and Sire,
He Heaven gate, base Earth they sole Desire.
Epig. 8. Agriculture. To his lo: friend Io G.
LIke Nero, many do enbowell deep
Their Mother Earth, for White and yellow Mine:
And others do into Her concaues creep
Like Pluto's swart, dark coals to dig that shine.
But thou art far more Natural then They,
Which do but, Raze thy Mothers face of Clay.
Epig. 9. To one, declining under the yoke of Affliction.
What tho thy cofers be not stuffed hard
With Caesar's crosses, all of beaten gold:
And all the crosses of the Popes be bard
Thy house; yet faint not; but be ever bold.
For thou have had those crosses, that exceed
Far these; which be Christ's crosses, best in deed.
Epig. 10. a Babylon Metamorphosed. To his lo friend Mr. Math. Bennet.
THou boastest proud, that thou do rule as Apoc. 18. 7.
Queen,
Thou art mistake, it is rather like a Apoc. 18. 9.
Queen. a
Epig. 11. On Sir Phill. Sidneys Arcadia.
THy works are worthy praise, and why, I pray?
Because that none can these dispraise, I say.
Epig. 12. To his lo: friend Mr. M Hop: for the loan of Dod, and Cleauer on
the Decalogue.
DOd with his Cleauer cleaues the stony rock
Of our hard hearts through their laborious pain:
And plains the way most plain for Christ his flock,
That leads over hills to the celestial plain.
These pair of friends with thanks I send again,
Though two in Name, in Nature yet not twain.
Epig. 13. On the monstrous sin of Drunkenness.
THat S^ de Tranquil. ^im.
stoicall sage did drunkenness prescribe
A salve most sure unto a quiet mind;
Which spuing potion most of every Tribe,
Now takes, which works most bravely, as we find.
It causes vomits, does phlebotomize,
And more, the dumb does cause to Rhetorize.
Epig. 14. To the hopeful, and courteous Courtier, young St. Edw. Lewis.
THe Court, thy Name may better, I confess:
But not thy Nature, less I miss to guess.
Epig. 15. Worm'shead. To his approved good fr. T. Rog.
A Rock there is that (...) shead has to name,
Within whose Concaues, fish, and foul do br^ed:
A wonder strange, which merits blazing fame,
That stones, the self same Rock, and eke indeed
At the same time, the feathered bird, the fish
Should feed, and stanch their appetites at wish.
Epig. 16. Christ, and Apollo. To Physicians.
BOth, sores of soul and body Christ does cure.
Which cannot Synthius, which you say is sure
A God; and Mat. 19. 26.
God, they say, can all effect,
But certs, I think, your God has this defect.
Epig. 17. On curious questionists. To his lo: fr. Har: Iohnes.
TOo many are of curious Questionists,
That proud demands what God himself did frame,
before a'fram'd the World wherein consists
All Cre'tures that both Savage be, and tame.
Which cannot yet their Pater noster say,
Unless perhaps in Latin clean astray.
Epig. 18. To his lo: fr: Mr. W. Awbrey, an ingenious A^agr* matist, late
turned a Minister.
I^ that the Censure of the Gabalists
(...) true, which says their lies in each man's name
By the inuersion of Hieroglyphists,
His fatal fortunes, or his blazed fame.
Which in thy name thou did, I think out find
When to that sacred coat thou gave thy mind.
Epig. 19. Pengwin, the eight wonder of the World. To ^s Cosen Rees Griffith a
Peregrinator.
THe universe, as we may read, contains
But only seven wonders, strange and rare;
The eight, to make the number even, remains,
Which Disticke-wise, herein I will declare.
This is a Bird, that Pengwin has to name,
Which never slew, and yet was never tame.
Epig. 20. To the cour^us Ge^. M. Arth. Mansell.
AS thou art Arthur excellent in Name,
In Nature to, I wish thee eke the same.
Epig. 21. The I Will of the Cross.
I Guess, Exilih. Munst. Cosm.
Columbus gave that fitting name
To that same Clime, which he calls Crucis I Will;
Because there Cannibals without all shame,
Do eat men's flesh, which they to them beguile.
Which first they fix unto a Crux to feed,
Like to an Ox, being fat they cause to bleed.
Epig. 22. On curious Damaetas. To his Cosen H. Tho. studious in the Bible.
THE ignorant in this our curious Age,
Or little less, some Ass of shallow reach,
Will seem to prate in myst'ries deep, and sage;
The greatest Clearkes which vex, that write, or preach
And if you tell him, Mat. 10.
do this thou shall live,
It Is naught, unless unto the depth you diue.
Epig. 23. Jesus College in Oxford, speaking to King James.
AL things, Arist. 1 Eth.
they say, do wish a perfect end,
I being imperfect, do eke wish the same,
Thy Royal hand my ragged walls can mend,
And perfect that what Priscious e'ne began.
An easier task, to join four corner stones
In me, then lincke in one four Nations.
Epig. 24. Mors, Sceptra ligonibus equat. Alluding to the death of the most
renowned H. Frederick, Prince of Wales.
OFatall death, can none escape thy Dart?
O ghastly Ghost, must all obey thy Hest?
Must Princes, as the beggar feel thy smart?
Must great ones die, sans mercy, as the least?
Henry was young, therefore thou might him spare;
Henry was sage, then should his life prolong:
Henry was war like touch him how could dare?
Henry was learned, death thou have us wrong.
Mauors farewell, and learned Mercury,
Since Henry left too soon our company.
Epig. 25. To the most famous, and Heroike Lady, Mary, L. Wroth.
THy worthy husband Ladifies thee Wroth,
Pray be not so with my poor pen, to place
Before R the O; then justly Lady Worth
I might thee style, worth what? hie honors Grace.
Epig. 26. The a Canaries.
THose Isles were wont to be called fortunate,
Have now their names Canaries, for the Curres
That breed therein (a Metamorphos'd state,
And strange) which thinks her blessed for beastly Burres.
But Britains I Will should certain more be blessed,
If with mad dogs she were the lesser pressed,
Epig. 27. Goddess Fortune.
THE unfortunate denominates his name
And fortunate also, from fortune blind:
In Polycrates, and Ulysses fame,
Her constancy inconstantly we find.
The one she ever cros'd by Sea and land,
The other blessed with her vnblisfull hand.
Epig. 28. Hispana, in Hispanos.
HIspana I Will, has in it a wonder rare,
Which Serpents be without all poison strong;
And do not hurt (as Ex Munst Cosm.
stories do declare)
The Inhabitants, which do dwell them among;
Which should teach those that conquered first the I Will,
To shun to kill, through veno^'s poisned guile.
Epig. 29. On Terhernes Sepulture.
TErherne thou li'est enterd within the grave,
Of a blind Monk, in those days compted wise,
And thou a fool; a Sepulture most brave,
Which does the idiot, and the Sage comprise.
Yet, thou a fool to greater Bliss may rise,
Then the blind Monk, that was esteemed wise.
Epig. 30. On the feminine Supremacy.
I Often heard, but never read till now.
That Women-kinde the Codpeeces did wear;
But in those Isles, the men to women bow,
Which do their names of Ex lib. Nauig. Aug.
male, and female bear.
I should therefore the woman judge to be
The vessel strongst, but 1 Cor. 7. 3.
Paul denies it me.
Epig. 31. To the right worshipful and most courteous knight, Sir Lewis
Mansel, of his he: a marriage,
THe Porcupine, with lances sharp, and keen,
Does now not seek to pearce the Fawchi'on fair,
Nor is the Fawchi'on against the Griffon seen
To ^y, but ioies as friends, a Royal pair.
What is the cause of this their league? thy a love,
Which does the birds, that is strange, to vnio^ move.
Epig. 32. On Cottulus the unconstant Professor.
Unconstant Cottulus, which primly wast,
Preciscian like, most curious of thy life:
But thou that faction thou have ouerpast,
And turned a Papist, seeds man full of strife,
I wonder, what thou thirdly wilt Profess,
Camelion-like, a Newter, as I guess.
Epig. 33. To his Antiquious Academian friend Mr. William Ie.
THe Swan, they say, does sing before he die;
But thine, I wis, did mourn most dolefully.
Epig. 34. On the beloved Gossips, Laena, and Larga.
Lae. Why wilt not Larga, Marry Mr. Steer?
A p^oper man, and wise, no Meacocks Gul:

La: I tell thee why, I hate a castred Pheere,
and rather chose my Suitor, Master Bull.

Epig. 35. The Picture of a Paramour.
MOst pretty Love, of all our Loves, which love
Never to feed on one sole dainty dish;
But many more do taste, and often pronest,
Through sweat of Body, and a lovely kiss.
Thou ever love variety of cares,
Which honest Vesta and Maechaon hates.
Epig. 36. To the ghastly Ghoast of Terherne.
SOme are, which have grow'n famous by their lore,
By dint of sword, and eke by Prudencie;
But thou (Terherne) renowned wast of yore,
For a pure fool, and natural foolerie.
But here is the difference 'twixt your brinted fame,
Theirs, for their wit, and thine, of folly, came.
Epig. 37. Cord Frank. Of the Knights of St. Denis Bathe,
I Wonder why men did thee nominate
Coed Frank, in Antique Britains copious Tongue;
Unless thou got'st it through the French-mans fate,
The gallian grief, which blasted thee along.
If it be so, let fleshmen learn by thee
To shun the Pox which burns the very tree.
Epig. 38. Of the lamentable Deaths, of H. 3. and H. 4. the French kings,
murdered by a brase of Friars.
IF Genesis 49. 5.
Patriarchs twain, in Holy Writ be named
Genesis 34. 5.
Brethren in evil for revenging wrong;
Then may those Brase of Friars well be blamed,
(Which burns sans Mercy, amongst the Hellish throng)
For doubtless they were brethren in ill,
Which trat'rously France Royal blood did Spill.
Epig. 39. To his Sickly friend.
STore is no sore, the Proverb verifies;
Which thou find'st false, in store of Malladies.
Epig. 40. To Reverend vida, the filching Preacher.
GOds zeal, (most zealous vida,) Prelate grave,
Did eat thee up, while that the borrowed oil
Of others Lamps, did furnish thee most brave,
With Budget Lore, to keep a Preaching coile.
What means thy silence? Sure the oil is out,
And being thrust from Movses chair, art Mute.
Epig. 41. To plain Io. the versificator.
What kind of Poem's thine, I thee beseech?
No witty one, therefore a witless speech.
Epig. 42. To Battus, the Cat^chiser.
MAgister Battus of the A. B C.
I do commend thy conscience for to teach
Thy Punies Raw, without reward or fee;
Th'wilt serve to catechize, but ill to preach.
Whereas thou do thy pupils teach for naught,
Right well thou may, thy Lore deseru's not ought.
Epig. 43. On Mistress Wag-taile.
THy gadding head, my pretty Mysa sweet,
Did cause thy tail to be most wagging still;
Herein we see both head, and tail do meet
Thy lust never satiate seeking to fulfill.
'Twas not thy Head that did thy Tail inflame,
But it was thy Tail, that did thy Head defame.
Epig. 44. Lex Taliouis, on Rot, the Tyrant.
PRoud cruel Rot, which now do rot in grave,
That e're wast wont to tread on poor men's necks
And force the harmeles Gull to be a Slave,
Unto thy Threts, and eke commanding checks.
These all requite thee now with Talio's Law.
And on thy Head do trample without Awe.
Epig 45. The Cacademons Epitaph.
H^ere Batcocke lies, a Cock too Bad by kind,
Which ever wak't his Prentises to play
At Cards, he had a zealous mind,
For them he bore instead of Books to pray.
Which being dead, a pair of Cards was found
Under his head, to play with under ground.
Epig. 46. Socrates.
THou Socrates the wisest Sage foretold,
That was on eath, while that on earth thou breth'st
Wast not so wise yet, for to choose that Scold,
To be thy wife; thou wisdom herein leau'st.
Unless it were thy patience, for to try,
If so, our days yields thee many a fry.
Epig. 47. To his honest kind friend Mr. Edw. Andrews, of the Epithit, Honest.
HOnest, a word, I swear an Adjective,
For now a days, it little stands in steed:
But he that to the Depth of Crafts can diue,
He is the Wiseman that does now exceed.
Epig. 48. An Anothomie for Husbandry.
Pattern for Husbands, Choke thou art of right,
Which do not choke thy good seed with the Thorns
Of worldly care to be a Miser hight,
Thy lands brings better fruit, then wild Acornes.
This shining candle of thy husbandry,
Under a Bushel does not hidden lie.
Epig. 49. To the worthy and famous Earl of Notingham, high Admiral of
England.
GReat number do on the firm land bear sway,
These thou excell'st, thou make the Sea obey.
Epig. 50. The Flushing fray. To his Couser, Leiftenant Ie, Watkins.
THe Flemmings fight is reasonable, yea;
Being drunk.
reasonlesse, he'ill but or stick, or snee.
Epig. 51. Omnium rerum vicissitudo est. Master, Messenger.
Ma: What Is thy name? Messenger? for what I pray?

Me: It Is Master kind, for your dear love, I say.

Ma: Tush, I do hate, detest thy lawless bed,

Me: You may help that, if you do me but wed.

Ma: Fie it is not fit for females for to sue;

Me. Tut, let us conioine, it is the fashion new.

Epig. 96. Amicus certus in re incerta cernitur. To trusty M. Gage.
THou faithful Gage, that wast a gage indeed.
For loyalty, and eke for service true,
(Unto that famous Qucene Elizabeth.
Prince by God decreed
To Quell the Pope, Religion pure to show)
In her distress; which few of thin own name,
To thy pure faith, themselves do wholly frame.
Epig 53. To the fair faced Margaret.
WHat odd's 'twixt Margarit, a precious pearl,
And Margaret, a sweet and peerless Girl.
No odd's I see, for we must buy the one,
And Gratis thee, I think possess shall none.
Epig. 54. The voluble wheel of Fortune. To the interne friend Mounsier Hie,
and Mr. Low.
Lo: THou clim'st the wheel of fortune Mounsier Hit
And gap'st for glory, and preferment great;

Hie. True Mr. Low, and thou as fast do fly,
And low descend'st from fortunes highest seat
Despair not yet if fortune, unconstant.
fortune be,
She may thy name appropriate unto me.

Epig. 55. To the worthy Gent. Mr. Rawley Bussie, in voluing the earthly Globe,
and tossing of the Tents ball, most expert.
THy solace is to volue the Orbicke ball
Of this round earth, and eke this Tenis Pile;
The one in sporting, which we pastime call,
The other, when thy fluent Muse do file.
Epig. 56. To Mistress Lightfoot.
I Chaunc'd, as once I trauail'd to overtake
One Mistress Quick, being found'red, making moan:
I asked, what did her pace so halting make,
I did my foot quoth she, hurt against a stone.
It Is nothing so, said I, kind Mistrisse Quick,
Your grief I take, came rather of a prick.
Epig. 57. Uincit qui patitur. To his lo fr. Rich. Gibons, a Teacher.
IF any wish his patience for to try,
Let him, but practice sole thy Ministry.
Epig. 58. To his fragile firtree staff.
THe Proverb se's, it is better for to bow
Then for to break, a note of gentleness;
But thou, my prop, do scorn to stoop so low
As bend, a sign, se'st thou of basefulnesse.
But break wilt rather (my most brittle Tree)
Yet do not so, I prithee, under me.
Epig. 59. On Stephen, the bloody Persecutor.
GOod Gardiners do use for to supplant
Their bad grow'n weeds, their fruitful herbs to save;
But Gardener thou the a flower of Troynouant,
Did think to weed, and bury in her grave.
To heavens Reapers, far unlike wast thou,
To weed the wheat, and let the Mat. 13. 28.
Ever grow.
Epig. 60. To the worthy Knight, Sr To. Wroth, of his house called Durnnce.
THy Durance keeps in durance none, I hear,
'Lesse be to partake of thy A famous housekeeper.
bounteous cheer.
Epig. 61. On our Popish fugitives.
THey say, o'refasting does procure a pain,
(Virtigo hight) the turning of the head:
Which true we find in male contents most plain,
When of preferments long they have not sped.
And Ex E^seb.
Arrius like, which mist his Bishopprick,
The Will change their faith, and show a Popish trick.
Epig. 62. Mother B's Tranflation.
GOode'n, most antique, zealous mother B,
This salutation well befits your age:
For while you live, a vestall you decree
To be, and shun the toies of Pupillage.
And as of old, on Beds you loved to play:
So now on Beads you wholly like to pray.
Epig. 63. * Licentia Poetica. To the carping Critic.
IVdge not so hard, that Poe^ts still do lie,
For what they write, it is 'llow'd by Liberty.
Epig. 64. On the Popes Holiness.
THe Romish Canons shamelesly aver,
Their holy Father, God, nor man to be;
What is he then? if that, I do not err,
H'is no Angel, of heavens Hierarchy.
Unless be 2 C^, 11. 14.
Him, that puts on every Hue
For to deceive, and this, I think, is true.
Epig. 65. To the Paracelfian Empricke.
IF all the World were like to Socrates,
That never stood in need of Phsicks hand;
How then could live, if this thy art should cease,
Poor Jack, in this, or any other Land?
Would thou thenbe a grave Sr. John by skill?
So, sure more souls, then bodies would thou kill.
Epig. 66. Of H. 1 King of England, whose inuenomed brain, being dead, killed
his own Physician.
WHat men alive, being sick, would often fulfill,
Thou being Ex lo Stovve. Chron.
dead did thy Physician kill.
Epig. 67. To Mr. Monoculus, the Sagittarie.
What dire mishap befell you Mounsier Blinck?
That you have lost your most respected eye:
You tell me, tush, you shall the better winck
To hit the mark, and let the arrow fly.
Is It so? your shot ^I guess, will be far wide,
When that you shut the other eye beside.
Epig. 68. To Zantippa the Scold.
What mary muffe, what makes thee sweet of hew
And sour of speech, most bitter, waspish, bad?
I think, thon art a most detested shrew;
Or with the Ague, or burnt fever clad.
Which ever fills thy tongue most full of Gawle,
To all distasteful, but to ban, and brawle.
Epig. 69. The Epitaph of his dearly beloved Schoolmaster, Mr. W. Edwards.
HEre lies the picture of pure honesty.
Here lies, the sire of many a learned Son,
Here lies, the zeal of Christianity,
Here lies, the Patron of Religion.
Here lies, that man, whose life was naught to none,
Here lies, that friend, whom young and old bemone.
Epig. 70. To Rome, with her Romish brood.
Paul 1 Timothy 23.
says, a Bishop should a husband be
Of one wife, for to live a sober life;
But the great Bishop, of the highest degree,
Will have his Bishops for to have no wife.
I wonder how from all he cuts this band?
They'are either Eunuchs, or play under hand.
Epig. 71. To Gill: the fingring Lawyer, and ambodexter.
What mak's thee, Gill, the perfect use to have,
As well of left, as of thy right hand fair?
Thou Galen-like wilt answer very grave,
It Is o'remuch heat that does from heart repair.
I think not so, but thy poor Clients gold
Mak's thee to be an Ambodexter bold.
Epig. 72. A new formo of finding out Petigrees To Don Stolidus.
MY vpstart Gull, that would right noble be
In Royal blood (thy labor quite is vain
In voluing books of old Antiquity
For thy base line, not worth thereof the pain)
B' advised by me, open thou an old made Grave;
There thou thy first Genologie shall have.
Epig. 73. Tom of Christ Church in Oxford. To our ceremonious Papists.
THe clapping sound of Antichristian Bells,
They say, expels from them their airie Ghosts:
So, Tom thy sound which all thy mates excels,
Does thine Oxonians cause to fly their Hoasts.
But if thy sound could sound as far as Spain,
Their bodies Ghosts, I think, would them refrain.
Epig. 74. God, and the Pope.
THe sacred Scripture does for truth record, a Mat. 22. 32.

That God is only of the living God,
And of the dead, he claims to be no Lord;
But father Pope recalleth with a nod
They say the dead, from Purgatories grief;
They Are dead in sin, that makes this their belief,
Epig. 75. To glorious Mopsa, of her stolen feathers.
WHy Mistress Noll, do thou Adulterate
(From others Royal lines, thy self to grace)
Their noble birth, and titles high of state?
That wast at first but poor, obscure and base.
If each should pluck from thy patch't Pedigree
His feathers of, right Aesops Iay might be.
Epig. 76. On Cornutus, the Monster. To his lo: friend Will: Arne.
OF all wild Birds, I loath the monstrous Batte,
Which is a bird, and eke a filthy beast;
But of tame birds, I do most deadly hate,
That Is man in shape, yet has a Beast-like creast.
Which of these Monsters do abhor the more?
I think the tame, that with his Horns does Gore.
Epig. 77. To Boorish Petita.
THe Latin Quaeuis terra alit artem.
proverb does for truth relate,
That every land does Arts divine embrace:
Which every where most true, I estimate,
But in Petita, amongst that Rusticke Race.
Which studies naught, but most the crooked Law;
And will effect no goodness, but for Aw.
Epig 78. To his Cousin, Lieftenant William Watkins, of Flushings Situation.
Where Flushing stands, the walkers I Will, it was well
So nem'd for in it walks many a Sentinel.
Epig. 79. On Nic: Herberts Posie, (Lle y Kymero. To his worthy Son Mr. Will:
Herbert.
Thy (Lle y Kymero) did well Sympathize,
(Right worthy Nich'las) with thy noble mind:
For where thou took'st, thou did not temporize,
But all thy friends did a sure Friend thee find.
Thou wast not like the glosers of our Age,
Which disagree most from their Posies Sage.
Epig. 80. To the right Reverend Father, Io: King, Bishop of London, a most
perswasiue Preacher.
What tho thy hand does not the Scepter sway,
Thy tongue does cause full many to obey.
Epig. 81. Tobaccho. To his respective good friend Mr. M Cradocke.
THe mayor part of our Tobacchonists,
Tak's sole the shadow of this smoakie weed:
But thou hereof contrary often whift's
The substance all of this prodigious Reed.
I grant the substance does the shadow pafse
In all besides; save in this Indian Grass.
Epig. 82. A pair Royal of Clerks. To his frtend Tho: Prichard.
THree sorts there be, which Clerks be called by nam^
The first of right is the superlatiue,
The Bible Clerk, that does expound the same;
The next in Rank is the Comparatiue,
The Pen and Inkhorne Clerk; that bandeth men;
The third, the positive, that cries, Amen.
But proud comparisons were odious far,
'Twixt these same Clerks, for their Scholaritie;
Yet my brave Scribe will make no bones to jar,
Yea with the best, in case of felony.
But poor Ding-dong will not offend his sire,
For fear to loose his small collected hire.
Epig. 83. Of the Ambitious. To his cosen Io: Vaughan of his fall from a
Wor^eshead.
SOme fall, whose falling does their Deaths procure,
Thy fall was great yet does thy life remain;
The ods is, they themselves to climb inure,
And sithence, thou from climing do refrain.
Epig. 84. To Sir Humfrey the Recorder.
THou Humfrey ke'pst a calender most straight
Of others faulrs, by Word, or Deed, ere sure;
But near I think, most hateful, careless weight,
Kep'st true account of thine own Crimes vnpure.
I deem thou could not, cause they did surmount
The'others slips, which thou so nigh did count.
Epig. 85. To Morus, the Baldepate.
GOod Mr. More, what made your pate be bawle?
You say, you were borne under Venus star,
Whose Constellation made your hair to fall,
And eke the credit of your crown to mar.
But, as I cast, of this your great mishap,
You lulled were rather upon Venus lap.
Epig. 86 Cupid the blind God. To his lo: friend Mr. William Williams.
WHy is it that Poets style the but a boy?
Since that thou art a thousand years of age;
No marvel, for thy Senes his pueri.
dotage love, thy ^oy,
With childish youth does even equipage.
Epig. 87. To Caecus, the painful Preacher, of our Dumb Dogs.
THou see not yet make other see
Their heinous sins, through thy laborious pain:
When Linx-ei'd Drones, which ever idle be,
With taking pains do never one soul gain.
Thy sight, their livings eke, I wish to thee,
So that thou would then not idle be.
Epig. 88. To his loving friend Io: Spencer, skillful in Arith meticke, of
Mounsier Mutilus.
THy numbering art the plural number loves,
And does casheere the singular, as none:
But Mutilus, Grammarian-like stout proves
The singular; as Lapis, his sole stone.
Epig. 89. On bibbing Belgieus. To his cousin Io: Watkins Ensign bearer.
FLemmingo uses after every whiffe,
His kind Comrade to take fast by the hand:
He se's, it is to show his kindness rife,
But it is, I guess, because he cannot stand.
Epig. 90. On Del Lucifer. To his friend Mr. Edw. Robinson, Cler.
What though Superbus from the Dunghill crept,
Thy holy function scorns with open throat:
Yet be content, forgive and eke forget,
Since Christ himself did dignifie thy coat.
Yet suffer Cinicke, when that he is dead,
To Hearse him, where the Cuckoe first was bred.
Epig. 8. The Imparatiue Mood. To my Lady Myso.
I Wonder greatly what thy Mood should be,
Indicative? no, that does reason show,
But thine is madd; nor Subiunctiue I see,
That should depend sole on thy husband true.
But thine, sans doubt, is the Imparatiue,
Which makes thee daily with thy Mate to strive.
Epig 92. To the ingenious Poet, Mr. William Herbert of his book entitled the
Prophecy of Cadwalader.
THy Royal Prophecy does blaze thy name.
So Poets must, if they will merit fame.
Epig. 93. To the snarling censurer.
REader, perhaps thou will my Muse dispraise
Of Barrenness, which was a curse of yore;
It is not so, note thou her fathers days,
A yongling, able to beget yet more.
If idle, vain, thou deem it, and unfit:
An idle vain becomes a childish wit.
Epig. 94. On Moneanus, the Bibber. To his loving friend Mr. William Thomas.
THy Nectar, Quondam, was but whiggin small,
Alias sowrew hay, how is it that naught but wine
Thy slippery palate now does taste at all?
That never was Pressed in Bo^eas freezing clime.
No marvel, for thy body is so bet
With cold, which thou do seek with Ale to Heat.
Epig. 95. On Simon Magus, Roman, To his lo. fr. and familiar, M. I. Vaughan
GOd gratis gives his Grace most liberally,
But man will not without a Simons fee.
Which was the cause, as far as I perceive,
That caused thee sweet Oxford for to leave.
Epig. 96. On Lukewarm love. To his lo. and approved good Cosen Mr. Edw
Gamage.
Love now adays is neither hot, nor cold,
Th'wilt ask me then, what is it? I say lukewarm;
Why then it is Bet, thou se'st, then that of old,
O, no, this warm has in it the greater harm.
Epig. 97. Tempus edax rerum, To the learned Historian, his lo. friend, Mr. W.
Meyricke.
TIme does in time they say, all things devour,
And eke forgets each learned Mercury,
Save the Historian, only times fresh flower,
Which never fad's, much less does ever die.
For It cannot be that time can blot his name,
Which does of time Records most antique frame.
Epig. 98. On Iudeas the Usurer. To his loving Cosen John Stradling.
WHat makes that Beggars in thy neighborhood,
Poor silly wtetches, numberless to swarm?
It Is not I ween, for thy devotion good;
But rather it is for thy purlonging harm.
Which suffer'st uone to thrive that lives at hand;
But begger'st all, by purchasing their land.
Epig. 99. To the Readers of his Epigrams.
IN the Popes tongue I list not to endite:
Cause of my time all men should have the sight.
Epig. 100. To the Printer, of Detractors.
THe Captain press the Soldier to repel
The furious force of foemens cruel hand:
So do thou Press some papers, that excel,
Yet must they cankred tongues of men withstand.
A wonder it is, the tongue for the hand, right
Should war; no force, it is but a woman's fight.
The end of the second Centurie.
Patere aut Abstine.
Disce aut Discede. W. G. FORLORN HOPE, Sailing, and Salling forth, under the
duskie Colors of the envious universe.
Epig. 1.
MArch forward, Muse thy Patroness is great,
And if she prove as good, I fear no ill.
But spac'ious fields has Ta^es as well as wheat,
Besides the Dolphin, Sea has Crocodill.
If one Mecaene yet, under Heavens Cope
Thou find'st; thou art not a quite forlorn hope.
Epig. 2. On Tricongius, who was made by Consul Tyberius Caesar, only for his
Drinking.
IF that our Bibbers now a days, should have
As large a Guerdon, as thou had of yore;
I think we should, of every Tankard slave,
Great Magistrates, then private men, have more.
Epig. 3. On conscionable Surdaster.
THouse'st, that all thy hearing thou have lost,
That Is true; withal, I think, thy feeling too;
How then can live? for this maintains most
Within us life, as often read we do;
And yet thou live tho quite without remorse,
So, many do, to sin that nothing force.
Epig. 4. On Lollus lofty Tomb.
WHat made thee build thy statue eu'n'so hie?
Whereas thy stature low on ground did lie?
This was to grace a stupid, liuelesse stone
More then thy self; it was well, for thou had none.
Epig. 5. On Cherillus the Poet.
PAn is not dead, since Pas began to sing.
Who all excels in consorts iarring string.
Epig 6. To his loving, and beloved Cosen, M. I. Pralph Cler. of the Sager, a
Hill situated in parish, apud Heref.
MOses, before the heavenly Canan saw,
Did first ascend the top of Vlt. Deuteronomy.
Nebo's Mount;
Where from he might a viue description draw
Of ^hly Canan, the first's Type in compte.
So may thou climb to Sagers lofty Hill,
And Canan view as it were, a pleasant plain;
To meditate of heavenly Canan it will
Thee instigate assured, as I feign.
Use to ascend this hill most pleasant, hie:
So, Heaven on earth thou mai'st see, ye^ thou die.
Epig. 7. Nusquamtuta fides. To Firmus, The Camelion.
I Wonder, Firmus, why thy faith is frail
To some? whose name approues a constancy;
It Is certs, because they be not head, and tail
Thine; both in falsehood, as in verity.
Epig. 8. To the Holy Well, on Mawverne Hill.
WE often read that Miracles have ceast,
Which otherwise seems by thy golden fame,
(Blazed far and wide: almost to East and West)
Which curest all, the vlc'rous, blind, and lame.
These miracles, God grant, they be not Mould
In the Popes forge; as Counterfeits of old.
Epig. 9. To Mr. Heaven of Heaven, in the County of Heref.
THou happy seem, two Heavens which possessed,
Thy dwelling one, the other is thy name;
Strive to enjoy, (and sure thou shall be blessed)
The third, which was that a 2 Cor. 12 4.
Saints, of greatest fame.
Epig. 10. To the Ministers of Gods Word.
THis Decimae Minutae.
phrase you use for your small Tithes by rat^:
And for your greater too, you may use that,
Epig 11. On Cressa's feminine flattery.
PErfidious wretch what made thee crack thy faith?
Which once thou vow'st for to observe and keep:
But that is true, which the old Proverb says,
Beware a woman when she gin's to weep.
Epig. 12. On Acts 13. 6,
Bariefus, the Magician, and his Sectaries
THy hateful name agrees with thy black art;
Who v^'s it, bar^'s quite Jesus from his heart.
Epig. 13. On the whore in Grain, Helen of Greece.
ONe stain, we read, did stain thy sunnie face;
But thy stained life, thy corpse did more disgrace.
This one spot did not more, thy sweet face mar,
Then thy lust Ilion did; in Trojan war.
Think not therefore it shame to have a stain:
But count it shame, to be a whore in Grain.
Epig. 14. To his lo. fr. M. W. Galloway, an Irish Gent. a student at Grayes
Inn, of his fortunate escape of shipwreck at Gorwer'sland.
THe drowning waters, and the burning fire,
Are elements, sans mercy, as we say;
Whose foamers fo^ing rage, thou did admire,
When shipwreck thou sustaind'st in a pro rossilie.
Sillies Bay:
Yet merciful was Neptunes God to thee,
Which Selde is cruel to Scholaritie.
Epig. 15. Blind affections picture. To Dunce the Pesaunt.
WHat mak's thee, Dance, Dick Truncus to commend?
Of no Deserts a Boore, a Corridon;
Thou say, because he is thy worships friend,
And, whom the current of thy love runs on.
But wherefore do Nick L^s. so dispraise?
A Gentleman of fashion, and of sort.
Forsooth, thou sai'st, thou can not brook his way
His comely carriage, or his seemly port.
See then affection, whether good or ill:
Laud's or defames according to his will.
Epig. 16 The Epitaph of Sir Will: Herbert of Swansey. To his right H^: brother
Sir John Herbert second Secretary of State.
IF homebred knowledge, or yet foreigne skill,
If sundry tongues, or Physickes Princely art,
If noble carriage, eloquence at will,
Could thee have kept from Deaths pale-Ebone dart,
Thou yet have lived, a glory to thy name,
The poor man's prop, and eke thy countries fame.
Epig. 17. To our wise British Barde, Mr. W. Matthew, Esquire; for wit, and
judgment excellent.
I Wot not which thy outward sense, thy ear,
Or inward else, thy brain, does most excel;
For, as we say, the former is the chair
Of Judgment, the other is inventions cell,
Thy brain, does thine own litterature invent,
Thy ear, on others labors, does comment.
Which most excell's I cannot well impart,
But leave it thee, the fi^'st for Logick's Art.
Epig. 18. To his loving Cousin H. Price, of Neptunes Purgation.
IF thou art sick, and would a vomit take;
If thou art well, and willing would be sick.
The Sea for both will thee a medicine make,
Killing the whole, the dead reviving quick.
This brackish purge excells far Hellobore,
For naught, besides perbraking, pai'st therefore.
Epig. 19 The Papists, and Anabapstis Sympathized.
THrough Imitation, the Anabaptists say
Their sins proceed, from their forefathers old*
The Papists eke their sinful fect obey:
Because their Sires were hattcht in the same fold.
Epig. 20. To his old friend and Schoolefellow, Mr. D. Ienkins, a worthy
Barrister in the Laws.
Our famous Ploydon we as yet Embrace,
Since thou do live to plead grave Ploydons case.
Epig. 21. Patience is a Virtue. To his lo: Cousin, and dear alismar, Hop:
Thomas.
PAtience endures the brunt of all assaults.
Eor frowning fortune can it naught displease;
Nor, can it (...) base feigned frindships faults,
Nor yet, being wronged, from constancy will cease*
Therefore, a peerless virtue, patience is,
Whereto nothing, at no time, comes amiss.
Epig. 22. Of the wonder, in Herefordshire; being a Piece of ground, that moved
of it self.
PHilosophers, for truth do testify,
Our Mother earth immouable to be;
But thy self motion strange Philosophy,
These Sages wise, proves liers, as we see.
If this thy motion had continued ay,
Our Est Aristotelus.
Aristotle we might just gainesay.
Epig. 23. To his lo. and constant friend Mr. Moore
Although Fortune.
thy name might thee unconstant prove;
The contrary we find in thy firm love.
Epig. 24. An Adonicke. On Mysa and Mopsa, two Honest Scoulds.
You both together
Iarring a sunder:
Far should be rather
Birds of one feather.
Since your pure living,
Ioin'd in one trading:
Never omitting
Your Mates defaming.
Epig. 25. Semel insaniuimus omnes. To his Cousin, Mr. I. P.
THe Proverb se's, that all the best of any
Has once bin mad; that once is certs too many;
But, after once, we come to perfect wit,
Worth small dispraise, I deem that frantic fit.
Epigr. 26. To the best Indenture drawer, Titubus, the nightwalker of
Fleetstreet.
What mak's thee walk so late against the law?
Kind Mr. Chach I do Endendures Draw:
Indentures draw, in the dark gloomy night?
Whose Manuscript require a brighter light.
You are mistake, we feld use light or hand:
We write e're Best, whenscarse we see, or stand.
Epig. 27 To the everliving, and never dying memory of the most Reverend
fatther in God, Io: Whitgift, late Archbishop of Canterbury
RIght reverend Prelate of our Church divine,
Strong, sollid Pillar of Gods holy Arc,
Bright Beacon, which incontinence did shine,
^ole, chiefest Scholars comfortable Mark.
Thy name Whitgift, for naught was sure not hight:
For both in life, and lore thy Gifts were Whit:
Epig. 28. On the most ho: and worthy lo: Lord Viscount de Lisles Posie. Quo me
fata vocant.
THy splendent Posie, well agrees with thee,
Renowned Lord, bright Sydney's shining Lamp:
For where so e're thou art called by Destenie,
Thou ready art for Court, or else for Camp.
In one, or both thy praise does most surpass;
Such ever, Sidneys Trophies noble, was.
Epig. 29. To the Malevolent, and Taxing Censurer, of his Epigrammes.
IF thou of glory vain wilt me accuse,
These worrhlesse lines in promulgating out;
Believe it then, I will not, Mome refuse
The lie to give thee, if a Soldier stout.
It Was friends, not Fame that these made publik then
In Lethe's lake, else drench' had been my pen.
Epig. 30. To his friend the Printer of his Book.
Some volumes bring in Folio to the Press,
In Quarto some, according to their lore;
(...) all the learned; I w^ am the less
(...) ^ring the all any store.
^ie it not fould in sexto (...)
Least, as the Tome, his (...) a^ little grow.
Respect the paper, though a p^ worth small;
Twill s^ for one (...) thee at thy stall:
^ig. ^1. On the others (...) period of his (...) Hope.
THy hopeless name, styles thee with no good hap,
Thy Numbers od^ approues thee happy yet:
For joy therefore thy Plaudities forth ^ap;
Thy one and thirty right the Game has hit.
Disce a^t Discede.
FINIS.

