THE TRIAL OF TOBACCO.

Wherein, his worth is most worthily expressed: as, in the name, nature, and
quality of the said herb; his special use in all Physic, with the true and
right use of taking it, as well for the Seasons, and times, as also the
Complexions, Dispositions, and Constitutions, of such Bodies, and Persons, as
are fittest: and to whom it is most profitable to take it.

By E. G. Gent. and Practicioner in PHYSIC.



Imprinted at London, by H. L. for Matthew Lownes, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Bishops-head, 1610



To the right Worshipful Sir Edmond Carey Knight.
YOu may peradventure wonder (most worthy Sir) or if not your self, yet many
others (I am sure) will, why I, being an old man, and in my declining age long
since, would be so inconsiderate as to set pen to paper, and write a discourse
of Tobacco. But I pray you give me leave to speak for my self and to answer
both the one and the other. Isocrates (the famous Orator) wrote the sweetest
and most eloquent Oration of his, called Panathenaica, after he was fourscore
years of age: and the same is reported of the divine Plato, who continually
studied, and wrote of diverse points in Philosophy when he likewise had passed
the Eighty year of his age, and so continued to his dying day, as John Pierius
in Oloris Hieroglyphico says. The famous lawyer Baldus began to study the
civil Law at three of the clock in the afternoon (at what time king Deiotarus
began to build a Ciuity) I mean, when he was an old man: and yet having an
excellent, prompt, and praegnant wit, and a natural inclination to that kind of
study, he became the most excellent man of his time. And although you will
grant old men to be subject to many imperfections and weaknesses, yet on the
other side you must confess, that young men are much tainted with lightness,
inconstancy of mind, and overmuch folly. Indeed old men are not so strong,
quick, sprightfull, and deliver as(...)

The names of all those authors and learned men, whose authorities are cited in
this present Work.
ARistoteles. Alciatus. Andreas ^heuetus. Aegidius Eurartus. Auicenna. Augerius
Ferrerius. Alexander Trallianus. Apianus. Aetius. Andreas Matthiolus Semensis.
Amatus Lusitanus. Albertus Magnus. Banisterus. Carolus Clusius. Cardinalis
Cusanus. Cornelius Celsus. Carolus Stephanus. Cornelius Tacitus. Catullus.
Dion. Diodorus Siculus. Galenus. Guido Pancirollus. Garceas ab Horto. Galfridus
Chaucerus. Dioscorides. G^ilielmus Camdenus. Fracastorius. Hesiodus. Homerus.
Hippocrates. Hieronimus Cardanus. Hercules Strozza. Herodotus. Guilielmus
Clusius. Vl^ichus de Hutten. Laurentius ^oubertus. Horatius. Johannes Langius.
Johannes Leo Afer. Johannes Gerardus Anglus. Johannes Li^baultius. Johannes
Heurnius. Johannes Baptista Porta. Johannes Hollerius. Johannes Bruerinus.
Iuuenalis. Lucretius. Josephus Quercetanus. Ludouicus Vertomanus. Petrus
Bellonius. Titus Liuius. Terentius. Ronssaeus. Paul^s Aegineta. Julius
Palm^rius. Theodorus Zuingerus. St^abo. Publius Ouidius. Martialis. Parac^lsus.
Suetonius Tranquillus. Mercurius Britannicus. Richardus Hackluit. Nicolaus
Monardus. Petrus Pena. Matthias de Lobell. Seneca. Vergilius. Pli^ius.
Theophrastus. Philon. Philaretes. Xenophon. Tibullus.
In commendation of the Author.
AS far as Boreas clappes his brazen wings,
So far thy fame grave Gardin^r shall fly.
Pleasure and profit both thy rare Work brings.
Who rightly reads, will say as much as I;
That thou of all do yet deserve the praise,
And to be crowned with a crown of (...).
One, with disgraceful and despightfull words,
This sovereign Simple basely discommends:
A second, lofty glorious terms affords,
And grace too great unto this Simple lends.
Both are extremes. The golden mean is best:
Which here thou keep'st: thy Work excels the rest.
Rejoice, O Britain, that thou have brought*forth
A Gardener of such admired skill.
Thou showest the virtue, the effect and worth,
Of this rare Simple, the good use and ill.
Then use it well, for Gardiners good sake:
And from his Garden a choice flower take.
Io: Serle.

Edward Michaell, In commendation of his learned friend Master Edmund Gardener.
THe Author well deserves the Tipe of fame,
To be conjoined to his honest name,
For setting forth (unto his Countries view)
Tabaccoes praise now in his brightest hue.
In lieu whereof, the guerdon he does crave,
Is but a kind respect of him to have.
For, all his pains, taken for your delight,
Is for to show Tabaccoes use aright.
Read then his work, with judgments brightest eye:
And thank him kindly: Thus with me reply;
Gardener Adieu: thy Work deserves such praise,
As few men give, in these our latter days.
The trial of Tobacco.
MAny men have, many times, set forth to the public view of the world,
diverse books entreating specially of one subject, and those either in praise or
dispraise of the matter they wrote of but yet amongst all writers or
exscriptors there have been in my judgment no treatises so often divulged, so
greatly discoursed of, and presented to the eyes of the world (especially of
late time) as those, that discourse of Indian Tobacco, one liking, another
discommending and dispraising, according to the several whirles of their
affections, either in part or in whole, this famous plant: so that a man may
not inaptly say of it, as Virgill the Poet does concerning the diversity of
opinions for the admission of the Grecian devised horse into the walls of
Iroy. Virgilius Aeneid. ^


Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus.
The wavering multitude, as each man finds,
Consists of many and contrary minds.
And in respect of the Writers, Patrons, and defendants of this rare plant on
both sides, I may not unfitly use this saying of Horace:

Caedimur, and totidem plagis consumimus hostem. Horat. li. 2 epist. 2. 29.

We by our forces are beaten, if not slain,
We with as many strokes waste them again.
There is such hard hold and tough reasoning on both sides.

Now although I be Medicorum minimus, yet you must remember it was said of old:
Scribimus indocti, doctique poemata passim, seeing no other to undergo this
task, I have boldly adventured to unbuckle my self (for you know who is so
bold as blind Bayard) I have I say not being thereto commanded or compelled,
as the answer to the book called Work for the chimney Sweeper was, but of my
own forwardness, and the desire I had to satisfy the world herein in some
sort: protesting, (as in the inferiournes of the style may well appear) that
neither vanity of glory, nor self presumption, (being of many the most
unworthy to have enterprised this task) nor other private respect, then duty
to my good friends (that have requested this at my hands) and zeal to my
loving country men, has made me to publish this book. For I saw the
discourses herein in my poor understanding to be faulty, defective and
halting, considering that one side too much extolled the virtue of this plant,
and another side as much on the contrary abased contened and rejected it. So
to give some satisfaction to both sides, I have made choice of the middle,
being as I take it, the more secure way, though it be a very hard matter to
keep right in the mid-path, and to decline neither to the right nor to the left
hand.

Just a pari premitur veluticum pondere libra, Tibul. li 4 heroi^. ver. 4.

Prona nec haec plus part sedet, ne^ surgit ab illa.
In English thus:

As when an even scale with equal weight is peized,
Nor falls it down this way, or is it that way raised.
Wherefore to perform that precisely which I have promised solemnly, and
seeing this discourse must be sent abroad and committed to the hands, the eyes,
the noses, the ears, the minds and the judgments of a great number of all
sorts, I will first begin with one that is furthest off it, Monardus a
Spaniard of Civil, who has written very largely of it in his treatise of the
west Indian Simples: but because he is already translated into English, I will
(lest I should seem actum agere) refer that which he has very large, to his
own volume. For that which he has gathered is likewise found in other
Authors, whereof hereafter you shall hear more, when we come to discourse of
the virtues of Tobacco. Charles Stephen, and John Liebault, and Andrew Theuet
all three Frenchmen, have writ of this plant, and so has Aegidius Eurartus.
Carolus Clusius likewise in his comment upon Garcaeas, Destirpibus et
Aromaticis Indicis, and Johannes Baptista porta in his eight book, and
eleventh chapter of his Natural Magic do highly commend this plant, as a
thing most excellent and divine. But amongst them all, and from them all for
his admirable knowledge in plants, our own Countrie-man Master John Gerard
Citizen and Surgeon of London has carried away the palm, as best deserving
it, to whom I may well apply that saying of Lucretius:

Qui genus humanum ingen^o superauit and omnes, Lucret. l. 3

Praes^rinxit stellas, exortus vti aetheriussol.
Who from all mankind, bare for wit the prize,
And dimmed the s^arres, as when skies sun does rise.
Another likewise of our countriemen, calling himself Philaretes, has lately
writ a book against Tobacco, entitled Work for Chimney-sweepers: which
book, another has friendly and modestly answered. In the beginning of
Philaretes book on^ ^. H. has made these discommendatorie verses against
Tobacco.

Pity it is such smoking vanity,
Is Englands most esteemed courtesy.
Often have I heard it as an old said saw,
The strong digesting hungry Camels maw
Brooks stinging nettles, and the vilest weeds,
That stinking dunghils in rank plenty feeds:
But (...) a to^, to mock an Ape indeed,
That English men should love a stranger weed.
To whom E. G. makes answer.

Fie, fume at fumigation,
And fret at thy own nation,
It wants not approbation,
That drugs should work purgation,
Often times more worth in vilest weed,
Then in manured Garden seed.
It is no toy, but truth indeed
That one soil should another need.
Philaretes seems to infer in his second reason and some other places of
his book, that by the frequent use of Tobacco, we ought justly to suspect and
fear the same to be a mighty drier, decaier and witherer of our radical and
unctuous moisture: and in respect thereof breeds consumptions: But yet it
seems (by his leave) not so much to breed hec^ike fevers and consumptions,
as appoplectike and cephalical passions, because many abusers thereof have died
suddenly: and we see that the brain does suffer from it by protopa^hie, rather
then by deuteropa^hy* he organ whereby it is received being so near a
neighbor (...) the brain. I wonder it is not discussed how it p^ffeth up and
plumpeth some, when he concludes that it wastes and dissipateth the unctuous
moisture, and substantial nourishment, by dissipation of natural heat, and
decay of spirits in our bodies.

The same Author likewise (though a man of excellent learning, exact judgment
and reading) seems to urge too far, when in his seventh reason against
Tobacco, he sticks not to affirm, that this herb seemed to be first found
out and invented by the devil, and first used and practiced by the d^uels
priests, and therefore not to be used of us Christians. But I will both answer
him and the Spaniard Monardus (from whom he has fetch^ his ground) at one
word thus; that it is certain that the devil did not find it, but Nature
gave it, and Nature does nothing in vain, according to that protrite axiom in
Philosophy, Natura nihil fecit frustra. If the devil did find it, yet we may
esteem it as well as hidden treasures descried by spirits at the request of
wicked me^. But in my opinion we ought to judge of the infinite power of Nature
with more reverence, and with more acknowledgement of our own ignorance and
weakness. For, that it was a plant created by God, when first even by the word
of his mouth all things were framed, I judge it not amiss for any man to say
and think: and there is no scholar so meanly learned, but will by reason
convince them both, and read a lecture of contradiction against them upon the
progress of Natures works; having his virtues and faculties infused into it
from above, whereby many find great ease and comfort as well as by other other
plants and Simples. For unless God himself had been the author of it, why
should it be endued with such noble and excellent properties: for

Ni Deus affuerit, viresque infuderit herbis,
Quid, rogo dictamnus, quid panacea iuvent?
If God help not, and into herbs infuse
A workingpower, in vain we medicines use.
Aristotle (the monarch of our modern learning) seems not to speak awry,
when he says: Multa sciri posse, quae nondum scita sunt. Many things may be
hereafter known, which as yet lie hidden in the deep dungeon of obscurity,
not manifested; as the quadrature of the circle, and the many virtues both of
this and other herbs, not yet known to the world: which hidden and secret
virtues though at this present they are not revealed to Natures interpretors,
yet hereafter they may: so that we may rightly conclude: Maximam partem little
quae nescimus, minimam partem eorum quae scimus aut scire possumus, to which
purpose Cardinal Cusanus has writ a book De docta ignorantia: Wherefore I
suppose none will be so mad to imagine that such a noble plant could come by
chance, or be invented by the devil, whose excellent virtues the profoundest
can scarce perfectly understand. By this we may see the wonderful works of
God, how that he can make things strange, great, and incomprehensible and
wonderful to man's indgement. Therefore it is a thing impertinent, to seek out
the causes and reasons of some things, as many men do, and daily go about to
do, for there are many secrets in Nature, the knowledge whereof is reserved
and kept to the only creator: also of many other that might be here
alleged: but for that it is not my argument, I omit it to come to the rest.

Philaretes my good friend says, that Tobacco is hurtful because it is hot
and dry in the third degree, which Monardus (says he) and others have
affirmed to come near to the third degree of excess in either quality. But
it seems not so hot because it blistereth not, nor yet exceedingly heateth,
and that deletery malignity which he adscribeth to it may be quintessentiall,
although not elementarie. And with him I will not deny, but that some
malignitie (out of question) is in Tobacco, yea, I will add further, that there
is in it some poison also, as there is in some other strong and vehement
purgers, but yet it may be with cordial and cephalical aromatikes alaied as
well as Scammony, Elaterium, Euphorbium, Coloquintida, turbith and some others.
Besides, diverse medicines do either retain, loose, or change their force and
power, according to the diverse constitutions of those natures to whom they are
given. For it is a hard matter to find any remedy that may do absolute good,
without some slight touch of harm, unless by art it be refined. Thus you see
I have been a little bold to trump in my friend Philaretes way, where I
thought he tripped, esteeming him yet for no less then a lover of virtue and
honesty, as his name imports, and a man of good judgment and learning. But
I will come into my path again, and acquaint you first with the diversities of
names and titles given to this herb, and so will I pass to his virtues and
properties.

This herb with the Franks or frenchmen has been most commonly known by the
name of Nicotiana, because one Nicot a French Ambassador to the king of
Portugal, sent this herb first into France, and so gave it his name.

Others again, that by tradition have noted the means from whence they
received this herb, have called it Herba Reginae, and Queen mother herb, for
that when Monsieur Nicot had first knowledge thereof, he sent and commended it
to Katherine de Medices, the Queen mother of France, (who died before she had
reeled up her spindle) and she first caused it to be planted in that kingdom.

Others there be that do term it Hyoscyamus Peruuianus, Henbane of Peru,
Herba Sancta, or Sacra, and Sana sancta Indorum: but upon what ground I know
not, unless it be for the singular virtues and faculties that are found in
this plant* as by the same reason Lignum Indicum or Guiacum is called sanctum,
because it is so helpful, and restores to cure a great many sicknesses and
griefs; as the learned in Physic do very well find. We know indeed by
practice, that an infinite number of diseases are cured by Tobacco, even a
capite ad imos vsque pedes, from the crown of the head to the very feet: so
that in regard of his noble virtues, it was thought necessary that it should
be entitled with some glorious name, as we also see done to others. For
Philon the Physician called his Alexipharmacal medicines, Deorum manus: and at
this day Physicians have graced and nobilitated some of their compositions with
splendidous titles; calling one Manus Christi, another Benedicta Laxatiua,
Catholicon a third, and some others by the strange and superstitious names of
Puluis sanctus, Gratia Dei, Apostolicon, vnguentu^ Paulinum and the like, as
Vlrichus de Hutten, a Knight of Germany has writ in his book De Morbo Gallico,
and the 6. chap. It is also entitled Petu^: and Lobelius, and Peter Pena do
make it a kind of Symphitum: and other while a kind of Hyoscyamus luteus: but
yet they stick somewhat at that. So having discoursed of his several names, we
will make a step to his description, his secret and rare qualities; and not
forgetting by the way, to tell besides of the hurt some receive thereby, with
the true and right use also. And first you shall hear what Carolus Clusius
says.

Nicotian (says he) so termed of the French, of the Spaniards Tobacco, of the
Brasilians Petum, has been long used of the Indians, especially of the
inhabitants of Hispania Noua, for the curation of wounds. It was brought but a
few years since into Spain, rather for the decking up of their gardens, as
being a strange plant and seld seen, more then for the hidden virtues of the
herb: but now it is much more famous by reason of his rare qualities then for
his elegancie and beauty that it carries in a garden. The common people of
India usually term it Picielt: for the name of Tobacco first came from the
Spaniards, because there was such plenty of it grew in a certain Island called
Tobacco, according to the name whereof they have christened it.

Andrew Theuet says, that the Americans have a secret herb which they name in
their language Petum, the which most commonly they bear about them, for that
they esteem it marvelous profitable for many things: this herb is like to
our buglosse. They gather this herb very charily, and dry it within their
little cabanes or houses. Their manner to use it is this: they wrap a quantity
of this herb being dry, in a leaf of a Palm Tree which is very great, and
so they make rolls of the length of a candle, and then they fire the one end,
and receive the smoke thereof by their nose, and by their mouth: they say it is
very wholesome to cleanse and consume the superfluous humors of the brain.
Moreover, being taken after this sort, it keeps the parties from hunger and
thirst for a time, therefore they use it ordinarily. Also when they have any
secret talk or counsel among themselves, they draw this smoke, and then they
speak. The which they do customably one after another in the war, whereas
it is very needful. The women use it by no means. If that they take too much
of this perfume, it will make them light in the head, as the smell or taste of
strong wine. The Christians that do inhabit there, are become very desirous of
this perfume, although that the first use thereof is not without danger, before
that one be accustomed thereto: for this smoke causes sweats and weakness,
yea, foaming at the mouth, sudden falling down, and conuulsions, as I have
seen in some. And this is no such strange thing as it seems, for there are
many other herbs and fruits that offend the brain, though that the taste of
them be pleasant and good to eat.

Pliny shows, that in Lyncest is there is a fountain that makes the people
drunk, that take thereof: Likewise another of Paphlagonia, which as Ovid says
in the 15 book of his Metamorphosis will cause a man to be no less drunk
then if he had copiously quaffed a great deal of wine. His words be these:

Quem quicunque parum moderato gutture traxit,
Haud aliter titubat, quam si mera vina bibisset.
This I know will not be received of all men for truth, and yet Philosophers
do witness that there is in Esclauonie by Apollonia, a fountain coming out
of a rock, whereas is seen to proceed a flame of fire, whereby all the waters
adjacent are as boiling. They have in diverse places of Hisp. Noua many hot
springs of water, as above all other I have seen in the Province of Mec^uacan.
In a plain field without any mountain, there is a spring which has much
water, and it is so hot, that if a whole quarter of beef, be cast into it,
within one half hour, it will be as well sodden, as it will be over a fire
in half a day. I have seen half a sheep cast in, and immediately it has been
sodde^, and I have eaten part of it: and this has the learned Hackcluit set
down in his book discoursing of the voiages of the English nation, by the
relation of Henry Hawks a merchant, who lived three years in Noua Hispania.
I will proceed a little further in relating strange things in nature. In
Bactria in the City of Boghar, there is a little river running through the
midst of it, but the water is unwholesome, for it breeds sometimes in men that
drink thereof, and specially in them that are there borne, a worm of an elle
long, which lies commonly in the leg betwixt the flesh and the skin, and
is plucked out above the ankle with great art and cunning.

Diodorus Siculus reports, that in Egypt there was a poole, the color of
whose water was vermilion, which being drunk would reveal secrets. Strabo
speaks of a fountain in the City Leuc^, of a most horrible smell. Besides,
this is very strange, that there is a fountain besides Haslea, which never
rises but early in the morning, at high noone, and at the shutting of the
evening. And if therein any evil thing be cast that may corrupt the same,
Theodorus Zuingerus mentions, that for certain days after it will not rise
at all. There is a fountain in Salmac in the country of Caria, which as
Strabo writes, makes men effeminate and lither. That of Aphrodosium in
Pyrrhea, causes barrenness, as Pliny notes: and such like a man man may
easily find, if any will take pains to read over the book, entitled
Britannia, written by that most learned and famous gentleman master Will. Camden
(the best antiquary of our age) he shall there I say, have plenty whereat to
admire, and peradventure to give satisfaction to that which here I have set
down for truth.

Some, I doubt not, but will imagine this not to be true, but altogether
false, the which I have spoken touching the natures and strange qualities of
these waters, and of this herb Tobacco, as though Nature could not give such
power to things; yes truly and far greater, as she has also given to
beasts according to the diversities of countries and regions. Wherefore then
should it leave this country of America, (wherein God included the greatest
gulf of mankind) void of such a benefit, being naturally proper to it, and
being temperate without comparison more then others? As in generality, Afric
yields the best Mules; Europe the best Lions, (as Herodotus and Pliny make
report) only to be found between the rivers Nestus and Achelous: the one
coasting Abdera a city of Thracia, the other being a flood of Epyrus,
separateth Acarnania from Aetolia. So in particular, we find England yields
the greatest store of good sheep, wool, tin, and lead: Muscouia the best
Bees, yielding honey and wax in plenty, and the best furs. Wherefore a
learned Physician is to observe, what store of vegetables, either of woods,
trees for fruit, or plants, the country yields: for every country has his
commodities and singularity of them, fitted by the providence of the eternal
God. As we read of in Asia and Virginia, singular Cedars and Pine trees: So we
have experience, that for fur and Deal trees, Denmark, Bohemia, Pomerania,
Russia, Norway, and the Newfound land, are notorious. For Vines, France: for
apples, pears, plums, and such ordinary fruit the realm of England. For
oranges, lymons, pomgranates, and such like, Spain and other hot countries:
for Oil and Olives, Candia, etc.

As for the second, concerning things hid in the veins and womb of the earth
(for what shall we need to enlarge this discourse with the huge woods to be
found in Germany, Bohemia, Muscouia, and Ireland, or with the notorious
vegetables of other nations) namely, the mines of metals, and fossiles, whereof
there are such sundry species, as it may seem impertinent of us to be further
touched, considering so soon as they are discovered, they be committed to
writing.

Some besides will not grant this to be true, but altogether false, that
Andreas Theuetus writes, that Tobacco keeps the Indians from hunger, and
thirst, for a certain time, although that our Epicureall Tabbacconists will
sufficiently refute the contrary: for they will say, and for a need swear to
it, that they can live a whole week together, neither eating nor drinking any
other sustenance. And if they will not be contented with this our witnessing and
affirmation, let them read Herodotus, which in his second book, makes mention
of a people in Africa, living only with herbs. Apian rehearses, that the
Parthians being banished, and driven out of their country by Marcus Anthonius,
lived with a certain herb that took away their memory: nevertheless they
had opinion that it did nourish them, though that in a short time after they
died. Master Stephen Borough did see some Lappians eat rock weeds as
hungerly, as a cow does grass when she is hungry. I saw them also (says he)
eat Cleanly.
fowls eggs raw, and the young birds also that were in the eggs. The Indians
will live seven or eight months in the war with meal made of certain hard
and dry roots, in the which some would judge that there were no nourishment
or sustenance at all. And they will tell strangers, who arrive in their coasts,
that they have heard say of their fathers, that before they had the knowledge
of the best roots, they lived but with herbs, and wild weeds, and roots like
brute beasts. There was they say, in their country a great Charaiba, that is to
say, a Prophet, the which came to one of their young maidens, and gave her
certain great roots, named Hetich, showing her, that she should cut them in
pieces, and then plant them in the earth: the which she did, and since they
have always continued from father to son: the which roots have so well
prospered, that now they have so great abundance that they eat little other
food, and it is as common with them, as bread is with us.

The old Poets and ancient people of the world did conceit, that the Gods
themselves did feed upon nothing but Nectar and Ambrosia; yea, and that some
of them had worse commons, and meaner meats, as they write of Romulus (who
being a God as they say) lived upon turnips. But, I think, that they rather
alluded unto the poverty and simplicity of feeding that was used in former
ages, wherewith Romulus was so well acquainted. The Poet Martialis seems
covertly to insinuate, that they eat the same meats in heaven, wherewith in
earth they were inured to feed upon, in these verses:

Haec tibi brumali gaudentia frigore rapa
Quae damus, in coelo Romulus esse solet.
Therefore ought not the Story of this Gentleman Tobacco, be thought so
strange, for men to live withal, as though the like had never been heard or
read of in histories, and times forepassed. The people of the East and West
India have diverse kinds of fruits proper only to those regions, as Nature
brings them forth, and yet they live long, and well disposed, being strong
and of robustious constitutions: yea, they will live (I mean the people of
America) a whole week together with one groat, which neither the Spanyard, nor
any nation in the world can do, as Petrus Martyr says. And for their long
lives, we may read in the learned Hackluit, discoursing of the voiages of the
English nation in far distant parts of the world, who introduces the example
of the King of Balloboam, being one hundred and threescore years of age, when
captain Candish arrived at the Island of Iaua Minor, and yet he was living
after that many years, at that time when the Hollanders travailed thither to
the town of Bantam, which is the furthest part in the world from this realm
of England, being measured geometrically. There be many who think it strange*
that some nations live only with fish: and yet he that is but meanly travailed
in Histories knows, that the poorest sort among the West Indies, live more
with seafish, and other like meats than with flesh. The same is true in this
our Isle of ^ritaine, especially among the Cornish men and Scots: yea, our
elders in times past lived only with fish, as many sects in religion both in
these days, and in former ages did. The laws of Triptolemus (as Xenophon
writes) did defend and forbid the Athenians the use of flesh. Therefore it is
no strange thing to live with fish only. First, in our Europe, and before that
the ground was tilled, men lived more hardly without flesh or fish, having not
the mean to use them, and yet notwithstanding they were stronger, and lived
the longer, being nothing so effeminate, as now in our age.

Americus Vespusius, one of the best Pilots that ever was, coasted almost from
Ireland unto the cape of Saint Augustine, by the commandment of the King of
Portingale, the year 1501. And since another Captain the year 1534. sailed
unto the region named of Giants. In this Region between the river of Plate, and
the straight of Magellane, the Inhabitants are very mighty, named in their
language Patagones, Giants, because of their hie stature, and form of bodies.
They which first discovered this country took one of them finely, being
twelve foot long, who was so uneasy to hold, that 25. men had enough to do
about him: and for to keep him, it behooued them to bind his feet and hands in
their ship, notwithstanding they could not keep him long alive, but for
sorrow and thought (as they say) he died for hunger. Thus you see I have
plainly showed that people dwelling in some regions, though faring hardly, and
poorly nourished, yet notwithstanding are men both of good complexions, of
personable and heroical, nay Giant-like statures, and long lived. And this may
seem to be a little beside, though not altogether out of the way.

Trinidada Tobacco has a thick, tough and fibrous Description of Tobacco, or
Sana sancta Indorum.
root, from which immediately rise up long broad leaves, and smooth, of a
greenish color, among which rises up a stalk, dividing it self at the
ground into diverse branches, whereon are set confusedly the like leaves, but
lesser: at the top of the stalks, stand up long necked hollow flowers of a
pale purple, tending to a blushe color; after which succeed the coddes or seed
vessels, including many small seeds, like unto the seed of marierome. The
whole plant perishes at the first approach of winter: in hot countries it is
sown all times of the year, but when it first sprouteth up, it must be
defended and preserved from cold, and planted near unto a wall for the
beautifying thereof; for, in such hot Regions as Spain, Naples, and Afric,
it continues green a whole year together, as Buglossum semper virens,
Telephi^m minus semper virens, Rosemarie and the Bay Tree with us in England
do.

It was first brought into Europe out of the provinces The place.
of America, which of some (though I know no reason for it) is called the West
Indies, in which is the province or country of Peru: but being now planted in
the gardens of Europe, it prospers very well, and comes from seed in one
year to bear both flowers and seed. The which I take to be the better for the
co^stitution of our bodies, then that which is brought from India, and that
growing in the Indies, better for the people of the same country;
notwithstanding it is not so thought nor received of our tabackians: for
according to the English proverb, Far fetched, and dear bought, is good for
Ladies.

Tobacco must be sown in the most fruitful grounds The time.
that may be found, and carelessly cast abroad in the sowing, without raking it
into the ground, or any such pain or industry taken as is requisite in the
sowing of other seeds, as I my self have found by proof, who have
experimented every way to cause it quickly to grow: for I have committed some
to the earth in the end of March, some in April, and some in the beginning of
May, because I durst not hazard all my seed at one time, least some unkindly
blast should happen in the sowing, which might be a great enemy thereunto.

It is hot and dry, and that in the second degree, as Monardus The temperature.
thinks, and it is withal of power to discuss or resolve, and to cleanse
away filthy humors, having also a a certain small adstriction, and a
stupefying, or benumming quality, and purges by the stool. And Monardus
thinks that it has a certain power to resist poison. And to prove it to be
of hot quality and temperature, the biting quality of the leaves does show,
which is easily pereiued by taste. Also the green leaves laid upon ulcers,
draw out filth and corrupt matter, which a cold simple would never do. The
leaves likewise being chawed, draw forth fleagm and water, as does also the
fume taken when the leaves are dried: which things declare that this is not a
little hot. For what things soever being chewed, or held in the mouth, bring
forth fleagm and water, the same be al accounted hot, as the root of pellitory
of Spain, Saxifrage, master-wort, betony, and hyssop, with other things of like
power. Moreover, the benumming quality hereof is not hard to be perceived: for
upon the taking of the fume at the mouth, there follows an infirmity like
unto drunkenness, and many times sleep, as after the taking of Opium, which also
shows in the taste a biting quality and therefore is not without heat; which
when it is chewed and inwardly taken, it does forth with show, causing a
certain heat in the chest, and yet without troubling of wits, as Petrus
Bellonius in his third book of singularities does declare: where also he
shows, that the Turks do oftentimes use Opium, and take one dram and a
half thereof at one time, without any other hurt following, saving that they
are thereupon taken, as it were, with a certain light drunkenness,
vertiginie, or giddiness in their brains. And Hollerius in his practice
tells us, that he knew a Spaniard take half an ounce of Opium, and yet
neither death, nor deaths hat me followed. So also this Tobacco being in taste
biting, and in temperature hot, has notwithstanding a benumming quality.

Hereupon it seems to follow, that not only this henbane of Peru, but also
the juice of poppie, otherwise called Opium, consists of diverse parts, some
biting and hot, and others extreme cold, that is to say, stupefying and
benumming: if so be that this benumming quality proceed of extreme cold
(as Galen, and all the old Physicians hold opinion:) but if the benumming
quality, or faculty, does not depend of an extreme cold temper, and that in
the fourth degree, but proceeds of the essence of the substance; then may
Tobacco be both cold, and also benumming; of temperature, hot and benumming,
not by reason of his temperature, but through the property of his substance,
otherwise then a purging medicine, which has his force, not from the
temperature, but from the essence of the whole substance.

Before I proceed any further to show against what sicknesses this herb
Tobacco most prevails, I will first briefly declare, what sickness is, and
how many sorts or kinds thereof there be, that I may be the better understood in
the discourse following. Sickness (then) is an evil affect contrary to
Nature, hindering of it self some action of the body. Of sickness there be
three general kinds, whereof the first consists in the parts similar. The
second in the parts isntrumental. And the third in both parts together.

The first kind is called of the Latins, Intemperies, that is to say, evil
temperature: which is either simple or compound. It is simple, when one
quality only does abound or exceed too much, as to be too hot, or too cold. It
is co^pound, when many qualities do exceed, as when the body is too hot and too
dry, or too cold and too moist. The second kind is called Mala constitutio,
that is to say, an evil state or composition: which is to be considered,
either by the shape, number, quantity, or site of the member, or part evil
affected or diseased. The third kind is called, vnitatis solutio, that is to
say, the loosing or division of the unity: which as it may chance diversely, so
it has diverse names accordingly. For if such solutio^ or division be in a
bone, then it is called a fracture. If in any fleshie part, then it is called a
wound or ulcer; in the veins a rupture; in the nerves or sinews, a conuulsion
or crampe; and in the skin, an excoriation. Again of diseases, some be
called Long, and some Sharp and Short, termed of the Latins Morbiacuti,
which be perilous, and do quickly kill the body. The Long do carry a greater
time with it. And yet moreover there is sickness by it self, and sickness by
consent. Sickness by it self, is that, which being in some member, hinders
the action thereof by it self. Sickness by consent, is derived out of one
member into another through the neighborhood and community that is betwixt
them: as the pain of the head, which comes from the stomach, because they
commnnicate and impart their damages from one to another by certain sinews,
passing and being common to either of them.

Thus the learned Physicians which write of man's body do divide sickness.
Now if any man will curiously diue and search into the nature of these, Tobacco
being given in his due time yields no small relief and comfort; for
according to the old saying:

Temporibus medicina valet: data tempore prosunt:
Et data non apto tempore vina nocent.
Physic at times does help: give wine in season,
It also helps: too much brings out of reason.
And Seneca says: In morb^s n^hil est magis per^culosum quam ^mmatura
medicina: in disea^es there is nothing worse or more dangerous then untimely
giving of medidicines, and out of due season. And again, this saying of Liu^e
agrees thereto. Et scio medicos, plus interdum quiet, quam mouendo atque
agendo proficere. For according to the times and seasons of the year, the
qualities of medicines are to be considered. For some are more familiar to some
bodies at some seasons of the year, then at othersome again and fitter
applied to amend and correct the distemper of parts, and to expel evil
iuyces. For who knows not that the spring is accounted the holesomest: which
Galen calls temperate, but Paulus Aegineta (his Ape) Aetius and the
Peripatetikes affirm to incline rather to hot and moist (for there is nothing
in Nature absolutely temperate) and this season is most agreeable to the best
habit.

It is for the most part good for sickly constitutions, or at leastwise, it
hurts not: for as Hippocrates in his third book, Aphorism the twentieth,
says, it causes madness and black Iaundise, leprosy, coughes, ringwormes,
morphues, or staynings of the skin, and many vlcerous pustules, and breakings
out with pains of the joints: not so much through the fault of the air, but
through the strength of Nature, being then fortified and made more lively by
the temperate heat of the spring to expel superfluities, and to separate
naughty humors, and to thrust the^ forth to the more ignoble parts. The same
heat helps likewise Nature, being readily disposed and willing to make a
secret and insensible transpiration through the body, by which it ought to be
expurged and avoided. So that the nature of this season ought to be regarded,
as well in the often taking of this medicine Tobacco, as in others also: so
that I judge it not the safest to use Tobacco at this time, unless by the advice of the learned: for to take it without difference and immeasurably as
some abusers do, must needs do hurt, and I am sure a great deal in some of
these fore-recited griefs.

Summer is hot and dry, subject to bilious or choleric diseases. The
beginning of the summer admits the diseases of the spring: but the midst
breeds usually, continual and burning fevers, bleareyednesse, tertian agues,
vomiting of yellow choler, choleric fluxes of the belly, pains of the ears,
and vlcerations of the mouth: putrefactions of the lower parts; especially when
the summer besides his heat, is inclined to overmuch moisture, and that no
winds blow, and the weather be dark, foul, close and rainie, or that
pincerna pluviaru^, I mean the south wind, which brings much rain, does
much blow. And read and angry wheales by means of much and often sweating,
being either choleric, sharp, or biting, do abound. For they sting and gnaw
the skin, making it ytchie, angring, and exasperating it after the fashion of
some sore. So that in this season, and for these remembered griefs, no man, I
trust, will grant Tobacco to be very wholesome. But if any spitting
Tabacconist be so much bewitched, as that he still must long after it, and
cannot refrain, he shall hear the Epigram of the noble Poet Hercules Strozza,
which he wrote against a great Gourmandizer or belly God. Let the Tabacconist
be his own interpretor, or make what moral he please, and thus it is.

Saepebibis, quo saepevomas, and saepevoracem
Distendas miseri corporis ingluviem.
Quin si forte tenax stomacho cibus haeserit, hunc vel
Dextra, vel in fauces indita penna ciet:
Tanquam sis genitus perdenda ad vina, nec vlli
Te natura alij finxerit officio.
O dignum laqu^o facinus; quodcunque voratur,
Turpiter ingeritur, turpius egeritur.
Thou quaffest often, to vomit much: by which thy riotous guise,
Thy bursten belly strouteth out, in strange and monstrous wise.
And if by chance thy meat within thy stomach sticks still,
Thou straight do seek to force it up, with finger or with quill:
As though (belike) Nature thee made only to drink down wine,
Beast as thou art, and to no other thing did thee assign.
Hang such a slave: what ere goes in it is filthy out of doubt,
And cramd into his greedy gorge, must needs go filthy out.
Autumn is dry and somewhat cold, very unequal, that is sometimes hot and
sometimes cold. It is evil for those (as the spring is) that have any
consumptions or putrefaction of the lungs, (for cum folia decidunt and
germinant, moriuntur tabidi:) It causes for the most part very deadly griefs
and diseases, yea and many of those that were rife in summer, likewise quartane
agues, and wandering swellings, and hardnesses of the spleen, dropsies,
stranguries, fluxes of the belly, pains of the hip or hanch, squinsies,
shortness of breathing, Iliaca passions, epilepsies, frenzies, and
melancholicall passions. So that in this season which we call the fall of the
leaf, we must not too often use Tobacco, unless with great wariness and advise
of the learned: and for this season, a man may say of Tobacco in some sense, as
Hesiodus speaks of his fathers dwelling place or the village called Ascra,
that it was (...). Hyeme mala, aestate molesta, nunquam bona. Evil in winter,
bad in summer, but never good.

The winter quarter is cold and moist and flegmaticke, very subject to
destillations, plurisies* inflammations of the lungs, lethargies, stuffings in
the head, murres and pose, coughes, pains of the breast, sides and loins,
vertiginies* swimming or giddiness of the brain, and apoplexies. So that in
most of these, it must of necessity be concluded, that Tobacco is a noble
medicine, and fit to be used. For you see that in complexions and men's natures,
some are well and indifferently affected, and others again either well or ill
in winter. And so much for this.

Now as good regard and consideration is to be observed, and kept in Tobacco
taking, concerning the seasons of the year, so likewise the same precise order
is to be observed for complexions. All they therefore that either of the
nature of their own bodily state, are of a dry complexion, or by any defect in
their parents at their birth and procreation; or finally, by any accidental
mishap or custom of living, as by want of food, thought, watchings,
heaviness of mind, or immoderate labor have commonly bodies slender and
thin: and their skin (where dryness is great) scuruy, rugged, unseemly
and lanke, swart and yelow, that are faced like Death, and lean as a rake: and
to conclude, that are in all respects resembling the physiognomie and shape of
Envy, described by Ouidius, must in any wise banish Tobacco far from them,
as a thing most pernicious.

Pallor in ore sedet, macies in corpore toto, Ovid lib. 2* Metam.

Nusquam recta acies: liuent rubigine dentes:
Risus abest, nisi quem visi mouere dolores:
Nec fruitur somno vigilantibus excita curis,
Sed videt ingratos, intabescitque videndo
Successus hominum, carpitque ac carpitur vna.
In English thus.

A face like ashes pale and wanne, A body scraggie lean,
A leering look, and teeth all furred with dross and filth unclean:
Her stomach greenish is with gall, her tongue with venom fraught:
And never laughes, but when mishap or harm has others caught.
No wink of sleep comes in her eyes: and rest she none can take;
For fretting carke and cankred care her watchful still does make.
Full sore against her will it is that any man should thrive,
Or prosper in his business: for that does her deprive
Of all her rest and quietness: there^t the hellish Else
Does stamp and stare, does fret and fume and pines away her self,
And to her self a torment is: for, seeking to annoy
The wealth and state of other folks, her self she does destroy.
So then as the case stands, seeing that Tobacco is so hurtful to dry
complexions, it must of necessity be very good and wholesome for those men that
are of moist constitutions: for he that is of this temperature, has a body
soft, not rugged and rough, white skinned; his veins and joints not standing
out, nor greatly appearing; his hair plain and flat, and for the most part
thick withal. Their taste and smelling, and other objects of their senses be
blunt and gross. And if withal they be cold, they are for the most part, in
mind and wit doltish and dull, slothful and lumpish: finally, neither by
nature, neither by use, forecastfull, sharp witted, nor crafty: by reason
their natural heat is languishing and feeble, and drowned with moist and cold
humors: and therefore also their memory is very faileable, obliuious, and
nothing at all (in a manner) retentiue. Their speech, as likewise their pulses,
and manner of gate, slow and dull. And because commonly they be assailed with
many and sundry diseases, for that they be given to sit still, loving their
ease and idleness, whereby many crude and raw humors are heaped up in their
bodies, i^must needs be granted that Tobacco being hotand dry in quality,
must of necessity do them much good: and even no less than labor and
exercise does in wasting waterish and cold superfluities. For sluggishnesse and
sloth (...) witnesses Cornelius Celsus) dulleth the body, but labor and
exercise makes it firm and lusty: the one brings old age before the time,
and the other making youth to last long. And therefore strong motions and
exercises, and likewise taking Tobacco are more requisite for these persons:
for otherwise cold and moist humors would too much increase, and heat quail
and be enfeebled.

But I purpose now briefly by the way, to show the nature and conditions of a
hot and dry complexion, and of choleric persons, and finally by what marks
and tokens they are to be perceived, discerned, found out, and known, to see
whether Tobacco be fitting these kind of people or no. And first to speak of
the outward signs. A body of this constitution is hot, slender, lean,
musculous, of decent bigness, and mean stature: of color they be brownish,
aburne, or somewhat ruddie, specially when their angry mood is up, or their
bodies set in a heat with exercise: and some be pale and yellowish. Their
skin rough: their heart strings and veins big and apparent, and not lying
hidden under the flesh: their tongue rolling at pleasure, ready and flowing in
utterance: their hair black, and in some curled and naturally frizled,
whereas the heat and dryness is very great and vehement: their noses (for the
mostpart) are crooked like a Hawks bill, they have tongue at will, and are as
Iuuenalis the Poet fitly says in his 3. Satyr.

Ingenium velox, a^dacia perdita, serm^
Promptus and Isae^ torrentior, obiter illos
Esse putes quemuis hominem; tum dicier apt
Grammaticus rhetor, geometres, pictor, aliptes,
Augur, schenobates, medicus magis omnia nouit.
In English thus:

Of dapper wit, and desperate bold, fine phras'd with gallant grace:
More eloquent than Isaeus, for every time and case.
Each person can they aptly play, At each art can they aim,
At Grammar, Rhetricke, Geometri^, Painting, and for the game,
At Sooth-saying, and cunningly* upon a rope to dance;
At Physic, Magic, ripe are they and free of every Haunce.
And therefore sithence those persons are of hot complexion, and that in their
bodies yellow choler is praedominant, which is compared very aptly to fire, it
must needs fall out, that tobacco being a hot plant, is very hurtful to them,
and in no wise to be used; for this is not the way to subdue and alter, but
rather make one more choleric and hot. For if a man should still cherish and
nourish it with his like in temperature, he should do nothing else but
Flammam ^leo extinguere, as the proverb is, quench the flame with oil, and
add fire to flax by exasperating the distemperance, and increase the tyranny
of this hot humor, by making it the more vehement. So that in dry and hot
bodies we must have no refuge or succor to tobacco, considering tha^ in
constitutions that be quite contrary, we find that it does much good. For we
see that if men have their stomachs surcharged with abundance of loathsome,
clammie, and tough fleagme, Tobacco does scour and cleanse it away more than
any other, and (if tabacconists say no more than may be warranted for truth)
than all other helps, and means whatsoever. Tobacco consequently does much
good unto all such, whose heads are filled with moistish vapors: for those
fumes or reekes, striking upwards as in a stillatorie, grow into a thick, and
sniuelly fleagme, whereby through coldness of the brain, the parties become
subject and open to sundry diseases, as the poze, murre, hoarsnesse, cough, and
many others; of which sort is the rheum or destillation of humors from the
head, where with in Romney marsh, and diverse places of Essex, Kent, and the
Isle of Ely, both rich and poor, high and low in winter season are much
troubled, and find by experience to be true, and yet many of them be very
healthy, and as sound as a bell. Horat. li. 1. Epist. 1.


Praecipue sanus, nisi quum pituita molesta est. In English thus:

In perfect health and thoroughly sound,
But when that fleagme does much abound.
In so much that I am sometimes driven into an admiration, to consider how such
abundance of filthy humors should rest in the head, which Nature one while at
the mouth, another while at the nose and throat, expels and purges.

Because the cold complexion is clean opposite and contrary to the hot
constitution: and for that this is the worst of all others, and furthest from
that state which is best: I will address my next speech to speak somewhat of
it; to the end, I would have men resolved whether Tobacco be wholesome for them
or no. And because cold is clean contrary to heat, it must of necessity be
concluded, that Tobacco is very wholesome for cold complexions serving as a
help in the office of concoction and digestion, considering that in this state
of body there lacks heat sufficient, and the other powers and faculties
natural, are not able for the weakness of the instruments and organes, to
attract and digest that nourishment that is moist, nor to make it like and
consubstantiall with the body and members.

I have known many of this complexion, that through gross and clammie glewish
phlegm, have gotten the Lethargy, or drowsy evil, the Apoplexy, the crampe,
palsy, and wrie mouths. There is none of these persons, but he abounds,
and is repleat with much fleagme, and phlegmatic excrements, which makes them
lumpish and sleepie, forgetful, slow of body and mind, and pale colored,
except sometimes at the coming of their especial friends they be heated with
wine or good Tobacco, and thereby have dumps driven out of their minds: for by
this means their color is made fresher, and all drowsinesse banished and
chased out of their minds.

As the time of the year, and different complexions; so likewise the custom
and frequent use of Tobacco is to be regarded. Some have reported, that it
little avails, and that it profits a hot complexion nothing at all: but
experience (the mistress of wisdom) has not showed it to be injurious to
either. For if a man have been often inured to the taking of it, it can do no
such great harm, as it does in a man that takes it seldom; for, Consueta
mala minus sunt infensa: accustomed evils are the less hurtful or offensive:
and Custom is another Nature; and we ought, as Hyppocrates says, to have no
less regard unto it, than to our own proper and engraffed temperament.
Gaudent natura consuetis semper. And again, Consuetudo plurimum potest,
repentinaque ab ea digressio non parum obl^dit corpora. Com. 2. in prognost.
Cap. 11. Consuetum quod est, bonum est, vel saltem minus nocet ijs, quae natura
quidem innoxia sunt, sed nunquam in consuetudine^ peruenerunt. For, as the same
Galen in another place says of meats, we may likewise say of medicines:
Ciborum vim and naturam ab experientia quisque sua magis quam a ratione
dijudicet, Com. 4. de v. r. in c. 89. And again, Ventriculus amplexatur ea and
long facilius concoquit, quaecunque cum vol^ptate assumit, auersatur autem ea
quae displicent: vnde nauseae, flatus and fluctuationes subsequuntur. Com. in
Aph. 38. lib. 2. For we find by experience, that if a man in time of health
have acustomed himself to the continual drinking of cold water, and has felt
no offense nether in his liver, bladder, stomach, nor any other part, it is
manifest that he finds ease and relief by that which another not acquainted
withal possibly cannot: yea, Physicians which proceed by reason and
experience do confess, that there is a great force and virtue in Custom,
lively showing the nature of every particular body, which, as I said even now,
Hippocrates himself expressly auerreth, writing that a moist diet is best
fitting for those persons that have any Fever; adding yet further, Especially
(says he) to children, and such as have been long used and acquainted
themselves by custom to such a diet: and consequently we must yield somewhat to
custom; for he says, that bad meats and drinks being accustomably taken, are
far safer than others, if a man should suddenly alter old custom, and take
others far holesomer. F^ if one di^* which ha^h not v^ed himself to it, he
is by and by made weaker, heavy, dull, lumpish, lazy, and sickish: and if
besides this he take his supper, he shall soon feel windiness, sour
belchings, and looseness of the belly; for the stomach being repleat and
ouercharged with such an unusual burden, which before was wont to be dry
and empty, now swells, distendeth, and with pain stretches it self out.
So yet again there be some laboring men, which having stomachs like Estriches
will digest iron, and fall to their victuals thrice in a day without any bones
at all: for, Ieiunus stomachus raro v^lgaria temnit. Hungry dogs will eat
thirty puddings, ^s the Irish man said. There be others found, which will make
a good large dinner, but take no suppers at all, (and contrariwise) so that if
contrarieto custom they do^suppe, they shall find themselves to be troubled
with heaviness in the belly, so that they cannot sleep without much tumbling
and tossing. So then my conclusion is, that if one have but accustomed himself
to take Tobacco, he must not suddenly leave it, but by degrees. So that it is
no marvel, if any not acquainted with taking the fume of this herb, if it
cause a vertiginie or giddiness in the brain, epilepticall accessions,
inclinations to fainting and sounding, headache, dimnesse of sight, and other
different effects, as I have often seen. We may say the like of wine, ale,
beer, and the like, to which diverse men are not inured but by long custom.

How great the force and power of this cruel tyrant Custom is, that creeps
in by little and little, insinuating and co^ueighing himself slily into our
natures, so that at length he will be so malepart, as to vendicate the whole
rule and government of our bodies, prescribing and limiting new laws, even
such as it self pleases, and abrogating old ancient orders, constitutions,
and fashions, Theophrastus in his 9. book de Histor. Plantar. Cap. 18. plainly
shows by the example of one Thrasias, who durst venture to eat whole handfuls
of Helleborus albus: and of Eudemus Chius, who sitting one day in the open
mercate, took two and twenty potions of the same Helleborus, and after that
went to supper, and dispatched his other ordinary affairs and business, without
any vomiting or perturbation of stomach or body. He had by degrees
accustomed his body to it, by first taking a little at once, and afterward he
increased the quantity by little and little, until at length he durst take so
much thereof as was incredible, and never felt hurt.

Sithence therefore that neither reason nor Philosophy can bridle or overrule
the power and force of custom, it is no marvel though man's body be
ouer-mastred therewith: which in my conceit ought to be a good lesson to many
Physicians, to regard and mark well the proper constitution and state of
every man's body, and to what he has bin most inclined or accustomed, being
withal very diligent and careful to administer nothing rashly, and at
adventure (as many blind medicine-giuers and receitmen do) neither yet any
desperate or unknown thing unto any; for such, are no better than murderers
before God, if their Patients prove not well under them. Neither let
covetousness overrule them, as those Physicians and Surgeons that dally with
men's bodies to get much money: but let every one account it his duty to do
good to all. And in so doing, they shall find God their Phisician, not only
of their bodies, but of their souls: whereas otherwise the saying of our
nation may be applied fitly unto them, Physicians cure your selves.

The leaves of Tobacco at this day be only in use (although for want of them,
some do make use of the seeds) and because they would have them in a
readiness, they thrust them through with a needle and thread, and so have them
to dry in the shadow: and afterward at their pleasure, use them either whole,
or being brought into powder. Because of his heat and dryness, it must needs
make hot, resolve, mundifie, and a little adstringe, as one may easily judge by
his virtues that hereafter follow.

The dry leaves of Tobacco are good to be used, taken in a pipe set on fire,
and sucked into the stomach, and thrust forth again at the nostrels against
the pains of the head, rheumes, aches in any part of the body, whencesoeuer
the original does proceed, whether from France, Italy, Spain, Naples, India
(being all pockie hot countries) or from our familiar and best known diseases.
Those leaves do palliate and ease for a time, but never perform any cure
absolutely: for although they empty the bodies of humors, yet the cause of
the grief cannot be so taken away. But some have learned this principle, that
repletion requires euacuation, that is, fullness craves emptiness, and by
euacuation assure themselves of health: but this does not take away so much
with it this day, but the next brings with it more; as for example, a Well
does never yield such store of water* as when it is most drawn and emptied. My
self speak by proof, who have cured of that infectious disease a great many,
diverse of which had covered or kept under the sickness by the help of Tobacco
as they thought; yet in the end* have been constrained, to have unto such a
hard knot a crabbed wedge, or else had utterly perished.

Fleagme in man's body, as it is diverse; so diversely it must be altered: for
being by nature cold and moist, it easily is converted into thickness, or hard
and tough sliminess, and in regard of his tenacious quality, it is very
difficult to be removed: for it does not very easily give place, either to the
virtue expulsive, or yield to an attractiue medicine. And to cause it to be
pliable and yielding, there be five things required; namely, heat, siccitie,
attenuation, abstersion, and cutting or dividing, which we call incision: all
which properties Tobacco is furnished withal, and adjudged fit to be used in
all tough and viscous humors wherewith the body is ouer-charged.

Mercurius Fritannicus in his third book De terra Australi an^hac semper
incognita, in the description of a certain country, termed Morouia (where
none but fools dwell) I suppose that it lies nere Portugal, for that
country is reported to abound with fools, as England is said to savor of
vanity; he wondered (I say) at one thing and mused above the rest, and that
not without just cause, that many of the Inhabitants there do li^e neither upon
bread nor meat, as other nations for the most part do, but only on the smoke
of a certain unwholesome herb, which they taking at their mouths, forthwith
again thrust forth at their nostrels, seeming as it were, so many smoakie
chimneys. Many men stand in doubt, neither can it be fully resolved whether the
cockscombly Morouians learned this fashion from the poor naked Indians, or the
Indians from them. There be some hold opinion, that certain Indians dwelling
near unto Torrida Zona, were the first inuentors and finders out of this
smokie medicine, that inwardly also they might turn black: for you must
imagine, that their Morian-black hue pleased them wondrous well, and they
judged it no reason that the inward parts should any whit differ or vary from
the outward.

How soever it be, this is certain, that when their noses are filled, their
purses many times are emptied, and the patrimonies of many noble young
Gentlemen, have been quite exhausted, and have vanished clean away with this
smoaky vapor, and has most shamefully and beastly flyen out at the masters
nose. But yet this may seem very strange, yea as strange as the rich man's
kitchen in Cheap Side, which had no fire in it for sixteen years together,
that whilst these lusty yonkers and tabacconists eleuate their noses on high,
snuffing up the fume very gallantly, that their kitchens in the mean space
have been key-colde. They that choppe away their patrimonies for the vanishing
smoke of Tobacco, are scarce so wise as Glaucus, who was so mad headed, as
that he would needs change and give away his armor of gold, which was prised
to be worth one hundred Oxen, with the iron armor of Diomedes, that was scarce
worth nine Oxen. The famous Poet Homer makes mention of this bartering in the
sixth of his Iliades, in these words; (...). Id est, Aurea areis, centenaria
nouenarijs: or as Alciatus has translated it, lib. 2. Pr^termiss.

Proquenouem ^ntum* proferro tradidit aurum. He gave away one hundred for nine,
and gold for iron. Some use to drink Tobacco (as it is termed) for wantonness,
or rather Custom, and cannot forbear it, no, not in the midst of their dinner
or supper: which kind of taking is unwholesome, and very dangerous, if not
slouenly; although to take it seldom, and that physically may do some good, and
is to be tolerated. Othersome there be that spend whole days, months, times
and years (for the most part) in Tabacco-taking, not sparing to take it even
in their bed, seeking by all means possible to hinder and pervert the course
of Nature, and natural order: which thing is both a great misspending of
precious time, and a great empairer of bodily health, accelerating by these
disorders their own deaths, before either Nature urge, Malady enforce, or Age
require it.

Wherefore we ought ever to remember that golden A phorisme of reverend
Hippocrates; Non satietas, non fames, non aliud quidquam bonum est, quod modum
excedit. And again, (...). Hoc est: adeoque in vniuersum* nimium, Naturae
bellum indixit. A man may have too much of his mothers blessing. It was death
for any magistrate, or any one placed in high authority and office amongst the
people of Locris, to drink any wine; unless for healths sake, the Physician
had prescribed to the contrary: so I could wish the like law to our
huffsnuffe Tabacconists, that misspend the flower of their youth in this
smoking vanity. Thus you see that Tobacco is a fantastical attracter, and
glutton-feeder of the appetite, rather taken of many for wantonness, when they
have nothing else to do than of any absolute or necessary use, which is much
to be discommended: but I commend the syrup above this fume or smoakie
medicine.

Surely, if we did observe time, and the golden mean (so much spoken of)
Tobacco it self is no more to be disliked or rejected, tha^ Boleti esculenti,
because the emperor Claudius Casar died with eating of them; whereof both
Pliny in his two and twenty book, chap. 22. Cornelius Tacitus in his twelfth
book, Suetonius Tranquillus in Claudio. cap 44. and Dio in his 58. book make
large mention. The Story is this: There was in times past, as there is now
adays, a kind of Fungus esculentus, a kind of Mushrom, which was thought to
be a dish fit for Princes in regard of their delicate taste and holesomnesse,
yet at length it grew infamous, because Agrippina the Empress poisoned
Claudius Caesar her husband with them, either he surfeiting through his
greedy eating, as King John did with eating of Lampries, as some of our
histories report, (for both these Princes took a singular delight in either of
these meats) but somesay, the King died with pears; some, with plums; but most
hold that he was poisoned by the hands of a pole-shorne Monk of Swinsted Abbey
in Lincolneshire: the like is supposed, that the wicked woman added a little
poison to these mushroms, because she would be rid of her husband the Emperor,
to the intent to settle the government, and to set the crown upon her own
sons head Nero, who indeed succeeded Claudius in the Roman Empire. Hence
proceeded those quips and taunts of Iuuenalis the famous Poet, who lived in
those days, against these kinds of mushroms, called of the, ancients, Boleti:
in his first Satyr.

Vilibus ancipites fungi ponentur amicis,
Boletus domino: sed qualem Claudius edit
Ante illum vxoris, post quem nil amplius edit.
And in the sixth Satyr:

-- minus ergo nocens erit Agrippinae
Boletus: siquidem vnius pr^cordia pressit
Ille senis* trem^lumque caput descendere iussit
In coelum. --
Hence also proceeded that bitter taunt of wicked Nero his successor, tearming
Boletus (...), hoc est Deorum ci^um, the meat of the Gods; because Claudius
Caesar died with eating of them, and the superstitious gentilisme imagined that
their Caesar's or Emperors after their deaths were translated into the number
of the Gods.

From hence likewise it was, that Martialis uttered this imprecation:

Boletum, qualem Claudius edit, edas. And this common versicle is not yet quite
forgotten:

Boleti lethi caussa fuere mei. But it is a thing not so much to be wondered
at, that poisons have been foisted amongst mushroms, and mixed also with other
meats; for we read in histories, that they have been given in Sacrifices. For
Victor the third Bishop of Rome was killed with poison that was conueighed into
the chalice, whereof he drank when Mass was celebrated, not without the
scoffs and mockery of his enemies, who said, It was a very divine draught
that sent Victor in such post haste without much ado to the joys everlasting.

In this point therefore, I would frame unto our Tabacconists this hortatorie
admonition, that they keep a moderation in receiving the fume thereof, and
that likewise they take it not, in case it be infected with some poisonous
quality, as it many times is, lest this Epitaph be inscribed on their graves:

Here lies he had lived longer, if
He had not choakt himself with a Tobacco whi^.
Tobacco of all men is concluded to be a very wholesome medicine, for rheumes,
pains of the head, etc. and yet in the use of Tobacco, and such hot medicines
there must be a great discretion that all be done in due season, and
rationally: for if so be, that one use hot medicines very much, and a long
time in passions of the brain, he shall do more hurt than good, inducing a
neshnesse, softness, or flagginesse of the muscles and fleshie parts; their
fibers being relaxed, the proper nutriment of the muscles being dissipated and
exhausted, and another excrementitious and waterish humor coming in place,
that is nothing apt to nourish, so that many times weakness of the sinews do
proceed from these causes: for the strength of the sinews consists in a
mediocritie of siccitie. Furthermore it brings an astonishment, benumming or
senselessness of the brain, causing as it were a resolution both of sense,
motion, and of all the actions of the brain, besides fluxes of blood at the
nose, the veins being loosened, faintings or swounings by a dissipation and
wasting of the spirits, and resolving of the membranes.

The Priests and enchanters of the hot countries, do take the fume thereof
till they be drunken, that after they have lien for dead three or four hours,
they may tell the people what wonders, visions, or illusions they have seen,
and so give them a prophetical direction, or foretelling of the success of
their business: but the Devil is a liar, and the father of that faculty, his
end is horror, his mean abuse, and his intent mischief.

The weight of four ounces of the juice of Tobacco being drunk, purges both
upwards and downwards, and procures after a long and sound sleep, as I have
learned of a friend by observation, affirming that a strong countryman of a
middle age, having a dropsy, took of it, and being wakened out of his sleep,
called for meat and drink, and after that became perfectly whole.

Here, since we have begun to speak of purging, I think it not besides the
way, and our business in hand, if I tell you that which most concerns
purgative medicines. First therefore it must be certainly known, whether
those bodies that are to be purged be first rightly prepared, or not. There
must therefore regard be had, if you will have them rightly purged, you must
first give them some gentle preparatiue. And for this purpose it is required,
that the body abound not with crude and indigested humors; that the liver,
spleen, lungs, and other noble inward parts have no inflammation, and the
like; as when the vein is exceeding hot burning and red, and the Patient have
a strong Fever: for in these and the like cases, purging medicines must not
rashly be given. So that there are three things necessarily to be observed in
every right purgation of the body: the freeness and liberty of the passages,
preparation of the matter offending, and the power and strength of nature.

Nicolaus Monardus says, that the leaves of Tobacco, being made hot, are a
present remedy for the pain of the head, for an inueterate headache, and for
the pain of the head called the megrim, that has been of long continuance,
if so be the pain proceed of any cold, windy or waterish humors: and they
must be often applied and laid to, until the grief be clean gone. Before
the application of this kind of remedy, some use to anoint the head with oil
made of the flowers of oranges: and not having that, I think, Oleum costinu^,
irinum, oleu^ Euphorbij, Oleum anethi, and Chamamelinum, or some chymicall oil
of thyme, or f^nnell ^eede, or calamint were not amiss. It ought to be taken
physically (not foolishly) in a pipe, for the same purpose once in a day at the
most, and that in the morning fasting, against pains of the h^ad, stomach, and
griefs in the breast and lungs: against cata^rhes and rheumes, and such as are
troubled with coldes, mur^es, the pose, and hoarsnesse.

The same hea^ be and fume, is proo^ed to be singular good against the
toothache: for it does not only cease the pains of the teeth, which proceed
of any cold cause, the tooth being first cleansed and scoured with some linen
cloth, dipped in the juice of this herb, and a pill made of the leaf being put
into the tooth, but also hinders and restrains corruption and rottenness of
the same from any further increase. And this stands with good reason: for if
the pain either of the head or teeth proceed of cold, and this herb being
of a hot and drying quality, must needs make against it, provoking, stirring,
and moving thereby the expulsive faculty, or melting the humor contained and
bred in the brain; or else drawing to it especially from the former ventricles
of the brain into that part, which by reason of the use, is called
Infundibulum (which is nothing but a deep cauitie in the forepart of the third
ventricle of the brain, which at length goes above the seat of Sphenoides:)
we may not unfitly term it, the brain tonnell, for from thence the humors
fall into the mouth, and by that means are purged, and voided away.

I my self know a man yet living in Northha^ptonshire, being very much and a
long time vexed with pain and coldness, especially in the hinder part of his
head, who having tried the skill and medicines of many Physicians, and nothing
at all prevailing, he was at length counseled to take Tobacco in fume; which
he yielding unto, after a while all the pain vanished away. And this stands
with good reason: for the Tobacco looseneth the fleagme, and those pituitous
humors that are bred in the head and breast, drying and coroborating the
brain very notably. And if this man had taken Tabaco, with vngula caballina,
iris, thus* or sulphur in fumigation, nothing could have been devised more
excellent.

For confirmation of this, John Heurnius in the first book of his method, ad
praxin, tells a story of himself, how plentifuly it draws slimie and
pituitous humors from the mouth and nostrels, by taking the fume in a narrow
pipe: for (says he) it searches every corner of the brain, and is carried
into the ears: and I dare boldly avouch, that this herb is specially and
peculiarly appropried to the brain, being by a most easy passage carried
thither, washing, purging, and clearing the brain from all corruption and
filthiness: for about a year since being much pained with the toothache, I
boiled this herb in water, adding to it some chamomile flowers, and holding a
spoonful of this warm decoction in my mouth, I did presently spit it forth, and
so doing certain times together, about two hours after, the pain somewhat
abated. The next day following, when (as my manner was) I went to a garden I had
in the suburbs, and there bending down my head to pull up some grass or
weeds, there dropped, and flowed down in great quantity from my nose a great
deal of moisture, as yellow as saffron, or a Kites foot, having the very sent
of Tobacco, and forthwith all the pain of my teeth ceased. In all my life, I
cannot call to remembrance, that either blood, or any other superfluous humor,
besides flegmaticke and waterish superfluities, ever came out at my nostrels;
but never in all my life did I see any thing more yealow, then this moist
humor was that issued from me at that time.

So this being granted, I can see no reason, but that one may safely use this
as a Suffitus, or a wholesome hot perfume, as well as we do myrrh, masticke,
pitch, Styrax, frankensence, turpentine, Castoreum, Ladanum, the gum of
Juniper, cloves, and the like being cast upon the coals, and used for the
griefs abouesaid. But peradventure some will object and say, that Tobacco is
of an ingrate and unpleasant sent, so that many thereby are brought to fainting
or swouning, even by the smell thereof. To whom I answer, that it is true: and
yet notwithstanding, I think a Calfe with one eye may easily see, that some of
these forerecited medicines have a far more noisome, I may say loathsome
smell, than this Gentleman Tobacco has.

The judgment concerning sweet sents in diverse men, is diverse; nothing almost
being common one with another: so that quot capita, tot sensus, look how many
sundry different visages and faces, so many discrepant judgments, concerning
the excellency of this or that odor. For with one, the sent of Cinnamon is
more fragrant than that of musk. With another, cloves seem to surpass them
both. To another, a Rose is held more odoriferous than any of them all. So that
concerning the diversity of sweet smells and savors, you shall ever have
diversity of judgments: so that when all the cards are cast up, this must be
the full decision, and final determination, that those things must be chosen,
which be most familiar to every man's nature, whether meats or medicines, and
those to be refused that be contrary.

Galen the Prince of Physicians, in his Method of curing, does affirm, that
there be certain medicaments, which by the propriety of their nature and
virtues, do more properly respect one part tha^ another: as for example,
Agrimony, Hepatica nobilis, absinthiu^, and all kinds of Endive or Succorie,
direct their ver^ues more specially to the liver, then to any other part or
particle of the body. Glans vnguentaria* germander, capers, Scolopendriu^, and
Ceterach called milt waste for his effects, tamariske, Cortex salicis, dancus,
scordiu^, calamint, asarabacca, and some others respect the spleen peculiarly.
Saxifrage, betonie, calcifraga Anglorum, otherwise called Perchepier, polygonu^
selinoides, the roots of Smallach, of Da^cus, fennel, berries of Juniper, and
the seeds of melones, the reins, and vreters. The fit and proper medicines for
the breast and lungs, are, the roots of fennel, of horehound, hastula regia,
Scabious, Reisins of the sun, figs, Hyssop, thyme, oak of Jerusalem,
licorice, barley, and fussilage, called of some blind Physicians farfara.
Mints, cynamon, wormwood and galangall, are excellent for the stomach. For
the Heart, saffron, bugloss, borage, balm, roses, basil, saunders, pearl,
the Bezoar stone, and gold it self: for as old Chaucer the English Poet says
of one of his Pilgrims a Physician, that travailed among the rest to Saint
Thomas of Canturburie, and that very truly;

For Gold in Physic is a cordial:
Wherefore he loved Gold in special.
Penirial, mugwort, sauin; calamint, peony, mir^h, saffro^, borax, are
medicines fit for some women's griefs. Celandine and eie-bright respect the
eyes. The fea onyo^, Chamepithis, psillium, and hermodactils, direct their
virtue chiefly to the joints. Staechas, laurus, rosemarie, the male pionie,
misseltoe of the oak, galangall, Castoreum, betonie, margerome, sage, and our
Tobacco, do especially respect the brain.

We must also know that there be some medicines which of their own proper
nature are offensive to some particular parts, either by some manifest quality
that is in them, or by some hidden property. For the often use of Thus, Mel
Anacardinum, and the herb called balm (wherewith Bees are so much delighted)
do offend the brain, perturbing the rational faculty. Vinegar is hurtful
to the lungs and vterus. Fat things offend and subvert the stomach, causing a
loathing or detestation of meats and drinks. Sweet meats and fruits cause
tumors and swellings in the liver and spleen. Colewort, parsley, and
hempe-seede hurt the eyes. Teuksburie mustard, and all sharp things will have
a man very soon by the nose: the Virginians, and other people of America,
cannot endure it, for if the eat any mustard with fish or flesh, they will make
many a sour face at it. Quick silver, as it is thought, is a great enemy to
the brain of man, but more properly to the ears. The often eating of leeks,
will corrupt the teeth, and lytharge hurts the tongue. The fume of Hearts or
Goats horn being burnt, causes a conuulsion to any that is troubled with the
falling sickness: and the same is reported for a truth, if any epilepticall
person be wrapped in a Goat or Deeres skin, and some say that the fume of
Sulphur works the same effect.

Neither is it to be pretermitted, that there be some medicines, which being
externally applied, do bring both speedy, and certain help and health,
which being taken into the body, do much hurt, and endanger the life. For
example sake, the use of verdigrease, aes vstum, squama aeris, Cadm^a,
Pompholyx, litharge, ceruse, and the like all these are used with good success
to outward ulcers and sores: which notwithstanding must not be taken inwardly,
for any ulcer within the body, but in stead of them, Hyposistis, the flowers
and ryndes of Pomgranates, balaustians, galls, Terra Lemnia, Sumach, the juice
of Roses, Acacia, and the like, which are of great virtue for the curation of
inward ulcers, never offending the stomach, liver, or any other of the inward
parts.

It would be too long to set down all things that might here in this place be
inserted: and although my eiesight be not so good as Linxius, who from the
promontorie of Lillibey in Sicilia, did discern and see the ships in the port
of Carthage; yet I am sure, by that which I have introduced, one may plainly
see, that a true Physician ought to have the faculty and natural knowledge of
every thing concerning diseases, or wounds in the body or mind of man. For
the remedying of all which, there are two things requirable; namely, the simple
knowledge of every living and inanimate thing, whether of minerals,
vegetables, sensible Animals or of man, and the experience how each of these in
several countries, and bodies have their certain operations. And seeing
without doubt, God has planted in the world means (either of Simples or of
Compounds) to remedy any sickness, or cure any wound, although the knowledge
or means do not always sort to ones desire, yet is not the true means to be
neglected. And though God have fitted every climate and country with good
means, to relieve the ordinary diseases, and grieuances of men: yet we see
for want of knowledge in Physicians, either how to use the Simples of their
own countries, or how to compound them aright, according to the dose of every
body natural, they are enforced to search into other countries for aid.

For, though we have, as other countries, many singular things to remedy the
decay or disquiets of Nature; yet seeing the Simples of other countries, for
some particular bodies and griefs, are more natural then many Compoundes of
our own, and the skill is less to apply them, why should not Necessity make
Physicians travel for knowledge, as the old wife for need. We see the
artificial Bezoar-stone to be less profitable for some bodies, then the
natural. The feigned Sanguinis Draconis, then the right which is brought from
Africa: and our own Tobacco in England or Europe, then that which naturally
grows in America; for the difference of climates and soyles alter much the
natures of every thing. And so of such like adulterate resemblances, which
necessity and men's gains have labored and arted. But lest I should seem to
wander too far in the wilderness of Nature, I will now return to Tobacco
again.

The suffumigation of Tobacco being taken, is a good medicine for the
starknesse or stiffnesse of the neck, called Tetanus, and for any pains or
aches in the body, proceeding of the cause that Tetanus does.

The juice or distilled water, is very good against Catarrhes, the dizzinesse
of the head, and rheumes that fall down to the eyes, for stuffing in the head
or nose by means of cold, against the pain called the meagrim, if either you
apply it under the temples, or take one or two green leaves, or a dry leaf
moistened in wine, and dried cunningly upon the embers, and laid thereto.

Sternutatories, especially those which are made of Tobacco, being drawn up
into the nostrels, cause sneesing, consuming and spending away gross and
slimie humors from the ventricles of the brain. These kind of remedies must
needs do good where the brain is repleat with many vapors, for those that
have a lethargy or vertiginy, in all long geiefes, pains and aches of the
head, in continual senselesses, orbenumming of the brain, and for a hicket
that proceeds of repletion.

Rec.
Piperis, Zinziberis, ana i. Pyrethri, Foliorum siccorum tabaci, ij. Trita
naribus inspirentur ante cibum.
Another Sternutamentorie.

Rec.
Foliorum siccorum tabaci, ijss. Zingiberis, Pyrethri, ana iss. Radicum
Hellebori albi, grana 6. Puluerisata commisceantur, and fiat sternutamentorium.
Ex fistula naribus parum infletur.
Those sternutatories which are very forcible, vehement and strong, as
E^phorbiu^, Helleborus albus, and the like to these, must not be blown up into
the head, but rather put into a box, the same being a little shaken, and so
holding it to the nose, to draw up a little at once. But Tobacco is not so
violent, and therefore may in my judgment be safely put in practice. Besides,
sternutaments are not so fitting, where the brain or head, the breast and
lungs, do abound with very crude or raw humors and superfluities; by reason
that they do move, trouble, and shake those parts too much, and too
vehemently, which ought rather to be moderately comforted, warmed, and suffered
to be let alone quietly, that those crude iuyces might the sooner come to
better digestion, and then afterward to be spent and carried away. For
otherwise the brain and chest with this preposterous proceeding will be the
more stufsed and ouer-charged. But when the humors there settled, are come to
some concoction, then sneesing medicines are taken with good success, and do
prevail very much.

It is therefore ever the safer course, rather to use Simples then co^pounded
medicines, because of their exceeding force and violence. To end in a word,
sneesing, as Cornelius Celsus (our Latin Hippocrates says) in diseases of the
lungs is very dangerous.

Thus then you plainly see, that all medicines, and especially Tobacco, being
rightly and rationally used, is a noble medicine; and contrariwise not in his
due time with other circumstances considered, it does no more than a Noblemans
shoe does in healing the gout in the foot, or a precious Ring a crampe in the
finger, nor a Diadem the pain in the head, or as Lucretius the Poet says;

Nec calidae citius decedunt corpore febres,
Textilibus si in picturis ostroque rubenti
^acteris, quam si plebeia in vest cubandum est.
Fevers no sooner from thy body fly,
If thou on arras or red scarlet lie
Tossing, then if thou rest
On couerlets home dressed.
Tobacco clears the eie-sight, and takes away the webbes and spots thereof,
being anointed with the juice bloud-warme.

The oil or juice dropped into the ears, and the fume likewise received into
the ears, is good against deafness: a cloth dipped in the same, and laid
upon the face, takes away the lentils, redness and spots thereof.

An Errhine or Nasale for stuffing in the nose, and for defect of smelling.

Rec.
Piperis. Pyrethri, Tabaci ana i. Olei naturalis balsami q. sufficit ad
incorporandu^. Cum melle q. s. fiat Nasale.
Another Errhine.

Rec.
succi Tabaci, i. Olei amygdalarum amararum i. Masticis subtiliter pulverisatae
i. misce. Trahatur naso dum ore reddatur.
This that follows is good for an old pain in the head, and sharpeneth the
eyesight.

Rec.
Succi tabaci vel sanae sanctae Indorum, Cicl^, betonicae, ana i. Bulliant cum
vini albi ij. Oxym. scillitic. ss. Fiat errhinum.
Another.

Rec.
Sinapi. gr. 5. Pull: fol. sicc. tabaci. Piperis albi, ana ss. Ladani, Cer^, ana
iss, misce. Fiat Nasale, pyramidis vel tent. forma.
When we are to use strong Errhines or Nasales, the mouth must be full of
water. If after the taking of these kinds of medicines, the nostrels do smart
or suffer much pain, then may it be taken away or diminished, either with
woman's milk, oil of violets, or vnguentum Rosatum. They that have sore eyes,
must not deal with them, nor yet they that either have, or are subject to
vlcerations in the nose, or such persons who suffer much headache caused by
the French pockes: for if they be too busy with them, their noses perhaps may
in the mean space be in danger of falling down flat. Neither must these
Errhines, or Nasales be compounded of any venomous matter: for so there may
grow ulcers, and filt hie sores in that part. Lastly, when you take them,
there must care be had that the nose be not filled too full; least that
respiration, and drawing in of the breath, be thereby let or hindered: nor
yet to be used (especially in deafness or dullness of hearing) but when the
body aforehand sufficiently is prepared and purged, as Alexander Trallianus
the learned Physician says.

The leaves of this herb being decocted in water, are good against the pains
of the breast, an old cough, asthma (the nature of which disease is to stop
the passage of the wind and make us breath uneasily) and the griefs which
arise of cold and waterish humors.

In like manner an ^clegma, linctus, or lohoch, made of the decoction of the
herb is excellent good against the same griefs. Sometimes the fume cures
those that be asthmatike, but then it is necessary that the body first be
cleansed, if occasion so require.

A sirupe made of the decoction of this herb with sufficient sugar, and so
taken in very small quantity, discharges the breast from rotten and
phlegmatic matter.

But here in these cases we must provide carefully aforehand, and well see to
it, and beware that we use not these Suffumigations and smoking perfumes of
Tobacco, where there is any spitting of blood; for the small veins thorough
the acrimonie of suffimentes are opened: neither yet are they to be used in
dry diseases of the breast: and when they are to be most used, the whole body
ought first to be purged.

Now for my own conceit, I have proved that Tobacco being taken with styrax,
calamita, and the powder of tussilago or coltes foot, helps these
fore-remembred griefs. And to this, besides mine own experience, you shall
have the testimony and attestation of Mathias De Lobel and of Peter Penor, two
learned men, in their Herball entitled, Stirpium aduersaria noua, expressly
affirming that there is not a more effectual or speedy remedy against the
consumption of the lungs, and such as be asthmaticall, and such griefs also as
proceed from plenty of tough and viscous humors. And And thus would I
prescribe it:

Rec.
Foliorum sanae sanctae Indorum. Styracis. Sandaracha. Terebinthinae.
Mastiches. ana parts aequ^les.
This medicine being rightly used, will deserve due commendation, in regard it
helps those which are short winded, or have any slimie and flegmaticke
humors grown to matter or suppuration. It also does much good to pleuriticall
persons, and likewise for the cough. For a very moist breast, the leaves of
Tobacco applied, are proved to be singular, without any other thing added to
them. For those medicinal means that do adstringe, or be of a very drying
quality, are not rashly to be laid upon the breast.

I knew my self a very learned Gentleman dwelling at Buckworth in
Huntingtonshire who had long languished of an Orthopnoea; so that by reason of
too many slimy and waterish humors which distilled down from the brain into
the chest, his lungs were so choked, that he could not breath, but by holding
his neck upright, insomuch that many times, especially in the night season, he
was in danger to be suffocated: by means of which, and his extreme cough,
together with an extenuation of the whole body, he was adjudged Tabidus of
most Physicians that visited him, yea and to be almost past all hope of
recovery, and one of the Physicians being first asked his opinion, concerning
the sick Patient, cast out these words:

Virtus lassa cadit, soluuntur frigore membra,
Vitaque tartare as fugit indignata per vmbras.
Faint falls his courage, and his limbs do fail for want of heat.
His life disdaining, packes to hell, where Pluto has his seat.
And because I being his familiar friend, and one that was best acquainted with
his whole course, and order of Physic and diet, which was both rationally
prescribed, and diligently taken and observed, yet nothing taking effect that
was administered, when al men thought he would have died, he was at length
counseled to take Tobacco in fume: which he daily did, and only by this way
by little and little, he recovered his former health and strength of body, His
friend before spoken being a Doctor of Physic, and he who had cast forth the
two former verses, seeing the sudden mutation, and wondering at the good
success, he thus again pleasantly and conceitedly answered.

Mors aderat, cymbamque Charon remosque parabat:
Asseruit medicina senem iam aetate trementem,
Restituitque no^as effoeto in corpore vires.
In English thus:

Now death appears, and Charon ready stands
To give him passage with his boat and oars:
But Physic frees the old man from his hands,
And him afresh to life and strength restoares.
They that have seen the proof hereof have credibly reported that when the
Moors and Indians have fainted either for want of food or rest, this has been
a present remedy unto them, to supply the one, and help the other.

The use of masticatories or apophlegmatisms, are much commended, and fitly
practiced against the affects and passions of the head, teeth, and windpipe:
and specially they correct inueterate hurts and maladies, and such as be of
long continuance, such as be dullness or dimnesse of the eyesight, deafness,
pustules of the face and head, and when the nostrels have any vlceration in
them, to auert and take away their flux of humors. And to effect this, these
that follow are much commended, videlicet, Hyssope, the roots of Iris, acorus,
gentian, ginger, and galingall, but chiefly Tobacco: I will set down some sorm
of these masticatories, that you may take your choice where you please.

Rec.
Zingiberis, Caryophillorum a^a j. Sanae sanctae Indorum, Piperis ana ss.
Staphisagriae ij. Mastiches, j. Fi^nt pastilli addita cera, vel ij. cortic.
cappar. adddu^tur.
Another Apophlegmatisme.

Rec.
S^ae sanctae Indorum, Mastiches, ana j. Ex cera in pastill^s avellanae
magnitudinis formentur.
An Apophlegmatisme is also made of moist things, when as the decoction of
sharp things is held in the mouth, as thus:

Rec.
Sanae sanctae Indorum, Thymi, Origani, ana p. j. Vuarum passarum,
Staphisagrie, ana ij. Cubebarum, iij. Sinapi, j. Coquantur ex aqua.
Gargarismes also are much used for all passions of the mouth, and the Almonds,
for inflammations, and to deterge and cleanse slimy and flegmaticke humors,
and for ulcers: and for these causes, Tobacco must of necessity be commended,
and put in the first rank.

A Gargarisme to cleanse tough and viscous fleagme.

Rec.
Fol. tabaci, m. j. Flo. st^chados. Flo. rorismarini, ana p. j. Glycyr^ hiz^
rasa, j. Passularum, Ficuum, ana paria december. Coquantur in aqua hordei integri.
In colat. liss. dissolve mellis r^s. col. ^iiij. Misce.
Another Gargarisme for putride, rotten, and filthy ulcers of the mouth.

Rec.
Foliorum tabaci, ligustri, Rosarum rubrarum, Rubi bati, Rubi saxatilis,
Fragariae sterilis, ana q. v. Coquantur omnia in vase sictili nouo ex aqua, and
fiat gargarisma.
Another Gargarisme for the Almonds of the throat that are inflamed.

Rec.
Foliorum rubi Idai, Foliorum tabaci, Trifolij acetosi, ana q. s. Coquantur in
aq. q. s. ad tertias. Iuri colato add sir. aceto. Simplicis, ss. Syrupi
myrtillorum, jss. Misce.
These gargarismes are of notable force and virtue to intercept, and stay the
fluxion of humors into any part, to hinder inflammations, to cease pain, to
cleanse, deterge, and bring to curation all ulcers, and soars in the mouth or
jaws.

A gentle Gargarisme for these intentions.

Rec.
Sana sanct^ Indorum, Serpilli, ana m. ss. Caricarum ping^ium, ij. Aqua q.
sufficit. Fiat coctio.
Rec.
Huius decocti, l. ss. Oxymelitis simplicis, ij. Misce.
If you will have it a little stronger, then mix some spices with it,
mustard-seede, and the like: or in stead of water, take the juice of sage,
calamint, hyssope, or costmarie, with Oxymel scilliticum.

But here lest I should seem to be too prodigal inthe praises of Tobacco, I
must (by the way) advise you to be very wary and circumspect in the using of
it in masticatories, and such medicines as be Saliua^ ducentia: and first that
if you mix any other ingredient with it, you must be very careful that they
be all of a pleasing odor and smell, that they may be held in the mouth the
longer time without any loathing detestation, or irksomeness. And secondarily,
we must be very precise in altogether abstaining from Tobacco, in case there
be any ulcers of the mouth or throat, likewise in inflammations of the lungs,
and in hot sharp rheumes and catarrhes, that destill or drop down right into
the lungs: so that Tobacco must not be prescribed to any that is subject,
aptly disposed, or in danger to fall into any these fore-rehearsed griefs and
passions, neither yet is it righ^ly used in ulcers of the lungs, least the
humor through an evil custom might fall down thither; but in this case,
errhines for diuersion sake are fitter, which are a form of medicines,
ordained to purge the brain at the nose. And this I take to be the chiefest,
and most safe course to be observed in the administration of this famous
Tobacco, for these griefs above repeated.

If after the using of these Masticatories, or any Apophlegma^ismes, any thing
cleaue^h to the roof of the mouth or palate, it is to be washed or rinsed
with some warm water, or rather in some decoction of licorice and barley.

There is also another thing especially to be observed, concerning
masticatories and errhines, that they all ought to be of a hot and sharp
quality and nature, and besides that, of a pleasant taste and sent, because
thereby the spirits animal, may the better be refreshed and comforted, and
likewise that the expulsive faculty may the more readily and lively be stirred
up, and provoked with such things as be of a sharp and piercing operation and
virtue, to fetch away that tough slime, or other thick humors and gross
superfluities contained in the head. Neither ought they to have any malignitie,
or evil quality in the^, such as be coloquintida, scammonie, and turpethu^:
for the membrane of the mouth is all one, and of the very selfsame substance
with the ^unicle of the stomach; the mouth therefore and the Oesophagus being
hurt, and offended, they do easily communicate their damages to the stomach.
And hence it proceeds, that such persons will complain oftentimes that their
meats which they have received, do seem unto them to be both bitter, and of a
stinking and unsavory taste.

Galen says that we must altogether refrain from these errhines and
masticatories, unless necessity urge thereto. And do you not think there is
an extreme necessity, when through an intolerable and vehement pain of the
head, there is danger feared of an apoplexy, epilepsie, blindness, or the
like? Will not a greater danger and hurt redound to the whole body by means of
any of these, the^ there will by offending the mouth with any distastful sent
or ingrate odor? Wherefore I conclude, that even of necessity, we must
sometimes bring them into use.

We must abstain from such things as be very ingrate and unpleasant, as
staphisacre, juice of Tithimals, of the wild cucumber, and Tobacco, being to
many the worst of the^ al. So then when all the reckoning is cast up, as Galen
in the seventh of his Method affirms, the properties, qualities, and natures
of every particular man's co^stitution and temperature, ought thoroughly to be
considered and sifted. You shall find some men, that if they go about to
dispatch any business in the night, to which they have not bin accustomed, they
cannot by any means fall to any rest or sleep. Some again there be, that if they
taste of any thing that carries but the bare name of a medicine, forthwith they
will so abhor and loath it, as they cannot choose, but must needs disgorge
themselves, rejecting all that is in the stomach: which thing (says he in the
first book of Alime^^s) is partly to be referred to custom and partly to be
attributed to the proper and peculiar nature of every man's te^perament. And he
introduces an example of Arias the Peripatetike, who being by nature of a thin
and sle^der body, and having the mouth of his stomach very cold, so that upon
every little occasion of cooling it, he would straight ways be taken with an
hicket, and by means thereof, durst never be so hardy as to drink or taste
cold water, at length being taken with a fever, and constrained of some
physicians contrary to his custom to drink cold water, he presently died. And
yet with others again, we see it falls not out so* for unless you boldly give
them to drink some cold liquor fit for them you shall very speedily bring
their life into great danger: For

Hic satus ad pacem; hic castrensibus vtilis armis.
Naturae sequitur semina quisque suae.
For as I have touched a little before, there are some men found, who can by no
means brook, or away with sugar, honey, oil, or vinegar, and the like,
wherewith notwithstanding a great many do feed full sauourly, and are thereby
well nourished and refreshed. The selfsame thing is to be observed in taking
this or that medicament.

I know some of such diverse and different natures, that they are more offended
with Cassia fistularis, than with Rubarb or Agarick. Others again there be that
can more easily away with Diagredium, being corrected, then with Rhubarbe; at
whose smell, yea, and many times, at the very naming of it, they are so
disquieted and moved, as they are ready to cast up all in their stomachs. In
some persons a Glister works very strangely, causing such a garboile,
rumbling and rolling, that it many times (ascending upwards) comes out the
wrong way, I mean at the mouth: and yet you shall have the same persons
nothing squeamish at the taking of any Purge, though never so bitter or
loathsome in taste. Othersome cannot endure a Suppositorie, which will easily
admit a Glister. We shall see some in other matters, and enterprises, to
contend even with the most valiant, that dare venture life and limb, that
cannot yet endure the letting of blood; and even before the instrument touch
them, their hearts will turn into livers, and so fall down in a swoune:
whereas weaklings, milke-sops, and spider-catchers, corner-creepers, and
cowards in other matters, and meacockly women will suffer and endure a very
large quantity of blood to be taken from them, without any shrinking, the
least pain, trouble or disquiet that may be.

By all which it is plain and manifest, that the nature of every sick Patient
is to be well considered, and the proper curation to be fitted to him; and
again, because the propriety of each man's nature and complexion is ineffable,
and cannot aptly in words be uttered, nor in any exact science be
comprehended or described, I pronounce and adiudge him to be the best Physician
of every grief, and sickness, which has already acquired, and attained unto
such a certain way or method, by which he can both readily know and discern the
temperaments, and natures of men one from another, and by a good and rational
conjecture, prescribe fit and convenient remedies. For, to think that there is
but one common and beaten hie way to cure all persons alike, as blocke-headed
and dunsticall Empiricks, and quacksaluers imagine, is mere madness. For why?
a common and general man is not cured, but each one particularly: one having
one distinct temperature, and another man being endued with another particular
nature, and different constitution. So then to draw to an end of this
discourse, because I have been carried beyond my compass futher than I thought,
our chief study and care must be, to know certainly of what temper every
man's body is. For medicines do^ either retain, lose, or alter their virtue
and qualities according to the diverse natures of each several constitution, to
whom they are given. And this, besides our own practice, may be further
confirmed by Hippocrates; l. 3. de Morb. Ac. where he flatly tells us, that
melicratum in some persons is diuretike, with others diaphoretike, and with
some again it causes purging. And so may we say of our Tobacco, that with
some it is accounted and esteemed to be of an excellent sent; but others again
cannot endure it. And thus I will stop my course a while in my full careere.

The leaves of Trinidada Tobacco, being warmed under the embers, never shaking
off the ashes, and applied and laid often warm to the stomach, do much
help the great shiuering, or exceeding shuddering coldness thereof, and
windiness in the same.

Some for the coldness and wind in the stomach, use to take the green
leaves, and bruise them in their hands (provided that first they be a little
anointed, or dipped in oil) and then make application to the stomach.

The leaves of Tobacco being bruised, and put to steep in vinegar and applied
as an unguent upon the stomach, are found by experience to be very good
against the obstructions of the stomach and spleen: on which parts again the
leaves warmed, or a linen cloth dipped in the warm juice thereof, must be
laid on: but in defect of the leaves, the powder of Tobacco being made, and
wrought up with some common unguent that is aperient or opening the
obstructions of these parts is much commended, if so be that the obstructed and
swelled parts be therewith a good while anointed.

Then women of America, commend this herb in all crudities, rawnesse, and ill
digestion of the stomach, especially in children, and such also as be of riper
years: and they use first to anoint the lower parts of the belly with common
oil, and then the leaves being roasted under the embers, to be applied to the
same forepart of the stomach, and also to the back directly against the same.
These leaves thus roasted and applied, do much soften, and gently purge the
belly, provided always that you do renew, and refresh them, so often as need
is.

An Unguent for a cold stomach.

Rec.
Oleorum, Macis, Menthae, Absinthij, ana ij. Gaelangae, Garyophyllorum, ana j.
Corticum citri, Calami aromatici, ana j. Sanaesanctae Indorum, ss. Cerae nouae
quod sufficit. Fiat vnguentum.
You may to this unguent add a little musk if you please. But if windiness
and cold have much prevailed and proclaimed open war to the stomach: then
for surenes sake, after the application of the former unguent, it will not be
amiss to lay on it this or the like Scutum.

Rec.
Sanae sanctae Indorum, Absinthij, Maioranae siccae, ana jss. Caryophyllorum,
Ligni aloes, ana j. Seminum foeniculi, Baccarum lauri, ana ijss. with a little
cotton ^titched, quilted, or interbasted between two fine linen clothes or
silks, with laces or strings tied or sowed to it, (as will be fittest) let it
be applied to the region of the stomach:
Or this Sacculus to be thus prepared for the coldness, and windiness in the
stomach and spleen.

Rec.
Foliorum sanae sancta Indorum, Florum chamomillae, ana m. j. Foliorum pulegij
regalis, Centaurij minoris, Absinthij, ana iiij. Seminum Rutae, Sem. Erucae,
Nasturtij hortensis, Barbareae, ana jss.
Beat them all into gross powder, and of these make a Sacculus, as before
applying it to the place affected.

Another Sacculus which is good to resolve and mollify, fit to be used in a
dry and schyrrous spleen.

Rec.
Salis communis, Seminis cumini parum torrefacti, anam. ss. Florum meliloti, m.
j. Fol. san^ sanctae Indorum, m. j. ss. Radicum ebuli, j. Seminis thysselij,.
v. Misce. Sicce^tur in tegul^, and tenui include linteo, fiat Sacculus ad
forma^ splenis, qui, vsus tempore, acerrimo aceto, in quo candent is molaris
lapidis frustum extinctum sit, rigetur. Of these make two bags, to be applied
to the spleen, one after another.
In making of any Sacculus to be applied to the stomach, the powders must not
exceed one ounce and a half; for oftentimes vj. are sufficient.

This plant then, as you hear, by the testimony of M John Gerard, Carolus
Clusius, and other learned men, cures wind, coldness, and stopping of the
stomach and spleen; in regard that as all men by sound experience find, it
consumes moist and waterish humors in all parts of the body, taking away, and
cleansing the superfluous sliminesse, and such other like tough and congealed
matter, which caused loathing of meat, and other oppilations: so that this
herb rightly used, must needs disperse wind, in regard of his hot quality,
stirring up an appetite, and desire to meat, by reason of that mild and gentle
adstriction, and cleansing virtue it has. So that he which is well acquainted
with the noble qualities, and has made true grounded experience, concerning
the right use of this plant, needs not be so sollicitous to run, and gad in all
haste to the good town, when his belly aketh or is griped, for a pint of
maluesie, a penie pot of sheric-sacke, hippocras, aquavitae, rosa-solis, or
Doctor Stephens water, to heat their mawes, when they are a little troubled
with gripings in the belly by means of wind: Or yet to have ready in their
closets and studies, nutmegs, or ginger condite, diatrion pipereon, sugarcakes
and jumbles, manus Christi, aromaticum rosatum, and the like, much less to buy
plasters, or unguents. And yet we must, as I have praemonished, not be too
knackhardy in the use of it: but withal this prouiso must be carried in mind,
that in the imbecillitie and weakness of the stomach, we do ever commixe
withal such things as do strengthen the liver, either because from thence the
natural splrits be diffused, scattered, or let run into the whole body, or at
leastwise because it is the shop of blood. And when by means of a very hot
liver, a cold flux of humors annoyeth, we must by all means possible
refrigerate the liver as the cause, and then the stomach will so much the more
easily return into his own temper and nature. So that in this case, Tobacco
is not so excellent as many suppose. Lastly, in the application of hot remedies
to the stomach, moderate adstringents must be commixed.

Tobacco is given with good success to such as are accustomed to swoune, and
are troubled with the colicke and windiness, against the dropsy, the worms
in children, the piles, and the sciatica or gowt in the hanch, or hip.

Some will think it strange, that it will cure panting and beating at the
heart, and Syncope stomachica, as I have found by practice, that it has
remedied these griefs: and yet others I have known, that found so little ease
thereby, that even by coming into the place, where the fume is received, they
will be ready to faint, and fall into a swoune, or utter failing of strength.
Well then, for resolution hereof, we must moreover consider, and add to my
former discourse, that by the particular nature of each singular individual
under the species of man, is manifestly to be discerned the incertainty of the
accidents; yea, and in some sort of the humane senses also: for who would not
wonder, that Demophon one of the Squires that was Caruer to Alexander the
Great, how that contrary to the nature of all other men, he would grow hot
and warm in the shadow, and would shake and quiver for cold in the sun? And
Andron the Argiue would travel through out the most dry, and barren sandy places
of the desart^ of Lybia and Afrike, without enduring of any thirstinesse.

Others there have been, who only by seeing, yea, and by smelling of
Coloworts, onions or garlic, have sallen into a swoune, and some again by
the only fume and smell of Tobacco. And Matthiolus that learned Physician in
his Commentaries upon Dioscorides, does assure us, that he himself knew a man
in whom this was natural. And albeit it be most certain, that the hemlock be a
most strong poison, and that the noble Socrates was poisoned there with in the
city of Athens; yet does Galen assure us (in the third book De Simpl. med.
fac.) that there was an old woman in that same town which did feed, and live
upon the same herb. And I my self know many country people that will not
stick to give the posset drink thereof without any curious respect of quantity
to any their friends that are vexed with hot or burning fevers. What flower is
more pleasant and odoriferous, than the Rose? and yet Auratus Lusitanus tells
us, how he knew a man, who by the only sight of a Rose, would fall into a
swoune: and of this nature also, as I am credibly informed by men of no small
reputation and gravity, was the late Lady Henneage: yea, her skin (as some
say) would blister, if any part of her body had been lightly touched with a
Rose, either damask, red, or white.

Some there be that do not love flesh, others cannot away with fish, and
another whom ^ was well acquainted with, dwelling at Ashdon in Essex, could
never abide the taste either of fish or flesh. Some do abhor cheese; and
there be some men, to whom fruit is so hateful, that if they do but see any
to eat thereof, they will be enforced to fall a vomiting. Some again have an
excellent quick and shape fight in the night, and in the dark, as had
Tiberius Caesar, and Ieronimus Cardanus, and they can see but very little and
badly in the day. Others be that will swallow glass, metal, wool, bricks,
and other such like things, and (which is almost incredible) by the heat of
their stomach, will be able to digest them.

There be three things generally which do make meats, and nourishments, which
of their own nature are hurtful, to be more pleasant, and less offensive:
that is to say, use and custom, the pleasure and delight that one is possessed
with, and a strong and firm stomach: for good and wholesome meats, if the
stomach cannot away with them do subvert, and cause a loathing, and abhorring
in it: and again, if the stomach be very weak, it easily refuses and
rejects meats of quick and easy digestion. In like manner concerning odours
and smells, with all men, nor yet with the most, the savor of Tobacco cannot be
unpleasant, nor produce such strange and fearful effects.

A Cerote against worms.

Rec.
Myrrhae, Aloes, ana j. Pull. fol. sanae sanctae Indorum, Sem. abrotani, ana ss.
Cerae, resina, an q. s. Fiat ceratum.
A liniment against the worms in children.

Rec.
Succi foliorum sanae sanctae Indorum, iij. Pulueris scordij, Aloes, ana ij.
Olei communis, j. C^rae parum. Misce and fiat linimentum.
Now follow such other medicines as are made of Tobacco, and first concerning
the Sciatic^. For it is found by experience of the learned, that it mitigateth
the pain of the gout, if the leaves be roasted in the hot embers, and applied to
the agrieued part. For pains likewise of the joints the tender leaves of
Tabbacco, or Nicotiana, being bruised and applied to the place, until it
begin to look red, are singular. In like sort a Cataplasme performs the
same effect, and is more effectual then the former, being thus made.

Rec.
Radicum Althae^, Rad. liliorum, Iridis, ana j. Foliorum sanae sanctae Indorum,
m j. Florum chamaemeli, Melil^ti, Summitatum anethi, ana p: j. Seminum lini,
Foenugraeci, ana ss. Cymini, Baccarum lauri, ana iij. Croci, ss. Axungiae
anserin^. Medullae vituli, B^yri, Olei liliorum quantu^ sufficit. Fiat
Cataplasma.
This Cataplasme is emollient, and softneth tumors, it digesteth and asswageth
pain, and resolves and discusseth wind. These Cataplasmes are seldom
administered but where the body is first purged.

A Fomentation that adds strength to the weakened parts.

Rec.
Foliorum sanae sanctae Indorum, m. j. Foliorum rosmarini, St^chados,
Chamaepiteos, Hyssopi, Nasturtij, ana m. ss. Coquantur ex vino austero, and cum
spongijs fiat Fotus.
For pain in the joints or hippe-bone, an excellent Cataplasme.

Rec.
Lact is, l. j. Micas duas panis albi. Coquantur, et add Pulueris tabaci, m.
ss. Croci, j. Vitellos duos ouorum, Olei rosarum, Olei Chamaemeli, ana vj. Fiat
Cataplasma: et bis die appplicetur calide.
A Suffumigation to be taken when the joints are much loosened, or relaxed with
too much moisture.

Rec.
Foliorum sanae sanctae Indorum, m. ij. Foliorum lauri, Fol. Saluiae, ana m. j.
ss. Hyssopi, Betonicae. Verbasci, ana m. j. Coquantur ex vino: lapides igniti
hoc conspergantur. Mane and vesperi admittat hunc vaporem loco calido.
After he has received the fume or vapor of these herbs a good while, so
soon as the Patient is ready to come forth, let him straight ways go to his
warm bed, and take one dram of excellent treacle in hot posset-ale: so being
covered very warm with clothes, let him sweat one hour, two or three after
it, as his strength will endure.

Experience by some persons a few years since has brought to light, that
Tobacco resists and breaks the force of poisons, and especially that most
dangerous venom, wherewith the Cannibals do anoint their darts, and arrows:
for before the virtue of this was known, they were wont to cast the powder of
Sublimatum on their wounds. Now the Spaniards knew well, that it would
ouer-master and infringe the power of poison, and that by these means: It
fortuned that certain Cannibals sailed in their canowes to S. John de Porto
Rico, of purpose to kill those Indians and Spaniards they found there, with
their inuenomed sh^fts. So arriving at the place appointed, they forthwith slew
the Indians, and some Spaniards, wounding many other: and wanting sublimate to
cure their wounds, a certain Indian taught them to wring and press out the
juice of this Tobacco, and to apply it to their wounds, and after they had done
this, to take the leaves being br^ised, and so to lay upon the wounded place:
which being done, straight ways the pains abated, and all those symptoms,
accidents, passions or effects which do usually accompany such inuenomed
wounds, the poison and venom thereof (I say) was by this overcome and utterly
vanquished, and the wounds perfectly cured.

So from that time forwards, men began to put in practice the leaves of this
plant against strong and deadly poisons. And the Catholic King himself (I
speak as a Romist) having a desire to try the virtues of this herb, caused a
dog to be wounded in the throat, and with the poison that hunters use, the
place to be rubbed and anointed, and within a while after, good store of the
juice of Tobacco to be dropped into the sore, and the leaves also being beaten
or bruised to be laid over, and bound close to the wounded place, and by this
means the poor dog escaped the danger, not without the amazement, and
wondrous admiration of all that saw or knew it. In like manner, it being applied
to venomous and pestilent carbuncles, botches, or sores, it brings a hard
crust upon the place, and so absolutely cures them. And against the bitings or
stingings of poisonous beasts, or any venomous living creature they are a
present remedy.

They affirm and hold for certain moreover, that a man in France (having a
sore ulcer or apostume, caused by the evil of Naples or Spain, (choose which
you will, all is but one, for the best of them is but Hydra malorum, as Auger
Ferner says) that we in plain good English call, the great Pockes, or, the
French something, by the applicatiof the leaves of this plant, was immediately
cured thereof. This is Morbus contagiosus, though not Pestilentialis: and I
must confess, that I am somewhat backward in believing of this, and therefore I
will leave every man to his own liberty of believing or refusing this. But for
the former example, I dare boldly say: for besides a Kings testimony, you
shall have the attestation of sundry good merchants of this City of London to
confirm as much. And I can see no reason why, but that the decoction of our
own country Tobacco should as well, and to as good success be used in the
plague, and other poisonous sicknesses, as tormentill, burnet, the wild
Angelica, and that of the garden, dictamnus, marigolds, butter burre, Carduus
benedictus, S. John's wort, Morsus diaboli, Scabiose, gentian eye bright, water
germander, vinca peruinca, Juniper, and bay-beries, with a hundred the like.
And a medicine in the plague thus prepared, I should judge to be very
effectual.

Rec.
Pulueris radicis Angelicae Hortensis vel syluestris, j. Theriacae optimae, j
ss. Aquae stillatitiae, sanae sanctae Indorum, iiij. Aceti optimi, ss. Misce.
This is to be taken warm at one time, and presently to go to bed and to move
sweat: let the sweat be continued gently and easily four or five hours, or
more if strength will endure, and keep warm after for two days.

If a sore do appear, then make a pultes with wheaten bread, two handfuls,
sweet butter ij. of the leaves of Tobacco, and the herb called Devils bit, of
either half a handful, with sufficient water make a pultes. After it is made,
put to the pultes vj. onions roasted under the embers, and mingle them. Lay of
this hot to the place, and shift it twice or thrice in a day.

An Unguent for a pestilent Carbuncle.

Rec.
Foliorum sanae sanctae ^ndorum, m. j. Contundantur addendo vitel. Oui vnius
Cum salis, ss. Unguent. Basilisco. ij. Mis^e. Fiat instar unguent. and
applicetur super Carbunculos.
Aqua Theriacalis ad Pestem.

Rec.
Liquoris stillatitij sanae sanctae Indorum, l. viij. Antidoti Mithridatics
Damocratis, vj. Carduibenedicti, Scordij, Galegae, ana* m. ij. Macerentur simul
per noctem, poste^ destillentur, s. a. Cap. iiij. pro vice.
But here a great doubt and controversy may arise, whether as sometimes we
see one poison to be the expeller of another poison; so in like sort, whether
one stinking savor, and graueolent or ill odor, and vapor of some pestilent
breath or air, may be the proper amulet or preseruati^e against any such
poison, to be hanged about the neck: for at this time let it be granted (to
please some) that Tobacco is of no good smell or sent and that it is a little
poisonous. For we see some daily in the time of any general or grievous
infection of the plague, for auoidance thereof, and for preservation sake, will
smell unto the stinking savor of some loathsome Privy, or filthy Camerine and
sink; and this they make reckoning is one of the best counter-poysons, that
may be devised against any pestiferous infection: for their nature being
inured to these, they will afterward not seem to pass for any pestilent
malignitie of the air, and dare boldly adventure without any prejudice, or
impeachment to their health, into any place or company whatsoever. And to
persuade us the more easily to this, they object to us for example sake, those
women that spend their days continually in hospitals for Pilgrims, and for
poor travelers, who are accustomed to every ab^ominable savor of the sick;
whereof we shall never see or very seldom, any of them either to be taken, or
die with any pestiferous infection, though never so dangerous. In like manner,
there be some that in time of the greatest heat and rage of the Pestilence, do
kill dogs, cats, and other like creatures, suffering them to be cast, and lie
rotting and stinking in corners of streets, cross paths, and where many ways
meet, thinking that by these means, the rotten, stinking and evil vapor
that from them is carried upwards, fills the ambient air, and so either
drinks up, consumes, or else quite alters the pestilent infection thereof.
After which sort we read, that in times past a certain Physician freed S^ythia,
now called Tartaria, from the mischief of a most dangerous pestilence.

I am not ignorant, how that sometimes one poison is the preservative against
another poison, and the flesh of vipers (which enters into the famous
composition of Mithridatum) to resist and quell, not only his own, but even
the venenositie of other Serpents. There is not a presenter remedy for one
that is dangerously struck of a venomous Scorpion, than the oil of Scorpions
it self. There be many living creatures that have certain hid properties
against diverse evils: and so we see that experience has given the knowledge of
many medicines, of the which none can give any certain reason. Wherefore I
would that some would experiment those of our own country, and compound some
Theriaca or Alexipharmacall medicine of our own plants, which the everlasting
God has given to our own use: the which to my judgment would prove more
excellent, far better, and more sure than vipers (though never so well
corrected) of whose flesh partly, is made and composed the famous electuary,
called Theriaca magna; knowing that it is not sure to use vipers, because of
their deadly poison that they bear, whatsoever others say.

But to return from whence I have a little digressed, I will not deny, but
that such persons as have been acquainted and accustomed to a bad and unwholesome
stinking air, or any pestilent malignity, but that they will smell unto, and
easily endure any thing that may be imagined worse then any stink it self or
carion-like smell, without either danger, trouble, or any displeasure at all,
and do recke so little of the plague when it rages most, as I have seen some,
and known more, even fasting and without fencing their heart or spirits with any
antidote, to have buried more than two hundred, whom the plague had bereft of
life. And yet this I say, that Tobacco is not so perilous as some would make
the world believe, but that amongst the proper curations and alexiteries
against any pestilent infection, this obtains not the last place.

Galen in his third book De Alimentorum facultatibus, plainly shows, that in
his days there were Egyptians that fed as sauourly on Serpents, as othersom
did of Eeles. The newfound world nourishes great store of Serpents and
Lyzards of a marvelous greatness, the which are easily taken of those
country people without danger: yea the Neigers eat these Lyzards, so do the
Indians of America, both these and also the lesser ones which are of the
bigness of a man's leg. And who has not read (though from long iourneys
large lies are afforded) what Peter Martyr of Angleria in his Decades has
written? And L^ure^tius Ioubertus, de Cutis capitis affectibus, will resolve us,
that the Americans, and their neighbors do the same.

About three degrees and a half from the equinoctial, there is found a river
that comes from the mountains of the country named Camia, and another more
less named Rh^gium, the which bear and bring forth very good fish, also
Crocodiles very dangerous: as the rivers of Nilus and Senega, and they eat
them as we do venison, as John Leo in his description of Africa says: And
Andrew Theuet in his description of the new found world, agreeeth with him
saying, that the Americans food for the most part, is roasted after their
manner, as rats of diverse kinds, and great ones, a certain kind of toades
greater than ours, Crocodiles, and others that they roast al whole, with the
skin and the bowels, and this they use without any difficulty: yea these
Crocodiles, and great Lyzards be as great as a pigge of a month old, the
which is a fine meat (as they say that have eaten thereof.) These Lizards of
America are so privy, that they will come near unto you, and take their
repaste, if that you will take it without all fear or difficulty. Their flesh
is like a chickens flesh, and they kill them with shooting at them with their
arrows. And if tobacco were half so bad as any of these, I trow the
dispraisers thereof might then with full mouths, and full cheeks except
against it.

It cannot be denied, but that Tobacco has some malignitie, yea, some naughty
and venomous quality in it, in respect that it produces such a strange
swimming, vertiginie or giddiness like drunkenness in the brain, with
foaming at the mouth and swouning, yea, lying as it were dead, or in a trance
for a certain time, when any almost has first taken it, and yet at length
after their bodies have been acquainted and inured to it, there has no such
passion or effect followed, though it has been taken by them in a very large
quantity.

Whereupon doubtless, we must conclude, that even of strong poisons, some men
may very well be nourished, and conveniently fed, especially if they be
assumed moderately, and by degrees a little at once: as Jews Vertoman writes
of the King of Calecut, whose father so inured him to take poison, that he was
fed and nourished therewith, and with nothing else all his life time: so that
when he intended to put any of his noblemen to death, he would but cheaw, and
bite in his mouth a certain fruit there growing, called Chofolos; which being
done, he would spit them in the face of him with whom he was offended: who
presently after being poisoned with this stinking breath, would go home and
die. This King (as the forenamed author says) had four thousand wives, but he
never lay with any of them but one night: for the next day day she was found
dead, only with the poisonous breath of the King. So that hereby, by these
examples we may learn, that poisons and strong medicines may by degrees be
overcome by the virtue and strength of nature, and be converted into a
profitable norishment of the whole body, as al Physicians allege; sithence
there is nothing that nourishes, but that which is first concocted, and
digested, by the power and benefit of nature.

Custom is of great force in our meats: and that many have been fed only with
poisons, John Bruyerni, de re cibaria, lib. 1. cap. 22. plainly shows. So in
times past the people called Psylli, and the Marsi would without danger, both
handle, and eat Serpents. Hollerius reports of a Spaniard that would eat
half an ounce of Opium at one time: we in England must not exceed twelve
grains, and in Poland two grains only will kill a strong man so that he shall
never arise, till the trumpe of the Archangell awake him. Johannes Heurnius
says, that he has seen diverse slaves at Naples in Italy, which would
devour a very great deal of Meconium: and others again would as fast eat
poppie without any sensible hurt thereby. And as I have partly touched before,
we read of one Tharsias an Apothecary, and many shepherds in Greece, who
would take into their stomachs whole handfuls of Helleborus albus, or
Neesewort, without any danger at all, digesting the^ very well. Eudemus of the
Island of Chios, would do the same, without any purging downwards, as
Theophrastus assures us: and yet with others we know, that it procures
vomiting mightily, and that with extreme danger, and hazard of life, if it be
not well corrected, and given to strong complexions, and robustious
constitutions, and not to nice and delicate persons.

We read in histories of a maid of excellent beauty, that was only fed and
brought up with the deadly poison of Napellus, who was presented to Alexander
the great by the king of India, to the intent he should be ensnared in the
inextricable labyrinth of her beauteous physnomie: whom when Aristotle his
master had thoroughly viewed and beheld, he forewarned the king of the danger,
and the bait that was laid to ensnare him. Neither was he therein deceived in
his judgment, for though the king refused her company, many other
sprightfull laddes and lustie-bloudes being allured and bewitched with her
company, they all died by that abominable poisonous and destroying vapor or
hurtful breath which came from her body, as Johannes Langius in his Medicinal
epistles has also remembered. This maid did well enough with this herb
Napellus: and yet the force and faculty thereof is so deadly both to man, and
also to all kinds of beasts, that if any do eat thereof, their lips and
tounges swell forthwith, their eyes hang out, their thighs are stiff and
their wits are taken from them, as Auicen^a writes in his fourth book. Yea
the force of this poison is such, that if the points of spears, darts, or
arrows be touched or anointed with the same, they bring deadly hurt to those
that are wounded therewith. So that if strong poisons through custom may be
turned into the profitable nourishment of our bodies; how much more, such
Simples, that be but as it were a little hurtful as Tobacco is.

The like may be said of meats and medicines: some men will eat and continue
with feeding on Cassia, as familiarly as if all their life time they had never
taken delight in any other thing: and yet with others again it is accounted
very loathsome, and brings gripings, wringing, and much torment to the whole
body. In some persons Manna turns wholly in choler: and it gently looseneth
the belly in others. Some will very easily digest beef, or any meats of harder
digestion, whose stomachs again do abhor the flesh of hens, rabbets, and
the like: and if they chance to eat of them, they turn into sower belchings,
and are quickly corrupted in their stomachs, lying there stinking, as in a
filthy puddle. Therefore what soever is familiar to any particular man's nature,
and wherewithal he is most delighted, never be afraid to give the sick,
although in others it may not be tolerated. But to return again into my path
from whence I have a little digressed.

Although all men, and all countries are not alike subject to, and hurt by the
pestilence (for China which is the greatest part of the habitable world, in
which there are (as some Histories report) seventy millions of people, being
scarce so many in all Europe, wherein (as I suppose) God has included the
greatest gulf of mankind, is not subject to this dangerous disease, nor yet
many parts of Africa, as John Leo a Moore borne in the Kingdom of Granada
says) yet we know and feel, that all those countries that lie open to the
sea, or be situated right against the South, or lie much open to that point,
are more dangerously infected than others that have not the same site of place
for their dwelling. And likewise those that dwell in hot and moist places,
poisoned with filthy or mistie exhalations, are more vexed and plagued, than
more open and champain countries, or those that be more mediterrane. And
again, amongst men they are more cruelly handled, which being of a hot and
moist temperature, and such as be full of gross and corrupt humors, having
such bodies as be ready to run over with plenty thereof, are more subject to
putrefied agues, than cold and dry complexions, and such as have but small
store of humors, and the same very fine and pure. For overmuch looseness and
largeness of body, even as too much adstriction makes a way for the
pestilence.

But it will be necessary, and to our purpose in hand, and worthy the labor
and pains taking, more deeply to enter into, and to make a larger rehearsal
into this discourse, and leasurely by peece-meales, as it were to cut and minse
the same. Although therefore the pestilent poison without exception, no less
violently sets upon, as well the richer as the poorer sort, and as soon
dispatcheth those of st^rdy and able bodies, as meacocks, milk-sops, and
weaklings, and such as be great, strong, quarrie, big, well set, handsome
timbred, and such as well call well proportioned and of a just temperature and
making (neither too slender nor too gross) as well as those that are sickly,
queasie, and abounding with cacochy micall humors, and upon men as women, old
and young, hot complexions as cold, moist as dry (for to all alike it
proclaims open war:) yet nevertheless it often comes to pass, that upon
some it sooner lays hold, and kills more speedily, than it does upon
others. For first in respect of ages, we find by common experience, that
Infants are more endangered thereby, and take it sooner than children, and
these sooner than young men, and younger more than those of riper years, and
women are more often subject to this grief than men, and chiefly those that
be with child, and such as are not monthly expurged.

Of complexions likewise, that temperament which is hot and moist, or cold and
moist, is oftener and easilyer overthrown, than either the hot and dry, or
the cold and dry complexions. And for the same reason, the sanguine, and the
phlegmatique constitution are most in danger, and are more subject unto this
grief, than either choleric, or melancholic persons, and do sooner die
withal. The cause of this variety is the superabundant, corrupt, or filthy
humors subject to putrefaction, or corrupt and filthy blood, which is easily
infected with the contagion of the air receiving pestilence. And this is the
cause, that those who are much subject to sickness (although that some will
falsely maintain, that either the French Pockes, or the quartane ague, is a
Supersedeas to the plague) and cacochymicall bodies, do sooner feel the hurt
thereof, and are put into further hazard than such as be exquisitly sound, and
in perfect health: and those that use nourishments which breed evil iuyces
and humors in the body, than the contrary, or such as be of easy
concoction; and such as surfeit, pamper, or cocker themselves too much, more
than those that behave themselves temperately, and use a moderation in their
expenses and manner of living, as some say they do at Florence in Italy.

To shut up all in a word, those that keep good rule living continently, are
freer from this plaguey infection, then such as live after their own pleasure,
wilfully, and luxuriously: and they that keep home, less than such as gad
abroad, being accounted good fellows, loving to frequent much company, do
less feel this poisonous disease. Now although by this that I have said, one
may easily gather, why Tobacco should be good in some constitutions, (I mean
in hot and moist, and cold and moist) and why not in othersome so wholesome:
yet for all that, this must be taken warily, namely, that we use not Tobacco
(for purgation sake especially) nor yet any purging medicine in the beginning
of the plague, or yet if they be taken with any flux or looseness of the
belly; for of these thus affected, there is scarce the hundredth person that
escapes with life. I know well what Fracastorius, Palmarius, and many others
have written, and enforced themselves sometimes too far concerning these
points, and as they imagine they have attained the truth. As for me, it is not
my purpose at this time to censure others in this judging world, but only I
thought good to speak thus much by the way, seeing it is not quite besides my
intended scope, as touching our Tobacco.

The juice of Tobacco boiled in sugar to the form of a syrup, and inwardly
taken, drives forth worms of the belly, if withal a leaf be laid to the
navel. It cures also the Piles, and the Dropsy.

An Unguent for a Dropsy.

Rec.
Succorum sanaesanctae Indorum, viij. Cortic. med. Sambuci, Chamomillae,
Tithymali, ana ij. Succi violarum, Radicum Cucumeris agrestis, Mercurialis
macis, Laureolae, Colchici Anglici, Fellis tauri, Aloes hepaticae, ana iij.
Diagredij, vnc. jss. Cum olei oliuar. lib. iij. and Cerae albae. lib. j. Fiat
vnguentums. art^m.
An Emplaster for the same.

Rec.
Stercoris vaccini, Sterco. Caprini, ana viij. Macerentur per horas vj. in
^ceto vini albi and siccantor. Tum Rec. aluminis rochae, Salis nig. torrefac.
Sulphuris flaui, ana ij. Succitabaci, vj. Foliorum Soldanellae, vnc. jss.
Seminum Anisi, Foeniculi, Carui, ana vnc. j. Farin^lupinorum, Orobi, ana vnc.
j. Terebinthinae, vnc. ij. Picis naualis, vnc. xij. Axungiae porcinae, vnc.
iiij. Fiat Emplastrums. artem.
Syrupus optimus ad Hydropicos.

Rec.
Foliorum sanaesanctae Indorum. (...). vj. Hyssopisicci, Pulegij reg^lis,
Ceterach (se^ asplenij) ana. m. j. ss. Calamenti minoris, p. ij. Seminum Anisi,
Seminum vrticae, Sem. Anethi, ana iij. Ga^angae, Hellebori albi, ana iiijss.
Asari, Agarici, ana ij. Rad. Angelicae hortensis, Rad. iridis, Costi, Amomi,
Polipodij quercini, ana j.
Let all these be beaten to powder, and infused in six pintes of the sharpest
wine vinegar for three days space in the open sun, in a glass vessel.
Afterward boil them in a double vessel with a gentle fire to the consumption
of the half, then strain them, and add to them of Mel rosarum l. j. Sacchari
l. ss.

Boil them again to the consumption of the vinegar, and aromatize it with
saffron, ginger, and mace, ana ij.

Fiat Syrupus secundum artem.

A convenient purge in a Dropsy.

Rec.
Seminum sanaesanctae Indorum, j. Rhabarb. ss. Diagridij, gr. ij. Syrupi ros.
sol. cum agarico j. cum aqua destillati tabaci, quantum sufficit. Fiat potio.
Detur post digestionem conuenientem.
An excellent Sacculus to discuss wind, to remove the colicke, and is very
effectual in a tympanie.

Rec.
Foliorum san. sanct. Indorum, p. iiij. Florum Chamaemelorum, Summitatum
anethi, ana p. j. Cymini, Cari, ana ss. Baccarum Lauri, iij. Make two bags of
all these being quilted or interbasted, so that they may cover the most part of
the belly.
Tobacco is a present remedy for the fits of the mother, it mitigateth the
pain of the gout, if the leaves be roasted in hot embers, and applied to the
agreeued part, and likewise a Cataplasme made only of the leaves of Tobacco
being boiled in milk with a little comin-seede with the yolks of two eggs
and saffron, j.

An Unguent to take away all pains of the Gout.

Rec.
Succifoliorum san. sanct. Indorum, viij. Axung. porcimasculi, Axung. caponis,
ana vnc. ij. Misce.
Put all these into a glass, stopping and luting it close with paste, and set
it in the oven for eight or nine hours, make an Unguent. This also helps
such as be troubled with crampes and conuulsions.

A Cataplasme also or Pultes made of the roots of marsh mallows, Tabaoco
leaves, some line-seede, and crumbs of bread is much commended in the gout: and
if a little oil of worms be added to it, nothing can be devised better. Some
do also greatly praise a medicine thus prepared, for the gout.

Rec.
Olei cannabini l. ss. Vini albi, l. j. Foliorum sanae sanctae Indorum, m. ij.
Bulliant ad consumptionem mediae partis.
The leaves of Tabac. in the low countries are used against scabs, and
filthnesse of the skin, and for the cure of wounds: but some hold opinion, that
they are to be used only but for the cure of wounds, and to hot and strong
bodies: for they say, that the use of Tobacco is not safe in weak and old
folk: and for this cause (as it seems) the women in America, as Theuetus
says, abstain from the herb Petum or Tobacco, and can in no wise endure it.

Against redness of the face.

Rec.
Lithagyri argentei, j. Cerusae albissimae, iij. Caphurae, ij. Aquae
stillatitiaesan. sanct. Indorum, ix. Aceti albi, ij.
Let them settle fix hours together at least, then filter them, and every day
twice or thrice wette the face withal.

Another against cancerous ulcers, and redness of the face.

Rec.
Plantaginis, Circaeae Lutetianae, Sanae sanctae Indorum, Albumin. ouorum no.
xij, Aluminis, l. ss. Mix them together, and let them be destilled: but it is
best, first to infuse them together for twelve hours space.
There is an oil to be taken out of the leaves of Tobacco, that heals
merry galls, kibed heels, and such like. Tobacco does likewise scour and
cleanse old and rotten ulcers, and brings them to perfect digestion, as
Nicolaus Monardis says.

The oil or juice dropped into the ears is good against deafness: a cloth
dipped in the same, and laid upon the face, takes away the lentils, redness,
and spots thereof, as thus:

Rec.
Olei sanae sanctae Indorum, j. Sulphuris in pollinem redacti, ij. Misce sine
foc^.
Ad guttam rosaceam, or a sauce fleagme face.

Rec.
Cerusam q. v. and ponatur cum aqua stillatitia tabaci ad solemn, vel cum succo
eiusdem herba: qua sicca adijciatur alia, dum fiat albissima and fiant pilulae.
Soluatur vna cx aqua tabaci, et illinatur facies.
For an old or inueterate sawce-fleagme face.

Rec.
Caphurae, ij. Boracis, ij. Pulueris subtilissimi foliorum san. sanct. Indorum,
vnc. ss. Misce cum succo limonum et melle despumato. Sovse it as an ointment
daily.
It is used against poison, and takes away the malignitie thereof, if the
juice be given to drink, with some Theriaca or Mithridatum, or the wounds of
venomous beasts be washed therewith.

Tobacco prevails against all apostumes, tumors, inueterate ulcers, botches,
and such like, being made into an unguent or salve, as follows.

Take of the green leaves of Tobacco l. iij. ss. Stamp them very small in a
stone mortar.

Olei oliuarum l. ij.
Set them to boil in a brass pan, or such like upon a gentle fire,
continually stirring it, until the herbs seem black, and will not bubble,
nor boil any more: then shall you have an excellent green oil: which being
strained from the dreggie refuse or f^ces, put the clear and strained oil to
the fire again, adding thereto of

Wax, l. ss. Rosin, iiij. Turpentine, ij.
Melt them together, and keep it in pots for your use to cure inveterate
ulcers, apostumes, burnings, green wounds and all cuts, and hurts in the head.

Tobacco is also good in burnings and scaldings with fire, water, oil,
lightning, or such like, being boiled with hogs grease in form of an
Unguent, which I have often proved and found most true, adding a little of the
juice of Pomum spinosum, or thorn apple leaves, spreading the same upon a
cloth, and so applying it.

Ronsseus, in his ninth Chapter, has stoutly striued to show all the
Indications very exactly, for the curation of al ulcers in the legs, and
other parts that happen to those persons, which are troubled with the scuruy,
or rather scorbute. And although that these ulcers are happily remedied with
sudoriferous medicines, especially with wine extracted from the flowers of
Antimonie, and with Sanguis Antimonij, with Turbith Mineral, and other
spagiricall liquors (for by these, that redundant humor which feeds, and
causes the ulcer, is not only dried up, but also perfectly conglutinated and
souldered) yet the business would more happily proceed, and the cure be
sooner perfected, if there were in my judgment certain vulnerarie herbs
added to them, such as be Sana sancta Indorum, Pyrola, Alchimilla, Consolida
Sarrasenica, cochlearia, sanicula, Nummularia, and others of the same virtue.
And thus would I make a Balsamum, for the curation of filthy ulcers coming by
means of the scorbute.

Rec.
Foliorum Nicotianae sine Peti Brasilianorum, Consolidae Regalis, Betonicae
Pauli, Ophiogl^ssi, anam. iiij. Nummulariae, Persicariae maculosae, Chelidoniae
maioris, ana m. j. Florum fug. d^monum, m. j. ss. Centaurij minoris, Flo:
Chamaemeli, ana m. j. Radicum consolid. maioris and Rad. althaeae recentium,
ana viij. Lumbricorum terrestrium vino maluatico lotorum, vnc. x.
Incisa et cont^sa circulentur, Pellicano Hermetice ferruminato inclusa, in
libris duabus olei vetustissimi, et l. j. terebinthinae abietin. per tempus
trimestre. After these three months space, destill them in a Retort with a
mild and gentle fire. In the destilling add unto it, Tegularum, xx.

Rec.
Huius destillati, l. j. ss. Vernicis, vnc. vj. Axung. human. vnc. viij. Mumm.
communis contrit. un. vj. Mastiches, Myrrh. Aloes, Thuris, Styracis liquidi,
ana vnc. vj. Destillentur adhuc semel, cum laterum in puluerum redactorum l. j.
Postea add Oleorum petrolei, Olei e terebinthina, Olei e granis Iuniperi, ana
iij. Puluer. aeruginis, vnc. j. Fiat Balsamus artificialis viridis.
And of the same virtue is this that follows.

Rec.
Terebinth. vnc. ij. Thuris vnc. ij. Aloes, Mastiches, Caryophyllorum, Galang.
Cinnamomi, Croci, Nucis mosch. C^bebarum, ana vnc. j. Aquae. stillattit. san.
sanct. Indorum, et Aquae Hordei, ana l. j. Destillentur.
An excellent Iniection to deterge and cleanse ulcers, especially those that
happen in the scorbute.

Rec.
San. sanct. Indorum, m. ij. Ligni sancti subtilissime puluerisati, et Corticis
eiusdem, ana vnc. ij. Aristoloch. long. Centaurij minoris, Absinthij, Equiseti,
Eupatorij, Saniculae. Foliorum myrti, Pimpinellae, et Consolidaemed.
vulnerariorum, ana, m. j. Corticum thuris, Myrrhae, Sarcocollae, ana v.
Vinirubri odoriferi, l. iij. Mellis despumati, iiij.
Boil all these together, and when it is strained, make an iniection into the
ulcer, adding to it of the best Aqua vitae j. for every time that you use the
iniection. Or else, if to the former decoction, you add of aqua vitae l. ij.
and destill them all together in a glass limbecke in ^alneo Mariae, you shall
have an excellent water, to deterge, cleanse and conglutinate filthy, hollow,
stinking, or sordidous ulcers.

This ointment also following, will perform the same effect.

Rec.
Succi san sanct. Indorum, lib. 5. Mellis electi, iiij. Farinae hordei, vnc.
ij. Myrrhae elect. ij. Terebinth. vnc. j. ss. Boil all these together, and
make an Unguent to dippe, or arm your tents withal, that shall be put into
the cauities of any ulcers.
Paracelsus the fuliginous Alchimist, in his first book, Chirurgiae Mag.
tract. 2. cap. 9. plainly describes the same virtues to be in that oil which
he there calls, Oleum antimonij rubicundum. In like sort Oleum aeris, Oleum
Saturni but chiefly Sal Saturni album brought into powder, destilled in a
retort with a very clear fire, until all the spirits be vanished, and the
water after that separated from the oil per Balneum: for within a few days it
perfectly cures those ulcers, which of some are esteemed for incurable,
especially those that follow any scorbuticall sickness.

Master John Gerard the most learned ^erbarist of this age, in his great
History of plants, describes an excellent balsame, surpassing in my conceit
all the fore-recited: which here in this place I purpose to set down, in
regard of the many and notable virtues that are in it. I do make (says he) of
Tobacco an excellent balsame to cure deep wounds, and punctures, made by some
narrow, sharp, and sharp pointed weapon: which balsame does bring up the
flesh from the bottom very speedily, and also heal simple cuts in the flesh
according to the first intention, that is to say, to glue or soulder the lips
of the wound together, not procuring matter or corruption unto it, as is
commonly seen in the healing of wounds. The Receipt is this:

Rec.
Oleirosarum, Olei Hypericonis, ana l* j. Foliorum tabaci in mortario
contusorum, l. ij.
Boil them together to the consumption of the juice, then strain it, and put
it to the fire again, adding thereto of

Venice Turpentine ij. Olibani, Masticis, ana ss.
in most fine and subtle powder, the which you may at al times make into an
Vng^or salve by putting thereto wax and rosin to make it a stiff body, which
works exceeding well in malign and virule^t ulcers, as in wounds and
punctures. I send this Jewel to you women of all sorts, especially to such as
cure and help the poor and impotent of your country without reward. But unto
the beggarly rabble of witches, charmers, imposters, and such like cozeners
that regard more to get money, than to help for charity, I wish these few
medicines far from their understanding, and from those deceivers, whom I wish
to be ignorant herein. But courteous Gentlewomen, I may not for the malice that
I do bear unto such, hide any thing from you, of such importance: and
therefore take one more that follows, wherewith I have done very many and
good cures, although of small cost, but regard it not the less for that. And
thus it is:

Rec.
Foliorum tabaci, l. ij. Axungiae porcinae, l. j.
Stamp the herb small in a stone mortar, putting thereto a small cup-full of
read or claret wine, stir them well together, cover the mortar from filth,
and so let it rest until morning, then put it to the fire again, and let it
boil gently, continually stirring it unto the consumption of the wine, then
strain it, and set it to the fire again, put thereto of the juice of the
herb l. j.

Terebinthinae venetae, iiij.
Boil them together to the consumption of the juice, then add thereto of the
roots of Aristolochia rotunda, or birth-wort in most fine powder, ij.
Sufficient wax to give it a body, the which keep for thy wounded poor
neighbor. This also helps and heals the old and filthy ulcers of the
legs and other parts.

Tobacco is used of many men in outward medicines, either the herb boiled
with oil, wax, rosin, and turpententine, as before I have set down; or the
extraction thereof, with salt, oil, balsame, the destilled water, and such
like, against tumors, apostumes, old ulcers of hard curation, botches,
scabbes, stinging with netles, carbuncles, poisoned arrows, and wounds made
with gunne, or any other weapon.

Thus have you heard what the learned and skillful Surgeon, and Herbarist
Master John Gerard, a man of unreprovable authority, says of Tobacco, and
yet I think he will not say, that it fitteth all persons alike: for I suppose,
that it is naught for Alchymists, Brewers, Bakers, Smithes, cooks,
furnace-men, more than for fishermen, and such waterish people. All things
have their season. Iuuenal Satyr. 6.


Imponit finem sapiens and rebus honestis. A wise man may use moderation,
Even in things of commendation.
And I may say my Pater noster out of season:

Diuersos diuersaiuuant, non omnibus annis Cat. eleg. 1.
-- omnia conueniunt. Diverse delights to diverse men: Nor to all,
Do all things at all years convenient fall.
The leaves of Tabac. being applied upon green wounds, staieth the flux of
blood, and soldereth and glutinateth them: and if the wounds be very great,
they must first be washed with white wine, and so the lips of the wound be
joined together, the juice of the leaves must be sprinkled or cast on, and the
dry leaves being bruised belayed all over upon the wounded place. And the next
day following, and from day to day, this order must be strictly observed,
until it be perfectly brought to cure, observing withal a true regiment in
our diet* and order of living.

Doubtless, this is a rare miracle of Nature, and a wonderful virtue, that is
in this cotemptible little plant, or rather esteemed to be so vilde, base, and
contemptible. ^or if any one be newly and dangerously wounded, and that the
miserable party feels a bleeding unto death, what is a more noble medicine,
or more ready at hand, then Tobacco, to bind hard upon the wound, to stay the
inordinate effusion of blood? Questionless, if we were as diligent and
greedy to search out the true properties and virtues of our own domestical
remedies, which we buy of others so dearly, we would not enforce our selves
with such eager pursuit after those of foreign countries, as though things
far fetched off, were better than our own near at hand; or as though nothing
were good and wholesome, unless it came from Egypt, Arabia, China, or India.
Surely, unless there were some wild worm in our brains, or that we we were
bewitched, and possessed with some fury, we would not so far be in love with
foreign wares, or be so much besotted, as to seek for greedy new Physic,
and physical means, considering that one poor plant, tobacco, will (being
rightly used) do more good for the stanching of blood, the curation of wounds
and ulcers, the hindering of sanies, slime or slough to grow in any sore, to
abate and quench swellings and pains, to conglutinate, and consolidate wounds,
more than a cart-load of Bole fetched out of Armenia, Sarcocolla, Sandaracha,
or that earth which is so much nobilitated by the impresse of a seal, and
therefore called Terra Sigillata, the clay of Samos, the dirt of Germany, or
the loame of Lemnos. For Tobacco has a moderat adstriction, it soldereth,
joins and closes up wounds, nor suffering any rotten or filthy matter to
remain long in them.

And in regard of these excellent virtues and qualities, it quickly cures
bleeding at the nose, the Haemorrhoides and other bloody fluxes, whether of
the opening of the mouths of the veins, their apertions, breakings* or any
other bloody euacuation that too much abounds, being either given by it
self, alone in some wine either inwardly, or outwardly, or commixed with the
bloud-stone, Crocus Martis, and other the like remedies fit for the same
intentions.

Laurentius Ioubertus describes an Unguent, which is of singular force, made
of Tobacco, for the curation of wounds, scabbes, and the disease called
Scrophules, or the Kings evil: yea, for that same knottie scourge of rich men,
and the scorn of Physicians, I mean the gowt, which as some learned men hold
opinion, can by no means be remedied, yet feels mitigation and diminution of
pain, and curation also only by this admirable medicine, whose description in
this place, I will rightly set down, and thus it is.

Rec.
Foliorum san. sanct. Indorum, l. ij. Axungiae porcinae recentis diligenter
lota, l. j.
The herb being stamped or bruised, let it be infused a whole night in red
wine, in the morning boil it with a gentle fire with the axunge to the
consumption of the wine. Then strain it very hardly: and that being done, add
to it of the juice of Sana sancta Indorum, l. ss*

Resinae abiegnae. vnc. iiij.
Boil them again to the consumption of the juice, and toward the end of the
boiling, add to it of

The roots of Aristolochia rotunda in powder, un. ij. New wax so much as is
sufficient. So make it up into the form of an unguent.
If you would have this Unguent in the form of a Cerote, then increase the
weight of the wax, and you have your desire.

Truth the daughter of Time has brought to light, that Tobacco strangely
cures old ulcers or sores, and mortifications or gangrenes, if the juice of
the leaves be dropped upon the places, and the leaves first bruised, and
applied thereon, without any other curious application or anxious mixture; the
body being first purged, and the redundant peccant humors, being first duly
euacuated, by the advice of some learned Physician, and a vein opened, if so
be it be thought needful, with keeping of a strict and orderly kind of diet:
for Nullum est tam potens medicamentum, quod pr^stare eam quam pollicetur opem
potest, si ratione victus aut perturbetur aut non adiuuetur. There is no
medicine so effectual or of such sufficient virtue only by it self, to cure
any disease, and to expel sickness, and restore to health, if by the order of
diet, and regiment of life, it be either hindered, or not somewhat helped.

Furthermore, it is found by long practice, that it is very available and
effectual, not only for the cure of ^lcers in men, but also in brute beasts:
for throughout all India strange and many sores do plague their oxen, and
other cattle, which by reason of the exceeding and super-abundant moisture of
the country, do putrefie and swarm with worms: on which poor beasts they
were wont heretofore to insperge sublimatum, being destitute of better
remedies: and because the price of this was at a very hie rate in those
places, it oftentimes so fell out, that the medicine cost more, than the silly
beast which was to be cured was adjudged to be worth. Wherefore having
experimented the faculties and properties of Tobacco in men, they transferred
the use thereof to the curation of rotten, stinking, and such corrupt soars of
beasts as were full of crawling worms, and they quickly found that the juice
of the herb being dropped into the place, did not only kill worms, but also
cleanse and mundifie the ulcers, and afterward bring them to perfect
cicatrization: and for the same cause the Americans ever carry about them some
of the powder of it.

I know a certain man that had an ulcer in his nose, out of which there issued
forth a virulent or filthy matter or sanies, not without great suspicion of
some contagion, or infectious sickness, who by mine advise dropped in ^om of
the juice of the leaves of Tobacco, and when he had done so twice together, a
great many worms first came forth, and after that fewer, and lastly after a
few days the sore was absolutely cured, and no worms never after that issued
forth: yet the parts that were consumed, and eaten away could never again by
any art be thoroughly restored.

This plant being hot and dry in the second degree, as some would have it,
does by means thereof undoubtedly purge and cleanse: and so it may heal
either vlcera putrida ac corrosiua in naribus, and Noli me tangere, so named
because it resembles (as some imagine) a cursed shrew that must not be touched
when she is angry, for then she will be, alcataimmitior hyd^a: therefore I
suppose it is not good to wake an angry dog; and when a mischief is well
quieted and brought asleep, it is good to go your ways, and say never a word.

The newfound Alchymists of our time take upon them to make quidlibet ex
quolibet, weauing and vnweauing daily the lucklesse web of Penelope: without
either reason for their mystery, or great reward for their labor: and yet
Johannes Liebaultius writes that there are which destill water of the green
leaves of Tobacco in alymbecke of glass, which water is no less singular in
all effects, and passions, then the very juice, helping all wounds, soars,
and bruses, even restoring to men which by some adventure, or by some poisonous
malignitie and vapor, have lost their nails, new ones by washing that part
with the water destilled, and after wrapping them up in fine linen clothes
dipped in the water. So that it is no marvel if the people of the newfound
world, which we commonly call the West Indies, do make such hie reckoning of
this herb: for there are found diverse populous nations in far differing
clymates, that lived for the most part upon filthy and loathsome poisonous
Spiders, as also of grasshoppers, pissemires, lyzards, and night-bats; and an
ougly toade was sold for six crowns in a time that al such meats were scarce
amongst them, which they boil, roste, bake and dress with diverse kinds of
sawces. Albertus Magnus mentions a maid, who accustomed her stomach to live
only upon spiders. I should judge that Tobacco were good for these kind of
people. But yet this seems more strange, that some of these people have been
found among these nations, to whom our usual flesh, and other meats were
mortal and venomous. Great is the force of custom: Hunts-men will watch all
night in the snow, and endure to be scortched on the hills: Fencers bruised with
sand-bagges or cudgels, and do not so much as groan. Aristotle speaks of
one Andron the Argine, that he would travel all over the scorching sands of
Lybia without drinking, which is impossible for any other to do.

In like manner may we say of our Tobacco: for as use is the most effectual
master of all things; so we see that Tobacco breeds such passions in some, as
though they had received some strong poison, and yet others that are poisoned,
do find it to be a good preservative against poison In some it causes fainting
and swouning; with another, utter deiection of the strength: with others again
it works a contrary effect. I may say, it is like wine. For many other over
shoot themselves with fuming wines, and yet the liquor may be all one, and yet
not work the same effect in all: for some sigh, others smile, some are dum and
silent; others attentive, and full of words: some embrace, others fight: some
sleep, others sing, according to the diverse humors of their bodies, and
instincts of nature. So the fuming vapor of tobacco will cause some to be
drunk, and to have a reeling giddiness in their heads: others again on the
contrary, say, that it expels drunkenness, and all swimmings in the brain.
In some, tobacco causes vomiting; in others again that I have known, it
performs the contrary effect by strengthening the stomach, staying vomiting,
and causing a good appetite. Some, if they take Tobacco much, are transported
with rage and choler, so that you shall see and hear, inflammation and fiery
rednes of the face, unwonted oaths, chafing, unquietness, and rash
precipitation.

Oratument ira, nigrescunt sangaine venae,
Lumina Gorgon^o saeuius igne micant.
In English thus:

The face through anger swells, the veins grow black with blood,
The eyes more fiercely shine than Gorgons fiery mood.
Yea, in some great Tabacconists, you shall see them staringly wild, their
face troubled, their voice frightfull and distempered. They foame at the mouth,
they startle and quake, rage and ruffle, and words escape them, that they
afterward repent. But in others again it causes a pleasant humor, and
clean contrary vsages, humors, and passions. Tabacconists and
Tabacco-companie keepers have in my opinion, but slightly harpt upon this
string, no more than they have upon others of the like or greater consequence:
so that by their variety of conceits, and instabilitie of their humors, and
opinions, they do (as it were) lead us closely by the hand to this resolution
of their irresolution.

Some there are also, who (to speak like a Chemist) do destill oil of
Tobacco, per descensum, which oil these authors (agreeing with the
Paracelsians) prefer before all other applications, eithers of leaves, juice
or powder, because the quintessences (quintessence is no other thing but a
quality, whereof we cannot with our reason find out the cause) and extractions
drawn out of the simples, are the subtle spirit, and have the purest virtue,
and faculty of the substance from the which they are drawn.

This oil is much commended against the toothache, the coughs, and the
rawnesse or coldness of the stomach, and the disease called the Mare.

Many of the Africans are tormented with the toothache, which as some think)
they are the more subject unto, because immediately after hot pottage, they
drink cold water: as John Leo in his first book says.

In Africa likewise, those which are of a sanguine complexion, are greatly
troubled with the cough, because that in the Spring time, they sit too much
upon the ground. And upon Fridaies I had no small sport, and recreation (says
the same Johannes Leo) to go and see them. For upon this day the people flock
to Church in great numbers to hear their Mahumetan sermons. Now, if any one in
the sermon falls a coughing, or a neezing, all the whole multitude will do the
same for company, and so they make such a noise, that they never leave, till
the sermon be quite done: so that a man shall reap but little knowedge at any
of their sermons. I should think it good that these kind of people would take
either the fume, powder or destilled oil of Tobacco for their untimely and
unreasonable coughing, and neezing: and since they are so much subject to the
toothache (as I said before) there is no man but will deem it far better
for them than for us who are vexed with none of these maladies, and yet take it
excessiuely.

The powder of Tobacco is an excellent dentifrice, or cleanser of foul and
rustie teeth, making them to look very white, by scowring away all that
sordes, clammie, and stinking matter that sticks unto them. There be nations
who endeavor to make their teeth as black as jeate, and scorn to have them
white, and in other places they die them read, and these sorts of people need
not any Tobacco for this intent.

For stinking and rotten gums in the disease called the scorbie, and in sore
mouths, there is nothing better than Nicotiana, being taken in a gargarisme,
which is published by Julius Palmarius, and it is also set forth not many
years since by Master ^anister in a book, which he calls his Antidotarie
Chirurgicall.

Rec.
Hordei integri, p. ij. Sanae sanct a Indorum, Morsus gallinae, Eupatorij,
Plantaginis, Rosarum rabrarum, ana m. j.
Boil all these together in aquae lib. iiij. till the one part be consumed,
then add thereto

Mellis rosacei, Serapij rosarum siccarum, ana iij. Aluminis vsti, Calchanti
^sti, ana ss.
Boil all these with a walme or two, and so let it cool, and then keep it to
your use.

Because I have made mention of a strange disease, called in English the Mare,
of the Grecians Ephialtes, and of the Latins Incubus, which (as I said) the
extracted oil of Tobacco cures: I will declare briefly what is meant thereby.

Ephialtes then, or the Mare, so called of Physicians, is a disease of the
stomach, concerning which read Paulus Aegineta. lib. 3. cap. ^6. Many, which
are taken with this disease, imagine that a man of monstrous stature sits on
them, which with his hand violently stops their mouth, that they can by no
means cry out, and they strive with their arms and hands to drive him away,
but all in vain. Some led with vain fantasy, think him who oppresses
them, to creep up by little and little on the bed, as it were to deceive them,
and anon to run down again. They seem also to themselves to hear him.
This disease of the Nightmare, is also called by another name, Puigalion, or
Puigamon. It comes by means of certain gross and thick vapors, which do
partly intercept, and hinder the free passage of the spirits animal: by which
mean, difficulty of speaking and breathing, do proceed, with a perturbation
of the sense and motion of the whole body. Now this dreadful grief (which
some being much deceived, thinking that it must only proceed of witchcraft)
is chiefly remedied with the extracted oil of Tobacco, a few drops taken in
sack or maluesie, after the stomach be first accordingly, by the rules of
art, expurged from those superfluous humors, which are the true cause of the
disease.

The oil of Tobacco for a cold and moist stomach, is far better than oil
of pepper, oil of Anniseeds, the extracted oils of Fennel, Commin, Masticke,
Cloaues, or Calamint: and if an Electuarie were made for this disease called
the Mare, I suppose this to be excellent.

An Electuarie for an ouer-cold and moist stomach.

Rec.
Puluer is aromat. ros. maioris ex descriptione Gabrielis, ij. Puluer is
electuar. diacalaminthes, j. Diatrion piperij, ij. Conseruae anthos and rosarum
Damascenarum, ana ss. Sacchari optimi, vnc. j. ss. Serapij de mentha quod
sufficit, vt fiat elect. liquidum. Add Olei tabaci chymici guttas aliquot.
Dosis vnc. ss. per horam vnam aut alteram ante pastum.
I have discoursed sufficiently (as I judge) of the virtues of Tobacco for
inward diseases of man's body: now will I proceed to his effects in curing
those that happen outwardly: and first there is prescribed unto us this Unguent.

Rec.
Of the choysest, and most substantial leaves of Tobacco, lib. j. Beat them in
a mortar of marble, and after that take of Axungia porcina, lib. ss.
Let it be refined and clarified, and without falt: so this being melted, add
to it the Tobacco, and set it over a soft fire to sees deliberately, and
leasurely, until such time as you find the waterish humiditie of the Tobacco
to be vapoured away, and that the mingled substances retain the force of a
perfect Unguent. Reserve this for a singular and medicinable good Unguent for
sores, ulcers, carbuncles, tetters, and likewise to dissolve tumors.

There is also another in use, which is this that follows.

Rec.
Terebinthinae, Resinae, Cerae nouae, ana vnc. iij.
Melt them together, and then add to them of Tobacco prepared as before, lib.
j. mix them together, and after with a slow fire set them to incorporat,
seething together five or six hours, until the waterish humor of the
Tobacco be clean euapourated. After this is done, strain it through a coorse
linen cloth, that may be very strong. After all this, take of Venice
Turpentine l. ss. infusing it into these things before said, without any more
boiling of it, but yet stirring it continually til it be cold, afterward
preserve and keep these as precious Unguents. This surpasses the former in
all cold griefs, to amend and ease the swelling pains and aches of the gowt,
Sciatica, and the like, helping and comforting weak and resolved sinews, and
cicatrizeth.

Master William Clowes, a skillful Surgeon of London in his book of
observations for curing gunshot, describes an excellent Unguent of Nicotiana
very like unto the former, which he learned, as he affirms, of a very
learned man both in Physic and Chirurgerie, which he said had wrought wonders
above belief, but I (says Master Clowes) found not that excellency in it,
which he promised, and I looked for: nevertheless, I acknowledge it a medicine
not to be disallowed: and this is the order of making of it, as the Physician
appointed.

Rec.
Foliorum Nicotianae, l. j.
Let the leaves be well stamped, and after strained out as strongly as possible
may be, then add thereto

Ceraenouae, Resinae, Olei communis, an^ iij.
Let all these boil together unto the consumption of the juice, then add
thereunto terebinthinae venetae, iij. boil alla little together, and reserve
it to your use. But this Unguent since it was first known, is greatly
bettered, chiefly by Josephus Quercetanus, and others also.

Moreover with the foresaid descriptions, there is also another in use, and
more necessary for wounds made with gunshot: and I have approved it in many
other cures: and thus it is truly prescribed, and published.

Rec.
Succi de Peto, lib. vj. Adipis ouini, lib. ij. Olei communis, lib. xij.
Terebinthinae venetae, xij. Resinae pini, lib. j. Masticis, ij. Colophoniae,
lib. ij. Cerae, lib. j. Vini albi, l. j. Misce and fiat Vnguentum secundum
^rtem.
Let not the Succus of Petum be put in, before all the rest be well relented
together, and then strained into a clean pan: and being molten, put in the
iuyces to the rest, and boil it till the iuyces be all consumed. Then strain
it again, and reserve it to your use. This Unguent does notably incarne and
mundifie.

You shall here, in the closing up of this my discourse, have prescribed two
singular ointments of my own invention, wherewith I have performed many great
cures, and thereby have won both crowns and credit. Vnguentum Sa^ans nostrum.


Rec.
Herbarum, sanae sanct a Indorum, m. iij. Quinqueneruiae, Saniculae, ^na m. ss.
Consolidae mediae vulnerariorum, Bagulae, S^lidaginis Saracenicae, ana m. j.
Beat and temper them all with barrowes grease, l. j. and of the best oil
olive, l. ss. and add to them Vini albi. l. jss. to be boiled the space of one
hour. Afterward strain them, and add to them of wax, l. ss.

Resinae, Terebinthinae, ana iiij. Misce and fiat Ceratum.
This does notably heal.

This other that follows is both sanatiue and mundificatiue, and this is the
true description of it.

Rec.
Terebinthinae, ss. Vnguc^tum nostrum Sanans and mundi^icans.
Vnguenti aurei, Vnguenti tabaci prius descripti, ^na ss. Myrrhae, Mastiches*
Sarcocollae, ana ij. Succi Tab^ci, jss. Cerae, Resinae, ana iij. Mellis, ij.
Olci Hyperici q. sufficit. Cum vitell. ouorum no. ij. Fiat Vnguentum.
Thus much as touching Tobacco, though not so much as others perhaps might, and
I could have done; but yet so much as I thought worthy to be noted and written,
for to satisfy and content the gentle good will of the loving and courteous
readers, i^ that it please them to take as great pleasure, and patience to read
it, as I have taken pains after my long endurance in prison of the kings
Bench, to set it forth. Which thought never to have done, had it not been for
the earnest solicitations and importunities of my best and dearest friends. I
am sure that some will find this my discourse too long, others too short and
trifling, and peradventure vpbraide and cast in my dish the saying of the
famous Poet Terentius in his Comedy entit^led Heautont. Act. 4. sce. 1.

Nae iste magno conatu magnas nugas dixerit. This fellow sure with much adoo,
Has told great tales and trifles too.
But if there be any such fault-finders, quarrell-pickers, corner-creepers, or
spider*catchers, I will leave both them and their figurative flowts, wherewith
they are accustomed to hit men over the shinnes, and end this my discourse with
the Poet Martialis, lib. 13. Epigram. 21. against all such detractours.

Nasutus sis vsque licet, sis denique nasus,
Quantum noluerit far rogatus Atlas:
Et possis ipsum tu deridere Latinum,
Non potes in nugas dicere plura meas,
I^se ego quam dixi: quid dentem dente juuabit
Rodere? carne opus est, si satur esse velis.
Ne perdas operam, quise mirantur, in illos
Virus habe, nos haec nouimus esse nihil.
In English thus:

Suppose you were long nosed, suppose such nose you wear,
As Atlas, if you should entreat him, would not bear:
That you in flowting old Latinus can be fine,
Yet can you say no more against these toys of mine,
Than I have said: what boot is it, tooth with tooth to whet?
You must have flesh, if you to glut your self be set.
Loose not your pains, against them who on themselves are doting:
Keep you your sting? we know these things of ours are nothing.
FINIS.

