Imprimatur.

THO. WYKE R. P. Episc. Land. Cap. domest.
December. 29. 1637.
HISTORY NATURAL And Experimental, Of Life and Death. OR Of the Prolongation
of Life.

Written in Latin by the Right Honorable FRANCIS Lo. Verulam, Vis-Count St.
ALBAN.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for William Lee, and Humphrey Mosley. 1638.



TO THE READER.
I AM to give Advertisement, that there came forth, of late, a Translation of
this Book, by an unknown PERSON; Who though he wished well to the propagating
of his Lordships Works, yet he was altogether unacquainted with his Lordships
Style, and Manner of Expressions; And so published a Translation, Lame, and
Defective, in the whole. Whereupon, I thought fit, to recommend the same, to
be translated anew, by a more Diligent, and Zealous Pen; which has since
travailed in it: And though it still comes short of that Lively, and
Incomparable Spirit, and Expression, which lived and died with the Author; yet
I dare avouch it, to be much more warrantable, and agreeable, than the Former.
It is true, this Book was not intended to have been published in English; But
seeing it has been, already, made free of that Language; Whatsoever Benefit,
or Delight, may redound from it; I commend the same to the Courteous, and
Judicious Reader.

W. R.

To the present Age, and Posterity, GREETING.
ALthough we had ranked the History of Life and Death, as the last, amongst
our six Monthly Designations; yet we have thought fit, in respect of the
prime use thereof; (In which the least Loss of Time ought to be esteemed
precious;) to invert that Order, and to send it forth in the second place. For
we have hope, and wish, that it may conduce to a Common Good; And that the
Nobler sort of Physicians will advance their Thoughts; And not employ their
Times wholly in the Sordidnesse of Cures; Neither be Honored for Necessity
only; But that they will become Coadjutours and Jnstruments of the Divine
omnipotence and Clemency, in Prolonging and Renewing the, Life of Man;
Especially seeing we pre scribe it to be done by Safe, and Convenient, and
Civil ways, though hitherto un-assayed. For though we. Christians do
continually aspire, and pant afterthe Land of Promise; Yet it will be a Token
of Gods Favor toward us, in our Journeyings through this worlds wilderness, to
have our Shoes, and Garments, (I mean, those of our Frail Bodies) little
worn, or impaired.

FR. St. ALBAN.

THE History of Life and Death. The Preface.
IT is an ancient Saying, and Complaint; That Life is Short, and Art Long.
Wherefore, it behooves us, who make it our chiefest Aim, to perfect Arts; to
take upon us, the Consideration, of Prolonging Man's Life; God the Author, of
all Truth, and Life, prospering our Endeavors. For though the Life of Man be
nothing else, but a Mass, and Accumulation, of Sins, and Sorrows; And they
that look for an Eternal Life, set but light by a Temporary; Yet the
Continuation of works of Charity, ought not to be contemned, even by us
Christians. Besides, the Beloved Disciple of our Lord, survived the other
Disciples; And many of the Fathers of the Church, especially of the Holy
Monks, and Hermits, were long lived; which shows, that this Blessing of Long
life, so often promised in the old Law, had less Abatement after our Saviors
Days, than other Earthly Blessings had. But to esteem of this, as the
chiefest Good, we are but too prone. Only the Inquiry is difficult, how to
attain the same; And so much the rather, because it is corrupted, with false
opinions, and vain Reports. For both, those Things, which the Vulgar
Physicians talk, of Radic all Moisture, and Natural Heat, are but mere
Fictions; And the Immoderate praises (...) Chymicall Medicines, first puff up
with vain hopes, and then fail (...) Admirers.

And as for that Death, which is caused by Suffocation, Putrefaction, and
several Diseases, we speak not now; For that pertains to an History of
Physic; But only of that Death which comes by a total Decay of the Body, and
the Inconcoction of old Age. Nevertheless, the last Act of Death, and the very
Extinguishing of Life it self; which may so many ways be wrought, outwardly,
and inwardly; (which notwithstanding have, as it were, one common Porch, before
it comes to the point of Death;) will be pertinent, to be inquired of in this
Treatise; But we reserve that for the last place.

That which may be repaired by Degrees, without a Total waste of the first
Stock, is potentially eternal; As the Vestall Fire. Therefore, when
Physicians, and Philosophers saw, that Living Creatures were nourished, and
their Bodies repaired; But that this did last only for a time; And afterward
came old Age, and, in the end, Dissolution; they sought Death in somewhat,
which could not properly be repaired; Supposing a Radical Moisture incapable
of solid Reparation; And which, from the first infancy, received a Spurious
Addition, but no true Reparation; whereby it grew daily worse and worse; And, in
the end, brought the Bad, to None at all. This conceit of theirs, was both
ignorant and vain. For all Things, in Living Creatures, are, in their youth,
repaired entirely; Nay, they are, for a time, increased in Quantity, bettered
in Quality; so as the Matter of Reparation might be Eternal, if the Manner of
Reparation did not fail. But this is the Truth of it: There is, in the
Declining of Age, an unequal Reparation; Some Parts are repaired easily,
others with Difficulty, and to their loss; So as, from that time, the Bodies
of Men begin to endure the Torment of Mezentius; That the Living die in the
Embraces of the Dead; And the Parts easily reparable, through their Conjunction
with the Parts hardly reparable, do decay. For the Spirits, Blood, Flesh, and
Fat, are, even after the Decline of years, easily repaired; But the Drier, and
more Porous parts, (As the Membranes; All the Tunicles; The Sinews, Arteries,
Veins, Bones, Cartilages; Most of the Bowels; In a word, almost all the
Organicall parts;) are hardly Reparable, and to their loss. Now these hardly
Reparable Parts, when they come to do their office, of Repairing the other,
which are easily reparable, finding themselves deprived of their wonted
Ability, and strength, cease to perform any longer, their proper Functions.
By which means, it comes to pass, that in process of time, the whole tends
to Dissolution; And even those very Parts, which in their own nature, are,
with much case, Reparable; Yet through the Decay of the Organs of Reparation,
can no more receive Reparation; But decline and, in the end, utterly fail. And
the cause of the Termination of Life, is this For that the Spirits, like a
gentle Flame, continually preying upon Bodies; Conspiring with the outward
Air, which is ever Sucking, and Drying of them; Do, in time, destroy the
whole Fabric of the Body; As also the particular Engines, and Organs thereof;
And make them unable, for the work, of Reparation. These are the true ways,
of Natural Death, well, and faithfully, to be revolved in our Minds. For He
that knows not the ways of Nature, how can he succor her, or turn her about?

Therefore, the Inquisition ought to be twofold: The one touching the
Consumption, or Depredation, of the Body of Man; The other, touching the
Reparation, and Renovation of the same: To the end, that the Former may, as
much as is possible, be forbidden and restrained; And the Latter, comforted.
The Former of these, pertaines especially, to the Spirits, and Outward Air; By
which the Depredation, and Waste, is committed; The Latter, to the whole Race
of Alimentation, or Nourishment; whereby, the Renovation, or Restitution, is
made. And as for the Former part, touching Consumption; This has many Things
common, with Bodies Inanimate, or without Life. For such Things, as the Native
Spirit, (which is in all Tangible Bodies, whether Living, or without Life;) And
the Ambient, or External, Air, works upon Bodies Inanimate; The same it
attempteth, upon Animate, or Living Bodies; Although the Vital Spirit super
added, does partly break, and bridle, those Operations; Partly exalt, and
advance them wonderfully. For it is most manifest, that Inanimate Bodies, (most
of them,) will endure a long time, without any Reparation; But Bodies Animate,
without Food, and Reparation, suddenly fall, and are extinguished; As the Fire
is. So then, our Inquisition shall be double; First we will consider the Body
of Man, as Inanimate, and not Repaired by Nourishment; Secondly, as Animate,
and Repaired by Nourishment. Thus having prefaced these Things, we come now to
the Topic Places of Inquisition.

The Particular Topic Places: Or, Articles of Inquisition, Touching Life and
Death.
1 FIrst inquire, of Nature Durable, and Not Durable; In Bodies Inanimate, or
without Life; As also in Vegetables: But that, not in a large, or Just
Treatise; But, as in a Brief, or Summary, only.

2 Also inquire diligently, of Desiccation, Arefaction, and Consumption, of
Bodies Inanmate; And of Vegetables; And of the ways, and Processes by which
they are done: And further of Inhibiting, and De laying, of Desiccation,
Arefaction, and Consumption; And the Conservation of Bodies, in their proper
State: And a gain, of the Inteneration, Emellition, and Recovery of Bodies to
their former Freshness, after they be once dried and withered.

Neither need the Inquisition, touching these Things, to be full, or exact;
seeing they pertain rather, to their proper Title, of Nature Durable; seeing
also, they are not Principals, in this Inquisition; But serve only, to give
Light, to the Prolongation, and Instauration of Life, in Living Creatures. In
which, (as was said before,) the same Things come to pass, but in a Peculiar
manner. So from the Inquisition touching Bodies Inanimate, and Vegetables; Let
the Inquisition pass on to other Living Creatures, besides Man.

Inquire, touching the Length, and Shortness of Life, in Living Creatures;
with the due Circumstances, which make most, for their long, or Short, Lives.

4 But because the Duration of Bodies, is twofold; One in Identitie, or the
selfsame substance; The other, by a Renovation, or Reparation; whereof the
Former, has place only, in Bodies Inanimate; The Latter in Vegetables, and
Living Creatures; And is perfected by Alimentation, or Nourishment; Therefore
it will be fit to inquire of Alimentation; And of the ways, and Progresses
thereof: Yet this, not exactly; (because it pertaines properly to the Titles of
Assimilation, and Alimentation) But as the rest, in progress only.

From the Inquisition, touching Living Creatures, and Bodies repaired by
Nourishment, pass on to the Inquisition touching Man. And now being come to
the principal Subject of Inquisition, the Inquisition ought to be, in all
points, more precise, and accurate.

5 Inquire, touching the Length, and Shortness of Life, in Men, according to
the Ages of the world; The several Regions, Climates, and Places, of their
Nativity, and Habitation.

6 Inquire, touching the Length, and Shortness of Life, in Men, according to
their Races, and Families; As if it were a Thing Hereditary: Also according to
their Complexions, Constitutions, and Habits of Body; Their Statures; The
Manner, and Time, of their Growth; And the Making, and Composition, of their
Members.

7 Inquire, touching the Length, and Shortness, of Life, in Men, according to
the Times of their Nativitie; But so, as you omit, for the present, all
Astrologicall Observations, and the Figures of Heaven, under which they were
borne: Only insist upon the vulgar, and manifest Observations; As, whether
they were borne, in the Seventh, Eighth, Ninth, or Tenth, Month; Also, whether
by Night, or by Day; And in what Month of the year?

8 Inquire, touching the Length, and Shortness, of Life, in Men, according to
their Fare, Diet, Government of their Life, Exercises, and the like. For as for
the Air, in which Men live, and make their Abode, we account that proper to be
inquired of, in the abovesaid Article, touching the Places of their Habitation.

9 Inquire, touching the Length, and Shortness of Life, in Men, according to
their siudies; Their several Courses of Life; The Affections of the Mind; And
diverse Accidents befalling them.

10 Inquire apart, touching those Medicines, which are thought, to prolong Life.

11 Inquire, touching the Signs, and Prognostics, of Long, and Short Life;
Not those which betoken Death, at hand; (for they belong to an History of
Physic;) But those, which are seen, and may be observed, even in Health;
whether they be Physiognomicall signs, or any other.

Hitherto have been propounded, Inquisitions touching Length, and Shortness
of Life, besides the Rules of Art, and in a confused manner; Now we think to
add some, which shall be more Artlike, And tending to Practice, under the name
of Intentions. Those Intentions are, generally, three: As for the particular
Distributions of them, we will propound them, when we come to the Inquisition
it self. The three general Intentions are, Toe Forbidding of Waste and
Consumption; The Perfecting of Reparation; And the Renewing of Oldnesse.

12 Inquire, touching those things, which Conserve and Exempt the body of man,
from Arefaction, and Consumption; At least, which put off, and protract the
inclination thereunto.

13 Inquire, touching those things, which pertain to the whole Process of
Alimentation; (By which the body of man is repaired;) that it may be good, and
with the best improvement.

14 Inquire, touching those things, which purge out the old Matter, and supply
with New: As also, which do Intenerate, and Moisten, those parts, which are
already Dried, and Hardened.

But because it will be hard, to know the ways of Death, unless you search
out, and discover, the Seat, or House, or rather Den of Death; It will be
convenient to make Inquisition of this Thing; yet not of every kind of Death,
but of those Deaths, which are caused, by want, and Indigence of Nourishment,
not by violence: For they are those Deaths only, which pertain to a Decay of
Nature, and mere old Age.

15 Inquire, touching the point of Death; And the porches of Death leading
thereunto from all parts: so as that Death be caused, by a Decay of Nature, and
not by violence.

Lastly; Because it is behoovefull, to know the Character, and Form, of Old
Age; which will then best be done, if you make a Collection, of all the
Differences, both in the State, and Functions, of the Body, (...) Youth, and
Old Age; That by them, you may observe, what it is that produces such manifeld
Effects; let not this Inquisition be omitted.

16 Inquire diligently, touching the Differences, in the State of the Body, and
Faculties of the Mind, in Youth, and old Age; And whether there be any, that
remain the same without Alteration, or (...), in old Age.

Nature Durable, and Not Durable.
The History.
MEtals are of that long To the I Artic.
lasting, that Men cannot trace the Beginnings of them. And when they do
decay, they decay through Rust, not through Perspiration into Air. Yet Gold
decays neither way.

2 Quicksilver, though it be an Humide, and Fluide Body: And easily made
volatile by Fire; yet, (as far as we have observed) by Age alone, without
Fire, it neither wastes, nor gathers Rust.

3 Stones, especially the harder sort of them, and many other Fossiles, are of
long lasting: And that, though they be exposed to the open Air; Much more, if
they be buried in the Earth. Notwithstanding Stones gather a kind of Nitre;
which is to them, in stead of Rust. Precious Stones, and Crystals, exceed
Metals in long Lasting; But then, they grow dimmer, and less Orient, if they
be very old.

4 It is observed, that Stones, lying toward the North, do sooner decay with
Age, than those that lie toward the South; And that this appears manifestly,
in Pyramids, and Churches, and other ancient Buildings: Contrariwise, in Iron,
that exposed to the South, gathers Rust sooner; And that to the North, later;
As may be seen, in the Iron Bars of windows. And no marvel, seeing in all
Putrefaction, (as Rust is) Moisture hastens Dissolution; In all simple
Arefaction, Dryness.

5 In Vegetables, (we speak of such as are feld, not Growing,) the stocks, or
Bodies, of harder Trees, and the Timber made of them, last dive Ages: But then,
there is Difference, in the Bodies of Trees Some Trees are, in a (...) Spongie;
as the Elder; In which the pith, in the Midst is sost, and the outward part
harder; But in timber trees as the Oak, the inner part, (which they call, Heart
of Oak lasts longer.

6 The Leaves, and Flowers, and Stalks, of Plants, are but of short Lasting;
But dissolve into Dust, unless they putrify: the Roots are more durable.

7 The Bones of living Creatures last long; as we may see it, of men's Bones, in
charnell Houses: Horns also last very long; so do Teeth; as it is seen in
Ivorie; and the Sea. horse Teeth.

8 Hides also, and Skins, endure very long; as is evident in old Parchment
Books: paper likewise, will last many Ages; though not so long as Parchment.

9 Such Things, as have possed the Fire, last long; as Glass, and Bricks:
Likewise, Flesh, and Fruits, that have passed the fire, last longer, than Raw:
And that, not only, because the Baking in the Fire, forbids putrefaction; But
also, because the watrie Humor being drawn forth, the oily Humor supports it
self the longer.

10 Water, of all Liquors, is soonest drunk up by Air; Contrariwise, Oil
latest: which we may see, not only in the Liquors themselves; But in the
Liquors mixed with other Bodies: For Paper wet with water, and so getting some
Degree of Transparency, will soon after wax white, and loose the Transparencie
again the watrie vapor exhaling: But oiled Paper will keep the Transparencie
long, the (...) not being apt to exhale: And therefore they, that counterfeit
Men's Hands, will lay the oiled Paper upon the writing they mean to counterfe
(...) and then assay to draw the lines.

11 Gummes, all of them, last very long; The like do, Wax and Honey.

12 But the Equal, or Vnequaliuse, of Things, conduces no less, to long
Lasting, or short Lasting, than the Things themselves. For Timber, and Stones,
and other Bodies, standing continually in the Water, or continually in the
Air, last longer than if they were sometimes wet, sometimes dry. And so
Stones continue longer, if they be laid toward the same coast of Heaven, in
the Building, that they lay in the Mine. The same is, of Plants removed, if
they be coasted just, as they were before.

Observations.
1 LEt this be laid for a Foundation, which is most sure; That there is, in
every Tangible Body, a Spirit, or Body Pneumaticall, enclosed, and covered,
with the Tangible parts; And that, from this Spirit, is the Beginning of all
Dissolution, and Consumption: so as the Antidote (...) them, is the Detaining
(...) this Spirit.

2 This Spirit is detained (...) ways; Either by astraigh Enclosure, as it
were in Prison; Or by a kind (...) Free, and voluntary Detention. Again, this
voluntary stay is persuaded (...) ways: Either if the Spirit it self, be not
too Moveable, or Eager to depart; Or if the External (...) importune it not
too (...) to come forth. So then, (...) sorts of substances are Durable; Hard
Substance and Oily: Hard Substance binds in the spirit close, Oily, partly
enticeth the Spirit to stay; partly, is of that nature, that it is not (...) by
Air: For Air is Consubstantiall to Water, and Flame to Oil. And touching
Nature Durable, and Not Durable, in Bodies Inanimate, thus much.

The History.
13 HErbs, of the Colder sort, dye yearly, both in Root, and Stalk; As Lettice,
Purslane; Also Wheat, and all Kind of Corn. Yet there are some Cold Herbs,
which will last three, or four years, As the Violet, Strawberrie, Burnet,
Prime-rose, and Sorrel But Borage, and Buglosse, which seem so alike, when
they are alive, differ in their Deaths; for Borage will last but one year,
Buglosse will last more.

14 But many Hot Herbs, bear their age, and years, better Hyssope, Thyme,
Savourie, Pot Marjoram, Balm, Wormwood, Germander, Sage; And the like,
Fennel, dies yearly in the Stalk, Buds again from the Root. But Pulse, and
sweet Marjoram, can better endure age, than Winter; For being set, in a very
warm place, and well senced, they will live more than one year. It is known
that a Knot of Hyssope, twice (...) year shorn, has continued forty years.

15 Bushes, and Shrubs, live threescore years; and some double as much. A Vine
may attain to threescore years, and continue Fruitful in the old age. Rose
mary, well placed, will come also to threescore years. But White Thorn, and
Ivy, endure above an hundred years. As for the Bramble, the age thereof is
not certainly known; Because bowing the head to the Ground, it gets new Roots;
so as you cannot distinguish, the Old, from the New.

16 Amongst great Trees, the longest Livers are; The Oak, the Holme, the
Wild-Ash, the Elm, the Beech-tree, the Chestnut, the Plain-tree, Ficus
Ruminalis, the Lote-tree, the Wildolive, the Olive, the Palm Tree, and the
Mulberrie-tree: Of these, some have come to the Age of eight hundred years;
But the least Livers of them, do attain to two hundred.

17 But Trees Odorate, or that have sweet woods; And Trees Rozennie, last
longer, in their Woods, or Timber, than those above said, but they are not so
long lived; as the Cypresse-tree, Maple, Pine, Box, Juniper. The Cedar, being
borne out, by the vastness of his body, lives well-neare (...) long as the
former.

18 The Ash, fertile, and forward in Bearing, reaches to an hundred years,
and somewhat better; which also, the Birch, Maple, and Service-tree, sometimes
do: But the Poplar, Lime-tree, Willow, and that which they call the Cycomore,
and Wall-nut-tree, live not so long.

19 The Apple Tree, Peare-tree, Plum-tree, Pomegranate-tree, Citron-tree,
Medlar-tree, BlackCherrie-tree, Cherrie-tree, may attain to fifty, or sixty
years; Especially, if they be cleansed from the Moss, where with some of them
are clothed.

20 Generally, Greainesse of Body, in Trees, if other things be equal, has
some congruitie, with Length of Life: So has Hardness of Substance: And
Trees, bearing Mast, or Nuts, are commonly longer livers, than Trees, bearing
Fruit, or Berries: Likewise, Trees putting forth their Leaves late, and
shedding them late again, live longer than those, that are early, either in
Leaves, or Fruit: The like is of Wild trees, in comparison of Orchard Trees:
And lastly, in the same kind, Trees that bear a Sour Fruit, outlive those
that bear a sweet Fruit.

An Observation.
3 ARistotle noted well (...) difference between Plants. and living Creatures,
in (...) of their Nourishment, and Reparation; Namely, that the Bodies of
living Creatures, an confined within certain Bounds and that after they be
come to their full Growth, they are continued and preserved by Nourishment, but
they put forth nothing New, except Hair and Nails; which are counted for no
better than Excrements; so as the juice of living Creatures, must, of
necessity, sonner wax old: But in Trees, which put forth yearly, new Boughs,
new Shoots, new Leaves, and new Fruits; It comes to pass, that all these parts
in Trees, are once a year young and renewed; Now it being so, that whatsoever
is fresh and young, draws the Nourishment more lively and cheerfully to it,
than that which is Decayed and Old; It happens withal, that the Stock and Body
of the Tree, through which the Sap posseth to the Branches, is refreshed and
(...), with a more bountiful and vigorous Nourishment, in the Passage, than
otherwise it would have been. And this appears notably, (though Aristotle
noted it not; Neither has be expressed these things so clearly, and
perspicuously;) In Hedges, Copses, and Pollards, when the plashing, shedding,
or lopping, comfort the old Stem or Stock, and makes it more flourishing,
and longer lived.

Desiccation; prohibiting (...) Desiccation; And Inteneration of that, which is
desiccated and dried.
The History.
1 FIre, and strong Heats To the 2 Artic.
dry some things, and mels others:

Limus ut hic durescit, and (...) Cera liquescit,
Vno eodemque Igne.
How this Clay is hardened, and how this wax is melted, with one, and the same
thing, Fire; It dries Earth, Stones, Wood, Cloth, and Skins, and whatsoever is
not liquefiable; and it melts Metals, Wax, Gums, Butter, Tallow, and the like.

2 Notwithstanding, even in those things, which the Fire melts, if it be
very vehement, and continues, it does at last dry them. For Metal, in a
strong Fire, ( Gold only excepted,) the volatile part being gone forth, will
become less ponderous, and more brittle: and those Oily, and fat Substances,
in the like Fire, will burn up, and be dried, and parched.

3 Air, especially open Air, does manifestly dry, but not melt: as High
ways, and the upper part of the Earth, moistened with showers, are dried; (...)
Clothes, washed, if they be hanged out in the Air, are likewise dried; Herbs,
and Leaves, and Flowers, laid forth in the shade, are dried. But much more
suddenly does the Air this; If it be either enlightened with the Sunbeams,
(so that they cause not putrefaction;) Or if the Air be stirred; as when the
Wind blows; Or in Rooms open, on all sides.

4 Age, most of all, but yet slowest of all, dries; as in all bodies, which
(if they be not prevented by putrefaction) are dried with Age. But Age is
nothing of it self; being only the measure of time: That which causes the
Effect, is the native Spirit of bodies, which sucketh up the moisture of the
body, and then, together with it, flies forth; and the Air ambient, which
multiplieth it self, upon the native Spirits, and jayees of the body, and
preyeth upon them.

5 Cold, of all things, most properly, dries; for Drying is not caused, but by
Contraction; Now Contraction is the proper work of Cold. But because we Men
have Heat in a high Degree, namely that of Fire; but Cold in a very low Degree,
none other than that of Winter; Or perhaps of Ice, or of Snow, or of Nitre:
therefore the Drying caused by Cold, is but weak, and easily resolved.
Notwithstanding we see the Surface of the Earth, to be more dried by Frost,
or by March winds, than by the Sun; seeing the same wind, both licketh up
the moisture, and affects with Coldness.

6 Smoke is a Dryer; as in Bacon, and Neats Tongues which are hanged up in
chimneys: and perfumes of Olibanum, or Lignum Aloes, and the like, dry the
Brain, and cure Catarrhs.

7 Salt, after some reasonable continuance, dries; not only on the outside,
but in the inside also; as in Flesh and Fish salted, which if they have
continued any long time, have a manifest hardness within.

8 Hot Gummes, applied to the skin, dry, and wrinkle it: and some Astringent
waters also do the same.

9 Spirit of strong wines, imitateth the Fire in Drying: For it will both potch
an Egg, put into it; and toast Bread.

10 Powders dry like Sponges, by Drinking up the Moisture, as it is in Sand,
throwneupon Lines, new written. Also Smoothness, and Politenesse of Bodies,
(which suffer not the Vapor of Moisture, to go in by the Pores,) Dry by
accident, because it exposes it to the Air; As it is seen in Precious
Stones, Looking-Glasses, and Blades of Swords; Upon which if you breathe, you
shall see at first a little Mist; But soon after it vanishes, like a Cloud.
And thus much for Desiceation, or Drying.

11 They use at this day, in the East parts of Germany, Garners, in Vaults
under Ground; wherein they keep wheat, and other Grains; Laying a good
Quantity of Straw, both under the Grains, and about them, to save them from
the Danknesse of the Vault: By which Device, they keep their Graiaes twenty,
or thirty years. And this does not only preserve them from Eustinesse, but
(that which pertaines more to the present Inquisition,) preserves them also in
that Greenness, that they are fit, and serviceable to make Bread. The same is
reported, to have been in use, in Cappadocia, and Thracia, and some parts of
Spain.

12 The placing of Garners, on the Tops of Houses, with Windows toward the
East, and North, is very commodious. Some also make two Sollars; An Upper, and
a Lower; And the upper Sollar has an Hole in it; through which the Grain
continually descends, like Sand in an Houre-glasse; And after a few days,
they throw it up again with Shovels; That so it may be in continual Motion.
Now it is to be noted, that this does not only prevent the Fustinesse, but
conserveth the Greenness, and slacketh the Desiccation of it: The cause is
that Which we noted before; That the Discharging of the watery Humor, Which is
quickened by the Motion, and the Winds, preserves the Oily Humor in his Being;
Which otherwise would fly out, together with the Watery Humor. Also in some
Mountains, where the Air is very pure, Dead Carkases may be kept for a good
while, without any great Decay.

13 Fruits; As Pomegranates, Cytrons, Apples, Pears, and the like. Also
Flowers; As Roses, and Lilies; may be kept, a long time, in Earthen Vessels
close stopped. Howsoever they are not free from the Injuries of the outward Air
which will affect them, wit. his unequal Temper, through the sides of the
Vessel; As (...) is manifest, in Heat and cold Therefore it will be good to
stop the Mouths of the Vessels carefully, and to bury them within the Earth.
And it will be as good: Not to bury them in the Earth, but to sink them in the
Water, so as the place be shady; As in Wels: Or Cisternes placed within Doors:
But those that be sunk in Water, will do better in Glass vessels, than in
Earthen.

14 Generally, those Things which are kept in the Earth, (...) in Vaults under
Ground, or in the Bottom of a Well, will preserve their Freshness longer,
than those Things that are kept above Ground.

15 They say, it has been observed; That in Conservatories of Snow, (whether
they were in Mountains, in Natural Pits, or in Wells made by Art, for that
purpose) an Apple, or Chest-nut, or Nut, by chance falling in, after many
Months, when the Snow has melted, have been found in the Snow, as fresh and
fair, as if they had been gathered the day before.

16 Country people keep Clusters of Grapes in Meal; which though it makes them
less pleasant to the taste, yet it preserves their Moisture, and Freshness.
Also the Harder sort of Fruits may be kept long, not only in Meal, but also
in Saw-dust, and in (...) of Corn.

17 There is an opinion held; That Bodies may be preserved Fresh in Liquours of
their own kind; As in their proper (...) As to keep Grapes in wine, Olives in
Oil.

18 Pomegrants, and Quinces, are kept long, being lightly dipped in Sea water,
or Saltwater; And soon after taken out again; and then dried in the open
Air, so it be in the Shade.

19 Bodies put in Wine, Oil, or the Lees of Oil, keep long; Much more in
Honey, or Spirit of Wine; But most of all, as some say, in Quicksilver.

20 Fruits enclosed in Wax, Pitch, Plaster, Paste, or any the like Case, or
Covering, keep green very long.

21 It is manifest, that Flies, Spiders, Ants, or the like small Creasures,
falling by chance into Amber, or the Gums of Trees, and so finding a Burial in
them, do never after corrupt, or rot, although they be soft and tender Bodies.

22 Grapes are kept long by being hanged up in Bunches; The same is of other
Fruits. For there is a twofold commodity of this Thing; The one, that they are
kept without Pressing, or Bruising; which they must needs suffer, if they were
laid upon any hard substance; The other, that the Air does encompasse them, on
every side alike.

23 It is observed, that Putrefaction, no less than Desiccation, in
Vegetables, does not (...) in every part alike; But chiefly in that part,
where, being alive, it did attract Nourishment. Therefore some advise, to cover
the Stalks (...) Apples, or other Fruits, with Wax, or Pitch.

24 Great Wiekes of Candles, (...) Lamps, do sooner (...) the Tallow, or Oil,
than (...) Wiekes: Also Wieks of Cotton sooner than those of Rush, (...) Straw,
or small Twigs: And in Staves of Torches, those of Juniper, or Fur, sooner
than those of Ash: Likewise, Flame, Moved, and Fanned with the Wind, sooner
than that which is still; And therefore Candles, set in a Lantern, will last
longer, than in the Open Air. There is a Tradition, that Lamps set in
Sepulchers, will last an incredible time.

25 The Nature also, and Preparation of the Nourishment, conduces no less, to
the Lasting of Lamps, and Candles, than the Nature of the Flame: For Wax will
last longer than Tallow; And Tallow a little wet, longer than Tallow dry; And
Wax Candles old made, longer than Wax Candles new made.

26 Trees, if you stir the Earth about their Roots, every year, will continue
less time; If once in four, or perhaps in ten years, much longer: Also
Cutting off the Suckers, and Young Shoots, will make them live the longer: But
Dunging them, or laying of Marle about their Roots, or much Watring them, adds
to their fertility, but cuts off from their long Lasting. And thus much,
touching the Prohibiting of Desiccation, or Consumption.

The Inteneration, or making Tender, of that which (...) Dried, (which is the
chief Matter,) affords but a small Number of Experiments: And therefore some
few Experiments which are found in (...) Creatures, and also in Man shall be
joined together.

27 Bands of Willow, wherewith they use to bind Trees, laid in water, grow more
Flexible. Likewise, they put Boughs of Birch, (the ends of them) in earthen
Pots filled with water, to keep them from withering; And Bowls cleft with
Dryness, steeped in water, close again.

28 Boots, grown hard and obstinate with age, by greasing them before the Fire
with (...), wax soft; or being only held before the Fire, get some softness:
Bladders, and Parchments, hardened also, become tender, with warm water, mixed
with Tallow, or any Fat Thing; But much the better, if they be a little Chofed.

29 Trees grown very old, that have stood long without any Culture, by
Digging, and Opening the Earth, about the Roots of them, seem to grow young
again, and put forth young Branches.

30 Old Draught Oxen, worn out with labor, being taken from the yoke, and put
into fresh Pasture, will get young and tender Flesh again; In so much, that
they will eat, as Fresh and tender, as a Steer.

31 A strict Emaciating Diet, of Guaiacum, Biscuit, and the like; (wherewith
they use to cure the French Pox, old Catarrhs, and some kind of Dropsies,)
does first bring men to great Poverty and Leanness, by wasting the Juyces and
Humors of the Body; which after they begin to be repaired again, seem (...)
more vigorous and young: Nay, and we are of Opinion, that Emaciating Diseases,
afterward well cured, have advanced many in the way of Long Life.

Observations.
1 MEn see clearly, like Owls in the Night, of their own Notions; But in
Experience, as in the Daylight, they wink, and are but halfe-sighted. They
speak much, of the Elementary Quality of Siccity, or Dryness; And of Things
Desiccating; And of the Natural Periods of Bodies, in which they are
Corrupted, and consumed: But mean while, either in the Beginnings, or Middle
Passages, or Last Acts, of Desiccation, and Consumption, they observe nothing,
that is of Moment.

2 Desiccation, or Consumption, in the Process thereof, is finished by three
Actions; And all these, (as was said before,) have their Original, from the
Native Spirit of bodies.

3 The First Action is, the Attenuation of the Moisture into Spirit; The Second
is, the Issuing forth, or Flight of the Spirit; The third is, the Contraction,
of the Grosser Parts of the Body, immediately after the Spirit issued forth:
And this last, is that Desiccation, and Induration, which we chiefly handle;
The Former Two consume only.

4 Touching Attenuation, the matter is manifest. For the Spirit, which is
enclosed in every Tangible Body, forgets not his Nature; But whatsoever it
meets withal in the Body, (in which it is enclosed,) that it can digest, and
master, and turn into it self; That it plainly alters, and subdues, and
multiplies it self upon it, and begets new Spirit. And this is evicted, by one
Proof, in stead of many; For that those Things, which are (...) Dried, are
Lessened in their Weight; And become Hollow, Porous, and Resounding from
within. Now it is most certain, that the Inward Spirit of any Thing, confers
Nothing to the Weight; But rather Lightens it; And therefore it must needs be,
that the same Spirit, has turned into it, the Moisture and Juice of the Body,
which weighed before; By which Means the Weight is lessened. And this is the
first Action; The Attenuation of the Moisture, and Converting it into Spirit.

5 The second Action, which is the Issuing forth or Flight of the Spirit, is as
manifest also. For that Issuing forth, when it is in throngs, is apparent even
to the Sense; In Vapors, to the Sight; In Odours, to the Smelling: But if it
issues forth slowly; (As when a Thing is decayed by Age,) then it is not
apparent to the Sense; But the Matter is the same. Again, where the Composure
of the Body, is either so Strait, or so Tenacious, That the Spirit can find no
Pores, or Passages, by which to depart, Then, in the striving to get out, it
drives before it the grosser Parts of the Body; And protrudes them beyond the
Superficies, or Surface of the Bodit; As it is in the Rust of Metals; And Mould
of all Fat Things. And this is the second Action; The Issuing forth, or Flight
of the Spirit.

6 The third Action, is somewhat more obscure, but full as certain: That is;
The Contraction, of the Grosser Parts, after the Spirit issued forth. And this
appears first, in that Bodies after the Spirit issued forth, do manifestly
Shrink, and (...) a less Room; As it is in the Kernels of Nuts, which after
they are dried, are too little for the Shells; And in Beams, and Planchers of
Houses, which at first lay closo together, but after they are dried, gape; And
likewise in Bowls, which through Drought, grow full of Cranies, The Parts of
the Bowl contracting themselves together, and after Contraction must needs be
empty Spaces. Secondly, it appears by the Wrinkles of Bodies Dried: For the
Endeavor of Contracting it self, is such; That by the Contraction, it brings
the Parts nearer together, and so lifts them up; For whatsoever is Contracted
on the sides, is lifted up in the Midst; And this is to be seen, in Papers,
and old Parchments; And in the Skins of Living Creatures; And in the Coats of
Soft Cheeses; All which, with Age, gather wrinkles. Thirdly this Contraction
shows (...) self Most, in those Things, which by Heat, are not only wrinkled
but ruffled, and plighted, and, (...) it were, rolled together; As it is in
Papers, and Parchments, and Leaves, brought near the Fire. For Contraction, by
Age, which is more Slow, commonly causes wrinkles; But Contraction, by the
Fire, which is (...) speedy, causes Plighting. Now in most Things, where it
(...) not to Wrinkling, or Plighting, there is simple Contraction, and
Angustiation, (...) Straitning, and Induration (...) Hardening, and Desiccation;
As was showed in the first place: But if the Issuing forth of the Spirit; and
Absumption, or waste of the Moisture, be so great; That there is not left
Body sufficient, to unite, and contract it self; Then, of Necessity,
Contraction must cease; And the Body (...) Putride; And nothing else, but a
little Dust, cleaving together, which with a light touch, is dispersed, and
falls asunder; As it is in Bodies that are Rotten, and in Paper burnt; And
Linen made into Tinder; And Carkaises Embalmed, after many Ages. And this is
the Third Action; The Contraction of the Grosser Parts, after the Spirit issued
forth.

7 It is to be noted; That Fire, and Heat, dry only by Accident. For their
proper Work is, to attenuate, and dilate the Spirit, and Moisture; And then it
follows by Accident, that the other Parts should contract themselves; Either
for the Flying of Vacuum alone; Or for some other Motion withal; Whereof we
now speak not.

8 It is certain that Putrefaction, takes his Original, from the Native
Spirit, no less than Arefaction; But it goes on a far different way; For in
Putrefaction, the Spirit, is not simply vapoured forth; But being detained in
Part, works strange Garboises; And the Grosser Parts, are not so much locally
contracted, as they congregate themselves to Parts of the same Nature.

Length, and Shortness of Life in living Creatures.
The History.
TOuching the Length, To the 1. Article.
and Shortness of Life, in Living Creatures, the Information, which may be had,
is but Slender; Observation is Negligent; And Tradition Fabulous: In Tame
Creatures, their (...) Life, corrupts them; In wild Creatures, their
Exposing to all weathers, often intercepteth them. Neither do those Things,
which may seem Concomitants, give any Furtherance, to this Information, (The
Greatness of their Bodies; Their Time of Bearing in the Womb; The Number of
their Young ones; The Time of their Growth, And the Rest;) In regard that these
Things are Intermixed, And sometimes they concur, sometimes they sever:

1 Man's Age, (as far as can be gathered by any certain Narration,) does
exceed the Age, of all other Living Creatures; Except it be, of a very few
only. And the Concomitants in him, are very equally disposed; His Stature, and
Proportion, large; His Bearing in the Womb, nine Months; His Fruit, commonly,
one, at a Birth; His Pubertie at the Age of Fourteen years; His Time of
Growing, till Twenty.

2 The Elephant, by undoubted Relation, exceeds the Ordinary Race of Man's life:
But his Bearing in the Womb, the space of ten years, is fabulous; Of two
years, or at least, above one, is certain: Now his Bulk is great; His Time
of Growth, until the thirtieth year; His Teeth exceeding hard: Neither has
it been unobserved; That his Blood is the coldest of all Creatures: His Age,
has sometimes reached, to two hundred years.

3 Lions are accounted long Livers, because many of them, have been found
Toothlesse; A sign not so certain; For that may be caused, by their strong
Breath.

4 The Bear is a great Sleeper; A Dull Beast, and given to ease; And yet not
noted for long Life: Nay he has this sign of short Life; That his Bearing in
the Womb is but short; scarce full forty days.

5 The Fox seems to be well disposed, in many Things, for long life; He is
well skinned, feeds on Flesh, lives in Dens; And yet he is noted not to have
that property. Certainly, he is a kind of Dog; And that kind is but short
lived.

6 The Camel is a long Liver: A lean Creature, and Sinewy: So that he does
ordinarily attain to Fifty; And some. times to an hundred years.

7 The Horse lives but to a moderate Age; searce to forty years; His
ordinary Period is Twenty years. But perhaps, he is beholding, for this
shortness of his Life, to Man: For we have now no Horses of the Sun; That
live freely, and at pleasure, in good pastures. Notwithstanding the Horse
grows, till he be six years old; And is able for Generation, in his Old
Age. Besides, the Mare goes longer with her young one, than a Woman; And
brings forth two at a Burden more rarely. The Ass lives commonly to the
Horses Age; But the Mule out-lives them both.

8 The Heart is famous amongst Men, for long Life; yet not upon any Relation,
that is undoubted. They tell of a certain Heart, that was found with a Collar
about his Neck, and that Collar hidden with Fat. The long Life of the Heart, is
the less credible, because he comes to his perfection at the Fifth year; And
not long after, his Horns, (which he sheds, and renewes yearly) grow more
Narrow at the Root, and less Branched.

9 The Dag is but a short Liver: He exceeds not the Age of Twenty years; And
for the most part lives not to fourteen years. A Creature of the hottest
Temper, and living in extremes; for he is commonly, either in vehement Motion,
or Sleeping Besides, the Bitch, brings forth many at a Burden, and goes
nine weeks.

10 The Ox likewise, for the Greatness of his Body, and Strength, is but a
short Liver; About some sixteen years: And the Males live longer than the
Females: Notwithstanding, they bear, usually, but one at a Burden, and go
nine Months. A Creature dull, and fleshy, and soon fatted, and living only
upon Herby substances, without Grain.

11 The Sheep seldom lives to ten years; Though he be a Creature, of a
moderate size, and excellently clad: And, that which may seem a wonder, being
a Creature with so little Gall, yet he has the most curled coat of any other;
For the Hair, of no Creature, is so much curled, as Wool is. The Rams
generate not before the third year; And continue able for Generation, until
the eighth: The Ewes bear young, as long as they live. The Sheep is a diseased
Creature; And rarely lives to his full Age.

12 The Goat lives to the same Age, with the Sheep; And is not much unlike in
other Things; Though he be a Creature more Nimble, and of somewhat a firmer
Flesh; And so should be longer lived: But then he is much more lascivious;
And that shortens his Life.

13 The Sow lives to fifteen years, sometimes to twenty: And though it be a
Creature of the Moistest Flesh; yet that seems to make nothing to Length of
Life. Of the Wild Boar, or Sow, we have nothing certain.

14 The Cats Age, is betwixt six, and ten years. A Creature nimble, and full
of spirit, whose seed, (As Aelian repotteth) burns the Female. Whereupon it
is said; That the Cat conceives with pain, and brings forth with ease. A
creature ravenous in eating; Rather swallowing down his Meat whole, than
Feeding.

15 Hares and Conies attain scarce to seven years: Being both Creatures
Generative, and with young ones, of several conceptions, in their bellies: In
this, they are unlike, that the Coney lives under Ground, and the Hare above
Ground; And again, that the Hare is of a more duskish Flesh.

16 Birds, for the size of their Bodies, are much lesser than Beasts: for an
Eagle, or Swan, is but a small Thing, in comparison of an Ox, or Horse; And so
is an Estrich, to an Elephant.

17 Birds are excellently well clad; For Feathers, for warmth, and close
sitting, to the Body, exceed wool, and Hairs.

18 Birds, though they hatch many young ones together, yet they bear them not
all in their Bodies at once; Butlay their Eggs by turns; whereby, their Fruit
has the more plentiful nourishment, (...) it is in their bodies.

19 Birds chew, little, or nothing; but their Meat is found whole in their
crops; Notwithstanding they will break the shells of Fruits, and pick out the
Kernels: They are thought to be, of a very hot, and strong concoction.

20 The Motion of Birds, in their Flying, is a mixed Motion Consisting, of a
moving of the Lims, and of a kind of Carriage, which is, a most wholesome
kind of Exercise.

21 Aristotle noted well, touching the Generation of Birds; (But he
transferred it ill to other living Creatures;) That the seed of the Male,
confers less to Generation, than the Female. But that it rather affords
Activity, than Matter: so that Fruitful Eggs, and unfruitful Eggs, are
hardly distinguished.

22 Birds, (almost all of them,) come to their full Growth, the first year, or
a little after: It is true, that their Feathers, in some kinds, and their
Bills, in others, show their years; But for the Growth of their Bodies, it is
not so.

23 The Eagle is accounted a long Liver; yet his years are not set down. And
it is alleged, as a sign of his long life; That he casts his Bill; whereby
he grows young again. From whence comes that Proverb; The Old Age of an
Eagle. Notwithstanding, perchance, the matter may be thus; That the Renewing of
the Eagle does not cast his Bill; But the casting of his Bill, is the Renewing
of the Eagle: For after that his Bill is grown, to a great crookedness, the
Eagle feeds, with much difficulty.

24 Vultures also are affirmed to be long Livers; Insomuch, that they extend
their Life, well-neare to an hundred years: Kites likewise, and so all Birds
that feed upon Flesh, and Birds of prey, live long. As for Hawks, because they
lead a degenerate, and servile life, for the Delight of Men; The Term of their
Natural Life is not certainly known: Notwithstanding, amongst Mewed Hawks,
some have been found, so have lived thirty years. And amongst wild Hawks,
forty years.

25 The Raven likewise, is reported to live long; Sometimes, to an hundred
years. He feeds on Carrion; And flies not often, but rather is a se dentarie,
and Melancholy Bird; And has very black flesh. But the Crow, like unto him in
most Things; (Except in Greatness, and voice;) lives not altogether so long;
And yet is reckoned amongst the long Livers.

26 The Swan, is certainly found, to be a long Liver; And exceeds, not
unfrequently, an hundred years. He is a Bird excellently plumed; A Feeder upon
Fish; And is always carried; And that in Running Waters.

27 The Goose also may pass amongst the Long-livers; Though his food be
commonly Grass, and such kind of Nourishment: Especially, the Wilde-Goose;
whereupon, this Proverb grew amongst the Germans; Magis senex quam Anser
Nivalis; Older than a Wilde-Goose.

28 Storks must needs be Long-livers; If that be true, which was anciently
observed of them; That they never came to (...) because that City was often
sacked. This if it were so; Then either, they must have the knowledge of more
Ages than one; Or else the old Ones, much tell their young, the History. But
there is Nothing more frequent, than Fables.

29 For Fables do so abound, touching the Phoenix; That the Truth is utterly
lost, if any such Bird there be. As for that, which was so much admired; That
she was ever seen abroad, with a great Troop of Birds about her, it is no
such wonder: For the same is usually seen, about an Owl flying in the Day
time, or a Parret, let out of a Cage.

30 The Parret, has been certainly known, to have lived threescore years in
England; How old soever he was, before he was brought over. A Bird, eating
almost all kind of Meats, chewing his Meat, and renewing his Bill; Likewise,
cursed, and mischievous, and of a black Flesh.

31 The Peacock lives Twenty years; But he comes not forth with his Argus
Eyes, before he be three years old: A Bird slow of pace, having whitish Flesh.

32 The Dunghill Cock, is venereous, Martial, and but of a short life; A
cranck Bird; Having also white Flesh.

33 The Indian Cock, commonly called, The Turkey-Cock. lives not much longer,
that the Dunghill-Cock: An Angry Bird; And has exceeding white Flesh.

34 The Ring-Doves, are of the longest sort of Livers; Insomuch, that they
attain, sometimes, to fifty years of Age: An Aerie Bird; And both Builds, and
Sits, on high: But Doves, and Turtles, are but short lived, not exceeding eight
years.

35 But Pheasants, and (...), may live to sixteen years: They are great
Breeders; But not so white of Flesh, as the ordinary Pullen.

36 The Blackbird is reported to be, amongst the lesser Birds, one of the
longest livers: An unhappy Bird, and a good Singer.

37 The Sparrow is noted to be of a very short Life; And it is imputed, in the
Males, to their Lasciviousness. But the Linnet, no bigger in Body, than the
Sparrow, has been observed, to have lived twenty years.

38 Of the Estrich, we have nothing certain: Those that were kept here, have
been so unfortunate, that no long life appeared by them. Of (...) Bird Ibis,
we find only, (...) long; But his year are not recorded.

39 The Age of Fishes is (...) uncertain, than that of Terrestrial Creatures;
Because living under the water, (...) are the less observed. (...) of them
breath not; By (...) means, their vital (...) more closed in: And there fore,
though they (...) some Refrigeration, by (...) Gils; yet that Refrigeration is
not so continual, as (...) it is by Breathing.

40 They are free, from the Diccation, and Depredation, (...) the Air Ambient,
(...) they live in the water: (...) there is no Doubt, but the Water Ambient,
and piercing and received into the pores of their Body, does more Hurt, to long
Life, than the Air does.

41 It is affirmed too, that their (...) is not Warm: Some of them: are great
Devourers, even of their own kind. Their Flesh is softer, and more tender,
than that of Terrestrial Creatures. They grow exceedingly fat; Insomuch, that
an Incredible Quantity of Oil will be extracted out of one Whole.

42 (...) reported to live about thirty years: Of which Thing, a Trial was
taken, in some of them, by cutting off their Tails: They grow until ten
years of Age.

43 That which they report, of some Fishes, is strange; That after a certain
Age, their Bodies will waste, and grow very slender; Only their Head, and
Tail, retaining their former Greatness.

44 There were found, in Caesar's Fish Ponds, Lampreys to have lived threescore
years: They were grown so familiar, with long use, That Crassus the Orator,
solemnly lamented One of them.

45 The Pike, amongst Fishes living in fresh water, is found to last longest;
sometimes (...) forty years: He is a (...) of a Flesh, somewhat Dry, and Firm.

46 But the Carp, Breame, (...), and the like; Are no held to live, above ten
years

47 Salmons are Quick of Growth, short of Life; So are Trouts: But the Perch
is slow of Growth, long of life.

48 Touching that monstrous Bulk, of the Whale, or Orke; How long it is wielded
by vital Spirit; We have received Nothing certain: Neither yet, touching the
Sea-calf, and Sea Hog, and other innumerable Fishes.

49 Crocodiles are reported to be exceeding long lived; And re famous, fer the
Time of their Growth; For that they, amongst all other Creatures, are thought
to grow, during their whole life. They are of those Creatures, that lay Eggs;
Ravenous, cruel, and well fenced against the waters. Touching the other kinds
of Shell. Fish, we find Nothing certain, how long they live.

Observations.
To find out a Rule, touching Length, and Shcrtnesse, of Life, in Living
Creatures, is very difficult; By reason of the Negligence of Observations, and
the Intermixing of Causes: A few Things we will set down.

1 There are more kinds of Birds, found to be long lived, than of Beasts; (As
the Eagle the Vultur, the Kite, the Pelican, the Raven, the Crow, the Swan, the
Goose, the Storke, the Crane, the Bird called the Ibis, the Parret, the Ring
Dove, with the rest;) Though they come to their full Growth, within a year;
And are less of Bodies. Surely, their Clothing is excellent good against the
Distemperatures of the wether; And besides, living, for the most part, in the
open Air, they are like the Inhabitants of pure Mountains, which are long
lived. Again, their Motion; which, (as we else where said,) is a mixed Motion;
Compounded of a Moving of their Lims, and of a Carriage in the Air; does less
weary, and wear them; And is more wholesome. Neither do they suffer any
Compression, or want of Nourishment, in their Mothers Bellies; Because the
Eggs are laid by Turns: But the chiesest cause of all, I take to be this;
That Birds are made more of the substance of the Mother, than of the Father;
whereby their Spirit is not so eager, and hot.

2 It may be a position; That Creatures, which partake more of the substance
of their Mother than of their Father, are longer lived; As Birds are; which
(...) said before. Also that those which have a longer time of Bearing in the
womb, do (...) more of the substance of the Mother, less of the Father; And
si are longer lived: Insomuch (...) we are of opinion, that even (...) among
Men, (which we (...) noted in some,) those that resemble their Mothers most,
are longest lived: And so are the children of old Men, begotten upon young
wives; If the Fathers be sound not Diseased.

3 The First Breeding of Creatures, is ever most Material, either to their
Hurt, or Benefit And therefore it stands with Reason; That the lesser
Compression, and the more liberal Alimentation, of the young one, in the
womb, should confer much to Long Life; Now this happens, when either the
young ones are brought forth successively, as in Birds; Or when they are single
Births; As in Creatures bearing but one at a Burden.

4 But long Bearing, in the womb, makes for Length of Life, three ways.
First, for that the young one partakes more of the substance of the Mother; As
has been said. Secondly, that it comes forth, more strong, and able. Thirdly,
that it undergoes the predatorie Force of the Air, sater. Besides it shows,
that Nature intends to finish her periods, by larger Circles. Now though
Oxen, and Sheep, which are borne in the womb, about six Months, are but
short lived: That happens for other Causes.

5 Feeders upon Grass, and (...) Herbs, are but short Livers; And Creatures,
feeding upon Flesh, or Seeds, or Fruits, long Livers; As some Birds are. As for
Hearts, which are long lived; They take the one Half of their Meat, (As men use
to say,) from above their Heads. And the Goose, besides Grass, finds
something in the water, and stubble, to feed upon.

6 We suppose, that a good Clothing of the Body, makes much to long Life: For
it Fenceth, and Armeth, against the Intemperances of the Air, which dot
wonderfully Assail, and Decay, the Body: which Benefit Birds especially have.
Now that Sheep, which have so good Fleeces, should be so short (...); That is
to be impated to Diseases, whereof that Creature is full; and to the
bareeating of Grass.

7 The Seat of the Spirits, without doubt, is principally the Head: Which
though it be usually understood, of the Animal Spirits only, yet this is all
in all. Again, it is not to be doubted, but the Spirits do, most of all,
waste, and prey upon the Body; so that, where they are either in greater
plenty; Or in greater Inflammation, and Acrimonie; There the life is much
shortened. And therefore we conceive, a great Cause of long life, in Birds, to
be; The Smalnesse of their Heads, in comparison of their Bodies: For even Men,
which have very great Heads, we suppose to be the shorter Livers.

8 We are os opinion; That Carriage, is of all other Motions, the most helpful
to long life; which we also noted before. Now there are carried; Water-fowles,
upon the water; As Swans; All Birds in their flying, but with a strong Endeavor
of their Lime; And Fishes, of the length of whose Life, we have no certainty.

9 Those Creatures which are long, before they come to their perfection; (Net
speaking of Growth in stature only, but of other steps to Maturitie; As
Manputs forth, First his (...) Next the Signs of Pube, tie; Then his Beard;
And so forward;) are Long-lived. For it shows, that Nature finisheth her
Periods, by larger Circles.

10 Milder Creatures, are not long-lived; As the Sheep, and Dove: for Choler
is as the Whetstone, and Spur, to many Functions in the Body.

11 Creatures, whose Flesh is more Duskish, are longer lived, than those that
have white Flesh: for it shows, that the Juice of the Body is more firm, and
less apt to dissipate.

12 In every Corruptible Body, Quantity makes much, to the Conservation of
the whole: For a great fire is longer in Quenching; A small portion of water is
sooner evaporated; The Body of a Tree withers not so fast as a Twig: And
therefore generally; (I speak it of Species, not of Individuals;) Creatures
that are large in Body, are longer lived than those that are small; unless
there be some other potent Cause, to hinder it.

Alimentation, or Nourishment; And the way of Nourishing.
The History.
1 NOurishment ought to To the 4. Artile.
be of an Inferior nature, and more simple substance, than the Thing
Nourished. Plants are nourished with the Earth and Water; Living Creatures with
Plants; Man with Living Creatures: There are also certain Creatures Feeding
upon Flesh; And Man himself, takes Plants, into a part of his Nourishment: But
Man, and Creatures feeding upon Flesh, are scarcely nourished with Plants
alone. Perhaps, Fruits, or Grains, baked, or boiled, may, with long use,
nourish them; But Leaves, of Plants, or Herbs, will not do it; As the Order of
the Foliatanes, showed by Experience.

2 Overgreat Affinity, or Consubstantiality of the Nourishment, to the Thing
nourished, proves not well: for Creatures, feeding upon Herbs, touch no Flesh;
And of Creatures feeding upon Flesh, few of them eat their own kind. As for
Men, which are Cannibals, they feed not ordinarily upon Men's Flesh; But reserve
it as a Dainty, either to serve their Revenge upon their Enemies, or to
satisfy their Appetite at some times. So the Ground is best sown, with Seed
growing elsewhere; And Men do not use to Graft, or Inoculate, upon the same
stock.

3 By how much the more the Nourishment is better Prepared, and approaches
nearer in likeness, to the Thing nourished; By so much the more, are Plants
more Fruitful; And Living Creatures in better liking, and plight. For a young
Slip, or Cions, is not so well nourished, if it be pricked into the Ground; As
if it be grafted into a Stecke, agreeing which it in Nature; And where it finds
the Nourishment already disgested, and prepared: Neither, (as is reported,)
will the Seed of an Onion, or some such like, sown in the bare earth, bring
forth so large a Fruit, as if it be put into another Onion; Which is a new kind
of Grafting; Into the Root, or under ground: Again it has been found out
lately; That a Slip of a Wild Tree; As of an Elm, Oak, Ash, or such like,
grafted into a Stock of the same kind, will bring forth larger Leaves, than
those that grow without Grafting: Also Men, are not nourished so well with Raw
Flesh, as with that which has passed the Fire.

4 Living Creatures are nourished by the Mouth; plants by the Root; Young ones
in the Womb, by the Navill: Birds, for a while, are nourished with the Yolke in
the Egg; whereof some is found in their Crops, after they are hatched.

5 All Nourishment moves, from the Center, to the Circum cumference; Or, from
the Inward, to the Outward: yet it is to be noted; That in Trees, and Plants,
the Nourishment passes, rather by the Bark, and outward Parts, than by the
Pith, and inward parts: For if the Bark be pilled off, though but for a small
breadth, round, they live no more: And the Blood, in the Veins of Living
Creatures, does no less nourish the Flesh beneath it, than the Flesh above it.

6 In all Alimentation, or Nourishment, there is a twofold Action; Extrusion,
and Attraction: whereof the Former proceeds from the Inward Function, the
latter from the Outward.

7 Vegetables assimilate their Nourishment simply, without Excerning: For Gums,
and Tears of Trees, are rather Exuberances, than Excrements: And knots, or
knobs, are nothing but Diseases. But the substance of Living Creatures is more
perceptible, of the like; And therefore it is conjoined with a kind of
Disdain; whereby it rejects the Bad, and assimilateth the Good.

8 It is a strange Thing, of the Stalks of Fruits; That all the Nourishment,
which produces, sometimes, such great Fruits, should be forced to pass
through so narrow Necks: For the Fruit is never joined to the Stock, without
some stalk.

9 It is to be noted; That the Seeds of Living Creatures, will not be
fruitful, but when they are new shed; But the Seeds of Plants, will be fruit,
full, a long time, after they are gathered. Yet the Slips, or Cions of Trees,
will not grow, unless they be grafted green; Neither will the (...) keep long
Fresh, unless they be covered with earth.

10 In Living Creatures, there are Degrees of Nourishment according to their
Age: In the Womb, the young one is nourished with the Mothers Blood; when it
is newborn, with Milk; Afterward, with Meats, and Drinks; And in old Age,
the most Nourishing, and Savourie Meats, please best.

11 Above all, it makes to the present Inquisition; To inquire diligently, and
Attentively; whether a Man may not receive Nourishment from without; At least
some other way, beside the Mouth? We know, that Baths of Milk are used in
some Hectic Fevers, and when the Body is brought extreme low; And physicians
do prescribe Nourishing Clysters: This Matter would be well studied; For if
Nourishment may be made, either from without, or some other way, than by the
Stomach, Then the weakness of Concoction, which is incident to old Men, might
be recompensed by these Helps; And Concoction restored to them, entire.

Length and Shortness of Life in Man.
The History.
1 BEfore the Flood, as the To the 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 11. Article.
Sacred Scriptures relate, Men lived many Hundred years: Yet none of the (...)
attained to a full Thousand. Neither was this Length of Life, (...) only to
Grace, or the Holy (...) For there are reckoned, of the Fathers, until the
Flood, eleven Generations; But of the Sons of Adam, by Cain, only eight
Generations; So as the Posterity of Cain may seem the longer lived. But this
Length of Life, immediately after the Flood, was reduced to a Moitie; But in
the Post-Nati: For Noah, who was borne before, equalled the Age of his,
Ancestors; And Sem saw the sixth hundred year of his life. Afterward, three
Generations being run, from the Flood; The Life of Man was brought down, to a
Fourth Part of the Primitive Age; That was, to about two Hundred years.

2 Abraham lived an hundred seventie and five years: A Man of an High Courage,
and prosperous in all Things. Isaac came to an Hundred and eighty years of
Age; A chaste Man, and enjoying more Quietness, than his Father. But Jacob,
after many Crosses, and a numerous Progeny, lasted to the Hundred forty
seventh year of his Life: A Patient, Gentle, and wise Man. Ishmael, a Militar
Man, lived an Hundred thirty and seven years. Sarah, (whose years only,
amongst women, are recorded,) died in the Hundred twenty seventh year of her
Age: A Beautiful, and Magnanimous Woman; A singular good Mother, and Wife; And
yet, no less Famous, for her Liberty, than Obsequiousness toward her
Husband. Joseph also, a Prudent, and Politic Man, Passing his youth in
Affliction, afterward advanced to the Height of Honor and Prosperity, lived
an hundred and ten years. But his Brother Levi, elder than himself, attained
to an Hundred thirty seven years; A Man Impatient of Contumely, and
Revengefull. Near unto the same Age, attained the Son of Levi: Also his
Grand Child; The Father of Aaron, and Moses.

3 Moses lived an Hundred and Twenty years: A Stout Man, and yet the Meekest
upon the Earth; And of a very Slow Tongue. Howsoever Moses, in his Psalm,
pronounces; That the life of Man is but seventie years; And if a Man have
Strength, then eighty; Which Term of Man's Life stands firm, in many
particulars, even at this Day. Aaron, who was three years the Elder, died the
same year, with his Brother: A Man of a readier Speech, of a more facile
Disposition, and less Constant. But Phineas, Grandchild of Aaron, (perhaps,
out of extraordinary Grace,) may be collected, to have lived three hundred
years; If so be, the War of the Israelites, against the Tribe of Benjamin; (In
which Expedition, Phineas was consulted with,) were performed, in the same
order of Time, in which the History has ranked it: He was a Man of a most
Eminent Zeal. Joshua, a Martial Man, and an excellent Leader, and evermore
victorious, lived to the Hundred and Tenth year of his Life. Caleb was his
Contemporany; And seems to have been of as great years. Ehud the Judge,
seems to have been no less than an hundred years old; In regard, that after
the Victory over the Moabites, the Holy Land had rest, under his Government,
eighty years: He was a Man Fierce, and undaunted; And one, that in a sort,
neglected his Life for the good of his People.

4 Job lived, after the Restoration of his Happiness, an Hundred and Forty
years; Being, before his Afflictions, of that Age, that he had sons at Man's
Estate: A Man Politic, Eloquent, Charitable, and the Example of Patience. Eli
the Priest, lived Ninety eight years; A corpulent Man, Calm of disposition,
and Indulgent to his children. But Elizeus the Prophet, may seem to have died,
when he was above an hundred years old; For he is found to have lived after
the Assumption of Elias, sixty years; And at the Time of that Assumption, he
was of those years, that the Boys mocked him, by Name of Bald-head; A Man
vehement, and severe, and of an Austere life, and a Contemner of Riches. Also,
Isaiah the Prophet, seems to have been an Hundred years old: For he is
found, to have exercised the Function of a Prophet, Seventie years together;
The years, both of his Beginning to Prophecy, and of his Death, being
uncertain: A Man of an Admirable Eloquence; An Evangelicall Prophet; Full of
the Promises of God, of the New Testament, as a Bottle with sweet Wine.

5 Tobias the Elder, lived an Hundred fifty eight years; The younger, an
Hundred twenty seven; Merciful Men, and great Almes-Givers. It seems, in the
time of the Captivity, many of the Jews, who returned out of Babylon, were of
great years: Seeing they could remember both Temples, (there being no less
than seventie years betwixt Them;) And wept for the unlikenesse of Them. Many
Ages after that, in the Time of our Savior, lived old Simeon, to the Age of
Ninety years: A Devout Man, and full, both of Hope, and Expectation. Into the
same time also, fell Anna the Prophetess; who could not possibly be less
than an Hundred years old: For she had been seven years a Wife; About eighty
four years a Widow; Beside the years of her Virginity; And the time that
she lived after her Prophecy of our Savior. She was an Holy Woman; And
passed her days in fastings and Prayers.

6 The Long Lives of Men, mentioned in Heathen Authors, have no great
certainty in Them: Both for the Intermixture of Fables, whereunto those kind
of Relations were very prone; and for their false Calculation of years.
Certainly, of the Egyptians, we find nothing of Moment in those works that
are extant, as touching Long Life; For their Kings, which reigned longest, did
not exceed fifty, or five and fifty years, which is no great matter; Seeing
Many at this Day, attain to those years. But the Arcadian Kings, are
fabulously reported to have lived very long. Surely, that Country was
Mountainous, Full of Flocks of Sheep, and brought forth most wholesome Food.
Notwithstanding, seeing Pan was their God, we may conceive, that all Things
about them were Panick, and vain, and subject to Fables.

7 Numa, King of the Romans, lived to eighty years; A Man peaceable,
Contemplative, and much devoted to Religion. Marcus Valerius Corvinus, saw an
hundred years complete; There being betwixt his First and Sixth Consulship,
Forty six years; A Man Valourous, Affable, Popular, and always Fortunate.

8 Solon of Athens, the Lawgiver, and one of the seven Wise Men, lived above
eighty years; A Man of an High Courage, but Popular, and affected to his
Country: Also Learned, given to Pleasures, and a soft kind of Life. Epimenides
the Cretian, is reported to have lived an hundred fifty seven years: The
Matter is mixed with a Prodigious Relation; For fifty seven of those years, he
is said to have slept in a Cave. Half an Age after, Xenophanes the
Colophonian, lived an hundred and two years, or rather more; For at the Age of
Twenty five years, he left his Country; Seventy seven complete years he
traveled; And after that returned: But how long he lived after his Return,
appears not: A Man, no less wandering in Mind, than in Body; For his Name was
changed, for the Madness of his Opinions, from Xenophanes to (...) A Man, no
doubt, of a vast Conceit, and that minded nothing but Infinitum.

9 Anacreon, the Poet, lived eighty years, and somewhat better: A Man
Lascivious, Voluptuous, and given to Drink. Pindarus, the Theban, lived to
eighty years; A Poet of an high Fancy, singular in his Conceits, and a great
Adorer of the Gods. Sophocles the Athenian, attained to the like Age; A lofty
Tragic Poet, given over wholly to Writing, and Neglectfull of his Family.

10 Artaxerxes, King of Persia, lived ninety four years: A Man of a Dull wit,
Averse to the Dispatch of Business, Desirous of Glory, but rather of Ease. At
the same time lived Agesilaus, King of Sparta, to eighty four years of Age: A
Moderate Prince; As being a Philosopher amongst Kings; But not withstanding
Ambitious, and a Warrier; And no less stout in War, than in Business.

11 Gorgias, the Sicilian, was an hundred and eight years old; A Rhetorician,
and a great (...) of his Faculty; One that taught Youth for profit, He had
seen many Countries; And a little before his Death said, That he had done
nothing worthy of Blame, since he was an old Man. Protagoras of Abdera, saw
Ninety years of Age, This Man was likewise a Rhetorician; But professed not
so much to teach the Liberal Arts, as the Art of Governing Commonwealths, and
States: Notwithstanding, he was a great Wanderer in the World, no less than
Gorgias. Isocrates, the Athenian, lived Ninety eight years: He was a
Rhetorician also, but an exceeding modest Man, One that shunned the public
Light; And opened his School only in his own House. Democritus of Abdera,
reached to an hundred and nine years: He was a great Philosopher; And, if
ever any Man amongst the Grecians, a true Naturalist: A Surveyour of many
Countries, but much more of Nature; Also a diligent searcher into Experiments;
And, (as Aristotle objected against him,) One that followed Similitudes, more
than the Laws of Arguments. Diogenes the Sinopean, lived ninety years: A Man,
that used Liberty toward Others, but Tyranny over Himself; Of a course Diet,
and of much Patience. Zeno of Citium, lacked but two years of an hundred: A
Man of an High Mind, and a Contemner of other Men's Opinions; Also of a great
Acuteness, but yet not Troublesome, choosing rather to take Men's Minds, than
to enforce them: The like whereof afterward was in Seneca. Plato the Athenian,
atrained to eighty one years: A Man of a great Courage, but yet a Lover of
(...) In his Notions Sublimed, and full of Fancy: Neat and D I cate in his
Life; Rather Calm, than Merry; And one, that carried a kind of Majesty in
his Countenance. Theophrastus the Etesian, larrived at eighty five years of
Age; A Man sweet for his Eloquence; Sweet also for the Variety of his Matters;
And who selected the pleasant Things of Philosophy; And let the Bitter and
Harsh go. Carneades of Cyrene, many years after, came to the like Age, of
eighty five years: A Man of a fluent Eloquence; And one, who by the
acceptable, and pleasant Variety of his Knowledge, delighted, both himself,
and others. But (...) who lived in Cicero's time; No Philosopher, or
Rhetorician; But a Grammarian; Attained to an hundred years of Age: He was
first a Soldier, then a Schoolmasters; A Man by nature tart, both in his
Tongue, and Pen; And severe toward his Scholars.

12 Quintus Fabius Maximus, was Augur sixty three years; which showed him to
be above eighty years of Age, at his Death: Though it be true, that in the
Augurship, Nebilitie was more respected, than Age. A wise Man, and a great
Deliberatour, and in all his proceedings Moderate, and not without Affability
severe. Masinissa, King of Numidia, lived ninety years; And being more than
eighty five, got a Son: A Daring Man, and trusting upon his Fortune; who in
his youth, had tasted of the Inconstancy of Fortune; But in his succeeding
Age, was constantly Happy. But Marcus Porcius Cato, lived above ninety years
of Age: A man of an Iron Body and Mind; He had a bitter Tongue, and loved to
cherish factions: He was given to Husbandry; And was to Himself, and his
Family, a Physician.

13 Terentia, Cicero's wife, lived an hundred and three years: A woman
afflicted with many Crosses; First, with the Banishment of her Husband; Then
with the Difference betwixt them; Lastly, with his last Fatal Misfortune: She
was also oftentimes vexed with the Gout. Luceia must needs exceed an hundred,
by many years; For it is said, That she acted, an whole hundred years, upon
the stage; At first, perhaps, representing the person of some young Girl; At
last, of some Decrepit old Woman. But Galeria Copiola, A Player also, and a
Dancer, was brought upon the Stage as a Novice, in what year of her Age, is
not known; But ninety nine years after, at the Dedication of the Theater, by
Pompey the Great, she was shown upon the Stage again; Not now for an
Actresse, but for a Wonder; Neither was this all; For after that, in the (...),
for the Health and Life of Augustus, she was shown upon the Stage the third
time.

14 There was another Actresse, somewhat Inferior in Age, but much Superior
in Dignity, which lived well-neare ninety years: I mean Livia lulia Augusta,
wife to Augustus Caesar, and Mother to Tiberius. For if Augustus his Life were a
play; (As himself would have it; when as upon his Deathbed, he charged his
Frineds, they should give him a Plaudite, after he was Dead,) certainly this
Lady was an excellent Actresse; who could carry it so well with her Husband, by
a dissembled Obedience; And with her Son, by power and authority: A woman
Affable, and yet of a Matronall Carriage, Pragmaticall, and upholding her
power. But Iunia, the wife of Caius Cassius, and sister of Marcus Brutus, was
also ninety years old; For she survived the Philippick Battle, sixty four
years: A Magnanimous woman; In her great wealth Happy; In the Calamity of her
Husband, and near Kinsfolks, and in long widowhood, unhappy; Notwithstanding
much Honored of all.

15 The year of our Lord seventie six, falling into the Time of Vespasian, is
Memorable; In which we shall find, as it were, a Calender, of long lived Men:
For that year, there was a Taxing; (Now a Taxing, is the most Authentical,
and truest Informer, touching the ages of men;) And in that part of Italy,
which lies betwixt the Apennine Mountains, and the River Po, there were
found, an hundred and four and twenty persons, that either equalled, or
exceeded, an hundred years of Age: Namely, of an hundred years just, fifty
four persons; Of an hundred and ten, fifty seven persons; Of an hundred and
five and twenty, Two only; Of an hundred and thirty, four men; Of an hundred
and five and thirty, or seven and thirty, four more; Of an hundred and
forty, three men. Besides these, Parma in particular, afforded five, whereof
three fulfilled an hundred and twenty years; and two, an hundred and thirty:
Bruxels afforded one, of an hundred and twenty five years old: Placentia one,
aged an hundred thirty and one: Faventia, one Woman, aged one hundred thirty
and two: A certain Town, then called Velleiacium, situate in the Hills, about
Placentia, afforded ten; whereof Six fulfilled an hundred and ten years of
age; Four, an hundred and twenty: Lastly, Rimino one, of an hundred and
fifty years; whose Name was Marcus Aponius.

That our Catalogue might not be extended too much in length, we have thought
fit, as well in those whom we have rehearsed, as in those whom we shall
rehearse, to offer none under eighty years of Age. Now we have affixed to
every one a true and short Character, or Elogie; But of that sort, whereunto,
in our Judgment, Length of Life, (which is not a little subject to the Manners
and Fortunes of Men,) has some Relation: And that in a twofold Respect: Either
that such Kind of Men, are for the most part long lived; Or that such Men may
sometimes be of long Life, though otherwise not well disposed for it.

16 Amongst the Roman and Grecian Emperors; Also the French and Almaine; To
these our Days; which make up the Number of well-neare two hundred Princes;
There are only four found, that lived to eighty years of Age: unto whom we
may add the two first Emperors; Augustus, and Tiberius; whereof the latter
fulfilled the seventie and eighth year, the former the seventie and sixth
year of his Age; And might both perhaps have lived to fourscore, if Livia and
Caius had been pleased. Augustus (as was said) lived seventie and six years: A
Man of a Moderate Disposition; In accomplishing his Designs, vehement, but
otherwise Calm, and Serene; In Meat and Drink sober; In Venerie Intemperate;
Through all his Life time Happy: And who about the thirtieth year of his Life,
had a great and dangerous sickness; Insomuch that they despaired of Life in
him; whom Antonius Musa the Physician, when other Physicians had applied Hot
Medicines, as most agreeable to his Disease, on the contrary cured with cold
Medicines; which perchance might be some Help, to the prolonging of his Life.
Tiberius lived to be two years older: A Man with Lean chaps; As Augustus was
wont to say; For his speech stuck within his Jaws, but was weighty, He was
Bloody, a Drinker, and one that took lust into a Part of his Diet:
Notwithstanding, a great Observer of his Health; Insomuch, that he used to
say; That he was a Fool, that after thirty years of Age, took advice of a
Physician. Gordian the Elder, lived eighty years; And yet died a violent
Death, when he was scarce warm in his Empire: A Man of an High Spirit, and
Renowned; Learned, and a Poet; And constantly happy, throughout the whole
course of his Life, save only, that he ended his days by a violent Death.
Valerian the Emperor, was seventie six years of Age, before he was taken
Prisoner, by Sapor King of Persia: After his Captivity he lived seven years
in Reproaches; And then died a violent Death also: A Man of a poor Mind, and
not valiant; Notwithstanding lifted up in his own, and the opinion of Men, but
falling short in the performance. Anastasius, surnamed Dicorus, lived eighty
eight years: He was of a settled Mind, but too abject, and superstitious, and
fearful. Anicius Iustinianus, lived to eighty three years: A Man Greedy of
Glory; Performing Nothing in his own Person, but in the valor of his
Captains Happy and Renowned; Uxorious: And not his own Man, but suffering
others to lead him. Helena of Britain, Mother of Constantine the Great, was
four-score years old: A Woman, that intermedled not in Matters of State,
neither in her Husbands, nor Sons (...); But Devoted her (...) wholly to
Religion, Magnanimous, and (...) Flourishing. Theodora the (...); (who was
Sister to (...), wife of Monomachus; And reigned alone after her Decease;)
lived above eighty years: A Pragmaticall Woman; and one that took (...) in
Governing; Fortunate in the Highest degree, and through her good (...)
Credulous.

17 We will proceed now from these Secular Princes, to the Princes in the
Church. S. John, (...) Apostle of our Savior, and the Beloved Disciple, lived
ninety three years: He was rightly denoted under the (...) of the Eagle, for
his piercing fight into the Divinity; And was as a (...) amongst the Apostles
in (...) spect of his Burning Love Saint Luke the Evangelist, fulfilled
fourscore and fouryeares: An Eloquent Man And a Traveller; Saint Paul
inseparable Companion; And a Physician. Simeon the Son of Cleophas, called
the Brother of our Lord, and Bishop of His rusalem, lived an hundred and twenty
years; Though he was cut short by (...) dome; A Stout Man, and Constant, and
full of Good works. Polycarpus, Disciple (...) to the Apostles, and Bishop
Smyrna, seems to have (...) his Age, to an hundred years, and more Though
he were also cut (...) by Martyrdom: A Man (...) (...) High Mind, of an
(...) patience, and unwearied (...) Labors. Dionysius (...) Contemporany to
the Apostle S. Paul, lived ninety cares: He was called The (...) of Heaven,
for his High lying Divinity; And was famous, as well for his Holy Life, as for
his Meditations. Aquila and Priscilla, first Saint Paul the Apostles Hosts;
Afterward his Fellow-Hel-bers; lived together, in an happy and famous wedlock,
at least, to an hundred years of Age, a piece: For they were both alive, under
Pope (...) the First: A Noble pair, and prone to all kind of Charity; who
amongst other their Comforts; (which no doubt were great, unto the first
Founders of the Church;) Had this added; To enjoy each other so long, in an
(...) marriage. Saint Paul, the Hermit, lived an hundred and thirteen years:
Now he (...) in a Cave; His Diet was so slender and strict, that was thought
almost Impossble, to support Humane Nature therewithal: He (...) his years
only in Meditations, and Soliloquies; yet he was not Illiterate, or an (...)
but Learned. Saint (...) the first Founder of Monks, or (as some will have it,)
the Restorer only; (...) to an hundred and five years of Age: A Man Devout,
and Contemplative Though not unfit for Civil Affairs; His Life was Austere,
and Mortifying; Notwithstanding he lived in kind of glorious solitude; and
exercised a Command; or he had his Monks under (...); And besides, many (...)
and Philosophers (...) to visit him, as a living mage, from which they (...)
not without some (...). Saint Athanasius exceded the Term of eighty (...): A
Man of an (...) Constancy; Commaning Fame, and not yielding (...) Fourtune;
He was free toward the Great Ones; With he people Gracious, and (...); Beaten
and (...) to Oppositions; And in (...) himself from them, out, and wise. S.
Hierome, (...) the consent of most (...), exceeded ninety years of Age: A man
powerful in is Pen, and of a Manly Elequence; quence; variously learn both in
the Tongues and (...) Also a Traveller, (...) that lived strictly toward (...)
old Age; In an estate (...) and not dignified, he (...) high Spirits; And
shined (...) out of Obscurity.

18 The Popes of Rome, are (...) Number to this Day, (...) hundred forty and
one: (...) so great a Number, five one have attained to the Age (...) fourscore
years, or upward But in many of the first (...) their full Age was intercepte
by the prerogative and (...) of Martyrdom. John the (...) ty three, Pope of
Rome, (...) the ninetieth year of (...) Age: A Man of an (...) Disposition,
and one that (...) died Noveltie; He (...) many Things, some to the Better,
others only to the New; A great (...) of Riches and Treasure. Gregory, called
the twelfth, created in schism, and not fully acknowledged Pope; Died at
ninety years; Of him, in respect of his short Papacy, we (...) Nothing, to
make a judgment upon. Paul the third, lived eighty years and one: A
temperate Man, and of a profound wisdom; He was Learned, an Astrologer; and
one that tended his Health carefully; But after the Example of old Eli the
Priest, over-Indulgent to his Family. Paul the fourth, attained to the Age of
eighty three years: A Man of an Harsh Nature, and severe; Of an Haughty
Mind, and Imperious; prone to Anger; his speech was Eloquent, and Ready.
Gregory the thirteenth, fulfilled the like Age, of eighty three years: An
absolute good Man; Sound in Mind, and Body; Politic, Temperate, full of good
works, and an Almes-giver.

19 Those that follow are to be more Promiscuous in their order; More doubtful
in their faith; And more barren of Observation. King Arganthonius, who reigned
at Cadiz in Spain, lived an hundred and thirty; Or, (as some would have it,)
an hundred and forty years; Of which he reigned eighty. Concerning his
Manners, Institution of his Life, and the Time wherein he reigned, there is a
general Silence. Cyniras, King of Cyprus, Living in the Island, then termed
the Happy and Pleasant island, is affirmed, to have attained to an hundred and
fifty, or sixty years. Two Latin Kings in Italy, the Father and the Son, are
reported to have lived, the one eight hundred, the other six hundred years:
But this is delivered unto us by certain Philologists; Who though otherwise
Credulous enough; yet themselves have suspected the Truth of this Matter, or
rather condemned it. Others record some Arcadian Kings to have lived three
hundred years: The Country, no doubt, is a place apt for long life; But the
Relation I suspect to be Fabulous. They tell of one Dando, in Illyrium; That
lived, without the Inconveniences of old Age, to five hundred years. They tell
also (...) the Epians, a Part of AEtolia That the whole Nation (...) them were
exceeding long lived; In so much, that many of them were two hundred years
old: And that one principal Man amongst them, named Litorius, a Man of (...)
Giant-like Stature, could have told three hundred years. It is recorded, that
in the Top of the Mountain (...) anciently called Tempsis, many of the
Inhabitants lived to (...) hundred and fifty years. We read that the Sect of
the Esseans, amongst the Jews, did usually extend their Life to an hundred
years: Now that Sect, used a single, or Abstemious Diet; After the Rule of
Pythagoras. Apollonius (...) exceeded an hundred years; His Face bewraying no
such Age; He was an Admirable Man; Of the Heathens reputed to have something
Divine in him; Of the Christians, held for a Sorcerer: In his Diet
Pythagoricall, A great Traveller; Much Renowned; And by some adored as a God:
Notwithstanding, toward the end of his life, he was subject to many Complaints
against him, and Reproaches; All which he made shift to escape. But lest his
Long Life should be imputed to his Pythagoricall Diet, and not rather that it
was Hereditary, his Grandfather before him, lived an hundred and thirty years.
It is undoubted, that Quintus Metellus lived above an hundred years; And that
after several Consalships happily administered; In his old Age he was made
Pontifex Maximus; And exercised those Holy Duties, full two and twenty years;
In the performance of which Rites, his Voice never failed, nor his Hand
trembled. It is most certain, that (...) Caesus was very old, but his years
are not extant; The most part whereof he passed, after he was Blind: Yet this
Misfortune no whit softened him, but that he was able to govern a numerous
Family, a great Retinue and Dependence, yea, even the Commonwealth it self
with great Stoutnesse. In his extreme old Age, he was brought in a Litter into
the Senate House; And vehemently dissuaded the Peace with Pyrrhus: The
Beginning of his Oration was very Memorable, showing an Invincible Spirit, and
strength of Mind; I have, with great Grief of Mind, (Fathers Consript,)
these many years, borne my Blindness; But now I could wish, that I were Deaf
also; when I hear you speak to such Dishonorable Treaties. Marcus Perpenna
lived ninety eight years; Surviving all those, whose Suffrages he had
gathered, in the Senate House, being Consul; I mean, all the Senators at that
time. As also all those, whom a little after, being Censour, he chose into the
Senate; Seven only being excepted. Hiero, King of Sicely, in the time of the
second Punick War, Lived almost an hundred years; A Man Moderate, both in
his Government, and in his Life; A Worshipper of the Gods, and a Religions
Conserver (...) Friendship; Liberal, and constantly Fortunate. Statilia,
descended of a Noble Family, in the Days of (...) Lived ninety nine years.
(...), the Daughter of Ofilius an hundred and Fifteen. Xenophilus, an Ancient
Philosopher, of the Sect of Pythagoras. attained to an hundred and six years:
Remaining Healthful, and vigorous in his old Age; And Famous amongst the
Vulgar, for his Learning. The Islanders of Corcyra were Ancienely accounted
Long lived; But now they live after the rate of other Men. Hippocrates Cous,
the Famous Physician, lived an hundred and four years; And approved and
credited his own Art, by so long a life: A Man, that coupled learning and
wisdom together; Very conversant in Experience and Observation; One that hunted
not after Words, or Methods; But severed the very Nerves of Science, and so
propounded them. Demonax, a Philosopher, not only in Profession, but Practice,
lived in the Days of Adrian, almost to an Hundred years: A Man of an High
Mind, and a Vanquisher of his own Mind; And that, truly, and without
Affectation, A Contemner of the World, and yet Civil and courteous: when his
Friends spoke to him, about his Burial, he said; Take no Care for my Burial;
For Stench will bury a Carleaise: They replied; Is it your Mind then, to be
cast out, to Birds, and Dogs? He said again, Seeing, in my life time, I
endeavored to my uttermost, to benefit Men, what hurt is it, if, when I am
dead, I benefit (...) Certain Indian People, called Pandorae, are exceedingly
long Lived; Even to no less than Two Hundred years. They add a Thing more
Mavelous; That having, when they are Boys, an Hair, somewhat whitish; In
their old Age, before their gray hairs, they grow coal black: Though indeed
this be every where to be seen; That they which have white (...) whilst they
are Boys, in their Man's estate, change their Hairs into a Darker color. The
Seres, another People of India, with their Wine of Palms, are accounted Long
Livers; Even to an hundred and thirty years. Euphranor, the Grammarian, grew
old in his School; And taught Scholars, when he was above an hundred years
old. The Elder Ovid, father to the Poet, lived Ninety years: Differing much
from the disposition of his Son; For he contemned the Muses, and dissuaded his
Son from Poetry. Asinius Pollio, intimate with Augustus, exceeded the Age of an
Hundred years: A Man of an unreasonable Profuseness, Eloquent, a Lover of
Learning; But Vehement, Proud, Cruel; And one that made his Private Ends the
Center of his Thoughts. There was an Opinion, that Seneca was an extreme Old
Man; No less than an Hundred and fourteen years (...) Age: Which could not
(...) be; It being as (...) that a Decrepit old (...) should be set over (...)
Youth; As, on the contrary it was true, that he was able to manage, with great
(...) the Affairs of State: Besides, a little before, in the Midst of Claudius
his Reign, he was banished Rome, (...) Adulteries committed with some Noble
Ladies; which was a Crime, no ways competible with so extreme old Age. Ioannes
de Temporibus, amongst all the Men of our latter Ages, out of a common Fame,
and vulgar Opinion, was reputed Long-lived, even to a Miracle; Or rather, even
to a Fable; His Age has been. counted, above three Hundred years: He was by
Nation a French Man; And followed the Wars, under Charles the Great. Gartius
Aretine, Great Grandfather to Petrarch, arrived at the Age of an Hundred and
four years. He had ever enjoyed the Benefit of good Health; Besides, at the
last, He felt rather a Decay of his strength, than any Sickness or Malady;
which is the true Resolution, by old Age. Amongst the Venetians, there have
been found, not a few long Livers; and those of the more eminent sort:
Franciscus Donatus, Duke; Thomas Contarenus, Procuratour of Saint Mark;
Franciscus Molinus, Procuratour also of Saint Mark; Others. But most Memorable
is that of Cornarus the Venetian; who being in his youth of a sickly Body,
began first to eat and drink by measure, to a certain weight; Thereby to
recover his Health; This Cure, turned, by use, into a Diet; That Diet to an
extraordinary Long Life; Even of an Hundred years and better, without any Decay
in his Senses; And with a constant Enjoying of his Health. In our Age, William
Postell, a Frenchman, lived to an hundred, and well nigh twenty years; The
Top of his Beard, on the upper Lip, being black, and not Gray at all: A Man
crazed in his Brain, and of a Fancy not altogether Sound; A great Traveller,
Mathematician, and somewhat stained with Heresy.

20 I suppose there is scarce a Village, with us in England, if it be any whit
populous, but it affords some Man or Woman of Fourscore years of Age: Nay, a
few years since, there was in the County of Hereford, a Maygame, or
MorrisDance, consisting of Eight Men, whose Age computed together, made up
eight hundred years; In so much, that what some of them wanted of an hundred,
others exceeded as much.

21 In the Hospital of Bethleem, corruptly called Bedlam, in the Suburbs of
London, there are found, from time to time, many Mad Persons, that live to a
great Age.

22 The Ages of Nymphs, Fawns and Satyrs, whom they make to be, indeed,
Mortal, but yet exceedingly Long-lived; (A Thing, which Ancient Superstition,
and the Late Credulity of some, have admitted;) we account but for Fables and
Dreams: Especially, being that, which has neither Consent with Philosophy,
nor with Divinity. And as touching the History of Long-Life in Man, by
Individuals, or next unto Individuals, thus much: Now we will pass on to
Observations, by certain Heads.

23 The Running on of Ages, and Succession of Generations, (...) to have no
whit abated from the Length of Life; For we see, that from the Time of Moses,
unto these our Days, the Term of Man's life has stood about Fourscore years
of Age; Neither has it declined, (As a man would have thought) by little and
little. No doubt, there are Times, in every Country, wherein Men are longer, or
shorter lived. Longer, for the most part, when the times are barbarous, and Men
fare less deliciously, and are more given to Bodily Exercises: Shorter, when
the Times are more Civil, and Men abandon themselves to Luxury and Ease. But
these Things pass on by their Turns; The Succession of Generations alters it
not. The same, no doubt, is in other living Creatures; For neither Oxen, nor
Horses, nor Sheep, nor any the like, are abridged of their wonted Ages at this
Day. And therefore, the Great Abridger of Age was the Flood: And perhaps, some
such Notable Accidents; (As particular Inundations, Long Droughts,
Earthquakes, Or the like,) may do the same again And the like Reason is, in
the Dimension and Stature of Bodies; For neither are they lessened, by
succession of Generations; Howsoever Virgil, (following the vulgar Opinion,)
Divined, that After-Ages would bring forth lesser Bodies, than the then
present; whereupon speaking of Plowing up the Emathian and Emonensian Fields,
He says; Grandiaque effossis mirabitur ofsa sepulchris; That After (...) shall
admire the Great Bones dug up in ancient Sepulchers. For whereas it is
manifest, that there were, heretofore, Men of Gigantine Statures, (such as, for
certain, have been found in Sicely, and elsewhere, in ancient Sepulchers,
(...) Caves,) yet within these (...) three Thousand years; A Time, whereof we
have sure Memory; Those very Places (...) produced none such: Although this
Thing also has (...) Turns and Changes, (...) the Civillizing of a (...) no
less than the Former. And this is the rather to be (...), because Men are
(...) carried away with an (...); That there is a (...) Decay by succession of
Ages, as well in the Term of Man's life, as in the Stature and strength of his
Body; And that all Things decline, and change to the worse.

24 In Cold, and Northern (...), Men live longer, (...), than in Hot: which
must needs be, in respect; The Skin is more Compact (...) close; And the Juyees
of the Body less dissipable; And the Spirits themselves less Eage to consume,
and in better (...) position to repair; And the Air, (As being little (...)
by the Sunbeams,) (...) Predatory. And yet, under the AEquinoctiall Line,
(...) the Sun passes to and (...) and causes a double Summer, and double
Winter And where the Days and Nights are more Equal; (...) other Things be
concurring they live also very long: (...) Pern, and Taprobane.

25 Islanders are, for the (...) part, longer lived, than (...) that dwell in
Continents: (...) theylive not so long in Russia as in the Orcades; Nor so long
in Africa, though under the same Parallel, as in the (...) and Tercera's; And
the (...), are longer lived, (...) the Chinese; Though (...) Chinese are
mad upon Long Life. And this thing is (...) Marvel; Seeing the Air (...)
the Sea does heat and (...) in cooler Regions, and (...) in hotter.

26 High Situations, do rather (...) long Livers, than Low; Especially, if
they be not Tops of Mountains, but (...) Grounds, as to their (...)
Situations: Such as was (...) in Greece; And that Part of AEtolia, where we
(...) them, to have lived so (...). Now there would be the same Reason, for
(...) themselves, because of the pureness and clearenesse of the Air, but
that they are corrupted by accident; Namely, by the Vapors, (...) thither out
of the Valleys, and Resting there. And therefore in Snowy Mountains, there
(...) not found any Notable long Life; Not in the Alps, not (...) the Pyrenean
Mountains, (...) in the Apennine: Yet in the Tops of the Mountains, running
along toward (...) and the Abyssines; where by reason of the Sands beneath
little or no Vapor rises to the Mountains, they live long even at this very
Day; Attaining, many times, to an Hundred and fifty years.

27 Marshes, and Fens, are Propitious to the Natives, (...) Malignant to
Strangers, (...) touching the Lengthning and Shortning of their lives: And that
which may seem more Mavelous, Salt Marshes, where the Sea ebs and flows,
(...) less wholesome, than (...) of Fresh water.

28 The Countries, which have been observed, to produce Long Livers, are
these; (...), AEtolia, India on this side (...), Brasil, Taprobane, (...),
Ireland, with the Islands of the Orcades, and Hebrides: (...) as for AEthiopia,
which by one of the Ancients, is (...) to bring forth long (...); It is but a
Toy.

29 It is a Secret; The (...) of Air, especially in (...) Perfection, is
better found by Experiment, than by (...) Or Conjecture. You may make a Trial
by a Lock of Wool, exposed, for a few days, in the open Air; If the weight
be not much increased: Another by a piece Flesh, exposed likewise, (...)
corrupt not over-soone: other by a Wether-Glasse the water interchange (...)
suddenly. Of these and like, enquire further.

30 Not only the Goodness, Pureness of the Air, but (...) the Equality of
the Air, Material to long Life. (...) mixture of Hills and Dales, pleasant to
the fight, but spected for Long Life. Plain, moderately dry; (...) yet not
over-barren, or (...) nor altogether without (...) and Shade; Is very (...) for
Length of Life.

31 Inequality of Air, (as (...) even now said;) in the (...) of our Dwelling,
is (...) But Change of Air by Traveling, after one be used unto good: And
therefore great Travelers have been Long Lived. Also those that have (...)
perpetually in a little Cortage, in the same place, (...) been Long Livers: For
Air Accustomed, consumes esse; but Air changed, (...), and repaireth more.

32 As the Continuation, and Number of Successions, (which we said before,)
Makes nothing to the Length or Shortness of Life; So the Immediate Condition
of the Parents, as well the Father, as the Mother, without doubt, avails
much. For some are begotten of Old Men, some of Young Men, some of Men of
Middle Age; Again, some are begotten of Fathers Healthful, and well Disposed,
Others of Diseased and languishing: Again, some of Fathers, immediately after
Repletion, (...) when they are Drunk; Others, after Sleeping, or in the
Morning: Again, some after a long Intermission of (...) Others upon the Act
(...): Again, some in the (...) of the Fathers Love (As it is commonly in
(...);) Others after the Cooling of it, as in long Married Couples. The same
Things may be considered on the Part of the Mother: Unto which must be added,
the Condition of the Mother whilst she is with child; (...) touching her
Health; As tou ching her Diet: The Time (...) her Bearing in the Womb To the
Tenth Month, or earlier. To reduce these Things to a Rule, how far they may
concern Long Life, (...) hard: And so much the Harder, for that those Things,
which a Man would conceive to be the best, will fall out to the contrary: For
that Alacrity in the Generation, which begets lusty and Lively Children, will
be less Profitable to long Life, because of the Acrimony, and Inflaming of
the Spirits. We said before; That to partake more of the Mothers Blood,
conduces to long Life. Also, we suppose all Things in Moderation, to be best;
Rather Conjugall Love, than Meretricious; The Hour for Generation to be the
Morning; A state of Body, not too Lusty, or Full; And such like. It ought also
to be well observed; That a strong Constitution in the Parents, is rather good
for them, than for the Child; Especially in the Mother. And therefore Plato
thought ignorantly enongh; (...) the virtue of Generation halted, because the
women used not the same Exercises, both of Mind are Body, with the Men: The
contrary is rather true. For the Difference of (...) betwixt the Male, and the
(...) male, is most profitable for the Child; And the (...) women, yield more
to wards the Nourishment (...) the Child; which also hold in Nurses. Neither
did (...) (...) women, which (...) not before twenty two, (...) as some say,
twenty five (And therefore were (...) Man-like women;) Bring forth a more
Generous, or Long-lived Progeny; Than the Roman, or Athenian, or Theban women
did, which were ripe for Marriage, at twelve, or fourteen years. And if there
were any Thing eminent in the Spartans; That was rather to be imputed, to the
Parcimony of their Diet, than to the late Marriages of their women. But this we
are taught by experience; That there are some Races, which are long lived, for
a few Descents; So that Long Life, is like some Diseases, a Thing Hereditarie,
within certain Bounds.

33 Fair in Face, or Skin, or Hoire, are shorter Livers; Black, or Red, or
Freckled, longer. Also too Fresh a Color in youth, does less promise long
Life, than Palenesse. A hard Skin, is a sign of long Life, rather than a Soft:
But we understand not this of a Rugged Skin, such as they call a Goose Skin,
which is, as it were, Spongie, but of that which is Hard, and Close. A Forehead
with deep Furrows and Wrinkles, is a better Sign, than a smooth and plain
Forehead.

34 The Hairs of the Head hard, and like Bristles, do betoken longer Life,
than those that are soft, and Delicate. Curled Hairs betoken the same Thing,
if they be Hard withal; But the Contrary, if they be Soft and Shining. The
like, it the curling be rather thick, than in large Bunches.

35 Early, or Late, Baldness, is an Indifferent Thing; Seeing many which have
been Bold betimes, have lived long. Also early Gray Hairs, (Howsoever they
may seem Forerunners of Old Age approaching,) are no sure Signs; For many that
have grown gray betimes, have lived to great years. Nay, Hasty Gray Hairs,
without Baldness, is a Token of long Life; contrarily, if they be accompanied
with Baldness.

36 Hairinesse of the upper Parts, is a Sign of Short life; And they that have
extraord narie much Hair on their Breasts, live not long: But Hairinesse of
the Lower Parts, as of the Thighs, and Legs, is a Sign of long Life.

37 Tallness of Stature, (if it be not Immoderate,) with a convenient Making,
and not too slender; Especially if the Body be Active withal; Is a sign of
long Life. Also on the contrary, Men of low stature live long, if they be not
too Active, and stirring.

38 In the proportion of the Body; They which are short to the Wastes, with
long Legs, Are longer lived than (...), which are long to the Wastes, and have
short Legs: Also they which are large in the Nether parts, and straight in the
upper; (The Making of their Body, rising, as it were into a sharp Figure;) Are
longer lived than they, that have broad Shoulders, and are slender down-wards.

39 Leanness, where the Affections are settled, calm, and peaceable; Also a
more Fat Habit of Body, joined with Choler, and a Disposition stirring, and
peremptory, signify long Life. But Corpulencie in youth, fore-shewes short
Life; In Age, it is a Thing more Indifferent.

40 To be Long, and Slow, in Growing, is a sign of long Life; If to a Greater
Stature, the Greater Sign; If to a lesser Stature, yet a sign though:
contrarily, to grow quickly, to a great Stature, is an evil Sign; If to a
small Stature, the less evil.

41 Firm Flesh; A Raw-boned Body; And veins lying higher than the Flesh;
Betoken long Life: The contrary to these, short Life.

42 A Head some what (...) (...) an to the proportion of the Body; A moderate
Neck, nor long, nor slender, nor fat, nor too short, wide Nostrils, what soever
the Form of the Nose be, A large Mouth, An (...) Gristly, not Fleshy; (...)
strong, and contiguous, not small, or thin-set; Foretoken long Life: And much
more, if some new Teeth put (...) our elder years.

43 A broad breast, yet not Bearing out, but rather Bending Inwards; shoulders
somewhat crooked, and (as they call such persons) Round-Back'd; A (...) Belly;
A Hand large, and with few Lines in the Palm: A short, and round Foot; Thighs
not Fleshy; And Calves of the Leg not hanging over, but neat; Are signs of
long Life.

44 Eyes somewhat large, and the Circle of them inclined to Greenness; Senses
not too quick; The pulse in youth slower, toward old Age quicker; Facility of
Holding the Breath, and longer than usual; The Body in youth inclined to be
bound, in the Decline of years more Laxative; Are also Signs of long Life.

45 Concerning the Times of Nativitie, as they refer to long Life, nothing
has been observed worthy the setting down; save only Astrologicall
Observations, which we rejected in our Topics. A Birth at the eighth Month,
is not only not Long-lived, but not likely to live. Alos winterBirths are
accounted the Longer lived.

46 A Pythagoricall, or Monast call Diet, according to (...) Rules, and always
(...) Equal, (As that of (...) was) seems to be very effectual for long
Life. Yet (...) the contrary, amongst those that live freely, and after the
common sort, such as have good Stomachs, and feed more plentifully, are often
the Longest lived. The Middle Diet which we account the Temperate, is
commended, and conduces to good Health, but not to long Life; For the Spare
Diet, begets few Spirits, and dull; And so wastes the Body less: And the
Liberal Diet, yields more ample Nourishment; And so repaireth more: But the
Middle Diet does neither of both: for where the Extremes are Hurtful, there
the Mean is best; But where the Extremes are Helpful, there the Mean is
Nothing worth. Now to that Spare Diet, there are Requisite, Watching, lest the
Spirits being Few, should be oppressed with much sleep; Little Exercise, lest
they should Exhale; Abstinence from Venerie, lest they should be exhausted:
But to the Liberal Diet, on the other side, are Requisite, Much Sleep,
frequent Exercises, and a seasonable use of Venerie. Baths, and Annointings,
(such as were anciently in use,) did rather tend to Deliciousness, than to
prolonging of Life. But of all these Things, we shall speak more exactly, when
we come to the Inquisition, according to Intentions. Mean while, that of
Celsus, who was not only a Learned Physician, but a wise Man, is not to be
omitted. Who advises Interchanging, and Alternation of the Diet, but still
with an Inclination to the more Benign: As that a Man should sometimes
accustom himself to watching, sometimes to sleep; But to sleep (...)
Again, that he should sometimes give himself to Fasting, sometimes to
Feasting; But to Feasting oftenest: That he should sometimes inure himself to
great Labors of the Mind, sometimes to Relaxations of the same, But to
Relaxations oftnest. Certainly, this is without all question; That Diet well
ordered bears the greatest part in the Prolongation of Life; Neither did I ever
meet, an extreme longlived Man; But being asked of his course, he observed
something peculiar; Some one Thing, some another. I remember an old Man, above
an hundred years of Age, who was produced as a witness, touching an Ancient
Prescription; when he had finished his Testimony, the Judge familiarly asked
him, How he came to live so long; He answered, beside Expectation, and not
without the Laughter of the Hearers; By Eating before I was Hungry, and
Drinking before I was Dry. But of these Things, we shall speak hereafter.

47 A Life led in Religion, and in Holy Exercises, seems to conduce to long
Life. There are in this kind of Life, these Things; Leisure; Admiration and
Contemplation of Heavenly Things; Joys not sensual; Noble Hopes; Wholesome
Fears; Sweet Sorrows; Lastly, continual Renovations, by Observances,
Pennances, Expiations; All which are very powerful to the Prolongation of
Life. Unto which if you add that austere Diet, which (...) the Mass of the
Body, and humbles the spirits, no marvel, if an extraordinary length of life
do follow; Such as was that of Paul the (...), Simeon Stilita the (...)
Anchorite; And of many other Hermites, and Ancherites.

48 Next unto this, is the Life led in good letters; Such as was that of
Philosophers, Rhetoricians, Grammarians. This life is led also in feisure; And
in those Thoughts, which, seeing they are severed from the Affairs of the
world, bite not; But rather delight through their Variety, and Impertinencie.
They live also at their pleasure; Spending their Time in such Things, as like
them best; And for the most part in the company of young Men; which is ever the
most cheerful. But in Philosophies, there is great Difference betwixt the
Sects, as touching long Life. For those Philosophies, which have in them a
Touch of Superstition, and are conversant in High Contemplations, are the best;
As the Pythagoricall, and Platonic: Also those, which did institute a
perambulation of the world; And considered the Varietit of Natural Things; And
had Retchlesse, and High, and Magnanimous Thoughts: (As of Infinitum, of the
Stars, of the Heroical Virtues, and such like;) were good for lengthening of
Life; Such were those of (...), Philolaus, Xenophanes, the Astrologians, and
Stoics: Also those, which had no profound speculation in them; But discoursed
calmly on both sides, out of common sense, and the Received Opinions, without
any shapr Inquisition; were likewise Good; Such were those of Carneades, and
the Academicks; Also of the Rhetoricians, and Grammarians. But contrarily,
Philosophies conversant in perplexing subtilties; And which pronounced
peremptorily; And which examined and (...) all Things, to the Scale of
Principles; Lastly, which were Thornie, and Narrow; were Evil; Such were those
commonly of the Peripateticks, and of the Schoolmen.

49 The Country Life also, is well fitted for long Life: It is much abroad,
and in the open Air; It is not slothful, but ever in Employment: It Feeds
upon Fresh Cates, and unbought; It is without Cares, and Envy.

50 For the Militar Life, we have a good opinion of that whilst a Man is
young: Certainly, many excellent (...) riers have been long lived Corvinus,
Camillus, (...) Agesilaus; with others, (...) Ancient, and Modern: No doubt,
it furthereth long life. to have all Things from our youth, to our Elder Age,
Mend and Grow to the Better; That a youth full of Crosses may minister
sweetness to our Old Age. We conceive also, that (...) Affections, inflamed
with a Desire of Fighting, and Hope of Victory, do infuse such a Heat into
the Spirits, as may be profitable for long Life.

Medicines for long Life.
THe Art of Physic, which To the 10. Article.
we now have, looks no further, commonly, than to Conservation of Health, and
Cure of Diseases; As for these Things, which tend properly to long Life, there
is but slight mention, and by the way only. notwithstanding, we will propound
those Medicines, which are Notable in this Kind; I (...) those, which are
called Cordials. For it is consonant to Reason, that those Things, which being
taken in Cures, do defend and fortify the Heart; or, more truly, the Spirits;
against Poisons, and Diseases; Being transferred with judgment and choice,
(...) Diet, should have a good effect in some sort toward the prolonging of
Life. This we will do, not heaping them promiscuously together, (as the
manner is,) but selecting the best.

1 Gold is given in three Forms; Either in that, which they call Aurum
potabile; Or in Wine wherein Cold has been quenched; Or in Gold, in the
Substance; such as are Leaf Gold, and the Filings (...) Gold. As for Aurum
(...). it is used to be given in desperate or dangerous Diseases; And that not
without good success. But we suppose, that the Spirits of the Salt, by which
the Gold is dissolved, do rather minister that virtue, which is found in it
than the Gold it self: Though this Secret be wholly suppressed. Now if the
Body of Gold could be opened, without these Corrosive waters; Or by these
Corrosive Waters, (so the venomous Quality were wanting,) well washed, we
conceive, it would be no unprofitable Medicine.

2 Pearls are taken, either in a fine powder, or in a certain Mass, or
Dissolution, by the Juice of sour and new Limons: And they are given sometimes
in Aromaticall Confections, sometimes in Liquour. The Pearl, no doubt, has
some affinity, with the Shell, in which it grows; And may be of the same
quality, with the Shells, of CreyFishes.

3 Amongst the Transparent precious Stones, two only are accounted Cordial;
The Emeraud, and the (...) which are given under the same Forms, that the
Pearls are; Save only, that the Dissolutions of them, as far as we know,
are not in use. But we suspect these Glassy Jewels, left they should be
cutting.

Of these which we have mentioned, how far, and in what manner, they are
helpful, shall be spoken (...).

4 Bezear Stone is of approved Virtue; For refreshing the Spirits, and
procuring a gentle sweat. As for (...) Horn, it has lost the Credit with us,
yet so, as it may keep Rank with Hearts Horn; And the Bone in the Heart of a
Heart; And Ivorie; And such like.

5 Amber Grise, is one of the best, to appease, and Comfort, the Spirits.
Hereafter follow the Names only, of the Simple Cordials, seeing their Virtues
are sufficiently known.

Hot. Cold. Saffron. Nitre. Folium Indum. Roses. Violets. Lignum Aloes.
Straw-berrie leaves. Citron-Pill, or Rind. Straw-berries. Balm. Juice of
sweet Limons. Basil. Clove GillyFlowers. Juice of sweet Orenges. Orange
Flowers. Juice of Permaines. Rosemarie. Borrage. Mint. Buglosse. Betony.
Burnet. Carduus Benedictus. Sanders. Camphire.

Seeing our Speech now is of those Things, which may be transferred into Diet;
All Hot Waters; And Chymicall Oils; (which (...) a certain Trifler says, are
under the Planet Mars; And have a Furious, and Destructive Force;) As also all
Hot, and Biting Spices; Are to be rejected: And a Consideration to be had, how
Waters and Liquours may be made of the Former Simples; Not those Phlegmatic
Distilled Waters; Nor again those Burning Waters, of Spirit of Wine; But such
as may be more temperate, and yet lively, and sending forth a Benign Vapor.

6 We make some Question, touching the Frequent Letting of Blood, whether it
conduces to long Life or no; And we are rather in the Opinion, that it does,
if it be turned into an Habit, and other Things be well disposed: For it
lets out the old Juice of the Body, and brings in new.

7 We suppose also, that some Emaciating Diseases, well cured, do profit to
long Life; For they yield New Juice the old being consumed; And, (as he says,)
To recover a sickness, is to renew youth: Therefore it were good to make some
Artificial Diseases; which is done by strict, and Emaciating Diets; Of which
we shall speak hereafter.

The Intentions.
HAving finished the Inqusition, To the 12, 13, and 14. Artic.
according to the Subjects; As Namely, of Inanimate Bodies, Vegetables. Living
Creatures, Man; We will now come nearer to the Matter, and order our
Inquisition by certain Intentions; Such as are true, and proper, (as we are
wholly persuaded;) And which are the very paths to Mortal Life. For in this
part, Nothing that is of worth, has (...) been inquired; But the
Contemplations of Men have been, but simple, and non-proficients. For when we
hear Meren the one side, speak of Comforting Naturail Heat, and the Radical
Moisture; And of Meats, which breed good Blood; Such as may neither be Burnt,
nor Phlegmatic; And of the Cheering and Recreating of the Spirits; We sappose
them, to be no bad Men, which speak these Things: But none of these (...)
effectually toward the end. But when, on the other side, we hear several
Discourses; touching Medicines made of Gold, because Gold is not subject to
Corruption; And touching Precious Stones, to refresh the Spirits by their
Hidden Properties, and Luster: And that, if they could be taken, and retained
in Vessels, the Balsames, and Quint-essences of Living Creatures, would make
Men conceive a proud hope of Immortality: And that the Flesh, of Serpents, and
Hearts, by a certain consent, are powerful to the Renovation of Life; Because
the one casts his Skin, the other by Horns; They should also have added the
Flesh of Eagles, because the Eagle changes (...) Bill: And that a certain
Man. when he had found an Ointment hidden under the Ground; And had anointed
himself there with from Head to Foot; (excepting only the Soles of his Feet)
Did, by this Anointing, live three hundred years, without any Disease, save
only some Tumors, in the Soles of his fect: And of Artefius, who when be
found his Spirit, ready to depart, drew into his Body the Spirit of a certain
young Man; And thereby made him Breathless, But Himself lived many years by
another Man's Spirit: And of Fortunate Hours, according to the Figures of
Heaven, in which Medicines, are to be gathered, and compounded, for the
prolongation of Life: And of the Seals of Planets, by which Virtues may be
drawn, and fetched down from Heaven, to prolong Life: And such like fabulous,
and superstitious Vanities; We wonder exceedingly, that men should so much
dote, as to suffer themselves to be deluded with these Things. And again, we
do pity Mankind; that they should have the Hard Fortune, to be besieged
with such frivolous, and senseless Apprehensions. But our Intentions, do both
come home to the Matter; And are far from vain and credulous Imaginations:
Being also such, as we conceive, posterity, may add much to the Matters,
which satisfy those Intentions; But to the Intentions themselves but a little.
Notwithstanding there are a few Things, and those of very great Moment, of
which we would have Men to be forewarned.

First, we are of that Opinion, that we esteem the Offices of Life, to be
more worthy than Life it self. Therefore, if there be any Thing of that kind,
that may indeed exactly answer our Intentions, yet so, that the Offices, and
Duties of Life, be thereby hindered; whatsoever it be of this kind; we reject
it. Perhaps, we may make some light Mention, of such Things, but we (...) not
upon them. For we make no serieus, nor diligent Discourse; Either of hading
the life in Caves, where the SunneBeames, and several changes of the Air,
pierce not; Like (...) his Cave; Or of perpe tuall Baths, made of Liquour,
prepared; Or of Shirts, and Seare-cloathes, so applied, that the Body should
be always, as it were, in a Box; Or of thick Paintings of the Body, after the
manner of some Barbarous Nations; Or of an exact Ordering, of our Life, and
Diet, which aims onlyat this, and minds nothing else, but that a Man live;
(As was that of Herodicus, amongst the Ancients; And of Cornarus the Venetian;
in our Days, but with greater Moderation;) Or of any such prodigy,
Tediousness, or Inconvenience: But we propound such Remedies, and (...), by
which the Offices of Life may neither be deserted, nor receive any great
Interruptions, or Mo'estations.

Secondly, on the other side, we denounce unto Men, that they would give over
(...); And not imagine, that so great a Works as the Stopping, and Turning
back, the powerful Course of Nature, can be brought to pass by some Morning
Draught, or the Taking of some precious Drug; But that they would be assured,
that it must needs be, that this is a work of labor; And consists of many
Remedies, and a fit Connection of them amongst themselves; For no Man can be so
stupid, as to imagine, that what was never yet done, can be done, but by such
ways, as were never yet attempted.

Thirdly, we ingenuously profess; That some of those Things, which we shall
propound, have not been tried by us, by way of Experiment; (For our Course of
life does not permit that;) But are derived, (as we suppose) upon good Reason,
out of our Principles and Grounds; (of which, some we set down, others we
reserve in our Mind;) And are, as it were, cut, and dug out of the Rock,
and Mine of Nature Her self. Nevertheless, we have been careful, and that
with all Providence and Circumspection; (Seeing the Scripture says of the Body
of Man; That it is more worth than Raiment;) To propound such Remedies; as may
at least be safe, if peradventure they be not Fruitful.

Fourthly, we would have Men rightly to observe, and distinguish; That those
Things which are good for an Healthful Life, are not always good for a Long
Life. For there are some Things which do further the Alacrity of the Spirits,
and the Strength and Vigor of the Functions, which, notwithstanding, do cut
off from the sum of Life. And (...) other Things, which are (...) ble to
Prolongation of Life; (...) are not without some Peril (...) Health, unless
this Matter (...) salved by fit Remedies: Of (...) not withstanding, as
occasien shall be offered, we will not omit, (...) give some Cautions, and
(...).

Lastly, we have thought good to propound sundry (...) according to the
several Intentions; But the choice of those Remedies, and the Order of them to
leave to Discretion. For to so down exactly, which of them agrees best, with
which Constitution of Body, which with the several Courses of Life; which with
each Man's particular Age And how they are to be taken, out after another; And
how the whole Practicque of these Things be administered and governed; would
both be too long; Neither it fit to be published.

In the Topics, we (...) three Intentions. The (...) of Consumption; The
Perfecting of Reparation; And the Renewing of Oldnesse. But, seeing those
Things, which (...) be said, are Nothing less (...) words; We will deduce
(...) three Intentions, to Ten Operations.

1 The First is, the Operation upon the Spirits, that they may (...) their
Vigor.

2 The Second Operation is, upon be Exclusion of Air.

3 The Third Operation is, upon the Blood, and the Sanguifying Heat.

4 The Fourth Operation is, upon the Juyces of the Body.

5 The Fifth Operation is, (...) the Bowels, for their (...) on of Aliment.

6 The Sixth Operation is, upon the Outward Parts, for (...) Attraction of
Aliment.

7 The Seventh Operation upon the Aliment it self, (...) the Insinuation
thereof.

8 The Eighth Operation is, (...) on the last Act of Assimilatioc

9 The Ninth Operation is, up on the Inteneration of the Part after they begin
to be Dried.

10 The Tenth Operation is, on the Purging away of (...) Juice, and Supplying
of (...) Juice.

Of these Operations, the (...) first belong to the First Intention; The four
next to the (...) Intention; And the two last, the Third Intention.

But because this Part, touching the Intentions, does tend to Practice; under
the Name of History, we will not only comprise Experiments and Observations;
But also Councels, Remedies, Explications of Causes, Assumptions, and
whatsoever has Reference hereunto.

The Operation upon the Spirits, that they may remain youthful, and renew
their Vigor.
The History.
1 THe Spirits are the Master-workmen of all Effects in the Body. This is
manifest by Consent And by Infinite Instances.

2 If any Man could procure that a young Man's Spirit: could be conveyed into
(...) Man's Body; It is not unlikely, but this great Wheel of the Spirits,
might turn (...) the lesser wheel of the (...) And so the Course of (...)
become Retrograde.

3 In every Consumption whether it be by Fire, or by Age, the more the Spirit
of the Body, or the Heat, preyeth upon the Moisture, (...) lesser is the
Duration of the Thing. This occurres every where, and is manifest.

4 The Spirits are to be (...) such a Temperament, and Degree of Activitie;
(...) they should not, (as He (...) Drink or Guzzle the (...) of the Body; But
Sippe them only.

5 There are two Kinds of Flames; The one Eager and weak, which consumes slight
Substances, but has little power over the Harder; As the Flame of Straw, or
small Sticks; The other strong, and constant, which converts Hard and obstinate
substances; As the Flame of Hard wood, and such like.

6 The eager Flames, and yet less Robust, do dry Bodies, and render them
exhaust and Baplesse; But the stronger Flames, do (...) and melt them.

7 Also in (...) Mediines, some vapor forth the (...) part of the Tumors, or
Swellings; and these (...) the Tumor; Others potently discuss, and these
Soften it.

8 Also in Purging and Absterging Medicines; some carry away the Fluide Humors
violently; others draw the more Obstinate and viscous.

9 The Spirits ought to be invested, and armed with such a Heat; That they may
choose rather to stir and (...) Hard and obstinate Matters; Than to
discharge, and carry away the thin and prepared: For by that means, the Body
becomes Green and Solid.

10 The Spirits are so to be wrought and tempered; That they may be; In
Substance, Dense, (...) Rare; In Heat, Strong, (...) Eager In Quantity,
Sufficient for the Offices of Life, (...) Redundant, or TurgideIn Motion,
Appeased; (...) Dancing, or Unequal.

11 That Vapors work powerfully upon the Spirits, it is manifest; By Sleep;
by Drunkenness; by Melancholy Passions; By Laetificant Medicines; By Odours
calling the Spirits back again, in Swounings, and Faintings.

12 The Spirits are condensed four ways; Either by Putting them to Flight; Or
by Refrigerating and Cooling them; Or by Stroaking them; Or by Quieting them.
And first of their Condensation, by putting them to Flight.

13 Whatsoever puts to Flight on all parts, drives the Body into his
Center; And so condenseth.

14 To the Condenfution of the Spirits by Flight, the most Powerful and
Effectual, is Opium; And next, Opiates; And generally, all (...) Things.

15 The force of Opium, to the Condensation of the Spirits, (...) exceeding
strong; When as perhaps, three grains thereof will, in a short time, so
Coagulate the Spirits, that they return no more, but are extinguished, and
become Im moveable.

16 Opium, and the like, put not the Spirits to Flight, by their Coldness; For
they have Parts manifestly Hot; But, (...) the contrary, cool, by their
putting the Spirits to Flight.

17 The Flight of the Spirits, by Opium, and Opiate Medicines, (...) best
seen, by applying (...) same outwardly; For the (...) straight withdraw
themselves; And will return (...) more; But the Part is Mortified; And turns
to a Gangrene.

18 Opiates, in Grievous Pains, as in the Stone, or the Cutting off, of a
Lunme, mitigate pains; Most of all, by putting the Spirits to Flight.

19 Opiates obtain a good Effect, from a bad Cause; For the Flight of the
Spirits is Evil; But the Condensation of them, through their Flight, is Good.

20 The Grecians attributed much, both for Health, and for Prolongation of
Life, to Opiates; But the Arabians, much more. In so much, that their Grand
Medicines, (which they called, the Gods Hands;) Had Opium, for their Basis, and
principal Ingredient, other Things being mixed, to abate and correct the
Noxious Qualities thereof: Such were Treacle, Mithridate, and the rest.

21 Whatsoever is given, with good success, in the curing of pestilentiall and
Malignant Diseases; To stop and Bridle the Spirits, lest they grow Turbulent,
and Tumultuate, May, very happily, be transferred to Prolongation of Life: For
one Thing is effectual unto both; Namely, the Condensation of the Spirits: Now
there is nothing better for that, than Opiates.

22 The Turks find Opium, even in a reasonable good quantity, Harmless,
and Comfortable; In so much, that they take it, before their Battle, to excite
Courage; But to us, unless it be in a very small Quantity, and with good
Correctives, it is Mortal.

23 Opium, and Opiates, are maaifestly found to excite Venus; Which shows them
to have force, to corroborate the Spirits.

24 Distilled matter of wild Poppie, is given with good success, in Sursets,
Agues, and diverse Diseases. Which, no doubt, is a Temperate kind of Opiate:
Neither let any man wonder at the various use of it; For that is Familiar to
Opiates; In regard that the Spirits, corroborated and Condensed, will rise up
against any Disease.

25 The Turks use a kind of Herb, which they call Caphe; which they dry, and
powder; And then drink it in warm water; Which they say, does not a little
sharpen them, both in their Courage, and in their Wits; Notwithstanding, if it
be taken in a large Quantity, it affects, and disturbs the Mind; Whereby it is
manifost, that it is of the same Nature with Opiates.

26 There is a Root, much renowned in all the Easternparts, which they call
Betel; Which the Indians, and others, use to carry in their Mouths, and to
champ it: And by that champing, they are wonderfully enabled, both to endure
Labors, and to overcome Sicknesses, and to the Act of carnal Copulation: It
seems to be a kind of Stupefactive, because it exceedingly blacks the Teeth.

27 Tobacco, in our Age, is immoderately grown into use; And it affects Men
with a secret kind of Delight; In so much, that they who have once inured
themselves to it, can hardly afterward leave it: And, no doubt, it has power
to lighten the Body, and to shake off weariness: Now the virtue of it, is
commonly thought to be, because it opens the Passages, and void. Humors: But
it may more rightly be referred to the Condensation of the Spirits; For it is
a kind of Henbane; And manifestly troubles the Head, as Opiates do.

28 There are sometimes Humors engendered in the Body, which are, as it were,
Opiate themselves; As it is in some kind of Melancholies; With which if a Man
be affected, it is a sign of very Long Life.

29 The Simple Opiates, (which are also called Stupefactives,) are these; Opium
it self, which is the Juice of Poppy; Both the Poppies, as well in the Herb, as
in the Seed; Henbane; Mandrake; Hemlock; Tobacco; Nightshade.

30 The Compound (...) are, Treacle; Mitbridate; Trifera; Ladanum Paracelsi;
Diacodium; Diascordium; Philonium; Pills of Hounds-Tongue.

31 From this which has been said, certain Designations, or Councels, may be
deduced, for the Prolongation of Life, according to the present Intention;
Namely, of (...) the Spirits by Opiates.

32 Let there be therefore, every year, from Adult years of Youth, an Opiate
Diet; Let it be taken about the end of May; Because the Spirits in Summer, are
more Loose, and Attenuated; And there is less Danger from Cold Humors: Let it
be some Magistrall Opiate, weaker than those that are commonly in use, both in
rtspect of a smaller Quantity of Opium, and of a more sparing mixture of
extreme Hot Things: Let it be taken in the Morning betwixt sleeps. The Fare for
that time would be more simple, and sparing, than or linary, without Wine, or
Spices, or Vaporous Things: This Medicine to be taken only each Other Day; And
to be continued for a Fortnight. This Designation, in our Judgment, comes
home to the Intention.

33 Opiates also may be taken, not only by the Mouth, but also by Fumes; But
the Fumes must be such, as may not move the Expulsive Faculty too strongly,
nor force down Humors; But only taken in a Weft, may work upon the Spirits,
within the Brain: And therefore, a Suffumigation of Tobacco, Lignum Alce;
Rose-Mary Leaves dr ed, and a little Myrrh, snuffed up in the Morning, at the
Mouth and Nosthrils, would be very good.

34 In Grand Opiaces; Such as are Treacle, Mithridate, and the rest; It would
not be amiss (especially in Youth,) to take rather the Distilled Waters of
Them, than themselves, in their Bodies: For the Vapor, in Distilling, does
rise; But the Heat of the Medicine, commonly, (...): Now Distilled Waters, are
good, in those virtues, which are conveyed by Vapors, In other Things, but
weak.

35 There are Medicines, which have a certain weak, and hidden Degree; And
therefore safe; Toan Opiate Virtue. These send froth a Slow, (...) Copious
Vapor, but not (...), as Opiates do: Therefore they put not the Spirits to
(...); Notwithstanding they congregate them, and somewhat thicken them.

36 Medicines in Order to Opiates, ate: Principally Saffron; Next Folium Indum;
AmberGrise; Coriander-Seed prepared; Amomum, and (...); Lignum-Rhodium;
OrengeFlower Water; And much more, the infusion of the same Flowers, new
gathered, in Oil of Almonds; Nutmegs pricked full of Holes, and macerated in
Rose water.

37 As Opiates are to be taken very sparingly, and at certain times, as was
said; So these Secundaries may be taken familiarly, and in our daily Diet; And
they will be very effectual to prolongation of life. Certainly, an Apothecarie
of Calecute, by the use of Amber, is said to have lived, (...) hundred and
sixty years; And the Noble Men of Barbary, through the use thereof, are
certified to be very long lived; whereas the mean people are but of short
life: And our Ancestors, who were longer lived than we, did use Saffron much;
In their Cakes, Broathes, and the like. And touching the first way, of
Condensing the Spirits, by Opiates, and the Subordinates thereto. thus much.

38 Now we will inquire of the second way, of Condensing the Spirits, by Cold.
For the proper work of Cold is Condensation; And it is done, without my
Malignitie, or adverse Quality; And therefore it is a fafer Operation, than by
Opiates; Though somewhat less powerful, if it be done by Turns only, as
Opiates are: But then again, because it may be used familiarly, and in our
daily Diet with Moderation; It is much more powerful for the Prolongation of
Life, than by Opiates.

39 The Refrigeration of the Spirits, is effected three ways; Either by
Respiration; or by (...); or by Aliment. The first is the best, but, in a sort,
out of our power; The second is potent, but yet ready, and at hand; The third
is weak, and somewhat about.

40 Air clear and pure; And which has no Fogginesse in it, before it be
received into the Lungs; And which is least exposed to the Sunbeams;
Condenseth the Spirits best; Such is found, either on (...) Tops of Dry
Mountains, or in (...), open to the winds, and yet not without some shade.

41 As (...) Refrigeration, and (...) of the Spirits, by Vapors; The Root of
this Operation we place in Nitre; As a Creature purposely made, and chosen,
for this end; Being thereunto lead, and persuaded, by these Arguments.

42 Nitre is a kind of Cool Spice: This is apparent to the sense it self;
For it bites the Tongue, and Palate, with Cold, as Spices do with Heat: And it
is the only Thing, as (...) as we know, that has this property.

43 Almost all cold Things, (which are cold properly, and not by Accident, as
Opium is,) are poor, and jejune, of Spirit; Contrarily, Things full of Spirit,
are almost all Hot: Only Nitre is found amongst Vegetables, which (...) with
Spirit, and yet is Cold. As for Camphire, which is full of Spirit, and yet
performs the Actions of Cold, it cools by Accident only; As namely, for
that by the Thinness thereof, without Acrimonie, it helps Perspiration, in
In flammations.

44 In Congealing, and Freezing. of Liquours; (which is latel grown into use;)
By Laying Snow, and Ice, on the Outside of the Vessel; Nitre is also added;
And, no doubt, it exciteth, and (...), the Congelation. It is (...), that they
use also, for this work, ordnarie Bay Salt; which does rather give Activitie,
to the Coldness of the Snow, than coo'e by it self: But, as I have (...) in
the Hotter Regions, where snow falls not the Congealing is wrought by Nitre
alone; But this I can not certainly affirm.

45 It is affirmed, that (...), which consists principally of Nitre, being
taken in drink, does conduce to Valor; And that it is used oftentimes, by
Mariners, and Soldiers, before they begin their Battles, as the Turks do
Opium.

46 Nitre is given, with good success, in Burning Agues, and Pestilentiall
Fevers, to mitigate, and Bridle, their per. nicious Heats.

47 It is most manifest, that (...), in Gunpowder, does mightily abhor Flame;
From whence is caused, that Horrible Crack, and Puffing.

48 Nitre is found to be, as it were, the Spirit of the Earth; For this is
most certain; That any Earth, though pure, and unmixt with Nitrous Matter, if
it be so laid up, and covered, that it be free from the Sunbeams, and
puts forth no Vegetable, will gather Nitre, even in good Abundance. By which
it is clear, That the Spirit of Nitre, is not only inferior to the Spirit of
living Creatures, but also to the Spirit of Vegetables.

49 Cattle, which drink of Nitrous water, do manifestly grow Fat; which is a
Sign, of the Cold, in Nitre.

50 The Manuring of the Soil, is chiefly, by Nitrous Substances; For all Dung
is Nitrous: And this is a sign, of the Spirit, in Nitre.

51 From hence it appears, that the Spirits of Man, may be cooled, and
condensed, by the Spirit of Nitre; And be made more Crude, and lesseeager: And
therefore, as strong wines, and spices, and the like, do burn the Spirits,
and shorten life; So, on the contrary side, Nitre does compose, and repress
them, and furthereth to long Life.

52 Nitre may be used; In Meat, mixed with our Salt, to the tenth part of the
Salt; In Broaths, taken in the Morning, from three Grains to ten; Also in
Beer; But howsoever it be used, with Moderation, it is of prime Force, to long
Life.

53 As Opium holds the pre-eminence, in Condensing the Spirits, by putting them
to Flight; And has withal his Subordinates; less potent, but more safe;
which may be taken, both in greater Quantity, and in more frequent use; Of
which we have formerly spoken; So also Nitre, which condenseth the Spirits by
Cold and by a kind of Frescour. (as we now adays speak) (...) also his
Subordinates.

54 Subordinates to Nitre are All those Things, which yield an Odor, some what
Earthy; Like the smell of Earth, pure, and good, newly dug or turned up: Of
this sort, the chief are; Boragi Buglesse, Langue de Boe uf, Butnet;
Strawberrie Leaves, and Strawberries, Frambois, or Raspis; Raw Cucumbers; Ram
Permaines; Vine-leaves, and Buds; Also Violets.

55 The next, in order, are those, which have a certain Freshness of smell,
but somewhat more inclined to Heat; yet not altogether void, of that virtue, of
Refreshing by Coolness: Such as are Balm; Green Citrons; Green Orenges;
Rose Water distilled; Roasted Wardens; Also, the Dimask, Red, and Musk Rose.

56 This is to be noted; That Subordinates to Nitre, do, commonly, confer
more, to this Intention, Raw, than having passed the Fire; Because that Spirit
of Cooling, is dissipated by the Fire: Therefore, they are best taken, either
infused in some Liquour, or Raw.

57 As the Condensation of the Spirits, by Subordinates to Opium, is, in some
sort, performed by Odours; So also that, which is by Subordinates to Nitre:
Therefore, the smell, of new, and pure Earth, taken, either by following the
plough, or by Digging, or by Weeding, excellently (...) sheth the Spirits:
Also, the Leaves of Trees, in Woods or Hedges, falling towa (...) the Middle of
Autumn, (...) a good Refreshing to the (...); But none so good, (...)
Strawberrie Leaves Dying Likewise, the smell of (...) or Wall-flowers, or
(...), or Sweet Briar, or (...), suckles, taken, as they grow, (...) passing by
them only, is of the like Nature.

58 Nay, and we knew a certain great Lord, who lived long that had, every
Morning, inmediately after Sleep, a (...) of fresh Earth, laid in a (...)
Napkin, under his Nose, (...) he might take the smell them of.

59 There is no doubt, but (...) Cooling, and Tempering, (...) the Blood, by
Cool Thing Such as are, Endive, Succourie, Liver-wort; Purslaine, and the
like; Does also, by Consequent, cool the Spirits: But this is about, whereas
vapors cool immediately.

And as touching the Condensing of the Spirits, by Cold, thus much: The Third
way, of Condensing the Spirits, we (...) to be, by that which we call,
Stroaking the Spirits: The fourth, by Quieting the Alacrity, and Unruliness
of them.

60 Such Things, Stroke the Spirits, as are pleasing, and friendly to them,
yet they allure them not, to go abroad but rather prevail, that the Spirits,
contented, as it were, in their own society, do enjoy themselves; And berake
themselves into their proper Center.

61 For these, if you (...) those Things, which were formerly set down, as
Subordinates, to Opium, and Nitre, there will need no other Inquisition.

62 As for the Quieting, of the Unruliness, of the spirits, we (...) presently
speak of that, when we inquire, touching their Motion. Now then, seeing we have
spoken, of that Condensation of the Spirits, which pertains to their
Substance, we will come to the Temper of Heat, in them.

63 The Heat of the Spirits, as we said, ought to be of that kind, that it
may be (...) not Eager, And may delight rather, to master the (...) and
Obstinate, than to carry away, the thin, and light Humors.

64 We must beware of Spices, Wine, and strong Drinks; That our use of them be
very Temperate, and sometimes discontinued: Also of Savorie, Wilde-Marjoram,
Pennie-royall; And all such, as bite, and heat the Tongue. For they yield unto
the Spirits, an Heat, not Operative, but (...).

65 These yield a Robust Heat, Especially Elecampane, Garlic, (...)
Benedictus, Watercresses, while they are young; Cermander, Angelica, (...),
Vervin, Valerian, Myrrh, Pepper-mort, (...), Garden-Chervile; The (...) of
these things with (...), and judgment, sometimes in Sallets, sometimes in
Medicines, will satisfy this Operation.

66 It falls out well, that the Grand Opiates, will also serve excellently for
this Operation, In respect, that they yield such an Heat by Composition, which
is wished, but not to be found in simples. For the (...) of those Excessive
(...) Things; (Such as are; Euphorbium, Pellitory of Spain Stavis-acre,
Dragon-mort, (...) Castoreum, Aristolochian Opoponax, Ammoniacum, (...), and
the like; which of themselves, cannot be taken inwardly,) To (...) and abate
the (...) Virtue of the Opium; The do make such a constitutia of a Med,
cament, as we (...) require, which is excellent seen in this; That (...) and
Mithridate, and the rest, are not sharp, nor bite the Tongue; But are only
somewhat bitter, and of strong seat; And at last manifest their Heat, when they
come into the stomach; and in their subsequent Operations.

67 There conduce also, to the (...) Heat of the Spirits, (...), often excited,
rarely performed; And, no less, some of the Affections, of which shall be
spoken hereafter. So touching the Heat, of the (...), Analogicall to the
Proongation of Life, thus much.

68 Touching the Quantity of he Spirits, that they be not (...), and (...);
But other Sparing, and within a Mean, (seeing a small flame, (...) not devour
so much, as a great flame,) the (...) will be short.

69 It seems to be approved by Experience; That a (...) Diet, and almost a
(...); Such as is either prescri bed by the strict Rules of Monastical Life,
or practiced by Hermites, which have Ne cessitie, and Poverty, for their Rule;
Renders a Man long lived.

70 Hitherto appertain; (...) king of water; A Hard Bed Abstinence from Fire;
A (...) Diet; (As namely, (...) Herbs; Fruits; Flesh, and (...) rather powdered,
and (...), that Fresh, and Hot;) An (...) Shirt; frequent Fastings; frequent
watching; few (...) pleasures; And such like: (...) all these diminish the
Spirit and reduce them to such Quantity, as may be sufficient only for the
Functions of life; whereby the Depredation is the less.

71 But if the Diet shall not be (...) so Rigorous, and (...); yet
notwithstaning, shall be always equal, (...) constant to it self, it (...)
the same effect. We see in Flames; That a Flame somewhat bigger, (so it be
always alike, and quiet,) (...) less of the Fuel, (...) a lesser Flame,
blown with Bellows; And by Gusts (...), or weaker: That which the Regiment,
and Diet, (...) Cornarus the Venetian (...) plainly; who did eat, and (...), so
many years (...), by a just weight, (...) he exceeded an hundred years of
Age, strong in Lims, and entire in his senses.

72 Care also must be taken that a Body, plentifully Nourished, and not
emaciated by any of these aforesaid Diet omitteth not a seasonable use of
Venus; lest the Spirits increase too fast, and soften, and destroy the body: So
then touching a Moderate (...) of Spirits, and (as we may say) Frugall, thus
much.

73 The Inquisition, touching Brideling the Motion of the Spirits, follows
next. (...) Motion, does manifestly (...), and Inflame them. (...) Brideling is
done, by (...) Means: By Sleep; By Avoiding of vchement (...) Immoderate
Exercise, and, a word, all Lassitude; And by Refraining Irksome (...) And
first, touching Sleep.

74 The Fable tells us, that (...) many years together, in a Cave; And all that
(...) needed no Meat; (...) the Spirits waste not much in sleep.

75 Experience teaches us, (...) certain Creatures, as (...), and (...),
Sleep, in (...) close places, an whole Winter together; Such is the Force of
Sleep, to restrain all (...) Consumption. That which Bees, and Drones, are
also thought to do; Though sometimes destitute of (...): And likewise
Butterflies, and other Flies.

76 Sleep after Dinner, (The Stomach sending up no unpleasing Vapors to the
Head, as being the first Dewes of our Meat,) is good for the Spirits, but
derogatorie and hurtful, to all other points of Health. Notwithstanding it
extreme Old Age, there is the same Reason, of Meat, and Sleep; For both, our
Meals, and our Sleeps, should be then frequent, but short, and little: Nay,
and toward the last Period of Old Age, a mere Rest, and, as it were, a
perpetual Repasing, does best; Especially in Winter time.

77 But as Moderate Sleep, conferreth to Long Life; So much more, if it be
Quiet, and not Disturbed.

78 These procure Quiet Sleep Violets, Lettuce, especially boiled; Syrup of
Dried Roses: Saffron; Balm; Apples at out going to Bed; A Sop of (...) in
Malmesey, especially wherein Musk Roses have been first (...); Therefore, it
would (...) be amiss, to make some (...), or a small Draught, of (...) things,
and to use it (...). Also those Things, (...) shut the Mouth of the (...)
close; As Coriander (...) prepared; Quinces; and (...), roasted; do induce
(...) Sleep: But above all things, in youth, and for those that have
sufficient strong Stomachs, it will be best, to take a good Draught, of
Clear, Cold, Water, when they go to Bed.

Touching voluntary, and procured Traunces; As also Fixed, and Profound
Thoughts, so as they be without Irksomenesse; I have nothing certain: No
doubt, they make to this Intention; And condense the Spirits; And that more
potently, than Sleep; Seeing, they lay asleep, and (...) the senses, as much,
or more. Touching them, let further Inquiry be made. So far touching Sleep.

79 As for Motion, and Exercises; Lasfitude hurts; And so does all Motion,
and Exercise, which is too Nimble, and Swife; As Running; Tennis; Fencing; And
the like: And again, when our strength is extended, and strained, to the
uttermost; As Dancing; Wrestling; and such like: For it is certain, that the
Spirits, being driven into streights, either by the swiftness of the Motion,
or by the straining of the Forces; Do afterward become more Eager, and
Predatorie. On the other side, Exercises, which stir up a good strong Motion;
But not over swift, or to our utmost strength, (such is are Leaping, Shooting,
Riding, Bowling, and the like,) do not hurt, but rather benefit.

We must come now to the Affections, and Passions of the Mind; And see, which
of them are Hurtful to long Life; which profitable.

80 Great joys attenuate and diffuse the Spirits, and shorten Life: Familiar
Cheerfulness strengthens the Spirits, by calling them forth, and yet not
resolving them.

81 Impressions of joy in the sense, are naught; Ruminations of joy in the
Memory; Or Apprehensions of them, in Hope, or Fancy, are good.

82 Joy suppressed, or communicated sparingly, does more comfort the Spirits,
than Joy powered forth and published.

83 Grief and Sadness, if it be void of Fear, and (...) not too much, does
rather prolong Life; For it contracteth the Spirits, and is a kind of
Condensation.

84 Great Fears shorten the Life; For though Grief and Fear do both
streighten the Spirit, yet in Grief there is a simple Contraction; But in
Fear, by Reason of the Cares taken for the Remedy, and Hope, intermixed, there
is a Turmoile and Vexing of the Spirits.

85 Anger soporessed, is also a kind of Vexation, and causes the Spirit to
feed upon the Juyces of the Body; But let loose, and breaking forth, it
helps; As those (...) do, which induce a Robust Heat.

86 Envy is the worst of all (...); And feeds upon the Spirits; And they
again upon the Body; And so much the more, because it is perpetual, And as is
said, Keeps no Holidays.

87 Pity of another Man's Misfortune, which is not likely to befall our selves,
is good; But Pity, which may reflect, with some similitude, upon the Party
pitying, is naught, because it exciteth Fear.

88 Light Shame hurts not, seeing it contracteth the Spirits a little, and
then straight diffuseth them; In so much, that Shamefast Persons commonly live
long: But (...) for some great Ignominy, and which afflicts the Mind long,
contracteth the (...), even to suffocation; And is Pernicious.

89 Love, if it be not unfortunate, and too deeply wounding, is a kind of Joy;
And (...) subject to the same Laws, which we have set down touching Joy.

90 Hope is the most Beneficial of all the Affections; And does much to the
Prolongation of Life, if it be not too often Frustrated; But entertaineth the
Fancy, with an Expectation of Good: Therefore they which fix, and propound to
themselves, some End, a the Mark and Scope of their Life; And continually, and
by Degrees, go forward (...) the same; Are, for the most (...), long Lived: In
so much, that when they are come to the Top of their Hope; And (...) go no
Higher therein; They commonly droope, and Live not long after: So that Hope is
as a Leafe-Ioy; Which may be beaten out, to a great Extension, like Gold.

91 Admiration, and Light Contemplation, are very powerful, to the prolonging
of Life; for they hold the Spirits, in (...) Things as Delight them; And suffer
them not to tumultuate or to carry themselves unquietly, and waywardly. And
therefore, all the Contemplatours of Natural Things, which had so many, and so
eminent Objects to admire; (As Democritus, Plato, Parmenides, Apollonius,) were
long Lived: Also (...), which tasted but lightly of Things; And studied rather
Exornation of Speech, than profundity of Matters, were also long Lived; As
Gorgias, Protagoras, I socraetes, Seneca: And certainly, as old Men are, for
the most part, Talkative; So Talkative Men, do often grow very old: For it
shows a Light Contemplation; And such as does not much strain the Spirits,
(...) them. But Subtle, and Acute, and Eager Inquisition. shortens Life; For
it tireth the Spirit, and wastes it.

And as touching the Motion of the Spirits, by the Affections of the Mind,
thus much Now we will add certain other General Observations touching the
Spirits, beside the former; Which fall not (...) the Precedent Distribution.

92 Especial Care must be taken, that the Spirits be not too often Resolved;
For (...) goes before Resolution; And the Spirit once (...), does not very
easily retire, or is Condensed: Now Resolution is caused, by Overgreat Labors;
Over-vehement Affections of the Mind; Overgreat Sweats; Overgreat Evacuations;
Hot Baths, And an untemperate, and unseasonable use of Venus: Also by
Overgreat Cares, and Carpings, and Anxious Expectations: Lastly, by Malignane
Diseases, and Intolerable Pains and Torments of the Body; All which, as much
as may be, (which our Vulga Phyficians also advise,) must be avoided.

93 The Spirits are delighted, both with Wonted Things, and with New: Now it
makert wonderfully to the Conservation of the Spirits, in (...) That we
neither use (...) Things, to a Satiety, and (...) Nor New Things, before a
quick, and strong Appetite: And therefore, both Customs are to be broken off
with Judgment, and Care, before they breed a Fullness, And the Appetite, aster
New Things, to be restrained for a Time, until it grow more Sharp and jocund:
And, moreover, the Life, as much as may be, so to be ordered; That it may have
many Renovations; And the Spirits, by perpetual Conversing in the same
Actions, may not wax Dull. For though it were no ill (...) of Seneca's; The
Fools does (...) begin to Live; Yet this Folly, and many more such, are good
for long Life.

94 It is to be observed, (...) the Spirits; (though the Contrary uses to be
done;) That when Men perceive their Spirits to be in a good, (...) and
Healthful State; (That which will be seen, by the Tranquillity of their
(...) and cheerful (...)) That they cherish them, and not change them: But
when, in a Turbulent, and untoward State; (Which will also appear by their
Sadness, Lumpishnesse, and other Indisposition of their Mind;) That then they
straight overwhelme them and alter them. Now the Spirits are contained in the
same state; By a Restraining of the Affections; Temperatenes of Diet;
Abstinence from (...); Moderation in Labor; Indifferent Rest and Repose: And
the Contrary to these, do alter and over-whelme the Spirits; As Namely, Vehe
meant Affections; Profuse Feastings; Immoderate Venus; Difficult labors;
Earnest Studies, and prosecutions of Business. Yet Men are wont when they are
Merriest, and best disposed, then to apply themselves to Feastings, (...)
Labors, Endeavors, Businesses; whereas, if they have a regard to long Life;
(which may seem strange,) they should rather Practice the Contrary. For we
ought to (...) and preserve good Spirits; And for the evil disposed Spirits,
to discharge and alter them.

95 (...) says not unwisely; That Old Men, for the Comforting of their
Spirits, ought often to remember, and (...) upon the Acts of their Childhood
and Youth. Certainly, such a Remembrance, is a (...) of Peculiar (...), to
every Old Man: And therefore it is a Delight to Men, to enjoy the Society of
them, which have been brought up together with them; And to visit the places
of their Education. Vespasian did attribute so much to this Matter; That when
he was (...), he would, by no means, be persuaded to leave his Fathers
House, though but mean; Lest be should lose the wonted Object of his Eyes,
and the Memory of his childhood: (...) besides, he would drink, (...) Wooden
Cup, tipped with (...) which was his Grandmothers, upon Festival Days.

96 One Thing, above all, grateful to the Spirits; (...) there be a Continual
Progress to the more Benign. Therefore, we should lead, such Youth, and
Manhood, the our Old Age should find (...) Solaces; Whereof the (...) is,
Moderate Ease. And there fore, Old Men, in Honorable Places, lay violent Hands
up on themselves, who retire (...) to their Ease: whereof (...) be found an
Eminent Example in Cassiodorus; who was (...) (...) Reputation amongst the
(...) Kings of Italy, that he (...) as the Soul of their (...): Afterward,
being near (...) years of Age, he (...) himself to a (...); Where he ended
not his (...), before he was an (...) years old. But this Thing (...) require
two Cautions; (...), that they drive not off, (...) their Bodies be utterly
(...) out, and Diseased; For (...) such Body, all Mutation, (...) to the more
Benign, (...) Death: The other, (...) they surrender not themselves to a
Sluggish Ease; But (...) they Embrace something, which may entertain their
Thoughts, and Mind, with Contentation: In which (...), the chief Delights,
are Reading and Contemplation; And then, the Desires of (...) ding, and
Planting.

97 Lastly; The same (...) Endeavor, and Labor, under taken Cheerfully, and
with good will, does Refresh (...) Spirits; But, with an (...) tion and
Unwillingness, (...) Fret, and Deject them. (...) therefore, it conferreth
(...) long Life; Either that a (...) has the Art, to institute (...) Life so,
as it may be Free, (...) Suitable to his own (...) Or else to lay such a
Command upon his mind, that whatsoever is imposed by Fortune, it may rather
lead him than drag him.

98 Neither is that to be (...) ted, toward the Government of the Affections,
That espe ciall care be taken, of (...) Mouth of the Stomach; Espe cially,that
it be not too much (...); For that part has a greater Dominion over the
Affections; Especially the Daily Affections; Than either the Heart, or Brain:
Only those Things excepted, which are wrought by potent Vapors; As in
Drunkenness, and Melancholy.

99 Touching the Operation upon the Spirits, that they may remain Youthful,
and Renew their Vigor, thus much. Which we have done the more accurately, for
that there (...), for the most part, amongst Physicians, and other Authors,
(...) these Operations, a deep silence: But especially, because the Operation
upon the Spirits, and their Waxing (...) again, is the most Realy, and
Compendious way, to long Life: And that, for a twofold Compendiousnesse; One,
because the Spirits work compendiously, upon the Body; The other, because
Vpours, and the Affections, (...) compendiously upon the Spirits: So as these
attain the end, as it were, in a right line: Other Things, rather in lines
Circular.

The Operation upon the Exclusion of the Air. 2.
The History.
1 THe Exclusion of the Air, Ambient, tends to Length of Life, two ways;
First, for (...) the External Air, next (...) the Native Spirit, ((...) the
Air may be said to (...) the Spirit of Man; (...) conferreth not a little to
(...);) Does most of all (...) upon the Juyces of the (...); And hasten the
Desiction thereof; And (...), the Exclusion of it, is effectual to Length of
Life.

2 Another Effect, which follows the Exclusion of Air is much more subtle
and profound; Namely, that the Bedie closed up, and not perspring by the Pores,
detaineth the Spirit within, and turns it upon the Harder Parts of the Body;
Whereby the Spirit Mollifies, and Intenerate them.

3 Of this Thing, the (...) is explained in the (...) of Inanimate Bodies, And
it (...) an Axiom almost infallible That the Spirit Discharged and Issuing
forth, dries Bodies, Detained, melts, (...) intenerateth them: And it
further to be assumed; (...) all Heat does properly (...) nuate and moisten;
And cotracteth, and Dries only Accident.

4 Leading the Life in Dens and (...), where the Air receives not the
Sunbeams, may be effectual to long Life: For the Air, of it self, does not
much toward the Depredation of the Body, unless it be stirred up by Heat.
Certainly, if a Man shall recall Things past to his Memory, it will appear,
that the Statures of Men, have been anciently much greater, than those that
succeeded; As in Sicely, and some other Places. But this kind of Men led their
Lives, for the most part, in Caves. Now Length of Life, and largeness of Lims,
have some Affinity. The Cave also, of Epimenides, walks amongst the Fables. I
suppose like wise, that the Life of (...) Anchorites, was a Thing Resembling
the Life in Caves; In respect, the Sunbeams could not much pierce thither; Nor
the Air receive any great changes, or Inequalitles. This is certain; Both the
Simeon Stylita's, as well Daniel, as Saba; And other Columnar Anchorites, have
been exceedingly long Lived. Likewise, the Anchorites in our days, closed up,
and immured, either within Walls, or Pillars, are often found to be long Lived.

5 Next unto the Life in (...) is the Life on Mountains: For as the Beams of
the Sun, do not penetrate into Caves; So on the Tops of Mountains, being
destitute of Reflection, they are of small force. But this is to be understood
(...) Mountains, where the (...) is clear, and pure; Namely whether, by
reason of the Drinasse of the Valleys, Clouds, and Vapors, do not ascend: As
it is in the Mountains, which encompasse Barbary; Where, even at this day,
they live, many times, to an Hundred and fifty years; As has been noted
before.

6 And this kind of Air; Of Caves, and Mountains, of his own proper Nature,
is little or nothing Predatory: But (...) such as ours is, which is Predatory
through the Heat of the Sun, ought, as much (...) is possible, to be excluded
from the Body.

7 But the Air, is prohibited, (...) excluded two ways; First, (...) Closing
the Pores; (...), by Filling them up.

8 To the Closing of the Pores, (...) Coldness of the Air; Going Naked,
whereby the Skin is made Hard; Washing in Cold Water; Astringents applied to
the Skin; Such as are, Mastick, Myrrh, Myrtle.

9 But much more may we satisfy this Operation, by (...) yet those rarely
used, (especially in Summer;) which are made of Astringent Mineral waters, such
as may safely be used; As Waters participating of Steel and Coppera; For these
do potently contract the Skin.

10 As for Filling up the Pores; Paintings, and such like (...) ous Dawbings;
And, (which may most commodiously be used) Oil, and Fat Things; Do nolesse
conserve the Substance of the Body, than (...) colors and Vernish do preserve
Wood.

11 The Ancient Britons painted their Bodies with Woad, and were exceeding long
Lived: The Picts also used Paintings; And are thought, by some, to have derived
their Name from thence.

12 The Brasilians, and Virginians, Paint themselves, at this day; Who are,
(especially the former,) very long Lived. In so much, that sive years ago,
the French Jesuits had speech with some, who remembered the Building of (...);
which was done an hundred and twenty years since: And they were then at Man's
estate.

13 Ioannes de Temporibus, who is reported to have extended his Life to three
hundred years; Being asked, How he preserved himself so long; Is said to have
answered; By Oil without, and by Honey within.

14 The Irish, especially the wilde-Irish, even at this day, live very long.
Certainly, they report, that within these few years, the Countess of Desmond
lived to an hundred and forty years of Age, and bred Teeth three times. Now
the Irish have a fashion, to chafe, and, as it were, to baste themselves with
old Salt-butter, against the Fire.

15 The same Irish, use to wear Saffroned Linen, and Shirts; Which though it
were, at first, devised to prevent Vermin, yet, howsoever, I take it, to be
very useful for Lengthening of Life: For Saffron, (...) all Things that I
know, is the best Thing for the Skin, and the Comforting of the Flesh; Seeing
it is both notably Astringent; And has besides, an Oseosity, and subtle Heat,
without any Acrimony. I remember a certain EnglishMan, who, when he went to
Sea, carried a Bag of Saffron next his Stomach, that he might conceal it,
and so escape Custom; And whereas he was wont to be always exceeding
Sea-sick; At that time he continued very well, and felt no provocation to vomit.

16 Hippocrates advises, in Winter to wear clean Linen; And in Summer,
fonle Linen, and besmeared with Oil: The Reason may seem to be, because in
Summer, the Spirits exhale most; Therefore, the Pores of the Skin would be
filled up.

17 Hereupon we are of Opinion, that the use of Oil, either of Olives, or
sweet Almonds, to anoint the skin therewith, would principally conduce, to
long Life: The Anointing would be done every Morning, when we rise out of
Bed, with (...), in which a little Bay Salt, and Saffron, is mixed. But this
Anointing must be lightly done, (...) Wool, or some soft Sponge, Not laying
it on thick, but gently touching, and wetting the skin.

18 It is certain, that (...), even the Oily themselves, in great Quantities,
draw some what from the Body; But contrarily, in small Quantities, are drunk in
by the Body; Therefore the anointing would be but Light, as we said; Or
rather the (...) it self, would be besmeared with Oil.

19 It may happily be objected, that this Anointing with Oil, which we
commend; (Though it were never in use with us; And amongst the Italians is cast
off again;) was anciently very Familiar, amongst the Grecians, and Romans; And
a part of their Diet; And yet Men were not longer-liv'd, in those days than
now. But it may rightly be answered; Oil was in use, only, after Baths;
unless it were, perhaps, amongst Champions. Now Hot Baths, are as much
contrary to our Operation, as Annointings are congruous, Seeing the one opens
the passages, the other stops them up. Therefore the Bath, without the
Anointing following, is utterly bad; The Anointing without the Bath, is best
of all. Besides the Anointing amongst them, was used only for Delicacie; Or,
(if you take it at the best) for Health; But, by no means, in Order, to long
Life. And therefore they used then withal precious Ointments; which were good
for Deliciousness, but Hurtful to our Intention, in regard of their Heat; So
that (...) seems, not to have said amiss; Nec Casia liquidi corrumpitur usus
Olivi.


That Odoriferous Casia, (...) not supplanted the use of (...) Oyle-Olive.

20 Anointing with Oil, (...) to Health; Both in Winter, by the Exclusion of
the Cold Airc; And in Summer, by Detaining the spirits within; And prohibiting
the Resolution of them; And keeping off the force of the Air, which is then
most predatorie.

21 Seeing the Anointing with Oil, is one of the most potent Operations to
long Life; we have thought good, to add some Cautions, lest the Health should
be endangered. They are Four, according to the Four Inconvience, which may
follow thereupon.

22 The First Inconvenience is; That by repressing Sweats, it may engender
Diseases, from those Excrementitious Humors. To this a Remeby must be given,
by Purges, and Clysters; That Evacuation may be duly performed. This is
certain, that Evacuation by Sweats, commonly advances Health, and derogateth
from long Life: But Gentle Purgers, work upon the Humors, not upon the
Spirits, as Sweat does.

23 The Second (...) is; That it may heat the (...), (...), in time, inflame
it: For the Spirits shut in, and not Breathing forth, acquire Heat. This
Inconvenience may (...) prevented; If the (...), (...) nsually, (...) to the
Colder part; And that at times some proper Cooling (...) be taken, of which,
we shall straight speak, in the Opertion upon the Blood.

24 The Third is, That it may (...) the Head: For all (...) from without,
strikes back the Vapors, and sends them up unto the Head: This Inconvenience
is remedied, by Purgers; Especially, Clysters; And by shutting the Mouth of the
Stomach, strongly, with Stipticks; And by Combing, and Rubbing the Head, and
washing it with convenient Lies, that something may exhale; And by not
omitting, competent, and good Exercises, that something also may perspire, by
the Skin.

25 The Fourth Inconvenience, is a more subtle Evil; Namely, that the Spirit,
being detained by the Closing up of the Pores, is likely to multiply it self
too much: For when little issues forth, and new Spirit is continually
engendered, the Spirit increases too fast, and so preyeth upon the Body more
plentifully. But this is not altogether so; For all Spirit, closed up, is dull;
(For it is Blown, and Excited, with Motion, as Flame is;) And therefore, it is
less Active, and less Generative of it self: Indeed, it is thereby increased
in Heat, (as Flame is,) but slow in Motion: And therefore the Remedy to this
Inconvenience, must be by Cold Things; Being sometimes mixed with Oil; Such as
are, Reses, and Myrtle: For we must altogether disclaim Hot Things; As was
said of Csia.

26 Neither will it be unprofitable, to wear next the Body, Garments, that
have in them, some Vnctuosity, or Oleositie, not Aquositie; For they will
exhaust the Body less: (...) are those of Woollen; rather than those of
Linen; (...) it is manifest in the Spirits of Odours; That if you lay
sweet-powders amongst Linen, they will much sooner lose their smell, than
amongst Woollen. And therefore, Linen is to be preferred, for Delicacie, and
Neatness; But to be (...) for our Operation.

27 The Wild Irish, as soon as they fall sick; The first Thing they do, is
to take the sheets off their Beds; and to wrap themselves in the woollen
clothes.

28 Some report, that they have found great Benefit in the conservation of
their Health, by weating Scarlet Wast-coats, next their skin, and under their
shirts; As well down to the nether parts, as on the upper.

29 It is also to be observed; That Air, accustomed to the Body, does less
prey upon it, than New Air, and often changed. And therefore poor people, in
small cottages, who live always within the smell of the same chimney; And
change not their seats; Are commonly longestliv'd: Notwithstanding, to other
Operations, (especially for them whose Spirits are not altogether dull,) we
judge change of Air to be very profitable. But a Mean must be used, which may
satisfy on both sides; This may be done by Removing our Habitation, four
times a year, at constant and set Times, unto convenient seats; That so the
Body may neither be in too much Peregrination, nor in too much Station. And
touching the Operation, upon the Exclusion of Air, and Avoiding the predatorie
force thereof, thus much.

The Operation upon the Blood, and the Sanguifying Heat. 3.
The History.
1 THe two Following Operations, answer to the two precedent; And are in the
Relation of Passives to Actives: For the two precedent, intend this; That the
Spirits, and Air, in their Actions, may be the less Depredatorie; And the
two latter, that the Blood, and Juice of the Body, may be the less Depredable.
But because the Blood is an Irrigation, or Watering, of the Juyces, and
Members; And a (...) to them; Therefore (...) will put the Operation upon the
Blood, in the first place. Concerning this Operation, we will propound certain
Counsels; Few in number, but very powerful in virtue. They are three.

2 First, there is no doubt, but that if the Blood be brought to a cold Temper,
it will be so much the less Dissipable. But because the Cold Things, which
are taken by the Mouth, agree but ill, with many other Intentions; Therefore it
will be best, to find out some such Things, as may be free from these
Inconveniences. They are two.

3 The first is this. Let there be brought into use, especially in youth,
Clysters; Not Purging at all, or Absterging; But only Cooling, and some what
Opening: Those are approved, which are made of the juyces of Lettuce,
Purstaine, Liverwort, Houseleek, and the (...) of the Seed of Flea-wort, with
some temperate opening Decoction; And a little Canphire: But in the Declining
Age, let the (...), and Purslaine, beo left out; And the Juyces of Borrage, and
(...), and the like, be put in their Rooms: And let these Clysters be
retained, if it may be, for an hour, or more.

4 The other is this. Let there be in use, especially in Summer, Baths of Fresh
water, and out Lukewarm; Altogether without Emollients; As Mallows,
Mercury, Milk, and the like; Rather take new Whey, in some good Quantity; And
(...).

5 But, (that which is the Principal in this Intention, and New,) we advise;
That (...) the Bathing, the Body be (...) with Oil, with some Thickeners;
whereby the Quality of the Cooling may be received, and the water excluded:
yet let not the pores of the Body, be shut too close; For when the outward
Cold, closes up the Body too strongly; It is so far from Furthering
Coolness; That it rather forbids it, and stirs up Heat.

6 Like unto this, is the use of Blodders, with some Decoctions, and Cooling
Iuyces; Applied to the Inferior Region of the Body; Namely, from the Ribs, to
the privy parts: For this also is a kind of Bathing where the Body of the
Liquour is for the most part excluded; And the Cooling Quality admitted.

7 The Third Counsel remains; which belongs not to the Quality of the
Blood, but to the Substance thereof; That it may be made more Firm, and less
Dissipable; And such, as the Heat of the Spirit, may have the less power over
it.

8 And as for the use, of the Filings of Gold, Leafe-Gold, Powder of Pearl,
Precious stones, Coral, and the like; we have no opinion of them, at this
day; unless it be only, as they may satisfy this present operation.
Certainly, seeing the Arabians, Grecians, and (...) Physicians, have (...)
(...) such virtues to these Things; It cannot be altogether Nothing, which so
great Men have observed of them. And therefore omitting all (...) Opinions
about them, we do verily believe; That if there could be some such Thing
conveyed into the whole Mass of the Blood, in Minute, and fine Portions;
Over which the Spirits, and Heat, should have little, or no power; Absolutely,
it would not only resist Putrefaction, but Arefaction also, And be a most
effectual Means, to the prolongation of Life. Nevertheless, in this Thing,
several Cautions are to be (...). First, that there be a most (...)
Comminution. Secondly, that such Hard and solid Things, be void of all
Malignant Quality; Lest while they be dispersed, and lurk in the veins, they
breed some Inconvenience: Thirdly, that they be never taken together with
Meats, nor in any such manner, as they may stick long; Lest they beget
dangerous Obstructions, about the Mesentery: Lastly, that they be taken very
rarely, that they may not congregate, and (...) together, in the veins.

9 Therefore let the manner of Taking them, be Fasting; in White wine; A little
Oil of Almonds mingled therewith; Excrcise used immediately upon the Taking of
them.

10 The Simples, which may satisfy this Operation, are; In stead of all, Gold,
Pearls, and Coral: For all Metals, except Gold, are not without some
Malignant Quality, in the Dissolutions of them; Neither will they be beaten,
to that exquisite Finenesse, that Leafe-Gold has: As for all Glassie, and
Transparent (...) we like them not, (as we said before,) for fear of
Corrosion.

11 But in our judgment, the (...), and more effectual way, would be, by the
use of Woods, (...) Infusions, and Decoctions; For there is in them sufficient,
to cause Firmness of (...); And not the like danger, for breeding
Obstructions: But especially, because they may be taken, in Meat, and Drink;
whereby they will find the more easy Entrance into the veins; And not be
voided in Excrements.

12 The Woods, fit for this purpose, are; Sanders, the Oak, and Vine: As for
all Hot Woods, or something Rosennie, we reject them: Notwithstanding, you may
add the Woody Stalks of Rose-Marie dried; For Rose-Marie is a Shrub, and
exceeds, in Age, many Trees: Also, the Woody Stalks of Ivy; But in such
quantity, as they may not yield an unpleasing taste.

13 Let the Woods be taken, either boiled in Broathes; Or infused, in Must, or
Ale, before they leave working: But in Broathes, (as the custom is, for
Guaiacum, and the like,) they would be infused a good while, before the
Boiling; That the firmer part of the Wood, and not that only which lies
loosely, may be drawn forth. As for Ash, though it be (...) for Cups, yet we
like it (...). And touching the (...) upon the Blood, thus much.

The Operation upon the Juyces of the Body. 4.
The History.
1 THere are two kinds of Bodies, (As was said before in the (...), touching
Inanimates) which are hardly consumed; Hard Things; and Fat Things; As is
seen, in Metals, and Stones; and in Oil, and Wax.

2 It must be ordered therefore, that the Juice of the Body, be somewhat Hard;
And that it be Fattie, or Sub-roscide

3 As for Hardness; It is caused three ways; By Aliment of a firm Nature; By
Cold condensing the Skin, and Flesh; And by Exercise Binding, and Compacting,
the Juyces of the Body, that they be not Soft, and Frothy.

4 As for the Nature of the Aliment, it ought to be such, as is not easily
Dissipable: Such as are, Beef, Swines-Flesh, Dear, Goat, Kid, Swan, Goose,
Ring-Dove; Especially, if they be a little powdered; Fish likewise Salted, and
Dried; old Cheese; And the like.

5 As for the Bread; Oaten Bread; Or Bread with some Mixture of Pease in it;
(...) (...) Or Barley Bread; Are more solid, than Wheat (...) And in wheat
Bread, the course Cheat Bread, is more solid, than the pure (...)

6 The Inhabitants of the Or cades which live upon Salted Fish; And generally,
all FishEaters, are long-lived.

7 The Monks, and Her mites, which fed sparingly, and upon dry Aliment,
attained commonly to a great Age.

8 Also Pure Water, usually drunk, makes the Juyces of the Body less Frothy;
unto which, if for the Dullness of the Spirit, (which, no doubt, in Water, is
but little Penetrative;) you shall add, a little Nitre, we conceive it woold
be very good. And touching the Firmness of the Alimens thus much.

9 As for the Condensation, of the Skin, and Flesh, by Cold: They are longer
lived, for the most part, that live abroad in the open Air, than they that
live in Houses; And the Inhabitants of the Cold Countries, than the Inhabitants
of the Hot.

10 Great Store of Clothes, either upon the Bed, or Back, do resolve the Body.

11 Washing the Body in Cold Water, is good for length of Life; Use of Hot
Baths, is naught. Touching Baths, of Astringent Mineral Waters, we have spoken
before.

12 As for Exercise; An Idle Life, does manifestly make the Flesh Soft, and
Dissipable: (...) Exercise, (so it be, without overmuch Sweating, or
Weariness,) makes it Hard, and Compact: Also Exercise, within Cold water, as
swimming, is very good: And generally, Exercise abroad, is better than that
within Houses.

13 Touching Frications, (which are a kind of Exercise.) because they do
rather call forth the Aliment, than Harden the Flesh; we will inquire
hereafter, in the Due place.

14 Having now spoken, of Hardening the luyees, of the Body; we are to come next
to the Oleositie, or Fattinesse of them: Which is a more perfect, and potent
Intention, than Induration; Because it has no Inconvenience, nor Evil
annexed: For all those Things, which pertain to the Hardening of the Iuyces,
are of that nature, that while they prohibit the Absumption of the Aliment,
they also hinder the Reparation of the same: Whereby it happens, that the same
Things, are both propitious, and adverse, to Length of Life: But those Things,
which pertain to making the Iuyces Oily, and Roscid, help on both sides; For
they render the Aliment, both less Dissipable, and more Reparable.

15 But whereas we say, that the Juice of the^ Body, ought to be Roscide, and
Fat; It is to be noted, that we mean it not, of a visible Fat, But of a
Deminesse dispersed, or (if you will call it) Radical, in the very Substance
of the Body.

16 Neither, again, let any Man think, that Oil, or the Fat of Meats, or
Marrow, do engender the like, and satisfy our Intention; For those Things,
which are once perfect, are not brought back again; But the Aliments ought to
be such, which after Disgestion and Maturation, do then in the end, engender,
Oleosity in the Iuyces.

17 Neither, again, let any Man think; that Oil, or Fat by it self, and
Simple, is Hard of Dissipation; But, in Mixture, it does not retain the same
Nature; For as Oil, by it s lfe, is much longer in Consuming than Water; So in
(...), or (...), it sticks longer, and is later dried; As we noted before.

18 To the Irroration of the Body, Roasted Meats, or Baked Meats, are more
effectual than Boiled Meats: And all Preparation of Meat, with Water, is
Inconvenient; Besides, Oil, is more plentifully extracted out of Dry Bodies,
than out of Moist bodies.

19 Generally to the Irroration of the Body, much use of Sweet Things is
prositable; As of Sugar, Honey, sweet Almonds, Pine-Apples, Pistaccio's, Dates,
Raisins of the Sun, Corrans, Figs, and the like. Contrarily, all Sour, and
very Salt, and very Biting Things, are opposite to the Generation of Roscide
Juice.

20 Neither would we be thought to favor the Manichees, or their Diet;
Though we commend the frequent use of all kinds of Seeds, and (...) and
Roots, in Meats, (...); Considering all Bread, (and Bread is that, which makes
the Meat Firm) is made either of Seeds, or of Roots.

21 But there is Nothing makes so much to the Irroration of the Body, as the
Quality of the Drink; Which is the Convoy of the Meat: Therefore, let there be
in use such Drinks, as without all Acrimony, or Soreness, are notwithstanding
subtle; Such are those Wines, which are, (as the old Woman said in Plautus:)
Vetustate Edentula; Toothlesse with Age; And Ale of the same kind.

22 Mead, (as we suppose,) would not be ill, if it were strong and old: But
because, all Honey has in it some sharp Parts; (as appears by that sharp
water, which the Chemists extract out of it, which will dissolve Metals;) It
were better to make the same Potion of Sugar; Not lightly infused in it, but so
incorporated, as Honey uses to be in Mead; And to keep it, to the Age of a
year, or at least, six Months, whereby the Water may lose the Crudity, and
the Sugar acquire subtlety.

23 Now Ancientnesse in Wine or Beer, has this in it; That it engenders
subtilty in the Parts of the Liquour, and Acrimony in the Spirits; Whereof, the
First is Profitable, and the second Hurtful: Now to rectify this Evil
Commixture; Let there be put into the Vessel, before the Wine be separated
from the (...), Swines-flesh, or (...), well boiled; That the (...) of the Wine
may have whereupon to ruminate, and seed; And so lay aside their Mordacity.

24 In like manner, if Ale should be made, not only with the Grains of wheat,
Barley, Oats, Pease, and the like; But also, should admit a part, (suppose a
third part, to these Grains,) of some Fat Roots; (such as are Potado Roots,
Pith of (...), Burre-Roots, or some other sweet and Esculent Roots;) we suppose
it would be a more useful Drink, for long Life, than Ale made of Grains only.

25 Also, such Things as have very thin Parts; Yet not withstanding, are
without all Acrimony, or Mordacity, Are very good in Sallets: Which virtue, we
find to be, in some Few of the Flowers; Namely, Flowers of Ivy, which infused
in Vinegar, are pleasant even to the Taste; Marigold leaves, which are used in
Broaths; And Flowers of Betony. And touching the Operation, upon the Iuyces of
the Body, thus much.

The Operation upon the Bowels, for their Extrusion of Aliment. 5.
The History.
1 WHAT those Things are, which comfort the Principal Bowels; Which are the
Fountains of (...); Namely, the (...), Liver, Heart and Brain; To perform
their Functions well; (whereby Aliment is distributed in to the Parts, (...)
are dispersed, and the (...) of the whole Body is accomplished;) May be derived
from Physisians; And from their Prescripts and Advices.

2 Touching the Spleen, (...) Kidneyes, Mesentery, Guts, and Lungs, we speak
not; For these are Members, Ministering to the Principal: And where as speech
is made touching Health, they require sometimes a most especial Consideration;
Because Each of these have their Diseases, which unless they be cured, will
have Influence upon the Principal Members; But as touching the Prolongation of
Life; And Reparation by Aliments; And Retardation of the Inconcoction of Old

3 And as for those Things, which according to the different State of every
Man's Body, may be transferred into his Diet, and the Regiment of his Life; He
may collect them out of the Books of (...) which have written of the
Comforting and Preserving the Four Principal (...) For Conservation of
Health, has commonly need of no more, than some Short Courses of Physic; But
Length of life cannot be hoped, without an orderly Diet, and a Constant Race of
(...) Medicines: But we will propound some few; And the House; And whose
Strength and Goodness, (...) fundamental to the other Concoctions;) ought so
to be guarded and confirmed; That it may be without (...) Hot; Next Astricted
or Bound, not Loose: Furthermore, Clean, not surcharged with Foul Humors;
And yet, (in regard, it is nourished from it self, not from the Veins,) not
altogether Empty, or Hungry: Lastly, it is to be kept, ever, in (...) Because
Appetite; sharpens Disgestion.

5 I wonder much, how that same (...) bibere. To drink (...) Drink; (which was
in use amongst the Ancients,) is laid down again. I knew a Physician, that
was very Famous, who, in the Beginning (...) Dinner and Supper, would (...) eat
a few spoonfuls of very Warm Broth, with much (...) And then would presently
wish, that it were out again; saying, He had no (...) of the Broth, but only
of the Warmth.

6 We do verily conceive it good, that the First Draught, (...) of Wine, or
Ale, or any other Drink, (to which a Man (...) most accustomed) be taken at
Supper, Warm.

7 Wine, in which Gold has been quenched, we conceive, would be very good,
once in a Meal: (...) that we (...) the Gold conferreth an Virtue thereunto;
But that we know, that the (...) of all Metals, in any kind of Liquour, does
leave a most potent Astriction: Now we choose gold, because besides that
Astriction, which we desire, it leaves nothing else behind it, of a Metalline
Impression.

8 We are of opinion, that Sops of Bread dipped in Wine, taken at the Midst of
the Meal, are Better than Wine it self; Especially, if there were infused
into the Wine, in which the Sops were dipped, Rose-Mary, and Citron-Pill; And
that with Sugar, that it may not Slip too fast.

9 It is certain, that the use of Quinces is good to strengthen the Stomach:
But we take them to be better, if they be used, in that, which they call
Quiddeny of Quinces, than in the Bodies of the Quinces themselves; Because they
lie heavy in the Stomach. But those Quiddenies are best taken after Meals,
alone; (...) Meals, dipped in (...)

10 Such things as are good for the Stomach, above other Simples, are these;
Rose-Mary, (...), Maslicke, (...), Sage, Mint.

11 We allow Pills of Aloes, Mastick, and Saffron, in Wintertime, taken
before Dinner; But so as the Aloes be not only oftentimes washed in Rose Water,
but also in Vinegar, in which Tragacanth has been infused; And after that, be
(...) for a few Hours, in Oil of Sweet Almonds, new drawn, before it be made
into Pills.

12 Wine or Ale, wherein (...) has been infused, with a (...) Elecampane, and
Yellow (...), will do well, taken at times; And that especially in Winter.

13 But in Summer, a Draught of White Wind, allayed with Strawberry-water; In
which Wine, Powder of Pearls, and of the shells of Crey-fishes, exquisitely
beaten; And (which may perhaps seem strange;) a little Chalk have been
infused; Does excellently refresh and strengthen the Stomach.

14 But generally, all Draughts in the Morning, (which are but too frequently
used,) of Cooling Things; (As of Juyces, Decoctions, Whey, Barley-waters, and
the like;) Are to be avoided; And Nothing is to be put into the Stomach,
Fasting, which is purely Cold: These Things are better given, (if need
require,) either at five in the afternone: of else, an Hour, after a light
Breakfast.

15 Often Fastings are bad for Long Life; Besides, all Thirst (...) to be
avoided; And the (...) is to be kept Clean, (...) always Moist.

16 Oil of Olives, new, and good; In which a little Mithridate has been
dissolved, (...) upon the Backbone, just against the Mouth of the (...), does
wonderfully (...) the Stomach.

17 A small Bag filled with Locks of Scarlet Wool, steeped in Red-wine; In
which Myrtle, and Citron-Pill, and a little (...), have been infused, may be
always worn upon the Stomach, And, touching those Things which Comfort the
Stomach, thus much; Seeing many of those Things also, which serve for other
Operations, are Helpful to this.

18 The Liver, if it be Preserved from Torrefaction, or (...); And from
Obstruction; It needs no more: For that Looseness of it, which begers
Aquosities, is plainly a Disease; But the other two, Old Age approaching
induces.

19 Hereunto appertain, most especially, those things which are set down in
the Operation, upon the Blood: we will add a very few Things more, but those
selected.

20 Principally, let there be in use, the Wine of Sweet (...); Or if that
cannot be had, the Juice of them, newly expressed; Let it be taken in the
Morning, with a little Sugar: And into the Glass, into which the Expression is
made, put a small piece of Citronpill, green; And three or four whole Cloves:
Let this be taken from February, till the end of April.

21 Bring also into use, above all other Herbs, Watercresses; But young, not
old: They may be used, either Raw in Sallets, or in Broaths, or in Drinks; And
after that, take (...)-wort.

22 Aloes, howsoever washed, or corrected, is hurtful for the Liver; And
therefore it is never to be taken ordinarily: Contrariwise, Rhubarbe is
Sovereign for the Liver; So that these three Cautions be interposed. First,
that it be taken before Meat, lest it dry the Body too much, or leave some
Impressions of the Stipticitie thereof. Secondly, that it be macerated an Hour
or two in Oil of sweet Almonds, new drawn, with Rose Water, before it be
infused in Liquour, or given in the proper Substance. Thirdly, that it be taken
by turns, one while Simple, another while with Tartar, or a little Bay Salt;
That it carry not away the lighter Parts only, and make the Mass of the
Humor more obstinate.

23 I allow Wine, or some Decoction, with Steel, to be taken three or four
times in the year, to open the more strong Obstructions; Yet so, that a
Draught, of two or three spoonfuls of Oil of sweet Almonds, new drawn, ever
go before; And the (...), of the Body, especially; of the Arms and sides,
constantly follow.

24 Sweetened Liquours, and that with some Fatness, are Principally, and not a
little effectual to prevent the (...), and Saltness, and Torrefaction, and in
a word, the Oldnesse of the Liver; Especially, if they be well incorporated
with Age: They are made of sweet Fruits and Roots; As namely, the Wines, and
Julips, of Raisins of the Sun, new; Iujuba's, Dried Figs, Dates, Parsnips,
Potado's, and the like; with the mixture of Licorish, sometimes: Also a Julip,
of the Indian Grain, (which they call Maiz,) with the Mixture of some sweet
Things, does much to the same end. But it is to be noted, That the Intention of
preserving the Liver, in a kind of Softness and Fatnes, is much more
powerful, than that other, which Pertaines to the Opening of the Liver; which
rather tends to Health, than to length of Life; Saving, that that
obstruction, which induces Torrefaction, is as opposite to long Life, as those
other Arefactions.

25 I commend the Roots of Snecory, Spinach, and Beets, cleared of their Piths,
and Boiled, till they be tender, in Water, with a third part of whitewine, for
ordinary Sallets, to be eaten with Oil and Vinegar: Also Asparagus, Pith of
Artichoakes, and Burre-Roots, boiled, and served in, after the same manner;
Also Broaths, in the Springtime, of Vine (...), and the green Blades of
(...). And touching the preserving of the Liver, thus much.

26 The Heart receives Benefit, or Harm, most, from the Air, which we
breath; From Vapors; And from the Affections. Now many of those Things, which
have been formerly spoken, touching the Spirits, may be transferred hither: But
that Indigested Mass of Cordials, collected by Physicians, availes little to
our Intention: Notwithstanding, those things, which are found to be good
against Poisons, may, with good Judgment be given to strengthen and fortify
the Heart; Especially, if they be of that kind, that they do not so much
resist the particular poisons, as arm the Heart and Spirits against poison in
general. And touching the several Cordials, you may repair to the Table,
already set down.

27 The Goodness of the Air, is better known by Experience, than by signs.
We hold that Air to be the best, where the Country is level and plain; And
that lays open on all sides: So that the Soil be dry, and yet not barren, or
sandy: Which puts forth Wild Thime, and Eyebright, and a kind of Marioram,
and here and there Stalks of Calamint: Which is not altogether void of wood but
(...) set with some Trees, for shade: where the Sweet-Brier-Rose, smells
something Muskie, and Aromatically; If there be Rivers, we suppose them rather
(...) than good, unless they be very small, and clear, and Gravelly.

28 It is certain, that the Morning Air, is more Lively and Refreshing, than
the Evening Air; Though the latter be preferred out of Delicacie.

29 We conceive also, that the Air, (...) with a Gentle wind, is more
wholesome than the Air of a Serene and (...) Sky: But the best is, the Wind
blowing from the West in the Morning and from the North in the Afternoon.

30 Odours, are especially profitable for the Comforting of the Heart; yet not
so, as though a good Odor, were the Prerogative of a good Air: For it is
certain, that as there are some Pestilentiall Aires, which smell not so ill,
as others that are less hurtful; So, on the Contrary, there are some Aires,
most wholesome, and Friendly to the Spirits, which either smell not at all, or
are less Pleasing, and Fragrant to the Sense. And generally, where the Air is
good, Odours should be taken but now and then: For a continual Odor, though
never so good, is burdensome to the Spirits.

31 We commend above all others, (as we have touched before) Odor of Plants
growing, and not Plucked, taken in the open Air; The Principal of that kind
are Violets; Gilly-Flowers, Finkes, Bean-Flowers, Lime-Tree-Blossomes,
VineBuds, Hony-suckles, Yellow (...), Musk-Roses; (For other Roses growing, are
fast of theirSmels;) Strawberry-leaves, especially Dying; sweet Briar,
principally in the early spring; Wilde-Mint, Lavender Flowred: And in the
Hotter Countries, Orenge-Tree, Citron-Tree, Myrtle, Laurel: Therefore to walk,
or sit, near the Breath of these Plants, would not be neglected.

32 For the Comforting of the Heart, we prefer Cool smells, before Hot Smells:
Therefore the best perfume is, either in the Morning, or about the Heat of the
Day, to take an equal portion, of Vinegar, Rose Water, and Claret Wine; And to
pour them upon a Fire-pan, somewhat heated.

33 Neither let us be thought; to sacrifice to our Mother, the Earth; Though
we advise, that in Digging, or Plowing the Earth, for health, a good quantity
of Claret Wine, be powered thereon.

34 Orenge-Flower Water, pure and good, with a small portion of Rose Water, and
Brist Wine, snuffed up into the (...); Or put up into the Nosthrils, with a
Syringe, after the Manner of an Errhine; (but not too frequently,) is very good.

35 But Champing, (though we have no Betel;) Or Holding in the Mouth only, of
such Things as cheer the Spirits, (even daily done,) is exceeding comfortable.
Therefore, for that purpose, make Grains, or little Cakes, of Ambre-Grise,
Mark, Lignum Aloes, Lignum (...), Orris powder, and (...); And let those
Grains, or (...), be made up, with Rosewater, which has passed through a
little Indian Balsame.

36 The Vapors, which arising from Things inwardly taken, do fortify, and
cherish the Heart, ought to have these three properties; That they be Friendly,
Clear, and Cooling. For (...) Vapors are Naught; And Wine it self, which is
thought to have only an Heating Vapor, is not altogether void, of an opiate
Quality. Now we call those Vapors: Clear; which have more of the Vapor,
than of the Exhalation; And which are not Smoakie, or Fu liginous, or Unctuous;
But Moist, and Equal.

37 Out of that unprofitable Rabble of Cordials, a few ought to be taken into
daily Diet: In stead of all, Ambre. Grise, Saffron, and the Grain of Kermes,
of the Hotter sort; Roots of Buglosse, and Borrage; Citrons, Sweet Limons, and
Permaines, of the Colder sort. Also that way, which we said, Both Gold, and
Pearls, work a good effect, not only within the veins, but in their passage,
and about the parts near the heart; Namely, by Cooling, without any Malignant
Quality.

38 Of Bezoar Stone, we believe well, because of many Trials: But then, the
Manner of Taking it, ought to be such, as the virtue thereof, may more easily
be communicated to the Spirits. Therefore we approve not the Taking of it, in
(...), or Syrrupes, or in Rosewater, or any such like; But only in Wine,
Cynnamon-(...) or the like distilled water; But that, Weak, or Small, not
Burning, or Strong.

39 Of the Affections we have spoken before, we only add this; That every
Noble, and Resolute, and, (as they call it,) Heroical Desire, strengthens,
and enlarges, the powers of the Heart; And, touching the Heart, thus much.

40 As for the Brain; where the Seat, and Court of the Animal Spirits, is
kept; Those Things, which were inquired before, touching Opium, and Niter, and
the Subordinates to them Both; Also touching the procuring of placide Sleep,
May likewise be referred hither. This also is most certain; That the Brain is
in some sort, in the Custody of the Stomach; And therefore those Things, which
comfort, and strengthen the Stomach, do help the Brain, by Consent; And may,
no less, be transferred hither. We will add a few Observations; Three
Outward, one Inward.

41 We would have Bathing of the Feet, to be often used; At least, once in the
week; And the Bath to be made, of Lie, with Bay Salt; And a little Sage,
Camomile, Fennel, Sweet. Marioram, and Pepper-wort; With the Leaves of
Angelica, green.

42 We commend also, a Fume, or Suffumigation, every Morning of dried
Rose-Mary, (...) dried, and Lignum (...): For all Sweet Gums, oppress the Head.

43 Especially Care must be taken, that no Hot Things, be applied to the
Head, outwardly; Such are kinds of Spices, the very Nutmeg not excepted: For
those Hot Things, we debase them, to the soales of the Feet, and would have
them applied there only: But a light anointing of the Head, with Oil, mixed
with Roses, (...) and a little Salt, and Saffron, we much commend.

44 Not forgetting those Things, which we have before delivered, touching
Opiates, Nitre, and the like; which so much condense the Spirits; we think it
not impertinent to that Effect; That once in fourteen days, Broth be taken in
the Morning, with three, or four, Grains of Castoreum, and a little (...)
Seed, and Calamus; Which both fortify the Brain; And in that aforesaid
Density, of the Substance, of the Spirits; (so necessary to Long Life;) Add
also a Vivacitis of (...) and Vigor, to them.

45 In Handling, the (...), of the four Principal Bowels, we have propounded
those Things, which are both proper, and choice, and may safely, and
conveniently, be transferred into Diet, and Regiment of Life: For Variety of
Medicines, is the Daughter of Ignorance; And it is not more true; That Many
Dishes have caused many Diseases; As the Proverb is; Then this is (...), That
Many Medicines have caused few Cures. And (...) the Operation, upon the
principal Bowels, for their (...), of Aliment, thus much.

The Operation upon the Outward Parts, for their Attraction of Aliment. 6.
The History.
1 ALthough a good Concoction, performed by the Inward Parts, be the
principal, toward a perfect Alimentation; yet the Actions, of the Outward
Parts, ought also to concur; That like as the Inward Faculty, sends forth,
and extrudeth the Aliment; So the Faculty of the Outward Parts, may call
forth, and attract the same: And the more weak the Faculty of Concoction,
shall be; The more need is there, of a Concurring Help, of the Attractive
Faculty.

2 A Strong Attraction, of the Outward Parts, is chiefly caused, by the Motion,
of the Body; By which, the Parts being Heated, and Comforted; Do more
cheerfully, call forth, and attract, the Aliment, unto themselves.

3 But this is most of all, to be foreseen, and avoided; That the same Motion,
and (...), which calls the new Juice to the Members; Does not again despoile
the Member of that Juice, wherewith it had been before refreshed.

4 Frications, used in the Morning, serve especially, to this Intention; But
this must evermore accompany them; That after the Frication, the Part be
lightly anointed with Oil; Left the Attrition, of the Outward Parts, make
them by Perspiration, Dry, and Juycelesse.

5 The next is Exercise, (by which the Parts confricate, and chafe themselves;)
so it be Moderate; And which, (as was noted before,) be not Swift, nor to the
utmost Strength, nor unto weariness. But in Exercise, and in Frication, there
is the same Reason, and Caution; That the Body, may not perspire, or (...), too
much: Therefore, Exercise is better in the oper Air, than in the House; And
better in Winter, than in Summer: And again, Exercise is not only to be
concluded with Unction, as Frication is; But in vehement Exercises, Unction is
to be used, both in the Beginning, and in the End; As it was anciently to
Champions.

6 That Exercise, may resolve, either the Spirits, or the Juyces, as little as
may be, it is necessary, that it be used, when the Stomach is not altogether
Empty. And therefore, that it may not be used, upon full Stomach, (which does
much concern Health;) Nor yet upon an Empty Stomach, (which does no less
concern Long Life;) It is best, to take a Breakfast in the Morning; Not of any
Physical Drugs, or of any Liquours, or of Raisins, or of Figs, or the like;
But of plain Meat, and Drink; yet that very light, and in moderate Quantity.

7 Exercise, used for the Irrigation of the Members, ought to be Equal, to all
the Members: Not, (as Socrates said,) that the Legs should move, and the Arms
should rest; Or, on the contrary; But that all the Parts may participate of
the Motion. And it is altogether requisite to long Life, that the Body should
never abide long in one posture, But that every half hour, at least, it
change the posture; Saving only in Sleep.

8 Those Things, which are used to Mortification, may be transferred to
Vivification: For both Hair Shirts, and (...), and all vexations of the
outward parts, do fortify the Attractive Force of them.

9 Cardan commends Netling: Even to let out (...); But of this we have no
Experience; And besides, we have no good opinion of it, lest through the
venomous Quality of the Nettle, it may with often use, breed Itches, and other
Diseases of the Skin. And touching the Operation, upon the Outward Parts, for
their Attraction of Aliment, thus much.

The Operation upon the Aliment it self; for the Insinuation thereof. 7.
The History.
1 THe vulgar Reproof, touching many Dishes, does rather become a severe
Reformer, than a Physician; Or howsoever it may be good, for preservation of
Health, yet it is Hurtful to length of Life: By reason, that a various Mixture
of Aliments, and somewhat Heterogeneous, finds a passage into the veins, and
juyces of the Body, more lively and cheerfully, than a Simple, and Homogeneous
Diet does: Besides, it is more Forcible, to stir up Appetite; which is the
Spur of Disgestion. Therefore we allow, both a Full Table, and a continual
changing of Dishes, according to the Seasons of the year, or upon other
occasions.

2 Also that Opinion, of the Simplicity of Meats, without Sawces, is but a
Simplicity of Judgment: For good, and well chosen, Sawces, are the most
wholesome preparations of Meats; And conduce, both to Health, and to Long Life.

3 It must be ordered that with Meats, hard of Disgestion, be conjoined,
strong Liquours; And Sawces, that may penetrate, and make way; But with Meats
more easy of Disgestion, smaller Liquours, and Fat Sawces.

4 Whereas we advised before, that the first Draught at Supper, should be
taken warn; Now we add, that for the preparation of the Stomach, a good
Draught of that Liquour, (to which every Man is most accustomed,) be taken
warm, half an Hour before Meat also; But a little spiced, to please the
Taste.

5 The Preparation, of Meats, and Bread, and Drinks; That they be rightly
handled, and in order to this Intention; Is of exceeding great Moment;
Howsoever it may seem a Mechanical Thing, and savouring of the Kitchen, and
Buttrie: yet it is of more consequence, than those Fables, of Gold, and
Precious Stones, and the like.

6 The Moistning, of the Iuyces, of the Body, by a Moist preparation of the
Aliments, is a childish Thing: It may be somewhat availeable against the
Fervours of Diseases; But it is altogether adverse, to a Roscide Alimentation.
Therefore, Boiling of Meats, as concerning our Intention, is far inferior,
to Roasting, and Baking, and the like.

7 Roasting ought to be with a quick fire, and soon dispatched; Not with a
dull Fire, and in long time.

8 All Solid Fleshes, ought to be served in, not altogether Fresh, but
somewhat powdered, or Corned: The less Salt may be spent at the Table, with
them, or none at all: For Salt, incorporated with the Meat before, is better
distributed in the Body, than eaten with it at the Table.

9 There would be brought into use several and good (...), and Infusions of
Meats, in convenient Liquours, before the Roasting of them; The like whereof
are sometimes in use, before they bake them; And in the Pickles of some Fishes.

10 But Beatings, and as it were Scourgings, of Flesh Meats, before they be
boiled, would work no small Matter. We see, it is confessed, that Pertridges,
and Pheasants, killed with an Hawke; Also Bucks, and Stags, killed in Hunting;
(If they stand not out too long,) eat better, even to the Taste. And some
Fishes, Scourged, and Beaten, become more tender, and wholesome. Also Hard, and
Sour Pears, and some other Fruits, grow sweet with Rolling them. It were good
to practice some such Beating, and Bruising, of the Harder kinds of Fleshes,
before they be brought to the Fire. And this would be one of the best
preparations of all.

11 Bread, a little leavened, and very little salted, is best: And which is
baked in an oven, thoroughly heated, and not with a faint Heat.

12 The Preparation of Drinks in order to long Life, shall not exceed one
precept. And as touching Water Drinkers, we have Nothing to say; Such a Diet,
(as we said before,) may prolong life to an Indifferent Term, but to no
Eminent length: But in other Drinks, that are full of Spirit; (Such as are,
wine, Ale, Mead, and the like,) This one Thing is to be observed, and pursued,
as the sum of all; That the parts of the Liquour, may be exceeding Thin, and
Subtle; And the Spirit, exceeding Mild: This is Hard to be done, by Age alone;
For that makes the Parts a little more subtle; But the Spirits much more
sharp, and eager: Therefore of the Infusion in the vessels, of some Fat
Substance, which may restrain the Acrimonie of the Spirits, counsel has
been given before: There is also another way, without Infusion, or Mixture:
This is, That the Liquour might be continually agitated; Either by Carriage
upon the water; Or by Carriage by Land; Or by Hanging the Vessels upon Lines,
and daily stirring them; Or some such other way: For it is certain; That this
(...) Motion, does both subtilize the parts; And does so Incorporate, and
Compact the Spirits, with the parts; That they have no leisure to turn to
sowrenesse, which is a kind of Putrefaction.

13 But in extreme old Age, such a preparation of Meats, is to be made, as may
be almost in the Middle-way to Chylus And touching the Distillations of Meats,
they are mere Toys; For the Nutritive part, at least the best of it does not
ascend in Vapors.

14 The Incorporating of (...) and Drink, before they meet in the Stomach, is a
Degree to Chylus; Therefore let Chickens, or Pertridges, or (...), or the like,
be taken; And boiled in Water, with a little Salt; Then let them be cleansed,
and dried; Afterward, let them be infused in Must, or Ale before it has done
working, with a little Sugar.

15 Also, Gravies of Meat, and Mincings of them small, well seasoned; Are good
for old Persons; And the rather, for that they are destituted of the Office of
their Teeth, in chewing; which is a principal kind of preparation.

16 And as for the Helps of that Defect, (Namely, of the Strength of Teeth, to
grind the Meat,) There are three Things, which may conduce thereunto. First,
that New Teeth may put forth; That which seems al together Difficult, and
cannot be accomplished, without an Inward, and powerful Restoration of the
Body. Secondly, that the Jaws be so confirmed by due Astringents, that they
may in some sort supply the office of the Teeth; which may possibly be
effected. Thirdly, that the Meat be so prepared that there shall be no need of
chewing; which Remedy (...) ready, and at Hand.

17 We have some Thought also, touching the Quantity of the Meat, and Drink;
That the same taken in larger Quantity, at some times, is good for the
Irrigation of the Body. Therefore both Greas Feastings, and Free Drinkings, are
not altogether to be inhibited. And touching the Operation upon the Aliments,
and the Preparation of them, thus much.

The Operation upon the Last Act of Assimilation. 8.
TOuching the last Act of Assimilation, (unto which the three Operations,
immediately preceding, chiefly tend) our Advice shall be brief, and single.
And the Thing it self, rather needs Explication, than any various Rules.

1 IT is certain, that all Bodies are endued with some Desire of Assimilating
those things which are next them: Tuis the Rare, and Pneumaticall Bodies; As
Flame, Spirit, Airt perform generously, and with Alacrity; On the contrary,
those that carry a Gross, and Tangible Bulk about them; Do but weakly: In
regard, that the Desire, of Assimilating other Thing, is bound in, by a
stronger Desire of Rest, and Containing themselves from Motion.

2 Again, it is certain, That that Desire of Assimilating, being bound, as
we said, in a Gross Body, and made (...); Is somewhat freed, and stirred up,
by the Heat, and Neighboring Spirit; So that it is then Actuated: which is the
only cause, why Inanimates Assimilate not, and Animates (...).

3 This also is certain, That the Harder the Consistence of the Body is, the
more does that Body stand in need, of a Greater Heat, to prick forward the
Assimilation: Which falls out ill for old Men; because in them the Parts are
more Obstinate, and the Heat weaker: And therefore, either the Obstinacy of
their Parts, is to be softened, or their Heat increased. And as touching the
Malacissation, or Mollifying of the Members, we shall speak afterward; Having
also formerly propounded many Things, which pertain to the prohibiting, and
preventing, of this kind of Hardness. For the other, touching the Increasing
of the Heat, we will now deliver a single precept; After we have first
assumed this Axiom.

4 The Act of Assimilation, (which, as we said, is excited, by the Heat
circumfused,) in a Motion exceeding Accurate, Subtle, and in Little. Now all
such Motions do then come to their Vigor, when the Local Motion wholly
cease, which disturbeth it. For the Motion of Separation, into Homogeneall
parts, which is in Milk; That the Cream should swim above, and the Whey sink
to the bottom, will never work, if the Milk be never so little agitated:
Neither will any Puterfaction proceed in Water, or Mixed Bodies, if the same be
in Continual Local Motion. So then, from this Assumption, we will conclude
this, for the present Inquisition.

5 The Act it self, of Assimilation, is chiefly accomplished in Sleep, and
Rest; Especially, toward the Morning, the Distribution being finished:
Therefore, we have nothing else to advise, but that Men keep Themselves Hot, in
their Sleep: And further, that toward the Morning, there be used some
Anointing, or Shirt (...) with Oil, such as may gently stir up Heat; And
after that, to fall asleep again. And touching the Last Act of Assimilation,
thus much.

The Operation upon the Inteneration of that, which begins to be Arified; Or
the Malacissation of the Body. 9.
We have inquired formerly, touching the Inteneration from within; (...) is
done by many Windings, (...) Circuits, as well of (...), as of Detaining the
Spirit from Issuing forth; (...) therefore is accomplished Slowly. Now we are
to inquire, touching that Inteneration, which is (...) without; And is
effected, as (...) were, Suddenly; Or, touching the Malacissation, and (...) of
the Body.

The History.
1 IN the Fable, of Restoring Pelias to Youth again; Medea, when the Feigned
to do it, (...) this way, of (...) the same, That the (...) Man's Body should
be cut into several Pieces; And (...) Boiled in a Cauldron, with certain
Medicaments. There may, perhaps, some (...) be required to this Matter; But
the Cutting into (...), is not needful.

2 Notwithstanding, this Cuting into Pieces, seems, in some sort, to be
useful; Not (...) a Knife, but with Judgment. For whereas the Consistence of
the Bowels, and (...) is very diverse; It is needful that the Inteneration of
them both, be not effected the same way; But that there be a Cure designed of
each in particular, Besides those Things, which pertain to the Inteneration,
of the whole Mass of the Body; Of which, notwithstanding, in the first place.

3 This Operation, (if perhaps it be within our power,) is most likely to be
done, by Baths, Unctions, and the like: Concerning which, these Things that
follow, are to be observed.

4 We must not be too forward in Hoping to Accomplish this matter from the
Examples of those Things which we see done, in the Imbibitions, and Macerations
of Inanimates: By which they are intenerated: whereof we introduced some
Instances before: For this kind of Operation, is more Easy upon Inanimates,
Because they attract, and suck in the Liquour. But upon the Bodies of Living
Creatures it is Harder; Because, in them, the Motion rather tends outward,
and to the Circumference.

5 Therefore, the Emollient Baths, which are in use, do little good, but on
the contrary, hurt; Because they rather draw forth, than make entrance; And
resolve the Structure of the Body, rather than consolidate it.

6 The Baths, and Unctions, which may serve to the present Operation; (Namely,
of Intenerating the Body, truly and really,) ought to have three properties.

7 The First and Principal, is; That they consist of those Things, which in
their Whole Substance, are Like unto the Body, and Flesh of Man; And which have
a Feeding, and Nursing Virtue, from without.

8 The Second, is; That they be mixed with such Things, as through the Subtilty
of their Parts, may Make Entrance; And so insinuate, and conveigh their
Nourishing Virtue, into the Body.

9 The Third, is; That they receive some Mixture (though much inferior to the
rest,) of such Things as are Astringent; I mean, not Sour or Tart Things; But
Unctuous, and Comforting; That while the other two do operate, the (...) out of
the Body, which destroys the Virtue of the Things Intenerating, may (as much
as is possible,) be prohibited; And the Motion to the Inward Parts, by the
Astriction of the Skin, and Closing of the Passages, may be promoted and
furthered.

10 That which is most Consubstantiall, to the Body of Man, is Warm Blood,
either of Man, or of some other living Creature: But the Device of Ficinus;
Touching the Sucking of Blood out of the Arm of a wholesome young Man; For the
Restoration of Strength in Old men; is very Frivolous; For that, which
nourishes from within, ought no way to be Equal, or Homogeneall to the Body
nourished; But in some sort, Inferior, and Subordinate, that it may be
converted: But in Things applied outwardly, by how much the Substance is Liker,
by so much the Consent is better.

11 It has been anciently received; That a Bath made of the Blood of Infants
will cure the Leprosy, and heal the Flesh already putrified: Insomuch, that
this Thing has begot Envy toward some Kings, from the Common people.

12 It is reported, that Heraditus, for cure of the Dropsy, was put into the
Warm Belly of an Ox, newly slain.

13 They use the Blood of Kitlins, warm; To cure the Disease called Saint
Anthonies Fire; And to restore the Flesh and Skin.

14 An Arm, or other Member, newly cut off; Or that, upon some other Occasion,
will not leave Bleeding; Is, with good success, put into the Belly of some
Creature, Newly ripped up; For it works potently, to Stanch the Blood; The
Blood of the Member cut off, by consent sucking in, and vehemently drawing to
it self, the Warm Blood of the Creature Slain; whereby it self is Stopped,
and retireth.

15 It is much used in Extreme and Desperate Diseases, to cut in two young
Pigeons, yet Living, and to apply them to the Soles of the Feet, and to shift
them one after another; whereby, sometime (...) follows a wonderful case.
This is imputed vulgarly, as if they should draw down the Malignitie of the
Disease; But howsoever, this Application goes to the Head, and comfort the
Animal Spirits.

16 But these Bloody Baths and Unctions, seem to us Sluttish and Odious; Let
us search out some others, which perhaps have less loathsomenesse in them, and
yet not less Benefit.

17 Next unto Warme-Bloud, Things alike in Substance, to the Body of Man, are,
Nutritives; Fat Fleshes; Of Oxen, Swine, Dear: Oisters amongst Fishes; Milk,
Butter, Yolks (...) Eggs: Flower of Wheat, Sweet Wine: Either Sugared, or (...)
it be fined.

18 Such Things as we would (...) mixed, to make (...), are; In stead of all,
(...) Especially, Bay Salt; Also Wine, (when it is full of Spirit,) makes
Entrance; And is an excellent Convoy.

19 Astringents of that Kind, which we described; Namely, Unctuous, and
Comfortable Things, are; Saffron, Mastick, Myrrh, and Myrtle-Berries.

20 Of these Parts, in our judgment, may very well be made such a Bath, as we
design: Physicians, and Posterity, will find out better Things hereafter.

21 But the Operation will be much better and more powerful; If such a Bath,
as we have propounded, (which we hold to be the Principal Matter,) beattended
with a Fourfold Course and Crder.

22 First, that there go before the Bath, a Frication of the Body; And an
Anointing with Oil, with some Thickning Substance: That the Virtue, and
Moistning Heat of the Bath, may pierce the Body, and not the watery Part of the
Liquour. Then let the (...) follow, for the space of some two Hours: After the
Bath, let the Body be Emplaistrea with Mastick, Myrrh, Tragacanth, Diapalma,
and Saffron; That the Perspiration of the Body, may (as much as is possible,)
be inhibited; Till the Supple Matter be by degrees turned into Solid: This to
be continued, for the space of twenty four hours, or more Lastly, the
Emplaistring being removed, let there be an Anointing with Oil, (...) with
Salt, and Saffron. (...) let this Bath, together (...) the Emplaistring and
Unction, (as before,) be renewed every Fifth day: This Malacissation, or
Suppling of the Body, to be continued for one whole Month.

23 Also during the Time of this Malacissation, we hold it useful, and proper,
and according to our Intention; That Men nourish their Bodies well, and keep
out of the Cold Air; And drink nothing, but Warm Drink.

24 Now this is one of those Things, (as we warned, in general, in the
beginning,) whereof we have made no Trial by Experiment; But only set it
down, out of our Aiming and Levelling at the End. For having Set up the Mark,
we deliver the Light to others.

25 Neither ought the Warmths and Cherishings of Living Bodies, to be
neglected. Ficinus says, and that seriously enough; That the laying of the
young Maid in David's Bosom, was wholesome for him, but it came too late. He
should also have added; That the Young Maid, after the manner of the Persian
Virgins, ought to have been anointed with Myrrh, and such like; Not for
Deliciousness, but to increase the Virtue of this Cherishing by a living Body.

26 Barbarossa, in his extreme old Age, by the advice of a Physician, a Jew,
did continually apply Young Boys, to his Stomach and Belly, for Warmth and
Cherishing: Also some Old Men, lay Wholps, (Creatures of the Hottest Kind,)
close to their Stomachs, every Night.

There has gone a report, almost undoubted; And that under several Names; Of
certain Men that had great Noses; who being weary of the Derision of People,
have cut off the Bunches, or Hillocks of their Noses; And then making a wide
Gash in their Arms, have bold their Noses in the place, for a certain time;
And so brought forth fair and comely Noses: Which if it be true, it shows
plainly, the Consent of Flesh unto Flesh, especially in Live Fleshes.

28 Touching the Particular Inteneration, of the Principal Bowels; The
Stomach, Lungs, Liver, Heart, Brain, Marrow of the Backbone, Guts, Reins,
Gall, Veins, Arteries, Nerves, Cartilages, Bones; The Inquisition and
Direction, would be too long; Seeing we now set not forth a Practique; But
certain Indications to the Practique.

The Operation upon the Purging away of old Juice, and Supplying of new Juice;
Or of Renovation by Turns. 10.
The History.
ALTHOUGH those Things, which we shall here set down, have been, for the most
part, spoken of before; yet because this Operation, is one of the Principal,
we will handle them over again, more at large.

1 It is certain, that Draught Oxen, which have been worn out with working,
being put into Fresh and Rich Pastures, will gather tender and young Flesh
again; And this will appear, even to the Taste and Palate; So that the
Inteneration of Flesh, is no hard Matter. Now it is likely, that this
Inteneration of the Flesh, being often repeated, will in time, reach to the
Inteneration of the Bones and Membranes, and like Parts of the Body.

2 It is certain, that Diets which are now much in (...) Principally of (...)
And of (...), China and (...) If they be continued for any time, and according
to strict Rules; Do first Attenuate the whole Juice of the Body; And after
Consume it, and Drink it up. Which is most manifest, because that by these
Diets, the French Pox, when it is grown even to an Hardness; And has eaten
up, and corrupted, the very Marrow of the Body; may be assuredly cured. And
further, because it is as manifest, that Men, who by these Diets, are brought
to be extreme Lean, Pale, and as it were, Ghosts; Will soon after become Fat,
well-colored, and apparently Young again. Wherefore, we are absolutely of
opinion, (...) such kind of Diets, in the (...) of Age, being used every (...)
year, would be very useful to our Intention; Like the old Skin, or Spoil of
Sarpents.

3 We do confidently affirm; (neither let any Man reckon us amongst those
Heretics, which were called Cathari;) That often Purges, and made even
Familiar to the Body, are more availeable to long Life, than Exercises and
Sweats. And this must needs be so, if that be held, which is already laid for a
Ground; That Unctions of the Body; And Oppletion of the Passages from without;
And Exclusion of Air; And Detaining of the Spirit, within the Mass of the
Body; Do much conduce to long Life. For it is most certain, that by Sweats,
and Outward Perspirations; not only the Humors, and excrementitious Vapors
are Exhaled and consumed; But together with them, the Juices also, and good
Spirits, which are not so easily repaired; But in (...), (unless they be very
Immoderate,) it is not so; Seeing they work (...) upon the Humors. But the
best Purges for this Intention, are those, which are taken immediately before
(...); Because they Dry the Body less; And therefore, they must be of those
Purgers, which do least trouble the Belly.

These Intentions, of the Operations, which we have Propounded, (as we
conceive,) are most true; The Remedies Faithful to the (...) (...) is it
credible to (...) (Although not a Few of these Remedies may seem but (...)
with what Care, and Choice, they have been examined by us; That they might be
(the Intention not at all empeached) both Safe, and Effectual. Experience, no
doubt, will both verify, and promote, these Matters. And such, in all things,
are the works of every prudent Counsel; That they are Admirable in their
Effects, Excellent also in their Order, but seeming vulgar in the Way and
Means.

The Proches of Death.
WE are now to inquire To the 15. Article.
touching the Porches of Death; That is, Touching those Things, which happen
unto Men, at the point of Death; Both a little before, and after. That seeing
there are many Paths, which lead to Death, it may be under stood, in what
Common-way, they all end; Especially, in those Deaths, which are caused by
Indigence of Nature, rather than by violence; Although something of this Latter
also, must be inserted, because of the Connection of Things.

The History.
1 THe Living Spirit, stands in need of three Things, that it may subsist:
Convenient Motion; Temperate Refrigeration; And Fit Aliment. Plame seems to
stand in need, but of two of these; Namely, Motion, and Aliment: Because Flame
is a simple substance, the Spirit a Compounded: Insomuch, that if it approach
somewhat too near to a Flamie Nature, it overthrows it self.

2 Also Flame, by a greater, and stronger Flame, is extinguished, and slain;
As Aristotle well noted; Much more the Spirit.

3 Flame, if it be much compressed, and straightened, is extinguished; As we may
see in a Candle, having a Glass cast over it; For the Air being dilated by
the Heat, does contrude, and thrust together the Flame; And so lesseneth it,
and in the end extinguisheth it: And Fires on Hearths will not Flame, if the
Fuel be thrust close together, without any space for the Flame to break
forth.

4 Also Things Fircd, are extinguished with Compression; As if you press a
Burning Coal hard with the Tongs, or the Foot, it is straight extinguished.

5 But to come to the Spirit; If Blood, or Phlegm, get into the (...) of the
Brain, it causes sudden Death; Because the Spirit has no Room to move it
self.

6 Also a great Blow on the Head, induces sudden Death; The Spirits being
straightened within the Ventrides of the Brain.

7 Opium, and other strong (...), do coagulate the Spirit; And deprive it of
the Motion.

8 A Venomous Vapor, totally abhorred by the Spirit, causes sudden Death: As
in deadly poisons, which work (as they call it,) by a Specificall Malignity:
For they strike a Loathing into the Spirit, that the Spirit will no more move
it self, nor rise against a Thing so much Detested.

9 Also Extreme Drunkenness, or Extreme Feeding, sometime cause sudden Death:
Seeing the Spirit is not only Oppressed with overmuch Condensing, or the
Malignity of the Vapor; (As in Opium, and Malignant Poisons;) But also with
the Abundance of the Vapors.

10 Extreme Grief, or Fear, Especially, if they be sudden; (As it is in a sad
and unexpected (...)) cause sudden Death.

11 Not only overmuch Compression, but also overmuch Dilatation of the
Spirit, is Deadly.

12 Joys excessive, and sudden, have berest many of their lives.

13 In great Evacuations; As when they cut Men for the Dropsy, the waters flow
forth abundantly; Much more in great and sudden Fluxes of Blood oftentimes,
present Death follows: And this happens by the mere Flight of Vacuum, within
the Body; All the parts moving, to fill the Empty places; And amongst the
rest, the Spirits themselves. For as for slow Fluxes of Blood, this Matter
pertaines to the Indigence of Nourishment, not to the Diffusion of the Spirits.
And touching the Motion of the Spirit, so far, either Compressed, of
Diffused, that it brings Death, thus much.

14 We must come next to the Want of Refrigeration. Stopping of the Breath,
causes sudden Death; As in all Suffocation, or Strangling. Now it seems this
Matter is not so much to be referred to the Impediment of Motion, as to the
Impediment of Refrigeration: For Air over-hot, though attracted freely, does
no less Suffocate, than if Breathing were hindered: As it is in them, who have
been sometime suffocated, with Burning Coals; Or with Char-coale, Or with
Walls newly plaistered, in close chambers, where a Fire is made: which kind of
Death, is reported, to have been the end of the Emperor Iovinian: The like
happens from Dry Baths, overheated, which was practiced in the killing of
Fausta, wife to Constantine the Great.

15 It is a very small Time, which Nature takes, to repeat the Breathing; And
in which she desires, to expel the Foggie Air, drawn into the Lungs, and to
take in new; Scarce, the third part, of a Minute.

16 Again, the Beating of the Pulse; And the Motion, of the Systole, and
Diastole, of the Heart; are three times quicker, than that of Breathing;
Insomuch, that if it were possible, that that Motion of the Heart could be
stopped, without stopping the Breath; Death would follow more speedily
thereupon, than by Strangling.

17 Notwithstanding, Use and Custom prevail much in this Natural Action of
Breathing; As it is in the Delian Diverse, and Fishers for Pearl; who by long
use can hold their Breaths, at least ten times longer, than other Men can do.

18 Amongst Living Creatures even of those, that have Lungs, there are some
that are able to hold their Breaths a long time, and others that cannot hold
them so long; According as they need, more, or less, Refrigeration.

19 Fishes need less Refrigeration, than Terrestrial Creatures; yet some they
need, and take it by their Gils: And as Terrestrial Creatures, cannot bear
the Air, that is too Hot, or too Close; So Fishes are suffocated in waters, if
they be totally, and long Frozen.

20 If the Spirit be assaulted by another Heat, greater than it self, it is
dissipated, and destroyed. For if it cannot bear the proper Heat without
Refrigeration, much less can it bear another Heat, which is far stronger.
This is to be seen in Burning Fevers, where the Heat of the Putrified
Humors, does exceed the Native Heat; Even to Extinction, or Dissipation.

21 The Want also, and Use of Sleep, is referred to Refrigeration. For Motion
does attenuate, and (...) the Spirit; And does sharpen, and increase the Heat
thereof; Contrarily, Sleep settleth, and restrains the Motion, and Gadding
of the same. (...) though Sleep does strengthen and advance, the Actions (...)
the Parts, and of the livelesse Spirits; and all that Motion, which is to the
Circumference of the Body; yet it does in great part, quiet, and still the
proper Motion of the Living Spirit. Now Sleep, regularly, is due unto Humane
Nature, once within Four and Twenty Hours; And that for Six, or Five Hours,
at the least: Though there are, even in this kind, sometimes Miracles of
Nature; As it is recorded of Mecaenas, that he slept not, for a long time,
before his Death. And as touching the Want of Refrigeration, for Conserving of
the Spirit, thus much.

22 As concerning the third Indigence; Namely, of Aliment; It seems to
pertain rather to the Parts, than to the Living Spirit. For a Man may easily
believe, that the Living Spirit (...) in Identitie Not by succestion, or
Renovation. And as for the (...) Soul in Man, it is above all question; That
it is no engendered of the Soul of the Parents; Nor is repaired; Nor can dye.
They speak of the Natural Spirit of living Creatutes; And also of Vegetables,
which differs from that other Soul, essentially, and formally. For out of the
Confusion of these, that same Transmigration of Souls, and Innumerable other
Devices, of Heathens and Heretics, have proceeded.

23 The Body of Man, does regularly require; Renovation by Aliment, every day.
And Body in Health, can scarce endure Fasting, three days together;
Notwithstanding, Use, and Custom, will do much, even in this Case; But in
Sickness, Fasting is less grievous to the Body. Also Sleep does supply
somewhat to Nourishment; And, on the other side, Exercise does require it more
abundantly. Likewise there have some been found, who have sustained
themselves, (almost to a Miracle in Nature,) a very long time, without Meat or
Drink.

24 Dead Bodies, if they be not intercepted by Putrefaction, will subsist a
long time, without any Notable Absumption; But Living Bodies, not above three
days, (as we said,) unless they be repaired by Nourishment: rishment: which
shows, that quick Absumption, to be the work of the Living Spirit; which
either repaires it self; or puts the Parts into a Necessity, of being
repaired; Or both. This is testified, by that also, which was noted a little
before; Namely, that Living Creatures may subsist somewhat the longer, without
Aliment, if they Sleep. Now Sleep is Nothing else, but a Reception, and
Retirement, of the Living Spirit, into it self.

25 An abundant, and continual, Effluxion of Blood; which sometimes happens
in the Hemorrhoides; sometimes in Vomiting of Blood, the Inward Veins being
unlocked, broken, sometimes by Wounds; Causes sudden Death; In regard, that
the Blood of the Veins ministers to the Arteries; And the Blood of the
Arteries, to the Spirit.

26 The Quantity of Meat and Drink, which a Man, eating two Meals a day,
receives into his Body, is not small; Much more, than he voideth again,
either by Stool, or by Urine, or by Sweating: You will say; No marvel; Seeing
the Remainder goes into the Juyces, and Substance, of the Body: It is true;
But consider then, that this Addition is made twice a day, and yet the Body
abounds not much: In like manner, though the Spirit be repaired, yet it
grows not, Excessively, in the Quantity.

27 It does no good, to have the Aliment ready, in a Degree removed; But to
have it of that Kind; And so prepared, and supplied, that the Spirit may work
upon it: For the Staff of a Torch alone, will not maintain the Flame, unless
it be fed with wax: Neither can Men live upon Herbs alone. And from thence
comes the Inconcoction of old Age; That though there be Flesh, and Blood; yet
the Spirit is become so Penurious, and Thin; And the Juyces, and Blood, so
Heartlesse, and Obstinate, that they hold no proportion, to Alimentation.

28 Let us now cast up the Accounts, of the Needs, and Indigences, according to
the Ordinary, and Usual Course of Nature: The Spirit has need, of Opening,
and Moving it self, in the Ventricles of the Brain, and Nerves, even
continually; Of the Motion of the Heart, every Third part, of a Moment; Of
Breathing, every Moment; Of Sleep, and Nourishment, once within three Days;
Of the Power of Nourishing, commonly till Eighty years be past. And if any of
these Indigences be neglected, Death ensues. So there are plainly three
Porches of Death; Destitution of the Spirit; In the Motion; In the
Refrigeration; In the Aliment.

It is an Error, to think, that the Living Spirit, is perpetually generated,
and extinguished, as Flame is; And abides not any notable time. For even Flame
it self is not thus, out of his own proper Nature; But because it lives
amongst Enemies. For Flame, within Flame, endures. Now the Living Spirit,
lives amongst Friends, and all due Obsequiousness. So then, as Flame is a
Momentany Substance; Air a Fixed Substance; The Living Spirit is betwixt both.

Touching the Extinguishing of the Spirit, by the Destruction of the Organs,
(which is caused by Diseases, and Violence,) (...) inquire not now; As we
foretold in the Beginning; Although that also ends in the same three Porches.
And touching the Form of Death it self, thus much.

29 There are two great Forerunners of Death; The one sent from the Head, the
other from the Heart; (...), and the Extreme Labor of the Pulse. For as for
the Deadly Hiccough, it is a Kind of (...). But the Deadly Labor of the
Pulse, has that unusual Swiftness; Because the Heart, at the point of Death,
does so tremble, that the Systole, and Diastole, thereof, are almost
consounded. There is also conjoined in the Pulse, aweaknesse, and Lowness, and
oftentimes a great Intermission; Because the Motion of the Heart fails; And
is not able to rise against the Assault, stoutly, or constantly.

30 The Immediate preceding Signs of Death, are; Great Unquietness, and
Tossing in the Bed; Fumbling with the Hands; Catching, and Grasping hard;
Gnashing with the Teeth; Speaking hollow; Trembling of the Nether Lip;
Palenesse of the Face; The Memory confused; Speechlesnesse; Cold Sweats; The
Body shooting in Length; Lifting up the White of the Eye; Changing of the whole
Visage; (As, the Nose sharp, Eyes Hollow, Cheeks fallen;) Contraction, and
Doubling of the Tongue, Coldness in the Extreme Parts of the Body; In some,
shedding of Blood, or Sperme; Shriking; Breathing thick, and short; Falling of
the Nether Chap; And such like.

31 There follow Death; A Privation, of all Sense, and Motion; As well of the
Heart, and Arteries; As of the Nerves, and Joints; An Inability of the Body, to
support it self uprigh; Stiffness of the Nerves, and Parts; Extreme Coldness
of the whole Body; After a little while, Patrefaction, and Stinking.

32 Eeles, Serpents, and the Insecta, will move a long time, in every part,
after they are cut asunder; Insomuch, that Country People think, that the
Parts strive to join together again. Also Birds will flutter a great while,
after their Heads are pulled off: And the Hearts of Living Creatures will pant
a long time, after they are plucked out. I remember, I have seen the Heart of
one that was bowelled; As suffering for High Treason; That being cast into the
Fire, leaped, at the first, at least, a Foot and Half in Height; And after,
by degrees, lower and lower; For the space, as we rememher ber, of seven, or
eight Minutes. There is also an ancient, and credible Tradition, of an Ox
Lowing, after the (...) were plucked out. But there is a more certain
Tradition, of a Man; who being under the Executioners Hand, for High Treason;
After his Heart was plucked out, and in the Executioners Hand; Was heard to
utter, three or four words of Prayer: which therefore, we said to be more
credible, than that of the Ox in Sacrifice; Because the Friends of the party
suffering, do usually give a Reward to the Executioner; To dispatch his Office
with the more speed; That they may the sooner be rid of their Pain; But in
Sacrifices, we see no Cause, why the Priest should be so speedy in his Office.

33 For Reviving those again, which fall into sudden Swownings, and
Catalepses, or Astonishments: (In which Fits, many, without present Help, would
utterly expire;) These Things are used; Putting into their Mouths, water,
distilled of Wine, which they call Hot Waters, and Cordial Waters; Bending the
Body Forwards; Stopping the Mouth, and Nosthrils, hard; Bending, or Wringing
the Fingers; Pulling the Hairs, of the Beard, or Head; Rubbing of the Parts,
especially, the Face, and Legs; sudden Casting of Cold Water upon the Face;
shreeking out aloud, and suddenly; Putting Rose Water, to the Nosthrils, with
Vinegar, in Faintings; Burning of Feathers, or Cloth, in the Suffocation of the
Mother; But especially, a Frying Pan, heated red hot, is good in Apoplexies;
Also a Close Embracing of the Body, has helped some.

There have been many Examples of Men, in show, Dead; Either laid out upon the
Cold Floare; Or carried sorth to (...); Nay, of some Buried in the Earth; which
notwithstanding have lived again; which has been found, in those that were
buried; (The Earth being afterward opened,) By the Bruising, and Wounding of
their Head, through the struggling of the Body, within the Coffin: Whereof the
most Recent, and Memorable Example, was that of Ioannes Scotus, Called the
Subtle, and a Schooleman, who being dug up again by his Servant,
unfortunately absent at his Burial; (And who knew his Masters Manner in such
Fits;) Was found in that State. And the like happended in our Days, in the
Person of a Player, buried at Cambridge. I remember to have heard of a certain
Gentleman; That would needs make Trial, in Curiosity, what men did feel that
were hanged; So he fastened the Cord about his Neck, raising himself upon a
Stool, and then letting himself fall; Thinking it should be in his power, to
recover the Stool at his pleasure; which he failed in; But was helped by a
Friend, then present. He was asked afterward, what he felt? He said; He felt
no pain; But first, he thought, he saw before his Eyes, a great Fire, and
Burning; Then he thought, he saw all Black, and Dark: Lastly, it turned to a
pale Blew, or Sea-waterGreene; which Color is also often seen by them which
fall into Snownings. I have heard also, of a Physician, yet Living; Who
recovered a Man to Life, which had hanged Himself; And had hanged half an
Hour; By Frications, and Hot Baths: And the same Physician did profess, that
he made no doubt, to recover any Man, that had hanged so long, so his Neck were
not broken with the first Swing.

The Differences of Youth, and Old Age.
1 THe Ladder of Man's Body, To the 16. Article.
is this. To be Conceived; To be Quickened in the Womb; To be Borne; To Suck;
To be Weaned; To Feed upon Pap; To Put forth Teeth, the First time about the
Second year of Age; To Begin to go; To Begin to speak; To Put forth Teeth,
the Second time, about seven years of Age; To come to Pubertie, about twelve,
or fourteen years of Age; To be Able for Generation, and the Flowing of the
Menstrua; To have Hairs about the Legs, and Arme-holes; To Put forth a
Beard; And thus long, and sometimes later, to Grow in Stature; To come to full
years of Strength and Agility; To grow Gray, and Bild; The Ceasing of the
Menstrua, and Ability to Generation; To grow Decrepit, and a Monster with Three
Legs; To Die. Mean while, the Mind also, has certain Periods; But they
cannot be described by years; As to decay in the Memory, and the like; Of
which hereafter.

2 The Differences of Youth and Old Age, are these. As Young Man's Skin is
Smooth, and Plain; An Old Man's, Dry and Wrinkled; Especially about the
Forchead and Eyes: A young Man's Flesh is Tender and Soft; An old Man's, Hard: A
young Man has Strength, and Agilitie; An old Man, feels Decay, in his
Strength, and is Slow of Motion: A young Man has good Disgestion; An old Man,
Bad: A young Man's Bowels, are Soft, and Succulent: An old Man's, Sale, and
Parched: A young Man's Body is Erect, and Straight; An Old Man's, Bowing, and
Crooked; A young Man's Limbs are steady; An old Man's, Weak, and Trembling: The
Humors in a young Man, are Choleric, and his Blood inclined to Heat; In an old
Man, Phlegmatic and Melancholic, and his Blood inclined to Cold nesse: A
young Man Ready for the Act of Venus; An old Man Slow unto it: In a young Man,
the Iuyces of his Body are more Roscide; In an old Man, more Crude, and
watrish: The Spirit, in a young Man, Plentiful and Boiling; In an old man,
Scarce and Iejune: A young Man's Spirit is Dense, and Vigorous; An old Man's
Eager and Rare; A young Man has his Sens's, Quick, and Entire; An old Man,
Dull and Decayed: A young Man's Teeth, are Strong, and Entire; An old Man's Weak,
worn, and Falling out: A young Man's Hair is Colored; An old Man's, of what
Color soever it were, Gray: A young Man has Hair; An old Man Baldness: A
young Man's Pulse, is Stronger and Quicker; An old Man's, more Confused, and
Slower: The Diseases of young Men are more Acute, and Curable; Of old Men,
Longer, and Hard to Cure: A young Man's Wounds soon Close; An old Man's, Later:
A young Man's Checkes, are of a Fresh Color; An old Man's, Pale, or with a Black
Blood: A young Man is less troubled with Rbeumes; An old Man, More: Neither do
we know in what Things old Men do improve, as touching their Body, save only
sometimes in Fatness: Whereof the Reason is soon given; Because old Men's
Bodies do neither Perspire well, nor assimilate well; Now Fatness is Nothing
else, but an Exuberance of Nourishment, above that which is voyded by
Excrement; Or which is perfectly Assimilated. Also, some old Men improve in the
Appetite of Feeding, by reason of the Acide Humors; Though old Men Digest
worse. And all these Things, which we have said, Physicians, negligently
enough, will refer to the Diminution of the Natural Heat, and Ridicall
Moisture; Which are Things of no worth for use. This is certain, Dryness in
the Coming on of years, does foregoe Coldness: And Bodies, when they come to
the Top, and Strength of Heat, do decline to (...); And after that follows
Coldness.

3 Now we are to consider the Affections of the Mind. I remember, when I was a
young Man, at Poictiers, in France, I conversed familiarly, with a certain
Frenchman; A witty Young Man, but something Talkative; Who afterward grew to
be a very eminent Man: He was wont to inveigh against the Manners of Old Men;
And would say, That if their Minds could be seen, as their Bodies are, they
would appear no less deformed. Besides, being in Love with his own Wit, he
would maintain; That the Vices of old Men's Minds, had some correspondence, and
were Parallel, to the Imperfections of their Bodies: For the Dryness of their
Skin, he would bring in Impudence; For the Hardness of their Bowels,
Unmercifulness; For the Lippitude of their Eyes, an Evil Eye, and Envy; For
the Casting down of their Eyes, and Bowing their Body toward the Earth,
Atheism; ( For, says he, they look no more up to Heaven, as they were wont;)
For the Trembling of their Members, Irresolution of their Decrees, and Light
Inconstancy; For the Bending of their Fingers, as it were, to catch,
Rapacitie, and Covetousness; For the Backling of their Knees, Fearfulness;
For their Wrinkles, Craftiness, and Obliquity; And other things, which I have
forgotten. But to be serious. A young Man, is Modest, and Shamefast; An old
Man's Forehead is Hardened: A young Man is full of Bounty and Mercy; An old Man's
Heart is Brawnie: A young Man is affected with a Laudable Emuletion; An old
Man, with a Malignant Envy: A young man is inclined to Religion, and Devotion,
by reason of his Fervencie, and Inexperience of Evil; An old Man Coolerb in
Piety, through the Coldness of his Charity, and long Conversation in Evil;
And likewise, through the Difficulty of his Belief: A young Man's Desires are
Vehement; An old Man's, Moderate: A young Man is Light, and Moveable; An old
Man, more Grave and Constant: A young Man is (...) to Liberality, and
Beneficence, and Humanity; An old Man to Covetousness, Wisdom for his own
self, and Seeking his own (...): A young Man is Confident, and Full of Hope;
An old Man Diffident, and Given to suspect most Things: A young Man is Gentle,
and Obsequious; An old Man Froward and Disdainful: A young man is Sincere and
Open-Hearted; An old Man Cautelous, and Close: A young Man is given to Desire
great Things; An old Man, to Regard Things Necessary: A young Man thinks well
of the Present Times; An old Man, Prefers Times-past before them: A young
Man Reverenceth his Superiors; An old Man is more Forward to tax them: And
many other Things, which pertain rather to Manners, than to the present
Inquisition. Notwithstanding, old Men, as in some things, they improve in their
Bodies, so also in their Minds; Unless they be altogether out of Date.
Namely; That as they are less apt for Invention, so they excel in Judgment;
And prefer Safe Things, and Sound Things, before Specious; Also they improve in
Garrulity, and Ostentation; For they seek the Fruit of Speech, while they are
less able for Action; So as it was not absurd, that the Poets fained, Old
Tithon, to be turned into a Grasshopper.

Moveable Canons, of the Duration of Life, and Form of Death.
Canon 1.
COnsumption is not caused, unless that, which bet departed with by one Body,
passes into another.

The Explication.
THere is, in Nature, no Annihilation, or Reducing to Nothing: Therefore that
which is consumed; is either resolved into Air, or turned into some Body
Adjacent. So we see a Spider, or Fly, or Ant, in Amber, (Entombed in a more
stately Monument than Kings are,) to be laid up for Eternity; Although they
be but tender Things, and soon dissipated. But the mattter is this; That
there is no Air by, into which they should be resolved; And the Substance of
the Amber is so Heterogeneous, that it receives Nothing of them. The like we
conceive would be, if a Stick, or Root, or some such thing, were Buried in
Quicksilver. Also wax, and Honey, and (...), have the same Operation, but In
part only.

Canon II.
THere is in every Tangible body a Spirit, Covered and encompassed with the
Grosser Parts of the Body; And from it, all Consumption, and Dissolution, has
the Beginning.

The Explication.
NO Body known unto us, here in the Upper Part of the Earth, is without a
Spirit; Either by Attenuation, and (...), from the Heat of the Heavenly Bodies;
Or by some other way. For the Concavities of Tangible Things, receive not
Vaccum, But either Air, or the proper Spirit of the Thing. And this Spirit.
where of we speak, is not some Virtue, or Energie, or Act, or Trifle; But
plainly a Body, Rare and Invisible; Notwithstanding, Circumscribed by place,
Quantitative, Real: Neither again, is that Spirit Air, (no more than Wine is
Water;) But a Body Rarefied, of kin to Air, though much different from it. Now
the Grosser Parts of Bodies, (being Dull Things, and not apt for Motion,) would
last a long time; But the Spirit is that, which troubles, and plucketh, and
undermineth them; And converteth the Moisture of the Body, and whatsoever it is
able to digest, into new Spirit: And then, as well the Prae-existing Spirit of
the Body, as that newly made, fly away together by Degrees. This is best
seen by the Dimination of the Weight, in Bodies dried, through Perspiration.
For neither, all that, which is issued forth, was Spirit, when the Body was
Ponderous; Neither was it Not Spirit, when it issued forth.

Canon III.
THe Spirit Issuing forth, Dries; Detained, and working within, either
Melts, or Putrifieth, or Vivifieth.

The Explication.
THere are Four Processes of the Spirit; To Arefaction; To Colliquation; To
Putrefaction; To Generation of Bodies. Arefaction, is not the proper Work of
the Spirit, but of the Grosser Parts, after the Spirit issued forth: For then
they contract themselves, partly by their Flight of Vacuum, partly, by the
Union of Homogeneals; As appears in all Things, which are Arified by Age; And
in the Drier Sort of Bodies, which have passed the Fire; As (...), Charocoales,
Bread. Colliquation, is the mere Work of the Spirits; Neither is it done, but
when they are excited by Heat: For then, the Spirits, dilating themselves, yet
not getting forth; Do insinuate, and disperse themselves, amongst the Grosser
Parts; And so make them Soft, and apt to Run, As it is, in Metals, and Wax: For
Metals, and all Tenacious Things, are apt to inhibite the Spirit, that, being
excited, it iffueth not forth. (...) is a Mixed work of the Spirits, and of the
Grosser Parts: For the Spirit, (which before restrained. and bridled the Parts
of the Thing,) being partly issued forth, and partly Enfeebled; All things in
the Body do Dissolve, andreturne to their Homogeneities; Or, (if you will,) to
their Elements: That which was Spirit in it, is congregated to it self;
whereby things Patrified, begin to have an ill Savor: The Oily Parts to
Themselves; Whereby Things Putrified, have that Slipperinesse, and Vnctuositie:
The Wairyparts also to themselves: The Dregs to Themselves: Whence follows
that Confusion, in Bodies putrified. But Generation, or Vivification, is a
Work also mixed, of the Spirit, and Grosser parts, but in a far different
Manner: For the Spirit is totally detained, but it swells, and moves
locally; And the Grosser Parts are not dissolved; But follow the Motion of the
Spirit, and are, as it were, blown out by it, and extruded into diverse
figures; From whence comes that Generation, and Organization: And therefore,
Vivification is always done in a Matter Tenacious, and Clammie: And again,
Yielding and Soft; That there may be both a Detention of the Spirit; And also
a gentle Cession of the Parts, according as the Spirit forms them. And this is
seen in the Matter, as well of all Vegetables, as of Living Creatures; whether
they be engendered of Putrefaction, or of Sperme: For in all these Things, there
is manifestly seen a Matter, hard to break through, easy to yield.

Canon. IV.
IN all Living Creatures, there are two Kinds of Spirits; Livelesse Spirits,
such as are in Bodies Inanimate; And a Vital Spirit superadded.

The Explication.
IT was said before; That to procure long Life, the Body of Man must be
considered; First, as Inanimate, and not Repaired by Nourishment: Secondly, as
Animate, and Repaired by Nourishment: For the Former Consideration, gives Laws
touching Consumption; The latter, touching Reparation. Therefore we must know;
That there are in Humane Flesh, Bones, Membranes, Organs; Finally, in all the
parts, such Spirits diffused in the substance of them, while they are alive; As
there are in the same Things; (Flesh, Bones, Membranes, and the Rest;)
Separated, and Dead; Such as also remain in a Carkase: But the Vital Spirit,
although it tuleth them, and has some Consent with them, yet it is far
differing from them; Being integrall, and subsisting by it self. Now there are
two especial Differences, betwixt the Livelesse Spirits, and the Vital
Spirits: The one, that the Livelesse Spirits, are not continued to Themselves;
But are, as it were, cut off; And encompassed with a Gross Body, which
intercepts them; As Air is mixed in Snow, or Froth: But the Vital Spirit is
all continued to it self, by certain Conduit Pipes, through which it passes,
and is not totally intercepted. And this Spirit is twofold also; The one
Branched only, passing through small Pipes, and, as it were, Strings: The
other has a Cell also; So as it is not only continued to it self, but also
Congregared in an Hollow Space, in reasonable good Quantity, according to the
Analogy of the Body; And in that Cell is the Fountain of the Rivulers, which
branch from thence. That Cell is, chiefly, in the Ventricles of the Brain;
Which, in the Ignobler sort of Creatures, are but Narrow; Insomuch, that the
Spirits in them, seem scattered over their whole Body, rather than Celled: As
may be seen in Serpents, Eels, and Flies; whereof, every of their parts move
long after they are cut asunder. Birds also leap a good while after their
Heads are pulled off; Because they have little Heads, and little Cells: But the
Nobler sort of Creatures, have those Ventricles larger: And Man the largest of
all. The other Difference betwixt the Spirits, is; That the Vital Spirit, has
a Kind of Enkindling; And is like a Wind or Breath, compouuded of Flame and
Air, As the Juyces of Living Creatures, have both Oil and Water. And this
Enkindling ministers peculiar Motions and Faculties: For the Smoke, which is
inflammable, even before the Flame conceived, is Hot, Thin, and Moveable; And
yet it is quite another Thing, after it is become Flame: But the Enkindling of
the Vital Spirits, is, by many Degrees, gentler than the softest Flame; As of
Spirit of Wine, or otherwise: And besides, it is in great part mixed with an
Aeriall Substance; That it should be a Mystery or Miracle, both of a Flammcous,
and Aereous Nature.

Canon V.
THe Natural Actions, are proper to the Several Parts; But it is the Vital
Spirit, that excites, and sharpens them.

The Explication.
THe Actions, or Functions, which are in the several Members, follow the
Nature of the Members Themselves, ( Attraction, Retention, Disgestion,
Assimilation, Separation, Excretion, Perspiration. Even Sense it self;)
According to the Propriety of the several Organs; (The Stomach, Liver, Heart,
Spleen, Gall, Brain, Eye, Ear, and the rest.) Yet none of these Actions
would ever have been actuated, but by the Vigor, and Presence, ofthe Vital
Spirit, and (...) thereof: As one Iron would not have drawn another Iron,
unless it had been excited by the Lodestone; Nor an Egg would ever have
brought forth a Bird; unless the Substance of the Hen had been actuated by
the Treading of the Cock.

Canon VI.
THe Livelesse Spirits are next Consubstantiall to Air; The Vital Spirits,
approach more to the Subsiance of Flame.

The Explication.
THe Explication of the precedent Fourth Canon, is also a Declaration of this
present Canon: But yet further, from hence it is; That all Fat, and Oily
Things, continue long in their Being; For neither does the (...) much pluck
them; Neither do they much desire to (...) Themselves with Air. As for that
Conceit, it is altogether vain; That Flame should be Air set on Fire. Seeing
Flame, and Air, are no less Heterogeneall, than (...) and Water. But whereas,
it is said, in the Canon, That the Vital Spirits, approach more to the
Substance of Flame, It must be understood, that they do this more, than the
Livelesse Spirits; Not that they are more Flamy, than Airy.

Canon VII.
THe Spirit has two Defires: One, of Multiplying it self; The other, of
Flying forth, and Congregating it self with the Connaturals.

The Explication.
THe Canon is understood of the Livelesse Spirits: For as for the second
Desire, the Vital Spirit, does most of all abhor, Flying forth of the Body;
For it finds no Connaturals, here below, to join withal. Perhaps, it may
sometimes fly to the outward Parts of the Body, to meet that which it loves;
But the Flying forth, as I said, it abhors. But in the Livelesse Spirits,
each of these two Desires holds. For to the I ormer this belongs; Every
Spirit, seated amongst the Grosser Parts, dwells unhappily; And therefore,
when it finds not a Like unto it self, it does so much the more labor, to
create, and make a Like: As being in agreat Solitude; And endeavors earnestly;
To Multiply it self; And to prey upon the Volatile of the Grosser Parts; That
it may be increased in Quantity. As for the Second (...) of Flying forth, And
Betaking it self to the Air; It is certain, that all Light Things, (which are
ever Moveable,) do willingly go unto their Likes, near unto them: As a Drop
of water is carried to a Drop; Flame to Flame: But much more is this done, in
the Flying forth of Spirit, into the Air Ambient; Because, it is not carried
to a Particle, like unto it self, but also as unto the Globe, of the
Connaturals. Mean while, this is to be noted; That the Going forth, and
Flight, of the Spirit into Air, is a redoubled Action; Partly, out of the
Appetite of the Spirit; Partly, out of the Appetite of the Air: For the Common
Air is a Needy Thing; And receives all Things greedily; As Spirits, Odours,
Beams, Sounds, and the like.

Canon VIII.
Spirit Detained, if it have no possibility of begetting new Spirit,
intenerateth the Grosser Parts.

The Explication.
GEneration of new Spirit, is not accomplished, but upon those Things, which
are, in some Degree, near to Spirit: Such as are Humide Bodies. And therefore
if the Grosser parts, (amongst which the Spirit converseth,) be in a remote
Degree, although the Spirit cannot convert them, yet, (as much as it can,) it
weakeneth, and softeneth, and subdueth them; That seeing it cannot increase in
Quantity, yet it will dwell more at large, and live amongst good Neighbors,
and Friends. Now this Aphorism is most useful to our End; Because, it tends
to the Inteneration of the Obstinate Parts, by the Detention of the Spirit.

Canon IX.
THe Inteneration, of the Harder Parts, comes to good effect, when the Spirit
neither Flies forth, nor begets new Spirit.

The Explication.
THis Canon, solveth the Knot, and Difficulty, in the Operation of
Intenerating, by the Detention of the Spirit. For if the Spirit, not flying
forth, wastes all within, there is Nothing gotten, to the Inteneration of the
Parts, in their Subsistence; But rather they are dissolved, and Corrupted.
Therefore together with the Detention, the Spirits ought to be cooled, and
restrained, that they may not be too Active.

Canon X.
THe Heat of the Spirit, to keep the Body, Fresh, and Green, ought to be
Robust, (...) Eager.

The Explication.
ALso this Canon pertains, to the solving of the knot (...); But it is of a
much larger Extent. For it fetteth down, of what Temporament, the Heat in the
Body, ought to be, for the (...) of Long Life: Now this is useful, whether the
Spirits be (...), or whether they be not. For howsoever, the Heat of the
Spirits must be such, as it may rather turn it self, upon the Hard Parts,
than waste the Soft; For the one Desiccateth, the other Intenerateth. Besides,
the same Thing is available, to the well perfecting of Assimilation; For such
an Heat, does excellently excite the Faculty of (...); And withal, does
excellently prepare the Matter, to be Assimilated. Now the Properties of this
kind of Heat, ought to be these. First, that it be Slow, and heat not
Suddenly: Secondly, that it be not very Intense, but Moderate: Thirdly, that it
be Equal; Not Incomposed; Namely, Intending, and Remitting it self: Fourthly,
that if this Heat, meet any Thing to resist it, it be not easily suffocated,
or languish. This Operation is exceeding subtle, but seeing it is one, of the
most useful, it is not to be deserted. Now, in those Remedies, (which we
propounded, to invest the Spirits, with a Robust Heat; Or, that which we call,
Operative, not Predatory;) we have, in some sort, satisfied this Matter.

Canon XI.
THe Condensing, of the Spirits, in their Substance, is available to long Life.

The Explication.
THis Canon is subordinate to the next precedent: For the Spirit Condensed,
receives all those four properties of Heat, whereof we spoke: But the ways
of Condensing them, are set down, in the first, of the Ten Operations.

Canon XII.
THe Spirit, in great Quantity hasteneth more to Flying forth, and preyeth upon
the Body more, than it small Quantity.

The Explication.
THis Canon is clear, of it self, Seeing mere Quantity, does regularly
increase Virtue. And it is to be seen in Flames; That the bigger they are, the
stronger they break forth, and the more speedily they consume. And therefore,
over great (...), or Exuberance of the Spirits, is altogether Hurtful to Long
Life: Neither need one wish a greater store of Spirits, than what is
sufficient, for the Function of Life, and the Office of a good Reparation.

Canon XIII.
THe Spirit equally dispersed, makes less Haste to fly forth, and preyeth
less upon the Body, than unequally placed.

The Explication.
NOt only Abundance of Spirits, in respect of the whole, is hurtful to the
Duration of Things; But also the same Abundance, unevenly placed, is, in like
manner, hurtful: And therefore, the more the Spirit is shred, and inserted by
small portions, the less it preyeth: For Dissolution ever begins at that
part, where the Spirit is looser. And therefore, both Exercise, and Frications,
conduce much to Long Life; For Agitation, does fineliest diffuse, and commix
Things by small Portions.

Canon XIIII.
THe Inordinate, and Subsultorie, Motion of the Spirits, does more hasten to
Going forth, and does prey upon the Body more, than the Constant, and Equal.

The Explication.
IN Inanimates this Canon holds for certain; For Inequality is the Mother of
Dissolution; But in Animates, (Because, not only the Consumption is considered,
but the Reparation; And Reparation proceeds by the Appetites of Things; And
Appetite is sharpened by variety;) It holds not rigorously; But it is so
far forth to be received; That this Variety, be rather an Alternation, or
Enterchange, than a Confusion; And, as it were, Constant in Inconstancy.

Canon XV.
THe Spirit, in a Body, of a Solid Composure, is detained, though (...).

The Explication.
ALl Things do abhor a Solution of their Continuitie, But yet in proportion,
to their Density, or Rarity: For the more Rare the Bodies be, the more do they
suffer Themselves, to be thrust into small, and narrow Passages; For Water will
go into a passage, which Dust will not go into; And Air, which Water will
not go into; Nay Flame, and Spirit, which Air will not go into.
Notwithstanding, of this Thing, there are some Bounds: For the Spirit is not so
much transported, with the Desire of Going forth, that it will suffer it self
to be too much discontinued; Or be driven into overstrait pores and passages:
And therefore if the Spirit be encompassed with an Hard Body; Or else with an
Unctuous, and Tenacious, (which is not easily divided;) it is plainly Bound,
and, as I may say, imprisoned; And lays down the Appetite of Going out:
Wherefore we see, that Metals, and Stones, require a long Time, for their
Spirit to go forth; Unless either the Spirit be excited by the Fire; Or the
Grosser Parts be dissevered with Corroding, and Strong waters. The like Reason
is there, of Tenacious Bodies; Such as are Gums; Save only that they are melted
by a more gentle Hear. And therefore, the (...) of the Body hard, a Close and
Compact skin, and the like; (which are procured, by the Dryness of the
Aliment, and by Exercise, and by the Coldness of the Air;) Are good for long
Life; Because they detain the Spirit in close Prison, that it goes not forth.

Canon XVI.
IN Oily, and Fat, Things, the Spirit is detained willingly, though they be not
Tenacious.

The Explication.
THe Spirit, if it be not irritated, by the Antipathy, of the Body enclosing
it; Nor fed by the overmuch Likeness of that Body; Nor solicited, or
invited, by the External Body; It makes no great stir, to get out: All which
are wanting to Oily Bodies: For they are neither so pressing upon the Spirits,
as Hard Bodies; Nor so Near as Watery Bodies; Neither have they any good
Agreement with the Air Ambient.

Canon XVII.
THe Speedy flying forth of the Watery Humor, conserves the Oily, the longer in
his Being.

The Explication.
WE said before, that the Watery Humors, as being Consubstantiall to the Air,
fly forth soonest; The Oily, later, as having small Agreement, with the Air:
Now whereas these two Humors are in most Bodies, it comes to pass, that the
watery, does, in a sort, betray the Oily; For that Issuing forth insensibly,
carries this together with it. Therefore, there is Nothing, that more
furthereth the Conservation of Bodies, than a gentle Drying of them; which
causes the Watery Humor to expire, and inviteth not the Oily; For then the
Oily enjoys the proper Nature. And this tends not only to the Inhibiting of
Putrefaction, (Though that also follows,) but to the Conservation of
Greenness. Hence it is, that Gentle Frications, and Moderate Exercises,
causing rather Perspiration, than Sweating, conduce much to long Life.

Canon XVIII.
Air excluded, conftrreth to long Life, if (...) Inconveniences be avoided.

The Explication.
We said a little before; That the Flying forth of the Spirit, is a Redoubled
Action; From the Appetite, of the Spirit, and of the Air: And therefore, if
either of these be taken out of the way, there is not a little galned.
Notwithstanding, diverse Inconveniences follow hereupon; Which, how they may be
prevented, we have showed, in the second, of our ten Operations.

Canon XIX.
Youthful Spirits iuserted into an Old Body, might soon (...) Natures Course
back again.

The Explication.
THe Nature of the Spirits, is as the uppermost wheel, which turns about the
other wheels, in the Body of Man. And therefore, in the Intention of Long
Life, that ought to be first placed. Hereunto may be added; That there is an
Easier, and more Expedite way, to alter the Spirits, than to other Operations.
For the Operation upon the Spirits, is twofold; The one, by Aliments, which is
Slow, and, as it were, about; The other, (and that Twofold,) which is sudden,
and goes directly to the Spirits; Namely, by Vapors, or by the Affections.

Canon XX.
JUyces of the Body, Hard, and Roscide, are good for long Life.

The Explication.
THe Reason is plain; Seeing we showed before; That Hard Things, and Oily or
Roscide, are hardly dissipated. Notwithstanding, there is this Difference, (As
we also noted in the Tenth Operation,) That Juice somewhat Hard is indeed
less Dissipable, but then it is withal less Reparable. Therefore a
Convenience is interlaced with an Inconvenience; And for this Cause, no
wonderful Matter will be achieved by this. But Roscide Juice, will admit both
Operations. Therefore this would be principally (...).

Canon XXI.
WHatsoever is of Thin Parts, to penetrate; And yet has no Acrimonie, (...);
Begets Roscide Juyces.

The Explication.
THis (...) is more Hard to Practice, than to understand. For it is (...);
Whatsoever (...) well, but yet with a sting, or (...); (As do all Sharp, and
Sour, Things,) It leaves behind (...) wheresoever it goes, some Mark, or
Print, of Dryness, (...) Cleaving; So that it (...) the Iuyces, and (...) the
parts. Contrarily, whatsoever Things penetrate through their Thinness merely,
as it were by stealth, and by way of Insinuation, without violence; They bedew,
and water, in their passage: Of which sort, we have recounted many, in the
fourth, and seventh Operations.

Canon XXII.
ASsimilation (...) best (...) when all Local Motion, is suspended.

The Explication.
THis Canon, we have sufficiently explained in our Discourse, (...) the (...)
(...)

Canon XXIII.
ALIMENTATION from without, at least some other way than by the Stomach, is
most profitable for long Life, if it can be done.

The Explication.
WE see, that all Things, which are done by Nutrition, ask a long time; But
those, which are done by Embracing of the like, (As it is in Infusions,)
require no long time. And therefore, Alimentation from without, would be of
principal use; And so much the more, because the (...) of (...), decay in old
Age; So that, if there could be some; Auxiliary Natritions; By Bathings,
Unctions, or else by Clysters; These Things, in Conjunction, might do much,
which Single, are less Available.

Canon XXIIII.
WHere the Concoction is weak, to thrust forth the Aliment; There the outward
Parts should be strengthened, to call forth the Aliment.

The Explication.
THat which is propounded in this Canon, is not the same Thing with the former;
For it is one Thing, for the Outward Aliment, to be attracted inward; Another
for the Inward Aliment, to be attracted Outward: yet herein they concur, that
they both help the weakness of the (...) though by diverse ways.

Canon XXV.
ALL sudden Renovation of the Body, is wrought; Either by the Spirits; Or by
Malacissations.

The Explication.
THere are two Things, in the Body; Spirits, and Parts; To both these, the way
by Nutrition, is long, and about; But it is a short way, to the Spirits, by
Vapors, and by the Affections; And to the Parts, by Malacissations: But this
is dillgently to be noted; That by no means, we (...) Alimentation from
(...), with Malacissation: For the Intention of Malacissation, is not to
nourish the Parts; But only to make them more fit to be nourished.

Canon XXVI.
MAlacissation is wrought, by Consubstantials; By Imprinters; 3 And by Closers
up.

The Explication.
THe Reason is manifest; For that Consubstantials do properly supple the Body;
(...) do carry in; Closers up do retain, and bridle the Perspiration, which
is a Motion opposite to Malacissation. And therefore, (as we described in the
Ninth Operation,) Malacissation cannot well be done at once; But in a Course or
Order. First, by Excluding the Liquour, by Thickners; For an Outward, and
gross Infusion, does not well compact the Body; That which enters, must be
Subtle, and a Kind of Vapor. Secondly, by Intenerating, by the Consent of
Cousubstantials: For Bodies, upon the touch of those Things, which have good
agreement with them, open themselves, and relax their Pores. Thirdly,
Imprinters are Convoyes, and insi nuate into the Parts, the Consubstantials;
And the Mixture of Gentle Astringents, does somewhat restrain the
Perspiration. But then, in the (...) place, follows that (...) Astriction, and
Closure up of the Body, by (...); And then afterward, by (...); Until the
Supple be (...) into Solid; As we said in the proper place.

Canon XXVII.
FRequent Renovation of the Parts Reparable, waters and renews the less
Reparable also.

The Explication.
WE said in the Preface to this History; That the Way of Death, was this; That
the Parts Reparable, died in the Fellowship of the Parts less Reparable; So
that in the Reparation of these same less Reparable Parts, all our Forces
would be employed. And therefore, being admonished by Aristotle's Observation,
touching Plants; Namely; That the putting forth of new Shoots and Branches,
refreshes the Body of the Tree, in the Passage; We conceive, the like Reason
might be; If the Flesh and blood, in the Body of Man, were often renewed; That
thereby, the Bones themselves, and Membranes, and other Parts, which in their
own Nature, are Less Reparable; Partly by the cheerful Passage of the
Iuyees; Partly by that new Clouthing of the young Flesh and Blood; Might be
Watered and Renewed.

Canon XXVIII.
REfrigeration, or Cooling of the Body, which passes some other ways, then by
the Stomach, is useful for Long Life.

The Explication.
THe Reason is at hand; For seeing a Refrigeration, not Temperate, but
Powerful, (especially of the Blood,) is above all Things, necessary to long
Life; This can, by no means, be effected from within, as much as is requisite,
without the Destruction of the Stomach and Bowels.

Canon XXIX.
THat Intermixing, or Entangling; That as well Consumption, as Reparation, are
the works of Heat, is the greatest Obstacle to long Life.

The Explication.
ALmost all great works are destroyed, by the Natures of Things, Intermixed;
when as that, which helps in one respect, hurts in another: Therefore Men
must proceed herein, by a sound Judgment, and a discreet Practice: For our
Part, we have done so, as far as the matter will bear, and our Memory
serves us; By Separating, Benign Heats, from Hurtful; And the Remedies,
which tend to both.

Canon XXX.
CUring of Diseases is effected by Temporary Medicines; But Lengthening of Life
requires Observation of Diets.

The Explication.
THose things, which come by Accident, as soon as the Causes are removed,
cease again; But the Continued Course of Nature, like a Running River,
requires a continual Rowing, and Sailing against the Stream. Therefore, we
must work regularly, by Diets. Now Diets are of two Kinds; Set Diets, which
are to be observed at certain times; And Familiar Diet, which is to be
admitted into our Daily Repast: But the Set Diets are the more potent: That is;
A Course of Medicines, for a time: For those Things, which are of so great
Virtue, that they are able to turn Nature back again; Are, for the most
part, more strong, and more speedily Altering, than those, which may, without
danger, be received into a Continual use. Now in the Remedies, set down in our
Intentions; You shall find only three Set Diets: The Opiate Diet; The Diet
Malacissant, or Suppling; And the Diet Emaciant, and Renewing. But amongst
those, which we Prescribed for Familiar Diet, and to be used daily, the most
efficacious are these that follow: Which also come not far Short of the
Virtue of Set Diets. Nitre, and the Subordinates to Nitre; The Regiment of the
Affections, and Course of our Life; (...) which pass not by the Stomach;
Drinks Roscidating, or Eng ndring Oily Iuyces; Besprinkling of the Blood with
some Firmer Matter, as Pearls; certain Woods; Competent Unctions, to keep
out the Air, and to keep in the Spirit; Heaters from without, during the
Assimilation after Sleep; Avoiding of Those Things, which Inflame the Spirit,
and put it into an Eager Heat, as Wine, and Spices: Lastly, a Moderate and
Seasonable use of those Things, which endue the Spirits with a Robust Heat; As
Saffron, Cresses, Garlic, Elecampane, and Compound Opiates.

Canon XXXI.
THe Living Spirit is instantly extinguished, if it be deprived either of
Motion; or of Refrigeration; Or of Aliment.

The Explication.
NAmely, these are those three, which before we called the Porches of Death;
And they are the Proper and Immediate Passions of the Spirit. For all the
Organs of the principal parts, serve hereunto; That these three Offices be
performed; and again, all destruction of the Organs, which is Deadly, brings
the Matter to this point, that one or more of these three fail. Therefore, all
other Things are the diverse Ways to Death, but they end in these three. Now
the Whole Fabric of the Parts, is the Organ of the Spirit; As the Spirit is
the (...) of the Reasonable Soul; which is Incorporeous and Divine.

Canon XXXII.
FLame is a Momentany Substance; Air a Fixed; The Living Spirit, in Creatures,
is of a Middle Nature.

The Explication.
THis Matter stands in need both of an higher Indagation, and of a longer
Explication, than is pertinent to the present Inquisition. Mean while, we must
know this; That Flame is almost every Moment generated and extinguished; so
that it is continued only by succession: (...) Air is a Fixed Body, and is
not Dissolved; For though Air begets new Air, out of watery Moisture, yet
notwithstanding the old Air still remains; whence comes that
Super-Oneration of the Air, where of we have spoken, in the Title, De Vent is:
But Spirit is participant of both Natures; both of Flame and Air; Even as the
Nourishments thereof are; As Well Oil, which is Homogeneous to Flame; As Water,
which is Homogeneous to Air: For the Spirit is not (...), either of Oily
alone, or of Watery alone, but of both together; And though Air does not agree
well with Flame, nor Oil with Water; yet in a mixed Body they agree well
enough. Also, the Spirit has from the Air, his Easy and Delicate
Impressions, and yeeldings; And from the Flame, his Noble and Potent Motions
and Activities. In like manner, the Duration of Spirit, is a Mixed Thing; Being
neither so Momentany, as that of Flame; Nor so Fixed, as that of Air. And so
much the rather it follows not the Condition of Flame; For that Flame it
self is extinguished by Accident; Namely, by Contraries, and Enemies
environing it; But Spirit is not subject to the like Conditions and
Necessities. Now the Spirit is repaired, from the Lively and Floride Blood of
the small Arteries, which are inserted into the Brain; But this Reparation is
done by a peculiar Manner, of which we speak not now.

FINIS.

