THE TRVE AND WONDERFVLL HISTORY OF Perkin Warbeck, PROCLAIMING himself
RICHARD the fourth.

Eurip. Iphig. in Tauris. Nullus sibi similis in periculis homo, quoties ad
audaciam ex metu venerit. LONDON, Printed by E. G. for NATHANIEL BVTTER, and
are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the
Pyde-Bull. 1618.

Historia est
Testis temporum. Lux veritatis. Vita memoriae. Magistra vitae. Nuntia
vetustatis.
Cicero de Orat. Lib. 2. Historia nihil aliud est nisi annalium confectio,
cuius rei memoriaeque publicae retinendae causa, ab initio res omnes singulorum
annorum mandabat literis Pontifex maximus, efferebatque in album, and
proponebat tabulam domi, etc. TO THE RIGHT Honorable THOMAS Earl of Arundel,
primer Earl of England, and one of his Majesty's most honorable Council, etc.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
SVch as my poor self, that am only a looker on of your virtues, as a
Passenger in a street beholding the Frontispice of some delicate Edifice, but
debarred the entrance and search into the inward rooms, must be contented, or
if you please indebted to the opinion and report of others; which I have found
so ample and enlarged concerning your great Honor, and greater worthiness,
that I will forbear any further insinuation, least I step into a kind of
flattery, a vice incident to most men, refused of none, yet in all fortunes to
be disclaimed of a Gentleman: only I must add this, that I am proud of mine
own assurance, that you are borne to adorn our Country, and illustrate our
Court, wherein your industry, loyalty, and immaculate truth shall make your
virtues complete and triumphant. Therefore great Lord have I chosen out this
History, merely for the strangeness, and charactred you the Patron of my
endeauours for the observations, that the remarkable passages herein
proposed, of which even Scotland had a part, may serve for all persons in such
dignity and eminent places, both for precept, and caution.

For Precept, to flourish in their own honors, and move in their own orbs,
sticking close to the glory of their Country, and clinging to the sides of
Majesty, that the King may ask, what shall be done to the man, whom he would
honor, and the Commonwealth follow them with Panegyricall applauses, who
preserve her peace from the rauishing, and deforming of strangers, be the hopes
to the contrary never so probable, or inductiue.

For Caution, not once to put any confidence in deceivers, nor believe the
Devil himself, though he promise to give the Kingdoms of the World, which
are none of his: yet, I confess him Prince of the same, that is, of the abuses
and impieties therein both raging, and reigning: and the rather, because the
end has ever been perdition of body, soul, honor, estates and posterity:
nor can the pleading of simplicity in the seduction, or ignorance in the
credulity serve the turn: For though Princes ma^y times have been drawn to
pardon the offenses of Subjects, and refractary delinquents, wallowing or
rather sunk over head and ears in the mierie bogs of such conuulsions: yet are
they not always to be presumed upon, nor will the Commonwealth endure the
indignity, or give way to any person whatsoever in vilipending the government.

I humbly therefore request your Honor to read over this true and strange
Story, and take in worth my good meaning, which presents the same unto you I
protest without any other motive, then to see you flourish, as a supportation of
our Commonwealth, and jewel of our kingdom. As for the faults and my
presumption, I expect, that that virtue and goodness, which must make you
famous in this world, and happy in the world to come, will extend but her own
properties to my pardon and admission, knowing that if I have done ill; wisdom
is not bought in the market, and yet God bids us come without money; if well,
it is in your honorable favor, and noble acceptance.

Your Honors humble obser^ant THOMAS GAINS^ORDE.

Lucan lib. 8. DEstruit ingentes a^imos, and vita superstes Imperio, nisi summa
dies cum fine bonum Affuit, and celeri praeuertit tristia letho, Dedecori est
fortuna prior, quisquam ne secundis Tradere se fatis audet, nisi morte parata?
A PREFACE.
Nec adulatori, Neque detractori,
TO speak of the commendation of history is not my meaning; nor of the
necessity my purpose: For besides the definition, and explanation of Tully
himself, you have at least forty several books, which begin (as I do) with a
preface, as a preparatiue to the Reader, to take their books within their
gentle embraces, merely upon the commendation of history. I leave all unnamed,
except Sr. Henry Sauill for Tacitus, Sr. Walter Raleigh for his history of the
world, Dr. Haward for the three Norman Kings, and Henry the fourth. In whose
writings, let us write, what we can, as much is written, as either delight,
profit, or private respect can extend unto: so that I say I desist from that
general insinuation concerning the credit, or particular satisfaction of
history, and come to more familiar opening the carpet of the business
proposed. Only this I will add, that I had rather read one true story
handsomely set upon the frame of Precept and Caution, True Histories to be
preferred before all profane and devised rel^tions.
then a thousand fictions diuerting my imaginary conceits to think upon, and
(as we say) spend themselves on impossibilities, and corrupt my meditation
with vain, foolish, beastly, and triuiall devises, which are the more
ridiculous, because there is substance, and matter enough in verity, to set on
work any humor and invention whatsoever, and satisfy apprehensions even in
their wanton, and exoticke wanderings.

For in this house of repast, which my Iuy-bush inuites you to, would thou be
made partaker of the attributes appropriate to the Divine Majesty? Here are
manifested his providence, wisdom, mightiness, power, justice, mercy,
prevention, love, goodness, majesty, etc, Would thou be made acquainted with
the secrets of Religion? here are demonstrated the vanities of ceremonies, the
necessity of adoration, the encumbrances of superstition, the simplicity of
times, the darkness of Popery, the fear of excommunication, the reverence of
Priesthood, and the folly of devises? Would thou know the policies of
government, and dignity of a King? here you shall see, what the desire of
sovereignty can do, the jealousy of a Princes estate, the revenge of wrongs,
the fear of troubles and innovation, the inconstancy of the people; the danger
of factions, und the senerall passages of a prosperous, or declining estate?
Would thou be quickened with the remembrance of pleasure, here are
particulars of delight, courtings of Ladies, amorous encounters, triumphant
shows, deceitful vanities, and some idle relations? Would thou see virtue
mounted on a pinnacle of her palace? here are wisdom, gravity, constancy,
magnanimity, endurances of misfortune, and moderation of power and greatness.
Would thou behold vice in her deformity? here are envy, hatred, malice,
pride, ambition, desire of revenge, rebellion, contumacy, stubbornness, and
such like. Would thou be acquainted with passions? here are joy, fear,
sorrow, gladness, jealousy, mistrust, and all of that sort. Would thou see
other varieties? Here are Princes deceived, hopers abused, liers execrated,
traitors punished, and the Devil himself confounded. In a word, would thou
hear of strange adventures? painful endeauours? heroik actions? dangerous
attempts? military proceedings? here is Fortune, as we profanely run away
with the Emblem, set upon a wheel, and turned round about by the hand of an
invisible, and invincible Deity. Here is the stage of variety, and table of
wonders? So that I am sure, from the conquest to this hour, there is no story
so remarkable, and so full of observation, either for the ridiculous beginning,
dangerous continuance, or lamentable effects?

For although the first contentions between the houses of York and Lancaster
began questionless from the wrong intrusiou of Henry the fourth, The house of
Lancaster began the first wrong.
when the right of the crown was in Mortimer, and his line by the daughter of
Clarence, King Edward the thirds third son, and elder brother to John of
Gaunt: yet there was some probability and inducement to the reuengers, either
mighty armies, strong factions, many confederates, the next of blood powerful
in his own possession and friends, with such like. But here; besides the
fanaticall invention, men were transported against their own conscience and
knowledge, and assumed arms to do they knew not what, only because they
would be counted factious, stirring, and resembling the fish Saepia, which cast
into any water befroths the same, and in the conclusion, the end as the
beginning, and both like a paper castle quickly set on fire, or if you will, a
confection of spicery, which after it is carried round about the house, is
placed upon the table with great wonder, amazement and delight both at the
st^ffe, and contriuing: but what is the issue? the lookers on at last fall to,
and pull even the guns and houses a pieces, and eat them.

In Ireland, Rebellion in Ireland natural.
I remember, they lay an imputation of baseness and cowardice on any man, that
has not been in action, as they term it, or has not had his pardon and
protection: so that custom makes them Traitors, and the vainglory of
reputation many times brings their necks to the halter: yet it is somewhat
tolerable for the generality of the fault, and enforcement of the motive, being
Bards, Rimers, Harpers, Priests, whom the very women ^ug in their bosoms, for
seducing their Noblemen, and Gentlemen, and enciting them to revenge. Upon
this ground, they must prosecute, first some things worthy the honor of their
ancestors, and next remember the deploration of Religion, Liberty, and the
usurpation of their Country, all which the English have from time to time
intruded upon, and are not to be endured in their tyranny, as they make them
believe. But in this our story, there is nothing sauouring true heroiknesse,
nor worthy the name of commiseration and assistance. For the best excuse
arises from shadows, smoke, vapors, foolish enterprises, and unjustifiable
actions, wherein only the power of God is manifested and made apparent, that
from so small beginnings, and slender a fountain, such turbulent streams and
raging rivers should arise, even to endanger one of the flourishingst Kingdoms
in the world: yea, my heart trembles to imagine, that so great a Prince, in the
unity of a right, by an vnpreuentable marriage, should be heaued at in so
formidable a manner by an vpstart, and (as I may say) puppet stuffed with straw,
to scare away crows.

I have read of one Spartago Spar^ago.
a Fencer, that taking upon him the person of Scribonianus, drew a great party
together: which as Nero laughed to scorn, so indeed the Common wealth quickly
put to flight. Likewise, the other day in Venice, Florence, and many
principalities of Italy, a strange Impostor after 30. years or thereabouts,
made them believe he was Sebastian King of Portugal, Sebastian.
slain in Barbary at the battle of Alcazar, as was supposed, but in truth
recovered, and obscured for a time etc. I might also add the cunning of Richard
Duke of York, who being in Ireland, animated the Kentish rebel Jack Cade to
personate the name of Mortimer, Mortimer.
for a trial how the people would affect that Title: But these florishes were
only the rash burnings of a bauin, as soon extinguished as on a flame, and
quickly overthrown, upon the first discovery: Only this story for the
variety, the continuance, the manner, and all other circumstances, has made
me (as I said before) amazed, and may in the reading produce the same effects
in others: Yet again, when I consider the estate of man's frailty, mutable,
troublesome, and full of encumbrances, and ouerlooke the condition of
mortality, which in Princes themselves is subject to inconveniences, and many
times fearful conuulsions, I wonder the less, because God will be known
unto them, and they have for the most part prevailed in their rights, and
justifiable endeauours. For which I also pray, that they may still hold up the
heads of triumphant and unchangeable greatness, wherein (no doubt) the same
divine arm of potencie which has protected others, will also support them
from all dangerous enterprises and fearful treasons, either of Foreign or
Domestique adversaries.

But amongst other remarkable accidents, this is not the least, that so many
examples, so many heads cut off, so many Armies overthrown, Treason did never
long prosper.
so many honorable families consumed, so much blood spilt, so great reuenges
taken (as if all such enterprises were cursed in the womb, and brought forth
like an untimely Embrion) could never affright others, nor be a sufficient
warning to succeeding times, but every occasion of innovation, were it never so
foolish or exorbitant, still excited one or other to parts taking, and brought
them to untimely overthrows, either by their Armies, and confederates
discomfited, or by their enditements, and accusations enlarged in judicial
trial against them: but this is the cunning of the Devil, who to fill up the
vast dungeon of Hell, make men so prodigal of their lives and honors, or so
covetous of revenge, and vainglory, that so they may have a name with
Herostratus, who burned the the Temple of Diana; they care not for the
reproach, supposing that as many will extol them for brave stirring spirits,
as condemn them for Traitors and disobedient Subjects. O ridiculous and
abominable conceits! O hateful and filthy imaginations! O deceivable and
imposturing impiety: Nay, in a word, O horrible and flagitious madness!
without reason, likelihood or inference of any probable, or perswasiue
circumstance.

But least my Preface extend beyond the bounds of my hearts commission, I will
attend the particulars of my Story, with this expostulation to all noble and
generous spirits; yea, I will kneel on my knees and hold up my hands unto
them, that they give no way to any deceivable seduction of Pope, Jesuit,
Priest, Faction, Innovation, Repining at the State, Private ambition, Corrupted
malice, and such like, against the current of government, or the ebbings and
flowings of the world and times. For the Majesty of Kings will not be tied up
with the slender bindings of rebellion, nor taught any lesson against their
wills either of favoring, or disfauouring, whom they please. As for personal
faults; Alas, Princes, Prelates, Officers, Maiestrates, and all sorts of men
will run the race of mortality; and if it were possible to remove offenders
at pleasure, the persons may be changed, but the imperfections continue. Let
them therefore alone a Gods name; for they must stand or fall to the estate of
their lives, which he has appointed: only this I will be bold to say, I would
have no man for any private respect run in the outrageous races of sins
himself, or defend any wickedness in others, bear with great men in their
vices, flatter or temporize for profit or preferment, yield unto base or
degenerating actions either for fear or favor; or in a word, do any thing
contrary to Gods word, wherein as in a glass men may perspicuously behold the
way of life and death, and the infallible positions, which in the affirmative
and negative conclude all things either by precept, or interdiction.

Eurip. Orest. Paruis enim res magnas quomodo caperet quis laboribus? stultum
etiam velle and conarihaec: quando enim excanduerit populus, ad iram prolapsus,
similis est igni ad extinguendum vehementi: si vero pedetentim quis ei
concitato quidem cedens obsecundarit, tempus caute obseruans, cum autem
emiserit flatus, forsan exhalauerit. THE TRVE AND wonderful History of PERKIN
VVARBECK.
THE contentions between the houses of York and Lancaster, are the subjects
of many discourses, and therefore I will insist the less either upon
Genealogies, Titles, Usurpations, Wars, Factions, Encounters, Reuenges,
Battails, Slaughters, or other accidental outrages, which for 90. years
filled the wrinckles of the face of our Commonwealth of England, with the
blood and sweat of ten Kings and Princes of the race royal: 60 Dukes and
Earls: 1000 Lords and Knights: and 150000 Soldiers and people. Only I must
make a little commorance and abiding in the wretched and ragged house of envy
and malice, governed and ouerseene by a woman, who was so opposite and adverse
to the Lancastrian family, that for all King Henry the seventh had obtained the
Crown by a strong hand; and as we say, diuinitus praemunitus: yea, debarred
all Titles, or fuming shadows of Titles, by consummating that marriage with the
Lady Elizabeth eldest daughter of Edward the fourth: she yet contrived all the
ways of his overthrow, and inuit a fortuna entertained every occasion, which
might add fuel to the fire of her inueterate hate, and blood-thirstie humor
of revenge, as if she had been borne like certain Antipathies in nature,
which cannot endure any neighborhood or commixture: such as the Eugh and
Palm: the Fig and Vine: the strings of Wolves and Sheep, which makes me
remember the story of Eteocles and Pollinices the sons of Oedipus, whose hate
was so great in their lives, that after death, the bones being burnt together,
the flame of the sacrifice divided asunder.

This was Margaret Duchess of Burgundy, Margaret Duches of Burgundy chiefest
enemy of Henry the seventh.
sister of Edward the fourth, and a sworn adversary to cast the red Rose of
England, into the black pit of confusion; who perceiving her first hopes
frustrated, and annihilated concerning the progression of Lamberts enterprises,
studied night and day upon further and further instigations; yea, houered over
opportunity like a hawke for her pray, to torment and trouble the peace of
England: embracing every strange and prestigious illusion, and not caring with
what pullies of ridiculous and impossible actions her malice and reuenges were
woond up, so they might be hurried down again upon the head of the King, whom
she cursed on her knees, and hated, even beyond the tenderness of her sex,
many of her own friends for his sake. Therefore to weary his patience a little
more, she set up another puppet like the former, one Peter Warbeck a Fleming,
to act a part of wonder on the Stage of dangerous Innovation, and take upon him
the Title of Richard the fourth Prince of England, and white Rose of the same:
But before I play the Midwife, or (if you will) Physician with her, to deliver
her womb of this monstrous birth of Peter Warbeck, whom she taught the cunning
and audacious impudency of personating Richard Duke of York murdered with his
brother in the Tower by Richard the third some eight year before. I think it
not impertinent to our purpose in hand, to tell you, what this Lambert was, and
wherein he seemed cosened with the whorish smiles of an adulterate fortune by
the only means, and coadiutement of this Duchess of Burgundy.

The first and second years of Henry the seventh swelled to so great a height
of joy, blessedness, and contentment from the rivulets of King Richards
slaughter, the corroboration of his estate, the amity of the Nobles, the
marriage with the eldest daughter of York, the birth of Prince Arthur, the
league and amity of foreign Princes, and the applause of all his subjects,
that the divine providence thought it meet to temper and allay the excess of
the same with some mixtures of fears and displeasure, lest mortality might
presume too far, and man triumph, that his own arm of flesh had contrived
his establishment. So that the Lord Louel; The Lord Louel and Stafford rebel
against Henry the seventh.
Humphrey, and Thomas Stafford, with Sir Thomas Broughton and diverse others,
attempted a dangerous rebellion, and drew into the field a great Army against
the King; whom to prevent, the Duke of Bedford with such forces as could be
raised on a soddain, made have to an encounter; but his fortune was so good,
that with a successful Oratory, not striking a stroke, he prevailed to
dissipate those threatening and thickning clouds of disturbance. For after he
had intimated the hainousnes of their transgression, and nature of their
offenses, which were capital Treasons, and with all inferred the Kings great
mercy, which was willing to pardon their rashness and pitiful ouersights, so
they would desist, and retire peaceably into their Countries: the whole company
surceased, and quietly deposed their Arms; whereupon, the Lord Louel fled, and
the Staffords took Sanctuary in a Village called Culnaham two miles from
Abington: but because the Judges of the law alleged that the Towns of refuge
among the Jews were ordained for other purposes; No Sa^ct^ary for Traitors.
and that Ioab was killed holding by the horns of the Altar, and the places of
privileges in England were never meant to suborne Traitors: Humphrey Stafford
was taken by force from the Town and sent to the Tower, from whence they
brought him to Tyborne, and there put him to execution: His younger Brother
Thomas was notwithstanding remitted, as a man, whom consanguinitie and
brotherhood had rather deceived, then wilfulness and malice against the King
abused. O blessed wisdom! that can so temper Justice with the consideration
of men's frailties, and other maleuolent circumstances to keep her a while from
contracting a brow of revenge upon every offender, and had rather draw some men
to a sweet obedience from their penetencie and newness of life, then cut off
other-some by the strong hand of execution: and thus in other cases of State it
many times chances, that even accessaries are condemned, when the principals
go free; yea, in the highest degree of Treason, which is displaying of colors,
and taking up Arms against a Prince; it is sometimes better taken in action,
then in co^sultation: yet is there no presuming on favor in any of these cases,
nor taking hands with example to trace in the by paths of any indirect courses.

But as mischiefs according to Euripides seldom come alone, and vnd^ vndam
sequitur: so presently upon the neck of this followed a strange and wonderful
trouble, through the insurrection of one Lambert Siminel taking upon him the
person of Edward Earl of Warwick, ^ new Earl of Warwick.
son of George Duke of Clarence, newly come into the hands of the King, and
committed to the Tower. This Lambert was induced (or if ye will seduced) to this
enterprise by the devil himpostures of Richard Simond a Priest, who was so
hasty in his accounts, and forward in his reckoning^, that he presently
proiected, that if Lambert could be King, he should be an Archbishop at least:
O manifest a phrenesis! whereby the way you may observe, that never enterprise
was achieved to the dissipation of Monarchies and translation of Kingdoms;
never mischief set on foot, nor wickedness put on the wings of prevailing:
but from the contriuance and coadiutement of a Priest, and such men as
professed the Religion of those times, as in Histories may appear. But if you
descend into Europe, and come lower amongst our selves, I dare say, that from
the conquest to this hour, all exorbitant actions, dangerous attempts,
terrible enforcements, never heard of Projects, and monstrous commotions to the
effusion of Christian blood, and weakening the glory of our kingdom, have been
achieved, and furthered by the means of Popish Priests and Jesuits, and the
damnable Doctrines and instructions of their associates, mere hypocrites both
in life and Doctrine: yea, that monstrous terror of Christendom, the family of
Ottaman, and religion of Mahomet was blown so big, as you see it in the
furnace of Sergius a counterfeit Monk, and now set on the Throne of
imperiousness through his supportation and assistance in composing the Alcaron.

When this our Priest Richard Simond, or Versepelles Sinon, well perceived and
understood the gentle condition and pregnancy of this Lambert, he wrought most
cunningly upon him, and thought him a fit instrument to hammer out the devilish
plots he proiected, whereby questionless you may apprehend the cunning and
malice of Satan who can entangle men with such strange illusions, The end of
devilish devices our destruction.
and all in the end to destroy them, and bring them to confusion: How else can
any reasonable man apprehend, that a Scholar and Priest should be so
infatuated as to make a silly fellow take upon him the person of a Prince, laid
long before in his grave, and murdered by the tyranny of an unnatural Uncle.
Yet did this nouice go forward with these strange disguises, like a ceeled
dove flying into the hawks feisure by her own wilfulness and blindness, and
as if the Poet should cry out, Medeae faciunt ad scelus omne manus: So was he
led by the hands of this Priest, who was now set upon nothing but wickedness,
and at the last plunged into the Sea of turmoiles.

But the chief original of this disturbance arose from a certain fame, and
report, that King Edwards children were not dead, but secretly conveyed into
some other Country, as Edward surnamed the Outlaw had in former times been
into Hungary, and that Edward Earl of Warwicks should be shortly put to death:
O simple men! and oh vain multitude! that are carried away with every wind,
believe unconstant reports, rely on foolish prophesies, and run along with
uncertain rumors, which makes me remember one of and so changed Lamberts name
into Edward Earl of Warwick, Lambert Earl of W^rwicke sa^^eth into Ireland.
all things serving as well to this as the other: the joy whereof brought him
into such an ecstasy, that he quite forgot the union of the houses, and how the
King had married the eldest brothers daughter, which must needs be a bar to
Warwicks claim, when wise men came to discuss of the matter: but resolved in
the error of his illusion, he strongly coni^ctured, that any of the house of
York were of sufficiency to pull down the strength of the Lancastrian Fa^ily.
Besides, he knew that actio nulla laudata nisi peracta, and therefore some thing
must be done to set the people on work, though it were with throwing
firebrands of division and falsity amongst them, even to the dazzling of their
eyes with smoke, and casting the sparks about their ears: whereupon both
craftily and audaciously he put his business to the trial and sailed with his
pupil over into Ireland, where his Grandfather and Ancestors had gotten such
love and respect, that even the name of Mortimer and York was sanctified and
religious amongst them: For barbarous nations are strong obseruers of
ceremonies and customs, and whatsoever has taken root and impression amongst
them, will hardly be removed or extinguished, as it is too lamentably apparent
at this hour, where the imposturing of Priests has got the upper hand of all
religion and piety, and to swear by Oneales hand, is of more efficacy, then to
call God and Heaven to witness.

Here he smoothly made relation of his own, and the Princes fortunes, and
escape to certain of the Nobility, especially of Geraldines, whom he knew
every way transpo^ted against the present government, enlarging his discourse
with his miraculous preservation, when without law, or other enforcement, he
should have been cruelly put to death by the Usurper, and brought in question
for neuer-^eard-of treason, all which, by Gods providence and his assistance,
was iudiciously prevented, and he had from a mere commiseration of a Princes
estate, adventured himself in that manner, and to such a place, where he
supposed true-hearted honor was resident, and care of religion and humanity
maintained.

Whereupon Th. Geral^ine Lord Chancellor of the Kingdom defrauded by this
illusion, The Earl of Kildare a sauorer of this counterfeit.
under color of succouring the distressed, and performing a work of charity,
received him into his castle, and adding all the ceremonies of reverence and
honor to his very person, assured him of aid, comfort, and supportation. To
this you must suppose was an answer ready, and such an one delivered with so
smooth and attractiue a demeanor, that though he had not been such as he
protested: yet he would have sworn him of ^igh birth and extraordinary
bringing up, which caused him to assemble together all his affinity, and
friends, to whom he related the matter, as it chanced, with intimation of the
glory of the enterprise, and the good service to God and the Church, for
establishing a Prince dejected in his throne, who was the ^rue and only
Plantaginet, left to spring up into a spredding tree of royalty, and therefore
he requested their loyalty and resolved courages to take his part, that the
right heir of the crown might be restored to England, and themselves
eternized to hereafter memory, for so meritorious a work. Little needed a
spur (says our Proverb) to a forward horse, all that saw him believed it, and
such as heard only the report, according to the Poet, -- and errorem vocis, vt
omen, amo, Clapped their hands for joy, that they should be employed in an
enterprise of such wonder and important greatness: whereupon money, horse,
armor, men, and all things else were promised, which might be aduantagious to
such a business. But alas, Ireland was too weak, and of themselves they did
only discover their malice, curbed yet with insufficiency, giving the King
notice, how their wills exceeded their power, and that they were ready to
entertain every opportunity to do any mischief. Therefore they sent over
into England, acquainting many discontented persons with the business: but
most principally, as to the life of their actions, they submitted to Margaret
Duches of Burgundy, sister of King Edward the fourth, for her directions. This
was a woman of a wonderful composure, so adorned with princely qualities,
Margaret Duches of Burgundy entertaineth this quarrel.
and settled in Maiesticall authority, as you shall hear hereafter, that she
was admired of all Europe, and beloved in her own country. Only as stinking
flies lying secretly in boxes of sweet ointments, putrify the same, did an
innated malice, and virulent hatred to the Lancastrian Family, corrupt her
other virtues, and (as it were) thrust up her princely enduments into a mere
bog and poole of dirt and filthiness: For although she knew the blood of
York extinguished, and that the Earl of Warwick was in King Henry's
possession, as taken forth together with the Lady Elizabeth now his wife, out
of the castle of Sherrington in Yorke-shire, under the custody of Sr. Robert
Willoughby: Yet insatiate in her hate and so consequently in her revenge: Nam
ingentes parturit ira minas: She admitted of every motion of disturbance, and
invented means of her own, to set in combustion the whole s^ate of England,
under a hopeful pretense to see the King overthrown and supplanted.

Thus did she pile up together the fire of this disturbance, and countenanced
the matter more with her greatness and power, then all the other accomplices
besides: but if you ask me, how she continued in this authority, being a
widow, amongst strangers, and enemy to so great a Prince as the King of
England: I will answer in a word, and measure out the chief and principal
cord that bound her royalty together. Charles Duke of Burgoine, having married
this Lady Margaret, daughter to Richard Duke of York, and sister to Edward the
fourth, had yet no issue by her, but left one sole daughter behind him named
Mary, which he had by his first wife the daughter of the Duke of Bourbon: this
was married to Maximilian son to Frederick the Emperor, by whom he had two
Princes, Philip and Margaret, which children after the death of the Lady Mary
their mother, this Lady Margaret Duches Dowager so entirely beloved, so
tenderly brought up, so motherly nourished, and so carefully preserved, that
she was highly reputed of, and esteemed for the same: To which, when she added
a politic ordring her affairs, both for the maintenance of their honor, and
administration of Justice in the Commonwealth: so that I may say with the
ancient Poet, Eurip. M^d^^.
Saepenumero iam per subtiliores sermones iui, and ad contentiones veni
maiores, quam conueniat genus foemineum perscrutari, etc. The whole body of
the government willingly consented to be apparrelled and adorned after her
fashion, so that like an absolute Prince indeed, she proceeded both in the
government for their benefit, and the illustration of her own greatness.

In this Orb of reputation thus moving herself, she still shined like a full
planet, from whose influence could proceed nothing but sweet presages, till
stepping aside into a contrary motion of despite and rankor against the King,
as an enemy to knowledge and her own conscience, she countenanced this
ridiculous and yet unhappy coniuration, which by her means grew apace, like
broad and stinking burs, unprofitable in themselves, and spoiling all the
grass about them, until at last they were by a politic hand of prevention
pulled up by the roots, and cast under foot into the dirt. For when King Henry
was certefied of all these tumults and comminations, and knew the deepnesse and
fullness of the channel, in which the tottered bark of this rebellion
steered, he verily supposed the best point of wisdom was principi^s obstare,
and so attempted with all care and vigilance to turn the rage of those
troubles another way, or else to prevent them from flowing over the banks of
his enclosures, and although the collusion and fraud of the invention, vexed
him more then the matter or substance of such a rebellion: yet he moderated
his anger, and with Ianus looked both ways, smiling with one face at the
ridiculousnesse and deceit of the project: and marking warily with another, all
the means to redact the confused Chaos of this molestation to better order and
uniformity, desiring only at Gods hands to prevent effusion of blood, which
must needs be spilt in any settled war and contracted army. Besides, in
well ordered battles, the event was disputable, and many times punishments were
ordained, as well to reduce good men ad correctionem and amendment, as to bring
bad men to ruinam and destruction. And therefore if it were possible, he would
rebate the insolency by other means, and divert it from handy blows and
bloody contentions: whereupon he called his Council together at the
Charter House besides his royal manor of Richmond and there consulted, how to
pacify this sudden tumult and conspiracy, without any further disturbance or
open defiance. This motion of the Kings so tempered with gravity, mercy, and
commiseration, was so well accepted of the whole company, that they presently
applauded his high wisdom, and religious care, and put in practice, whatsoever
seemed convenient for their intended affairs.

They first began with a general pardon, published to all offenders that were
content to receive the same, Articles agreed upon by the Council, to pr^uent
the war.
and remain obedient to the Majesty of England. For although at this very
instant Sr. Th. Broughton, who had obscured the Lord Louell a great season from
the King, was in a manner ready to give him battle, with many friendly
coadiutors and a well-settled army: yet did the King think it policy to
desist from a forcible ouerrunning them; because, as desperate of life or
pardon, considering their former treasons and abuses, they would hardly be
reclaimed in their rages, but now fight for their lives and liberties. Again,
in showing exemplarie Justice upon them, once subject to accusation or
condemnation, he must needs proceed against many, yea such whose offenses in
standing out, could admit of no pardon: and therefore (as I said) he gently
proclaimed the same, which was much auailable to his purpose. For even those,
which favored the Lord Louell most, began to stagger in their resolutions,
when they perceived the Kings benignity, and knew with what lenity and
commiseration he was willing to proceed.

Secondly, they thought it necessary and pertinent to their peace, to show the
son of Clarence personally abroad in the City, and other public places,
whereby the rumor might be dashed out of countenance, and the purblinde eyes of
false opinion extinguished. For such an impression this ^ictiue relation of his
escape had made, that though they beheld him present, yet durst some of them
swear, it was but a devise of the Kings: whereby you may observe the danger
and inconveniences of idle reports, which if they be not strangled in the
cradle with Hercules Serpents, and smothered betimes, ere they come to stronger
groth and life, will viper like after they have received warmth in ones bosom,
fly in his face: Nay, such is the nature of devices in a tottering
Commonwealth, that prohibitions to restrain them, augment them the more, and
they who would have spoken nothing but truth, left to their own liberty; being
prohibi^ed, diuulge more then they meant.

Thirdly, It was determined, that Queen Elizabeth wife to Edward the fourth
should loose her lands, and be deposed from all manner of sway in the
government, because she had voluntarily submitted her self and daughters to
the hands of King Richard, whereby all former contract^ and pretenses of
establishment might have been frustrated, through the inconstancy of a woman:
or as the State pretended a private ambition, or covetousness to set any loome
on work to weaue the web of her own pleasure and contentment, which although
was a heinous crime, and very dangerous to the present Kings peace and
tranquillity: yet, questionless the doom and judgment seemed over rigorous:
Durus fuit hic sermo, and if ever (...) ius proved summa iniuria, it was
verified in this verdict. For questionless they forgot the turbulency of those
times, the rage of the tyrant, the fearfulness of many accidents, the
seducing^ of a King, and the flattering promises of a whole Commonwealth,
wherein stronger judgments might have falled then a woman's: But it should
seem that God has a special hand in the punishment of sins, and disposing
of Kingdoms. For without controversy, if she consented to the murdering of
King Richards wife for her own ease and emolument, if she seemed an adversary
to the good pretended, to England by uniting the ^amilies: or if she proiected
her own advancement in the present glory of the Kingdom, forgetting the loss
of her husband, the murder of her kindred, the slaughter of her children, the
odiousness of the incest, and the curse of Heaven upon crying sins: God would
never suffer such horrible faults unrevenged, but as you hear inflicted her
wavering and inconsiderate timerousnesse with this punishment: For, she was
presently confined to the Abbey of Barmondsey in Southwarke, and there deceased
after she had lived a while in some calamitous distress, and excruciation both
of soul and body: such are all humane instabilities, wordly chances, and the
condition of Princes themselves. Otherwise, she that being a poor widow had
resisted the Kings importunity, and by her chaste and modest behavior attracted
his good will to marry her: she that had founded a College in Cambridge,
bearing her name at this hour of Queens College, for the propagation of
learning, and education of Children and Students: she, that had loved her
husband, and the glory of England, endeavoring all things to the augmentation
of the honor of them both: she, that seemed proud in works of charity, and to
help forward the petitions of honest complainants and distressed suitors: she,
that kneeled on her knees for Clarences liberty, and importuned the King to
remember his brother, by the example of Richard the first, who remitted his
brother John a far greater delinquent; had never fallen so low into the
dangerous pit of a son in laws displeasure, and seen her self generally
maligned through the kingdom: or else, as I said, the revealed things belong
to us, the secret to God, who questionless blew the coals of this
displeasure, to purge the contagion and infection of hi^ heart, which was only
known to himself.

Fourthly, because they knew that reward and hope of gain might do much with
corrupted persons, and irresolute men (as all Rebels were) they proclaimed a
gratuity of a^housand pounds sterling to any one which would present the State
with the body of this counterfeit Lambert, to which they were the rather
induced, because not long before, the Tyrant Richard the third had prevailed
with the like against the Duke of Buckingham, whom his own servant Banister
betrayed in hope of recompense from the State, which is also a custom in
Italy, where the heads of the Banditi are vallued at so many checkinos or
pieces of gold, and so the Zaffi, or other desperate Ruffiani obtain many
preies and booties.

Last of all, it was concluded to have forces in readiness, and an Army
prepared, whatsoever should chance, with all provision and furniture belonging
to the setting forth of the same, and honor of such a Kingdom, that neither
security or presumption one way of their own greatness and establishment,
might make them too confident of themselves, nor vilipending and slight regard
of the contrary, another way too negligent against their enemies.

When all things were thus befitted to the disposing and ordering their
affairs: On a Sunday ensuing, Edward the young Earl of Warwick was brought
from the Tower through the public streets of London to the Cathedral Church
of Paul's, The Earl of Warwick shown in public.
where he remained all Procession time and high Mass, having open conference
with many of the Nobility, especially such, whom the King suspected might have
been induced to the commotion upon the full assurance of his escape. But if he
had asked them why he was imprisoned, or what transgression the King could
impute unto him, to detain him in dures in that manner, and after put him to
death being an infant innocent, without law or reason, I meruaill what they
would have answered, or how the Council themselves would have satisfied a
judicious questioner in that kind: yet by this occasion the imaginations of
diverse were settled, and the better sort believed, that these Irish news were
simulatory, and represented Ixions boasting that he had laien with Juno, when
it was but a cloud, as by the monstrous birth of the Centaures did appear.

But it was not so with all: For, as it often happens in the stopping of a
violent inundation of water, that it causes it the more to rage and make a
terrible noice, whereas running in a deep channel it would go quietly away:
So fell it out in the suppressing of these rumors, and men's hatred and malice:
many were the more exasperated, and by this gentle and saire course to reduce
them, thought all but tricks of policy to deceive them; proouing like
certain kinds of burs and nettles, which soughtly handled sting the more
violently, but hardly crushed together lose their force and energie. Of this
sort was the Earl of Lincoln, John de la Pooles son Duke of Sus^ folk by a
sister of Edward the fourth.
son to John de la Poole Duke of Suffolk; Now Earl of Lincoln takes part
with Lambert.
and Elizabeth another sister to Edward the fourth: who much maligning the
advancement of this Earl of Richmond far his inferior (as he supposed)
took hold of this open Rebellion as a meet opportunity to beat out his own
ends on such a pestilent anuile, and therefore determined to uphold, fortify,
and support this Irish expedition, and take part with his new cozen, who as he
made him self believe, was escaped indeed, for all the pretty conueiances of
the State. This Earl of Lincoln besides his blood, experience, and wisdom
in and great important affaire^, had a priuacy of humor, which many men
excepted against, as fantastical, and precise: For he was so cautelous in his
words, and singular in his phrases and actions, that he would neither swear
nor tell a lie, by reason his communication was still seasoned with sauorie
Parenthesis and breakings off, or if you will Apos^opesis: As I will not
confidently auerre it, but it is so, and so, if men may be credited in their
mortality.

The number amounts to so many, if men fail not in their computations: I dare
not justify it further then one my credit another, with such like. Yea, in his
enterprises he was both curious and Roman like for stricknesse of discipline,
yet valiant enough: To conclude in a word, had not the mantle of greatness
ouer-couered his gesture and actions, the same garb and fashion in an inferior
might have been thought ridiculous: but to our purpose in han^.

When he apprehended a kind of fear and iealosie in King Henry through this
false rumor, he determined with the same water that drove the Mil to drown it,
and out of this fiction to raise a matter of consequence, whereupon he
presently repaired to Sir Thomas Broughton and others, who like the Thieves of
Egypt lying in the reeds by the River Nilus, breaking out upon any hope of
advantage upon the silly passengers, watched all occasions to be revenged on
the King, and yet could render no just account of their discontentments, and
after diverse consultations, concluded to sail into Flaeunders to his Aunt the
Duches, being his Mothers own sister, and so without further commorance, after
the King had dissolved the Parliament at London, put the same in practice,
whither he was well commed with all worthy and kind embraces. Not long after
Francis Lord Louel repaired unto him well accompanied, where for the time
secured, and assembling themselves with this Position, that omnia efficit
consilium, quod and ferrum hostile efficere potest, lest the World should laugh
them to scorn, for prosecuting idle and vain attempts, The Earl of Lincol^e
and Lord Louel go into Ireland to Lambert.
they resolve, that the Earl of Liucolne and Lord Louel should repair into
Ireland, and add a better countenance to the business by their presence, in
attending and honoring their new King with all graceful ceremonies and marks
of majesty: Then, with the power of the Irish-men to bring him into England,
by which time the Duches forces would be ready to join with them. Last of all
to give King (...) battle wheresoever: in which if they prevailed, they might
at their pleasures depose this counterfeit Lambert, and deliver the true Earl
of Warwick out of prison, in all which they proceeded accordingly and with
expedition.

But King Henry supposing he had settled and appeased the minds and unstable
humors of his Nobility, by the personal presence of Edward Earl of
Warwick, began to be less moved and disturbed, yea, as it were secure and
careless of any further malice and dangerous attempt against his estate and
dignity, mistrusting nothing less, then any man to be so foolish and mad, as
to believe that Lambert could be the Earl: so that he coniectured nothing, but
the suppressing of those barbarous Irish, and the sedation of that trouble,
until he heard how the Earl of Lincoln was fled out of the Realm, until he
heard how the Lord Louel was confederate with him, until he heard how diverse
were united unto them, until he heard how the Duches of Burgoine coadiuted the
enterprise, until he heard they had raised a strong party, and were resolved
to give him battle; this somewhat moved him, and exasperated his displeasure:
For when he saw no other cataplasme could serve the turn, but that he must
cauterise the sore, and sere and cut away the putrified flesh of this corrupted
and rebellious body, he determined with strong hand and martial power to do
the same.

Whereupon he commanded his Musters to go forward, The King rai^eth an Army.
and appointed the several Captains a Rendezvous, where the whole Army might
meet, as occasion and his adversaries should incite him, and lest others might
pretend discontentments, wants, debts, devotion, pilgrimages, and such like,
and so go out of the Realm after the rest, he gave order to all Lieutenants
of Shires, Sherifes, Majors, Bailifes, and officers, to search and watch the
Ports and Havens for the going out, and recourse of strangers, or passengers
unlicensed and vnlimitited.

Thus what he could not with the Foxes, he was feign to compass with the Lions
skin, and yet knowing, that Victoria est tota ^ita in bona consultation^, he
did not cast away the other, but when he saw no Council nor policy could
either l^niat their obduratnesse, nor divert their inficious intents against
him, he resolved with an equal strength, to remove the blocks of his peace and
quietness, cast thus in his way by flagitious contumacy and ridiculous
innovation. But some fires are not so easily quenched, as raised or maintained:
for though all his aduises, and good order consorted with success, yet were
they not sufficient to stop the mouth, or hinder the passage of the present
disturbance with deputies or Commissioners: therefore he set forward in person,
supposing they would arrive from Flanders side on some of those Coasts, and so
came to Saint Edmonds Bury: where he was certified, that the Lord Thomas
Marquess Dorcet was coming to him to excuse and purge himself of those
crimes enforced against him, or at least such ouersights, in which he
perfunctorily performed his duty while he was in France. To him was sent the
Earl of Oxford by way of anticipation to intercept at this time his journey:
For the King was too full of troubles and cogitations about the suppressing his
enemies and new raised tumults, and so could not attend his business: The Lord
Mar^ quesse Dorce^ sent to the Tower.
The Earl had only Commission to convey him to the Tower, which when some of
the Council supposed a hard doom, he answered them plainly, What need further
words? If he be my friend, as I am confident thereof, he will be contented a
while to suffer a little reproach and rebuke for my sake: yea, peradventure
pleasure, and contentment. If he be otherwise, it is a place of security, and
would I had my adversaries as safe there, as they would me in the like either
mislike, or contention.

From thence the King went to Norwich, where he solemnised the feast of
Christmas, and so departed to Walsingham under pretense of devotion, as the
superstition of those times coacted. For according to that ancient Poet: Ritus
ver^ extra Iusticiam sunt, Eurip. Bacch^.
reijcientes cultus deorum: It was an instinct of Nature to confess a Deity,
and maintain the Sacrifices and offerings to the same. Now, because the most
part of the World knew not the true God, they invented several Idols to
represent their several Deities, to whom they brought their prayers and
oblations, nor durst they enterprise any business without offertories and
devotion, that their true intents might be acceptable to the God which
commanded them: yea, such as professed Religion, and abused their knowledge,
invented Images and devises to please the natural man; because, with the
reason of Idolater, they would not kneel to the air in va^ne, which was, and
is the errors of Christians both of the Greek and Latin Church. Now because
our Lady was in these times the mediator of the Papists, and the Lady of
Walsingham the most famous shrine of our Country, as that of Loretto is at this
hour for Italy. The King went thither for the impetration of prosperity, in
his affairs, and overthrow and dissipation of his enemies: which finished, he
returned to Cambridge, and so to London.

In the mean while, the firebrand and fuel of this contention, Lady Margaret
Duches of Burgundy, had blown the coals to such a heat, that there were two
thousand Almaines in a readiness, M^rtinus Swart.
under the conduct of Martin Swart a noble man of Germany, and a martial man
by profession, bold, expert, and daring, whom after great rewards, and secret
directions from a well contracted Oratory, she sent into Ireland with all his
company, where they arrived a^ Dublin, and were joyfully welcomed by the Prince
and the other Lords the coufederates, especially the Earl of Lincoln, who
well knew, that no enterprise was to be entertained without men and money, and
good beginnings were the drawers on of success in the end. Thus they made no
more ado, but in the pride and strength of their conspiracy, they proclaimed
young Lambert King of England, withal the glorious titles, and glorious manner
appropriat, as the time and Country afforded, which ended, with other
ceremonies and some circumstances, to set as upright their business as they
could, they protracted no time, but knowing the secret of expedition, which as
their case stood, must be their best friend, prepared for England: the Army
consisting (as yet principally) of high Almaines, and a multitude of beggarly
Irish, which according to the Roman saying, were many men, and few Soldiers.
For their best defenses were Scains and Mantles, and here and there a slender
dart, more fitter for a maigame and to move wonderment, then to oppose against
good defenses, and well ordered troops. Lambert with his Army comes into
England.
Of these the Lord Thomas Gerardine was Captain, and with these and the rest,
they landed for a special purpose (or if you will to vni^e themselves with Sir
Thomas Broughton, one of the chief commanders in this unhappy conspiracy) at
the Pile of Foudray within a little of Lancaster.

These affairs so notorious, and so public, could not have so secret a
passage and contriuance, but the worthy and wise King must needs be made
acquainted with the same: whereupon he dispatched certain horse and
scout-masters, through the West parts of the Realm, to attend the arrival of
his enemies abroad: yea, peradventure to ouerwatch the actions of his friends
at home, as much troubled with the inconstancy of these, as perturbed with the
rebellion of them. Presently after he raised a sufficient Army, over which the
Duke of Bedford, and Earl of Oxford were principal commanders, whom he sent
forward before him, then he came in person to Couentrey, where the principal
rendezuous was appointed, and where he first heard of the landing of his
enemies. Within a while he could fill up a scedule with the chief Traitors
names, and the manner of their troops and proceedings: Last of all, he called
a Council, proposing only two principal matters unto them: First, whether it
were better to encounter with his enemies out of hand, as Achitophel persuaded
Absalom to do against David, and so to dissipate them by maine force and
expedition, according to the Poet: Toll moras: Lucan. lib. 1.
semper nocuit differ paratis. Secondly, or weary them out by delays and
detracting of time, as Quintus Fabius surnamed after Maximus did by Hannibal,
and so sent him far enough from Rome into Brutia and Apuleia, whereupon he was
eternized with, Vnus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem.

The conclusion was, that though many times great Armies, whose fury at the
first rushes could not be rebated, were at last spent with time, expectation,
and many inconveniences; as want of pay, commotions, mutinies, encombrances in
a strange Country, fear of foreign people, mortality, famine, and such like:
yet as the affairs of the Kingdom stood, all speed and an orderly festination
was to be put in practice, lest (like a ball of snow in a moist, cold, and
misty Country, which by often rolling grows greater and greater) they might
augment their numbers with their rage and madness, being so near the Scots
open enemies, and in the north parts dissembling friends: Whereupon the King
removed to Nottingham, and took a field near unto a wood called Bowers,
whither came unto him the Lord George Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, The King with
his army is ready to the encounter.
the Lord S^range, Sr. John Cheny, and many other Commanders, with sufficient
forces and furniture, to encounter better men then heavy Almaines and unarmed
Irish, and so the Kings army wonderfully increased, and had the fullness of his
subjects obedience, to his great satisfaction, and the comfort of all the rest.
For a Prince can in nothing be so well pleased, as in the loyalty, love, and
observation of the subject: nor the soldier contented, as in the amity and
full assurance of one another, especially being all of a nation and language,
to understand the wants of such as would be supplied, and be relieved with the
willingness of those which are ready to perform the same.

In this space, the Earl of Lincoln entered Yorke-shire by easy iournies, for
not ouerwearying his princely Nephew unaccustomed to travel, and after his
precize manner, he both commanded, that no violence should be offered to any
of the Inhabitants, and commended all those, which repaired unto him, using
such humility and affable demeanor, that it wan the hearts of many as yet
unsettled, unto him, and strengthened the love of such, as had already
submitted themselves. Notwithstanding, being much frustrated in his expectation
of many coadiutors, and failing in that sufficiency which he presumed upon,
he began a little to entertain an ill companion to all noble designs, fear
and mistrust; casting up an untoward reckoning of his proceedings in this
manner: To retire back again, were to meet death and destruction by a way
which he looked not for: To go forward, he was yet too weak, the King being
so strong and enabled, which irresolution made the Poet cry out: Non satis est
muris latebras quaesisse pauori? Lucan lib. 2.

And again: -- facilis sed vertere mentes
Terror erat, dubiamque fidem fortuna ferebat:
At last remembering, that audaces fortun^ iuuat, and the adventures of war
are not always bound to numbers and multitude. For King Henry himself had,
not two years before (with a small power) vanquished King Richard and his
mighty army, he absolutely determined to try the fortune of a battle, The
Earl of Lincoln comes forward to Newarck to meet the King.
and encounter with his adversaries, who not only expected the like, as being
in the same forwardness and resolution, but determined to rou^e them, in
despite of any protraction, in what den or place soever, they meant to
obscure themselves: whereupon he marched from York to Newarck upon Trent,
presuming the King to be two or three days journey from him, and so he was
sure not to lose by the bargain. But before he came thither, King Henry was
in his bosom, as understanding his egresse, regresse, and progresses, which he
undertook, and when he came there, was ready to fly in his face. For he
settled himself the night before the battle, approaching within three miles
of the contrary.

The valiant and ouer-hardy Earl of Lincoln, nothing terrified at the matter,
but rather -- duro ad^isit gaudia v^ltu, And came forward apace: yet not in
any ouer-daring manner; but vnstartled in his resolutions, retained his
accustomed gravity, and very near the Kings army, at a village called Stoke,
quartred his forces, and took up the field, with resolution the next day,
Stoke field.
to call Fortune to the deciding of the controversy. The King likewise
prepared himself, and only acquainting the company with matters of necessity,
in an equal and plain field divided the troops, and darraigned the battalions.

To tell you of any signs, wonders, prodegies, prophesies, dreams, devises,
forewarnings, or portentous accidents, making sometimes a cause either good or
bad, would spend time to lose time, and procure small thanks in the pains:
For the superstitious and ignorant would be angry, at the opposition and
repugnancy: and the truly religious offended at the vanity and superfluity, as
abhorring the participation of divine power to Men, Devils, or Angels. To
enlarge my discourse concerning military proceedings, of entrenchings,
fortifications, encounters, divisions of squadrons, ordring the companies, and
setting forward the forces, would prevent me from a fitter and more opportune
occasion hereafter. To discourse of the Captains, the Soldiers
encouragements, the Earl of Lincolnes orations, the Kings forcible and
gracious speech, the intimation of the imposture, and discovery of the treasons
at large, were to prolong the history without further profit, then a poor
invention, which would questionless extenuate the worthiness of the
business: therefore I desist from all extraneall and superfluous discourses,
and apply my self to a more succinct enarration of the matter.

When the field was fully and orderly agreed upon, The armies join.
the precize Earl, as if he would amate the King with a kind of precedence,
set forth the Vau^tguard of his army, and with a manly courage, only animated
the Soldiers, that day to remember his honor, the Kings safety, and their
own lives and liberties, and so gave a sign to the battle, whereat the Irish
began their accustomed cry, or if you will Lullal lullo, which neither
affrighted nor troubled the English on the contrary side, but ministered
occasion rather to laugh at. The Germans perceiving the skirmishes and violent
meetings of these warlike bodies, contrary to their usual keeping of their
stands and close fights, set upon the Kings Vauntguard, and as they were
approved and expert men in many encounters, so did they for the time in all
things, as well as strength and policy could execute, equalling and answering
the English man to man, or battle to battle and for the Generals, had the
Earl of Lincoln been as nimble and deliver, as he was vigilant, valiant, and
wary, he might well have paralleld the best of his adversaries. But to
decipher, and truly to speak of Martin Swart, I shall much disable his
worthiness and merit. For he was heroike in spirit, strong in heart, and of
great ability in body, expert, experienced, and failing in nothing but his
fortune: Eor when the Irish, being most of them (as I said) unarmed, were put
by their light manner of skirmishing a far off, and charged with strong
horses on the Flancks, and as strong bodies of pikes in the Front, to which you
may add the cunning of the Kings artillery, and violence of the arrows, which
fell down like hail upon these poor and naked souls, they knew no way of
resisting or retiring, but were subject to a terrible encounter and slaughter.
And although they held out a while, as long as an equal met manhood
protracted the victory: yet were they so pressed and oppressed, that they
quickly yielded, and shrunk under the strokes of a mightier arm. Again, the
Kings Foreward being full of company and well furnished, continually supplied
with Wings and Archers, and wonderfully encouraged with the high deserving of
the Commanders, at last brake the body of the Almaines, and scattered their
company with a lamentable discomfiture: yet I must needs say, they were first
more terrified to see the Irish killed so confusedly, then exanimated with
their own disasters. The King obtains the victory against the Rebels.
What should I report? it is with staggering troops and dispersed companies, as
with a man falling down a pair of stairs, who never leaves tumbling till he
come to the bottom: so these yielded to the fortune of a defeat without
recovery, and only met honor in the way to a glorious death. Therefore I will
stand the less on descriptions. For never was a victory so soon gotten, nor a
business more quickly ended, many being slain, many taken prisoners, many hurt,
and few or none escaped: the cheifest reason because the Lord Louell, the Earl
of Lincoln, and other Commanders, desperate of mercy or reconciliation, and
wondering at the valiant Germans manhood and exploits, joined with him in a new
adventure, and cried alowd, We will die with thee noble heart, for thou art
worthy to live with Kings and die with Princes, yea to be buried in the fields
of everlasting renown, and so they were as good as their words. For after men
and manhood had acted their parts on this blo^dy stage of fury and slaughter,
they were all found dead in the field, that is to say, the Lord Martin Swart,
or if you will Sward, the Earl of Lincoln, the Lord Geraldi^e, the Lord
Louell, Sr. Th: Broughton, with the most part of the Commanders, and five
thousand Soldiers.

The report was, that the Lord Louell took his horse, and would have fled over
Trent, but not able to recover the highness o^ the bancks, he was drowned in
the river: some also maintain, that the King out of the generosity of his
spirit commanded, that none should kill or hurt the Earl of Lincoln, that
being brought unto him, he might discover the secrets of this mischief, and
the viperous brood of false-hearted subjects: but the soldiers would not
permit it, lest the saving of his life might, by such detection endanger diverse
others, as good as himself, and so killed him by way of anticipation.

After this victory, the King would needs solemnize a thanksgiving to God in
the open field, as well to a^cyd ingratitude, as to give good example, and when
it was urged, he might better defer it till he came to some religious place, or
house of devotion, he more religious assured them, that God was every where,
and neither the place, nor the manner graced the sacrifice, and the
intentiuenesse of the heart, and true meaning of the soul, which he had
learned of the Poet, and so alleged these verses out of Lucan: Estque
Deisedes, vbiterra, Lucan lib. 9.
and pontus, and aer,
Et coelum, and virtus: superos quid quaerimus vltra,
Jupiter est, quodcunque vides, quodcunque moueris?
This the Bishops present durst neither deny, nor would willingly approve for
fear of any diminution in their settled ceremonies and glorious Cathedralls:
but at this time the Kings ardency prevailed, and he kneeled down on the bare
ground in the open fields, and rendered thanks and praises to God. Afterward,
he gave order for the funerals of the dead, shedding tears himself in
commiseration of so many worthy men slain for such an unjustifiable business,
the people yet unmoved, and the soldiers not so much as daunted, though they
saw the bleeding carcasses and wounded bodies, according to the saying,
Exemploque carens, and nulli cognitus aeuo
Luctus erat, mortem populos deflere potentis.
Then he proceeded to the casting up a new accounts of mercy and forgiveness,
proclaiming pardon to all, that would penitently admit of the same, and to his
eternal fame, not only gave Lambert and the Priest their lives, but
commanded, that no man should abuse them with contumely and reproach, as
perceiving the one (for his years) incapable of the apprehension of treason,
or flagicious circumstances concerning the same: the other (for his orders and
profession) to be a privileged person: yet most heroikly and wisely he told
him, that he which rolleth a stone up a hill, may peradventure have it fall
upon his own head, and he that looks too high in a dangerous entrenched
ground, may fall into the ditch. Notwithstanding, for his penance he was
committed to perpetual imprisonment: but Lambert admitted into the palace, and
from place to place, came at last to be one of his Majesty's Faulkoners. Last
of all, he looked joyfully on his own company, and in remuneration of their
loyalty and noble services, spread the mantle of honor over diverse, and
imparted several rewards to the rest, according to their places of eminency.

This battle was fought on a Saturday the sixteenth of June, 1489. and in the
end of the second year of Henry the seventh. And thus was all this high
enterprise of Lady Margaret, The Duches of Burgundy is rather enraged, then
da^n^ed with the news.
represented to a ball blown out of a box of soap and water, which when it
comes to a swelling fullness, at last hursts in pieces of it self, of which
when she was aduertized, and had cause sufficient of exclamation and repining
against her misfortune and disastrous prevention of her malice: yet was she so
far from relaxation or pacifying her hate, that it rather exasperated the
same and made her more forward to contriue more ^ellish proiects, as we shall
see by and by: so that I may well exclaim -- Orabiosamulier!
Quam sit manisesta phrenesis! --
Yea, she set up such a loome out of her pestilent invention, that a man would
think it impossible for a woman to contriue, or prosecute: but that the old
Poet has so long ago told us, Praeterea nos sumus mulieres, Euri^. Medea.

Ad bona quidem ineptissimae,
Malorum vero omnium effectrices sapientiss^mae.
Yet for the time she deplored the miscarrying of the matter, but was not
ashamed to confess, that she cared not by what means King Henry might be
debased.

After this great mischief (like a piece of Ordnance ouercharged) was thus
broken in the fullness, and that with little trouble, tumult, and expenses,
compared to many other wars. The King (as you heard) returned thanks to the
Decider of all controversies, and presently sent word to London of his
prosperity and adventure, seeming sorry for nothing, but the death of the Earl
of Lincoln, assuring the Duke of Bedford and Earl of Shrewsbury, that he
delighted in his humors, and had a determination to have saved his life,
adding yet this by the way, that he was amazed at nothing more, then the
audaciousnes of the man, that durst (so meanly accompanied) set upon such a
great and puiss^nt an army. Therefore it must needs be, that he presumed on
further suppliment, or some breakings out amongst themselves. But seeing it
has pleased God, that we have not only escaped this threatening storm of
commotion and disturbance, but also choked with the dust of their own
dissension, the interior divisions and conspiracies of the Kingdom: Let us
(my Lords) I pray you, be somewhat considerate, touching tumultuous and
discontented persons, that they may be orderly satisfied in their honest
demands, and discre^tly prevented from unlawful ^onuenticles, or associated
as^emblies of vnquiemesse, and murmuring against our government, under color
of hunting faires, markets, hor^^-races, weddings, and such like. Let us also
have a care of our ports, harbors, and havens, to prevent wanderers and
travelers, who from the excuses of devotion to visit Rome, and curiosity to
explore foreign countries, do many time deceive our trust with indirect and
preposterous business.

In this triumphant prosperity he returned to London, and was as well welcomed
to the people, as contented in himself, and so ran forward in the race of all
mundane felicity and maiesticall happiness. But neither his own wisdom, the
vigilance of the Officers, the fidelity of his Nobles, the policy of his
Councillors, the loyalty of his subjects, nor the whole regard of the Common
wealth, could turn the frame of heaven about, nor prevent his destiny,
concerning following mischeefes: Nam fato prudentia minor: That is to say,
could put a scarlet cloth over the sting of that serpent Envy, to pull it out
of the heart, no not out of the mouth, The Duches of Burgundy raises new
troubles.
no not out of the hands of the Duches of Burgundy: but she must be tampering
with the edge tools of devilish despite, and beating on the annile of
malicious calumniation, or (if you will) conspiracy, hoping at one time or
other, to hammer out such a work of disturbance, that neither the King should
be able to quench the flames, nor the Subject daring to disable the enterprise.
Whereupon to prevent all claims, exceptions, and means of distrust, Some
four years after, she set up another I doll of defiance, personating Richard
Plantaginet second son to King Edward the fourth and Duke of York, Another
Richard the fourth
supposed to be murdered with his brother Prince Edward in the Tower, who (as
it were) resuscitated from death to life, or rather reserved by miracle, must
be at last a scourge to the usurping house of Lan^aster, which as it began with
the blood of that innocent Richard the second, must now be revenged with the
destruction of the Conqueror himself. Nor was this barely alleged to her
friends and followers, but exornated with certain illustrations of example and
precept. First, concerniug the wonder and deliverance of the Prince, she
alleged the example of Ioas, kept from the rage of Athalia, and after advanced
to the throne of Iud^. Then for the business of the war and reueng, she
proclaimed her self another Tomyris, who overcame the Persians, and in
recompense of her sons death, and craf^ie: in education pregnant, in
languages skillful: of behavior extraordinary, and of manners audatious,
called Peter Warbeck a Fleming, and yet in scorn nicknamed both by his Country
men, and English Perkin, according to the Dutch phrase, who character cowardly
and timorous yonglings in that manner. His linnage and bringing up, he shall
show you hereafter in his public confession. His actions and proceedings till
then, or if you will, fatal ruin, I will undertake, and (as far as my
ability may extend, or the dangerous business in hand requier) delineat unto
you: desiring all estates whatsoever to behold the attributes of God in this
History, as his power, wisdom, providence, justice, mercy, and what else
belongs to the humbling of mortal men, or pulling on their knees the
proudest presumption, and security: but especially confounding the inventions
of men, and policies of Satan, as laughing all to scorn, that submit not to
his greatness and unmatchable power, according to our Lucan lib. 2 Iamque irae
patuere d^um, manifestaque bell^
Signa dedit mundus: legesque and fadera rerum
Praescia monstrifero vertit natura tumultu,
Indixitque nefas: --


First, a mighty Prince was not only terrified with an Idol and puppet, as it
were, made of straw and painted cloth: but threatened to be shouldred aside, out
of his firmness and throne of Majesty; secondly, when the wheel was ^urned
about, God derided the Devil, and brought this mountain of pride down with a
vengeance, seeing the noble Kings innocence, patience and humility: Thirdly, he
taught all abominable and diabolical practices a new lesson, condemning both
the actors and contriuers, as freneticall, and foolish: Fourthly, he enstructed
the best of men, to consider they were but men subject to the inconveniences of
life, mutabilitie of the World, counterchangeablenesse of times, and
inconstancy of people: Last of all, to make us know that all actions grounded
on irreligious foundation^, and wicked conuentions must needs fail in the end;
for, rather then punishments shall not follow sins, God will scourge one
wicked man with another, as you saw, how all the Monarchs of the Earth were
dissolved, and the Kingdoms of the Gentiles brought to ruin and desolation.
But now to our Story.

After the Duches of Burgundy had fastened on this An^hor hold for her reuenges,
Peter Warb^ck instructed by the Duches h^w to demean himself.
she caused the young man to travel into many Countries to learn as many
languages, whereby he was so perfect in the English, that she reioiced to
think in what a well manured ground she had sowed the feeds of her hopes: by
which occasion the baseness of his stock and birth was so obscured, that few
or none discoue. red the same, or durst detect the secrecy: Thus she kept him
a certain space privily with her self, and used such diligencie and
instruction concerning the house of York, the affairs of England, and the
lignage, descent, and order of her family, that by that time he came to repeat
his lesson, she ve^ily believed he was the same she had supposedly contrived:
and he quite forgot, that ever his first original came out of the D^nghill:
For without any difficulty, or sign of subornation (such a ^orcible impression
ha^h the hope of honor and preferment, according to that common, Honores
mutant moves) he kept such a princely countenance, and counterfeted a
maiesticall roialty, that all others firmly approved he was extracted out of
the blood of Plantaginet, and observed him accordingly: she again grew proud
of nothing so much, as the wonderment of her own handyworke, and that out of
so little ^ cloud, she should raise such a tempest of trouble, and distraction?
but ou^ Ovid endoctrined her, Flumina magna vides paruis de fontibu^ orta, and
she knew she was a woman fit to be such a workemistris.

Whereupon taking an opportunity of the Kings wars (...) France, she sent for
her yongling out of Portugal and privately conueid him into Ireland with sure
and forcible instructions how to inueigle and incite this rusticall people to
admit of him, who besides their natural inclination to rebellion, and
disorder, would now be glad of this new occasion and business to revenge the
slaughter of their Countrymen: And although it might seem to reasonable men,
and understanding apprehensions, that the unhappy proceedings of Lambert and
his counterfeit assoicat (the Priest I mean) might have been a sufficient
warning unto them for ever being taken again in the net of such abuses, or
entangled with the snare of collusion: yet did he so demean himself, that he
made these doubts the very ground of his acceptance: For once again
insinuating with the houses of the Geraldines and Butlers, he played the Orator
with them, and as we say, captare beneuolentiam, thus persuaded them to give
credit and affiance to his false and wonderful demonstrations, as though he
had been the very son of King Edward indeed.

MY worthy Lords, Perkins Oration to the Irish Lords.
and gracious friends (said he) For the generality of my business, I hope you
are not unacquainted with many instances of distressed Princes, flying to one
another for refuge and succor, when an ouerdaring hand of a more mightier enemy
has suppressed them, or cunning insinnuation spread abroad a mantell of more
forcible reasons to admit of his title in prevailing, rather then to look
after the weakened estate of his wronged, and abused Competitor. For so
Jeroboam, and Hadad the Edomite were entertained in the Court of Pharao,
merely from charitable commiseration against Solomon, who had yet formerly
married a daughter of Pharao: and amongst our selves the sons of that valiant
Edmond Ironside, fled from (...) into Hungary, and were there protected, yea,
advanced in marriage for the further and better recovering their inheri^ances:
But what need I go further, then the usurper now regnant, who in despite of
my Father and Uncle of Gloucester, was entertained by the Duke of Britain, and
the French King, and as it were secured from all Treasons and corruption or (if
you will) pollecy of searchers to bring him to destruction: wherein
questionless those Princes, as they obtained a perpetual renown, for so
noble and glorious a charity: so did they repute nothing so meritoriou^, (...)
the extention of favor, and a helping-hand to the perfecting such a work from
princely compassion: Therefore I will say the less in this point unto you,
because you have ever been faithful to my progenitors, and willing to be
counted a Nation for the defense of virtue, and propulsing of injuries. As for
the ill success of Lambert in personating my cozen the Earl of Warwick, and
setting a foot that title, whereby you may be terrified in hereafter
prosecutions: Alas, I confess it was for my sake, and a mere devise to sound
the foord of the troublesome streams of those times and proceedings: wherein,
if my Uncle of Lincoln had any way thriued; you must be assured, though they
would not hazard my person so young; yet it was only to make way to my
fortunes. For small recompense should have stopped his mouth, and vt mayor ^nx
extinguit minorem, my presence quickly have turned the stream, and with the
son exhaled the strength of his me^eor. This trick my Grandfather put upon
the State when he was Governor amongst you, by lack Cade of Kent, who
proclaimed himself Mortimer, to see how the people affected the Title, or
could remember the Genealogy in the truth of his precedencie, as marrying the
daughter of Lionel Duke of Clarence third son of our great Edward the third of
England and Heroos of his time: so that I hope this shall be no bar or
interception either to my interest, or your good will, considering I am now
come in person to offer up my self a sacrifice if need be for you all, and
promise you by the secrets of my birthright to make you a glorious and free
Nation under me, if I prevail by your means.

These words were uttered so audaciously, and yet with simulatory majesty, that
they conceived every thing in his be half, and not once disputed on the craft
or cunning conueiance of the business: but exalted and applauded him with all
reverence and due honor combining themselves with affectionate obedience to his
aid and assistance: wherein that they might be the better induced just at the
same instant, as if honor made have to welcome him, according to our Poet:
Nunc festmatos nimium sibi s^nsit honores. and fortune determined to smile on
them all. Charles the French King in some di^pleasure with King Henry of
England, The French King sends for Perkin.
sent for Perkin out of Ireland, with resolution to make him the royal head of
an Army against England: which although it much animared the Irish to believe
the former seduction: yet it was but a devise of the French Kings to di^ert the
war, which the King of England pretended out of France, and so to enforce him
back again to look home to his own affairs, Howsoever, this our Counterfeit
was not a little revived with such a message, and supposed himself exalted to
heaven in being thus called to the familiarity and acquaintance of Kings and
Princes: so that coming into France accordingly, he was roially accepted, and
after a Princely manner entertained, having a guard assigned him, whereof the
Lord of Congreshall was governor. Hither also repaired unto him, especially
while he lay in Paris Sir George Neuil the Bastard: Sir John Tailer: Rowland
Robinson, and a hundred English Rebels: But alas all these were but smoking
illusions: For on a soddain, -- Ingem^it rector, Lucan. Lib. 7.
sensitque deorum
Esse dolos, and fata suae contraria menti:
And when a peace was to be determined and concluded between England and
France, the French King quickly dismissed the young man and all his associats,
under color of excuse, that he durst no longer protect him against his new
confederat and brother of England; but some others attending upon him, yielded
a more forcible reason for his departure, that he himself suspected how King
Charles would deliver him into the hands of the King of England: and therefore
he beguiled the Lord Congreshall, and fled from Paris by night. But howsoever
this may be disputed, and whether he departed without the Kings consent, or no;
he was questionless deceived in his expectation, and in a manne^ desperate of
success: so that loath to remain amongst such distrustful enemies, he
quietly returned to his most assured friend the Lady Margaret of Flanders, the
master builder of this work.

The Duches before he came, Perkin welcomed to Lady Margaret.
thought every hour from his departure, a whole year, till his return: For
to hear how he proceeded, was a quiet to her thoughts, and to know how fortune
would deal with him a joy to her heart, but to see him a very rauishment: Yet
when she understood how he was abiected and repudiated in the French Court, it
could not choose but be a great agony and amasement unto her. Notwithstanding,
to prevent all suspicion, she seemed at his arrival no less revived, then a
mother is glad for the return of her long absented son, or a person
condemned, for a pardon and restoration to his life and dignity: At his first
approach she received him with large embraces, and hanging over his neck,
seeming to shed tears of joy and comfort for his escape from many dangers and
adventures: O dissembling and deceiuable hypocrisy! that ever a woman should
be the author of such devilish devises and hellish proiects, and yet
ouer-daube her mischievous imaginations with the sugared shows of love, and
regard of pity toward a Prince in distress: but this made Hippolitus long a
go cry out, O Jupiter! quodnam adulterinum hominibus malum
Mulieres, ad solis lucem habit are fec^sti, etc.
and this she had learned of her own Physicians, Eurip. Hippolitus Coronatus.
who in administering of bitter pills, had showed her to roll them over in some
candide powder: and this we have taught our selves out of Gods one mouth, who
in several places of Scripture has puplished wherein a bad woman does exceed
all the creatures of the World.

After this extacy was past, she proceeded with a cunning desire to have him
relate his first miraculous preservation, his after trauails and exploration of
Countries, his next entertainment in Ireland and France, and finally his
resolution to go forward in his noble and necessary intendment for his
inheritance, and recovery of the Crown of England: wherein he proceeded so
effectually, and orderly without stammering or stuttering, that the whole
company verily believed it, and such as were not present, the rather, induced
by the report of others, sorrowing for nothing, but that they heard him not
Vina Voce, and endeavoring what they could to present their personal
obedience unto him: Whereupon when she perceived, how every thing consorted to
her own wishes, she assigned him a Guard of 50 persons in Murry and Blue, and
honored him with a cloth of Estate, and denomination of the White Rose and
Prince of England.

From thence forward the Nobility of Flaunders, and diverse of England with all
obsequious diligence attended him, and from a reverent estimation of his
ancestors, performed all the good offices, which belonged to the exornation of
his majesty, and extention of their own loves and dut^es: so that in a word,
this Sinons horse entered the broken walls of Troy, and feined invention shadowed
with the pretense of verity and truth, prevailed with their credulity, that
they adhibited the more faith and indubitate trust unto it, supposing verily he
had been preserved by the will and providence of God, and so committed to the
trust and custody of some faithful friend, either by King Edward or his
mother, when she was in Sanctuary: relying also on this impossibility, that any
Tyrant would so rebel against God, as infring the orders of holy Church, and
take him perforce from thence, as yet the story manifests was to be done even
by the Cardinal himself.

By this time the same of this iuggled miracle was not only blown over
Flanders and the Territories adjacent, but so rumored in England, England
strangely possessed with the humor of Perkin.
by reason the present government suppressed all public reports, libels, and
writings, that in the very whispering Nam fraudibus euentum deder at fortuna.
It was more forcible, then if it had been published by l^cence and authority.
Thus have I seen a fire smoothered, and enclosed in some secret place never to
be quiet, till it were vented out, and when it came to eruption, made the more
forcible and outrageous noise. For it was here received, as an infallible
truth, and not only believed of the better sort, but entertained of the common
people, who being more liberal of audacious behavior, and less fearful to
offend God, began to confirm it with oaths, as a matter of truth, which
others but barely affirmed, as a report of uncertainty.

Thus began trouble upon trouble, and as the Spring puts forth the buds and
blossoms like the messenger of Summer, and pleasant times to ensue: So did
this fantastical fable thus diuulged, prognosticate following calamity and
consequent desolation. For after it was known, with what honor he had been
entertained in Flanders, and reverenced in other places of Europe: there began
sedition on every side in England, and no man was sure of his friend, the times
grew to such distraction. Some, that were fled to Sanctuaries for great and
heinous offenses perpetrated, discharged themselves, and went beyond the seas
unto him. Some, that had confined themselves to privileged places for debts
and accounts, began to show themselves under his support and combination, then
being safest, when the State is vnsafest. Some, even of the better sort,
through rashness and ^emerity, because they would be counted factious and
stirring, drew apace unto him. Some out of the nature of inconstancy, or rather
impression of melancholy, never to be removed from the opinion they have once
entertained, believed verily, that this Perkin was the indubitate son of
Edward the fourth. Some, through simplicity and easiness of apprehension,
without examining the probability and likelihood of the matter, yielded to any
thing which was told them. Some temporizers, to curry favor in the change of
Princes, persuaded and solicited other to their opinions, that so bringing many
coadiutors, they might not only be reputed of strength and reputation in their
countries, but the better welcomed and entertained with the preuailer. Some,
through indignation and envy, murmuring at their slender advancement, or
grudging they were not more condignely rewarded, for their former pains and
adventures in his Majesty's business, resorted to this new Prince, in hope of
better acceptance. And some ouerwearied with e^se and placability of
idleness, greeuing to see the world stand at a stay, with desire of change,
ran headlong into this fury, madnesse^ and seditious conspiracy: O tempora! o
mores! o flagitiosa voluntas!

But for all this rumor of this twice borne Duke Richard of York, and that
England was divided, and drawn into parts taking, and several factions: so
that the minds of men were vexed, either with the hope of gain, or preferment:
or fear of loss and confusion: Yet was the King and his Council not much
disturbed or affrighted, more then their marvel and modest anger at so many
persons, seeming in their right wits to be seduced, either in the contriuing
such a manifest and notorious lie, or assenting and preparing themselves to
countenance the same without fear of God or men, not once forecasting the
dangerous penalty of treasons, contempts, conspiracies, and practices against
their natural Prince, and so sufficient a Governor. For it was not only a
pernicious fable and fiction, strange and marvelous; but prodigious and
unnatural to resussitate a man from the dead, and with impudent asseueration
to set it forth, and palliate it with the vesture and garment of a professed
verity. But in such cases, be Kings ueuer so wise, nor matters so triuiall and
unlikely, there is no sitting still, nor giving way to the business,
especially there is no rebating an enemy with proclamations, writings, and
prohibitions, who comes forward with the clamors of war, and well settled
prep^ration of offense. Therefore his Majesty thought it the best course, to
look about him, and both by force and policy to prevent the mischief
impending and threatened. For he perceived, how already the fire of rebellion
had taken hold of some of the principal houses of England, whom he knew had
underhand already sent messengers unto Lady Margaret, to understand when
Richard Duke of York would come conveniently into England, that they might be
ready to help and succor him, even at his first arrival.

This business increased to a fullness and ripeness, Sr. Robert Clifford sent
to Perkin.
about the eighth year of his Majesty's reign, insomuch that the confederates
(by common assent and agreement) posted over Sr. Robert Clifford Knight, and
William Barley into Flanders, to be the better assured of all particulars: who
were not only gladly accepted, and lovingly welcomed of the Duches, with full
intimation of the truth, and wonderful delivery of strangeness of the story.
Nec grauide lachrymas continuere genae: But brought to the sight, and sweet,
entertainment of Perkin, who played the counterfeit so exactly, that his words
resembled for cible incantations according to that of the Poet: Vna per at
hereos exit voxilla recelsus,
V^rbaque ad inu^tum praefert cogentia numen.^
For all men praised his virtues and qualities, Lucan lib 6.
with a resolved belee^e of his princelinesse, and Sr. Robert Clifford swore
directly that he was extracted of the blood royal, and the very son of King
Edward the fourth. Whereupon he wrote letters of confidence and credit to his
associates in England, that as the Queen of Saba told Solomon, she did not
believe the half of that which was reported, till she had seen it with her
eyes: So he could not be persuaded to so much, as rumor had preferred, till
he had ouerveiwed him in person: But when these letters were received in
England, the conspiratours caused them to be openly published and diuulged in
many places, with full credence, that it was true and not fained, which was
spoken by the Duke of York, and therefore they need not be afraid to be
drawn to such a commotion, and parts taking: all yet was carried so orderly
and covertly, that the King more then uncertain suspicion, could not as yet
detect any person of name or quality, which troubled him so much the more.

But when he perceived indeed, that this misty vapor was not qui^e vani^hed,
nor the impression put out of the mad brains of the common people; and
understood, how Sr. Robert Cl^fford was privily fled into Flanders, he resolved
on a conspiracy against him, and thought it expedient, both for the saueguard
of himself and his Realm, whose reciprocal good or hurt were dependants one
upon another, The King prepares for Pe^kin.
to provide some remedy for the repressing of this abusing fraud and deceit,
and suppressing the insolency, if it should extend to force and rebellion.
Wherefore he disper^ed several companies both of horse and foot to defend the
sea coasts, that no man might pass or repasse vnapprehended, who had not
license or safe conduct for his iourny, business, and affairs: Then he sent
down the Lieutenants and lustices into their several countries to detain the
people in obedience, and muster the forces of the same, as occasion should
serve. Which order observed, he underhand authorized wise and discreet Espi^lls
into all the cities of the Low Countries, to discover of what Province,
progeny, parentage and estate, this misnamed Richard was descended and
propagated, promising princely rewards to such persons, as could relate the
truth, and (as a man may say) enucleate the secret. Besides, he wrote loving
letters to certain trusty friends, concerning the same; who to do their
Prince and Country service, dispersed themselves into several towns and
cities both of France and Burgundy, where they were certified and assured by
the testimony of many honest persons (amongst whom some of especial wit and
behavior repaired to the town of Tourney) that this fained Duke was of mean
parentage, and truly named Peter Warbeck, which was principally confirmed by
one Nathani^l Osbeck of his own kindred, who as it should seem in hope of
reward, took upon him more then the rest, and exprobrated him for so
countersetting, with this taunt out of the Poet: Sed male dissimulat, Pa^^^
Hel^^^.
quis enim celauerit ignem
Lumine qui semper proditur ipse suo?
And alas, howeuer he is now transhaped into a princely garb and fashion, we of
Peter named him Perkin, for his effeminatenesse and childisnnesse.

With this news and man, the inquisitours returned into England, and made a
true report unto his Majesty of all that ever they knew and heard, both
concerning the assumpted presumption and impudency of the counterfeit, as also
the proceedings and purposes of all the conspiratours, which was seconded by
the faithful letters of especial persons, who had larger commission to make
their commorance the longer out of England: when the King was thus satisfied,
and (as he supposed) to all seeming reasonable understanding, had openly and
apparently manifested it, heresolued to have it further published and declared,
by open proclamations and sound of trumpet, both in the Realms of England and
Ireland, and in the courts of foreign Princes: for which purpose he sent over
diverse Ambassadors to many Countries, especially to Philip Archduke of
Burgoine, Embasie to the Archduke.
and his Councillors, as a place which nearest concerned him. This Embasie was
the charge and commission of Sr. Ed. Poinings, a most valiant Gentleman; and
William Warrham Doctor of the laws, a man of great modesty, learning and
gravity. The general points of their commission had large fields to walk in,
but the principal matters to be enforced had these limitations.

FIrst, to declare that the young man resident amongst them with the Lady
Margaret, was descended of a base and obscure parentage, having falsely and
untruly usurped the name of Richard Duke of York, who long before was
murdered in the Tower with his brother the Prince, by the commandment of King
Richard their uncle, as many men living can testify.

Secondly, that from the probability of the matter and enforcement of reason,
there was no likelihood, that King Richard dispossessing the Prince both of his
life and Kingdom, would leave the other brother still to affright him, and
trouble him in his government.

Thirdly, that Queen Elizabeth their mother, was therefore attainted in
Parliament, for surrendering her daughters into the Tyrants custody, and
committing them into his hands, who, she knew, had already murdered their
brethren.

Fourthly, to desire the Archduke, and the principal Lords of his Council,
not to give any credit to such illusions, nor suffer themselves to be any more
blinded or seduced with impostures, or shadowing appearances of truth.

Last of all, to remember how King Henry had (some few years since) succored
and relieved Maximilian their principal Lord, almost oppressed and overcome
with the foreign hostility of the French King, and intestine rebellion of his
own subjects, and therefore it must be unprincely, and a point of great
ingratitude, either directly or indirectly, to abett or maintain any traitor,
or traiterous practices against him, or the peace and tranquillity of his
Kingdom.

With these instructions the Ambassadors failed into Flanders, and were gently
received, and honorably welcomed by the Archduke and his Council, as
appeared by the solemnity of their audience, and quick dispatch of their
business: wherein Doctor William Warrham in a well penned oration declared the
Kings mind, as before you heard, and by the way touched the malice of Lady
Margaret, saying with the Poet, -- Tantaene animis coele stibus irae: And under
a kind of reprehension, rebuked her inficious disposition against a Prince of
so great worth and deserving, that never wronged her, nor entertained a
prejudicial motive, to inflict either her or hers with any malignant injury;
wherein she only might be compared to a weak breath, which spitting against a
forcible wind, had it returned b^cke again into her face, adding withal
somewhat vehemently, that in her old age, contrary to the nature of all
births, she had brought forth two such detestable monsters, that is to say,
Lambert before disputed upon, and now this Peter, that the like was never heard
of. And whereas, in the conception of children, women were commonly delivered
in eight or nine months, as nature did require, she could not be released in
eight or nine years; nay, the youngest was fifteen years old, before her
threnes were passed, and they justified to be showed openly, and this was not
sufficient neither, but they must be at least extracted of Princes, and able
to give Kings battle in the open field: whereupon he might well conclude with
that ancient Poet: Sedres excellens est, Eurip. Andromache.
contra reptiles bestias
Remedia mortalibus deorum prebuisse aliquem,
Quae viperas and ignem superant:
Sed nullus contra mulierem remedia inuenit adhuc
Malam: huiusmodi sumus hominibus malum.


This oration so effectually delivered, and in the public assembly
audaciously maintained, did not so much trouble and vex the Duches, as aff^ight
and dishearten poor Perkin, who in a manner exanimated, lest his fraud and
pestilentiall enterprises should not only be discovered, but discouraged,
began to be somewhat appaled, and by a fearful countenance seemed to
discountenance both his honor and the action, had not the Duches taken the
cause in hand with a more undaunted courage, and like a true Virago raised her
spirits to a higher pitch of revenge, thus resuscitating her darling, and
answering the Doctor.

MY Lords Ambassadors of England: The Duches answer to Doctor Warrham oran^tion.
For the dignity of princelines commands no less, and awful regard of
Majesty combineth me to such observation: Besides, I am no way offended with
your persons, but your message, wherein I know the Orator has much transcended
his bounds, but speaking for his fee, and doing another man's errand, he is the
more pardonable, and therefore as near as I can re^ember, I will answer
succinctly to every point delivered.

First, whereas you impeach the miraculous and wonderful preservation of this
Prince. In which yet my credit and knowledge of the truth, shall be of
sufficiency to answer all other objections and intercedings, I cannot blame
you, nor him that set you on work; For he well knows that sons ^re to be
preferred before daughters, and ashamed of the ^reachery of his ancestors, he
would put off the blame by a trick of policy in laying as great faults on the
shoulders of his adversary, I mean my brother Richard, whose tyranny and
obdurate heart has only wrought this relenting in me, that say and do what
England can, I will be now the Protectrix of this every way distressed Prince,
and so to conclude this point, assure your King, Permanet in voto men's mea
firma suo.

Secondly, whereas you infer the improbability and unlikelihood of saving the
Prince, being in a Tyrants custody, and determining to murder the King
himself, I answer in a word: I am of your mind, if ever he had come into his
hands: But it is well known, that the Cardinal himself was deceived, and the
child conuayed away, in despite of the maleuolent practices of so cruel an
Homicide. Yet say it had not been so, I hope eldest brothers daughters are
preferred before a younger brothers claim; and he had five Princesses, besides
my Nephew Warwick, to wrestle wi^hall, before he could go out of the lists
with his own triumphs. Therefore it was not the fear of him, that did
accelerate his murder, as you suppose; but his resolution to be King, in
despite of Heaven and Hell.

Thirdly, concerning the dispossessing of the Queen their mother by your
Parliament, I am ashamed of your asseueration, that ever man, and such a man,
whom (as you say) the Heavens protected, should be attainted of inhumanity, to
think a woman might not be affrighted with a Tyrant, when he himself ran
into every corner from his reaches. But say there had been a fault perpetrated
(through the timidity of her sex and tenderness of her widdow-hood) would any
man marry the daughter, and hate or distress the poor mother, in whose
behalf I may well say with Ariadne to Theseus, -- Sinon ego causasalutis:
O^id. Epist.

No^ tamen est, cur tu fis mihi causa necis?
And therefore if there were no more then to revenge her quarrel, I will be
an enemy to Lancaster, while I live, and am no further moved with your
unseasonable oratory then afraid of his menaces.

Fourthly, whereas you would insinuate with our Nobles and trusty friends to
desist from my allegiance, and a^^sting my Nephew in his lawful claim: you
think belike we are as perfidious as your selves, that seem glad of Treason
and turmoiles upon the very sound of innovation: yea, the least advantage or
disadvantage will cause you leave your Prince in the midst of his enemies.

Fifthly, concerning your exprobration of Maximilian for ingratitude, and not
coadiuting your King in his petty reuenges upon France: First, his great
dessignes are not to be compared to your triuiall business, and having matters
of high consequence elsewhere, he could not leave them to attend your weaker
importunities: Secondly, he well knew it was but a folly to assist you in any
business of France; for as fas^ as you got it one way, you would loose it
another, so that you cannot now show any Town or Fort, either of King Edwards
conquests, or Henry the fifts enterprises except Calice, which lying so near
you, you cannot for shame but defend: And thirdly, in my conscience he took
pity of you, knowing you had a war at home to attend, and so were not able
to prosecute both encounters at once: go back therefore and tell your politic
Prince, that whereas words are but women's weapons to his imagination, we
determine to arm our selves, and this Prince by Gods assistance: and my power
shall bid him base in his own Kingdom with spear and shield, and make an
equal combat the decider of both their Titles.

Last of all concerning your inuectiue against women; alas, I smile at your
schollership, and am ashamed at your poor discretion in adapting some
poetical invention out of fury or despite, to your present purposes, when
both the same man, and all others of the same condition are as forward to
commend as dispraise us: For to answer your worn out and thread bare
Tragedian, hark what our Divine Petrarch affirms:

Huius men's terrenar^m nescia curarum: Petr^rck d^ contemptu mu ndi dial. 3.
Coelestibus desider^s ardet: in cuius aspectu si quid vnquam very est diuini
spec^^en decoris effulget: cuius mores consummata honestatis exemp^^^ sunt:
cuius nec vox, necoculorum vigor mortale aliquid: nec incessu^^^minem represent
at.

With which words she arose, and carried away Perkin with such state and
majesty, that Sir Edward Poinings, though he were every way invincible for his
courage, and a known man for wonderful and several exploits, yet seemed
amazed at her Heroical speech, and delicat manner of obstinacy.

Notwithstanding, the Emb^ssadors and Council of Estate often met, and after
long debating the matter, somewhat to pacify the King of England for many
reciprocal gratuities and benefits received, they concluded, that the
Archduke should neither aid nor assist Perkin nor his accomplices in any cause,
or quarrel whatsoever against the majesty of England. Only, if the Duches
continued in her obduratnesse, and would not desist from her feminine rages,
and terrible prosecutions, they were not to oppose against her, nor was it in
their power to let or withstand it: For, she was an absolute governor in her
own territories, and the seignories and lands assigned for her dower, were of
sufficiency to suffulciat her enterprises without their contradiction or
restraint.

When this answer was given, The Ambassador return into England.
they returned again into England with a true relation of all occurrences as
they chanced, and circumstances impending: whereupon King Henry both politic
and charitable (for of all other things he desired, if it were possible, to
avoid effusion of blood and hazzardous danger of battle, supposing that was
the last remedy of curing diseased Commonwealths, as Surgeons do to festered
sores) contrived another work, which although it was branded by some with the
character of traitorous intelligences, yet it served his turn for the present:
and so diverse were appointed to discover the secrets of the contrary by feigned
dissimulation. Of these were two sorts, one to feign themselves Yorkists, and
so learn out what they could prejudicial to King Henry: another, to tamper
with Sir Robert Clifford and William Burley for their return to the obedience
of the King: and concerning the Plot it self, he reputed it justifiable as
authorized by all Authors, ages, and Commonwealths, who set down in their
politic discourses, that -- Fraus est concessarepellere fraudem,
Armaque in armatos sumere iur^ finunt.


These cunning enformers so demeaned themselves, and employed their^time with
such sed^lity and care, Quid. de art amandi. lib. 3.
that they persuaded (though with much ado) Sir Robert Clifford to desist from
this foolish and dangerous collusion, which had neither sure ground nor
foundation to stay it self upon: but Master Barley could not be diuerted at
this instant, till within two years after almost tired out with expectation
after P^ter Warbecks fortunes and success, he returned of himself to the
King, and had pardon both for life and liberty. The others likewise proceeded
so effectuaily, that they had sure notice of especial persons confederate, and
adjured to this blind and foolish project; of which they presently informed
the King, who by that means could not only personally name his home enemies,
but to prevent the worst, did as personally attach the most principal: that is
to say, Sir John Ratcliffe, the Lord Fitzwater, Sir Simon Mountford, Sir Thomas
Thwaits, William Dawbney, Robert Clifford, Thomas Cressenor, and Thomas
Astwood: with these were diverse religious persons imprisoned, as William
Rochford Doctor of Diuiuitie, and Thomas Poines both Friars Dominicks, Doctor
William Sutton, William Worsley Deane of Paul's, Robert Laiborn, and Richard
L^ssly, with diverse others vnapprehended; of whom, some took Sanctuary, and
some fled into Flaunders to Perkin: But of those whose liberties were
constrained, Sir Simon Mou^^ford, Sir Robert Ratcliffe, and William Dawbney
were beheaded, as powerful, factious, and chief authors of the conspiracy:
the rest were pardoned, especially the Priests, who were in those times for
their orders sake sequestered from public executions, what offenses soever
they perpetrated, which made them so forward in all facinorous actions; and
others so superstitious, as to believe any thing they either proiected, or
attempted, from which hypocritical and deceiuable manner of life, all Poets
and Philosophers themselves have had both general and particular inuectiues
against Priests, augures, soothsa^ers, figure casters, and religious persons,
both for their profane lives and seducing vanities: so that Euripides amongst
many other places concludes in his Ephigenia, Vatiduum omne genus ambitiosum
malum est: and all the Kingdoms, and times of the World, Eurip. Iphigenia in
aulide.
hau^ smarted through the pride, covetousness and malicious wickedness of
Priests and Friars, and lastly Jesuits, as I said before: But to our Story.

Although the Lord F^^zwater was pardoned his life for the present: yet coming
after to Calice he was beheaded for attempting to escape by corrupting his
keepers, and so to go to Perkin: whereby this strange and intricate work so
busied his Majesty, that he would often compare it to the conquering of Hydra,
a beast so privileged by nature, that as one head was struck off, seven others
grew in the place. For his turmoiles both at home and abroad increased, and he
seemed as much tormented with the suspicion of bosom friends, as affrightings
of foreign enemies, which so exasperated him, that as he supposed to prevent
the worst, considering Maximilian King of the Romans had ieofaild with him in
his wars against France and that Lady Margaret with the Flemings had supported
Perkin Warbeck against him, he in a kind of re^^nge banished all Low-Countrie
men, and their commodities out of the Realm, with restraining the Merchant
from having access into any of their Cities: But alas this was to no purpose,
and in truth rather a custom of anger, then secret of policy, as if a man
because his finger torments him, should cut off his hand to ease himself: for
they did the like by us, whereby the Mart being kept at Calice, and no vent
elsewhere for our Merchandise, many poor housekeepers complained for want of
work, many rich men murmured and were compelled to lessen their families, and
abate their retinue, many Merchants felt the loss, and the Tradesman cried
outright, because the Esterlings brought all manner of manual work ready
made into the Land, A riot (...) the Esterlings.
and took from them both their labor and customers, whereby a riot was made
upon them at the Stilyard, and the Mayor of London with the principal Officers
had much ado to appease the tumult, and this was the ninth years disturbance.

The King thus turmoiled every way, repaired for diverse reasons to the Tower of
London, whither shortly after came Sir Robert Clifford unto him, partly
trusting to the Kings promise, partly mistrusting his own company and Perkins
weakness: But the chiefest polecie of his resiance in the Tower was to secure
himself, and lay hold of all others suspected, or accused in this conspiracy,
who thither resorting to the Council, might with ease and without any tumult
be committed to prison, as it presently fell out: For after the King had
admitted Sir Robert, and insinuated with him in excellent positions of
Divinity, and morality by way of disceptation, urging the love and favor of
his Prince in his true obedience and reconciliation, he not only related the
manner of Perkins proceedings, but on his knees with teare^ in his eyes
discovered the matter to be weak and impossible, if it had not factious
supportation from some of powerful houses of England, and very near his
Majesty's person, whereof though many were punished, and the rest dissipated
and divided: Yet Sir William Stanley remained unsuspected, and his heart
trembled to accuse him: But when the King heard Sir William Stanley named, Sir
William Stanley accused.
he started back amazed and in a manner confounded, that Sir Robert was afraid
he had done him more harm in the relation, then good in the detection.

At last he burst out, what my bosom friend? my Councellor? my Chamberlain?
then I see there is no trust in men, nor as the Psalmist says confidence in
Princes: For as we shall not want instruments to go forward with what
enterprise we please, as David had his Ioab: so shall we not lack enemies let
them be never so careful and desirous to favor the least deseruer, but I may
well now cry out, Heu cadit in qu^nquam tantum scelus! and with the kingly
Prophet exclaim, It was not mine enemies abroad, but my companions, and such
as eat at my table betrayed me: What Sir William Stanley? he has the
government of my Chamber, the charge and controlment of all that are next my
person, the love and favor of our Court, and the very keys of our treasury.
He made me a conqueror in the field, and by his hand I scourged tyranny out
of his Throne, therefore it is impossible, and I cannot believe it. But when a
second reply brought him to the sight of fairer particulars, and that he saw
the smoke, though it was but a smother, came from some fire, he quickly
recollected his spirits, and with these verses of Euripides, set himself down
at the table of prevention and reposednesse: Ex amicis autem alios quidem non
certos video amicos
Qui vero sunt recte, Eurip. Herefu^^^^.
impotentes sunt vt iuuent:
Talis res est hominibus ipsa infoelicitas,
Qua^ nullus vnquam (quicunque vel mediocriter amicus mini)
Assequatur amicorum examen certissimum, --
The same night upon better consideration my Lord Chamberlain was restrained
from his liberty within the quadrant Tower, and confined to his own Chamber
for a season: but when the crime was openly proved, and the Council had as it
were with a charming hand of Hecate turned his inside outward, and found all
his excuses to consist in distinctions, and his reasons of defense manifest
astipulations of the matter, he grew out of all patience, and knew not what to
say, or to do: For one way like an Noble Prince commiserating his subjects, he
feared lest his brother Lord Thomas Stanley the life of his first roialty, as a
man should say take it grievously. Another way he misdoubted, lest in remitting
the fault, some other might abuse his lenity and mercy, and be the bolder to
run forward in the dangerous courses of further treasons: At last by the advice of his Council, and general vouge of the Court, severity (considering
the peril of those days) took place, Sir William Stanley beheaded.
and mercy was put back: so that after a solemn arraignment, he had judgment
to dye, and accordingly was brought on the 16. of February to Tower Hill, and
had his head struck off.

The principal point of his enditement consisted in this, that Sir William
Stanley swear and affirmed, that he would never fight nor bear Armor against
the young man Peter Warbeck, if he knew of a truth that he was the indubitate
son of Edward the fourth, whereupon arose a coniecturall proof, that he bare
no good will to King Henry. Again, the principal motive of his distasting and
murmuring at the King, was for being denied the Earldom of Chester, when his
brother Lord Thomas was invested with the sword of Derby: yet the King besides
many rewards, and other great offices made him his chief Chamberlain; what
should I say? it should seem ambition had blinded his eyes, and perverted his
judgment. For he still thought on the benefits which the King received from
the love and service of his family, never remembering the compensation and
gratuities returned back again to him self, supposing that his vessel of
oil should still be filled to the brims, or else he harped on a Machiuilian
position, thankfulness is a burden, but revenge is sweet and reckned as
gain. But it should seem, that in possessing King Richards treasure at the
conquest of Bosworth field, which King Henry franckly bestowed upon him, and
the command over the people in the Country, he grew proud and elated, and so
vilepended the King: or from a continual melancholy reuerberating mislike and
hate upon his staggering conceits, he more and more over burdened his heart
with rage and despite, which as you have heard unpurged, vented out those
words of disloialtie to the loss of his life; or in a word according to that
of our old Tragedian: Animorum Jupiter vindex est minis superborum, Eurip,
Heraclida.
the searcher of heart^ was weary of his tumors and ingratitude, and so took
the Kings cause in hand and upon good inforcement thrust him into the house of
destruction. Otherwise, he could not choose but remember, how not twenty year
before the Law had interpreted the profuse and lavish speeches of a Grocer
named Waker, dwelling at the sign of the Crown in Cheapside, who bad his
son learn apace, and he would make him heir of the Crown, meaning his
house he dwelt in, for which he was adjudged to die: nor forget the Story of
Burdet the Esquier, within whose Park King Edward hunting, a white tame Heart
was killed by chance, which he had brought up by hand, which when Burdet heard
of, he wished the horns in his belly that had moved the king to come first
thither, for which he was drawn, hanged and quartered. Thus you see there is
no jesting with Princes, nor distasting them in troublesome times, nor
presuming in such cases on their clemency: For our Ovid tells us: Non ideo debet
pelago se credere, si qua
audet in exiguo ludere cimba lacu:


After this, many rumors and libels, yea defamatory speeches both concerning
the landing of the new Duke of York proclaimed all ready in Ireland, Richard
the fourth: and the Kings present fear and proceedings, were spread abroad,
which compelled as strange prohibitions, yea, punishments and reuenges,
according to the example of that judgment, Libel. ^rs hanged.
that hanged Collingbroke for a rhyme against the usurper: The Rat, the Cat, and
Louel the Dog,
Rules all England under a Hog:
so that he was farther enforced to have many politic searches through the
whole Realm for such offenders, and as many strong Guards and Watches for the
defense of the whole Kingdom, by which when he perceived the care, vigilancie
and good will of the Subject, he entertained a greater fullness of contentment,
and showed a better alacrity of spirit then his former griefs would remit:
Then he advanced Giles Lord Dawbuy a man of wisdom, experience and fidelity,
to be the Chamberlain of his house, and have the Guard of his person.
Afterward he took order with the City and Merchants of the same, and had
their faithful Oath and protestation to look to it, and all the places of
their traffic abroad, concerning such things as might be offensive and
prejudicial to the Kingdom. The next thing he took care for, was the
manning of the Cinqueports, and fortifying diverse havens, with a stict
commanding the Lieutenants and Justices of each Shire, to repair into their
Countries, by which good order observed, he grew somewhat secure and bolder, to
show himself in public assemblies undaunted, or any way discomfited.

But this was yet far from the fullness of his establishment, as long as
Ireland remained corrupted, and swelled again in every place, Special
Commissioners sent into Ireland.
with the ouerblowen reports and rumors of Perkins royalty, to which each
traiterous ear lay open, and abused heart went quite away with the nouelty.
Whereupon he resolved on the necessity of purging and cleansing the same, and
determined to perform it by new Officers and honest Surueyors: So he sent
thither with powerful authority, Henry Deane late Abbot of Langhton to be his
Chancellor, and Sr. Ed. Poinings (with a sufficient preparation) to be Lord
General of his army. These had a large Commission, under his Deputy the Earl
of Kildare, to suppress all innouations, and spare no offenders: For it was
such a time, that mercy and favor would rather embolden men to abuses, then
lustice offend with extremity. Besides, the Majesty of Kings was not to be
controlled, either in their favor or reuenges, but they would simply command,
and have the subject honestly to obey, with which instructions and the doctrine
of Probity out of our ancient author, Probi enim viri officium est, and
Iustitiae i^seruire,
Et maleficos punire vbique semper:
They arrived in Ireland, and disposed of themselves accordingly.

Now because the country was already infected with a superstitious credulity
of the preservation of one of the sons of Edward the fourth, and that the
barbarous Irish once believing a thing, would never be diuerted by reason or
persuasion, they proceeded the more cautelously and circumspectly in their
business. First, assembling the Nobility and better sort before the new
Chancellor, who with all attractiue demeanor and elocution, persuaded them
not only to persist in obedience to the King, and loyalty to the government,
but to aid and assist his Majesty's forces under Sr. Ed. Poinings, with their
power, strength, and ability, especially against such rebels, as rather
through factious malice and wilful reuolts, then blindness of error or folly
had adhered unto Perkin, or any of his associates, in which they knew there was
reason and sufficiency of enforcement. For amongst themselves, the petty Lords
would endure no competition of sovereignty, and their Law-Tanist established
him, that for his heroike actions deserved to be honored, and by his worthy
endeavors obtained the jurisdiction and inheritance. So that their own Priests
could tell them, Ex paruis magna comparantur, and if it were so in petty
governments, what was it in mighty Monarchies and with regardable Kings,
amongst whom: Nulla fides regni socijs, omnisque potestas:
Impatiens consortis erat: --
Therefore to avoid the imputation of treason, and the fearfulness of
revenge, from a Princes incensed indignation, he advised them to a tenacity
and strong continuance in their loyalty.

To this their answer was, as soldiers in a camp after a mutiny, sad looks
and small repentance: fair words, but little performance. For they all
promised assurance off aith, but no man determined the due performance, only
the better sort, or (if you will) such as dwelled within the English pale, or
had been enobled or enabled by the Prince, to live in richer form and
eminence then others: answered directly, they would acknowledge no King but
Henry, nor supreme Lord, but such as should be extracted from the union of the
marriage between the two Roses, and to this they were the rather emboldned,
because the Earl of Kildire being Deputy, seemed to maintain their
submission, and justify their intents: so that Sr. Ed. Poinings had little to
say at that time, more then he hoped in the confidence of their promises, and
relied on their worthy integrity: yet I dare swear, if he had been examined
on his conscience, and brought to the bar of discovery for his thoughts, he
would have cried out with the Poet: At paucos, Lucan lib. 5.
quibus haec rabies aucthoribus arsit,
Non Caesar, sed Poena tenet: etc. --


Whereupon he prepared all his forces against the wild Irish, to whom, as he
was informed, diverse of the rest had fled for succor. I could here enlarge
this discourse with a topographicall description of the country, and
conditions of the people, because I have personally ouerlooked their actions,
and been a passenger even from one side of the country to the other, but the
times are full of the experience of many men, and diverse explorations have
discovered the unswept corners of this savage and superstitious people, whom
never man shall see civil or once affecting the handsomnesse and wealth of the
other parts of Europe, till either it grow more populous, or the King be as
willing as he is able, to extirpate (as it were by the roots) the Bards,
Rimers, Harpers and Priests, that hang upon them, and stick close unto them,
as some deformed wen in a straight growing tree, or (if you will) venomous
cankour, which will in time either eat out root and rind, or (for the time)
disfigure and disproportion the proudest comeliness of the best Cedars in the
forest. But to our story.

Sr. Edward Poinings, The North of Ireland.
according to his commission, marched into the North: But alas, he neither
found France to travel in, nor Frenchmen to fight withal? Here were no
glorious towns to load the Soldiers home with spoils, nor pleasant
vine-yards to refresh them with wine. Here were no plentiful markets to
supply the salary of the army, if they wanted or stood in need, Here were no
cities of refuge, nor places of garrison to retire unto in the times of danger
and extremity of weather. Here were no musters ordered, nor Lieutenants of
shires to raise new armies: here was no suppliment either of men or
provisions, especially of Irish against the Irish, nor any one promise kept
according to his expectation. Here was (in plain terms) boggs and woods to
lie in, foggs and mists to trouble you, grass and fern to welcome your
horses, and corrupt and putrify your bodies: here was killing of kine, and
eating fresh beef to breed diseases: here was oats without bread, and fire
without wood: here were smoking cabins, and nasty holes: here were boggs on
the tops of mountains, and few passages, but over marshes, or through strange
paces: here was retiring into fastness and glins, and no fighting but when
they pleased themselves: here was ground enough to bury your people in being
dead, but no place to please them while they were alive: here you might spend
what you brought with you, but be assured th^re was no hope of relief: here
was room for all your losses, but scarce a castle to reserve your spoils and
treasure. To conclude, here was all glory and virtue buried in obscurity and
oblivion, and not so much as a glimmering of hope, that how valiantly soever a
man demeaned himself, it should be registered and remembered: which makes me
consider, what that worthy Politician writes of the Sweuians and Heluetians in
those days, and apply them to these times and people: Heluetij, Sueuorum
mor^scu Politian^.
Vsipetesque atque effera corda Sueui,
Queis vnum praedaestudium, ac durare subipsis
Corpora fluminibus, telque assuscere dextram:
Non vrbis, non cura domus, agriue colendi,
Venatu ducunt vitam, atque e lacte liquente,
Et quod Mart sibispoliat^ ex host parari^t:
Bella placent, fususque hostili e corpore sanguis.


Whereupon the worthy General, with his other Captains, began to complain,
but knew no way of redress, his men died, the Soldiers were slain, the army
decayed, the Irish insulted, the auxiliaries failed, and not a man which
promised assistance, came in to help him: so that he was enraged at the
perfidiousnesse, and compelled to retire to Dublin, all exasperated to
despite, by which he aims at the highest in his displeasure, laying the
fault and blame of his preposterous proceedings on Gerald Earl of Kildare, The
Earl of Kildare accused by Sr. Edward Poinings.
his Majesty's principal Deputy, who remembering his own greatness, could not
confine it within a little circuit of patience; but answered this our Captain
somewhat like himself, that he was as loyal to the King as he, as serviceable
as he, as loving to his country and crown of England as he, and so defied
him to his face, which added only fuel to the former fire, that the undaunted
Soldier apprehended and attached him of high treason, which seemed an
insufferable piece of business, and had it not been within Dublin, or some
principal place under the English command, an Herculean and intricate Labor.
But thus is this great Earl under arrest, and without any more ado carried
into England to answer the matter.

But when he came before the King and Council to be examined of treason, and
matters laid to his charge, either his innocence was a Perseus shield against
this Gorgons head of calumniation, or his wit and delicate judgment brought
him out of the labyrinth of those troubles, or the times afford^d not such
severity, and proceedings, or the King had other matters to think upon, or
indeed it was no pollecie to rub these new soars with rude hands, according to
the rule Horrent admotas vulnera cruda manus: For he was quietly dismissed,
thanked, rewarded, and of Deputy made Lieutenant, and so sent back again,
upon the engaging of his hononr to withstand the landing of Perkin, if ever he
came into Ireland.

By this occasion the King was without fear of battle, and determined his
progress about Midsommer to visit his mother, lying at Latham in Lancashire,
still wife to the earl of Derbie: But as he was preparing his journey, The
King progress intercepted upon report of Perkins lan^ding.
news came of Perkins landing in England, which a while diuerted him, and
enforced his retardance from his first determination: For in truth, when the
Duches of Burgundy had notice of all the Kings proceedings both in England and
Ireland, and that the principal offenders were condemned, and executed, and
confederats dissipated, and ouerwatched: she found too late her own
slacknesse, and the first misfortune of the King of France his retractions,
from assisting the Prince: For whether I name Peter, or Perkin* or Warbeck, or
Prince, or Richard Duke of York, or Richard the fourth, all is one man, and
all had one end. And questionless, if at his first repairing into Ireland, he
had made for England, while that rumor had possessed the people, and the
looking after nouelty busied them with strange and impossible hope, while every
one stood amazed to gaze after wonders, while the conspiracy was in growth, and
had diverse factious Nobles to form it to a larger birth, while the soldiers
desired to be doing, and men grew weary of ease and quietness: The business
might have plunged the Kingdom, and success took a flight with strong wings
indeed, whereby you may perceive the sweetness and benefit of expedition in
all dangerous business, and resemble unjustifiable actions to theeuish
bargains, which either must be made away in the dark, or hastened apace in
the proudest market place according to the saying: -- Praceps facit omne
timendum
Victor, (...). lib. 9.
and in nulla non creditur esse Carina.


Notwithstanding, our great Duches remained undaunted, and in a manner of
scorn to depend upon others promises, she adventured on her own power, and
determined to put him under the wings of Fortune, let her ouershade him as she
pleased: so gathering his forces together, and furnishing her ships with a
sufficient company, and some valiant Captains, she sent him to sea, and only
prayed to the wrathful Nemesis, as author of her revenge, for success and
thriuing in so glorious an attempt. Here were of all nations and conditions of
men, Bankrupts, Sanctuary-men, Thieves, Robbers, Vagabonds, and diverse others,
who affecting liberty, rapine and spoil, desisted from honest labor, to be the
servants of dishonest rebellion. His fortune (as we now profanely abuse that
term) drove him on the coast of Kent before Deale-Castle, Perkin comes to
Kent.
where being becalmed, he cast anchour, sending diverse on shore, to certify
the Inhabitants of this arrival, preparation, purposes, and well ^ furnished
army, and to put them in mind of their ancient liberties, privileges, and
undaunted courages, which have given battle to Kings, and made their own
peace with Conquerors. But alas, this oratory flew like a shaft without a head;
and they had learnt other lessons of stability and loyalty, as finding the
sweetness of peace, and happiness of government. Notwithwanding, they called
a Council, and I believe, if they had been fully resolved, that he was the
true Prince indeed, they would have entertained the motion. For some of their
fingers itched to be doing, but suspicious of his original and former
weakness, and wisely apprehending, how shame and revenge dogged treason and
rebellion at the heels, they concluded to continue firm and faithful to the
State, and so with a kind of policy to allure them to land, they sent diverse
to Perkin, with flattering hopes of their assistance, while they were indeed
mustering of forces to surprise them as fast as they should land: which when
Perkin perceived, he imagined that all could not be well, or consorting to his
expectation. For in this point, his wit and experience served him to understand
thus much, that common people and multitudes stirred to sedition, use no solid
counsels or settled discourses: but come flocking with their fullness and
forwardness to assist their friends, and follow their pretenses, according to
Euripides description of a confused company and rebellious army: -- In infinito
enim exercit^
Incoercita turba, Eurip. Hecuba.
nauticaque licentia
Violentior igne: malus vero, qui mali nihil agit:
Whereupon he durst not land himself, and was sorry so many of his company
were on shore, but seeing there was no remedy, he sent others, if need were,
to releue them, or bring them back again to his ships.

When the Kentishmen beheld such a rabble of strangers and dissolute persons,
and wisely foresaw that there was no no man of honor or eminence to give credit
to the attempt, they presently coniectured, that they came rather to spoil and
forage the coasts, then to relieve a distressed Prince in his right: and so
running the right way indeed, stood firmly for their Country, and set upon
them as they were straggling up and down in the villages, enforcing the better
sort and better armed back again to their boats, and surprising such, as
could not maiutaine the quarrel, and had presumed too far from the maine
battle, Perkins company defeated, and he driven back to se^.
of whom they took 160. prisoners, yea, the principal Captains themselves,
while they labored to persuade the retreat, and to gather them together after
some martial form of resistance: viz. Moumford, Corbet, Whight, Bets,
Quintine, or Geuge: who were all brought to Sr. John Pechy high Sheriff, and
so raled in ropes, like horses drawing in a cart, sent up to London, and there
executed in diverse places adjoining to the City, whereby Perkin had matter of
disconsolation for the time, and time enough to sail back again into
Flanders, to entertain better advice and more company.

The King (as you heard) understanding of this attempt, left his progress and
came to London, where assured of this good success, he sent Sr. Richard
Guilford into Kent to thank the Sheriff and the people, for their loyalty,
obedience, and valiant circumspection, which had so quickly dissipated his
enemies, and quieted the Country, giving present order to his Navy to scowre
the narrow seas, to the Province to keep the coasts, to the Watches to fire the
Beacons, to the Captains to prepare their Soldiers, and to all sorts to
attend their several charges, according to the ancient and laudable custom of
the Kingdom.

When Perkin and his Captains were arrived in Flanders, and found, how their
former delays had been a great obstacle, and hindrance to their proceedings,
they resolved to remedy the same in their following courses, and by the
contrary celerity and speediness to wipe away the blots of their weakness,
and faint proceedings, as if they had learned of our Poet: Sic agitur censura,
Ovid. 6 6. ^a^torum.
and sic exempla parantur,
Cum ludex, alios quod monet, ipse facit:
Notwithstanding, because they were now resolved, that the King taking notice
of this onset and attempt, would fortify the Coasts, and be in a readiness
with well prepared forces: they determined to sail into Ireland, Perkin
resolves for Ireland, and so into Scotland.
there to augment their company, and corroborate their pretenses, which
accordingly was effected, and the entertainment yielded him a little comfort
and satisfaction: but because he well knew the Irish were weak and unarmed,
and so unable to prevail against the strength of England, and still out of
countenance, and quickly daunted, when they were drawn from their bogs, and
woods to solid battles and strong charges, contrary to their flight,
skirmishes, and running encounters, they thought it more meet and expedient to
pass into Scotland: Gens semper inuisa Britannis, and there make trial of a
new friendship, casting up a forward account of their happiness, in this
manner: First they were assured of the natural and general hatred between
the Nations, which upon very small occasions and probable opportunite, would
burst out into flames of despite. Next, they proiected, that the nature of the
business would allure them to his assistance, upon hope of vainglory, and a
reputation of so charitable a work, as to help a Prince in distress. Thirdly,
they relied on this hope, that if no other cause would be inductiue to his
supportation, yet the desire of spoil would quickly incite them to war
against so plentiful a Country. Fourthly, they persuaded themselves, that the
Scots had a good opinion of the house of York ever since the cruelty of the
Lord Clifford against Rutland, for which they utterly abandoned Henry the sixth
and the Queen. And last of all, they concluded to promise them the surrendering
of Barwick, and to enlarge their territories if he prevailed by their
assistance, which was a sure motive to draw them into any action whatsoever:
whereupon he departed from Corck and landed on the West of Scotland, from
whence he prepared himself to go to the King with some solemnity, wherein his
instructions prevailed with his fortune, because for the most part the mass of
people are guided by shows and ceremonies, rather then matter of substance and
truth, and so he traveled to Edinbourgh, whose Citizens unaccustomed to such
glorious shows, began already to commiserate his fortune and distress: yea,
the King himself assembled his Lords and Courtiers, as their manner then was
to entertain him and give him audience; which when Perkin perceived to fall
out to his good liking and hearts desire, he thus framed his speech unto him,
or if you will reduced his instructions to a manner of attracting Oratory.

MOst mighty and renouned King: Perkins Oration to the King of Scots.
Iudicis officium est vt res, ita tempora rerum quaerere -- and therefore I
come not to you altogether like a cast away or banquerout, to recover my estate
by a cosening agreement with my creditours for a trifle, when there may be
sufficient to pay the principal: nor like a runaway from a hard-hearted
Master: or if you will, to take my liberty the better, to cast of the yoke of
honest and civil obedience, where there is a duty and necessity of service
imposed: but as a stranger subject to shipwreck, and the hassardous endurances
of a tempest, I am enforced to your refuge, as much enduced with your Princely
delight in deeds of charity and hospitality, as my own wants or recovery: I
might add your famous actions, renown, and heroicke commiseration of a
dis-esteemed Prince, but Pudor est vlteriora loqui: And although I may confess
my self to resemble the man in the Gospel that fell amongst thieves, whom
diverse looking upon passed by without relief: yet, at last he found one
Samaritan to pay the cost and defray the charges of the Surgerie: so have I
done a worthy aunt, friend, and noble kinswoman to acknowledge her afflicted
Nephew, who has helped me accordingly: so that I make no question, that from
the example of a woman your Princely commiseration and powerful coadiutement
shall open their larger embraces, considering that you above all other Princes
have been made acquainted with the distractions of our family, and from time
to time know how the house of York has been dilacerated, and torn in pieces
by the cruel hand of Tyrants and homebred Wolves, which whether it were the
permission of God or the secrets of his divine Justice; I will not now dispute
upon: Only, I must be bold to say, that when my father obtained the Crown, and
revenged his fathers wrongs and death, there were signs of Gods favor and
assistance in the fair issue prepared, and sweet fruit of such a flourishing
tree, namely two sons and five daughters, who were simply committed to the
tutelage and protectorship of an unnatural Uncle, who proved a tyrant and
destroier of our blood and progeny, so that I may well cry out as Ariadne to
Theseus: Mitius inueni, quam te, genus omne serarum: Notwithstanding, Most
mighty King, how ever my Princely Brother miscarried, as swallowed up in the
jaws of cruelty and slaughter, It should seem the murderers were affrighted
at that they had done already, and desisted from a full prosecution of the
Tyrants command, or confounded with compunction of spirit spared me, and
secretly conveyed me out of the hands of such an homicide and blood sucker (for
so I hope without offense I may rightly term him) and although by this means
and the supportation of high borne Buckingham he obtained the Diadem: yet did
God follow him with the swiftest pace of wrath and anger, and at last I must
needs say, scourged him with rods of vengeance indeed; for he presently lost
his son, and his friend and coadiutor lost himself: what afterward chanced
unto me, as my strange deliverance, my bringing up in Tornay under certain
supposed parents of honest reputation, my travails into foreign Countries, my
adventures abroad, my endurances at home, with such like; it would be to
tedious to relate, and therefore I desist to put you now to further wonder and
amasement at the same, because I have them as it were registered in a scedule,
which at your Princely pleasure you may ouer-looke, with the Duches and
Councels of Burgundies hands to confirm the same: so that I confess when the
King of France sent for me out of Ireland, I was in a manner secure of my
estate, and thought upon no further assurance, then his gracious apprehension
of my ind^bitate claim. But it should seem (most gracious King) that you are
reserved for the glory of this business, and everlasting memory of so
remarkable an action, wherein I submit my self, ships, and people to your
guidance and direction, Oh do not then annihilate my confidence, nor reject my
demands. For next to the high controuler of men's actions, I have put my self
under the shadow of your supportation, and altogether rely on the unity of your
willingness and power, to bear me through the difficulties of this passage.

When he had made an end and given them cause of some amasement at his years
and tenderness of experience to deliver yet his mind so freely, The King of
Scots resolves to assist Perkin.
and with some illustration of words and readiness of gesture, the King without
any further scruple or diffidence cheered him, telling him plainly he would
assist him, and what-euer he was, or intended to be, he should not repent him
of his coming thither, and so concluding with a speech of Medeas to Jason:
Hinc amor, hinc timor est, ipsum tim^r auget amorem: he gave order for his
entertainment accordingly, whereby he had time with his wearied people to
repose himself, and the King, occasion to think of many matters: yet rather
for custom then to be diuerted from his resolutions, he called his Council
and disputed the matter with them; they again, (as it happened to Rheoboam, and
shall be withal the Princes in the World) grew to contradiction, and divided
themseelues, some standing for their Country, some for their private
affection, some to please the Prince, and some to enjoy a good opinion of
polecie, and wisdom. The grauer sort and of greatest experience disannulled
all the former intimation of the Prince, with the impossibility of the
business, as if he were but a bare assumer of titles indeed. The quieter sort
and such as had smarted with the dissentions between England and Scotland
disclaimed any further warr^, and were weary with that which had passed. The
younger sort apprehended it, as a worthy enterprise, and though it had but
color of commiseration, yet considering he was befriended from the Emperor,
King of the Romans, and the whole state of the Low Countries, it could not
choose but help them with many friends. There was another sort, who confessing
the poverty of their Country, concluded, that by this means by forraging,
spoiling and getting good booties in England, much wealth might enrich them
without loss or hindrance of their own, and so cared not how the war began,
nor how long it continued. The last sort consisted of such, who because they
would have their credit enlarged from an opinion of Statesmen, and high
reaching capacities, argued (as we say) on both sides, pro and contra, and from
a kind of Enthymema raised profit and emolument to the Kingdom out of their
sophistry: That if the Duke were assisted and prevailed, Scotland was sure to
confirm their own conditions: If he were countenanced, though not prevailing,
the King of England would accord to any offers or demands, rather then King
Ieames should take part with his adversary and so strange a competitor.

Whereupon it was resolved, that without further diffidence, or drawing the
Duches of Burgundies business in question, the King should entertain the
Prince, who presently honored him accordingly, and caused him to be proclaimed
the Duke of York, showing him all the favors the Country could afford, and
affording him such entertainment, as they imagined was both befitting his
person and condition: He again, as if that spes bona dat vires cheered
himself, and assumed a new kind of behavior, both tempered with gravity, and
yet commended for cheerful and well becoming: so that by the way of solace
and inuitation to pleasure and delight, he hauked and* hunted, yea, the Ladies
of the Country graced the Court, and came with all conueniencie and befitting
their estates to the City. For understanding so great a Prince; in
possibility to be one of the mightiest Kings of Europe; not full eighteen
years of age, young, wise, and in the complete strength of beauty, was
resident amongst them, they conceived matters beyond the Moon, and thought
themselves happy if he would fancy or fasten upon any of them. What should I
say, although with the Poet: Tarda solet magnis rebus inesse fides: Ovid.
Epist. Helena Paridi.


Yet here was no mistrust, nor any way given to fear and displeasure, but as
the time, business, and place afforded, shows, masks, and sundry devises
invited him to his contentment, and the present ouercomming all pensiveness:
so he courted with some, danced with others, The King of Scoss provides Perkin
of a wife.
iested with the rest, and was acceptable to all, till at last (the King giving
way to the motion) he fancied the Lady Katherine Gourdon daughter to Alexander
Earl of Huntle nigh kinswoman to the Crown: and because she should not think
him barren of education, nor heart bound to his ambitious designs, he took an
opportunity thus to discover his love unto her, and good opinion of her.

Lady (said he) and the first of Ladies, that ever usurped my liberty, or
taught my tongue to pronounce the accent of affection or liking, If I proceed
not so passionate as your sex expects, or you may imagine is the custom of
Courtiers, I pray you impute it to the multiplicity of my business and
greatness of my affairs: besides, it is not seemly with Princes to betray their
high spirits into the hands of deceit and ouerworki^g fancy; yea, foppishnes
either of words, or gesture: yet, concerning your person, I can say with Paris
to Helena. Si tu Venisses pariter certamen in illud,
in dubium Veneris Palma futura fuit:
and touching my good will; If I live, I will make you as great in the World as
my self, and desire no more but that you keep you within the limits of love
and obedience, that our children may be our own, and the Commonwealth rejoice
they be not mocked or deceived with extra^eall enheritors: What I am, you now
see, and their is no boasting in distress: what I may be, I must put it to the
trial, and submit to the divine providence: If you dare now adventure on the
adversity, I swear to make you partaker of the prosperity; yea, lay my Crown
at your feet, that you shall play with me as Apame did with Darius, to command
and I obey: Take me now then into your embraces, and I will adore and reverence
your virtues, as you commiserate my misfortunes: Oh give me leave to say no
more, lest I be transported to vndecencies; be now conformable, and let me be
the servant of your desires, and you shall be hereafter the Mistress of my
performances; If I prevail, let this kiss seal up the contract, and this
kiss be a witness to the endentures, and this kiss, because one witness is
not sufficient, consummate the assurance, and so with a kind of reverence, and
fashionable gesture, after he had kissed her thrice, he took her in both his
hands crosse-wise, and gazed upon her with a kind of putting her from him and
pulling her to him, and so again and again rekissed her, and set her in her
place with a pretty manner of enforcement.

The young Lady pleased as well with the complement of his behavior, as the
matter in hand (which was the hope of one of the greatest Diadems in the World)
whether as lovers, who in a simpathy of liking, applauding any thing from their
amorosos, seemed pleased with the very accent of his voice, and variety of the
Court-ship: or unaccustomed to such wooers, she remained glad of the
opportunity: or taught beforehand what to do, she resolved to cast away all
peevishness and nicety: or indeed ravished with the thing proposed, she was
loath to be silent, considering she was pleased, and could not be displeased,
considering he had begun so kindly with her, and therefore answered him with a
pretty blushing modesty, to this effect.

My Lord, If I should act a true woman's part, The Ladies answer.
I might play the hypocrite in standing a loofe off from that I most desire,
and cry out with Ariadne against Theseus: Non ego sum titulis surripienda tuis:
whereupon some resemble us to lapwings, that make a great ciulation farthest
from their nests: But I mean not to deal so with you, but come as near as I
can in my answer to that which consorteth with reason and probability: If I
were then absolutely at my own dispo^ing, I would thank you more then I do,
and think you for your gentleness and fair demeanor worthy of any creature,
or thing you could desire. As for your disclaiming deceitful words and
flattering Oratory concerning our beauty, comeliness, virtues, and such like
baits to draw us into the net of self-love, and amasement: I like it the
better, and wish that all women were of my mind to marry upon fair and
reasonable conditions, and not be hurried away sometimes to their overthrows
with the violence of passion and affection, which is the best excuse they can
make for their folly, yea many times simplicity. But you see I am the Fathers
daughter, and the Kings cousin, so that I will in no sort prefer my own will
before their directions, and disposing of me: If then it pleases them to
hazard me, or (as you please) to bestow me in this sort, I shall be proud to
call you mine, and glad if you vouchsafe to esteem me yours: Lay then your
foundation on them, and you shall see the frame of the building erected to your
own liking: For believe it, such Wards as my self, may well be resembled to
delicate plant^ in rich grounds which either grow too rank and out of order
for want of pruning and looking to: or thrive not in their situation for lack
of refreshing and manuring, all which is reformed by the discretion of a
skillful gardner and advised ouerseer: Therefore noble Sir repair I say to the
Master of the family, leave is light and know their pleasures for your
admission into this Nursery, and then shall I be glad to be a flower of your
own choice, whether it be for profit, pleasure, or exornation.

What need more words? the marriage was consummated, Perkin marieth the Lady
Katherin Gourdon daughter to the Earl Huntley.
and poor Perkin transported in his own contemplation for joy, that if he
proceeded no further, his fortune had conduced him to such a harbor, kissing
the ground, which he trod upon, and swearing, the very place was the seat of
his Genius: Ipse locus misero far volebat opem: But when he more and more
perceived, that the Scots (like a piece of wax) were rolled together by his
warming hand, and fashioned to what form he pleased, he then made no
question to hammer out his designs on the anuile of prevailing, to their
everlasting glory, and his establishment: yet herein he went beyond himself,
and deceived both them and himself, by warranting powerful aids in his
assistanc^, from all the parts of the Realm, as soon as he should set footing
in England: notwithstanding, they prepared all things for an invasion, and
every man was ready to please the King and pleasure the Prince: yea, they were
so forward, that in hope of gain, spoil, victory, renown, and revenge, they
cared not whether the Dukes title were good or no, and so with a well appointed
army and sufficient forces, they marched toward the confines and borders of
the North. The Scots invade England in the behalf of Perkin.
But the King (out of discretion) loath to make more haste then good speed, and
understanding policy, coniecturing that the English, by reason of Perkins being
in Scotland, might always have an army in readiness, or raise sudden troops
to lie in Ambuscado in the borders, by way of prevention: sent forth diverse
Stradiots and Scowtmasters, to discover the Country, and the behavior of the
English, who returned with full assurance of the coasts cleerenesse, and (for
any thing they saw) they might make both incursions and excursions at their
pleasure: which although in some cases made the King the rather to wonder, as
if England were secure from any idle project, or indeed scorned Perkins title
and claim: yet because it was generally accepted for good news, he would not
be a contrary amongst so many: but made the more haste, and so with fire and
sword, as if he did arma vir^mque canere, entered Northumberland, proclaiming
the title of the Duke of York, by the name of Richard the fourth, and
promising both pardon and preferment to all such, as would submit themselves to
the yoke of his obedience: the denial whereof was accompanied with such
spoil, cruelty, and insulting, that never before or since did they ever
triumph over us, or proved so tyrannous: so that I may well cry out, as the
Poet does against Scilla. Intrepidus tanti sedit securus ab alto
Spectator sceleris: ^ucan. lib. 2.
miseri tot millia Vulgi
Non piguit iussisse mori: congesta recepit
Omnia Tyrrhenus Sillana cadauera gurges.
Wherein questionless they had gone forward, but that they perceived no aid
or succor to come from any parts of England to restore this titular Duke.
Besides, the soldiers (full of spoil and blood) would go no further, till
they had sent their presents to their wives and children, or returned
themselves to gratify one another, after such a victory: but in truth the King
resolving it would be revenged, determined rather to retire with this assured
victory, then to tarry the nuncupatiue Dukes unsure and uncertain proceedings,
and so reculed into Scotland again.

Some remember, Perkin lamenteth the English slaughters.
that at this time (though it was but a very simple policy) Perkin used a
certain kind of ridiculous mercy and foolish compassion toward the English
people, as though that rather moved the Scots to the retreat, then any thing
else: whereupon, lest his cozening and illusion should be discovered, by
reason so few resorted unto him, he thus complained to the Scottish King, and
(as it were) exclaimed of himself. O wretch and hard-hearted man that I am,
thus remorselesse to forage my native country, and purchase mine enheritance
with such effusion of blood, cruelty and slaughter. For now I see, ere this
businrsse can be brought to any good pass, houses must be fired, countries
depopulated, women ravished, virgins defloured, infants slain, the aged
murdered, the goods rifled; and the whole Kingdom subject to deuastation,
which (to my grief of soul) I must needs deplore. Therefore, great King, I
request you from henceforth, do not afflict my people, nor deforme my country,
in such a lamentable and remorse^esse a manner. For questionless, I shall
never endure it with a peaceable soul and conscience, and had (in a manuer)
rather lose my part and interest therein, then purchase it with such loss and
excruciation of mind, especially effusion of blood and barbarous enforcement.

Surely, The Kings a^^^swer.
replied the King of Scots half angry, and more then half mistrusting his
dissembling, yea fully resolved on his weakness and pusillanimity: -- fletus
quid fundis inanes? Lucan. lib. 3.

Nec te sponte tua sceleriparere fateris?
Vsque adeo ne times, quem tu facis ipse timendum?
Me thinks your care is rather ridiculous then super fluous, to be thus
dolent for another man's possessions: yea, I see not, but your claim is so
remote and disanulled, that it must be an Herculean labor to settle you in any
of their cities and petty provinces. But for calling England your land and
Realm, and the Inhabitants your people and subjects, it is as wonderful to
me, as displeasing to your self, that in all this time, neither Gentleman, nor
man of worth has extended a daring hand, or (if you will) commisserable arm
of assistance toward you: nay, though the war was begun in your name, for
your sake, and within your Realm, of which you say you are the indubitate
heir, and invited to the same by your own people and faction.

Alas, Perkins answer
replied the Prince, I confess as much as you say: but if it will please you
to acknowledge the truth, the falling back of the King of France, yea, when I
was in the speed of my journey, the failing of many promises to mine aunt the
Duches of Burgundy, and the defect and protraction of my business, by the
loss of an hundred Lords and Knights, some in their liberties, some in their
lives, some from their own good motives and intents, and all from their true
hearts and endeauours, by the Kings forces and vigilant eye over them, has not
only deceived my expectation; but (in a manner) perverted my fortune Besides,
you know with what difficulty the nature of adversity and men in distress,
attain unto any credit and estimation: so that we and you both have had
woeful experience of many great Princes deposed from their thrones* and left
friendlesse, succourlesse, and quite destitute of relief in the hands of their
enemies: and therefore, as mischief and misery are of mine old acquaintance,
so am I not now unprepared to entertain the same, but must submit to the
calamity, and attend the appointment of the highest God, concerning my lowest
deiection, and so I conclude with an ancient saying of Euripides: -- Turbam
enim recipere me puduit, Eurip. Helena.

Vt oculis viderent hunc meum turpem habitum
Occultans praepudore meum infortunium: quando enim vir
Habuerit male magnus, in ineptias
Caedit deteriores, eo qui fuit dudum infoelix.


Although this came roundly of, and sauoured some what better then the former:
yet the King replied not at all, but was content with his first reproof, being
more fearful every day then other, that this intricate business would be a
work of wonder, and to fashion the lump of such deformity, to any handsome or
substantial proportion, must be dangerous and prejudicial for ever to the
Scottish crown.

After the Nobles had been thus startled in Northumland with the clamours of
the people, and saw the Inhabitants fly every way from the fury of the Scots,
they fortified their holds, They prepare in England against Perkin.
mustred their forces, followed the enemies, and certified the King of all this
enterprise and invasion, who not a little abashed at the same, as more fearing
the natural subject for starting out of the sphere of his allegiance, then any
foreign comet in the greatest radiance, and presages, he presently took order
for the repressing of each tumults and insurrections: but assured of the Scots
retreat, and that they were returned laden with spoils and great riches, he
resolved upon another course, having in the mean while so great occasions of
displeasure against Scotland, that all men either to please themselves, or
animate the King in his willing reuenges, cried out to arms, to arms, and
this was the eleventh years work.

The twelfth year began with a Parliament, both for the settling the
uncertain affairs of the Kingdom, and the obtaining a subsidy, or other
disbursements of money for the furnishing an army into Scotland, to which all
the Nobility and Gentry opened willingly their cofers, and cheerfully their
hearts, exclaiming against their immanity, and proclaiming their loyalty and
endeauours, to prosecute them with all revenge, that durst so affright the
Kingdom, and affront the peace and tranquillity of the Commonwealth. Of this
army, was Giles Lord Dawbney, the Kings Chamberlain, made Lieutenant General,
a man of no less wit then experience, of no less experience then hardiness,
of no less hardiness then moderation and government. But see the changes of
human life, and the mischeefes to which the best men and greatest Princes are
subject, as if the Poet were again to cry out: Heu non est quic quam fidum:
neque certa faelicit as: As he was marching forward with his forces,
Arebellionin the west diuerteth the army out of Scotland.
a strange innovation called him back again. For, as if Fortune meant to play
the wanton with Perkin on the one side, and bring him (as weesay) into a fools
paradise, and misfortune on the other side try the Kings patience: A new
rebellion in the West, had like to have been as a heavy burden on his
shoulders, and set in combustion the whole Commonwealth. For when the
Parliament was dissolved, and that Commissioners were speedily sent to gather
in the money, this excande scens populus, to whom such taxes and impositions
was a kind of drawing blood from their very life veins, began to rebel,
especially the Cornish men, inhabiting the remotest parts of the Kingdom
westward, who not only complained on their own penury and wants, as living
in a barren and sterile soil, overcome with labor, watches and toils in the
mineralls, and getting a poor maintenance out of the cauerns of the earth,
with fearful endurances: but threatened the officers, denying the taxes, and
began temeriously to speak of the King himself: yea, when there seemed by the
Justices and others in authority, a dam to be cast up against this fearful
inundation, they desisted from womanish exclaimes, lamentings, and eiulations,
and fall inconsiderately to malicious calumniation, threatening the Council,
and naming Thomas Moorton Archbishop of Canterbury, and Sr. Reinold Brey, as
principal directours and setters forward of these impositions against them,
saying plainly, it was a shame, that a small incursion of the Scots, which was
not only customary, but as soon extinguished as kindled, should raise such
exactions, and incite the Kingdom to insufferable turmoiles, with a general
war and tumultuous hurliburly: to which things, when the Commissioners would
have gently answered, and honestly maintained the Kings purposes and
prarogatiues, Thomas Flamock a Gentleman learned in the Laws, and Michael
Joseph a Blacksmith, took upon them the defense of the Commons, threatening
without further reasoning the matter, both the receivers, and all such, whom
they employed as inferior officers under them.

By which occasion, according to that saying, Res vehemens multitudo, improbos
cum habuerit praefectos: he became a monstrous head to these unruly bodies,
exhorting the people to arm themselves, and not be afraid to follow them in
this quarrel. For they intended neither hurt to any creature, ^^mock and
Joseph Captains of the Reb^lls.
nor spoil to any place, but merely a reformation of the disorder, and
correction on such persons, as were the authors of their grief and vexation,
and when any seemed to impugn and reprove these seditious and unreasonable
courses, affirming plainly, that (from all examples and times) treasons and
commotions have ended with lamentable effusion of blood, both of the authors
themselves, and many innocents made accessaries, through constrant and wicked
instigation, they were called base dastards, cowards, fools, and lovers of
ease and surquedry, more then renown, and their countries honor and liberty:
so that what with shame of taunts and rebukes, and what with fear of the loss
of their lives and goods, they united themselves to this outrageous company,
and made up a strong party well armed, and too well enstructed: for the
Captains not only praised and extolled the hardiness of the people, but
rewarded such as assisted and relieved the soldiers, whereby (after a general
muster of 40000.) they came forward to Taunton, where they slew the Provost of
Perin, principal Commissioner for the subsidy in those parts, and from thence
to Wells, intending to go forward to London, where the King was resident, and
such Councillors as they maligned.

O rabies inaudita! O wretched and abused people! that think of nothing but
present rages, nor once admit of any providence, to consider of following
punishments, what ever sudden events contriue, but in their disobedience
against God* their Prince and Country, resemble a violent sea, a burning
torrent, a tempes^uous wind, all which (with extremity and impetuous force)
spoil the trees, ouerrunne and swallow up the lower ground, consume all
things, and in the end leave the mischief to the wringing of hands, crying of
the people, and deprecations of the better sort, who impute such vengeance to
the power and Justice of God, that punishes sins, and will not suffer
disobedience and horrible villainies unrewarded. For never rebellion prevailed
in their greatest forwardness, nor ended without insufferable damages wrought
by their unruliness, which rather tended to thefts, robberies, spoils and
slaughters, then reformation or honest coercion of disorders. Men in authority.
As for their motives and excuses for such facinorous attempts, breaking out to
find fault with men in authority, and audacious inuections against the
government: Alas, neither can they tell, what to demand, or what to redress,
when it shall come to true deciding indeed. For a very confusion will hinder
their resolutions, and not knowing wherein to proceed directly, ask
indirectly that which may not be granted. As for the Governors themselves, let
them be never so good, they shall be sure of enuyers, and finders of faults,
let them be never so bad, they shall have flatterers and supporters; let them
be indifferent, and the good which they do shall not be so well accepted, as
the ^ad they procure maliciously taken: yea, remove whom you will, the persons
may be changed, but the faults will remain, and so the Prince be pleased, and
men's private humors satisfied, who regarded the Commonwealth, or helped a
poor man for charities sake: yet I must needs say, that many times honest
Governors, instead of obedience have good will, and whosoever loves his
Country without collateral respects, may sit down with a safe conscience, but
not vnscandalized or maligned of some of his own rank. Therefore I would
have all generous spirits, either to love virtue for virtues sake, once placed
in authority, and (in despite of the world) stick close to the sides of
religion and equity, though persecution and troubles do follow: or disclaim
the affecting such transcendent places, allaying the thirst of ambition with a
quiet potion of reposednesse and contentment, and leaving the vanity of foppish
observation to vain glorious fools, who are not only called so by God
himself, but peradventure reputed so even by such as do them reverence, and
fat themselves in the well soiled pastures of their go^ernment.

But to our story.

When the King was aduertized of these troubles and exorbitant attempts, which
gathered like a clowd, threa^ning a tempest round about him, and saw into what
perplexity he was now detruded, having war on every side, he compared
himself to a man rising in a dark night, and going into an^vndrest room,
hitting his head against that post, running against that table, meeting with
his shinnes such a stool or form, and staggering up and down against one
block or another: and so stood (for the time) amazed, not knowing what to say,
what to do, or with whom to find fault, till with a kind of sigh he vented out
this saying of Euripides. -- Similes sumus nautis, Eurip. H^ra^lida.
qui
Tempestatis cum effugerint saeuam vim,
Prope terram appulerunt, deinde a terra
Flaminibus pelluntur in pontum iterum.
But to complain of God or men, would rather aggrauate his grief, then
procure his redress, and therefore although he well knew that Princes were the
tennis-bals of fortune, and subjects of mutabilitie and alteration, whereas he
must submit to the divine providence: yet, he also understood there was no
iying still in this deploration without the ordinary practice of such remedies
as God had appointed in their several workings, and therefore prepared his
Armies either to bring this disturbance to a quiet atonement, or whip the
Rebellion with the scourges of fire and sword: But when again he considered
the Scots were his enemies, and must be suppressed; the Western Rebels were at
his doors and must be repugned: France was wavering, and must be looked unto:
Flaunders threatening, and must be appeased: Perkin Warbeck lay at advantage,
and must be watched; yea, ouer-watched as indeed the principal firebrand,
that set all this on a blase, and in the midst of these hurliburlies came over
Ambassadors from the French King, who must be answered; he grew somewhat
perplexed again, till shaking off all the hindrances of his amasement, he fell
to practice and orderly performances.

Whereupon he called his Council together, and they without any great
difficulty determined the business in this manner: To attend upon the Scots, The
Armies in England raised.
Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey, a puissant and politic Captain, prisoner at
the overthrow of King Rich. the 3. and within two years set at liberty, and
after John Lord Dinham made high treasurer of England, was appointed to muster
the forces of the County Palatine of Durham, and the borders round about, and
so atte^d that service. To repress the Western Rebels, the Lord Dawbney with
his whole power prepared for Scotland, was recalled to march against the^
wheresoever they encamped; to look unto France; Calice and Guisnes with the
Garrisons were much augmented, and provided for. To prevent Flaunders, the Navy
was prepared, and the Staples for the Merchants settled: To keep Warbeck from
coming into England and ioining with the Rebels, the whole nobility combined
themselves, especially the earl of Essex, and Lord Montioy; who came of
purpose to London to offer their service to his Majesty, and so all places were
looked vnt^ with a vigilant eye, and manned with strength of soldiers: and to
answer the Ambassadors of Charles the French King, he sent honorable persons
to receive them and conueigh them to Dover, and there a while to detain them,
till some of these tumults and rebellions were extinguished and suppressed,
which indeed was so wisely and politikely handled, that none of the Ambassadors
were troubled so much as with the rumors of these commotions.

But see the horror of despite, and with what a contracted brow misfortune can
look upon Kings themselves: so that a man may well say to this Rebellion, as
Ovid did to Cupido in his first book of Elegies: Sunt tibi magna puer,
nimiumque potentia regna:
Cur opus affectas ambitiose nouum:


For, as these Rebels and Cornish men departed from Wels, they entertained for
their chief Captain James Twichet Lord Audley, Lord Audley Captain of the
Rebels.
whose countenance and authority in the Country strengthened them much. For,
by this occasion they went without intermission to Salsbury, and so to
Winchester, and from thence into Kent, hoping for further and further
assistance; but they were deceived in their expectation: For the Earl of Kent,
George Lord Aburgaue^y, John Brook Lord Cobham, Sir Edward Poinings, Sir
Richard Guilford, Sir Thomas Burchier, Sir John Pechy, William Scot, and many
others with a well mustred army were not only ready to defend their Country
from al mischief and destruction: but determined to offend them in their
facinorous attempts, and prejudicial intrusion, which loialtie somewhat
rebated the forwardness of the Cornish-men, and they began to suspect
themselves, being so far from their Country, and remote from any supply.
Notwithstanding, loath to dis^earten their spirits with any depressing humor,
they cast away all doubts, and presuming on their own strength and forces, as
also animated by their leaders and conductors, they were now as much exasperated
against the Kentish-men for deceiving their assistance, Black-Heath^ield.
as against the King for usurping their liberty: swearing revenge against both:
In which ^age and heat of repining, they came as far as Black Heath within
four mile of London, and took a field in an arrogant ouer-daring manner on
the top of an hill, supposing all things consortable to their arrogance and
deceiuable hopes, because as yet they passed and repassed without fighting, or
strong encounters: But alas, Blanditiae Comites tibi erunt terrorque furorque
and they were abused with a vale of ignorance and covering of obstinacy: For
the King disposed of his affairs with great policy and circumspection, not
determining to give them battle, or exagitate them at all till he had them
far from their proper dwellings and flattering friends, till they were in
despair of relief and wearied with long and tedious iournies, till their
treasure was spent, their vitaile consumed and provision failing, till their
company dropped from them like rotten hangings on a moistened wall, and their
whole designs and expectation quite disanulled; and then, when he imagined
their souls vexed with the terror of a guilty conscience, their fury assuaged
with compunction and penitency, their spirits daunted with repentance and
remorse, and all their army affrighted with madness and doubtful extacies,
would he set upon them, and in some convenient place circumuent and inuiron
them to his own best advantage, and their irrecouerable damage and destruction.

As for the City of London: London.
I cannot but remember and compare it unto Rome, both when Hannibal passed the
Alps to threaten the Monarchy being yet far off himself, and also Marius
and Silla covered her fields with armed men, and trampled on the bosom of
their Country with ambitious steps, and cruel feet of usurpation: then spoke
the Poet in this manner, -- Quoties Romam fortuna lacessit, Lucan. lib. 1.

H^c iter est bellis, gomitu ^ic quisque latenti,
Non aufu^timuisse palam: Vox nulla dolori
Credita: --
There was chaining the streets, shutting up the shops, making strong the
gates, doubling the watches, hiding their treasure, cries, fears, terrors, and
every one more disturbed for the loss of his private goods, then the
encu^brances of the Commonwealth. Here was mustering of soldiers, watching all
day in armor, staccadoing the river, filling the streets with companies of
horse and foot, cutting down the Bridge, locking up their doors, shutting the
Gates, and what else named before, to be put in practice with advantage of many
pieces of ordnance both in Southwarke and the Suburbs, and the strength of the
Tower which they knew was reserved for the King himself. Notwithstanding, such
was the instabilitie of the Citizens being a little disturbed from their
quietness and rest, their dainties and ease, their banquetings and meetings,
their feasts and sumptuousness, their pastimes and pleasures, that they rather
complained on the King and his Council for the first occasion of these
tumults, then exprobrated the rebel for ingratitude and disobedience: But the
King without further disputing against their peevishness, or laying open the
abuses of such refractary people, delivered them of this fear: For he
presently sent John Earl of Oxford, Henry Burchier Earl of Essex, Edmond de
la Poole Earl of Suffolk, Sir Rice ap Thomas, Humphrey Stanley, and other
worthy martial men, with a company of Archers and horsemen to enuiron the Hill
where the Rebels were encamped round about: Himself with the maine battle
and forces of the City, much ordnance and great provision took St. Georges
field; where, on a Friday at night he quartred himself, and on the Saturday
very early in the morning he poasted Lord Dawbney to Dertford, who by break of
day gat the bridge of the Strand in despite of resisters, which manfully
defended it a while, shooting arrows a full yard long, and demeaning
themselves like scholerly and eloquent Orators, pleading for the time in a bad
cause with good words, and handling an ill matter too-too well. From thence he
went courageously against the whole company, and what with the former Earls
assaulting them on the one side* and his own charges on the other side, as
knowing how the Kings business stood to make an end of the war, the battle
began apace, and not a man but prepared himself to fight it out, till at last
the Lord Dawbney engaged himself so far, that he was taken prisoner: but
whether for fear, or through his own wit and policy, The Rebels ^uercome.
they quickly released him, and he as quickly dispatched the matter, and made
an end of the war: For he put them all to flight, so that a man may well say
unto them: -- Via nulla sa^utis,
Non fuga, non virtus, vix spes quoque mortis honestae:
and I may truly report of the contrary: never was a battle so well fought
and so quickly determined. For before the King was ready to go to dinner,
there were slain two thousand Rebels, and many more taken prisoners, the rest
hardly escaped home; who for all their defeature, and uncomfortable news to
the people, were rather accelerated to revenge their companions wrongs, then
exanimated from further attempts, or seemed grieved at the King and Countries
molestation, showing sad looks, but stomachous hearts, and so remained
intoxicated in their brains, and ready upon every occasion to a new rebellion,
as you shall hear hereafter.

When this battle was ended, and so delicately contrived (for the King lost
not above four hundred men) some imputed it to the Kings policy, who
appointing the same on Monday, by way of anticipation fell upon them on
Saturday, and so taking them somewhat unprovided, had the fortune to prevail
and thrive in his advantage: Such as were taken and apprehended had their
pardon, except the principal and firebrarnds of the mischief: For the Lord
Audeley was drawn from Newgate to the Tower Hill in a Coat of his own arms
painted upon paper reuersed and all to torn, Lord Audeley executed.
and there beheaded the 28. of June. Thomas Flamoch and Michael Joseph were
executed after the order of Traitors, and their quarters sent into Cornwall for
the terrifying of the people, some were dispatched at sundry Towns as they
deserved: amongst whom the Smith, and diverse others of his immodest friends had
no excuse to make for this rebellion, but whether they prevailed or no, they
were sure to be registered to eternity for daring to do somewhat in behalf of
their Countries liberty, and bidding battle to Kings and Princes at their
Palace Gates, and before the City Walls, even London it self, that great
City, the Chamber for their treasury, and strength of their roialtie: which
makes me remember a saying of Lucan: -- Sed me velsola tueri
Fama potest rerum, Lib. 8.
toto quas gessimus orb,
Et nomen, quod mundus amat: --
And in another place:
-- Quid plura feram? Lib. 9.
tum nomina tanto
Inuenies operi, vel famam consule mundi:
and this was the end of the twelfth year.

In this time you must know, that the King of Scots lay not idle, but merely
upon supposition of what would follow, The King of Scots prepares against
England.
prepares himself, nor was so ill befriended, but he had secret intelligences
of all King Henry's purposes, and intendments, whereupon he enlarged his Army,
barracadoed his passages, entrenched and fortified the holds, kept good Watch
and Ward, and stood on the pinacles of a high presumption to encounter with the
proudest forces of England; yea, to give defiance if need were to the King
himself. Notwithstanding, he now lay a while only at defense, watching with
what ward the English would break upon him, and wondering at my Lord Dawbneis
retraction, and why he came not forward as his espials had advertised: but when
he understood of the Western rebellion, he then coniectured the truth, and a
while reposed himself, till a Messenger of these Western men came unto Perkin
and proffered their obedience and endeavors, if he would come and join his Army
with theirs, and so as their Prince and Captain, revenge there wrongs: this
was motioned to King Ieames, who for all he confessed, that if they would join
with the Cornish men, there might be a gate open indeed to prevail, and walk
in the fields of Victory: yet he would by no means adventure his people so
far, and confessed plainly he wanted ships for transporting so great an Army
into those parts: Only, because he would be doing to please the supposed
Prince, he meant to take this opportunity of the King of Englands disturbance,
and once again adventure into his territories, King of Scots besieges Norham
Castle.
and so with a sufficient preparation he attempted the Castle of Norrham
standing upon the River of Twede, dividing Scotland and England. But Richard
Fox Bishop of Durham, a man of great learning, courage, experience and
fidelity, suspecting as much, had well stored and fortified the same, and was
in it with such power, munition and provision as he was able to raise, sending
the King word of the siedge, and inuiting the Earl of Surrey to come to his
reskue with all expedition: The Earl was mustering of men in Yorke-shire, when
this news extended it self, and like a worthy seruitor hastened his journey
the rather, and so with twelve Earls and Barons of the North Country, The
Earl of Surrey raises the siege.
one hundred Knights and Gentlemen of name, and twenty thousand Soldiers well
ordered, and armed he came to raise the siedge, in which this brave Prelate was
so engaged: Besides, he furnished a hansome Navy at Sea, whereof the Lord
Brook was Admiral to give their attendance whatsoever should chance: But when
the King of Scots and his counterfeit Duke of York had full and certain notice
of the Earl of Surreis approach, and that the Lord Dawbenies army was also
integrat and unbroken, yea, ready to march forward as a second to the former,
they thought it better to retire with security, then to tarry the adventure
with certeinty of loss, if not hazard both of life and honor, and so by a
voluntary consent they raised their camp and returned under color of
commiseration of the people whom they knew in the best war, must be subjected
to slaughter or captivity: and to this purpose they could yield a reason out
of our Poet to certain spirits, that wondered at their affrightings and drawings
back, seeing no peril apparent, nor hearing of any steadfast reports,
concerning a more forcible enemy, and so calling for a book reading to them
this le^^on of satisfaction. -- Lucan. lib. 7.
Potuit tibi Vulnere nullo
Stare labor belli, potuit fine caede subactum,
Captiuumque ducem violatae tradere paci?
Qui^ furor ^ Coeci scelerum, Ciuilia bella
Gesturimetuunt, ne non cum sanguine vincant?


This answer of the Kings did rather harm then good to poor Perkin. For,
they perceived the King was weary of this war, and loath to take his part any
longer, and so they rested a while displeasingly pleased.

But the truth was the Earl of Surrey was so enraged at the bragging and
ouer-daring Prince, that he followed him at the heels, and in revenge of many
mischiefs perpetrated by him in such audacious manner, The Earl of Surrey
enters Scotland.
he entered Scotland, defaced the Castle of Cundrestins, deuasted the Tower
Hedonha^^, undermined the Tower of Edington, overthrew the Pile of Fulden, and
sent Norey King of Arms to the Captain of Haiton Castle, the strongest
fortification between Barwick and Edinborough to deliver the same, which he
absolutely denied, until the worthy General set himself down before it,
made his approches, and cast up a strong rampart or battery for the
expugnation, prevailing so far, that at last it was surrendered, their lives
only saved: who were no soooner departed according to the conditions, but our
General quite overthrew and demolished the same.

The King of Scots was within a mile of the siedge, and yet durst not reskue
the same, only by way of ostentation, he sent Marchemount and another Herrald
to the Earl of Surrey with a kind of defiance, and challenge either to
encounter with him Army to Army, or body to body; conditionally, that if the
victory fall to his majesty, the Earl should deliver and surrender for his
ransom the Town^ of Barwicke with the fish-garthes of the same, if the Earl
again were Victor, the King would pay 1000. pound sterling for his redemption.
The King of Scots offreth a private combat to the Earl of Surrey.
The noble General welcomed these Herralds, and like a courageous, yet
understanding Captain: quickly answered all the points of their commission:
First, he was ready to abide the battle in the plain field, and would if he
pleased for the same purpose lay open the trenches, and make the passages so
easy, that victory should have comfort of coming amongst them. Secondly, he
thought himself much honored, that so noble a Prince and great a King, would
vouchsafe to descend to so low a dregree of contention, as a private duello
with him, for which he would not only repute him heroike and magnanimous: but
setting his loyalty to his Prince aside, perform all good offices, which
belonged to the sweet contract of a perpetual amity, if it were possible,
between them. Thirdly, for the town of Barwicke, it was none of his, but the
King his masters, which he would not so much as coni^cture upon without his
consent and advice, as he himself might well judge in the affairs of Princes,
what was to be done. Fourthly, he thought his own life worth all the towns
of the world, and so would gladly hazard himself; yea, was proud (as he said
before) that so great a Majesty would parallel him in such a kind, only he
desired pardon for a little vainglory, that if he conquered the King, he
would release him freely; if the King vanquished him, he would either yield
him his life, or pay such a tribute and competency, as is befitting the state
and degree of an Earl, to all which he was the rather induced, because he was
confident, that Causa iubet melior superos sperare secundos:

But it should seem, these affronts were mere flourishes: For neither
battle, nor combat, nor any enterprise worth the recording was put in
practice, although the English forces had layen long in the Country to the
same purpose: whereupon the Lord General, loath to spend his time so
inconsiderately, and somewhat wearied with the distemperature of the Climate,
and unseasonableness of (...) weather, the Country affoording nothing but
mists and foggs at this time of the year, raised his camp, and retired to
Barwicke. But when the truth was further enlarged, the King commanded him so to
do by his letters of private intelligence. For now came a time, in which the
windows of heaven seemed to open, and the God of mercy thought to recompense
his patience and goodness, with a quiet end of his troubles, and happy
success in his enterprises, which fell out upon this occasion.

Ferdinando King of Spain, The King of Spain would marry his daughter to
Prince Arthur.
and Elizabeth his wife, having a purpose to marry their daughter Lady
Katherine, to Arthur Prince of Wales, and very loath that any content on
between the King of Scots, whom he much favored, and the King of England,
whom he highly respected, should be (as it were) a wall of partition between
their proiected amity and royal affinity, especially that either probability
of an interest, or counterfeit device of the issue-male from the house of York,
should cast any blocks or hindrances in the way of these pretenses, he most
prouidently sent one Peter Hialos a man of great learning, experience, and
prudency, as an Ambassador to James King of Scots by way of mediation to
contract a league of peace and absolute amity between the King of England and
him, An Ambassador to the King of Scots from Spain.
who proceeded with such fair conditions, and prevailed so well in his
proposed message, that he perceived a glimmering sunshine of this peace a
far off, but that there were certain thickning clouds of mischief and
disturbance, which by some effectual heat from the King of Englands breath
must be removed and dissipated, and therefore he wrote to King Henry, that
if it would please him to send some worthy man to be his associate in this
enterprise, he persuaded himself, that an honest oratory would quickly
conclude the profitable articles of amity. For the Poet had assured him, and
he found by some experience, that Addidit inualidae rebus facundia causae, And
for an entrance into (...) same, he assured the King, that there was g^^at
likelihood to lay down the bloody colors of defiance, and flourish the
pleasant ensigns of tranquillity. For the King of Scots had already protested,
he was only emulous of King Henry's virtues, and not maligned or despighted
his person, and for Perkins title he made it a matter of conscience and
charity. For he knew him the right heir, if he were the right creature, and
the Clergy warranted the actions as meritorious. The better sort disclaimed
all tyrannous prosecutions: For except their obedience to the King, they spent
and consumed their estates, and only returned with tears and lamentations for
the lo^se of (...) friends. The inferior sort imputed all to the superior
commands, and as for the formidable effects and bloody issue of war, it was
only the chance and fortune of encounters, the action of fury, and the
vengeance or curse appropriate to dissentions, according to that worthy author
of excellent sentences and proprositions.

-- Lucan lib. 7.
Sed mentibus vnum
Hoc solamen erat, quod votiturba nefandi
Conscia, quae patrum i^gulos, quae pector a fratrum
Sperabat, gaudet monstris, mentisque tumustu,
Atque omen scelerum subitos putat esse furores.
Whereupon King Henry boasting of the character of Prince of peace, so that he
might not be branded with ignominy of baseness, pusillanimity and dishonor,
quickly consented to such agreement, and for the same purpose sent Richard Fox
Bishop of Durrham, who stilllay in the ba^ttered Castle of Norrham, as his
chief Commissioner, An Emb^ssador from Engl^nd to Scotland.
who accordingly associated himself with Peter Hialos, at the town of
Iedworth in Scotland, whither the Ambassador from King James likewise
repaired. Here were many matters disputed upon, many conditions laid open,
many difficult^es raised, many greeuances urged, and many conclusions argued:
but because they failed in the maine point, nothing was determined. For the
King of England required Perkin Warbeck to be delivered into his hands, as the
principal fountain of this venomous stream, the chief ^ccasion of his
unquietness, the perturber of his Realm, the seducer of his subjects, and the
author of many rebeilions. But the King of Scots (like a Prince indeed) would
not buy his peace with the blood of Innocents, especially a man coming to him
for succor, showing all the marks of a distressed and abused Prince, allied
unto him by marriage, commended by the Emperor, assisted by the Duches of
Burgundy, and in himself of fair demeanor, sweet behavior, and of a most
royal and well esteemed spirit. Therefore (I say) he would by no means betray
him into the hands of his enemies, that was so long admitted into the bosom of
his friends, nor should it be said, that in any such degree, for any wordly
respect whatsoever, King James of Scotland would be base or perfidious, which
he had learned from the example and punishment of Prusias King of Bithynia,
whom the Romans deposed, for consenting to betray Hanibal into their hands,
though they had promised large rewards, and threatened severe vengeance.

The Commissioners answered directly, that they intended not by way of
defamation, or contumelious discovery of the vanity of the man, or
impossibility of his business to make him odious or corroborate their own
purposes, by the destruction of so silly a creature, or discrediting so poor a
business: but merely to show the truth, and unfold the secrets of the deceit,
that such a Prince as King James, might not be colluded with shadows and
apparitions, but orderly drawn into this holy and general league, wherein
both Emperor, France and Spain desires a combination of amity with England,
only there wanted himself to make the number complete, that the horn of
Achelous might be sent from nation to nation, from kingdom to kingdom. For I
can assure you, the Merchants of England have been received into Antwerp with
general procession, the Emperor is pleased with this combination, the King of
Spain pretends a marriage, the King of France endeavors a league, and all
the Princes of Europe seek after a true confirmation of quietness. Therefore
once again, be not an enemy to the good of all Christendom, nor so adverse to
this holy combination, that the world shall rather esteem you wilful and
preiudicate, then wise and considerate.

Notwithstanding all this forcible and effectual intimation, the King of Scots
would not consent to deliver Perkin The King of Scots will not deliver Perkin.
upon any condition, but as he came to him for refuge, he should depart
untouched, and not by his occasion be in worse case then the bruit beasts, or
vildest condition of men, as he had learned long since out of that ancient
Tragedian: Habet confugium b^llua quidem petram, Eurip supplice^.

Seruivero ar as deorum: ciuit as vero ad ciuitatem
Fugit, calamitatem passa: Rerum enim humanarum
Non est quicquam perpetuo beatum.
Yet with much ado he was brought to a truce for certain years, and
condescended to this, that Perkin should be no longer succored, harbored, or
maintained by him, or in his territories and dominions: with which answer, and
orderly ratification of the same, the Ambassadors departed, the Armies
retired, the Soldiers discharged, the King of England satisfied, the Orators
of France (who from Do^er had audience at London about the same purpose)
rewarded, and of all others the worthy Peter Hialos, as principal worke-man in
this intricate business, liberally and bountifully recompensed.

Only poor Perkin, whose glorious meteor began now to be exhaled, seemed
disconsolate and examinated at this news and determination, especially when
King James began to expostulate and reason the matter with him. First, from a
repetition of the benefits and favors received by his Princely liberality and
gentleness. Secondly, from his consanguinity, in marrying his kinswoman upon
dangerous hopes and triuiall adventures. Thirdly, from his many trialls of
sundry conflicts in England, proouing all his promise^winde and smoke, and his
best enterprises triuiall and fana^icall. Fourthly, upon the now combination of
amity with all the Princes of Europe, which could not be done without the King
of Englands consent and agreement. Fifthly, upon the fatherly regard of his
Country, which had need have some breathing time of ease and rest, and must
questionless take a love day of consolation and desisting from turmoiles. Last
of al, from the care of the Religion and Mother Church, unto whose obedience
and regard he was now absolutely sworn: Therefore he desired him to take some
other course, and depart out of his Realm. For (as he heard) he was now
interessed in the confederacy of the peace of Christendom, Perkin discharged
out of Scotland.
and unless he should be a perjured and perfi^ious Prince, he could in no
sort infringe the conditions, nor break the truce combined by a firm and
inseperable adiuration.

When Perkin had heard him out, although every word was worse then the croking
of some night-rauen or scrichowle, and the amazement (for the time) might have
much disabled him: yet loath to discredit his cause by any demisnesse or
pusillanimity, and seeing all answers were superfluous, and the very messengers
of despair and disconsolation, he raised himself with some outward
cheerfulness, and as well to avoid ingratitude toward so great a Benefactour,
as to countenance himself and his business, he thus casting away all fear
and abashing timidity, replied.

Most worthy Prince: Mortale est quod quaeris opus: mihi fama perennis. And
therefore God forbid, that my commorance in your Court and Kingdom, or the
weakened cause of my attempts should prove disaduantagious o^ ominous unto you,
both in regard of the many favors your Princelinesse has heaped upon me
undeserved, and mine own willingness not to be too too troublesome or
offensive unto so benign a Majesty, which rather then it should be hazarded
for my sake without a cheerful and liberal willingness, the fame and glory
of the enterprise shall be sufficient for me, and I will not only disclaim
my right and interest in the Kingdom of England, my lawful inheritance by
descent: but pour out my self, and spend my life most profusely for your
sake. Only this I must entreat at your hands, to give me leave to rigg and
calcke up my ships, and gather together that dispersed company I have, or such
as would willingly and voluntarily attend me. Which seeming but reasonable, and
no way repugning the former agreement with the Ambassadors, was quickly
condescended unto: so with many gifts, Perkin retorne^h into Ireland.
and royal furniture for his wife and family, he took his leave and sailed
back the same way he came into Ireland, determining (as the last anchor-hold
of his fortunes) either to unite himself with the Cornish-men, whom he knew
not fully appeased, or to retire to Lady Margaret his most worthy aunt and
faithful coadiutrix.

He had not been long in Ireland, but his false fortune began once again to
play with him, as flattering him with assured confidence and warrantize, that
the Western men would welcome and entertain him, from whom he had this
notice: that they could not forget their former injuries and slaughters, nor
determined a settled and true obedience to the Lancastrian family: whereupon
because something must be done, or else he should be for ever discredited: or
that God in his Justice derided all such enterprises to scorn: or else in his
mercy would give King Henry a breathing time to set his other Princely
qualities of wisdom, magnificence, quietness, religion, charity, government
and pol^ecy on work: he sailed out of Ireland with five small Ships, and two
hundred men, his wife and attendants, his substance and wealth, and in a word
all that he had.

But when he was to confer about his landing and setting forward his
designs, Perkin ec^meth into England.
he had such poor Counselors, as a man would smile at for pity, rather then
laugh at for scorn. For his principal friends were now John Heron a mercer,
and banquerout. John of Water sometimes Mayor of Cork: Richard Sketon a Tailer:
and John Astley a Scriuener: men in general defame for dishonest actions, and
in particular reproach, for understanding nothing but what consorted to their
own wilfulness, and outrageous appetites; of whom I may say, as Ovid
complains in another case in his Elegies: Non been conducti vendunt periuria
testes,
Non been s^lecti Iudicis arca patet:
With this crew about the month of September he landed at a place called
Bodnam, and there so solicited, and excited the multitude and wau^ing people,
that when they heard him proclaimed Richard the fourth, as the indubitat son
of Edward the fourth, whom the Duke of Gloucester, or if you will, Richard the
Tyrant determined to murder, but that he escaped by the providence of God,
they flocked unto him to the number of 4000. and according to the nature of
children running after newfangled toies or painted pictures: submitted to his
princelines, and swear with all allegiance to maintain his dignity and
royalty: with which confidence and company after they had taken the musters of
his Army, and concluded to get some strong Towns into their possession, that
so they might not only augment their forces, but still have places of
supportation and refuge to retire unto, they went directly to Excester, Perkin
besiedgeth Excester.
and besiedged it. But because they wanted ordnance to make a battery, and
other provision to raise their trenches, and approches, or indeed if you will,
were ignorant of martial discipline, and the secrets of a true Soldiers
profession, they spent the more time against the Gates, and endeavored nothing
but a forcible entrance, assaulting the same with great pieces of timber like
the Roman rams, crows of iron, firebrarnds, and impetuous violence of great
stones cast at ther^, and amongst them. But the Citizens manfully defended
themselves, and held it out to their perpetual fame, letting over the walls in
secret places diverse in baskets with strong cords to post to the king and
acquaint him with their distress. In a mean while seeing a fire made under
their Gates, and that the enemies fury increased, they suspected themselves,
and had no other shift but to put force to force, and with one fire extinguish,
or if you will devour another, and so they caused great store of faggots and
timber combustible to be brought close to the posternes and greater gates,
where the mischie^e began, and set the same on fire, which increased with a
filthy smoke, and smother, and at last burst out into a flame and blazes, so
that neither the enemies could come in, nor Citizens go out: but all were
compelled to desist from that work, and apply themselves to more new and
necessary labors. For the Rebels assaulted the most weak and broken places of
the Wall, and the Citizens ran to the expulsions, and repaired the breaches
as fast as they were made; besides, they had leisure to cast up great trenches
under their Gates, and by strong barks rampering the same made them more
difficult passages then before: The walls were mightily and impetuously
assaulted, but the worthy Citizens defended them with that courage, and
countermanding: that they slew above two hundred Soldiers in that fury, and
behaved themselves as if they determined to obtain a perpetual name of
renown, and unmatchable Trophe of honor: so that I may well and briefly say
of them: -- Serpens, sitis, ardor, arenae
Dulcia virtuti: gaudet patientia duris.


When Perkin and his associats saw so strong and strange opposition, Perkin
discomfited leaves Excester and departs to Taunton.
they seemed both amassed and defatigated at the same, whereupon between rage
and despair, he retired his lousy and distressed Army to the next great
Town called Taunton, where he mustred them a new, but found a great want of
his company: For many of his desperate followers were slain and cut off: many
of the honester and ciuiler sort, seeing the Town of Excester so well
maintained, and that very few resorted unto him, contrary to his former
flourishes, and ostentation; fell from him, and retired themselves home: many
weary of the wars, and coniecturing an impossibility, to remove a king so
firmly established, or terrifyed with the punishment impending on Treason, and
presumptuous rebellion, left him to his fortunes, and many politikely
forecasting for the worst, seeing not one of the nobility or better sort to
afford a helping hand to the lifting up of this frame, were contented to
dispense with former protestations, and so provided for themselves, whereby (as
I said) as if the proverb were verified: Non habet euentus sordid a praeda
bonos. he came short of his reckning, and the Items of his accounts went much
curtailed of their former length and computation.

But in truth the posts of the Country brought comfortable tidings of the Kings
Army approaching, of which the Lord Daubney, The Lord Dawbney general of the
Kings force^.
a fortunate and successful man in all his enterprises, was General: yet in
the mean while had Lord Edward Courtney Earl of Devonshire, Lord William his
son, Sir Edmund Carey, Sir Thomas Trenchard, Sir William Courtney, Sir Thomas
Fulford, Sir John Hatwell, Sir John Croker, Walter Courtney, Peter Egecomb,
William Sentnaure, and diverse others, brought forward the forces of the
country, to raise the siege of Exester, which not only animated and
encouraged the Citizens, but rebated the fury of the contrary, and diuerted
them from that sore and outrageous manner of assaulting the walls, where in the
last onset, the noble Earl, with diverse others, were hurt with arrows; he
wounded in the arm, and the rest in several parts of their bodies, but very
few slain: And so with much ado, this famous and honour-thirsting City, with
the honest Inhabitants of the same, were delivered and relieved.

By this time, the royal standards of King Henry were advanced in sight of the
City, The King comes forward with his Army.
and the d^ums beat up their accustomed marches, to the joy and fullness of
contertment, both of the town and Country: But when the King was adu^rtized
of their returning to Taunton, he hasted thither: But first he welcomed Edward
Duke of Buckingham, a young, noble, and well regarded Prince, in whose company
came along an hundred Knights and Esquires of special name and credit in their
countries, amongst whom Sir Alexander Bainham, Sir M^urice Barckley, Sir Robert
Fame, Sir John Gmise, Sir Robert Points, Sir Henry Vernon, Sir John Mortymer,
Sir Thomas Tremaile, Sir Edward Sutton, Sir Amias Paulet, Sir John Bickwell,
Sir John Sapcotes, Sir Hugh Lutter^l, and Sir Francis Cheny were principal. O
what a glorious thing it is, The Duke of Buckingham.
to see a Noble man either stand by the chair of the Prince, as a Court star
and Supportation: that (at last) the King may ask, what shall be done to the
man he means to honor: or move in his own orb, that is the love and credit
of his Country, firm to the State, and graceful in all his actions and
proceedings, still having a care to the government of the people, and an eye to
the dignity of the Commonwealth: so shall his fame be extended abroad, and his
renown enlarged at home, which makes me remember the description of Capaneus
in that ancient Euripides, Eurip. suppl^ce^.
who may be a President to all young Noblemen, yeal wish with mine heart, that
such as are not too presumptuous on their own gifts of nature and education,
would take the book in hand, and make use both of precept and example, for the
illustration of their Honors, and administration of their lives: the Poet is
somewhat large and more pleasant in the Greek then the Latin. He thus
begins.

Cappaneus hic est, cui facult as viuendi erat abundans, (...)

Minime vero diuitijs insolens erat: magnitudine^ vero animi
Non maiorem habebat, quam pauper vir,
Fugiens splendido victu, quicunque intumesceret minis,
Sufficientia vili pendens: Non enim in pastu ventris
Virtutem esse, mediocria vero sufficere dicebat: etc.
But to our story again:
When the King approached the town of Tawnton, whether out of policy not to
hazard the whole army at once, or out of suspicion of some reuolters in his
company, or humbly considering there might be a turning of Fortunes wheel, as
still Rota fortunae in Gyro in the encounters of a battle, or harping upon
some stratagem and enterprise, as prouidently forecasting both the worst and
best, which might chance: He sent before him Robert Lord Brook the Steward of
his house, Giles Lord Daubney, and Sr. Rice app Thomas to give the onset and
begin the battle, that he with the rest, as a strong Ambuscado and relief,
might come to the reskue, if they were wearied and de^atigated. But little
needed this policy, or procrastination: For poor Perkin (desperate of his
fortunes, and quite exanimated to encounter with the Kingsforces, in so warlike
a manner and fearful a preparation, contrary to all the motives of a true
Roman Honor, and without knowledge of his army) about midnight, Perkin
desperate of all relief takes Sauctuary.
accompanied with sixty horse, departed in wonderful celerity to a Sanctuary
town besides Southampton called Be^dly, where he, John Heron, Thomas a Water,
and others, registered themselves as persons privileged.

O what a God art thou! that can one way humble settled Princes, with the
very shadows of peril and danger, making them confess their frailty and
ticklish estate of mortality, by the several encumbrances and mischeefes, to
which they are subject: and another way confound the mightiest proiects, and
annihilate their enterprises, turning all actions and mountains of pride,
sedition, conspiracies and ambition, to powder and dust, and then blowing it
away like smoke and vapor: and another way protect the right of the innocent
and distressed, sending remedy and comfort, when they least think of it, or
know to help and advance themselves: and another way whip with the rods of
vengeance, the freneticall and vain multitude, who know nothing, but rudeness
and clamorous outcries, nor practice any thing but vndecencies and
outragiousness: so that we may well say: O Jupiter, cur nam miser^s sapere
dicunt
Homines! ex te enim pendemus, Eurip. supplice^.

Agimvsque ea, qua tu volueris.
O nihili homines!
Qui arcum extendentes tanquam vltra articulum,
Et iure vitque mala patientes multa,
Amicis non quidem creditis sed ipsis rerum euentibus* etc.


When King Henry knew that Perkin was fled, and departed from his camp, The
Lord Daubney sent after Perkin.
he sent the Lord Daubney with five hundred horse, to intercept him: but he was
lodged before they came, although most of his company were surprised and taken,
who as miserable caitiffs and poor wretched delinquents were presented to his
Majesty: But when the residue of this fearful and staggering army, could
neither understand what was become of their General, nor see their accustomed
Penons and Ancients, nor their quarters so well ordered, as was the manner of
Soldiers, nor their companies so cheerful and well heartned, they knew not
what to say, or to do, some supposing he was fraudulently slain, some
suspecting he was traitorously fled, some reporting the manifestation of his
deceit, some wondering at the strangeness of his proceedings, in that he had
so myraculously begun, and presumptuously prosecuted such a dangerous work:
some exclaiming upon the simplicity of the matter, that built upon no better
grounds then vain hopes and presumptuous titles: some cursing themselves, that
they had so far engaged their loialties against their Sovereign Lord and
King: some continuing in their rancorous malice, swear nothing but revenge, and
obstinacy: and some never to be reclaimed, even when their forces failed, cried
out to go forward, railing at the misfortune of their business, that they
must now fail, when they were ready to pull down the Town walls with their
hands: Yet when they were assured of his cowardly flight and base
pusillanimity, the common fear, common mischief, and common danger, The Army
of Perkin submits to the King without fighting.
made them cast away their armor, and submit to the King, to whom though they
came with affrighted countenances, and venomous hearts, sad looks and little
repentance, curses in their souls, and promises of faith, loyalty and
obedience, out of their mouths: yet did the King entertain them with all
cheerfulness, and acceptable comfort, as the greatest benefit which God could
at that time bestow upon him, nor disputing of their hypocrisy, nor
determining by more narrow searches, or artificial incantations to try out the
depth, and search the bottom of their resolutions.

Thus as a conqueror without manslaughter and effusion of blood, The King
r^turneth to Ex^ester.
he road triumphantly into the City of Excester, and knowing Praemium and
Poena to be the mastering curbes of all the things in the World, not only
praised and applauded the Citizens: but opened the Treasure house of reward,
and honor amongst them, giving some presents, advancing others to the order of
knighthood, granting many petitions, according to the worthy condition of a
Prince, and the full corroboration of their obedience: Then proceeded he to
some exemplary punishment of diverse refractary Cornish-men, whom their own
companies accused, as Delinquents, and the Majesty of the government would not
endure without correction.

But all this was nothing in comparision of that which followed: For his
horsemen prosecuted the chase so diligently and honestly, that they pursued the
Lady Katherine Gourden wife to this Perkin, Perkins Wife taken.
even to Michaels Mount; who, notwithstanding, had she not been betrayed by
some of her own followers, might have escaped: For transhaping her self into
one of her servants habits, she had gone quite away to her ships: But that some
pitying the distress of the King, and turmoiles of the Kingdom; and
perceiving the end of the war and pacification of these troubles to depend
upon her surprising, would by no means give way unto new disturbances, but
took her and presented her to the Kings Commissioners: what should I say, when
she herself said nothing, but perceiving them Gentlemen of worth with
Hipsiphile to Jason, she cried out. Siv^s nobilitas, generosaque nominatangunt.
I know you will use me like your selves, and understand I am a Prince every
way, so they gave her leave to adorn her self, and brought her like a
bond^woman and captive to the King, who wondering at her beawtie and attractiue
behavior, lifted up his hands to Heaven in her behalf to see so great a worth
betrayed to fanaticall hopes, and freneticall deceit, thanking God for
himself, that he had such a Trophe of his endurances and victories in his
hands, nor was the Emperor Aurelius more proud of Zenobia, then he reioiced in
this adventure: some say he fantasied her Person himself, and kept her near
unto him, as his choicest delight; yea, so doted on her perfections, that he
forgot all other things, then the contentment, which he received by her,
insomuch that many dared to libell against him with that saying of Deianira to
Hercules. Quem nunquam Juno, seriesque immensa laborum fregerit, huic Iolen
imposuisse iugum: Some report, he durst not let her marry for fear of
ambitious tumors in such, as could attain to such a fortune: Some confirm,
that she was of that greatness of spirit, that she scorned all others in
regard of her self, both by the privilege of her birthright, and the
possibility of her greatness. Howsoever, he entreated her most honorably and
amiably (such a power has beauty and comeliness ever in distress) and sent
her to the Queen so maiestically attended, as if she had been a Queen indeed.

In the mean while my Lord Dawbney employed himself and his company so
effectually, that enuironing the sanctuary wherein Perkin was with two
companies of light horse, who were vigilant, cautelous, strong and courageous,
and so lay in the advantage ^f watching the place, that Perkin could no way
escape: but the King was not satisfied with thi^ protraction, and therefore
loath to loose him, or give him liberty to run with the blind mole into
further cauerns of the earth to cast up heaps and little hills of commotion and
affrighting his estate and yet daring not to infringe the privilege of these
holy places (such a hand had superstition, and the Popes fulmination got over
all the Princes of Europe) he went more politikely to work, and sent diverse
persons of account to persuade his submission, and render himself wholly into
the Kings hands, who not only promised him pardon of life, but comfort of
liberty, yea, honorable maintenance upon the easy conditions of desisting to
perturb the Commonwealth any further, and disclaiming so injuriously to
pretend any title to the Diadem.

When Perkin saw to what streights his Bark was driven, and that he must
either split on the rocks of despair, or retire back again into the
troublesome Ocean of despite, according to the nature of cowardly and
irresolute men, he chose the worst part to save his life, and submit to the
Kings acceptance, not remembering, because he was never acquainted with the
secrets of majesty, that he, which has been once a Prince, must never look
for a settled quietness in a private estate (because he is still subject to the
Conquerors pleasure) but an ignominious life, then which, an honorable death
is ten thousand times better, which made the noble Hecuba, as a worthy
pattern to al unfortunate Princes, thus answer the proudest conquerors
themselves. Porrigam collum cordate intrepide, Eurip. Hecuba.

Liberam vero me, vt libera moriar,
Per deos queso dimittentes occidite: Apud manes enim
Serua vocari: Regina cum sim, pudet me:
But as I said he now only recounted the difficult passages of his former
travails, the dangers escaped, the deceit pretended, the peril imminent, and
the misfortune too-too apparent, as being in no security in the place, he was
fled unto, nor having any confidence in the persons, he had chosen: For though
he knew there was a reverence appropriate to sanctuaries; yet kings, if they
pleased, will be tied neither to law nor Religion, but perform what they
list, or under color of their own security, say they are compelled unto:
Therefore without any further aggrauation, Perkin submittet, to the King.
relying on the Kings Pardon, and those honorable conditions propounded, he
voluntarily resigned himself, and came to his majesty, as a messenger of glad
tidings, that now all wars, troubles, and commotions were by this means
ended and determined.

The King not much wondered at him: for he only found him superficially
instructed of a natural wit, of reasonable qualities, well languaged and
indifferent apprehension, but far from that highness of spirit, or heroic
disposition to deserve the character of a Prince, or lay claim to a Diadem:
yet loath with any boisterous strength to handle a bruized arm, or draw the
feltow into a new self-love, or good opinion of himself, he passed over his
examination the slightlier, and brought him immediately to London, being met
all the way with great co^courses of people, who both came to gratify him and
his auspicious success, and to see Perkin like some strange meteor or monster:
or, if you will, because we will deal more cleanlier with him, like a
triumphant spectacle, to move amazement, delight and contentment, according to
that saying of our Poet: Nocte pluit tota, redeunt spectacula mane:

But when they began to capitulate, that being a stranger and an alien borne,
he durst not only abuse so many Princes and Commonwealths with lies,
fictions, and abominable deceit: but even bid battle to Kings and Princes:
yea, bring Kings and Princes into the field for his assistance, they fell from
wondering at him, to rail and abuse him, both with checkes and opprobrious
taunts: yea, diverse dared to put in practice many vndecencies, both of rage and
indignation, had not the reverence of his Majesty's presence diuerted their
inconsideration, and commanded no further rumor, gazing upon him, or violent
threatenings against him. To conclude, the King brought him quietly to London,
and for all he had given him life, and affoorded him a kind of liberty: yet
did he set a guard over him, that he could neither have free conference, nor
do what he wantonly listed without them.

By this time you must consider, that Lady Margaret in Flanders, Duches Dowager
of Burgundy, was not so ill befriended, or negligent in her own affairs, but
she had both intelligence from England, and espialls of her own, to acquaint
her with all occurrences and adventures, Lady Margaret much troubled with this
discomfortable news.
as they chanced. But whether it was a news to her of bitterness, and
tormenting despite, or no; let them judge, that make their stomachs and
inward faculties a storehouse of rankour and malice, and cry out with Seneca,
Foelix iacet quicunqu^ quos odit, Premit: yet was she not tormented so much
with the loss, expenses, or disaster of the business, which might be the
chance of war, as in that she could not prevail in her malignant courses,
against her enemy the house of Lancaster: So that she bemoaned the lamentable
success of her unfortunate darling, and (as many did testify) even shed
tears again; but they were so far from co^punction, or penitency, that they
seemed rather signs of rage, frenzy, and intolerable madness, in which she
cried out on nothing, but revenge: and repeated an exclamation of Hermiones
against Orestes: Quae mea Coelestes iniuria fecit iniquos!
Quodue mihi miserae ^idus obesse querar!
So that if she had had power to her implacable hatred, K. Henry should have
felt the scourges of her wrathful hand, even to the lowest deiection, and she
had questionless showed him a trick of a woman's will, or (if I might speak
without offense) wickedness.

In this while Perkin having two years liberty to ruminate on his business,
and swell up his vexed soul with uncomfortable commemoration of precedent
misfortunes, would many times cast out abrupt and uncertain speeches,
concerning his distress, and the maleuolent aspect of his fate, cursing his
miserable life, and complaining on his unprofitable Genius, that had stood him
in no better steed, wishing he had been borne to any mechanical drudgery,
rather then from the royal blood of Plantaginet: Insomuch, that his keepers
mistrusted him in these ecstasies, and the King was still troubled, that he
could neither make him confess the truth, nor disclaim this high assumption
of another dignity and royalty. But at last, as all such discontentments and
eruptions must have avent, and so a determination, whether the opprobry of this
kind of imprisonment grieved him, or the unquietness of his thoughts vexed
him, or the baseness of his submission abused him, or the loss of his sweet
wife confounded him, or the instigations of others disturbed him: or indeed,
because the last act of his Tragedy and Catastrophe was now in hand, he not
only studied which way to escape; but put the same in practice in despite of
his own knowledge, that the King was acquainted with all his discontentments.
For alas; Princes have long hands and prying looks, to reach into the furthest
parts of their Kingdom, and search into the secretest close^s of their
palaces, yea, other men's houses, Perkin deceives his keepers, an^^ escapes.
and so are made to understand the affairs of the remo^est regions. But
concerning himself, his vain suppositions, as in his former enterprises,
still flattered him, that he should once again find fuel enough, to set
another rebellion and commotion on fire: and his vexation to be bereaved of so
delicate a creature as his Lady, made him desperate of all, and set his wits on
the ^enter-hookes, to put something in practice to his further contentment. So
that one day reading the story of Mortymers escape out of the Tower, by giving
his keepers a sleepy drink, he in such a manner deceives his guard, and
betook him to a resolution of escaping and flying out of the land, wherein he
proved only like the silly bird, that with striving in the net, entangles
herself the more: or, as Dear that are hunted, betray themselves to
well-sented hounds, by their faster running away, whereby they make the deeper
impression in their steps: So fell it out with him, Incidit in Scyllam, cupiens
vitare Charybdim: And by seeking after liberty, he brought himself to a more
straighter and vnkindlier endurance. For when he had gone to the seacoasts,
and heard the exclamations of the people against him, saw all places debarred,
knew great searches made for him, understood what an indignation the Country
had conceived of his mockeries and illusions, and found the whole Kingdom up
in his search, and posting after him, he was quite exanimated, and (like a man
distracted) knew not what to do. At last, unstable in his former wilfulness,
he once again altered his pretended journey, and came to the house of Bethelem,
called the Priory of Shene, Perkin comes to the Prior of Shene.
beside Richmond in Surrey, and committed himself to the Prior, with a long
and secret conference, concluding with an impetration of his charity, that
being a man of God, he would not think it strange to see Princes subject to
disasters and fatal conclusions of misfortune. For he well knew the story,
both of the Abbot of Westminster and the Bishop of Carlisle, who in despite of
King Henry's usurpation, who had not only proiected the delivery of Richard of
Bordeaux; but opposed the King in his strength of sovereignty, against his
wilfulness to destroy the other deposed: and therefore he desired him to
obtain his pardon of the King, yielding forcible intimation for the same
purpose.

The Prior (glad to have interest in such a meritorious work, and proud to be
serviceable to his Prince and Country) came with convenient speed to the
Court, and acquainted his Maiewy with the accident, leaving no circumstance of
any validity vnrecounted, which ended to the Kings wonderful content, and the
whole Courts disdain and amazement. But all times are not alike, and Princes
(in their mercies and pardons) are not so flexible, as presumption builds
upon: Yet to please the Prior, he gave him his life, which to a generous and
free borne spirit was more irksome then death. For he was first taken and
brought to Westminster with all scorn and repr^ch, Perkin once again (...),
but ignominiously used.
then set in a pair off stocks with contumelious derision, then carried
through all the streets of London like a prodigious spectacle, then put to the
rack, which made him not only confess his pedigree and original, but write
it with his own hands: Last of all, mounted on diverse scaffolds he read it in
public, and that so disgraciously, as in the commemoration was able to torment
a looker on so that he might well cry out -- Vitamque per omnem (...). lib. 5.

Nulla fuit tam moesta dies: nam caeter a damna
Durataiammente malis, firmaque, tulerunt:
In some of your Chronicles you have this confession at large, as in Grafton,
which to make the story complete, I have a little contracted, and thus expose
the same.

BE it known unto all men, Perkins confession.
that I was borne in the town of Tourney in Flanders, my father John O^beck
Controller of the said town, and my mother Katherine Haro, my grandfather
Direck Orsbeck, after whose decease my grandmother married Peter Flamine
Receiver of Tourney, and Deane of the boat-men over Lescheld, my mothers father
was called Peter De Faro, which kept the keys of St. Thomas gate within the
said town. I had also an uncle Mr. John Statime of St. Pias Parish, with whom
I dwelled very young, he married mine aunt Jane, and brought me up very well;
yet my mother not contented, as being very chary of me, had me to Antwerp to
lea^^e Flemish more exactly to a kinsman of my fathers John Steinbeck, with
whom I remained a full half year, but by reason of the wars I returned to
Tourney, where I was placed with Mr. Barlo, who within another year carried me
to the mart at Antwerp, where I fell sick awhile, and so was boorded in a
Skinners house much conversant with the English nation, whereby I learnt the
language, as you see. From thence I went to Barrow mart, and lodged at the old
man: Afterward, Mr. Barlo, left me at Middle-borough with John Strew a
Merchant, who first made me believe, I was better then I was. From Antwerp I
sailed into Portugal with my Lady Brampton in a ship called the Queens ship,
and served a Knight in Lichborne called Don Peter Las de Cogna, who had but one
eye; yet the manner of his behavior and order of his house, made me tarry a
year. Then Pregent Meno a Britain carried me into Ireland, and either
commanded so by my Lady Margaret, who (as she said) was my aunt, or proiecting
something for his own private, would needs persuade me I was a Plantaginet of
the house of York. For when I arrived in Corck, because I was somewhat
ha^dsomly apparrelled, they would needs bestow upon me the title of the E. of
Warwick son to George Duke of Clarence formerly in Ireland, which John Le
Wellin the Mayor maintained, and for as much as my denial was contrary to
their expectation, they brought me to the cross, and made me swear: which I
did, disclaiming him, or any of his kindred, until Stephen Poitron, with John a
Water came unto me, as resolved I was King Richards bastard-sonne (then in the
hands of the King of England) persuading me not to be afraid or daunted at
any thing: For they would aid me and assist me, even to the obtaining the
crown of England; yea, they knew of their own knowledge, the Earls of
Desmond and Kildare were ready to adventure their lives and estates for my
sake: After this they carried me into Flanders, to Lady Margaret Regent and
Duches of Burgundy, who prevailed so far with me, that I took upon me the
person of Richard Duke of York, second son of King Edward the fourth, and so
with reasonable preparation, I returned back again into Ireland, where the
said John a Water, Stephen Poinings, John Tiler, Hubert de Brough, the foresaid
Earls, and many others entered with me into a dangerous rebellion, and I was
proclaimed by them Richard the fourth. From hence the King of France sent for
me by Loyte Lucas and Stophen Frian, but making peace with England, he left me
to my fortunes: Then I sailed into Flanders, where my supposed Aunt made more
of me then before, so I attempted England, but was driven back again into
Flanders, from whence I went into Scotland, and from thence again into
Ireland, and so into England.

When the people had heard him out, they wondered both ways at the matter, and
stood (as it were) confounded betwixt shame and indignation. If it were a
co^lusion, to think how grossly the Kingdom, and some of the best therein,
yea many Kingdoms had been abused with such an imposture, to the prosecuting
several ^acinorous actions, and disturbance of the peace and tranquillity of
the Commonwealth: If it were not so, and that for fear of life he confessed
the contrary, being the true Plantaginet, and a Prince borne to so great a
fortune: then they wondered if any man could be so base, as to deiect himself
to such ignominy and opprobrious disgraces, when to die had been honorable, and
to sell ones life in the field, far better then to plead on a scaffold, where
the many changes must needs distract him, and make a poor soul neither fit
for life nor death: But whatsoever he was, they could not choose but deplore his
estate and misfortune, as naturally and ordinarily all men are bemoaned in
adversity, especially such an one, that was so forward in the race and journey
to Majesty, and pulled back so often by the sleeue, and turned with a fury
into the house of desolation, and dungeon of disconsolate wretchedness when to
have perished at once, had been a favor of death and fortune indeed,
according to our Poet: Mitins ille perit subita qui mergitur vnda, Lib. 3. de
pont^.

Quam sua qui liquidis brachia lassat aquis.


When the King had this way satisfied himself, and pleased the people, Perkin
committed to the Tower.
as he thought: he made no more ado, but to prevent inconveniences, clapped him
in the Tower, from whence he escaped not, until he was carried to Tiborne,
and there swallowed up by the never satisfied paunch of Hell, for his former
abuses and intolerable wickedness, which happened very shortly after. For just
at this instant, a roguish Augustane Friar called Patricke, on the borders of
Suffolk, after Peter Warbecks example, taught a poor scholar one Ralph
Wilford to take upon him the title of the Earl of Warwick, as yet in the
Tower of London: but supposed to escape, as corrupting his keepers, intimating
the glory of the action, and the bravery of such an enterprise, wherein who
would be so base and cowardly, as not adventure his life, and put in practice
any design to attain to a Diadem, especially by so easy means, as
personating a Prince, and assuming the title of the next heir to the crown:
And when some of his better understanding friends laid open the danger and
impossibility of the attempt, with the odiousnes and perf^diousnes of the
Treason, he answered the first with one Poet: Fa^naque post Cineres mayor
venit, Li. 4. de (...)
and mihi nomen
Tum quoque cum vinis annumerarer, erat
And the latter with another:
Si enimiiniuste facere opportet, potissimumpropter
Imperium ius violandum est: (...)
alias pium esse conuenit*
But although this mischief was quietly blown over like a weak and thin
cloud suddenly dispeirced by a forcible wind (For both Master and Scholar were
quickly apprehended: the one hanged on Shrouetuesday at Saint Tho. Watrings,
and the Friar condemned to perpetual imprisonment) yet it left such an
impression behind, to the troub^^^g, as a man may say the whole Region of the
air, that the King would dally no longer, but like the Sun in his full
strength at the next incensing of his majesty, dissolved all such vapors, and
gave the law leave to play her part to the final extirpation of the very roots
of sedition, which presently was thus set on work.

Peter Warbeck impatient at this restraint of his liberty, and stomaching his
former disgraces and indignities, would endure no longer, but studied every
hour how to escape, not yet knowing what to do, when he did escape, to which
purpose by fair promises and false persuasions, he corrupted his keepers:
Strangwaies, Blewet, Astwood, and long Roger servants of Sir John Digby
Lieutenant of the Tower to slay their said Master: and set both Perkin and the
true Earl of Warwick at large, and so to make their fortunes, as they could
either by domestike or foreign friends: to which, when the innocent Prince
condiscended, as glad any way to enjoy his liberty, and to be freed of his
imprisonment (for you see birds kept in golden cages beat and flutter up and
down as scorning their enclosure, Perkin corrupting his keepers to escape out
of the Tower is taken and hanged at Tiburn.
to get out into their native Country the region of the air) mischief and
misfortune, which plays the tyrant with many men all their lives long, and
never affords one day, or breathing time to give them a taste of any
pleasure, or contentment, discovered the whole conspiracy to the King and his
Council, not leaving out any circumstance which might either exasperate his
rage, or pull forward death and destruction to the delinquents. Whereupon,
without further disputing the matter Perkin Warbeck, John a Water sometimes
Mayor of Corck, and his son were the 16. of November arraigned and condemned
at Westminster of high Treason, and the 23. hanged at Tyburn: Perkin mounted on
a scaffold reading his confession, and contrary to all expectation, a^king the
King and Country forgiveness, and dying penitently with great remorce of
conscience, and compunction of spirit: Et sic ^inis Priami --

Not long after Edward Earl of Warwick, who had been the 21. of November
arraigned at Westminster before the Earl of Oxford high Constable of England
for the present, The Earl of Warwick beheaded.
was upon the 28. 1429. beheaded at the Tower Hill: For he quietly confessed
the enditement, concerning his consent and willingness to obtain his
liberty, though it were by violating the law in that kind, and breaking of
prison, whose simplicity I rather lament, then condemn the offense. For it was
a dangerous time for any Plantaginet to live in, and I may well cry out: Omne
tulit secum Caesaris ira malum: But the King was indeed glad of this occasion,
and fortune gave virtue the check, because as he had imprisoned him without a
cause, he knew not what to do with him without a fault: yet some report that
the principal reason of accelerating his death was a speech of Ferdinando's
king of Spain, who should swear, that the marriage between Lady Katherine his
daughter, and Prince Arthur of Wales should never be consummated, as long, as
any Earl of Warwick lived. For the very name and title was not only formidable
to other Nations, but superstitions to the wau^ring, and unconstant English:
whereupon the King was the gladder to take hold of this opportunity, where in
the conviction of Law had cast this stumbling block of treason in his walk and
race to a longer life, and yet was there nothing done, but by orderly
proceedings, and justifiable courses: more then when the silly Prince submitted
to his mercy, he thought it the greatest point of mercy to look to himself,
and so for the benefit of his posterity, and the sedation of all troubles both
present and to come, struck off his head, and with him the head of all division
and dissension.

FINIS.

