Their deeds in effect, my life would have
Their words do pretend, my living to crave
Their deeds I dread not, their words being such
I dread and regard, in manner as much.
My life is but vile, I esteem as light
Then should I in gooddes, or living delyght
Whom matters and deeds, naught moves at all
Should wind and vain words, his courage appall.
Not man unto man, can threaten I wot
More grievous then death, the horrible lote
And be it that death, by sentence of man
I suffer and that, well suffer I can.
What should I regard, this transytorie state
Regard and think on, both early and late
I must a new life, that ever shall last
Subject to no death, no syckenesse, no waste.
Than welcome be death, the entrye of life
And dew to the world, the stage of all strife
Life lost in this wise, releuyth again
For ever in bliss, to live without pain.
From hence and herein, my comfort and stay
Reposed I have, that can not decay
God grant me such loss, that rayseth this gain
God grant me that death, such life to retain.
In mean time and space, say properly this
I may and in place, Vana salus hominis.
Stephen Wynton.

YOur deeds in effect, that made your life brave
Has caused your words, the truth to deprave
Your deeds ye forget not, your words being such
You drive on and dread not, all men se to much.
Your life has been lewd, which ye esteem light
Of force to leave gooddes, no thank to go quyght
Though matters and deeds, naught move you at all
Let God and his threats, your stowtenes appall.
For man unto man, can naught threate ye wot
More grievous then death, that horrible lote
But if ye have death, that Justice give can
Dread then your deserts, and blame ye not man.
Amend and repent, your stobourne estate
That truth has near tried, but almost to late
A patarne most popysshe, from first to the last
As wylfull, as wyttie, which want works waste.
I doubt the welcome of death, to that life
Plased for Popes pageantes, in stage of much strife
Life lost in this wise, releuyth again
As he that from bliss, returns to pain.
From hence and herein, your comfort and stay
Reposed you have, which needs must decay
If God for this loss, do grant ye dew gain
God shylde ye from death, such life to retain.
In mean and space, our prayer is this
As we may in place, God turn to his.
H. S.


