

Steven Bishop of wynchester to the reader.
GOD give the (gentle reader) judgment to discern truth from untruth.
Bitwene which two, in the persons of me and Joy, thou shall se contencio^.
Wherein I have not such regard to the man, to dispute with him (whom by saint
Poules counsayll, after so many admonitions, I should exchue) but only to
treat the matter, which needs true explication. As I have contemned the ioyly
hunter and other ianglers, wiselye in my friends opinions: so should I do
Joy, for any thing he has said of me. And against Joy I strive not, who
ouerturneth him self, but am enforced to talk with him, as a medler in the
thing, which I can not pretermitte, and suffer vndeclared. I ca^ not frame my
writings meet for all men's capacities, either learning fails, or the matter
will not suffer, good will wants not, which I would wysshe, were throughlye
persuaded unto the, with this also, that albeit, tharticles of our belief, with
knoweledge sufficient, for direction of our living, to gods pleasure, may be
comprehended of rude and unlearned wits: yet the discussion of the
scriptures, requires gods further gifts of erudicion and learning.
Farewell.

To George Joy.
AFter your book has been well worn in the hands of your favorers, it is
comme at the last to mine, If I had sooner had it, I would sooner have entered
thopeninge of that matter, not to contend with you (whose raylyng I esteem no
more then I do the ioylye hunters of the fox, and other of that rabble) but to
declare the truth, in the matters ye improve: therroure wherein, is very
dangerous, and the true understanding very profitable. Ye take upon you to
confute Wynchesters false articles, as ye term them: the truth whereof, I shall
examyne hereafter, In the mean time I marvel, how such matter as I spoke by
mouth, in the instructynge and teachinge of Barnes, at such time, as by his
own suit, to the kings majesty he submitted him self to be my scoler,
should come to your hands written or unwritten, and who toulde tales out of
ye scoole* For Barnes had but one scoole fellow with him, and between us was no
writing, but taking upon me the place of a teacher at Barnes desire: I uttered
some such matters as ye write of, but more at large, to Barnes and his scoole
fellow, by way of doctrine, with some other explication, then ye do set
fourth. And it shall not be out of purpose, to speak somewhat of Barnes, of
mine acquaintance with him, and what has chanced between him and me,
whereby may appear, how truly and charitably you master Joy and such as
ye be report of me concerning Barnes, whom I knew first, at Cambridge, a
trim minion friar Augustine, one of a merry skoffynge wit frerelike, and as
a good fellow in company was beloved of many, a doctoure of divinity he was,
but never like to have proved to be either martire or confessor in christ's
religion, ^uther exceeth in the eat of ray^nge and Joy does netely for a
coler, the ^yly hunter nay compare ^ith either.
and yet he began there to exercise raylynge (which among such, as newely
profess christ, is a great piece of connyng, and a great forwardnes to
reputacion specially if he rail of Bisshops, as Barnes began, and to* please
such of the lower sort, as enuieth ever authority) chiefly against my lord
Cardinal, then under ye kings majesty, having the high administracion of the
realm. It chanced at the same time, a friend of Barnes, in Cambrydge, to be
sued for just debte, by his neighbor, which creditour, for no entreaty that
Barnes could make, would leave his suit, but have his debt paid him, as the
law would, whereat Barnes waxed angry, and began to preach of it, Barnes
began at the lewdest opynion of the Anabaptists whereby to extinct the order
of justice.
and as he warmed in the matter, spoke so much the more violently, and to show
him self stout, plainly affirmed in the pulpet, that it was not lawful for
one christen man, to sue an other, and that he would stand by, and prove by
saint Paul. Of this preaching complaynt was made to the vicechaunceloure, and
after the matter hard among the doctoures, and somewhat spoken sharpelye by one
doctor Preston (whom Barnes could not bear) it was ordered, that Barnes
should recante that false assertion, which is an article of the Anabaptists,
upon refusal whereof by Barnes, ye matter was brought to my lord Cardinals
knowledge, ^ wantonne ^yghtnes so ^o ieeste at those days ^f one in so ^igh
aucto^itie and without all ^ute of edi^ication.
with accumulacion of such raylynges and iestinges as Barnes had made, against
miters and crosses, and all my lord Cardinals hauoure, so far as in his
sermons in place of carnal affections, he termed them cardinal affections,
wherein he pleased some, at those days. At the time of this accusacion of
Barnes: I was in service with my lord Cardinal, of acquayntau^ce with Barnes:
Almost all ^at have ^n notable ^aue ben of ^y special ^cquayn^au^ce. I have
^ued the ^n, and ^er hated ^e noughtie ^pinion from ^e begyn^ynge.
and not accounted his enemy, and yet I thank god, never favored such
strange opinions, as he and some other wantonlye began to set forth, but
because there was not then in them malice, and they maynteined communication,
having some savor of learning, I was familiar with such sort of men, and was
then sorry for Barnes, and glad to help him, so far as might stand with my
duty, to my lord my master against whom he rayled. And yet that raylynge,
in a friar had been easily pardonned, if Barnes had not fondly persisted in the
Anabaptists opinion, denieng suits to be lawful among christen men. And I
labored with Barnes secretly to bring that out of his head, wherein he
yielded to me, upon the showing to him, of a saying of saint Austen,
expoundynge the scripture, where Barnes took his error. So as afterward Barnes
was content to abjure that opinion, with crosses staves and miters, My lord
Cardinal would not s^f^r Barnes raylinge w^ be at libert^
and al his jesting matter, and all this time took me for his friend, as I was
in deed, his folly set aparte, and had showed him as I thought, a fre^dly
turn. When Barnes afterward had broken out of the keeping of the freres
besides Stanforde, and escaped out of the realm, Barnes ^oke remay^eth in
print ^hereby the ^uth hereof ^ay appear.
the first tidings I hard of him, was in a book made by him and prynted,
wherein he wrote, how doctor Steuens (by which name I was then called) had
deceived him, by showing him a place of saint Austen and thereby had
inueygled him, to leave his opinion for I showed him not (he said) the hole
saying of saint Austen but a piece of the beginning, and if I had read it him
thoroughly, the latter part had made, for confirmacion of his opinion. And this
reward had I, for the first friendly deed I did him, Sins which time, at his
repair into England under saufe conduyte, not to be touched, for such suit he
made upon pretense, that he had matter to show worthy to be known, I
chanced to meet with him at Ha^pton court, where in the presence of my lord
of Caunturbury, that now is, I laid that mysreport of me, to his charge, and
there showed him the book, to se saint Austins words, which in the first part
and also last part, condemned his Anabaptisticall opinion. Wherevpo^ Barnes
fill down on his knees, and asked me instantly forgeuenes, with promise to
write a book to the world, wherein to declare, that he had belyed me. Upon
which reco^ciliation, I had Barnes home to my house that night and made him the
best chere I could. And hitherto I trust no man can judge, I should
persecute Barnes, but Barnes me, because I suffered him not to be worthelye
burnte. But after he was reconciled I forgate that, and Barnes forgate also to
purge me, and blame him self to the world of his lie against me. After this
Barnes returned frelie into England, and lived here triumphantlye, till by his
own pride and arrogance, he sought his own confusion and persecuted him
self, The material points of this story, ^e either public within memory or
have such witness as all men will, (I think) believe, for they be indifferent
/ and the truth of the matter should much declare me, and disprove such as
rail to the contrary.
wherein I was only an occasion as a stumblyng stone, but otherwise no doer
but a sufferer, as in the truth of the storye shall appear. In declaracion
whereof, think not amysse of me (reader) for I mean only the reformacion of
such as seduced by false prophets, be wrong borne in hand, and have feigned
lies told them, of such as they take for masters in lerninge, and other,
noted to be their adversaries. Among which adversaries, I have been noted, as I
have not ben, ne am angry at it: but as I have not merited, and therefore have
taken it for a lesson, what I should have done, and ought to do, for else I
have been wonderful negligent to deserve any such brute among men, Those help
I never yet searched to uphold the truth, I deserve no praise herein but only
because I tell truth.
nether by fre^dshyp ne secret communication I have not kept one scoler at
Ca^brydge or Oxford syns I was bishop to be brought up in the catholic
opinion, which is also mine, I have not gone about to allure by any worldly
entiseme^t any man to it: but have followed therein thadmonition of the word of
scripture I write Vana salus hominis. As I have been called, in place, I have
used thopportunitie, and as I have been provoked, I have written and spoken as I
have done to Bucer: and as I do now to you master Joy, but else I am
persuaded, that being the truth, a matter which god has to heart, and under
him ye kings majesty, The sunday before in the court at dinner upon co^playnt
of the Deane that he was unprovided, the orde great ^hamberlain ^amed me which
I ^ould^ not ^efuse.
I may with untimely busynes in it, and out of my place, rather hinder then
further. According to which determination, when I had preached the first friday
in the beginning of Lent. Anno. M.D.xxxix. before the kings majesty upon the
words of the prophet, Clama ne cesses, and had cried out somewhat, that Barnes
and some other lyked not, I take here^ies in the ^hurche to be ^ke byles in ^
man's body ^hiche ouer^one lau^ced ^are sorer: and in time ^trifie their ^atier,
and ^ele of their self with a ^yttell clen^ng plaster ^f the chief ^urgeon.
where I was desired by a learned friend, to procure that I might preach, that
day all ye Lent, to him I answered, that I was called suddenly to make the
sermon I had made, and spoke therein that I thought to be spoken, but I would
not meddle so far as to auaunce my self further in the matter to make my
self a captain against them, for mine opinion was, that they should not
dissolve by pollycye against them, but by excess of their own malice work
their own confusion, some confirmacion, whereof incontinentlye followed, as I
shall truly tell, whereof I have witness living, I minded some sunday of that
lent, to preach at Paul's cross, as I had been years before accustomed, and
upon the first saturday in lent, going to Lambehith there to be occupied all
that day, I devised with my chaplein that he should go that day, and know who
should occupy the cross that lent, and to speak for a place for me on one of
the sondayes, not meaning the sunday, that should be on the morrow, for I
had in my mind more reverence to that audyence, then without some
convenient premeditacio^, to show my self there. Nevertheless my chapleine,
repayrynge to know, how the sondayes were appointed, and understanding that
Barnes should preach the first sunday (which was the morrow) thought in his
mind, rather to take that day for me then any other, specially because he
thought I would speak that was good, and Barnes should be disapoynted to utter
that was naught. And so when I had done my business at Lambehith (which ended
not before five of the clock that saturday) my chaplein the^ waiting for me
told me he had been so bold over me, to appoint me to preach the next day at
Poules cross, adding how he thought better to disapoynt Barnes on the morrow
then some other catholyque man, appointed on other sondayes. Whereupon I
gathered my wits to me, called for grace, and determined to declare the
gospel of that sunday, containing the deuyls three temptacions, the matter
whereof seemed to be very apt, Apart of m^ sermon at Pouls cross^ the first
sunday of lent An. M.D.xxxix.
to be applied to the time, and good occasion, to note the abuse of scripture
among some, as the devil abused it to christ, which matter in deed, I touched
somewhat plainlye, and in my judgment truly. And alludinge to the temptation
of the devil to christ, to cast him self downward, allegyng scripture that
he should take no hurt. I said now a days, the devil tempts the world,
and byddeth them cast them self backewarde. There is no forward in the new
teachinge, but al backward. Now the devil teaches, come ba^ke from fasting,
come back from prayeng, come back from confession, come back from weping
for thy sins, and all is backwarde, in so much as he must learn to say his
Pater noster backwarde and where we said, forgive us our debtes, as we forgive
our debtors, now it is, as thou forgiuest our debtes, so I will forgive my
debtors, and so God must forgive first, and all I said is turned backewarde.
And among other things noted the deuylles craft, what shifte he uses to
deceive man whose felicity he enuieth, and therefore coueteth to have man idle,
and void of good works, and to be led in that idelnes, with a wanne hope,
to live merely and at his pleasure here, and yet have heaven at ye last: And for
that purpose, procured our pardons from Rome, wherein heaven was sold for a
little money, and for to retayle that marchaundise, the devil used freres for
his ministers: now they be gone with all their tromperye, but the devil is
not yet gonne. And now he perceaueth it can no longer be borne to bye and sell
heaven (both the marchaundise is abhorred, and the ministers also, we can not
away with freres, ne can abide the name) The devil has excogitate, to offer
heaven without works for it, so frelye that men shall not need for heaven to
work at all, what so ever opportunite they have to work, mary if they will
have an higher place in heaven, god will leave no work unrewarded, but as to be
in heaven, needs no works at all, but only belefe, only, only, nothing
else. And to set forth this the deuylles craft, there were (I said) mynysters,
but no mo friars, fie on the name and the garment, but now they be called, by
an English name, brethren, and go apparelled like other me^, among which
be some of those that were freres, and served the devil in retaylynge of
heaven in pardons, for they can skyll of the deuyls service. But if the kings
majesty as he has banyshed freres by the French name, would also banyshe
these that call them self brethren in English, the devil should be greatly
discomforted in his enterprise, and idelnes thereby banyshed, which the devil
will else persuade by mysunderstandinge of scriptures, as he did in
thaduauncemente of pardons. This my sermon was thought to some very plain, and
Barnes (as he confessed after, and as appeared by that he did) could not
digeste it, but was persuaded and comforted to handle me somewhat rudely, which
he did the sunday fourtnyght after, in ye same place, where he took to entreat
the same text of the gospel, that I had declared, and left the scripture of
the sunday he preached on, which had not ben seen in that place before. Barnes
preachinge at Paul's cross the third so^day in lent An. M.D.xxxix.
There he began to call for me, to come forth to answer him, he termed me to
be a fighting cock, and he was an other, and one of ye game, he said I had no
spoores, and that he would show. This glory endured but till the friday after,
by which time he had for gotten al: on the saturday chose his scolemaister:
and the monday came to scoole like a good child.
And after he had pleased him self in thallegory of a cockefight, then upon a
foolysh conclusion, he cast me openly his glove, and not content therewith, he
called me forth by my name gardener, and opposed me in my grammar rules, and
said: If I had answered him in the scoole, as I had there preached at the
cross, he would have given me six stripes, and raged after such a sort, as
the like has not ben herd done in a pulpete (ordered to declare the word of
god in, and not to touch any particular man) as he rayled of me, by name
alludynge to my name Gardener, what evil herbs I set, in the garden of
scripture, so far beyond the terms of honestye, as all men wondered at it,
to hear a Bylshop of the realm as I was, so reuyled, and by such one
openly. So as my friends enforced me to complain unto the kings majesty and
for maintenau^ce of common order, not to pass* it over unspoken of. Whereupon
I complained carynge more for the perverse doctrine he went about to
establyshe in deprauing of me, then for any displeasure, could come unto me
by his raylynge. How graciouselye the kings majesty herd the complaynte,
and how indifferentlye his majesty after his accustomed goodness, ordered
thexamynation of it, all good men might have cause to rejoice, and Barnes no
cause of grief but cause of comfort, in the kings majesty's mercy, if he
would have ernestly enbraced it. For what so ever followed worthily by justice,
If Barne^ had not extremely abused the kings majesty's goodness for a little
vain glory among such as magnified him for their own purpose, he had escaped
all punishment*
the kings majesty offered Barnes as much mercy, as ever did prince any
offendour, declarynge how his highness, was desyrouse of concord in the truth,
rather then the punysshemente of any man that would from error be reduced to
the truth: And one notable thing was done, in the hearing of that matter, by
the kings majesty, when Barnes offered to yield to his highness in his
opinion: the kings grace syttinge secretly in his closet, and having with him
the late Earl of Southampton (whose soul God pardon) the master of the horse
that now is, Me, Barnes, master doctoure Cocks, and doctoure Robinson. The
kings highness, A behauour and speech of the kings majesty, secretly done,
and worthy, an open knowledge and eternal memory.
at that offer of Barnes, said, I am (quod his majesty) a mortal man, and
therewith rysyng, and turning to the sacrament, and puttinge of his bonet said:
Yonder is the master of us all, author of truth, yield in truth to him, and I
shall (says the kings majesty) defend that truth. And otherwise Barnes
(quod the kings majesty) yield not to me. Much more there was notably spoken
by the kings highness, to refourme Barnes folly, in his manner and also learning,
which I touch not because I should rather empayre and diminishe that was in deed
said, then tell it fullye. But to the purpose I tell this story for, I desired
the kings majesty, that Barnes and I might commen together of the matter, out
of his highness presence, in the hearing of certain, to be appointed by his
highness as indifferent to make report of our dispitions, and then Barnes
should have no cause to excuse him self if he could not convince me, as he
did in the pulpete, only touching the truth of his doctrine disprouynge
mine. For as for his rebukes, I clearly remytted and forgave them, and would
common as quyetlye with him as if he had used no such language of me, which my
peticion, the kings majesty granted, and appointed master doctoure Cocks,
and master doctoure Robynson with two other to be indifferent hearers between
Barnes and me, and only to hear us talk together, and make report to his
highness. Whereupon that night (which was the frydaye. after Barnes had
preached so outragiouslye of me) Barnes, I, and the hearers, were aparte, where
none other might hear us. And for entry of disputation, between Barnes and
me, I told him I began with forgyuynge all was past, that might touch me, I
began in frendshyp with him, only intending to try the truth of the
doctrine in controuersye between him and me, and therein I offered him choice,
whether he would have me answer him, or he to answer me. He chase to
answer me, whereupon I prepared my self to fashyon certain arguments to
him of the scryptures, ^eherse this ^t for my ^ise, but to ^are Bar^s v^l^rned
^ogancie.
and to my first argument he could make no answer, I made him an other, and
thereunto he could say nothing, but then desired me that I would spare him for
answer to them, that night, and we should comme together again erelye the
next morninge, and so goo through, I told him I was content, and yet if I
should strive with him for glory, after a childysshe fasshion and like a
grammariane, such one as he fasshioned me in the pulpete, all the time he
studied for his answer I should decline, Nto^ conuictus, May^ doctor co^ and
may^ doctor R^bynson w^ present* ^ know ^ to be true
gto^ conuicti. etc. but that were boyeshnes in deed. And therefore he should
have all the night to study on, to make answer with all my heart, and I would
also do so much for him, as to tell him a third of mine arguments, and badde
him think upon that against the morning also, and so departed for that
night. In the morning, we assembled be times according to the appoyntemente.
At which time Barnes went about to assoyle mine arguments, I replied to his
solutyons, and so spente two hours very quyetly and pacyentlye. And
sodaynelye, beyond all our expectations when it was Barnes part to have
spoken, he fell on both his knees, and desired me to have pytye upon him good
Bishop and spoke so many words to my glory and in praise of my lerning, ^
durst ne^ write ^th this, ^d I had ^t the fore^de witness ^ living
as I was ashamed to hear the^, and dare not for vaineglory rehearse now. And
I did no more acknowledge his praise there, to give to me yt I had not, then
his disprayse in the pulpet to take from me that I had, for I had neither
more or less for either of both, but such was Barnes hauour then, so far
discrepant from that in the pulpet, and therefore I tell this matter. In that
submission Barnes granted him self overcome, and desired he might be my
scoler, to be instructed of me, and required all them present to be means to
the kings highness that I might so take him, and desired me to forgette all,
and he trusted if he were with me, his wit should not myslyke me. This change
in Barnes was so far from that I looked for, that I used it in an other
extremity, I took him up from knelinge, I remembered old familiar knowledge,
assured him of me, I refused to be his scoolemayster, It is har^ medelynge with
such manner of (...) if a man pr^cure their p^nishmente (...) they deseru^
there follows diffamacion of cruelty. if man would d^ them good it is
sclau^dered as coruption or flattery.
but being as I perceived, he was minded to fall from error, I would
communicate unto him some honest portion of my living, and named xl. li. a
year, and he to live felowlyke with me in my house. And this I rehearse because
it was told abroad afterward, how I offered him.xl* li. a year to leave his
opinion, but he would not. But to Barnes again, he would needs be my scoler for
ought I could do, and said God had given a gift to me, wherewith to do much
good, and then going a part with me from the rest, began familiarlye to
deuyse which scolefelowes it were expedient to have to scoole with him, and
there devised me a great meany of scolers besides him self, ^ write not ^ll be
^olde (...), for I will ^blysshe no ^ore th^n I ^n prove.
who reformed, al should be well (he said) and in speaking of scolers, told me
many things that I knew not before, but I concluded with him, that he might
bring one to scoole with him and he would, but I would no moo at ones.
Whereupon the kings highness advertised of the conclusion of the matter
between Barnes and me, was content that Barnes should repair to my house at
London the mondaye following, which he did with a scole fellow with him,
neither Ierarde nor Iherome, but an other yet a live. And at that time, in
teaching Barnes, Such me^ as master Joy is corrupt all they meddel with.
I vttred such articles as ye master Joy have put forth in printe, but not
all together so as ye rehearse them, for they have a mark that they have passed
your hands, that is to say, be a little corrupt and falsified, as I show
afterward. When master Barnes had gone to scoole two days, he waxed werye
of that humility, and came the third day, and signified to me that if I
would take him as one that came to confer, he would come still, but else he would
no more come, I perceived from whense the change came, and told him, Such is
the constancy of men of that sort.
saying he had ones yielded him self to me as a scoler, I would so use him,
till I saw him better learned able to be my fellow, which he had not yet
attained sins satterday, at which time he made ye submission. Hereupon they
began to spread abroad an envious rumor of me that I would be scoole master
to all the realm, and many good morowes, and so was I rydde of my waywarde
scoler, and never meddled with him after. At the solemn easter sermon. An, M.D.xl
Barnes in deed troubled me yet ones again at my being at saint Mary spittell
by commandment, After Barnes had given up my scoole he renounced his opinion
to the kings majesty and promised to recant, not at my suit, persecution, or
prosecution.
and syttinge there by the Mayre to hear him preach, and recant in writing,
to the conceyuynge whereof I was not pryuie. But when Barnes right solemplye and
formally had made his recantacion in the formour part of his sermon, at the end
of that: he cried out to me, and asked me forgeuenes with a maruaylous
circumstaunce, as though the world should think I had had need of such a
publyque obtestacion, and needs I must hold up my hand in token of a grant,
and where I, encombred with shamefastnes, Barnes w^ not appoy^ted thus t^ do,
nor it was not needful, I was in authority, wherefore f^re me, no meddled no
further w^ him, and h^ forgiven h^ before.
did not by and by as he required, he called for it again, and bad me hold up
my hand. So it lyked him with a courage to play with me, and to blind the
other submission done secretly, as though it had been of none other sort, and
therewith to boste his own charity, and bring mine in doubt. And when he had
in the pulpete played these two parts, to recant his opinion as he was
appointed: and ask me forgiveness which he did of wantonness, the^ after the
prayer he begins a process of a matter, There is thing m^ true the^ th^ne
more de^stable in a subject, so ^penlye to ^lude his p^ and soueray^ lord,
bes^^ the injury the truth.
and plainly and directlye preaches the contrary, of that he had recanted,
so evidently, as ye Mayer of him self, asked whether he should from the pulpete
send him to ward, to be fourth coming to answer for his contemptuouse
behavior, to preach in the same place, to the same people, the contrary to
his recantacio^. But Barnes was not stayed, ne spoken to, whiles Iherome and
Iherarde had both preached and followed the same trade. ^his ne^ly^n^e was
^tabl^ in ^e late lord ^mwel^ ^ho not ^arkynge noughlye that was ^ritten in
^em, caused ^m self those ^ers to be ^dde to over, and so ^lled Bar^es and his
^owes ^naues.
The kings majesty had appointed certain to make report of the sermons,
before which report, one that favored them, had written to his friend at the
court, how gayly they had all handled the matter, both to satisfy the
recantacion and also in the same sermons to utter out the truth, that it might
sprede without let of the world, and this letter by negligence came to light
whereupon, and report of the sermons, they were al apprehended, and by the
secret counsel (to which company I had then none access, ne had not
almost a year before, ne had not after so long as Crumwels time lasted)
sent to the tower, when Ba^nes was s^ to the tow^ I was (...) of the priu^
counsel.
and thereupon ensued further process, by the hole realm, whereunto I was
privy, but among the rest. And otherwise then I have rehearsed, I have not
persecuted Barnes, and as I have toulde the storye, so it was done. And think
me not (good reader) so much a beast, that all such being yet alive, in
whose presence and knoweledge these matters have passed between Barnes and me.
I would vaynly feign in such a tale, wherein I account not mine estimation to
have overcome Barnes, for he was not learned, and should much hyndre mine
estimation, if any man could in ye I have told, reprove me of a lie. For so
much ye tale may be profitable to ye (reader) to consider how things be blowed
and blustered abroad with lies, and how Barnes death is laid to my charge, ^he
number three signi^th infinite, ^^d so often (...) I forgive (...): and ^^erefore
am (...) his (...) and ^as as Da^^d did per^^^ute Saul.
that have only suffered at Barnes hand, and never did any thing to him, but
ever forgave him, and he ever used forgeuenes, never to amend, but to delude
and tryfle. And if any would note my blindness in vayneglorye, that because
Barnes yielded to be my scoler of policy (as David feigned him self mad
before Achis) I could not epsy it, Thus the (...) examples (...) scripture
(...) applied to ^uer lewd ^ens fautes, ^hen they ly (...) examinaci^n, that
is as ^braham de^^d Sara. (...) they coun^^f^t, that is (...) Dauyd (...) fore
this. Exem^lum placet.
but take it in earnest. I would to such say, that if Barnes counterfaited in
that submission, he deceived moo as well as me, and in deed, a man in his own
praise may soon be made a fool. And one of that company told me (whom I
take for my friend) that he had not thought to hear so much divinity of me,
ne se so much charity in a Bishop. How this matter shall be taken, I
remitte to the indifferencye of the reader, I mente good faith with Barnes and
symplye, and further meddled not with him then I have rehearsed, wherein
appears on my behalf no malice, and there appears also upon what occasion
I have uttered such articles as Joy will now confute for false, which how
substauncially he does, by comparynge his and mine together, I shall entreat
hereafter.

He begins his book thus.

I Chaunsed upon certain articles, entitled to the Bishop of Winchester,
called Steven Gardener, In this rek^nynge Joy has ouershot him sel^
which were written against doctor Barnes and his two fellows, brent
M.D.xxxix. for preaching only faith to justify.

only faith justifies. I was by Barnes choice (as is aforesaid) his
scolemayster, at which time we entreated tharticle of only faith justifies,
as shall hereafter appear

By these his articles, Winchester would prove that works must justify, that
is to say, with our works we must merit the remission of our sins, which
doctrine, as it is contrary to gods word: so is it infuriouse to Christ's
blood, whose godly name is one alone, for all sufficient, even that same
precious hyd treasour in ye gospel: in whom (says Paul) are all ye treasours
of wisdom and knowledge hidden, for in him dwells the most perfitte
fullness, of god verily, and in him are we complete even perfitly justified
without any inweyuinge of Winchesters works. This thing do I tell you (says
Paul) least any man (as now would Winchester) deceive you with his apparaunt
popysshe persuasyons. This full justification by only faith Paul expresses
clearly in these words also. This our everlasting living priest, and
intercessour Christ abides for ever unto this end, even absolutely, fully and
perfytly without any lack or breath to save all them, that through him by faith
come to god the father. Here are we taught Christ to have an everlasting
preesthode to save perfytlye, and sufficientlye through our faith only, and
that he ever lives unto the same end, wherefore for the defense of our so
plentuouse and perfyt redemption, and for the rich favor and mercy of our
heavenly father, and free forgyuenes, in Christ's passion through our faith
only, and that the glory of his grace, whereby he has made us his dearly
beloved chosen children, through his beloved son, should be praised, by
whom we have redemption through his blood, even the remyssyon of sins,
according to the riches of his so plentuouse grace, unable to be mynisshed. To
defend this my lord gods glory (I say) and to warn the simple unlearned
that they be not deceived by such blasphemouse Bishops articles, I shall by
gods help, iustlye by his word, clearly confute them, although he yet teach
and preach them, into his own dampnation, and deceyuyng of as many as believe
him.

preaching taking the word in that sense) it were in deed an occasion of
offense and sclaunder to such sort of men, and in the first apparaunce,
contained blasphemye against the passion of christ, which in the sight of god,
is only sufficient sacrifice for the sin of all the world, so full and
perfyt as it needs not any addicion or supplement of any man's deserte to the
appeasynge of gods just wrath against man for sin. And therefore ye shall not
need to speak of half saviors, or patched saviors, or else bring in your
allegations to prove christ a only redemer. It is the first letter of our
cross row. It is the foundation of our faith. Only Christ is our mediator.
Christ's only passion is our redemption, justice, and satisfaction. And when
Barnes went to scoole with me (as his scoolefelowe can report) this article was
first without any varyaunce agreed on, ^s scoole^owe is ye^ ^yue and ca^ ^ I
say ^th
with such explication as scriptures do testify, that only Christ is our hope,
only christ is our life, only christ is our way, only christ our savior,
holly, thoroughly, perfitly, absolutely, totally, entierly, fully, and herein no
tongue can express so much as the matter truly conteyneth, ne there was ever
any so mad as to bring this truth in question, where by to shake the fou^dacion
of our faith, and to bring in doubt that is so plain and evident, as ye would
bear the people in hand men did, when learned men, impugn your frantique
understanding of this truth. The conte^tion is not of the preciousnes,
validity and effect of christ's passion, but of the use of it. And where your
doctrine should only implye that it is sufficient, to think and talk of
christ's passion, we say it is also necessary to some, to taste and feel of
christ's passion, and also to drink of it, as Christ said. Potestis bibere
calicem, quem ego bibiturus sum? Can ye drink the cup that I shall drink?
And we with the grace of God doing the works of penance, taste and feel the
passion of Christ, and as good men have called it meryting and deseruynge, to
use the benefytes of christ's passion, and by strength thereof to do penance
for sin, which has been called likewise satisfaction, as wherein man
satisfies (that is to say) contenteth God, who says: he wylleth not the
death of a sinner, but that he should turn to him and live. And in this
speech, meriting and deseruynge, sygnyfyeth the due using of the benefyte
offered, after which sort we say also: He is worthy love and favor, that
will leke for it, and do his duty to atteine it. And in this wise the hole
church prays. Omnipote^s sempiterne deus da nobis fidei, spei, and
charitatis augmentum, and ut mereamur assequi quod promit it is, fac nos amare
quod precipis. and in this sense we speak of the merits of our Lady and
other saints who used the benefits of God, to his pleasure and honor. And
albeit the words have long continued in this sense, and in all tongues, yet
such as you be, have maliciouslye impugned them, and caused them to sound, as
though there were meant derogacion to the benefit of christ's passion by the^,
where in deed they do set forth thexcellencie of the same, as by virtue of
which passion, men in state of grace, purchased by christ's mediacion, do the
works of justice, and sinners be called to grace to do the works of penance
whereby to recover the favor of god, with remission and forgeuenes of their
sin. You will percase, find matter of raylyng, that I bring in the words
of the common prayer of the church, for to show the use of the speech, in
the word (merit) and call it papisticall scripture. But I did it not for
want, but upon that occasion to touch the matter. And now I add this gathered
out of scripture, that like as in other actions or qualities being in God
essential, we be called by participacio^, by the names attributed to god, and
for so much, as we do participate have also the thing in deed. And therefore
as God is goodness it self, we by participacio^ from him, be good. As god is
light it self, we by participacio^ from him, be light. As god is wisdom it
self, we by participacion from him, be wise: So as christ merited and deserved
thoroughly: we by participacion in vsyng his gifts, merit and deserve. And as
christ satysfied fullye, so by participacion we also satisfy. And as our
goodness light and wisdom by participacion, is no addition, or derogacion to
gods goodness, light, or wisdom, in essence or being, no more is our
merityng, deseruyng, or satisfaction: a derogacion or supplement to the merits
of christ's passion, but only a due using of them, by the gift of his grace.
Now how this participacion is wrought, and by gods goodness deryued to man:
herein the world is troubled, but the speech with this sense has no
absurdite, and out of this sense it has not ben spoken in the common prayer
of the church. But I did never utter this proposicion, in these terms, to
say: that man must merit remyssyon of sin, nor I have not (as I remember)
read it spoken in this form, till you have so termed it, only to make
matter to talk of, by occasion whereof, ye tell a long tale of heresies as
follows.

In Paul's time there strayed about a certain idle sort and sect of
heretykes, called Nazares or Minei, the most subtle kind of men, in paynting
and perswadynge their false doctrine. These heretics troubled and perverted
the churches, well instituted of the apostels, especyally the Galathiens,
Antiochens, and Romans, against whose heresies Paul did write so myghtely
and ernestly, co^futyng them. These pharisees labored in the same heresy, in
which Winchester now teaches and writes myxing thobseruau^ce of the law,
with the grace of the gospel, even works with faith to iustyfye. These
Nazares confessed Christ to be god and man, that he dyed, rose again etc. but
unto him only, through our faith, they attributed not all our hole
justification, but part thereof (as now does Winchester) to the works of the
law, as unto our own merits and part to his passion, making Christ a
savior to halues. But is Christ divided (says Paul)? These heretics
descended out of ye faction of the pharisees as now do our Iusticiaries, out
of the Pelagia^s, whose ryghtwysenes (says Christ) except ours excelle more
abou^dantly, we shall never come to heaven. These Nazaries were Iues borne, but
in name they would be called Christians, and yet nothing holding the benefit
of grace by Christ, confoundynge the law with the gospel, merits myxte with
grace, free forgyuenes, with deseruynge by works, contendynge no man to be
saved by Christ, except he being cyrcumcised, kept the law of Moses,
against whom Paul with so great labor, far otherwise instituted his
churches, preaching and writing constantly, our sins to be known and showed
us by the law, and not thereby to be taken away only the grace of faith
through Christ to justify all nations. Happy it was that these heretics
spronge up in his days, whose epystels we have yet so myghtlye and clearly
confutyng and pressyng down these heresies, now crepte up again by
Winchester. The chief articles of the christen religion, upon the which all
other are stayed and grounded, is that in Christ Jesus is al sufficie^cie and
perfection of forgyuenesse of sins, and salvation, of whose fulness we receive
grace for grace, as says Ihon^. Wherefore as many as be justified, are
justified by thonely faith in him, and by nothing else, as by any subsidiary,
atteynement (as Winchester would have his helpyng wylworkes) unto his full
justification in Christ the perfection of the law. This is the su^me of the
hole Gospel. This is the station of ye cause, the argument* and material of
all Paul's pistels, even the treds^le or groundsole whereupon, as the door is
turned and returned, so are all his arguments and process, thereupon treated and
retreated. And specially in his pystels to the Romans, Galath. and Hebrews.
And now sith this Bishop sterith up afresshe these old heresies, we can have
no better armoure and arguments, then Paul made against him, first warning
us of such sedicious sect sowers, saying: There are many runners abroad, of
whom I warned you often, but now with weeping tears I warn you again, even
of the enemies of Christ's cross, whose end is dampnatio^, whose belly is
their god, and their glory shall end with shame, whose care and study is set
upon earthly things. I can not maruayle enough at this Bishop, fyghtyng so
earnestly for good works to justify, that he does none him self, but
persecuteth Christ's church so cruelly, prison pitiously, and destroy the
poor innocent lambs of God, christ's own blood, I pass over his luciferine
pride, ambytion, arrogancye, viciouse living etc. above Nero, Julian, Traiane,
Herod, or any soft Sardanapale, By like he believes not his own articles: for
if he did, he would do better works for his own justification. The fruits of
Paul's faith, being ones a Pharisaie, of Winch. opinion, were the persecution
of Christ's church, above measure, as him self testifies. And as all like
pharisees have ever done and do yet still unto this day. God co^uerte them
ones, as he did Paul. So be it. We therefore with Paul and Christ affirm our
only one alone savior Christ, for his own merits and our faith into him
through the favor of his father appeased in him to iustifye (that is) to
absolve us, from our sins, and to give us life eternal. This our only
savior, we preach and write, to be the only rightwysnes, wisdom, holy
maker, redemption and satisfaction, sufficient for all that believe in him. And
if there be any that think Christ's rightwysenes his satisfaction, his
merits, and redemption, made for us of his father not a sufficient
iustificacio^ and forgyuenes of their sins, but that they must set their own
works, checkmate with his passion and redemption, to help forth unto the
atteynement of this effect of Christ's passion, (well) let them couple and
wrappe in their own works to, for their justification, and then in so doing,
shall they procure their own dampnatio^. For all our good works or
ryghtwysenes (says I say) are right fylthy and naught, and so much the worse
then naught, for that they be set in so high a place, e^all with Christ's
blood, which is a plain blasphemye. These unright rightwyse makers would
serve two contrary masters at ones, the pope and god to, the gospel and the
popes laws, but whiles they thus haulte on both sides with Baals priests, they
serve truly the devil, which has no concord with Christ, neither shall
there any papyst nor chrystian believe them, for in conclusion ye shall se them
to be justified, neither by works nor faith, but dampened for their unbelief,
no man beleuyng nor loving them by their wicked works procuring them self
the hatred of all men.

^euisers of ^we terms ^e noted by ^ynt Paul ^^ men of ^issension ^ religion:
and works checkemate, with such devises of new words (which saint Paul
notes, as a mark to tell what ye be) be all to no purpose. And besides the
issue of the matter in hand, ye disprove troublers of the church with evil
opinions, as though ye were none of them that troubled it, ye cry stowe the
thief, to hyde your self with the noise, and thereby escape thattachement of
the folowers. I for my self, boost not my works to the world, but do the
office of an hand, at a cross, to say this is the right way, and whether I
stere or no, to enter the way my self, I have god to my judge, to whom I
stand or fall, and ye take upon you to judge an other man's servant, I stir
up no heresies, but as ye provoke me say my conscience to the disprove of such
blasphemouse heresies, as ye stir up. Wherein your asseueracions and mine
set aparte, let the matter show it self. The scryptures ye have brought
in against me, read them ones again, and mark them for your own part, to
whom most properlye appertains to be called the runners about: to me, that
speak to no man of the matter, but as I am provoked, or you that in your
writings wander abroad and be in every man's ears and where ye dare appear,
show your self, and specyallye at Antwerpe, to corrupt the youth, from
whense one came of late, to search proufes, against your person, to
dysproue the false witness (as he said) ye had borne with your tongue,
whether he belyed you or no, I will not affirm, for albeit ye give me cause to
doubt of your truth throughlye, yet I will not comdemne you, in that I know
not, as ye do me. But let us se what follows in your book. Ye enter into
mine articles thus. Now to his articles.

First article.
Theffecte of Christ's passion has a condition. The fulfyllynge of the
condition dyminisheth nothing theffecte of Christ's passion.

God is thelyghte, and will not be taught with dark and co^fuse terms. Isay
prophesied of Christ that when he should come, he should not be dark and
dyfficyle or hard in his doctrine. Now speak thou plainly (said his
disciples). And Paul rejoiced greatly that he had so syncerelye and frelye
preached the gospel: Christ toulde his that they should be the light of the
world purely and clearly to teach, especially the chief principilles of the
christen relygion of which the psalm has: Manifest and clear are thy words
(oh lord) they illumyne and give understanding to the little ones. But and if
gods word appear into us hard and dark, our own sluggishnes, negligence,
and ignauy is the cause thereof: If it be dark, it is dark to the^ that hate
ye light: If it be unsavory it is so to the^ that list not to taste thereof. It
is hard ridles to the^ which are so wise in their own conceytes that they
disdeine to learn of any man, as it was to the seers, herers, and vndersta^ders
which hard cr^^t and understood him not, so blind at none days (ye gospel now
clearly common) that they stagger, and reele in the clear light, like drunken
crowns of proud Ephram and Moab. By like Winch. is a shamed of the plain
simple words of christ's gospel, as of these wont and common words
forgyuenes of sins, faith and works, but goes about to cover them with his
conditions, effects, fulfillinges and confuse knowledges. The scriptures know
none other effect and condition, but remission of sins upon this condition
that we believe christ to have died for them and to have risen again for our
justification. Thou shalt call his name Jesus (said the angel to Mary) for
he shall save his people from their sins. Math. 1. Therefore was Christ
lyfted upon the cross, that as many as believe in him should be saved. Every man
may se that Wynchester, entendeth some iuglinge cast with his confuse
condition, which he dare not express, calling it works speaking plainly.
Theffecte of Christ's passion, has works whose fulfillynge. etc.

neither darkely nor confusely. And why ye should call it so, I se not, for
both ye matter is certain, and the words commonly used and understood.
Theffecte of Christ's passion, is the work therein intended (that is to say)
to reconcyle man to god and bring him to salvation, wherein, I asked Barnes,
whether he took the effect of christ's passion to be absolute to man, or with
a condition on man's behalf. If it be absolute and without condition, then shall
all men be reconciled and saved. For saying Christ dyed for all: if nothing
else were required on man's behalf, it should extend to all men, and then
should no man be dampened, but all saved at the last, as the Origenistes said.
Here unto Barnes first answered, as ye say now, that he knew no condition,
but if a man believed. I asked him then: whether he would grant there was that
one condition? He said yea, he would graun^ that, for else he must have agreed
to an inconvenience, that all men shall be saved, whether they believed or no.
And herevppon the first proposicion that ye now call dark, was agreed unto,
that the effect of christ's passion had a condycyon. I asked Barnes then,
whether the fulfillyng of the condition, did dymynysshe the glory of Christ's
passion? that is to say: Whether the passion of Christ were more gloriouse to
redeem man, whether he believed or no? and so doing nothing? or else when man
by gods gift wrought the work of belefe in ye same? Whereunto he said that
ma^s belefe did nothing diminishe the glory of christ's passion. And because he
had before granted, that belefe was a condition, which decerned them that
shall enjoy the fruit of Christ's passion, and them that shall not: thus we
termed that proposicion, that the fulfyllynge of the condition, required in
man: did nothing diminisshe the glory of Christ's passion. And thus far
we agreed, I only dissentinge from him, that where he said, he knew but one
condition, that is to say beleuynge, as you do now. I said because he came
to me as a scoler, I would learn him mo conditions required in man, and among
many other, told him of this* wherein he had in his open sermon inueyed
against me. To forgive his neighbor or else he should not be forgyuen. And
concluded upon that he had granted before that the fulfilling of this
condition was not the diminution of the glory of Christ's passion. And so
likewise of any other condition required in scripture of man, either in his
incorporation into christ by baptism, or returninge to christ by penance,
with perseueraunce in virtue, for the atcheuyng of eternal life. And after
this sort we discussed this matter in earneste with such respect to the
honor of the passion of Christ, as we esteemed it most abominable sacrilege,
to diminysshe any part of the fruit and effect thereof. But it follows in your
book. But play on yet a gods name Wynchester.

second article.
They that will enjoy the effect of christ's passion must fulfill the*
condition.

YEt will ye not express your condition? well, then will I express it for
you. For I know your mind is to prove works to justify. This is Win.
article. They that will enjoy the forgyuenesse of sins, must do good works.
And so he entendeth as ye shall se anon after this wise deduction, to conclude
his foolyssh conclusion, yet play on Winchester a gods name above the board.



Yet Vvi^ second article.
The fulfillynge of the condition, requires first knoweledge of the condycyon,
which knoweledge we have by faith.

Ah good faith, where have thou ben all this while: has this iugler kept the
this long in his bag under ye board* thou have tarried all to long, for
Wynchester will be justified by his condition ere thou co^mest. Here might I
ask Wine. whether works (which are his condition) be before faith, or faith
before his works? By his process, works go before faith, and so must his
works be sin and displeasure to god. For what so ever is not of faith (says
Paul) is sin. And without faith, it is impossible to please God. If faith
goes before works then must faith only iustifye, or else it is no faith, as I
shall now prove by Paul, which giving to faith her essential diffinition,
joins it immediately and essentially unto things invisible assured us by
hope, saying, faith is a substa^cial assured persuasio^, of things hoped for,
with a sure hope and confidence, even the certeinte of things invisible. God
invisible so entierly joins him self to faith, that in the faithful he
dwells, and they in him. Faith therefore always inseperably is joined to gods
mercy, his grace, remission of sins, to salvation, and life eternal through
Christ, which all are invisible things hoped for. But Winchester dreaming us
forth, his new fained faith, coupleth her to an externe knowledge of what manner
a visible fulfylling I ca^ not tell you, nor yet of what a fond confuse
condition, nor yet of him self expressed. Join you thy faith to an outward
visible bodily thing, and so it is neither faith nor hope. Blessed are they
that believe and se not, Now must Wyn. prove his condition, with the
fulfylling and knowledge thereof, to be things invisible, hoped for as
eternal life. etc. or else his faith shall not be that faith, which Paul
diffineth, and christ so often mencioneth in his gospel.

is first say you? by mine own words, faith or works? And yet ye say by my
process works go before, when my words rehearsed hitherto declare the contrary.
But ye were so pleasant in scoffinge, that ye forgate the matter. And these be
the fruits of the spirit that vexes you. This is ye mild, meke, sobrenes of
your profession of christian charity, I will ask you a question waking. Is
not all our certain knoweledge of gods will and pleasure by faith? Some part
of your words seems to say yes, when ye call it the certeinte of things
invisible. And yet when ye say that I dream an ex^erne knoweledge of visible
things with addicio^ of these two words (yt is to say) externe and visible.
Ye say, ye can not tell us more of it. And it is a world, to se how fondely ye
talk, for faith in no sense can signify an externe knowledge which is only by
the senses. And where did I talk in my dream of visible things speaking
of god and his will, which be all invisible, and in gods will is contained the
condition I speak of, which after knowledge thereof, as I said, must be
fulfilled, and without knoweledge before, can not be fulfilled. As for your
mangled argument, to conferme the proof ye promysse, shall be more
commodiously entreated afterward. In this part I show only, how ye wrangle
with me, and take upon you to improve that ye understand not, as by the
rehearsal of my next article shall appear more plainly. Ye rehearse it thus.

third article
This faith comes of God, this faith is a good gift. It is good and profitable
to me: It is profitable to me to do well and to exercise this faith.

This faith so far of flytted from the invisible iustyfycatyon whether it be
the gift of God, and profitable to Wynchester I doubt it, but this I am sure
of, by Christ's own words, that when Wynchester has done all that God
commanded him (which I dare say he shall never do) and so never fulfill his
condition, yet is he but a servant (if he be not a lord) unprofitable. I would
ask Wynchester when he looks and considers first theffecte of christ's
passion, whether he believed it or no? If he did not believe, so was he then an
infidel. If he believed it (saying it is the promised forgyuenes of sins in
Christ's blood) whether believed he it to be effectuouse to him self, or only
to other men? If to other, and not to him self, so is his faith and the
deuylles faith all one. If he believed his own sins, to be forgyuen thereby,
so was he justified by faith only, ere any other condition was known or
spoken of, or else he must make christ a liar, which says: As thou beleuest
so come it to the. When Iairus desired Christ, to come and help his daughter,
and in Christ's coming Iairus his servant met him saienge: Desease not
Christ out master no further, for your daughter is dead. What said Christ?
Said he not to him, fear not? Believe only and she shall be safe. These same
words (only believe) stand both in Mark and Luke. What condition else then
faith only in Christ's promysse, can Wynchester find, to enjoy the effect
of Christ's passion? Christ (all conditions else set a side) only faith
mentioned, said: Thy faith has saved the. What condition else then faith
did Christ require of the chyldes father, prayenge him to cast the evil
spyryte out of his son? Added he any thing else then faith, saying: If
thou canste believe all things are possible to the beleuer. Away Wynchester
with your confuse comberouse condycyon, fond fulfyllynges and your crafty
knowledge, and abuse not the preciouse gift of faith, to serve your synful
affectes, to prove your blasphemouse conclusion: But yet perchance Wynchester
will answer to my former questyon, that when he beholds the forgyuenes of
his sins, in Christ's passion, he sees also therewith his condition, well be
it so. Then ask I him, whether the forgyuenesse of his sins there beholden,
and him self hearing Christ calling and cryeng: Comme unto me Wynchester,
laden with sins and I shall ease the, whether (I say) it is moore profitable
for him by faith to set hold* of the forgyuenes of his sins, now offered
him by christ, that can not lie, or to tarry and send him word, that he will
first know and fulfill his condition? A wise man would think it most
profitable, to set hold first, by faith upon his iustificacion freely now
offered him, and to take the thing certain and present, rather then so
precious a gift neglected, to labor in an uncertain condycyon. For if his
condition be the works of the law (as he will not deny it) which it is
impossible for any flessh to fulfill, (as Paul affirms) and al our best
works are infected with Adams birth poison, stained like the sick woman's
clothes, as Isai says. And if Wynchester (I say) tarry till he has fulfilled
his condition he shall come to short of his justification in Christ. For ere he
begins to full fill the condition, he is disobedient to christ's calling and
refuses the forgiveness of his sins, of which unfaith f^ll disobedience, what
so ever deed follows, it is sin, yea and that a greuouse sin, as Samuel
exaggerateth it unto king Saul, albeit he did it (as they say) of a good
intent.

and profitable to me to do well, and exercise this faith. Ye note me to have
spoken a sort of good words, but such as I spoke not in deed, and be in deed
nothing to the purpose. And it had been a coold speech to say, faith is a good
gift, and it is good and profitable, and it is profitable to me to do well. I
that had called faith the gift of god, and necessaryly before all required for
knowledge, it had been worship fully spoken afterward, to say, faith is a good
gift by laken, as though any gift of god, could be otherwise then good.
Barnes wit was more fresh, ^r^de that ex^ed grace ^rred al in ^arnes and many
mo.
and our matter more lively and quycke, the^ to make these articles as ye note
them: And they serve nothing to the co^clusyon, that ye rehearse afterward ergo
by the gift of god, I may do well before I am justified. And yt was in deed the
matter proponed between us. whether a man might have grace to do well before he
were justified. For master Barns had affirmed yt albeit god says: we must
forgive our neighbor, to obtain forgyuenes of god, yet he said that god must
forgive us first, before we forgive our neighbor. For else to forgive our
neighbor were sin, by ye text that ye bring in: All that is not of faith
is sin. A true saying, but brought in, to subuerte truth, as ye devil did
scripture. And in this dream was Barnes, that following the new scoole of
extremites, he denied al degrees of grace, as you do, and said: A man could do
nothing good or acceptable before the grace of justification. For co^futation
whereof I agreed first with him and he with me, of the former proposicions, and
came to this that we must have faith first of all, to know what we should
believe. After this I asked him, if a gentile felt him self moved, to go hear
a preaching, or read some part of scripture, whether would he call it well done
of him to go to ye sermon and read ye scripture, or were it sin because it
was before faith? He said it was good: And then I said it must needs be so, for
it was of God and profitable to him. And thereupon followed the conclusion that
ye laughe at, ergo a man may do good before his justification. Barnes was not
content in deed with the conclusion. And when he saw that he could improve
none of the parts whereof it followed: Then began he to say, that such a
gentyle so moved, to go to the sermon, or to read scripture, was then justified
of god in that mocion: And then I replied, Ergo men be justified before faith,
and so were it by Barnes false, that only faith justifies, for this man was
justified without faith. For how should he have faith, before he had hard,
when faith is of hearing, as saint Paul says. But to defend and maintain
his first fond saying, that a man can do no good thing, before he be
justified, he was feign to maynteyne that a man is justified, before he hears
and before he believes and so confounded he the degrees of gods workynge in
time in us. First to call us, and then to justify us, as saint Paul declares
it. Those he has known, he has predestinate, and those he has predestinate,
he has called, and those he has called, he has justified, and those he has
justified, he has glorified. So as calling (which god does by many means)
is before justification, at the lest in order, or else if we considre no
prioritie in gods workinge in time in us, we must as well say, god has
glorified us, when he does justify us, as that he has justified us, ^erard
that ^ffred with ^arnes had preached.
at the calling of us. And in deed one of Barnes companions had preached, that
God had justified us, before the beginning of the world, putting no
difference, between justification in time, and predestination and election that
God works above time, and such a confusion arises, where men will take upon
them, to affirm that they understand not. And because they neither done mind
to do, any good deeds, they would persuade to ye world, ye we ca^ do no manner
of good deeds till we have no need of them for our salvation, that is to say,
til we be justified, and clearly in gods perfyt favor, and assured by our
own belefe of life everlasting, I speak co^fuselye of works of justice and
works of penance together, which they, do not distinct, as appears by Joy
in the last article, but for doctrine I say with saint Austine, that bona
opera (iusticie) sequuntur iustificationem and opera penitencie precedunt.
and as though we should say to god: Give me my wages aforehande and make me
sure that I shall have heaven, and then I profess I will forgive my neighbor.
Then I will fast the true fast from sin. Then I will pray. Then I will do
almose. Then I will love mine enemy. For then I can do it. And before ye, al our
deeds, al our thoughts be sin. Ne man can have grace, to do any of these,
before justification. And so if belefe be required before justification, there
aryseth then a maruelouse perplexytye, how I should work well the work of
belief before I am justified. But as we say my sins be forgiven because I
believe, so because my sins were forgyuen, I did believe. And for defense
hereof, they enter into a darker matter of gods privy counsayl of
predestinacion, and make predestination the next and immediate cause to our
salvation. Predestinacion.
And then as all the world has almost left doing, so they should leave
talking of works, yea and faith also, and say that men be saved by
predestination. For god has so appointed, whose will in them that be
predestinate shall be fulfilled, and in them that be reprobate, can not be
withstanded. Voluntati enim eius quis resistit? And so when men have so long
stryuen to atteyne knoweledge of the truth, and babled of faith and works,
without atteynynge either of both: then as men do, that be weary of all
together, they resort to the idle reasonynge, as the Greeks call it. That
shall be, shall be. And as god has appointed so must it be, and god knows who be
his, and he will lose none of them. And al believed that were preordinate to
everlasting life, and they that be indurate, can not hear or se, for god has
blinded them, finally all things come to pass by an absolute necessite, and
so man's life, death, manours, behauour, state, condition, and every thing is
fixed, and fastened in his place appointed, No conclusion is by Luther more
stoutly affirmed the^ this*
with nails riueted and clenched with mere necessite. This is the last
conclusion of this teachinge. But when I say this now, I look they will be in
the top of me with exclamations, with fie on me wretch that scorneth
predestination, and compares the scriptures with idle reasoninge of the
gentiles. They use the word papish to stop every man's mouth withal.
And this they will ask me. Thou papysh bishop and folysh lawer, do thou
deny predestination? do thou deny gods knoweledge infallible? If god
knows it shall it not be so? Be not those scriptures true, that thou semest
to rehearse in scorn, do not god indurate whom he will, and have mercy of whom
he will? Have any sophistry to avoid this scripure? Be not the words plain
language? and be they not written to us so plainly that we may understand
them? do not God know his? and be not al our hears numbered. To these men I
will first answer, or I go any further with you master Joy, and say that I
acknowledge gods predestination, as whereof I am most certeynly assured by
scripture and also confess the textes of scripture by me rehearsed to conteyne
a most certain truth, and ought therefore to be worshypped and reverenced.
And am sorry, to se the high mysterye of gods predestinacion, and the
scriptures likewise to be abused unseemly by noughtye men, to such end and
effect, as the Greeks and infidels used the false opinion of destinye, and
that they called (...). Thus I lamente to se the truth so abused by
mysvnderstandynge, and any sense to be taken of scripture, under the pretense
of plainnes: that should be contrary and repugnaunte to other scriptures,
that be as plain. Note this similitude for the understanding of scriptures.
And therefore as two stones that be knocked together, put fourth a spark of
fire, which appeared not in any of the stones alone. So two textes of
scripture compared together put fourth a spark of knoweledge and
understanding, which appeared in neither of the textes alone. And therefore
all such textes of scripture as seem to attribute to man, power and faculte,
of him self to do good, how plainly so ever they be, I may gather no sense
or understanding of them, but such as may agree, with those textes of
scripture that show how man of him self can not do any good thing, not so
much as think a good thought, but it be by the special gift and grace of
god. And how plain so ever some of the textes of scripture seem: so to
considre man, as to rese^ble him to an earth pot at the pleasure of the potter,
and only to do as he is ordained to do by god, yet must we forbear to make
any other sense, then such as may agree with other textes of scripture, that
declare man's fre choice, to receive grace, when it is offered him, or to refuse
it, and continue in sin. The sense of scripture is, uniform and plain when
it is found, and gives wisdom to them that be meke in spirit, and not
arrogant in presumption of knowledge, Gregory ^zianzene ^^eth how ^ synes and
fa^tie has ne^gence is yn^ to them, a^ hardness, d^ligence car^ estimacion.
but young in understanding, knowing them selfs to have need of more. Mary
the words of scripture written by the counsel of the holy gooste, has many
times an outward apparaunce of contradiction, by occasion whereof to stay and
exercise us, in searching of the true sense, and to have the more estimation of
it, when we have found it. And therefore it is a great cause of temeritie and
boldness, to bear men in hand that the words of scripture, be so plain and
euidente, where as in deed, when christ opened the scriptures t^ his disciples
they perce^ued that before was hi^de^. So much works right opening.
being the words appointed to contain so high mysteries, they be so placed
and ordered, as they do cover and hyde such precious iewelles, and require a
convenient opening, to show fourth, that is contained in them. And therefore
the words of scripture, be not so plain and open as men would have them to be
esteemed, ^or want of ^is search, ^uche error taken for ^th.
but require a search as Christ said. Search the scryptures. And saint Peter
says, that in saint Paul's epistels be many hard places, which many have
depraved. etc. And albeit the true sense of scripture, has been by the spirit
of god, preserved in the church, as certain and inviolable, ^en may of ^alyce
cor^upt the wor^es of scripture.
how so ever it has been impungned in sundry ages: yet have some words of
scripture in certain places ben for a time maliciouslye changed, sometime
left out neclygently, sometime of ignorance perverted, and again by gods
goodness restored, but not without learning, and senses exercysed in
knowledge, as does appear by such labors as good men have employed by gods
gift and assistaunce, for the clear expoundyng of ye scriptures. And thus much
I say to the facilite and easy understanding of scripture, which many do
arroga^tly presume to have by them selfs atteyned. As to the mystery of
predestination, which is gods high secrecye, Predestin^c^on.
scripture enforces all men to confess, the predestinacyon of God in his
saints, whereof saint Paul speaks specially in the epistle to the Romans
and also to the Ephesians, which is also noted and signified in the prophets,
and spoken of and touched in every part of scripture. For as the tenure of the
latter judgment, conteyneth how God has prepared a kyngedome: So has he
prepared a chosen people, to enjoy that kyngedome. And this has god wroughte
as saint Paul says according to the purpose of his own will and goodness:
in praise of his glory, to be communicated unto man. significati^ of
pr^de^nation.
And so we may call predestination the decree of god to help and direct men
chosen to the end of their glorification. And so whom so ever god choseth, he
predestinateth. Whom he predestinath, he calls. Whom he calls, he
justifies: and whom he justifies he glorifieth. Whereby appears, how god
is the auctor, thayder, thassister, and continual helper, to bring man to
felicity. And hereof god does assure us, that thus he works with his elect
people, comforta^ remem^ce of ^edestinati^n.
whereof we should conceive great consolation and comfort, being persuaded that
god is with good men. And if he be with us, what can we fear any man or
devil? And so long as we remember gods election and predestinacion to this
effect: it is profitable to us. And when we enterprise to unclasp the book
o^^ly^e, and will ^sume to devour the apple of secret knowledge, to be like
god in understanding and knoweledge of ye good and evil men, and se how god
orders his election, and decree of predestinacio^, in discerninge one man
from an other without acception of persons, and yet leaving therewith to all
men fre choice and election, to use gods gifts or reiecte them. We that be
thus curiouse, shall be eiected and cast out by the aungel of god, and thrust
into the darkness and blyndnes of our sensual reasonyng, and so confound our
selfs with doubt upon doubt, as we can not tell what to say. Here some
will percase, replye that I have spoken a meany of good words, which serve
rather to wind up the matter again, then to declare it. For that I have said
hitherto of predestination, ^re might ^n end, if (...) were ^ent
is the sense of a few words of the wise man, saying. Seek not for things
that be above thy capacity, and let gods secrecies alone. And after this sort
saint Paul handled this matter to the Romans in the.ix. chapter, and
continues in that matter, to the xii. concluding there with an exclamacion of
the height of the wisdom of god, and of his counsels and judgments, not
able to be comprehended by man's understanding, but the process of that matter
well digested should much satisfye all men, in consideration of this high
mysterye. For when saint Paul for declaration of his abundance of charity
toward his nation of the Jews, with a zeal of the setting forth of gods
glory, as he wisshed him self abiecte from gods favor, so all the Jews
might be saved, to whom God had showed so many prerogatyues: He answered
then, as it were to the obiectyon of a murmuring Jew, that would impute the
fall of the Jews to the change of gods pleasure, meaning (as it were
(blasphemouslye, that God had failed of his word and promysse. And first
saint Paul says: The word^ of god fails not, bu^ is sometym no^ well
understood
The word of god has not failed for the promysse was not made of God, to all
the Jews, but only to the very true Israelites. And all the sede of Abraham, be
not the sons of Abraham of whom God mente, but only in Isaac Abraham's
seed shall be esteemed. And not they that by carnal generation only came of
Abraham, should be the sons of God, but they alone that were the children of
the promysse. By openyng whereof, saint Paul minded to put such a Jew to
silence, with declaracio^ of ye Jews ignorance, that he understood not the
promysse of god as it was made, but understood it carnally, as though it had been made to a carnal generation. And then saint Paul, to declare further to
them that would find out the cause of the Jews reiection on gods behalf,
^ods iudge^e^tes excede (...) capacite.
how far gods judgments and choyses excede our capacite, shows how god
without al difference to be atteyned by man's judgment, did chose Jacob and
reprove Esau, having both one father, one mother, in one time begotten,
neither of the^ yet borne, neither having done any work why to be preferred
the other, not only hereby hidinge from us the cause of such election, and
preferment of the younger to the elder, but also taking away all conjecture of
causes, to the intent all such ways, of search and diuinacion of gods
secret doings should be taken away from the curiosite of man's wit. And where
any thing alters otherwise the^ man looks for: there for to confess that
god is all truth, and all wisdom, and we without gods gifts, be all folly and
faulty, Gods will is cause of all causes, but not cause immediate of al thing.
so as we ought to worship gods will, as cause of all causes, directinge all
thing in equitte and justice, number and measure, the particular discussion
whereof, Man can nether comprehend god n^ his works.
no man's wit can perticulerly comprehend. For as no man has seen god as he
is: so no man can se througly all the secrecy of gods workemanshyp, but only so
much as is opened unto us. Wherefore saint Paul as he did in the first
declaration of Abraham's seed and posterity, lay before the murmuringe Jew,
his ignorance in the understanding of gods promysse: So does he in opening
of gods election of Jacob and Esau, God hides his secrets from us,
teach by this occasion all the world, how gods determinacions be hydden
from us, and every wyndowe shyt up, where we might pere into them. And yet
man can not let this matter alone. And the more secret it is the more busye we
be to know. And therefore saint Paul in the person of a murmurer, deuiseth
this encountrynge with god. What shall we say? Is iniquity with god? mary god
forbid. And yet I se that god prefers ye younger to thelder. And I can not
fysshe out any cause or conjecture, to call the deed equity in man's reason,
but rather because the younger is preferred there appears to man's reason a
cause of iniquity. Wherefore we be learned by saint Paul, that we must in such
wise, subdue our understanding to faith, that beleuyng, undoubtedly god is
all justice, we may not esteem any thing, certainly affirmed to be done by him
to be unjust. For as saint Chrysostom says. God sees with other eyes then
we do. And as the carpenter choseth a piece of timbre, we can not atteyne the
reason of gods wo^kes.
to serve his purpose, the reason whereof a man vnskylled, can not discern: So
god to buyld his church, choseth after his knowledge, whereunto we can not
attain. And therefore we must submytte and humble tharrogancie of our
understanding, to gods wisdom, we must believe fortrut^ that we ca^ not
deuyse how it should be truth.
and believe that which God teaches and byddeth, to be all true, although the
matter in consideracio^ of our judgment be impossible to be set together.
For so did Abraham believe god in his promysse of the multiplication of his
seed by Isaac, and believed god also, when he badde him go offer up Isaac in
sacrifice, and yet if Abraham upon the commandment of the offrynge of his
son, had debated with him self, how the former promysse and the last
commandment, might have agreed together he should not have found how to have
joined them in one truth. Which Abraham did not, but without stay (as the
scripture reaporteth the storye) went about, that he was commanded to do, and
leauyng the curiosity of reasonyng, believed in hope against hope. And
therefore likewise where scripture signifies to me gods providence and
predestination, which should seem to take away, and be repugnaunt to the
free choice of man, forasmuch as the scriptures be nevertheless in that
matter of fre choice, also evident, I must believe both to be true, as Abraham
did, although I can not set them together. But let us return to saint
Paul, who reiectyng such blasphemy of god, as to say that god has iniquity,
does not go about to prove that god has no iniquity, for we may not require
the proof thereof, but as it is most true, so must we most certeynlye believe
it. A busy witt^ must be confounded, and so tamed like a young colt^ in a new
falowed land, brought to know his imbecillite*
But saint Paul does rather go about to confound man's judgment, more and
more, that would enterprise to discern gods secret judgments, and to that
purpose brings in the answer of god to Moises, when he prayed god to
pardonne the sin of Idolatrye, committed by them that worshypped the golden
calf, which au^swer of god was, that god would have compassion of the^ that he
thought good to pardon, and show mercy to such as it pleased him, whereby
appeared, that among a multitude that offended a like to man's judgment, god
in ministracion of mercy used the pleasure of his will making a difference, in
distribucion of his mercy, where man's reason could perceive no difference in
the offense. So as neither man's willing or runnyng, atteyneth the effect, but
by the mercy of God. And after this saint Paul brings in the scripture of
Pharao, whom God stirred up to show his virtue in him, and to show forth gods
name, in the hole earth, in which Pharao, the withdrawynge of gods mercy which
he obstinatelye withstode, notwithstanding so many miracles wrought by gods
power to call him to mercy, the said Pharaos induracion, grew and followed in
such sort as man's reason will thereof gather and conclude whom so ever god
will have mercy on, he ministers it unto him, and whose heart god will harden,
he hardens. And then it follows yt if this be so, god has no cause to
complain of man, as the murmerer says, who is fashioned and placed after gods
will which no man can resist. Preyde by boldness encresith, and stays not til
it come to the highest.
Wherein saint Paul learneth us, to what issue the presumptuouse searchynge
of gods secret judgments commethe unto, whereby manne studyeth to impute
his fault to gods ordenaunce, to arrecte all the blame to God, and excuse
our self. And further saint Paul teaches us, how to repress such men's
arrogante temeritie, to encountre with god and pertely to ask him why he
complayneth of that he has him self ordained, for as he has wylled, all
thing is, such a rebuke as follows is very mete and convenient, as what man
art thou, that can use such language to god? Shall the work that is made
ask the crafts man: why made me thus? may not the potter of one lump of
claye, make one vessel, A presumptuous boldness must be put to silence.
to an honest use, and a another to a vile use? In this wise and with such
sort of answer, should the mouth of each proud presumtuouse arrogante
wit, be stopped, that would attempt, so to dispute gods works, as in
conclusion, he might deryue, the very cause of man's iniquity, to be
attribute to gods ordenaunce, as directed by his only will. How unseemly is
it that the work should strive with the crafts man? we should be all in the
hand of god, as the claye is in the hand of the potter, following, obedient,
still, quiet, without reasonyng, or murmuringe at gods ordenaunce. Note thi^
understanding of saint Paul^ in this plac^
And here saint Chrysostom notethe that this simylytude of the potter, is not
brought in by saint Paul, to declare that God has created men in the
world, as the potter makethe pottes specyallye appoyntynge this man or that
man to be dampened, as the potter makethe certain vile pottes, for then we
should affirm a mere necessity. But this similitude of the crafts man and
potter, is brought to declare our part toward God, not to reason with god
of our state, and control his doings, but to honor him, obey him, with
contentemente of our self in our estate, without all irreuerent encountryng
with our crafts man god, no more the other works of men, do with their
crafts man. Manes free choice has ^en a perpetual true doctrine in christ's
church.
So as in this pass of saint Paul, saint Chrysostom is very diligent to note
and conferme unto us, that saint Paul myndeth not to empayre the true doctrine
of man's free choice, given of God, to be the cause of his own dampnacion, by
refusing gods gift of grace, whereby he might be saved, and that the
induracion of Pharao grew of his own malice, only by gods sufferaunce and
permission, and this doctrine has ever ben in Christ's church from the
beginning, Simon Magus the first auctor of mere necessite.
which Simon Magus did first impugn and was the first auctour of the heresy
of mere necessity, which heresy has been in sundry ages renewed, as it has been of late by luther and other, and not yet extinct. But let us return again
to saint Paul, who after he has stopped the unshamefast mouth of the
murmuringe Jew, that would unpute the reiection of the Iues, to gods
ordenaunce. Saint Paul entendynge to declare where the cause of the Jews
fall, is to be sought and found, after certain textes brought out of the
prophets Osee and Isaye, sygnyfyenge before such a reiection to be of the
Jews, Saint Paul asks what shall we say then, if if be not to be
attributed to gods fault or iniquytye? which is over great blasphemye,
that the Jews were cast out and the ientyles received. Quid dicemus? what
shall we say? where shall we find the cause of their reiection? Whereunto it
is answered and a cause declared as follows, that the ientyles, not following
the iustyee of works, embraced the very justice by faith. And the Israelites
folowinge the law of justice, atteyned it not, because they went about to
obtain it by works and not by faith. So as finallye this lesson we must
learn, whereof saint Paul spoke in the beginning of the epistle. Deus uerax
est, and omnis homo mendax. And we must worship gods truth, and accuse our
own iniquity. The cause ^f ma^s dam^ation, in ^ym self.
We must s^ke the cause of our dampnacion, in our own malice, and not in gods
ordenaunce. Perditio tua ex te Israel. We must acknowledge the inscrutable
wisdom of god, that so disposes all thing swetely, as all men have cause to
magnify his mercy, and no man by gods order tempted to murmur of his
justice. Those that be dampened must lamente their own misery. Those that be
saved must glory in god, who has predestinate them, called the^, justified
them, and glorified them. And therefore death is a due sold for sin, and life
everlasting due by the grace of god. What shall I say now? have I learned you
what is predestination thoroughly? nay for sothe. Nor I have taken that upon me.
But thus much I know, that predestination does not impugn the free choice of
man, ne restrayneth the goodness of god with acception of persons, or
diminissheth that sentence of saint Paul. Deus uult omnes homines saluos
fieri, and ad agnitione^ ueritatis uenire. God wylleth all men to be saved and
come to the knowledge of the truth. And christ bad preach the gospel to all
creatures. And god speaks by Ezechiell, that if a sinner to whom god had
said he should dye, left his wickedness and turned to him, he shall be saved.
And when soever a sinner wayleth his sins, he shall live: Now these
defendours of mere necessity, which they do mysvnderstandynge predestinacion,
they handell all these general places of scripture, as though the speech of
God were like the common proverb, when the sky fall we shall have larkes.
Understanding all such condycyons as impossyble. So as when he that is
necessitate to be dampened turns to God, he shall be saved. But such one shall
never turn, as the sky shall not fall. And so the textes I have brought in,
such as speak generallye, be in their judgments to no purpose. And in dead
they them selfs be ouerturned in their own judgment. For and their opinion
were true, there neded no preaching, The inconvenience of mere necessity.
prayer, ministracion of sacraments, or any memory or remembrance of christ,
but as the Turks do, ones in a weke tell the people out of the stepyll, ye
that are predestinate, shall be of necessity saved, ye that are not
predestinate, shall be of necessity dampened. And so an end of al other search
in that matter which has no alteracion, after their fansy, that dream of
necessity. Here again, I am like to here somewhat that I speak thus lyghtely
of predestination. I am sorye I have cause to note men's lyghtnes in such an
high mystery* I have hard one say unto me, that he knew him self
predestinate. A maruelouse matter how they talk of predestinacion, being a
work of god without us, and of us to be honored in silence as a great
mystery, the circumstance whereof our capacities can not comprehend. And yet
men have reverently traueled in the consideracion of it. Saint Augustine has
written a treatice, de predestinatione sanctorum. And how so ever men would
wrest him to conferme their opinion of necessity, Necessity ^xtincteth al^owe.
he him self is plain in the condempnation of necessity, for it does clearly
extinct all virtue and vice, and likewise heaven and hell when it is thoroughly
thought on, with the true opinion of God also, and finallye the order of the
world, if it be well considered. You master Joy percace wax weary of my
babbling (as ye will term it) and will ask me what I mean? and interrogate
me homely, what I would say of predestination, and I could speak? Surely to
this tends that I have spoken, that I would predestinacion were honored as it
should be, less talked of, Predestinacion to be honored.
and better understood, so much thereof, as it has pleased god to reuele to
his church. And for my self I note that saint Augustine expoundyng the
saying of christ. Nemo uenit ad me nisi pater meus traxerit eum, in
thexposicion thereof says. Si non traheris, ora ut traharis. Quem trahat, et
quem non trahat, noli querere, si non uis errare. No man comes to me (says
Christ) onles my father draws him. In the exposition whereof saint Augustine
says: If thou be not drawn, pray that thou may be drawn, but whom
god draws, and whom he draws not, ask not if thou will not err. An
argument of man's reason in predestinacion,
Now thus will man's reason tumble in this matter. If god has decreed already
whom he will draw, and whom he will not draw, then it is to late to pray to
be drawn, or not needful, for god will draw as he has determined, and none
otherwise. And this reason extends to all manner of exhortacions, either to be
not effectual, as to late after predestination, or not needful, as I have
already said. Out of this combre I rydde my self easily, with such discussion,
as I have read and learned of men exercised in scriptures, which is that when
we speak of God, with distinction of time, of any work done by god out of
time, we speak improperlye. Of that god works in time, we may conuenientlye
distinct the time. we may say: God has sent his son into ye world to redeem
man, for it was in time (as scripture says) when the fulness of time was. But
when we say god has predestinate and chosen us before the beginning of the
world, the speech is not hable to express the matter, and seems to signify
a time paste where in deed there is none past. For there is no time paste,
where was no time, so as we must acknowledge thimperfitnes of our speech,
wherein the hollye ghost speaks to imperfitte men. And therefore the
pretertens rather declares a perfection in thacte, then the passing over of
the time in the act. Like as (in has glorified and has justified in them
that be not yet borne) we understand not iustificacion and glorificacion as an
act past, because it is written in the pretertense, for then both in
justifying and glorifieng, we must say, all is done before the beginning of
the world, for the verbes expressing the acts of iustificacion, and
gloryfycatyon, be put in the pretertense, that predestinacio^ is written in.
And so it we should deduce our arguments from the time, we must say that
god has justified and glorified them at ones, with predestinacion, which were
a plain absurdite. And yet our imperfitte speech so sounds, as though
glorificacion were done with predestinacion. And albeit the pretertence
signifies in scripture the time to comme, as appears in many places, yet in
this place, quos iustificauit glorificauit, the futurtence can not fully
express that is signified, for it is done us to understand, that God whose
works be hydden in secret, and who works continually, has from the
beginning favored man, and according to his knowledge, has before all time
elected and predestinate, that is to say, before the beginning of the world,
and in time has called, does call, and shall call, has justified, does
justify, and shall justify, has glorified, does glorify, and shall glorify,
his elect and predestinate, in such measure as his pleasure has appointed. I
do not here go about (good reader) blasphemouslye to deprave the scripture, The
phrase of scripture, conceived by the holy ghost
and to find fault at that which can not be better spoken, being the pen
as we truly and certenlye believe, directed by the holy ghost, but to note unto
the how the holy ghost has expressed the workynge of god in our salvation in
such a part of speech, as might signify in ye same speech a thing most
assured, which is the pretertence, for to our understanding, that is most
assured to be, that is past, and yet with god that shall be, is in like
assurednes, as that is already done. And therefore when we go about to descant
in scripture, time, which was not by that scripture sygnyfyed unto us, we then
fall streighte in error. As when we read written of god the father, that he
has begotten his son, the second person in trinity, if we shall in that
verb (genuit) has begotten, consider time, as we do in an other scripture
(Abraham genuit Isaac) Abraham has begotton Isaac, we should say (which
were folysshe) that god the father was before God the son, as Abraham was
before Isaac, but in one place, the verb signifies the act without time,
when we speak of god, and in the other, the act with time. So as when the
scripture tells us: God has chosen, god has predestinate, god has forseen
al, god has known all, before the beginning of the world: here these
verbes, has chosen, has predestinate, has seen, has known, do declare
these acts in god, to be most perfyt, but not any such time to pass as man
dreameth of, for these acts in god, be without time, and above time, and so is
sygnified unto us, by those words before the beginning of the world, when
was no time, which words nevertheless, man's curiouse wit used to an other
signification, to gather of them that those acts be past in god, as done
before the beginning of ye world, where as in deed, albeit those acts of
prouydence, election, and predestinacion, were in god most perfytte then,
before the beginning of the world, yet they were not in God past then, for
(past) signifies an effluxio^ of time, which is not in god who is eternal.
The unlearned arrogant reader will here wax angry that I should go about, An
objection
by sophistry (as he would call it) to entangle plain words, and to make him
believe that before the beginning of the world is not yet past, and then he
will go lustly forth to prove me a fool, if the beginning of the world be
not yet past, then the world is yet to begin. And then you master Joy will
percase extend the matter further and say: If I be let alone, I will prove by
sophistrye and iuggelynge, that nothing is past, and in deed if the beginning
of the world be not past, nothing to us is past, for in the world we be
comprehended. But I say and affirm, the beginning of the world is past. Then
will you reason thus: That which is before yt is past, that is much more
paste. As if noon be past, much more the morning of that day is paste. But I
grant that the beginning of the world, is past, ergo all that was before it,
is much more past. And then further ye will reason thus. The election of god was
before ye beginning of the world, as faint Paul says, ergo the election of
god is more then past, as done before the beginning of the world which is past.
An answer
To this I answer, that when ye go about to measure gods works with our
words, ye come short, for our speech can not express, ne our thought
comprehend the ciru^stance of gods work, nether in time nor place. And Gregory
Nazianzene wisely notes and also devoutly, that if god could be throughlye
comprehended of man, either in his thought or understanding, god were not
superior to man. For what so ever is comprehended, is less then that
comprehends it, and therefore we must confess truly that god comprehends
all, and is in no wise holly comprehended. So much as scripture tells us of
god, and his works, wroughte in time, or above all time, so much we know
illuminate by faith, but when we will, by our consideration, after the measure
of our own understanding, by things within the compass of our creacion
(which in deed pass in time) esteem gods doings before time, and call them
past also because they be before the beginning of the world: we deceive our
self as much as if in consyderatyon of place, we should speak of god as we
speak of men, that because God is here he is not there, which no man is so
mad to say, because God is every where. And as man by participation of
gods gift, may in his thought and memory, represente things paste, with
them that be present, without distaunce of time. And a man with his eye,
without dystaunce of place or time in the action of seeing, conioyne together
at ones, things which in them self be one far from an other, as I may
see houses standing one.v. or.x. mile beyond an other, and ships saylynge
one before, and one behind an other a great dystaunce, and yet they be all
together at ones, in the action of my syghte. So god who has given man these
gifts, being of him self, in his knowledge and actions, most excellent, does
with his eye se, that is in the world, before and after, without any before
or after, in his knowledge, and likewise works without time (that is to
say) choseth and predestinateth without any (before or after, paste or to
come) which be only distinctions of time. And yet we may not gather hereof
in gods works a confusion, ^oddes wor^s be most ^derlye, but ^e can not
^nceyue the ^der, as they all done, ^ost justly, ^t we cannot ^scusse his
^stice.
but believe yt all his works have such order in them as we can not atteine.
And learn this lesson of humility, that gods secret works excede our
capacity, and may not therefore be measured by our language. For as the
gentile philosopher said, of whom Gregorye Nazianzene speaks, in his work.
(...). It is hard (he said) to know god thoroughly, but impossible to express
god in language. Wherein he notes the colorable speech of the philosopher, to
hyde his own ignorance, as though he knew more of god, then he could
express where in god and his works, the tongue and heart be both imperfyt,
and neither sufficient in that behalf, and specially the tongue, and therefore
we may in no wise understand the speech in the explycacyon of gods acts,
as of men, and think because it is written: God has chosen, and has
predestinate, that therefore his choice and predestination be paste, whereupon
to ground our arguments, of (before and after past and to come) wherewith to
deceive our self. Mary when so ever in scripture god knytteth time to his
workynge, that work must needs pass with the time, as when we read how god
has create the world, has destroyed Sodom and Gomor, has overwhelmed ye
world with water, has made promysse to Abraham, has cast Adam out of
paradyse, and such infinite acts dome in time, those acts be called past by
success of time. But when god puts no time to his workynge, but declares
his workings, to be without the compass of time: it is the fault of our
curyosytye, to compass such an act of God with the terms of (past or to
come before or after) which be dystinctions of time, wherein we should only
confess that god undoubtedly does the act, which scripture affyrmeth god to
do, and to profess our ignorance, of the circumstaunces, how it is done,
and to be content with the sense of scripture, without reasonynge of the
words, The election and predesti^atio^ of god ^o be worship^ed in silence.
after our capacity, and so to worship the election and predestinacio^ of
god in silence, as we add not thereunto, thimaginacion of an ac^ passed already
in god, by reason whereof we might dream, that in our choice or endeavor when
god offreth his gifts unto us, we came to late, because god in our fancy,
has determined his pleasure already, that can not be changed: For the
consideration of time, which in our understanding, passes over, compared
with the act of god, being in deed without any time, encombreth our wits
and understandings in the conceiuyng of the matter, where as the time being
disseuered in our understanding, from gods act, which time makes to us a
thought of (before and after) we be delivered of the repugnaunce, Note this.
that time did engendre, and our arguments taken away from natural wit,
which were grounded al upon time, whereby we be driven from reasonynge to a
silence, meruelynge and worshyppyng as we should do always the high mysteries
of god, far exceeding our capacite. And in this wise some have learnedly and
reverently entreated this matter, not with presumption to discuss it
absolutely, but with an humble and reverent meke spirit, to note that might be
truly considered in the same, and finally to learn us, that in deed, we know
not, ne can not know this high matter thoroughly, because the means of our
knowledge be taken away, and so the things hidden from us, wherein we may not
do as arrogant artificers, be accustomed to do, who when they perceive not in
deed the counsel of him that devised first any platte, they take upon the^
nevertheless, to set the frame together, and mar some principal posts, or
cast them out as vain, because they can not tell how to join the^ with the
rest whom such me^ follow, who because they can not tell how to frame gods
choice, and man's choice together, they mangle and deny man's choice, and cast
it away as vain, being a principal part to be believed in our religion. Thus
much as I have read and learned, I utter it whereby to teach you soberly, as
much knowledge as I have (that is to say) ignorance, in this matter. In this
ye master Joy will agree with me, that I have toulde you ignorance, and call
it mere ygnoraunce, and say I have showed my self, in tossynge and syftynge
of words to exercise the craft of ignorance, not to teach but to blind, not
to give light but to darken, so as albeit ye rude men can not answer, to the
sophistry of the arguments, yet the matter in the understanding (as ye will
say) remains as it did, for in what so ever words we should speak it, or
though we want words to speak it, the thing is thus in your opinion as
follows. First god is before man was. Anteque Abraham fieret ego sum, Christ
said. And whether before signifies time or no time, whereof your plain
scolers will say they can no skyll, before is before and not after, and why
call we it the providence of god, but because it is a foresight, and none after
sight, ne withsight, and predestination likewise a former decre, and
prescience, a former knowledge. And to charge me further, you master Joy,
will note to your scolers, that I my self speak sometime after the same sort,
and say, god choseth us first, and god preue^teth us with his grace, and what
is preuenteth, but comes before, and god prepares man's will, that is to say,
makes ready before. And god calls, before he justifies, and god justifies
before he glorifieth. And when scripture speaks of this sort, and I my self
also, then (ye will say) I make a trouble in the consideration of time, and
cause my time in writing and yours in reading, to pass over without fruit.
For when ye read me, ye find your self perplexed, and entangled with words,
but when ye have wound your self from those thorny words, the thing is in
your mind as it was before. Hereunto I will say somewhat that if ye like your
self, in your own fansy, so well as whatsoever ye conceive for truth, is
ever also to you true, in the sort ye comprehe^d it: I marvel not though my
words be not fruitful to you, for I go about to teach you ignorance, and
you be so asotted and dotyng upon the false persuasion of knoweledge, that ye
can not abide to have your pleasant opinion removed and taken from you, As he
that in his fransye thought all that he saw to be his own, was sorye, when he
was healed of his fransye, thinkyng him self to have lost a great loss, to
se him self then so poor. For else, if ye list to make this foundation, that
man sees no more of God then God has showed and reveled by his scriptures,
and that all the scripture is so uniform in sense, as it is al but one word,
which admits no repugnance or contrariete, and therewith remember, that
words of scripture, although in respect of the matter they contain, they be
in deed and be called holly, and so to be reverenced, and honored, as an image
representynge gods will unto us, and therefore at the speakinge of them, in
presence of the multitude, do put of our cappe and bow, English speech
latelye made by englyssh men (as we now speak it) placed to expres god, or any
godly thing, may be honored not with godly honor, but with reverent behavior
without danger of idolatry.
yet those words as words, be in deed words of our common language in
English, and such as disseuered and removed a part from that hollymatter,
men put to other profane uses, by reason whereof we may easlye deceive our
selves in them, and be daily deceived. And moreover if we could considre,
that it is a more shame, confusion and rebuke to us, to be noted in an error,
of blusterynge knowledge, then to be accounted in the number of simple
ignorauntes. And finally that in consideration of god and his works, after
knowledge by faith, that god certainly is, we should rather study to know,
how much we know not of god, then to presume to know all. He that were thus
instructed, and prepared by gods grace, he would as diligently learn to
condemn his own knoweledge with his ignorance, as to auau^ce his
understanding, to that may be atteyned. And to such one if he considre, that
is before written, I shall be seen, not only to have touched the words, but
also the matter, which I specially intended, wherein I labored to declare that
scripture, which reueleth god unto us by faith, does not in the words always
fully signify, that we gather of the^, but be written sometime to do us
understand the thing to be in god, or wrought by him without cyrcumstaunce of
the measure of time, as we conceive it. For when christ said. Before Abraham
was, I am, the time in this speech, is not after our measure, for the present
Tens, in God, is placed in the speech before the pretertens in man, which in
our account is contrary. And as for prouydence, predestinacion, and
prescyence, that we take to signify with the acts time, signifies perfection
absolute in God in those acts, who in contemplacion of him self, sees and
knows perfytelye and absolutelye all his works, choseth also and
predestinateth after his will, which is most just, and has no need of
any admyny^te or help of the cyrcumstaunce of the thing, or to abide the
being of it, and therefore scripture says. God does it before all time,
without all place (that is to say) before the beginning of the world, when
there was neither time nor place. But here ye will snappe at me, and leaving
time and place a part yet ye say ye may gether. Ergo it is done. Leave (quod
you) the words, and speak of the thing. If the election and predestinacion of
god were done before the beginning of the world, they be not undone now, and
either the act of election and predestinacion in God must be done, undone, or
doing. For man's understanding, concludes it must be one of those three. And
surely for so much ye tell me truth, for man's understanding can go no
further. And if ye could prove me therewith that man's understanding may
penetrate thoroughly al gods secrets, and then have language to utter it, ye
had said then the hole matter, or else if ye can not do that (as ye can not
in deed) ye must to ye foresaid three (done, undone, or doing) put a
fourte, that is to say, or else ye can not tell, what to say in it, and in
that fourte, I would yield unto you. For that is the very lesson I would learn
you, to say, you could not tell. For if you shall come to your three (done,
undone, or doing) contained within the capacity of man's wit, and perusynge
them in order, think of election and predestination in god, as done, in such
wise as done sounds to us an act past, and frame these principal posts of
election and predestination, in that joint, and please your self in it, as well
set together, ye shall fall to the abomination of mere necessity, and mar
the two principal posts, which god has ordered to be set up in the frame
of our salvation, fre will, and fre choice. And if fleyng from that
inconvenience, which must needs be fled, we shall go about to frame these
posts of election and predestination, with the ioynte of (undone) and because
ye dare not call them done, call them undone. that were even as wisely done of
us, as if a man would frame a tenant without a mortesse. For we can not say
election and predestination in god, as undone, which were as much to say as
they be not, and then scripture says the contrary* And if we should say, the
election and predestinacion of god is doing, which is the third mortes of that
we can guess at, it should signify an imperfection in ye which were blasphemy
to think in god, for gods works be perfect, as him self is most perfytte.
In man who by participacion of god, has excellent gifts, we may se, that he
that is cunnyng, does at ones conceive, and perfitly comprehend either such
matter as he will utter in speech to the ear, or in any corporal demonstracion
to the eye. The carpenter for example as he excels in cunning so does he
conceive so much the more suddenly, and with a small short thought represent to
him self all the hole frame of that he will work perfitely, which has a
longer time in vtterynge of it, and has a dystaunce of doing whiles the
carpenter draws it in paper, and afterward a longer doing, whiles he sets
it forth in ye matter. But the absolute act in the crafts man, which was in
the mathematical representation, that is to say, divided from corporal
matter, that act in the understanding had no doing in any perceptible
distance, but was past doing and perfytted in a momente, in a very conning
exercised man. Wherefore if we may thus think of an excellent crafts man in
his doings, and join to the act a perfection in a moment, it were an
absurdite to think of god less excellency and call his act yet doing, whose
acts be perfited with less then a thought, and can not be, but incontine^tly
perfect, in him that is all perfitnes it self. Here I look ye will say thus, if
we agree herein we must say further, ye man can not think the election and
predestinacion in god perfect, unless he thinks the^ done, for that is perfect
ye is done, or else if it be not done it is not perfyte. And before I said, we
may not think of them as done, so as by the same reason, we may not think of
them as perfytte. Note well (reader) that I shall now say, and considre, ^an
has ^ mean to ^mprehende ^ds secretetes.
how much gods acts excede man's understanding in all actions of man, wether
we call them done or perfyt, though they have but an instante or a moment, for
the doing and perfection of them: yet there is in them all of those that be
done, by the least and shortest thought, The least thought of man has three
parts.
three things to be considered. A beginnynge of thacte, an end of it, and a
mouynge from the beginning to the end. As for example, In the conning crafts
man, in conceyuynge of the matter, he will speak or make in plat, or in a
musician, that deuiseth with a maruelouse celeritie, the descant that he
plays upon his instrument, which is a wonderful swiftnes and agilite of the
powers of the soul, in these actions there is none so short, so swift and
fine, but there is a beginning, and from ye end of beginning, a mouyng to
the end of perfection, by which three considerations, we judge of our acts as
done and perfect. Now of god, we be learned to say truly, that before ye world
there is no beginning, as we understand beginning, and so not the beginning
end of any act. In god also there is no mouynge at all, for what so ever
moves is judged thereby imperfyt, for mouynge declares a want of that
whereunto it mouethe, which in god can not be. In god also there is no end at
al. So as those three, whereby we consider done, undone, doing, and perfect among
men, be clerelye taken away from our consideration in God, and yet for want of
more perfect knowledge and more perfytte speech, we be bold to speak of god,
with such words as we have in our tongue, whereby we may not take further
boldenes to go through, and measure gods acts either by our words or
ymaginacion to be like ours. For in the beginning of the gospel of saint
John^ where saint John^ says of the second person the very word of god (In
the beginning was the word) if a man should have the same ymagination of a
beginning spoken of god as he has of a beginning, when he speaks of the
beginning of saint Iohn^s gospel, and because the gospel has an end to
begin at, that god has also an end to begin at, for so has every thing
that begins as man conceyueth it, or else there is not in our ymaginacion a
beginning, we should gather by saint John^ that god is not eternal, because
he was in the beginnynge as the words of saint John^ speak plainly to our
ymaginacion, such as our reason conceyueth, fansyenge an end to every
beginning which end when we can not find, we say that thing has no
beginning, as a round cyrcle in consideration of it self has no beginning,
because it has no distinction in one place more then other to begin at. And
yet speaking of god without end, we use the word (beginnynge) for we have none
other word to speak, and so likewise of gods knowledge, election, and
predestination, we speak by such words as we have, signifienge them unto us
as done and perfyt, and so be they in deed, but not as our acts be done and
perfect, and therefore to be called paste and perfytte whereby there should be
in thaction a mouinge from the beginning to the end, but they be done, as god
works without time, where is not paste and perfyt, as god works most
perfytely, that is to say, in such wisdom and perfection as ma^s reason can
not comprehend, ne ca^ therefore skyll to frame the doing of them, with man's
free will, and free choice to be the cause of each man's own dampnacion without
just murmr of the want of gods election. And therefore if ma^s busye
presumptuous wit could be content to let alone that is not learned him to know,
but only to worship and occupye him self, in that he is commanded to do,
he should no more trouble him self herewith, then among masons, the hewers and
squarers of stone trouble their master mason, to question with him how such
and such a molde appointed them to work after, answers in the tracynge,
and will agree in the work, among whom, because they have conceived a
reuerente opinion of the master mason, co^fessynge their ignorance not to
atteyne his high knoweledge, every man as is prescrybed him works in silence
somewhat leysurly (men say of masons) for their own ease, but yet they work.
God whose wisdom is incomprehensible, whose knowledge is above all knowledge,
and conning above all connyng, has traced the plat of the building of his
church, and has for a mould where after to square the stones, sent our savior
christ into the world whom he has willed us to hear and follow, being his
very image and the manifestacion of his will, commaundynge all his stones to be
squared after that moulde, wherewith because god for our comfort tells us,
that he has care of the squarynge of the stones, and therefore has before the
beginning of the world chosen and predestinate those that shall be square
stones, we leave workyng and squarynge after the mould delivered unto us which
is commanded, and fall to questionyng and musing, how god works him self
his secret work of election and predestination, without exclusion of our
work in free choice and free will, the inquisicion whereof is forbidden, as
above our capacite. And therefore saint Augustyne said: Search not who is
drawn if thou wylt not err, and byddeth every man pray that he may be
drawn, which implies in his judgment, how that man may be yet chosen and
be yet predestinate, as we can speak of it, or else why should he bydde him
pray to be drawn. And when we exhort men by examples in the scripture to
virtue, our speech conteyneth the same. And when saint Paul says, he
suffers for the electes that they might be salued, and saint Peter exhorting
men to make their election certain by good works, both these great apostels
do the church of god to understand (in the building whereof they have been two
principal stones) that gods election is so done by him, as it imports no
necessity in man but requires a conformite in us agreeable for the same, which
conformite we can not have but of god and yet not having that, we can not be
called truly chosen and predestinate. Saint Paul to the Collossen. writes in
this wise. You that were sometime abalienate and enemies in mind in evil
works, now god has reconciled you, in the body of his flesh, by his death,
that he should bring you fourth holy without reproach and without blame, in his
sight, so that you continue grounded and stable in faith, ne be not moved from
the hope of the gospel. Consider this text of the apostell which does men
reconciled, to understand, that they must persevere, continue, and not be
removed from the hope of the gospel, signifieng that the reconciliacion of
god, implies no necessite of co^tinuaunce, but they may swerve, they may
fall, and therefore does admonish them there of. Wherefore he wanted not deep
knowledge, that said as scripture does us understand, that Thomas
predestinatus, ioynynge those two words in the matter truly together, non
potest damnari, for the devil can not take out of gods hand that is his,
and yet nevertheless disseuer the word with the matter of predestinatus, from
Thomas, and speaking of the same Thomas we may say by scripture. Thomas
potest damnari. For gods predestinacion as a superioure cause does not
violentlye work to the compulsion of the inferior cause. And god does so work
in his knowledge, election, and predestinacion, and with such secrecy, as we
can not take any such knowledge of thactes of election and predestinacio^
applied to any man whereby to disprove his saying to any man perticularly.
Thou may be damned by thine own sin, and likewise to every particular
man. Thou may be saved by gods mercy, be the one never so virtuous, at
the time of my speaking, or the other, never so much a sinner. But to whom
so ever we may truly join. predestinatus, we must say of that man non
potest damnari. And albeit I shall be judged of some to entangle this matter more
then neadeth, yet writing to learned and unlearned I had rather abide that
check then to pretermytte any thing, that I think might serve to the
clearynge of such notes as have been made of the scryptures by some of
symplicitie, and some of craft and mischief, wherewith to encombre the truth of
ye catholic faith, wherein to comprehend such persuasio^ of god (as though he
wrought in election and predestinacion necessarily) is a maruelouse subversion
of the hole, as I have before said, and yet the words of scripture be marked
to sound so, as when scripture speaks of the little flock to be by god
specially preserved, and how the electes can not perysshe and God preserves
his elect, with the induracion of Pharao, the reprouynge of noughtye men,
which truths be most certaynlye true. For Deus uerax est, and yet because it
is even as true, that omnis homo mendax, therefore as god can not fail in his
promysse, so man may fail in the receyuinge and reteynynge of that is
promised, Note that I say not each manshal, but ^ay.
and also each man may. And therefore the admonitions and exhortacions in
scripture to eschew falling, and to arise again, be fruitfullye made to the
elect, not so as though Thomas elect, might be dampened, for that is
impossible, but so as (Thomas) speaking of the same (Thomas) may be dampened.
Only god works election and predestinacion, and only god can join the^
truly with Thomas or John^, mary Thomas and John^ may presume, and that way
play the fool, to join them selves, by such new belefe as the devil by his
postelles frames now a days to election and predestinacio^, and say as one
has said to me, I know my self predestinate. I marvel where he had learned
that lesson being yet quycke and quethynge and such one as might fall. S.
Austen although he knew the lesson very hard and would we should not search,
whom god draws and whom he draws not, yet in his work ( de
predestinatione) he seems to give a form, to learn predestinacion, saying.
Disce excursu predestinacionem. etc. So as they that fly vice, and chose
virtue, and run in virtue gladlye, and ascend from virtue to virtue they may
well be assured, that the profyt in virtue is by gods help and grace, and
when they are in payment of the general tribute (for sin) which is corporal
death, The lesson o^ predestinacion in each man till he has made an end of his
course in cunninge.
at which paiement they may say. Cursum consummaui, they may the^ like good
scoolers rejoice, in the knowledge of the lesson of predestination and
acknowledge the election of god in them, with a certain hope and expectation
of that is prepared for gods elect, but whiles men be wauerynge in the sea
of this world before they be arrived in the haven, of passage from this life,
such talkers and reasoners of gods election and predestinacion, to persuade
necessite, do it not for any godly fruit, but for a worldely lewd policy,
to exclude from sin, both shame and blame to the world, which two among
many, let and hyndre many carnal pleasures, and where necessity is
persuaded, can not in deed have place. For who is to be blamed, for that he can
not eschew* or who should be a shamed of that he can not avoid? Wherefore
should saint Paul excommunicate the Corrinthian and blame him for his
fornicacion? or saint Peter against Ananie and Saphira his wife, give a
sentence of such efficacy, as whereupon should follow corporal death for
lyenge, wherein they might have pleded, if necessity had been by the lerning of
these two chief apostelles approved, that they did as they were ordered and
walked as persons not chosen but indurate, whether necessity led them by
god appointed. But the true teaching of christ's church abhors necessity,
and yet worshyppeth for most certain truths, gods providence, election,
and predestinacion, whereby we be taught that god is auctor of al our health,
wealth and salvation, the cyrcumstaunce of which workyng in god in his election
and predestinacio^, although it be as impossible for man's wit to frame with our
choice and free will, as to devise how a camel should pass through the eye
of an nedle, without making ye nedles eye bygger or the camel less, yet yt
is impossible for man, is not impossible for god, And in that belefe we ought
to acquit our self, and not be ashamed to learn and confess ignorance in
these high mysteries, wherein an arrogante proud curiouse wit should clearly
be put to silence, and yet nevertheless a sobre humble spirit by a devout
search and consideracion may learn somewhat, wherewith to repress and subdue
the temptacio^s of carnal reason ever murmuringe to the contrary. For which
purpose all the holy fathers of ye greek church and besides saint Austen, other
of the latten also, have reuerentlye spoken somewhat of light in the matter of
election and predestinacion by distincting gods knowledge, from his election,
as the cause from the effect, and thus considered of god. That god in his hye
counsel determining to create man, he saw and knew man's fall, which
knoweledge could be no cause of thalteration of his decree to create man, for
then we should grant in god mutabilitie of his decree by his knowledge but
there with god decreed to repare and restore that fall in man, and by the
abundance of his goodness, and by the renouacion of man in his redemption, to
increase man's felicity. In which renouacion of man, god choseth as he sees in
his divine providence those that shall receive and use his gifts according to
his will, and reproves them that he sees before will refuse them and work
their own confusion, and so predestinateth such as he has chose^, by which
order gods knowledge is the cause of his election, gods election the cause of
his predestination, predestinacion the cause of calling. etc. After which
declaration man's reason could not gather, that gods knowledge of that is to
come, should more be ye cause of that he knows before to come after, then
man's knowledge, to be the cause of that is past, which by gods gift man
knows with god. Herein god is not compared with man, but answer is made to
the carnal reason, which men make amysse of god. Gods knowledge they say is
infallible in all things that shall be, and that is most true, but the
infallibility is no kind of cause, of the thing thereby so to be caused, to
be, but only an assurance that the thing as it is known of God* shall so
be. God is the cause of all causes, and in the creacion of all natures and
recreacion of man's nature, by grace, has ordered things to move and work by
their immediate special causes, not all necessarilye, but some with
interruption and some casuallye and principallye above all, man by fre choice
of that is offered him, by which excellent gift man differs from other
creatures. Now as god has ordered the world, so he most perfytely knows it,
that is to say, that is necessary, even so necessary, that is casual, casual,
that is of man's free choice, as wroughte by man's free choice. And every
thing as it is wrought, God knows it wroughte, knowing them as done by the
inferioure causes, not ordering them so to be done by his prouydence or
infallible knowledge. Here reason spoorneth and says, god might have changed
it, when he saw it should so be, and not have made man inclineable to fall,
when he saw he would fall before he made him. Here is a homelye talk of god.
And hitherto men come, when they forget their reverence, and duty to God, to
be so perte with god as to control his works. Now men be suffered to look on
gods secrecies, they will begin to tell him how he might have done better. But
yet he that thus replieth must first confess, yt the knowledge of god although
it be infallible, yet it is not the cause of all that is known, for in
knowledge, god only sees most perfitly the works of al natures, as they be,
and man's reason that would find fault, can not considre gods knowledge to
be in prioritie to gods decre, to create man, whereby that knowledge as it
followed, and was no cause of it, so it could be no cause why to alter it, and
then carnal reason must be answered as in the like a carnal man would judge.
A carpenter that determines to make a house, and therein a door, if he had
therewith the gift of prophecy to know things to come, and so to se, that
thieves should after go in at that door, and rob the house, would ye call in
man's reason the carpenter the cause of the robbery, because he made the house
with a door at which door he saw the thieves should enter? If the carpenter
were charged in reason therewith, and with his knowledge before, he would for
him self say: I made a house which of conuenience to be a house, required a
door, and therefore I made the door, not for the thieves thabuse it, which I
saw would follow, but for the owner to well use it, and then if the carpenter
did therewith before, bydde the owner take heed of the danger, like to follow,
what can be said further to the carpenter? who might reasonablye allege if
he should have made no door at al, he should not have made a convenient house,
for without a door, it had not ben perfitelye a house. Can any man further
replye to this carpenter, unless a man would say, that the carpenter was also
after, the thief him self, as men will not fear to say of god
blasphemouslye, that he is the auctoure of evil. Now if carnal reason must
needs admytte this in the carpenter: why should the same reason spurn
against God to make him the cause, because when he saw how man would abuse
free will which he gave him, that yet god gave it him where the devil entered,
as at the door, and robbed him. God gave man that excellent gift of free
will for an ornamente and a convenient use, and admonysshed man to beware of
the misusing of it to disobedience, gyuynge a law to be observed, as matter
wherein to exercise his free will. If God had made man without free will and
immutable, he had not ben then properly man, having mutabilitie to good and
evil as a difference from god, a body corporal to differ from angels, and
free will and free choice, to differ from other beasts unreasonable. And is
not he a ioylye workman that would deuyse to have God done, otherwise then he
has, or else because malice have wrought in man malice, would take god for
immediate cause of all ye is done, which were abominable blasphemouse
abhominatio^ without all reason, and against all lerninge? God is ye superior
cause, without which nothing works, ^ynne is of ^an and the ^uyl, and ca^ ^t
be of god ^ho is all ^odnes.
as learned men have discussed it, in actu substracto, but man's free choice, and
the devil add the myschief to every act where any is, and be the immediate
causes thereof, who although they have god author of their being, yet he is
not author of their noughtines, which is caused by their corruption engendered
in them by their fall from god. And thus thou see good reader that if reason
should contend with reason in discussion of gods works, necessite should be
excluded, and not employed in gods prouydence, election, or predestinacion.
For god, Quos presciuit predestinauit, of which word (presciuit) the holly
fathers learned men and deuoutlye learned as before, have noted gods election
to be according to his knowledge, of them who should receive and reteyne with
perseueraunce gods gifts. Saint A^gustine in ^sideration ^ gods ele^on,
agree^ not throug^ly with oth^
Mary saint Austen troubled with the pelagians, who for confirmation of their
error searched out places of scripture, and writhed them violently as
heretics always do, to their purpose so extollinge man's endeavor, as they did
injury to the special grace and gifts of god, for avoiding thencombre of
these subtle heretics, thought not necessary to follow the rest in that
point, whereby to note the cause of gods election to be any wise referred to
thendeuor of man but only to be in gods will, which is most just, and wherein
is no acception of persons. And yet s. Austen does not so dissent from the
other fathers for avoiding the pelagians as he does any thing favor thopinion
of them, ^aynte Au^yne abhor^th necessite
who now a days by understanding of those acts of election and
predestinacion in god would establysh mere necessity. And as for my self
minding to speak of this matter. Forasmuch as I have seen saint Austen in
this point dissent from other, not with contencion but rather thereby to
exclude the matter of argument that might serve the Pelagians: I have not made
foundacio^ to discuss thelection and predestinacion of god after those devout
men's consideration but by declaringe what blyndnes men have in gods workyng
to put men in remembrance to worship that truth and confess our ignorance.
^ccasion ta^en of a disa^ement in ^mine part, ^ contemn ^l.
But somewhat will here be gathered by the way, that men dissente from men,
doctors from doctors, fathers from fathers, and why should we then (says
your sect) regard men, doctors, or fathers, but all resort to the very
fountain of gods word, and thence fetch pure, sincere, clean, undefiled
water, and not to resort to men's puddelles that b^ myerie, troubled and not
clean. If saint Austen dare disagre from the rest why may not I disagre from
him (quod you) and from the rest also, and cleave only to gods word? Gods
word is the life, and whether should we go but thither, and there is playnes.
God says he is omnipotent, and he says truly: He says he knows all, and
he says truly. He says he works all in all, and he says truly. He
says I have made the wicked to the evil day, and he says truly. He says
there is none evil in the city but he has made, and he says truly. God
says he has indurate the heart of pharao. And he says truly. And always god
says truly: And all men be liars as Dauyd says. Filij hominu^ vsquequo
diligitis uanitatem and queritis mendacium? Ye children of men ye love
continually vanity and search out lies. Hereunto I will say somewhat, ^n
answer.
that of God here be rehearsed many truths, and as they be spoken truly. And
if they were also truly understood, then al were well and plain. And they
say men be liars, therein they say also truly. ^en ^e all ^ned to lie ^ut do
not in ^ll things ^e, saint Pe^er lied not ^onfessynge, (...).
But if the scripture affirming men to be liars should be also perpetually
verefied in them whom god endueth with his gifts of truth and learning, that
understanding would serve to wype out all, but that is not the sense of ye
scripture, wherein is declared what man is destitute of god, and left to him
self. Man's corrupt nature, not illuminate, nor directed by gods grace,
deliteth in vain things, erreth, wandereth, loves fancies, and seeks that
has no substance or being in it self, and is therefore vain, and
counterfayt, and so a lie. All wisdom, all truth, all virtue, is of god, and
without god man is blinded with vanities and lies, but our savior christ has
for our sake overcome the devil, destroyed death, risen for our iustificacion,
and ascendinge into heaven has given gifts to men and sent the spirit of
truth to be among us, whereby man is able to know the truth, confess it,
and utter it, to the edification of other, against which sort of men the
scripture is alleged out of purpose to say he is a liar because he is a man.
And herein those that so improve all men generally they forgette that them
self that so speak be men also, and then by the general reprofe of men in
their mouth they prove them self to lie, Mentiens, is ^he name of a ^ophisme
cal^ed in greek (...), when (...) part of ^h^ speech destroys an ^th^r of
the ^me speech.
and if that be so, the^ that other men say is truth speaking contrary to
them and thus the matter is brought in a circle to a confusion by a
sophistical speech called (menciens) by each man's mistrust to an other, and
each one there fore calling an other liar. For if I will improve the doctrine of
them that have written because some dissente from them, how should any new
man require him self to be believed dissentinge from the^ also, mary no (says
the Anabaptist) and believe not me without I bring scripture. Nor believe not
me says the Sacramentary without I bring scripture. Believe not me says
the Arriane without I bring scripture. Vho flies most buselye to scripture
Believe not me says Joy without I bring scripture. There was never
heretic but bosted scripture, as all the Jews bosted Abraham for their
father, and scripture by gods sufferau^ce is subject to man's peruersitie,
and is to good men, Odor uite ad uitam, and to evil men, Odor mortis ad
mortem. Scripture is a sweet pure flower, Scripture of it self all truh.
whereof spyders gather poison and bees honye. As thou art that cryeste for
scripture, so shalt thou gather of scripture. Goo thither instructed with
wholesome doctrine, and there thou shalt se it confyrmed. Goo thither infecte
with malycyouse opynyons and there thou shalt wrythe out matter, wherewyth to
maynteyne them. And so the devil did when he tempted Christ, thence he
fetched his armor wherewith to fight with christ. And so do all heretics to
fight with the church. As for the disse^tion betwne the fathers of the church
in exposicions of scriptures has not arrisen of purpose to impugn any true
catholyke doctrine, but for defense of that has been impugned by malicious
heretics. Among simple devout men each text seemed to bear witness to every
truth, ^he simplici^ of tholde others not ^ing with ^ritiques
and where good men with good men entreated the matter so the conclusion were
catholyke and true, they seemed not over curious to search out the propre
textes for confirmacion of that they affirmed, not for necligence, but for
declaracion of the perfect believe in the matter, which when it began to be
impugned of evil men, good men for defense of truth, were feign so to considre
what they said or granted as they gave thereby none advantage to the
adversary who studieth only to invade and violate the truth. Saint Austen in
contencion with the Maniches was very precyse for free will which they
impugned, and with the Pelagians was precise in defense of grace, which they
impugned, and for defense of the truth, which he saw brought in danger,
fought with scriptures like a stout champion, as Dauyd with his stones to
overthrow Golias, wherein how so ever saint Austen dissented from the rest, it
is not to be accounted as a disagremente in any truth necessary for our
edification, but as the feate of a wise warriar for defense of truth to eschew
such occasion as noughtie men would gather for ye subversion of ye truth. And in
this wise good men learned, may humblye disagre with a devout intent to
defend the truth, which we ought not so peruersly to take as though all such
good men's labors and travails in thexposicion of scriptures were to be
contempned, and as though each man by him self alone could understand and
expound scriptures in the true sense, which asseueracion how true it is the
prodigiouse and monstruouse opinions which have been, and be at this day,
gathered of scryptures do declare, wherein as god did in the building of the
tower of Babylon, to depresse that arrogant enterprise, confound the
understanding in one tunge, Confusion of ^ndersta^ding wi^h multitude of
dy^erse strange opinions.
and divided it into many: So in this time when each man with a gaye pretense
of resorting to the scriptures, and to the fountain, without the teaching
and instruction of other catholic men, do arrogantly enterprise to build
them self a knowledge to reach to gods secrets, one catholyque faith is
divided into as many sundry opinions and persuasions, as was the one tunge at
the building of the tower of Babel, into diverse languages. And therefore we must
remember, although scripture be the foundation and ground of al truth, yet it
is dark and obscure to senses vnexercysed, and god gives not all, the spirit
of prophecye, and yet god has given it in his church to many who have left it
testified in their labors, not so as sometime they show not them selfs as
men, and to speak of the^ self (and therefore must be so warelye and yet
reverently read) but so as their consonaunce and agremente together in the
matter of doctrine where they agree, may lead us to considre the more
certaynlye the truth in scripture, and those good men not upon every
alteration one from an other to be reject or contemned of us as liars, as men
would now a days have it, bearing every man in hand that he may (so he
understand english) learn him self alone, which is the deuylles persuasion
to spercle that is gathered and where we be a congregacyon to make each man
wander from his fellow, and each man only to believe him self. And thereupon to
follow, as you master Joy teach afterward to be said to each man, As thou
beleuest so be it to the, and so the church to be in no place a church as
any polityque body, neither the church of England, ne the church of
France to be unite within the^ selfs in gouernemente, and whereunto by
scripture men's desperate faults should be toulde neither in the hole to be
unite in sacraments, and true doctrine, but each one man to be a church
alone, and therefore each one man to fast alone (if he fast at all) without
days appointed for the hole body to fast together. Note well t^ inconuenie^^
of alone.
Each one man to pray alone (if he prays at all) without days or hours,
appointed for the hole body to pray together, and so all to be alone, alone,
alone, mine own self al alone. And then to be devoured of the devil alone,
without comfort in wilderness alone, and so sing up the free man's song of
alone, whiles we be here, as though there were none other life after this, for
thitherto will resort the issue of the sore, when each man presumptuouslye
gives him self alone an understanding of gods scriptures, and contempnynge
that other men devout and learned have written, trust to their own sense
contrary to the wise man's advertisement, or rather lustelye so to bost forth
for knoweledge that they like to say they know because they would in deed
have it so taken whether it be so or no. Obstinacy in ^resumtyon ^f knowledge
And such men, what so ever is said to the contrary of that they ones say
they know, either they make a lyppe at it, or yield with silence to seem to
give place to authority for the time, or if they dare speak, lay their hand
on their breast, and say they spoke as their conscience serves them, or tell
how they have prayed for grace and can not believe the contrary, some lift up
their eyes and wysh that the truth may sprede abroad that has been long
hidden. And thus as they would have it, they will have it, and be clearly deefe
to any other teaching. And therefore as I have rehereed after contempt of
thexposicions of other, they say gods words be plain to prove mere
necessity, and yet they might say otherwise and they would for any necessity
yt forces the^ so to say, for ye scriptures, they bring in, enforces the^
not at al, and that they know well enough, and might therefore in the
predestinacion and election of god confess with me, ignorance, if they lysted
so to do. For of my self, I shall say thus, what so ever opinion men would
for their purpose have persuaded of me abroad that I should use carnal wit
and sophistry in thentreatyng of scriptures, I protest openly and take god to
record, yt I never yet durst be so bold, to gather any sense of ye scripture,
but such as I had read gathered already in good authors, whose spirit, I
durst better trust, then mine own. I knowledge and confess mine own
poverty therein. I know none opinion of mine own finding in scripture, and
what so ever gift other have, scripture is to me over dark, to understand it
alone, without the teaching of other, such as have left their labors
therein, in writing behynd them. Of whom together with the scryptures I have
learned, to speak of predestination as I have written, and of justification
thus: That god only justifies man, according to the scripture before alleged,
Quos uocauit, iustificauit, and in an other place, Deus iustificat. And herein
the world makes no controversy. A controversy there is, how God works
this justification in man, whether to justify man, he gives him one gift of
faith or two gifts of faith and charity. And in this controversy, one thing
is very perverse, that those which say that god justifies man, with one gift
of faith only, will be seen more to extol god in his favor unto man, then
they that say God gives three gifts in the iustificacion of man. And because
the word (only) that has and does meynteyne much babbling, has been joined
by the^: to faith, to say that only faith justifies, to defend yt, they
trouble the people with a fine distinction of offices, and say that in
iustificacion of man, it is ye only office of faith to justify, and charity
and hope, there waiting without office whiles the man be justified. A pretty
shif^ from only faith justifies, to fayt^ only justifies, and an a^row
differe^c^ to the rud^ reader.
And so (only) is now shifted from faith to the office of faith. And these be
they that accuse other men of darkness. But ye scripture tells me that he
who loves not remains in death. And therefore if ye state of a justified man
be life in Christ: Charytye, which is godly love has as well her office, in
iustyfycacyon, to give life, as faith has her office to be (...) knoweledge
the most certain ground and foundacyon of it, and hope her office to be
placed and establysshed upon them both. In receyuynge of which gifts how
man works by gods calling, to turn to him, and use that is offered of
him, according to their effects: I shall speak after at large, aunsweryng
you master Joy, who seems so to term such works, as I say man does to
atteyne iustificacion, as though I mente day works, or week works, and
either not knowing in deed, what I meant with Barnes, in works before
iustificacyo^ and to thatteynyng of it: or else dissembling your knoweledge,
to engendre matter of skoffynge, ye triumph of me at your pleasure, which I
shall pretermytte, and somewhat open, of what force your matter is, that ye
violently wrythe out of scripture. And first ye bring in that if Winchester
has done all that god has commanded him, he is but a servant unprofitable.
And this text of scripture ye bring in to dimynyshe the estimacion of good
works. And thus gods holly scripture is profaned by you, ye would be seen to
utter only that the spirit of god tells you, with such a mere sincerite,
yt it has nether honey nor wax. An exposition of the scripture, that we be
servants unprofitable
For this text of scripture is written to admonish us what a good lord we
serve of god, who having no commodity or profyt by our scruyce, does
nevertheless allow and commend our service. So differs the service of god
and the devil, the service of god from the service of man. For the state of a
servant among men is to do their masters profit, and not their own,
for so much as they be servants. And therefore to an evil servant it is said
commonly as a rebuke. Thou art a leude servant, thou sekest thine own gain
and not thy masters. But in the service of god, such as be servants profess
openly, and truly affirm, that they be unprofitable to their lord god, as the
text by you brought in testifies, who needs no service of us, ne can not be
increased or diminished by profyt or lack of our service. And yet he has so
much care of our wealth, that albeit our service is not profitable to him, yet
he commends it because it is profitable to us, and therefore says to a good
servant, Euge. Well said servant that art good and faithful, because thou
art faithful in a few, I shall appoynte the, over more. And moreover
declarynge how our service is profitable to our self he byddeth us, if we
will enter into life, to keep the commandments. And so that scripture that
is written to teach us one thing ye bring it in for an other. Because god
puts us in remembrance of the nature of our service to him that he has no
profyt by it, whereby we should knowledge his gratuitie and goodness to be so
much the more toward us, ye would we should take it, that god cares not for
our works in his service, and yet we be delivered (as the prophet says)
from the hands of enemies, to serve him in santite and holiness all days of
our life. The greeks by a gross proverb, ^ gross pro^erbe of the ^rekes.
would put men in remembrance what inconvenience follows of thabuse of good
things out of their place saying of him that so did abuse his necessaryes,
how he opened his lock with his hatchet, and cleued his wood with his keye.
And after this sort the scriptures be brought in by you, and other of your
sect, al out of purpose they were written for. And yet when some so do, then
they boste most, that they bring nothing but scripture, and the word of god,
and the mere truth, plain speech, simple language without iugglynge,
sophistry or man's tradicions. And when al comes to al, for so much they
bring a truth in deed, but to a wrong purpose, as is a hatchet to open y^
lock, which can do but burst it, and yet can not be denied but it is a good
hatchet, and good to cleue wood. And sometime again the scripture they bring
in is even as dull (to the purpose it is brought in for) as is a keye to cleue
wood. After which sort predestinacion, being signified unto us, for our
comfort, to declare what care god has of us, whereby we should be more
encouraged to work having god to our help, the same is used as an hatchet to
open the lock, whereby the less to care for our works, upon pretense that god
has done all. And likewise in many other places of scripture, if I would tarry
to rehearse the^. But now I will return to you master Joy, and where ye appose
me whether when I considered theffect of christ's passion, I believed it or no?
I profess, An answer to Joys examinacion of my belefe.
I believed it. The^ ye ask whether I believed it to be effectual to me? To
this I answer you, that first I believed it was and is effectual to me in my
baptism, wherein I obtained remission of sins, and renouacion of life. I
have believed, and believe it also effectual unto me, in the sacrament of
penance, whereby to recover the state of grace, from which sith the time of
my baptism, I have diverse times fallen by sin. And likewise I have believed
and believe that in the use of all the other sacraments, as it has pleased god
to ordeyne them, Christ's passion is effectual by work of God in the^, to
confer grace unto us. And generallye I have and do believe the passion of
christ to be effectual unto me, when so ever and as often as I by the grace of
god, purchased by the same passion, do use my self in fulfyllynge of gods
will, as the scriptures and the true understanding of them, teach me, the
obseruacion of which teaching, ye may call and it please you (and ye will
needs make me thauthor which I have not hitherto taken upon me) Winchesters
condition. And therefore Wynchester says that because scripture does require
of a christen man, that he be baptized whereby to be incorporate into Christ,
and being partaker of his death and resurrection, obteyneth remission of
sin, An accomp^ of such wokes as I me^ required to atteyne justification.
and is borne again of water and the holy ghost, Wynchester says as
scripture teaches him, that Baptizetur unusquisque in remissionem peccatorum.
And this one of Wynchesters works, and employed in his condition, that ye
wonder so much at, and call so dark and confuse. And generally when Christ
says: Come to me, ye that be charged with sin and I shall refresshe you, my
teaching is as scripture enfourmeth me, that he that is called, must do so
much as goo, when he is called, with the help of the caller, without which
he can not goo. And this is also one of Wynchesters works. And when God
says, believe, I must believe. And this is a another of Wynchesters works. And
when God says, love, and gives the gift of it: I must love, or else
remain in death. And this is a another of Wynchesters works. And al these
works which seem a great heap of works, be contained in the condycyon that
must be fulfilled for obteynynge the effect of Christ's passion, being
remission of sin, and a new state of life. And thus I have toulde you
playnelye my faith, and also the works I mean of, before iustyfycacion, and
likewise the condycyon which ye call so confuse and blind. And thus I taught
Barnes, and otherwise then thus (which is the catholyque belefe) I thank God
I have not believed, nor I dare not be so boulde (as ye be) to frame my self
any other pryuate believe, upon confydence of the text of scripture ye
bring, which is like a keye to cleave a logge: Scripture fondely alleged by
Ioy^
As thou beleueste so comme it to the. Christ spoke these words to Centuryo,
allowynge his faith so much, as he said he found not so great faith in
Israel. And it is a joy to see how wyselye ye will apply this to all men
how so ever they have conceived their faith whether it be catholyque or no.
And then the Arryane may be saved by his faith, and the Sabellyan by his
faith, the Marcyoniste by his faith, the Mahometane by his faith* the
Lutherane by his faith, the Swynglyan by his faith, and Joy by his faith.
For this text serves all. As thou beleueste so be it to the. And if any
believed that Gluttony were no sin: As thou beleueste so be it to the. And it
is as fond that ye bring in of Iairus, and makes nothing to the purpose ye
bring it for. For albeit ye faith of miracles were alone with the faith of
salvation, which your authors abhor because Christ said to Iairus believe
only, do that prove that Christ requires no more of none other where by to
atteyne salvation? Each man must do after the time of his calling, as the
parable teaches. And he that is called at.viii. of the clock, may not stand
idle till eleven, and fall to work then, to make a short end, as some do,
that fasshion them self to use the pleasures of the world so long as their
bodies may sustain, with mind to serve god when they can not tell else what
to do. Such me^ search scripture to know who has done lest, that they may do
as little as he. And if they that be given to stelynge, would study in
scripture the mercy showed to the thief hanginge on the cross, to the intent
they might have less care for their life in the mean season: were not such
learning fruteles and perniciouse to the common wealth? And after this like
sort does Joy handle ye scriptures, and goes about with his hatchet to open
the lock, and with his key to cleue logges. Joy brings in another miracle
of christ, wherein Christ said. thy faith has saved the. And here Joy
says is no condition but faith. To this I say that this is not all the
scripture, and he that will truly judge of scripture, he must join all
together. For that is not spoken in one part of scripture, ^e scripture (...)
but one word in ^se ^our all ^pugnau^ce.
is spoken in another, and all at the last must make one word. That is in
some part of scripture attribute to faith (as in this miracle) is in a another
part attribute to charity, as when christ said. Dimissa sunt ei peccata multa,
quia dilexit multu^. And in a another place, to hope, as Spe salui sumus, we be
saved by hope. And we must omit no part of the truth, but so understand
one, as all may be comprehended. And here I note unto the (reader) this manner
of speech in scripture. Thy faith has saved the, without mention of Christ's
passion, and without mention of god, as though a man might arrogantlye say: I
have saved my self, my faith has saved me, where by every man might be noted
his own savior. But this were blasphemouse sophistry, even such as men use
now a days, when they will impugn such devout speeches as has been used in
ye church, when each man exhorts other to save his own soul, or desires an
other to save his neighbors soul, or else moves his friend by alms, prayer,
fasting, and good deades, to work the wealth of his soul. All which
saluacyons, and works of salvation, good and devout men, understand to be
done (as in deed they can not be done otherwise) by the merits of Christ's
passion, and the gift of god. And yet these beasts that put no difference
between a keye and a hatchet, diffame the speech, as though such men fansyed
works of them selfs without god, or thought the passion of christ not
sufficient, when in deed it is mente in such works only to use the
benefit of christ's passion without presumption to add or supply any thing to
ye same, which were a fond folysshe, wicked, and arrogant blasphemy. And in
this matter I speak so much, because these idle talkers would discourage
virtuous disposed doers by such maliciouse report and sclau^der of their good
doings. After your leude divinity ye fall to fond policy, and ask whether it
be more profitable to take forgyuenes of sins without condition or tarry
whiles the condition were fulfilled. fashion of ^nswere (...) for Joy
Which question is so fondely conceived, that I will answer meryly unto it,
as the prentyce of London did his master before the wardens of the craft,
upon complaynte made that the master was over street to the prentice in his
diete. Why son (quod the master to his prentice in the wardens hearing) is
not cold mutton good meat? is not cold beafe good meat? cold capon good
meat? and sometime a cold pie. Lo (quod the master to the warden) has not my
prentyce good cause to complain? The warden checked the prentyce, and said he
was deyntye that would complain of so good fare. Whereunto the prentyce said
that his master had spoken of much good meat if a man could have it. And
so your masshyppe has said truly, that a man were better, if any thing
could be better then God has ordained it to take remyssion of sin without
any condition, for then without any endeavor, all should have it. But how
shall we have it so, when God puts a condition to it? We must take gods
benefyte as it is offered, and not as we would have it. Ye talk of wysshyng as
might satisfye your appetyte, and not as god has ordained and declared his
will. And yet as though ye had clerklye and substancially handeled the matter,
ye proceed to your triumph, with, now say on yet again Wynchester, and then
it follows in your book.

iiii ^rticle.
Ergo by the gift of god I may do well before I am justified.

YEa marye, this is the conclusion I waited for. Lo, now has he concluded of
him self, that he may do well before he be iustyfyed. This his well doing
stands upon ye fulfyllynge of his condycyon, where ye see he has his faith
and his works and yet is he not justified, ergo in that same time before he is
iustyfyed is he not iustyfeyd by faith nor by his works. Here ye se playnelye
into what confusyon he bringith him self, and what it is to reason by his own
wit without any word of scripture. Would God the papystes had no wyser
divines to defend their false relygyon, seldom are these popyshe lawers good
deuines. He says he may do well, and I say he may do evil to. It becomes
a learned man so to co^ferre the scriptures trewly understood that* he be
fewer and certain of his conclusyon. But perchance he take this word May, for
the merry month of May next Apryl, and then am I content to tarry till May come
again for the verifyenge of his conclusyon waityng for his well doing, for
hitherto (god knows) he has done much evil. The lord amend him before
May, or else take him shortly away. Amen. Because Win. has no scripture to
prove his conclusyon, I will help him, but yet I commend Standish agenst
Doctor Barnes, for he laid on scriptures written and unwritten, englyshed and
vnenglyshed as thick as hayle, and understood not one word what he said, even
the very doctors painted of Paul to have erred from the true faith and love,
and are swaruen unto vain lies, which would be seen Doctors of the law and
yet understand they not what they say nor of what thing they affirm. But to Win. conclusion, Thou knoweste good reader, that in scripture there is
mentioned a dead faith and a feigned or false faith. And also there is a
rightwysenes of the law or our rightwisenes and also a like justification, one
of faith before god, and an other of works before men. When Paul had
myghtelye proved only faith to have justified before God, the Jew not being
content with this conclusion objected saying. What then shall we say of our
father Abraham? Got he no justification by his works? he was a good father
and did many goods deeds. It is trweth says Paul, but yet has he not to
rejoice thereof before god, but only before men. Now let us set up my Lord
Gardener in his Veluets and Satyn alofte upon his mule trapped with velvet with
gilden sterups and bridle. etc. with his ientle men bare head chayned with
gold, before and after him. Who will not say but there rides a pryncely
prelate a gloriouse Bishop to orne and honor an hole realm? See what a clenly
sort of tall men he has about him, what costely liueries gives he, what a
many of idle belies daily fedeth he. Has not Winch. lo, whereof to glory
before men? is not this a ioylye justification? Now follows his conclusion of
him self saying, ergo by the gift of god, that is by these worldely gifts I
may do well before worldly men of fleshely judgment before I be justified
before God, yet justified gloriously (in which I rejoice) before men. This is
his Iewysshe justification whereof the Pharisaies so highly rejoiced, in so
much that Christ told them that he came not to call such just men, but
sinners to repentance, warning the people that except their rightwysnes
abounded above the Pharisais good deeds, they should never come to heaven. And
Paul says that men ignorant of the ryghtwisnes or rightwise making of god,
and seeking to set fast (as now does Wynchester) their own rigthwisenes,
they be never subject to ye rightwisnes of god. Wynchester yet knows not the
office of the law, to show us our sins, to work wrath, to make sin the
more to abound as Paul proves it to the Romans, so far of must it be to
justify. Neither yet knows he thoffice and proper place of faith nor yet what
thing faith is, but conceyueth a certain fantastical opinion thereof as does
every speculatyue pharisay and idle hypocrite. And a man should speak after the
very order of nature and of the time, he must needs set faith before works,
as is the tree before it blometh and the blomes before the fruit. The sead is
cast into the earth before it grows and fructifieth. The seade is the word of
god says Christ. And nyghe unto the is the word of faith even in thine heart
and mouth. Faith is effectuouse and works by love. And the end of the
precept is love out of a pure heart (by faith hearts are made pure says
Peter) and a good conscience and of faith unfeigned. I think Winc. is not so
ignoraunte in his Gramer as to english this text of Paul. Fides que
operatur per dilectionem, as did John fysher the bishop of Rochester in his
sermon at Paul's cross and afterward prynted, thus englysshed, faith which is
wrought by charity: so setting the carte before the horse and like an
ungodly gardener to peruerte and turn the rotes of his plants and herbs
upward, of which I hard as it were an old prophecye.xl. years agoo that
such an Antechrist should come to peruerte the iustificacion of faith and turn
Christ's relygyon vpsedowne. I am sewre he will not set works before faith,
no not in the young baptized infantes, nor yet in Paul at his conversion, nor
in the thief hanging by Christ crucified. It is truth that works being the
fruits of faith standing in their own place procedynge out of faith
iustyfyenge dymynysshe not the effect of Christ's passion. For we are made in
Christ Jesus to do the good works which God has prepared that we should
walk in them. We are saved frelye by faith says Paul, yea and that not of
works, for it is the gift of god, that we be saved by faith, and not for our
works lest any man should rejoice in his own deeds. But if Wynch. put his
works in the place and office of faith, as the condition without the which
no man is iustyfyed, so dymynyssheth he, yea he is iniuriouse and blasphemous
unto the effect of Christ's passion, for by this doctrine his diminute
imperfecte and wicked works should deserve us forgeuenes of sins as though
Christ's blood and so plentuouse a redempcyon in Christ were not suffycyente.
If by the law says Paul men be made ryghtwyse, so is Christ dead in
vain. Love must fulfill the condycyon (says he) ergo the works of the law
are his condition. Roma. 13. Now let us see what love god asks of us, for if
we have not that love, we shall never fulfill Wynch. condition. God commands
us to love him with our hole hearts, minds, souls, and with all our
strength, and our neighbors, ye and our enemies to, as our selves, ye and
that even as Christ loved us, which dyed for us being his enemies. He
byddeth us to be perfyte and holy as him self is, not to be so angry with our
brother as to provoke him with any evil word to anger, nor to desire any
other man's good, servant, wife. etc. no not to love our own lives in his
cause, but to hate our flesh and dye for his sake. Now tell me Wynchester if
any one man has this love, and so fulfilled your condition? or else dare your
self affirm to have fulfilled it? if ye have not, ergo by your own words
ye shall never enjoy the effect of Christ's passion (and yet speak I not of
the perfytte faith and hope yt every man, in God is bound to have) beware
therefore Wyn. how ye set your salvation upon so hard a condition, lest ye
come to short of the gates shutting with your.v. folysh virgens. If you had
once fulfilled (as you never shall your condition, and so perseuering, you need
not to pray. Father forgive me my dettes, nor never to say your Pater noster.
For ye owe no love neither unto God nor man, ye have paid all. And yet says
Paul, owe ye nothing to any man but mutual love, showing love to be a debt
ever in payenge and never full paid. We shall answer for every idle word
says Christ. But if Wynchester had accomplysshed his condition, so might he
go play and iustle in judgment with Christ for his salvation, having no need
of Christ's passion, then might he claim heaven of duty and make grace no
grace, which is a mere free gift undeserved of any man and thus were he one
of those just prelates whom Christ said he came not to call. Is not he a
proud fool to whom when god gives a free justification in christ, yet will
he refuse to take it but upon a condition, that he deserve it with such works
as him self is never able to perform? what arrogant fool would thus
condition him self agenste gods will? Peter consideringe this importable
condition said, by faith god purifieth their hertes, and wherefore then do ye
now tempte god so much layenge such a yoke upon men's necks which nether our
fathers nor we be able to bear? By the grace of our lord Jesus christ we believe
us to be saved as were our fathers. If we should say that we have no sin in
us, so are we liars. Wherefore the scriptures conclude every man to be a sinner
and infidele, that of all men God moughte have mercy. And that the promise out
of faith in Jesus christ should be given to the beleuers. Only Christ
fulfilled the law. And if Wynchester would mok out Paul, saying that when he
concluded so often man to be freely justified by faith only without the works
of the law: that he mente by the works of the law but cyrcumcysyon and the
other ceremonies now abrogated, and not the law of the commandments. Then
let him hear Paul expownynge him self of what law he mente aunswerynge to
such objections. By the law says he, comes the knowledge of sin, and I
had not known concupyscence to have been sin had not the law said: Thou
shall not have any concupiscens or lust. And then when he wrote his pys^les,
circumcision and the rytes and ceremonies were abrogated among the christen
Jews, and the Gentyles never were bound to them as was Abraham iustyfyed by
faith only ere the law was written and before he was cyrcumcysed. And Peter
said that this same law which Paul excludethe from iustificacion and Wynch.
calls his condition, is a yoke importable which proves it not to be
circumcysion nor any of their ceremonies of Moses law, for these were light
enoughe to bear, lyghter and easyer then to not lust or desire any thing
against gods will or for a rich man to forsake all and give it to the pore,
or for Wynchester to cast of his pride his bisshopryke with all his vaynglorye
and to become the humble poor pure persecuted preacher of gods word. It is
read that therewas one man that by suffering doing and fulfyllynge the law of
the commandments came to heaven, even christ only, In Math. we read of a
another young man that would go to heaven by doing some good works, asking
Christ, Good Master what deeds shall I do to have life eternal? whose mind
Christ seeing, did set him but certain of the easyeste commandments to
fulfill them. And he said, as for these I have done them alredye, well then
said christ, or rather so thought, If ye will needs go to heaven by doing: I
shall set you to do such deeds as I know well ye will never do, yea they be
impossible for you to do the^, even to sell his substance and to give it to ye
poor and so to follow him now going forth to Jerusalem to suffer death. What
did this man I pray you? how far went he with Christ think you? went he
not his way heuyly from christ? And yet will Wynchester go to heaven by doing
and fulfyllynge his hard condition, I dare say he would skratche his head
twice (as did this rich man) ere he sold his bysshoprike and had given it
to the poor. And therefore christ pronounced that it is impossible for such
rich men to come to heaven. God therefore trusted us so little with the
fulfyllynge of the law and so by this condition to come to heaven, that he
took it out of our hands and laid it upon his son christ's back to be
fulfilled. For if he had left our salvation in our own hands to be deserved
by our works we had been al dampened.

of only faith justifies, unless in teaching ye will so handel the matter as
Barnes did, that a man is justified before he believes. For and if believe go
before justification, as a cause does theffecte, then seeing in scripture,
belefe is called a deed, and proceeding from the gift of god, must needs be a
good deed, it follows necessarily. Ergo I may by gods gift, do a good deed
before I am justified. But I moved Barnes, of a deed before belefe, that is
that lerning to believe by hearing sermons or reading, wherein the grace of god
prepares man's will as scripture says, (So truly do you say when ye call me
pelagian) I asked Barnes of that deed whether it were good or no? and proved
it good. And then because it is done before justification, I brought the
conclusion aforesaid, whereof ye take occasion to be joyful in the merry month
of May. All which your iestinges I can so well digest, as I am not ashamed to
cause the^ to be rehearsed in this book, because the buddes of your fruteful
lerning may appear, to considre what fruit we may look for of the^. As for the
matter of justification by faith and works, was not meant between Barnes and
me, to be spoken of in this conclusion, and so therein ye strive not with me but
with your self, and beat your own shadow in stead of an adversary. Where ye
think I am not so ignorant in my gra^mer as to english the text of saint
Paul. Fides que per dilectionem operatur. Faith which is wrought by charity,
and make (operatur) a uerbe passive: ye think not amiss, if I should
english it word for word. But as for the sense, because scripture does
attribute life to charity, without which faith remains dead I se no such
cause of absurdite, as ye find, to say faith is set a work by charity, The
enterprise of these s^eres is worldly, an^ they set it furthe wit^ prophecies
other worldly vanities.
and the good learned men of the Greek church expound saint James after that
sort. And as for such vanity in prophecies if ye do regard them, in the
perverting of justification, you and Barnes with your sect, were that company
who have so confusely handled that matter, as ye make justification before al
faith in him that is only moved to believe. Considre with your self whether
this turnynge vpsidowne, in consideration of the doctrine in justification.xl.
years past, may be verified on you or me, I affirm the same justification yt
was the^ taught and you be the turners, Joys pr^phecy note^ him self an^ he
sees it not.
and so by your own prophecy be noted for Antechrist. I give no credit to
such prophecies, but because you do, I allege your own prophecy for your
own confusion, Blind men ^ee nothing
and as ye can not se gods truth, which ye believe not, so ye can not se the
true sense of your own profane prophecy which ye believe. And if ye will
now go back from your backewarde iustificacion, after your accustomed manner,
then must you place the studyouse work of learning our belefe, and likewise
the work of baptism, the work of believing, and the work of love, to be
before justification, and some of them in the thief hanging on the cross. God
justifies no man without the gifts of faith and love, this ye grant, which
when man receives, he receives by the^ justification, wherein I call man's
deserte and merit only the using of the benefits offered of faith and love.
And other deserte and merit man can not have. For what has any man good that
he has not received. And therefore the commandment of love with our hole
hearts. etc. is not so extreme as ye make it to a christen man, whose faith
speakethe to God boldly. Da quod iubes, as saint Austen says: Give that thou
co^maundeste, by reason whereof the yoke of the law, impossible to be borne,
is in christ easy through the gift of God, by Christ, in whom we may do
all. Neither love ne faith, can be in man perfect and they need both continual
encreace, but he that knows our infyrmities, takes in good part our
imperfection for our sauyoure Christ's sake, upon whom our salvation is
grounded, and neither upon works, ne faith, works strive not with faith, as
Joy and his, suppose
with your division whereof, ye deceive the simple people, as though works
required of a christen man; wherein to use the gifts purchased for man by
christ* were at contention and strife with faith, like the works of Moises
law. And herein ye much please your self, and think other gross, that be so
mad to ground their salvation upon works, being impossible, and leave the
salvation by faith, which is sure and certain. And some talk of faith,
wherewith to apprehende gods mercy, as though faith had hands to take and
hold fast, and love none, and they grant that no man is justified without
charity, but yet properlye they say faith apprehends the iustificacion,
whereof how properly they speak, I shall speak hereafter at large. Now I will
a little note your fondness master Joy, so to dally in so great a matter* ye
ask me, whether I have fulfilled the condition of the justification, and yet
ye can not tell what condycyon Barnes and I spoke of, and so ye ask ye wot
not what, and come in with a free justification, as though I devised our
justification to be bond. These be mere fransies. I ever affirmed that we be
frelye justified, and freely saved, and yet god in giuinge us this fredome, for
christ, works so in order, and so wylleth us to observe it, which I call the
condycyon, as for want thereof we shall either not atteyne fredome, or loose
our fredom, when we have atteyned it. For ones made free from sin, we must
walk in the pathe of justice, and live in this world soberly, justly and
godly, and also to atteine this fredome, do as god has ordained in using his
sacraments worthelye, with conuersyon also of our heart, and penance, as god
requires of us, whose will our savior christ in his works, deeds and
preachinges has declared unto us, which you deprave so abhominablye and
detestably, as even in this place god suffers you, to write so vndiscretelye
of him, as has not ben lykely seen or hard. For not being co^tente to
allege christ's words in a sense of your own imagination, ye utter it thus.
A licencious speech of Joy, touched.
Christ so said, or rather so thought. A strange speech Christ showed him
self god, in yt he knew the thoughts of men, and what do you show your
self, in that ye take upon you, without words to lead you, to discern the
thought of Christ very god and man? and frame the speech so as though christ
could not utter his thought for want of language, and that is implied in your
(rather so thought) Joy read this place ones and ones again, and considre
thine own folly in it. I will not with other terms engreue the matter, but
pray God it may ashame the, and bring the to repentance. For malice in the
treatinge of this matter, has so increased in the, as it has utterly
confounded thy senses, yt thou saw not what thou haste written in this place
(Christ said or rather thought) ye say. And what thought do you attribute to
christ^ that he should bid men do that he knew well they would never do, and
that were impossible to do, which were a more cruel thought then any christen
heart could attribute to our most merciful savior. Cursed be he (says
saint Iherome) that says gods commandments be impossible. And when ye have
in these few words said so far amiss, ye bydde me say on Wynchester ones
again as follows.

v. ^rticle.
Ergo I may do well by the gift of God before I am justified toward the
atteynement of iustificacion.

Now declares he by his well doing for the attaynement of his justification
to be justified by works. Here is his condition declared to be works. Here he
shows him self to be arrogantlye bolder then Dauyd or just Job, which both
feared their works and desired god not to enter into judgment with them, for
then should there no man be justified in his sight, and again says Dauyd,
Lord if thou shouldes observe our inyquytyes, who shall stand before the in
judgment vncondempned? But Wynch. may do well in the month of May, before
men, ere he be justified before god, and so rejoice of his own ioyly
iustificacion ridinge upon his horse or mule. He would feign here wrap in his
works with his faith both together into one bed to warm and win his
justification, that he might be sure by both together (for the mo the better)
to be justified. Sed pallium ambos operire non potest (says Isai) but the
couerlet is to narowe and to short to cover them both, one of the^ therefore
is like to lie bare ars and a cold. For god to whom we be married by faith
and mercy is a jealous god, and will not that any of his spouses should lie
with a another to divide their faith from him to works to be justified by them,
nor to separate forgyuenes of sins from his blood. Is Christ divided? And
therefore if this iusticiarye by his may well doing, before he be justified,
toward thattaynement thereof so proceed toward his intent, he may be (as the
friars and monks were wont to say) in via perdicionis, perfectionis I would
say, but unto the very justification shall he never come, even men of a corrupt
mind carried away of diverse lusts, ever learning and never commen unto the
knoweledge of the truth: for such deceyuers shall goo forth worse and worse,
till their wyckednes be ripe, leadynge other into errors, their selves being
blind and far out of the way, turned unto vain speech and false
doctrine, willing to be seen doctors and yet understand they not what they
say nor of what things they make acts, artycles, and institutyons.

toward the atteynment of justification. And now ye say I declare how man
is justified by works, and thereupon ye dally, how faith and works can not
lie in one bed, and one couerlet can not cover them both, and Christ is not
divided. Whereunto harken a little, here how wisely ye speak, In your
justification by only faith, this I ask, who believes, god, or man? I think
ye will say man by gods gift. And so God gives the gift of faith, and man
receives it, do not here concur in two works, god and man? which lie both
in one bed? and be covered with one couerlet? to thaccomplyshment of
justification? And is god so jealous then, that he will not have it spoken when
he works, and man also works with him by his gift and help? Be not we called
in scripture cooperatores dei? Did not one couerlet cover god and Gedeo^ (if we
shall speak in your allegory) and was not Gedeon taught to join him self to
god and to teach his soudiers, so to cry in the destruction of ye Madianites?
the sword of god and of Gedeon? and Domino et Gedeoni? After which sort,
knowlegyng that god uses the me^bres of his church, in ye ministry of his
works with mutual prayer, one to help an other, we say god and our lady help
us, wherein god gives the help and our Lady prays for it, which is a help
to obtayn help, and so in the honor of god and our lady: God gives not his
glory from him. Therein he is jealous, but god does communicate his glory in
glorifieng of his saints which then redou^deth to him. And yt we may
acknowledge in our speech. And we english men to whom god has given many
victories under the banner of saint George, may not we as well say: God and
saint George, as they said under Gedeon Domino et Gedeoni? Gods honor is
nothing diminished, by addicion of his servant to wait upon him, and for our
teaching therein. Gedeo^ was learned to say, Gladius domini et Gedeonis. And in
this common speech, when men say, I thank god and the king. Trow ye god is
angry with the speech, as though it were to homely to join ye king with god? or
has god the less thank that ye king is joined in thanks with him? where in
deed the king has no thank, but by god, and for god, and god is thanked as
author, and the king as gods servant. And in this sense the speech was
conceived. Mary among ye rude people, by mysvndersta^ding there has growe^
supersticio^, which is a fault annexed to ye multitude, to do either to much,
or to little, and the reformacio^ therein has been expedient, but the young boy
that in thentrie to learn his letters, was taught to say, Christ's cross, me
speed and saint Nicholas, was for so much taught, no error at all, but saint
Nicholas well named, as one by christ's cross auau^ced here, to lerning and
virtue, and now by power of the same cross, placed in felicite, where he may
pray for other, to be helped as he was, And god helps by giuinge of help,
and saint Nicholas helps by prayenge for the same help, In confession
whereof, we set forth the honor of god, and magnify it, even as god would
have it magnified, who so has exalted his ministers as to be one with him, not
by division, as ye peruersly term it, not as checkemate, as ye odiously name
it, but as being participate and enioyinge his glory and his honor which is
not lessed thereby or diminisshed, but among us, more set fourth and spread
abroad. And therefore churches and aulters, be named with saints names, not
that any saint, is author of any church, for god is only author, ne there
can be any sacrifice, and so none altar, but to god only, and yet for
memory of those saints, in whom god is honored we have done and may
dedicate churches and aulters, in the honor of God and this or that saint,
wherein the saint is remembered, as an honorable servant. And so when we say,
In the honor of god and saint George. God is named as author of all honor,
and saint George as called to the participation of that honor, by god,
according to the words of Christ, If any man honor me, my father shall
honor him* in heaven, wherein god spends not his honor and has the less
him self, as they would persuade, that would not have saints named with god in
honor, for sparyng of gods honor, but god so spredeth his honor abroad, and
is thereby magnified among us* The catholic doctrine teaches god holly with
his servants, Christ, hollye with his precepts. You be the only deuyders of
Christ, who can not abide the teaching of hole Christ, which consists in
the due receiving the benefits of his passion and following his example. This
haulfe of Christ, ye talk of, that he has suffered for our sin, paid our
ransom, satysfyed for us, but the other haulfe, that Christ suffered for our
example, to work after him, that ye can not abide ne digest the preaching of
it. Ye say also ye love Christ, but ye deuyde him from his servants, his
saints departed, under a wrong pretense of the preservation of his hole
honor. Christ him self, ye call life, but ye call his servants the saints
departed, dead men, and for spite cut of their ears, and say they can not
hear, because they want their bodies. Thus do you deuyde christ, and make
strife between his gifts also, with your only faith, where with to put
charity out of office in justification. And ye be verelye they of whom the
text of saint Paul to Timo. may be verified which ye bring in against me.
Read the text, as ye allege it again, and do as Plato was wont to do, when
he read any thing saying, do not this touch me? As for the matter of acts in
the realm (which ye know I make not) I will not entreat with you, being
matters by the realm agreed upon, according to gods truth, which it besemeth
me not, to call in any doubt. But let us see what ye say further.

But play on yet again ones master Wynchester.

vi. article.
There is ever as much charity toward god as faith, and as faith increases
so does charity increase.

This is truth nether ought it to be impugned if he take faith and charity as
Paul takes them. There must needs some truth be myxt with lies, that he might
the slylyer deceive, and some sugar myngled with his venom that he might the
priuelier poison.

ever be together in one. But to this purpose, this speech served, we spoke of
turnyng to god, wherein I said, that as god gave man, by faith, knoweledge to
come to him: So he gave charity to love him. So as when god calls man, to
him, there, in the turnynge of man, and going to god, god adds to faith,
love, according as saint Austen says. Credere in deum est amando in eum ire.
To believe in god, is by loving to goo unto him. And therefore ye shall not
take that advantage of my (there) which word (there) placed as it was then
spoken to Barnes, had an other signification special, then ye by allowynge of
it would have it signify. For it was not spoken in this sense, yt your doctrine
teaches, whereby to signifye, that who so ever loses charity, loses also
faith, but there where god gives faith, he gives also charity* because faith
without charity, remains dead.

What then Wynchester.

vii article.
To thattaynment of iustificacion, is required faith and charity.

Faith only (says Christ and Paul) is required to thattaynemente of the
iustificacion which is of God, nether is charity excluded from faith, but
from the efficacye effect and office to justify. For to this effect and
office is faith alone sufficient effectuously. As from fire or from the son
we exclude not heat nor bryghtnes, but yet have heat and brightness their
sondrye effects and offices, for the heat warmeth and with his brightness the
son shyneth and gives light. Charity has many fayer effects and, offices
attributed only unto her self as proper, and is hyghlye commended for them,
as is faith extolled of Paul for her offices in the Hebrews. And I dare say
charytye is content with her own works, called benygne pacyente. etc. so
that she desires not to put her elder sister faith out of her chief office
nor yet to usurp any part thereof, whose office pryncipall is alone to
justify, but and if Wynchester will defraude faith of her effect and imparte
it unto charytye, he shall offend both charity and faith. This is certain
that if charity had had any such an excellent effect and office as to
justify, Paul would not have omytted it, but would have given her the glory
thereof setting it forth before al saying. Charity justifies, charity is
benygne, pacyente, etc. I would Wynchester would ones show us where he fyndeth
this text in scripture. Charity iustyfyeth. It is written in many places faith
justifies, by faith god testified our fathers to be justified, yea and that
without the works of the law. Frelye doubteles are men justified by grace
(says Paul) through the ransom and redemption made by the anointed
sauyoure whom god the father has set forth to be the free merciful gift or
seat of mercy thereupon to be appeased through faith in his blood set forth (I
say) to declare him self faithful and true of his promysse concerning the
forgeuenes of sins hitherto committed and paste, which sins God the father
had not anon punisshed but patiently suffered them to declare his long
suffringe and him self to be true of his promise at this present time when him
self would be known and declared faithful and just in that he justifies
who soever believes and lives in Jesus by faith. Where is then thy gloriouse
bostynge oh Wynchester? It is plainly excluded and shut out of doors. By what
reason? by the reason of virtue and works? No no, but by the reason of faith,
we conclude therefore (says Paul) that by faith a man is justified without the
works of the law. Lo here is all gloriacio^ of works blown down, laid flat
in the dust by reason and power of faith: for as faith humbles and gives all
glory to god, so do works puff up man and ascribe glory unto men. If the
effect of Christ's passion should depend of the condition of our works, we
should never be sure and certain of our iustificacion, for all our works are
vnperfytte and foul as the sick woman's clothes. Paul him self did his
office so truly that his conscience could not accuse him of any faut, and
yet he said, Non tamen in hoc iustificatus sum, yet for so doing am I not
justified.

and Christ, say, faith only, whereby ye declare your self, how much ye
regard their sayenges, and that what soever they say, ye dare (if it like you)
say the contrary. Now for my part I say, faith and charity be both in
iustificacion, because Christ and saint Paul say the same. An other varyaunce
between you and me is, ye say, albeit both systers, faith and charytye, be in
iustyfycation, yet charytye, the younger sister (as ye term it) stands still
idle, and only waits upon her elder sister, faith, which faith ye say, is
only in efficacy, effect and office in iustificacion, but not only in
company, for faith (ye say) is accompanied with charity in iustificacion, and
yet faith as the elder sister works al. I say they be both not only in
company in iustificacion, but also in office, and efficacy, so as all the
controversy, in iustificacio^, is come now to this fine, subtyl, narowe issue
whether charity in justification, works or is idle? The issue of the
co^trouersy in iustifica^ion*
And is not (trow you) the discussion of this point, a worthy matter, wherewt
to travel the simple unexercised wits of the world. And surely, all the
disputacyon, in this article of iustificacion, is deduced by discussion thus
far, that for all the only and only, with so many onlyes which they have
added to faith, to make ye speech litigiouse, there now is none found among
learned men, but that say (as ye master Joy say) that charity is not excluded
from faith in iustificacion, but that there is in the iustificacion of man,
faith and charity. But the new sect (which ye profess) to maintain the
aduerbe (only) say the office of faith is only to justify, and yet
charity is present, but is not effectuouse therein. So as faith and charity
being two gifts of God given both together, the one (yt is to say) faith,
works justification only, as ye say, and that other, charity for the time
stands idle, till justification be past. And to induce men, to se this even
as well as you do your self, ye use a similitude of the son and fire, which
manner of teaching Christ used much by things corporal and visible, to make
some explication of things invisible and incorporall, and so to induce men to
the understanding of them, which for my part I much allow, and only find
this fault in some of your sort, that albeit in you, Similitudes be
necessary to plain teaching.
they allow and approve similitudes, for corroboracion of your doctrine, yet
when your doctrine should be impugned, they can not abide similitudes, but they
say straight as they here of them, fie on them: Blind not me (says he) by
similitudes but comme to the plain matter, and yet sometime ye matter is so
dark, as it can not be perceived without the spectacles of a similitude, or
parable, and anon the similitude well considered, the matter that was dark, is
seen by and by. For a similitude, is as it were a speech of the words and
thing together for both ye thing resembled, and the words also speaks at
ones. But now to your similitude, whereby ye entende to make men perceive,
how it might be, that two things conjoined together, may have diverse
effects, and so each one of them, to work his effect apart, without
confusion. For so ye say, does faith and charity. The son and fire ye say,
have each one of them heat and brightness, and the heat warmethe and the
brightness shyneth. So as by this similitude, we may understand, that from
god, whom ye signify by the son or fire, is given to man before he be
justified, two virtues, faith and charity, whereof faith shyneth, and charity
warmeth. And in deed the effect of faith, is properly, to illuminate the
understanding, and of charity to warm and kyndle man's cold and earthly
affection. Now if the justification of man implied only the expulsion of
darkness, from man's understanding, theffecte of faith, would suffice, but
saying god in iustificacio^, moves man's heart, and kindles love in it, why
may not these two virtues, with their two effects, by gods workyng, concur
in man's justification? your similitude lets it not, but rather confirms
it. As for saint Paul declares plainly, that albeit he speaks sometime of
faith without mention of charity, yet he means not faith as a bare
foundation, but faith with charity. And as every foundacyon corporal, is
first in prioritie of time. So is every foundation intellectual, first in
prioritie of nature. And therefore because noma^ loves yt he knows not
before, faith yt brings knowledge must needs p^cede, and faith that has not
charity is dead, so as by these.ii. virtues god resuscitating man in
iustificacion from the death of sin to life, Iustificati^
gyuethe the gifts of knoweledge and love (that is to say) faith and
charytye, being god only the officer him self that justifies, and to him ye
may put (only) and (only) for he is the iustifier and requires (only) of
man (mary that he will have done) to receive and use these virtues, as he
gives them. And this is the plain teaching, and agreeable with scriptures,
which must be so understood, as one part, may be consonante to the other,
without such hackynge as ye make of it. God gave Abraham faith wherewith to
believe him, and charity wherewith to love him, and Abraham as he believed god
so he loved him both together. And if I should return to your similitude, when
me^ say, that they should plant their vines, where the son may shine on them,
do they affirm that the brightness and light of the son, gives the comfort
to the vynes? or rather the heat? The speech is of the brightness, as a part
may signify, the hole, but in the heat is theffect. Ye dalye in the matter, to
triumph over me, and take upon you ye part of a mediator, between ye two
sisters faith and charity, and ye commend charity, for many good properties
forsothe, but ye say the elder sister faith, has ye justification by
scripture. Is not this properly handled, in so serious a matter? But ye require
scripture of me whiles ye daly, and talk your self, without scripture. As for
scripture this I say to you, that and ye note scripture, ye shall find in the
true sense of it, that as the promysse of god is knit to faith, so it is knyt
to love, as life is promised to men beleuynge, so it is promised to men
loving. And as often as saint Paul names faith, not speakinge of love, so
often and oftener, does saint John^ in his epistles speak of charytye without
mention of faith, and declares plainly, that he that loves not, is in death,
and he that loves not, knows not god. And as saint Paul says to the
Hebrews, he that comes to god must believe. So Christ said in the gospel of
saint Ihon^, No man he says, comes to me, without my father draws him, the
sense whereof is, but by love, wherewith saint Austine says, god draws us
according as god by Moises signified to us, that he shows his mercy, to
them that love him. It is true, we can not love god onles he prepares our
heart, and give us that grace, no more can we believe god, unless he gives us
the gift of belefe. And so god is the author of all our wealth, and our helper,
that we may work with him, and he is the only iustifier, God the on^ iustifier.
the only savior and only mediator. And as for the speech of (only faith
justifies) the scripture has not, and yet has been spoken by some learned men
to exclude the works of Moses law, wherein S. Paul labored in his epistle
to the Romans, where S. Paul speaks not of the aduerbe (only) nor he
has not this fasshyon of speech, faith justifies, but in this wise, we be
justified by faith, and attributes the act of justification to god. And S.
Augustine says plainly, that for the more plain understanding of S. Paul,
god inspired S. James to write his epistle. And further saint Austen says,
that S. Paul speaking of faith, did ever mean such a faith as had the gift of
charity with it, whereof he spoke, to ye Galathia^s. Neque circumcisio, neque
prepuciu^ est aliquid, sed fides que per dilectionem operatur. And to the
Corrinthians, he that has not charity is nothing. And therefore as scripture
testifies yt god makes his promise to the^ that believe in him so it
testifies that god makes his promise to them that love him, as saint James
writes. And by the wise man god says, I love them that love me. Saint John^
affirms, he yt loves not god, knows not god, so as without I love I can
not frutefully believe, no not the belefe of knowledge, as saint Ihon^
declares whereby appears, that the younger sister charity, for so ye speak
of her, has office to help her elder sister faith, in justification. But ye
now press me to show you scripture, in this form of sillables, Charity
justifies. And yet ye have no scripture so framed, for faith, as to say, faith
justifies, nevertheless to answer you according to your folysshnes, and to
stop your mouth, who begin to appose me, as children were wo^t each one
another in their primers, to ask, where they found two deus and never a meus?
An auns^ mete for (...) that will (...) strive for ^lables.
Thus much I say, I find in saint Paul, deus iustificat, and then I find in
saint Ihon, deus est charitas: And so I find charitas iustificat. For quicquid
predicatur de subiecto, predicatur de predicato. And so if deus predicatur de
iustificare, to say, deus iustificat, and then charitas predicatur de deo,
deus est charitas, the scripture that says, deus iustificat, says also
charitas iustificat. And thus I give you words for words, who deserve none
other. For else I know that charitas que de deo predicatur, est increata, and
so differs, a charitate qua iustificamur. Thus for my recreacion, I answer
you, as you be worthy, who from seriouse discussion of the true sense, will
bring the matter to sillables, and yet in deed, ye have no such syllables, for
faith, what so ever ye say, as you would have me find, to serve for charity:
for scripture has neither fides iustificat, nor charitas iustificat, in
syllables, but the sense of both is contained in scripture, as before is
declared. As for works of the law serve you only, for matter to talk on. As
for frenes in justification, I affirm al to be of gift, and there is nothing
freer then gift. I speak of no glory, but only of gods glory in whom we
should glory as saint Paul teaches us. Now where ye say, that if the
effect of christ's passion, should depend, of the condition of our works we
should never be sure, and certain of our justification, for all our works are
imperfect, and foul. Thus I au^swer you, that what surenes ye would have I can
not tell, but of this I am sure, that god has thus ordained that baptysme is
necessary, to attain salvation, and yet all children, be not sure to be
baptized. And this does scripture tell me assuredly, that a man must persevere
in good doing, to the end, or else he shall not be saved, and that he that
stands in virtue, may fall, and be cast out. I am assured by saint Paul's
admonition in his epistle to the Romans bidding the gentyle, take heed that
he fall not. And saint Austen says, If we continue in goodness, we may be
assured of god, that he will not fail, but whether we shall continue, no man
knows. And therefore such assurance as ye speak of, without regard of the
condition, and observing of it also, I have not read. Thus have I learned in
scriptures, if we turn, when god turns to us, If we believe, when god
illuminateth us. If we love, as god kyndleth us. If we be baptized as God
commands us we shall be justified, Conditions required in scripture of man for
his salvation.
If we walk in justification, as god by christ has taught us, and therein
persevere, we shall be saved and glorified. And I know none other english for
so many iffes, but to call them conditions, and works also to be done by us,
which works, be imperfect in us, that be our self imperfect, and as
touching vnperfitenes, faith therein differs not from charity, for they
need both daily increase of perfection, and therefore Job said. Verebar omnia
opera mea, which may comprehend faith also. But al our imperfitnes, is
supplied in christ's perfitnes, and so christ supplyeth us, and we supply not
christ, We should do all as christ did, for he is our example to follow, but
we can not, for we have the dregs of sin, and be compassed about with
infirmities as punyshme^t for the sin of our father Adam. So as the powers of
our soul, upon occasion of the world, and the flessh, and suggestion of the
deuell, be ready to rebellion, And herein as well ye power of the soul, ye
properly receives faith, to diffidence, and doubt against ye certaynte of
godly faith, as also the power of the soul, that receives charity to
contempt or negligence toward the observation of gods pleasure, with some
confusion in hope also, as adversities encombre us, or pleasures make us
wanton. For although the gylte of oryginall sin, be taken away in baptysme,
yet the scarre of it and (as it were) ye matter of it, does remain, which as
it troubles, and lets man's perfection in virtue, and thereby is maynteyned a
continual strife and debate, so is it not to be accounted our sin till we
conceive it, by enbracyng and agreynge to such carnal motions. And therefore
saint James says, that concupiscence, when it conceyueth, brings forth
sin. And like as in every kind, the female is commenlye barren, unless it
conceyueth of the male: so is concupyscence barren and void of sin, unless
it conceive of man the agreymente of his free will, consenting to the evil
motion. And because no man has been so perfytte, but has in the contynuall
fight yielded, although men might be by grace, without sin, yet because no
man has (except our Lady as saint Augustyne says who is always to be
excepted) if we should say we had no sin, we were liars, as saint John^
says, and therefore after saint Austens mind, do not only for humilite,
but also for truth, pray in our common prayer daily for remission of our
sins, And so master Joy to return to our matter, if ye would for policy,
flee from the work of love, to the work of faith, because ye would be
assured, ye be no more assured, in respect of your own work, by faith, then
ye be by charity, but all our assurance, is in gods promise. For, deus
uerax, et omnis homo mendax, and therefore how so ever ye and yours will Ieste
at it. I will return again to the common prayer of the church, Omnipotens
sempiterne deus, da nobis fidei, spei and charitatis augmentum, and ut mereamur
assequi quod promittis, fac nos amare quod praecipis. Which prayer being so
old in the church, they have been affrayed, for reverence of auncientie, to
banishe in Germany, although it repugneth and disproueth their teaching in
this matter. Wherefore as the su^me of our health begins, continues, and is
accomplysshed by gods mercy. Quia neque volentis neque currentis, sed
miserentis est dei: so the assurance of our health, depends upon gods
promise: Mary (quod you) and that is truth, and here ye will clap your hands,
and extolle the strength of truth, that bresteth out, although we pharisais (as
ye saduces call us) would oppress it. The promise of god is all, Et ideo, ex
fide (say you) and these words scripture has, ut firma sit promissio. A
consideration of the argument, how faith apprehends the promise:
And now ye will percase bring in Melancto^s correlatiues whereof ye make
mention in the end of your book of faith and of promise: And that the cause
why we be justified by faith (says he) and not by charity, is because
promise can not be received, but by faith. And in this point / they meruayl of
ye grossenes of our wit, that understand not the nature of correlatiues, and
se not how a promise, can only be apprehended by faith, and that is the
ground, that moves them to say, Only faith justifies. And thus they
reason, Saying our salvation depends upon gods promise, and a promise can
not be apprehended, but by faith only, we must needs say, only faith
justifies, And to make the matter plain they bring in a similytude. If one
man promises an other.xx.li. how can he, to whom the promise is made,
apprehende the promise but only by beleuynge him that promises. And this is
the new scoole of Germany, where sophistry is not banished but has a new
garmente and is clothed with a pretense of simplicity. For in this teaching,
is a meruelouse apparaunce of playnnes, and throughlye considered, conteynethe
a mere deceyte. And note well reader, that thou may perceive this
iuggelinge sophistrye, where it deceyueth the. It is not denied, but only
faith apprehends the promise, therein is no controversy, but mark well this,
when god justifies man, god ministers mercy to us, which was the thing god
promised to give us (as ye prophet zachary prophesied god would give him self)
who is all mercy, whereupon is grounded our salvation, wherein we must consider
distinctly and a part the promise of god, and the thing by him promised,
which is mercy. The promise is one, ye thing contained in ye promise is an
other. As in their example (for I dare make no new) when one fre^d promises
an other. Gods promise of mercy, shows the promise to be the bo^d^ and
mercy the thing promised.
xx.li. the promise is the bond, the thing promised is the.xx.li. In which
example, though I grant, that I apprehend my friends promise, with believing
him, yet I apprehende not, yt is contained in my friends promise, with believing
him, for I apprehe^d that with my hands, if it be paid me. And so although we
apprehend gods promise, with our belefe, yet the exhibicion of the mercy of
god, which is the thing comprehended in gods promise, we apprehend that with
all such parts of us, of body and soul, as be comforted and healed, by that
mercy. And in the workynge of christ's miracles, the promysse of health, in
body and soul, was received by faith, in the understanding lyghtened by God,
but the health was received, in all the parts healed of body and soul. Now
if he will yet wrangle and say, that the promise of god, is mercy, and god
will surely fulfill his promise. So as he that apprehends, the promise,
apprehends also mercy. I will not vary with him therein to say that the
promise is for the certain hope of the thing promised, mercy. For as our Lady
said in the spirit of prophecy. Suscepit Israel puerum suu^, recordatus
misericordiae suae. God has taken to him Israel, his servant, remembryng his
mercy, yt is to say, according to his merciful promise, which the next verse
declares. Sicut locutus est. etc. yet ye shall note here a distinction in
degree of mercy between ye mercy in the merciful promise, when our Lady says
recordatus miseri cordiae suae, and the very receyuyng of Israel to his service
which god does in justification of man, for then he takes Israel the beleuer
that sees god to his servant, which is a further mercy and the very mercy
promised. So as Israel apprehends the merciful promise by faith, but being
taken to service, receives ye further mercy promised, in receiving a new
heart, a new spirit, which god creates in man, with the gift of charity, and
resuscitateth in man life, being al life and charity him self. Wherefore we
may not properly say we apprehende justification by faith, which is the
exhibition of mercy promised by god, to justify man, unless, we would call
the promise of god, and the exhibition of the thing promised all one. God will
do assuredly, that he promyseth, and yet his promise, and the thing promised
be distinct, and the promise and the exhibitio^ of ye promise distinct, but
assuredly knit together, without failing, for god can not fail, and yet
disseuered, in consideration of the scripture. And herein is the sophistry, in
this new scoole, slythly to pass over and iuggle, as this man speaks of
under board, from the promise to the exhibition of the thing promised, which
their slight is not of the rude, easelye espied, because in common speech, we
use sometime, to signify, by the word (promise) the thing promised, and so we
do, when we say we be saved by gods promise meaning his mercy promised, and
yet be the promysse, and mercy promised, diverse in consideration of the thing,
as before. As soon as man believes, God proceeds to the fulfillynge of his
promise, for his part, and gives us a new spirit, and a new heart, and so
justifies us, if we receive it, and assente by our free choice unto it, and
work with it, which is the effectual receiuyng and the worthynes on our part,
whereby we be justified. And note well this that there must be on our part a
worthynes, and therefore, how so ever ye will smyle at it, The church has
alwa^ labored in ^membraun^^ of gods p^mises to p^ us in remembrance o^ our
wort^nes.
it is a good prayer, Ora pro nobis sancta dei genitrix, ut digni efficia mur
promissionibus christi. In this prayer we call upon our Lady as a lively
membre of christ's mystical body, to pray to god, for us and with us, that we
may be made worthy, ye promises of christ. In which prayer we acknowledge and
truly profess, that the promises of god, require in us a worthynes. For the
promyses of god be not to all men, without condition absolute for then all
should be saved, but only to such as be worthy, to enjoy the^. And of this
worthynes the scripture speaks the third chapter in the book of wisdom,
^sedome ^archeth se^nge them, ^at be wor^ye her.
saying, god has tempted them, and found them worthy him. And Centurio in
the gospel, when he humblye, would have avoided the coming of Christ into his
house, said. Lord, I am not worthy, that thou shouldeste enter into my
house. Now if we shall so press the signification of this word (worthy) as
we mean sometime when we say. Dignus est operarius mercede sua, no man can be
found worthy, the mercy of god, but if we can be content in the
understanding, to absteyne from the extremite, and take worthynes for metenes
after gods acceptance, then all such, may be accounted worthy as conform them
self to gods pleasure, and use such gifts of god, as whereby god makes us
worthy, both the gifts received and other more. So as the sense of the prayer,
that we may be made worthy, is that we may be conformable, to the fulfillynge
of gods will. And it is to be noted, that we pray that we may be made
worthy (for we can not make our self worthy) but must receive all of god, of
whom is all worthynes, and of our self unworthiness, and yet in the atteining
of worthiness, we be workers with god, by his grace as before is declared. And
thus much I speak hereof how this prayer, which many would deprave is agreeable,
with the sense of scripture, because it is necessary, we be put in remembrance
that the promises of god, require the condition of worthiness on our behalf,
wherein is required our endeavor. Ye bring in at the last a text of saint
Paul, like a keye to cleue a logge. For saint Paul's speaking in that place,
nothing perteyneth to the justification we speak of, as ye know well enough
but only use it because ye delight in copy. Then follows that ye call my.viii.
article.

viii ^rticle.
Every thing is to be called freely done, whereof the beginning is free and
at liberty without any cause of prouocacion.

So is there nothing frelye done. For man having his humane natural affectes,
as love hatred, fear, joy, heuines, gladness, concupiscence, honger thirste
etc. Besides these also having any celestial gifts as faith hope etc, must
needs be provoked of them to do or to suffer al things. But the liberty of
the spirit conceived by faith whereof christ and Paul speak, affirming by faith
him self to be fre and by love to be bondsman to al men is of an higher
divinity then this popissh lawer or cowrtly ruffler ca^ attayn unto.

(compulsion) ye put in the word (provocation) I would never have given Barnes
and his scolefelow such a cause of prouocatio^ to have iested of me, How Joy
here provoke me to call him by his name.
as to say as ye rehearse For not only vice, besides the instigation of the
devil, has a material cause of prouocatio^ to vice, but also virtue, besides
the calling of God, has a materyal cause of provocation to virtue. In
provocation of virtue and vice this differethe, that a man may play the
deuylles part, and tempte him self, and so exercise the material cause of
vice, but man can not play gods part, and of him self put in work, the
material cause of virtue, virtuously, for all goodness comes from above. But
with Barnes it came in by ye way, to speak of ma^s fre working, either in sin
or virtue, or any other action indifferent. This maxim, I told him that every
thing is to be esteemed of the beginning. For if the beginning has no
compulsion, the act is to be called free, if the beginning has force and
compulsion, all that follows has the nature of necessity. We discussed this
in many specialties, and amongeste other, in ye state of preistes, whether they
that lived unmarried, such as would now marrye, I mean such as those be,
whether they may, complain of want of fredome, to use ye world at liberty,
as god has permitted? And herein because the beginning of that state of
preisthode, has no cause of compulsio^, for no man is compelled to be a
preiste, and yet there be many causes of provocation, so as each man has ones
in his life liberty and choice whether he will enter the state of preisthode
or no. After any man has entered that state, if he lyketh it not, he may well
lament his own folly in the choice of it, but he has no cause to complain of
the state, whereunto he was never compelled, but might have chosen whether he
would have entered it or no. And therefore to every man that murmurethe at ye
present condition of his life, it is objected in common reason thus. Ye might
have chosen. Whereunto if any man could truly replye, and say I could not
choose, every man lamenteth the state of him, that says and declares, he
could not choose, and condempneth the complaynte of him, that might have
chosen. So as these two comme^ speeches, I could not chose, and might have
chosen, be worthelye allowed among us, whereby to excuse or blame all our
doings, To our friend that is offended with our doing, we say I pray you
blame me not, for in good faith I could not chose. If you could not chose
(says the friend) I am not so fond, to fall out with you, I will never blame
a man (says he) for that he could not chose. Now on the other part, he
that leueth his occupation, to be a serving man, or sells his land, because
he lyketh better ready money, or marieth for his lust, without godly
consideration, if that man can allege nothing, that should have enforced his
so doing and yet will grudge at his fortune accomptynge him self miserable, he
is put to silence with these few words. Ye might have chosen. It shall be said
to me percase, that here is a long talk without scripture of, I might
chose, and, I could not chose. And some shall call it wylye wit, and some
jangling sophistry, and some haly water reasons, The devil deuiseth to
deprave every thing with pretty terms.
for with such pretty words, the devil chereth his gestes, whom he feesteth
with talking and jangling abroad in the world, wherewith to ouerwhelme the
very truth. To the matter I say thus, that this peace of truth, of man's free
choice, to do good or evil, confirmed in the scriptures, because it has been
truly planted and roted in our common speech, I have thought good, to stir
up the remembrance of it, by discussinge the commen speech to the intent when
it appears to agree with scripture, it may be more regarded, not because it is
a commen speech, but because it is the truth of scripture, whereby the better to
resist, such perverse doctrine, as some would persuade to be in scripture of
mere necessity, upon their wrong consideration, of gods providence, election
and predestination. Gods secret judgments, I leave untouched, and god
works after the purpose of his will. Which is most just. He calls some in
the morning, some latter, and at diverse hours of the day, as the parable
shows, But to us whom he calls at the time of workinge, whiles it is day,
and has endued us with the gifts of reason and understanding: If a sinner
might say to god for defense of his actual sin, I could not chose but do
as I did (which no such man can do) it were an excuse for his sin. But
because god may truly say to the sinner. Thou might have chosen, therein
is the confusion, in every sinners conscience. This speech shall percase offend
many. And some will say, may not the infant, that perissheth in ye mothers
womb, unchristened, say to god, I could not choose? May not the child borne,
that dies before baptism, say, I could not chose? And those in such countries
as hear not of Christ's gospel, may not they say, they could not chose? and
then shall we allow (quod they) this lawiers divinity of (I may not chose) for
man's allegacion to god, and grant that all these be upon this conclusion
saved? Hereunto I say, yt I do not take upon me, to lay before you, the platte
of al gods secret works, but as (saint John^ says) that we have seen and
hard, we testify, and that god has not opened let us worship it, in silence.
I entreat not in this place the state of infantes, ne of other, who in
respect of choice be like unto them. Note of what sort of men I speak, and
ask not of other, of whom I talk not. He was never good scoler ye whiles his
master taught him one thing, would devise to ask other impertine^t qu^stions.
Here he two questions asked together the first for the seco^des sak^, for in
the first he aunswerethe him self and douteth not of it.
A curiouse wit would not le^ me pass thus, but ask me, wha^ say ye yet in
deed to such children, and such sort of men, what state be they in? be they not
saved? and why do ye say they be not saved? In good faith, I will make such
an answer, as I would a great meany (when they might truly) would also
plainly make. I can not tell (that is to say) in such matters as man's capacity
can not go through. And note here reader, what I add here to, I say not, I can
not tell, because I know nothing in the matter, but because, albeit there be
some light, in thentry of ye matter, yet it is dark wtin, and the speech of it
makes not to our edification, but only to norish the curiosite of our desire,
to know that we can not comprehend. Scripture is euidente, yt he that is not
baptized shall not enter into heaven. Whereby I may say of their state, they be
not saved But then to other questions that may arise, how stand that with
this or that, whereby to show the reason of gods secret judgments. I can not
tell. And herein the true confession of man's weakness of capacity, to
comprehend gods secrecies, with confessing his ignorance and the answer (I
can not tell) does much set forth our reverence to his majesty. And in this
time of vaineglory in knowledge, it shall be as necessary, to teach
ignorance, for thexclusion of arrogancye and presumption, and plantyng of
humilite, as has been in time of extreme darkness, expediente, to set forth
knowledge to thincrease of gods glory. Both the extremities have like
inconvenience. This saying shall have a skof that bishops would teach
ignorance, for they teach men none other lesson (some will say) But when such
one has well pleased him self in his skof, and jest, he shall find that I say
true, and him self to have need to learn his ignorance in this point. But to
the matter, I speak in this place, of fre choice of such, as to whom god
offreth his gifts being endued with grace, and maturitie of judgment to
discern the^, of such I am learned by scriptures to say that necessity or
co^pulsion to mischief, were their excuse (if there were any) and their
fredome of choice, their only confusion to their condemnacion. And so S. Paul
testifies in the.ix. chapter of his epistel to the Romans, where he shows
that the Jews were rejected, because they stu^bled at the stumblyng stone,
meaning christ. And god said by his prophet To^a die expandi manus meas, ad
populum non credentem and co^tradice^tem, I have (says god) spredde abroad my
hands the hole day, to a people not believing, and gainesaienge. So as god
offringe his help which is signified, by the spredyng abroad of his hands, if
that people had chosen rather to be in the house of their lord god, then to
dwell in ye tentis of sinners, they had been received to salvation, An objection
we read nevertheless, that christ said to his apostels, ye have not chosen me
but I have chose^ you. In which speech it is to be noted that in comparynge
together the doing of god, with the cooperation of man, nothing is to be
attributed to man in the speech, but all applied to god, not because man's
doing is nothing, but because it is nothing in respect of god. And when
soever man, in the glory of gods gifts, is compared fondely to god, all that
man has, vadeth and wanneth away, as the light of a ca^dell, is not seen, in
the great light of a brighte son. And therefore scripture says. Non uos
estis qui loquimini, sed spiritus patris uestri qui loquitur in uobis, which
denies not, but they spoke, but theffectuouse and chief doer in the speech was
the holy ghost. And this also, may be commenly observed, that the first and
principal thing occupies the name of the hole. And therefore because god
choseth us first, and we can not choose god, before he choseth us, and offreth
us grace to come to him, Christ in his spech truly affirmed his choice, which
was chief, principal, and formest, and denied our choice, which depends of
it. And yet man being called to grace, and having by reason thereof the way
of life offered him which no man is compelled to receive, he may in the
receyuynge of it say with the prophet Viam ueritatis elegi. The greeks call
this choosing of man ((...)) which taken away, they say man differs not,
from a beast. And therefore the holly men of our religion, such as have
traueyled in thexpou^ding of scripture, do specially note, that no scripture,
may be thought right understood whereby to take away ma^s fre choice, and
thereby to confirm compulsion or absolute necessite, which both repugne
thereunto. And this faculty to chose, implies also a discerning of good from
evil, with a faculty to accept either this or that. Here man's froward
reason, has devised this sophistical argument? Can man chose heaven? even as
wisely spoken (says a good fellow) as to say a man can chose to fly. And
here comes in scripture. The carnal man understands not, any thing of
god, and how should such one chose heaven? Brother (quod this godly reasoner)
see not how wit trauaileth to drown gods word, and blind it with witty
devises? I pray the note this (says he) After the light of gods word has
put out their free will: now come they about the busshe again, with the
name of free choice, and all is not worth a greane chease. Believe not the false
doctrines of man's inue^tion, Look Paul to the Ephesians and there shalt thou
find, that god has chosen man before the beginning of the world. Keep this
in thy breast what so ever they say, I understand this english, as well as the
best bishop of them of all. And after this sort some (I would they were a
lesser some) do handle this matter abroad, whom I would gladlye satisfye, and I
trust could also, if they were indifferent, to have the very truth have place,
rather then that they would have truth. But to the matter, man can not of him
self in deed, fly, no more then he can, without gods gift clyme to heaven.
And yet scripture says. Quis dabit michi pennas sicut columbe, et uolabo et
requiescam? who shall give me feathers, as it were of a dove and I shall fly and
rest me? Thus Dauyd enspired by god, desired feathers to fly, which when they
were offered him, then David might chose whether he would use them or no. David
knew without feathers he could not fly, and also, when he had obtained the^,
might chose whether he would fly or no, but mark that I say further in ye
parable of distribucion of Talentes, he yt had but one talent and laid it up,
might have used it, as the other did, but he mysused his judgment and laid it
up idelly. So as when thacco^pt was asked of him, of that he had received, and
upon knoweledge that it was laid up idle, was asked, why he did not give the
money to usury? His answer was not that he laid it up, because he could not
choose, but he declared the reasons by him devised and excogitate which he said
moved him, to lay it up, whereby appears, that as they, that had five
Talentes, and might have laid them up, did chose to be industriouse and
faithful, and increase their talentes, by exercise, and were of their lord
considered thereafter, in likewise he that was slothful and did chose, to lay
his talent up idle, was of his lord so taken and used accordingelye. And here
note well reader and thou shalt perceive the craftye sophistry, of the devil,
in the person of him, that pretends symplycitie. In the parable aforesaid,
these men to whom Talentes were given could not chose to have the Talentes
given unto them, for that was in the pleasure of him, that was lord of the
Talentes, hereunto all must agree wherein is resembled gods choice. But when
the owner of the Talentes, being at lybertye, to distribute or not dystrybute
his Talentes, had thought good and so chosen, to distrybute the Talentes of
his own mere clemencye, to one moo, and an other less, Then the receyuers of
these Talentes, might likewise choose (as it appears they did) whether
they would use them or no. For some of them did use them, and some did not.
And here thou may see plainly a resemblau^ce of gods choice that the sely
soul spoke of, and of our choice, which I have intended here to entreat. God
choseth to give unto us his gifts, God choseth and man choseth.
and in that part we have no choice, and the^ we choose, whether we will use
the gifts or no, and in this part we have fre choice, as appears, in
declaration of this parable. For in our inclynatyon to good or evil, there is
neither necessity nor compulsion: fre will in the full significacion, should
implye free choice.
Between free will and free choice, I put no difference, but in the terms of
free choice, which expresses the greek and latin words, Liberum arbitrium,
and (...), the matter may be more clearly opened in my judgment. For albeit
free will and free choice, were meant to signify one thing, yet they that be
more fine, in their consideracions, by abuse of the words, from their full
signification, have devised, how to grant free will, because they saw the
world, so much abhor the denial of it, and yet therewith, to defend still,
their abominable dream, of mere necessity, which mere necessity, can in no
wise stand, Necessite cannot stand with free choice.
with man's fre choice, For necessity signifies one point and no mo,
whereunto any thing is directed. Now every choice must be of two, at the
least, for one has no choice, so as he that is necessitate to be dampened has
no choice, ne he that is necessitate, to be saved, has any choice, A man may
will that is necessary, i^ some sense. But not chose that i^ necessary i^ any
sense*
and both these sorts of men, have no free choice at al. But as for fre will,
as we take it only for a desirouse appetite, which is not the full
signification of free will, may stand with necessity, as in example a man
being necessitate to dye (as every man is) may also gladly, willinglye and
desirouslye, dye, as many have done for christ's sake, many for glory, many
for werines of their life, And much more, if men were necessitate to be saved,
they should gladly, willingly, and desirouslye, do the works of salvation. And
so the Captains of the sect have, studied out a deuyse how deceyuyng men,
in the signification of fre will, as though it signified no choice at all but
only a desirouse appetite, they have granted that man has free will to his
salvation, which they call a will new create of god, to be desirous of
salvation, and therewith defend still their mere necessity, and there withal
say this also, that a good man does necessarilye well, and also freely well, and
an evil man, does necessarily evil, and frelye naught. They say also, that
god does compel no man, for compulsion (say they) is contrary to free will,
But not necessite, and for this they allege the ethnyke philosopher
Aristotell, because he may help forward, who considering, Aristotell
speaks of the (...), which is commen to man and beast, and so is not
volu^tas nor arbitrium.
the natural parts of the soul says that uiolentum opponitur voluntati, non
necessitas. And yet Aristotell uses such a word in the stead of uoluntas, as
signifiethe Lubentiam or libidinem, that is commen to man and beast and not
uoluntatem which is propre to man, and yet thus they shyft in the words, to
deceive ye simple, whom they would seem to desire, to teach gods truth, and
under pretense thereof, do sow abroad the deuyls falshed. But Aristotel their
author says, that absolute necessite which is properly necessity, is
contrary to fre choice, which man must have or he is no man. And what a
Sophisme is this to say, that a good man does necessarily well, and an evil
man does necessarily evil, and therewith say also that man is not compelled
by god, to good or evil. For every mere necessity that can not be eschued,
and is o^ it self a necessity, does enforce and compel all the mean causes,
to do him service, for mere necessity will be by no means disapointed* And it
is said therefore, Nothing more violent the^ necessite.
that there is nothing more violente, then necessity absolute. And mark we^
these teachers, for in doctrine they conclude each man's salvation or
dampnacion under mere necessity, and yet they say, god compels no man. And
then because the philosopher says, that compulsion only is contrary, to fre
will not necessity, they say a good man does frelye and necessarilye good, and
an evil man freely and necessaryly evil. And as they do in the words of free
will so they play in the word (necessity) which is taken two ways.
Necessity, is taken two ways.
For there is a mere and absolute necessity, that the learned men call
necessitatem consequentis and a condicionall necessity, which the learned men,
call necessitatem consequentie. As in this example, when I tell one he shall dye
the corporal death. I tell him a mere necessity, for he shall needs dye, and
it depends neither of iffes, ner andes, ne can not be avoided, but that
necessite of death co^pelleth al mean causes to serve it necessarylye, to the
accomplyshment of it. Therefore I may say, It is merelye and absolutelye
necessary that thou shalt dye. And this is necessitas consequentis, For the
thing is ordered precisly so to be. But if I say^ thus, Forbearyng thy food,
thou must necessarily die or it be long this necessite is no mere necessite
but depends upon the condycyon, of the forbearyng thy food marye avoid not
the condition but let that stand true, and then ye necessity follows. And
of this sort of necessity ye gentyles, such as had clearer understanding
reputed that they called destine, fatum. As put thy finger in ye fire* and it
will necessarylye burn having the natural cause, no le^ of operacion. Now if
it were asked, whether thy finger should necessarilye burn, I must say no,
meaning of a precise, absolute and mere necessytye, for thou neadeste not put
thy finger in the fire, and so the burning shall be avoided. But and if thou
puttes^ thy finger in the fire, then of a co^dicionall necessity, it must
neades burn. Now mark the sophistry of this sect, The sophistry of such as
defend mere necessity.
A good man (they say) does necessarilye good, and that is true, in a
condicionall necessite. For if he be a good man he must neades do well, for as soon as he ceasseth to do good he is no longer a good man, and so in an evil
man, he does necessarylye evil, for if he did well he were no more an evil
man. And this necessytye has in deed no compulsyon, because the former part
of the speech, is at liberty without necessytie or compulsyon, and the
latter part is made necessary, by the maynetenaunce of the truth in the
first part. And therefore this speech is true. Thomas being a good man does
necessarylye well and John^ an evil man does necessarylye evil: But this is
not true, ye Thomas, speaking of ye same Thomas does necessarily well, or John^
speaking of the same John^, does necessarily evil. For there is no necessity
at al, in the matter, but upon vpholdynge the truth of the condition, which in
these latter speeches is left out, And thus I have declared the difference of
necessities, the one mere and absolute, and the other condicionall, and I have
showed how the simple people not having their senses exercised be deceived by
such as be the deuyls apostels to seduce the world with intricatio^ of
speech, and like false merchants, shiftynge the words which be marks, from
the signification of one thing to an other, by such colors maintain discord
and disagremente in those things wherein it were most expedient, men should
agree. This matter of free choice has much troubled the church, by reason of
such, as would presume, to have through knoweledge of all thing after their
discussion, and so entangling them self, with gods high mysteries, have been
authors of such opinions, of mere necessity, as not only impugn the hole
process, of scripture, but also subuerteth al stay of good direction, and
endeavor, either to godly exercise, or polytyque behauoure. It is the
extremite of al mischief, to say that man can not chose whether he will use gods
gifts or no, when they be offered him, which is the time of man's choice (as
before) for we must be persuaded that as god gives to man his gifts freely
without necessity or compulsion: so man receives them freely without
necessity or compulsion to use them. As for the high divinity ye speak of
(master Joy) I will not inquire ye further of it, but would wisshe that
divinity were ordered godly, spoken of reuerentlye and semely, with fear of
error, with humble meke spirits, not arrogantly, not presu^ptuously, not by
way of jesting, not by way of raylyng, not out of season, nor among other
pastimes, to supply other communicacion. Gregorye Nazianzene a noble clercke of
the greek church, scolemaster to saint Jerome, in whose time there were
certain called Eunomians, who affirmed there was no way to heaven, but one,
to talk of god, and dispute of gods works. This Gregorye Nazianzene, noted
those me^, Considre (...) a lesson ^his is for ^ut ^^me.
of their itche in their tongue (as he calls it) and shows, how they allege
scripture, as me^ do the chance of dyce, take that comes first at all
adventures, he notes them how they troubled, all good assembles, with their
talks in scripture. And that talk waxed so common, that women also troubled
their nourseries therewith, and by occasion of their talk, lost as he says,
the flower of their shamefastnes, For whose reformacion at that time, he
shows that of God, neither al should be disputed that might be spoken, nor all
men should speak of him, nor to all men, nor in all times, In speaking of
God, he would men's capacity, should be considered. For the time (he says) we
should not mingle the talk of God, at the time of other triflinge pleasures.
As for ye audience, he would it were such as the speaking of God might edyfie,
For them that should talk, he would wysshe them either perfytelye cleansed in
their life, or at the least such as endeavored them self to amend in their
life, lest being fylthy and corrupt in living, they should hurt them self,
as he that has sore eyes is hurt by sight of the son. This was the mind of
this good man at that time, and when he had said thus much, he was afraid
they would have misreported him, that he forbad them to think of God always.
For in such wise evil disposed people, are wont to make misreport, of good
advertisement. And therefore (he says) I would they should think of god, as often
as they breath, but I speak (quod he) of talking, reasonynge and disputing of
god, which he calls in one word ((...)) And yet I do not (quod he) improve
that, but the vntymelynes of it, and the excess of it, And al thing (quod he)
has his time, as Salamon says. And good is not good (as Gregorye Nazianzene
there says) if it be not well done. It is semely (quod he) for a woman to
were a man's garment? And after in the same work do not saint Paul say, that
all be not apostels? ne all prophets, and finally concludes the matter that
if the ytche of men's tongues can not otherwise be healed, but they must needs
talk, he byddeth them talk of such matters, as wherein an error is without
all danger. Thus in effect, says Gregory Nazianzene, who, among some, if
he were here, might percase hear that he would be sorye for, and yet he for
his high learning in divinity, has been honored and celebrate by the name
of Theologus, as exceading al other in knowledge of divinity. They that saw
the absurdity ensuenge of the mysorder, has testified it unto us, whom it is
better to believe the^ by abiectynge their counsel abide ye inconvenience,
which the church then felt. It is now time, to return to the discussion of
the rest of your book, wherein it follows.

Forth on Winchester.

ix. ^ticle.
Faith must be to me the assuerance of the promyses in god made in christ (if I
fulfill the co^dicio^) and love must acco^plisshe the condition, whereupon
follows thatainme^t of the promise according to Gods trweth.

Yet dare not he express his condition, saying plainly: Faith assewreth me of
the promise of god (if I fulfill the law) but Win. nor none else, but only
christ, fulfilled the law ergo neither Winch. nor any else standing this
condition, shall never be assured of the promise of God. Paul argues a another
ways excludyng the condition that men might be the suerer and certayner of
the promise. For if the promise should stand of an uncertain, yea impossible
condition: who shall be certain and assured of the promise? Thus argues
Paul. By the works of the law came not the promise to Abraham or to his
seade, him to be thayer of the world, but by the rightwise making by faith.
For if they that will be justified by ye works be therefore made thayers, so is
faith and believe in vain and the promise void and frustrate. For the law
works but wrath, ergo it works no good works to thattaynement of
justification. It works wrath for that it is impossible to be performed and
acco^plyshed of man which is flesh, as Paul constantly affirms, and
therefore it wrappeth all the workers thereof to be justified thereby under the
curse. For as many as stand upon the works of the law to this end even for
their iustificacio^ are yoked under exetracion and tied to the curse Gala. iii.
For where is no law there is no transgressyon. Wherefore (Paul now concludes
against Winchester saying) out of faith is the heritage given, like as out
of grace, that the promise might be the more ferme and sewerer unto all the
seade, not to it that is only out of the law, but also to it which is out
of the faith of Abraham. Paul in spirit did se before this Winchesters
condycion to frustrate the promise, and therefore he confuteth it here so
clearly. And again unto the Galathens, If any would obiecte saying, ergo
the law is agenste the promyses. God forbid says Paul, but if there had been
a law given which might have given life, then no doubt justification might
have commen by the law. But the scripture concluded all under sin that the
promise, the promise (I say) out of the faith of Jesus Christ should be given
and not deserved to the beleuers. Thus ye se how with so many words Paul
excludes Wynch. impossible condition, to make fast the promise in Christ that
our faith might be the sewrer stayed and cleave to it. If only unbelief
dampneth, why should not only faith justify? it is a good argument of
contrary. But yet because Win. wyndeth in his condition so hard for the
attaynement of his iustificacion by works. I would feign se some one of his
good works so perfyt, pure without any carnal affecte annexed, either of
vayneglorye or of love to him self or for fear of pain not done nor for hope
of reward, or any lucre, promocion or to receive a better thing for the doing
thereof, out of so pure an heart that it be not done of any affeccion to the
person, put only of faith and zeal for the glory of god and profit of his
neighbor, or only to mortify his own affectes and to set naught by him
self, to abnegate and renounce his estimacion and glory, to be renewed in
spirit and to follow christ mekelye to death. Paul acknowlegeth him self and
complayneth in his most perfection not to be able to do that good which he
would do, but to do that evil which he would not do. He durst not call in,
this condition to atteine his iustificacion thereby, but constantlye affirmed
as many as stand upon the works of the law to fulfill them, thereby to be
justified, are yoked unto the curse of the law saying. Cursed is every man
that abides not in all things written in the book of the law to perform
them. I wonder therefore that Wynchester dare stand upon his condition to be
fulfilled to attain any part of his iustificacion thereby. Dare he claim
(think ye) any part of his iustificacion for burning of Doctor Barnes and his
felows for preaching agenst these wykedly armed artycles? Tell us Wynche.
dyddest thou burn them so cruelly of love and not of hatred or envy? trwelye
love burns no man* for preaching ye truth charity enuyeth not. etc. Abi
igitur post Christum satana. Come bak devil after christ, thou art
sclaunderous to his cross, for being married to thine own wit, thou sauourst
not the heavenly and godly justification, but such one as natural reason
persuades among men, even one good turn for a another to be done, and so to
deserve thy justification. But be it in case, that Wynche. thus condicioninge
with god has in his own opinion done some good deed whereby he dare claim
his justification, yet shall not that same deed serve him to the attaynement
of that effect. For were it never so good, yet does his false opinion in his
deed make it dampnable. But let us speak of a good deed absolutelye,
excluded from all carnal affectes (if any man may do such one) this deed is
not our deed, but the deed of God workynge it in us, for what deed soever
proceeds out of our corrupt nature is naught. It is god says Paul that
works in you according to his good mind both to will well, and also to
perform your work: Neither are we apt and able to think so much as a good
thought out of our own selves, but al our ablenes comes from God. And
Isaie says, Lord set peace among us, for it is thou that workeste and
fynyssheste all things in us both our thoughts and deeds. And therefore well
said Austen. God crowns in us his own deedis and not owrs. Condycyon not
therefore (Wynchester) with God for your deeds, which (as all men see them)
are but malice, mischief, envy, rankor, bytternes, blood thirstinge, pride:
cruel tyranny, blasphemies, persecucion of christ's innocent lombes and of
his word, deceytefullye flaterynge your prince, evil cownsel giving to
provoke the wrath of god upon you all, and upon that noble realm, sowing most
pestilent heresies yea and that wittyngly which is the sin agenst the holy
ghost, which when all sins (be they right grievous) shall be forgeuen, yet shall
this your ungodly impiete be never forgeuen.

Yet Vvin ix. article
YOu say that faith is thassueraunce of ye promise of forgeuenes of sin^es.

If faith be that same certitude and assured persuasion as Paul says,
assuring you of your justification, why then add you your uncertain condition
waueryng upon your sinful works which as they be unstable imperfect and sin
so can they never make you a quiet and tra^quyl conscience, nor certify you of
your justification, God so saying, Thou labourest in ye multitude of thine own
ways and yet thoughteste thou them never enoughe. Add no condycyon on your
behalf therefore (oh Wyn.) into your own condempnacio^. Christ never taught
you to believe upon a condition, but said symply and playnelye, Believe and thou
art saved. Add not to gods word, lest ye be condemned for a liar. Wynch.
told Martyne Bucere that he and his would not receive the doctors as Wyn.
would, I could bring Austen Hierom Origene and many other autentyk writers
agenst him self, but let us see whether he will believe this one doctor saint
Ambrose, thus writing upon the first epistle to the Corrinthes saienge. This
thing is constituted of god that who so believe in christ he is saved without
any work, only by faith freely receiuinge the remission of his sins. What can
be spoken more plainlye? Now make an end Wyn. and conclude your arrogant
articles.

not but only mark and note what gods word contains. And when I se so many
times, if, required of us, I know none other english name, to signify what
that is, A discussio^ what is adding to god^ word
but a condition: And here let us dyscusse, what we shall call addyng to gods
word. If ye call thinuencion of a new word whereby to discern what is
written in scripture, as I or you understand it, an addicion to gods word:
then do you and all your sect, offend in deuysynge the words (office and
correlatiue) to signify what faith does, and how it apprehends the promise,
which I think the spirit would not suffer you to do, if it were adding to
gods word. Moreover I think ye call not addyng to gods word thaddynge of
an other language wherein to expres gods word, by other syllables the^ it was
first spoken in. For then were ye world on both parts, in a great offense,
being gods word translate into so many tongues, nothing like the original
tongues of greek or Hebrew. Whereby appears, that being the true sense kept
hole, and entier, the letters and sillables may be altered without danger,
as the language requires, and without any contradiction of this text, for not
adding to gods word. Furthermore if thexplayninge and openinge of
scripture, with mo words in the same language with similitudes also, to give
more light to the true sense, ye mean to declare, were adding to gods word, I
am sure ye would not have travailed so much in thexposicions of scriptures, as
ye have done in your sundry books, And specially, where ye make a drinking
of christ's holly supper, ne have used the similitude ye have done, of the
son and fire, for declaration of the secret workynge of faith alone, if ye
had taken that for adding to gods word. When ye rail of me vncharitablye
and deuyse for your purpose, that is not true, we can not call that adding to
gods word, that is all besides it and contrary to gods word. When I say to
you that it is pity to see, the gifts of learning in you and many other so
abused and abhominacion most detestable, to se the pretense of gods word, to
cover so many deuelyshe and detestable words of sclau^der malice, myschief and
heresy, will you say that I add to gods word herein because it is not there
directlye spoken of you? ye can not truly. For albeit, it be not specially
written of you, yet because of a general warraunt of scripture, that we may
say and write, that is truth, and edyfieth, ye can not say I add herein unto
gods word, but according to gods word say truth. And so likewise in
every other just honest and holy thing. Who then does add to gods word?
Only he that calls scripture which is not scripture, or reports the sense
of gods scripture amiss. For such one frames him self an ydol in his own
fansy, and worshippeth it for gods truth falsely. Such men add to gods word
and report not god truly, and therefore (as the text says) shall be
condemned as liars. And this is the true understanding of this text brought
in by you. Add not to gods word. Which I have hard many times used, like
a keye to cleue logges, and therefore have discoursed thunderstandynge of it. As
for the saying of saint Ambrose, makes nothing against mine article, For in
the beginning when the contention was between christ and Moses law, by
faith was signified hole christ, and by works the law of Moses, and in this
strife where faith and works stood in contencion one against a another, the
speech only faith, was spoken of that good faith, only to exclude Moses
law, with the receyuynge or not receyuyng, whereof christendom was troubled.
For else only did never exclude the familiar company of faith with charity
that stood of the same side that faith does. And so you your self understand
it, that charity is there and not excluded. And the precyse words (without any
work) exclude only the works of the law, for the works of receyuynge and
using the gifts of faith, and love, must needs be there as is before
declared. And now to the article that follows in your book, which article
ye call mine, and I am very glad so to take it, it follows thus.

x. article.
A man being in deadly sin, may have grace to do ye works of penance,
whereby he may attain to his justification.

And I say the contrary. That a man being in deedly sin may have no grace
to do the works of penance, as I fear me it will be verified of Win. him
self. But the Lord convert him ones, so that all men may se his open fruits
of repentance for his grievous persecution of Christ's members and hear him
openly with tears recanting his false doctrine whereby he has seduced many a
simple soul. This is lo, his doctrine, A man must do the works of penance
before he be justified, and so by such works merit and deserve his
justification and forgyuenes of sins. Here thou see (christen reader) that
such a man has no need of Christ's death, but for such men (says Paul)
Christ is dead in vain. Thus ye se the conclusyon of his articles to be. That
he may do well before he be justified. But (as I said before) it behooves a
learned divine to conclude what ought to be done, and what god wylleth to be
believed by his manifest word, and not what Winch. may do by his own blind
reasonyng without gods word. He may do well by the gift of God (says he)
which is faith, ergo his faith goes before his well doing and his
justification, and his good works must be thrust betwixt both (if the place be
not to narow for them) so that he having his faith and his good works, is not
as yet justified neither by his faith nor by his good works, for they must
serve him but toward the attainment to his iustificacion. Paul and christ
joined faith and iustificacio^ ever inseparably together: but this scismatike
jewish Hieroboam and deuillish deuider of al christian unite will thrust his good
works betwixt the^, not suffering faith to cleue to immediately her own obiecte,
even the mercy of God promising remyssyon of sins in Christ's death. He
would thruste in here the works of penance before iustyfycacyon which thing
how folysshe it is ye shall se. First, ye know that penance must go before
her works as is the tree before her fruits. Penance is a turninge to god,
whereby of the sincere fear of god a man humbled acknowelegeth his sin, and
so al his whole life he makes new. Who turns to god, but he first believe
and knows god for christ's sake to be so merciful unto him that at his
turnynge to him he receives him and forgeueth him his sins? which faith
and knoweledge what else is it then his justification, god the father so
affirmynge it in his prophet Isai saying. In the knowledge of him this even my
servant shall iustifye many. Here ye se yt this knowledge and faith justifies
before the works of penance are done. For God is kn^wen in Christ ere we
turn to him of the which turning to god there follow the fruits of repentance
in doing them all our life long, as to fear god, to humble our self, to
confess our sins to him and to renew our lives mortifieng continually our
flesh.

unto ye country. And herein I shall speak to you again, somewhat like a
lawier. Ye handle me in your answer like one of your sect, and do the
world understand hereby, whereunto this vnreuere^te reasonynge, disputynge, and
talking of gods truth will come to at the last, that is to say, to
division, debate, hatred and strife, when in that all should say one, each
shall answer other, as ye do now me, with, I say the contrary. And so
learning is all paste, and the matter rests upon twelve men, wherein ye
labor the country as fast as ye may. And ye flatter the world with
lycentiouse doctrine, and offer them to pull from their necks, all such yokes
as ye think did at any time let or impeche them either in thought or deed, Ye
promise them liberty of al thing. And then to rydde them out of debt, ye
translate saint Paul thus, that we owe nothing to no man but love. Ye flatter
the couetouse master with pulling away holy days, yt he may have the more
work done him for his years wages. Ye flatter again the servant with pulling
away al opinion of fast by abstine^ce from any meat either in le^t or
otherwise. Ye offer priests wives to wit and they can win them to you. Ye
rydde all of confession, and wepinge for sin. Ye take away distiction and
difference of apparel, days, times, and places. Ye take away ceremonies which
in deed do much let good chere in asse^blies of good fellows. Ye give women
courage and liberty to talk at their pleasure so it be of gods word, and to
make the husband amends for that encombrye, ye teach men secretly (and so as
you may deny it again if need be, till it be time to come abroad) that they
may have as lawfully two wives at ones, as one, so they will find them both,
I do not herein fame or lie, for I know they have not written in any matter
more seriouslye ne more fondelye (but yet maliciously and untruly) then to
prove it lawful for a man to have two wives at ones though the first be never
so chaste. And so when women be so ernest to set forth your enterprise, they be
suffered of god for punysshme^t to work there own confusion. And after ye same
sort by other intiseme^tes learned me^, to deprave lerning, and prestes to
travel to destroy prysthode. And in this wise for punishment of our sin, each
part labors by a mean to scourge and trouble their own astate. And in the
mean time your sect hops to win the country, and therefore the postelles
of your sect although they preach not much now a days yet they write
diligently and send the books abroad buselye with, Venite, emite, absque
argento, and in significacion ye call men to fredome, ye give your books abroad
freely, with all such alluereme^tes as may serve to make the country yours, and
such as should give evidence against you, them ye deprave and blaspheme, with
all kind of vyllany wherewith to distroy their credit in so much as among
you, a bishop or a priest has a new sense in englysh, to signify a knave.
Ye have a great while awayted to have the panel returned, but the kings most
excellent majesty who has the high shiriffes office in his hand under god,
could never yet be induced to return the Iurye as ye would have it. And
therefore I have seen you often times fall in a non suit, and lain still in
wait, as they yt have euel tytles to lands to have the shirif for your
purpose. How say you now, have I not commened with you like a lawier? and
truly declared the councelles of your sect, Thenglyssh of this lati^ dominum
e^ christum, i^ god and the king.
wherein ye conspire, Aduersus dominu^ et aduersus christum eius? I would lawiers
had always their tales told them of their clientes so truly as I have told
this, and then the world should not be troubled with so many long suits as it
now is. But now to your contraryenge of me which ye fashyon thus, And I say
the contrary. If I were like you I should say again, Mary and I say the
contrary to you. And then thicker, you lie and you lie, and I can tell as well
as you, and I as well as you. And shall this fruit grow of gods word? and
so you will have this brought again of the prymatyue church, that our
hearers and readers of our books shall say I believe Joy, and I believe
Wynchester. Ego Cephe, Ego pauli, but yet to avoid some part of that
inconvenience, men have devised to say, now I believe not Luther, nor Melancton,
nor Bewcer, nor Suinglius, nor Joy nor Turnor. And call them (for the time)
knaves, for Maledictus qui confid^t in homine, but I believe (quod he) gods
holy words which can not lie as men do. And shall I not believe the words of
the bible? I know what edifiethe me, thanks be to the lord of his gift, my
conscience tells me, what is good, and no man shall bring me from that god
teaches me by his holy spirit. Now y^ will ask me. And is not this well
said? Verelye if man were never deceived, in the true sense of gods word, and
were assured that god in deed taught him by his holy spirit the answer were
grave, but when so many errors are arrisen in the sense of gods holy word,
and the devil may and has transformed him self into the angel of light,
such speech in communycacyon is besides the purpose. For men doubt not whether
gods holy word is to be believed, but what is ye sense of gods holy
word. And the manner of speech aforesaid, being so precise serves rather,
as ashes, to cover fire, to keep an error close, then with sobre communication
each man mistrustinge his own learning, to try out what other men whose
spirit is commended unto us, have by one consent left written and testified
what they understand in the matter. Mary you master Joy, I pray you
pardonne me, for if god has so made you of his secret counsel, that ye can
tell what christ thought (as ye have before arrogantly affyrmed) ye may speak
for so much with more aucthorytie, then any other. But let us considre ones
again your (And I say the contrary) for albeit ye say so in sum yet when ye
declare your self afterward, some would conster ye said otherwise, and that
whether ye will or no ye agree with me. For when ye call penance a turnynge to
God, your saying implies, that before such a man as turns by penance
did by gods calling turn, that man was out of gods favor not justified
but turned from God, and after that by grace turns, which ye call penance.
So as if ye may be so understood, ye say that a man being a sinner may
have grace to turn. The difference if we understand you thus, between you and
me is, that you express the work of penance, which ye call turnynge, And I
speak of the work of penance in general, and yet I have not contended with
you, what be the works of penance. And for ought I here of you in the works
of penance, I shall not contend with you much but agree with you for all this
babbling, that turninge to god is the work of penance, so it be a hole turn,
whereof scripture speaks, with a man's hole heart in fasting, weeping, and
waylynge, and as the church has declared our turnynge should be, and not half
a turn, as some of your scole teach and among all, your turnyng Turnor,
whom god turn into the right way. But afterward ye handle your turninge
otherwise and will so understand your turninge, as a sinner should be
justified, before he does turn, wherein you turn the matter so about, as it
is inexplicable, for by you a sinner turns not, as your speech purporteth,
but a man that was a sinner now believing and justified having his sins
forgiven turns, and so, he that is turned all ready in iustificacion, and yet
remaynyng tha^ turns again in penance, and then the second turninge should
be from god, if ye turninge in iustificacion were to god, as it must neads be,
for in remyssyon of sin and iustificacion god turns man to him. And so the
plain man, whom ye take upon you to teach plainly, would understand it. For
when ye say that a sinner before his turnyng by penance believes and is
justified, that is one turn, where he was before from god, now to be toward
him. And then if there be yet after a turnynge again in penance, that
turnynge must needs be from god. For a second turn must needs be contrary
to the first, as a simple man answered when one told him the world was
turned. Then (quod he) all is well, for I hard my graundfather say in his
time, the world was turned, And then the world was naught. And therefore by
the second turn he concludes, it should be good. For in two turns one
succedinge a another, if the first be one way, the second is a another. And yet
you would have a sinner first justified by faith wherein he is turned to god,
and then turn by penance. If ye would call me now Pelagian, because I should
speak as though man might turn of him self without belefe, then I would
say ye spoke as besemethe the person ye mainteyne, I have learned and
thereafter speak, that a sinner can not turn without the grace of god, which
god dystributeth by degrees, as ye son shows her self in the morninge, in
whom there is increase by success till the son come to the highest at noon.
Men fall suddenly down the hill from god, but they be drawn up the hill to him
by degrees. And the degrees of health be signified in the miracle of christ, of
the blind man, to whom christ restored not his perfect syghte at ones, but by
degrees. We preach to me^ to rise in the morning, orto iam sole for Vanum est
ante lucem surgere, and ye bydde men lie still, while it be noon, that the
son be at the highest, and this causes your fond stoicall scoole of
extremities, which admytteth no mean. I have been somewhat merry with you for
my own relefe, being vexed and weried with your fond talk, which is such
as makes only a confusion of that ye speak of without fruit or edifienge.
And yet I can not pretermytte, to note somewhat in your justification, which ye
declare thus.

Now let us se the order of our justification before god according to the
scriptures. First (says Paul) we are chosen of god in Christ before the
foundation of the world was laid. And when we be borne anewe of the spirit
we are called to receive faith Joan. i. and.i. Joan. v. which gift of faith
certifyeth us of our election, geuynge us the knowledge of god the father, in,
and by Christ. Which knowledge, as nothing can be said breiflyer so is there
nothing more excellent, sweter, more full and perfect, holsomer, more
comfortable and ioyouse. For when I know god the father in Christ, by the
holy ghost, I know these.iii. persons to be the only one God, the most high
goodness having his being of him self and all other creatures to have their
being, life, and mouynge of him, even that one alone my very living God for me
and for all sufficient, mercyful, benygne loving, almighty to me, my delyuerer,
defender, and keeper, long suffering, just, true, my present sauyoure and
forgeuer of my sins, gyuynge me frelye for Christ's sake eternal life and
beatitude. In this knoweledge of my celestial father am I fermly persuaded,
Christ Jesus his only son both god and man to be sent for my sake into this
world to be the anointed Messyas, king and preiste, to be my gouerner,
delyuerer, auenger, defender, my head, redemer by his passion, medyatoure, my
cleansing sacrifyce, once for me and for all faithful for ever offered up on
the cross, my only intercessoure now into heaven ascended, my holiness, mine
expiacion, my rightwisenes, health, way life, and satysfaccyon satisfyinge my
fathers justice for my sins never to be imputed to me for my only faythes
sake daily iustifienge and absoluinge me, contynuallye reuyuynge me with his
holy spyryte, anoyntyng me with the grace of the holy gooste: so that now I
by his mercy and grace being in christ his elect, might walk daily in good
works, pleasynge my celestial father unto this knowledge and belief, he
calls all his chosen for whom he has forseene, predestined, and chosen,
them has he called by his word and creacyon of this world, unto this faith
and knoweledge, and whom he thus called, the same has he iustyfyed, and
whom he has iustyfyed, them has he glorified.

faith. If you can justify this to be true I will not further impugn your
justification, But your allegation of this scripture, is like the spellynge of
a young strypelynge, I ones went about to teach to read, He would neades spell
backewarde, (A.b.) he spelled it Ba. and (B.A.) Ab. The scripture ye allege,
says. He that believes is borne of god, and ye say, we be borne of god to
receive belief. Scripture places faith in order before the birth, not in
prioritye of time, but in natural order. And ye place it after, as it were also
in the distaunce of time. The words of the scripture in the gospel of saint
John^ be, that so many as receive Christ have power given them, to be the
sons of god such as believe in his name, who be not borne of the bloodes, nor
the will of man, but be borne of god. By this text, to be the son of god,
faith must neades go before. The words of the epistle be these. Every man
that beleuethe that Jesus is Christ, is borne of god, Is not faith placed
here, in ye order of the text, before the birth, as a declaration whereby to
know what is signified by this to be borne of god, that is to say, to believe
that Jesus is christ? Not to believe in tongue, as saint John^ says, but to
believe in workinge that is believed: Christ teachinge Nichodemus our
regeneration and second nativity of god says: Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex
aqua and spiritu sancto, non potest introire in regnum dei, Which nativity is
ministered in the sacrament of baptism, And in thactes of thappostles, when the
Enuche desired to be partaker of this regeneration and to be borne of god and
said, Here is water what lets me to be baptized? Phillyppe said to the
Enuche, If thou beleuest with all thy heart thou may. And thenuche answered,
I believe Jesus Christ to be the son of god. And so was thenuche baptized,
which form of baptism the church observes still, in ye christeninge of
Infants offered to christ in the faith catholic and of their parents. And
according to this declaration the words of saint Iohn^s epistle be that each
man who believes yt Jesus is Christ, is borne of god not excludinge the
sacrament of baptism, but declaringe, that the foundation of our regeneracion,
is this faith, where saint John^ in a few words reuerentlye foldeth up the
hole misterye of our faith. By your interpretacion, ye would have men first
borne the children o^ god, and then to receive faith. But Philyp expounds it,
that we receive faith to be borne the children of god, and therefore requires
it before the regeneracion, and semblable in other matters, scripture preaches
penance to obtain remission of sin, and ye teach remission of sin whereby
to come to penance. Scripture says, and we do not forgive our neighbor, god
will not forgive us. You teach yt god must first forgive us, and then we to
forgive our neighbor. Christ calls us to him to be unburdened of our sin,
And ye teach that we be unburdened of our sin or we come at him. And so
thoroughly ye teach christ backward: Scripture never taught him after that sort,
and yet ye call upon other for scripture, and then ye will have scripture
plain as it is written, to be understood straight of al men at the first
reading, which bearyng in hand of playnnes, with a desire that man's curiouse
nature has to knowledge, or for want thereof to be seen to have knowledge, the
number that reads after you, says they understand, as ye do. And if such
one can say, only faith justifies, and a priest is a knave, the mass is not
in scripture, and an Image is an idol, ye praise so much the lord in him, and
rejoice so much as in a proselite, that ye make him run, through the
scripture, in thick and thin even till he comes to predestination, and
further to gods providence, that some be so blinded at ye last, as they call al
in doubt. Ye be your self blind, in malice, and take upon you to be leaders
of the blind, and so tumble al together, in the pyt of error, with the
miserable destruction of soul and body. Let us return again to ye scripture
ye have brought in, which (ye say) signifies, that when we be borne a new of
the spirit, we be called to receive faith, The words of the scripture be. Each
man that believes, that Jesus is christ, is borne of god, If ye would herein
resort to gra^mer and say, This part is only to Joy, tha^ did before or pose
me in my gramme^
because ( natus est) is written in the preterperfitence, and ( credit) is
written in the presentence, and thereupon fansy, that ( natus est) must be before
( credit) I must answer you again by gra^mer, that the preterperfitens, in
laten signifies the presentens as well as the preterte^s, for philophers
affirm, by reason of the continual moving and that time ever passes, nothing
is properly present, but only god And for declaracio^ that the pretertence,
signifies ye present, every verb passive and depone^te, boroweth in his
preterperfittens, of the verb substantive, to join with his participle, both
( est) and ( fuit) so as ( natus est) is properly, the present perfittens and (
natus fuit) the preterperfittens. Now if the translation had been ( natus fuit)
then the grammar would somewhat have help, to wrangle with all, And I would then,
have resorted only, to the declaracion of Philippe to the Enuche, which Philip
was no papiste, nor lawer: as I would have resorted also, to christ's words,
Qui crediderit, and baptizatus fuerit, which places faith, before baptism the
sacrament of birth of the spirit, as ye speak, in new englyssh, and of the
holly ghost as the old englisshe turned it, and of god, as the scripture by
you brought in speakethe it, And I doubt not but Christ thought in these
words, even as he spoke, because ye meddle with christ's thoughts, and
according thereunto, with the same order instructed Philippe to baptize
thenuche. And yet ones again to your scripture, yt allows not your report,
of it. The scripture is, Every man that believes Jesus is christ, is borne of
god. This has the same sense that saint Paul spoke, in other words. No man
can say or speak our lord Jesus christ, but in the holly ghost, when saint
Peter also confessed christ, to be the son of god. Christ said, that
flesh and blood, had not reveled that unto him, but his father, that is in
heaven. And so in this place, Every man that believes Jesus to be christ, has
yt believe of god, which having of god, is spoken in the terms of birth of god.
He is borne of god, to signify the sacrament of baptism, wherein we be
regenerate of water and the holy ghost after christ's teachinge, whom God
badde us hear, and therewith beware of you, that teach christ not as ye have
learned in scripture, but after your own ymaginations. For when there may be
any resemblaunce, in the rude consyderacyon of the simple man, meet to agree
with your perverse interpretacyon, ye do easelye seduce him, to allow your
fansye. As in this text, when ye read, he that believes Jesus is Christ is
borne of god, ye cause the rude man to note first a birth of god, and then a
beleuynge and somewhat like thereunto, We in common speech say, (he that
follows me, is my servant). In this speech is a plain understanding, that
the man was my servant before he followed me, So as the resemblaunce of this
speech, to the other of scripture, In engly^ speches the seem of o^ fashion,
is great diue^te of sense^
causes simple folk, easelye to agree to your exposicion, that by that text
of scripture, it should appear, that a man is first borne of God, before he
beleuethe, because the one speech is like the other. And when the unlearned,
by you be led into this error, then the pride of a presumptuouse knoweledge
makethe them obstinatelye to defend it, and call all other knoweledge, whereby
they should be rydde of their error, iugglynge and sophistrye, man's
inventions, and such other peuysshe words, as men be encombred to hear,
unless they would make gods word, the matter of the deuylles strife. Think
me not tediouse (good reader) that I tarry, in this matter, to open and show,
how one fashyon of speech in english, receives diverse interpretacion, by
reason of the order of the matter, that is knytte together. For when I say (he
that follows me is my servant) the speech imports that he was my servant
before he followed me. But in an other matter knytte in the same fasshyon of
speech when I say (he that couenaunteth to serve me is my servant) this
speech signifies not, that he was before my servant, and then couenau^ted,
but that by this covenant, he is made now my servant, and was not before. In
the other speech, he was my servant, or he followed me, and in this last
speech, we must understand, that he did couenaunte, or he were my
servant. And what reason of dyuersitie in these two? Marye in the first
speech, I join that is out of all kind of causes, to theffecte, as to
follow me is no cause to be my servant, but rather ensues of service. But in
the second I join a kind of cause with the effect, And then I may not say
the effect was before the cause, and therefore in as much as a covenant, is
of the kind of causes, to make him my servant: I may not by the like
fasshion of speech deceive my self, and say, because in the one speech, it
was not true, where I said (he that folowethe me is my servant) that he was
my servant, before he followed me: I must therefore in this speech (he that
couenaunteth to serve me, is my servant) say also, that he was my servant,
before he couenaunted with me. Now because in the speech of scripture, which
is. Each man yt believes Jesus to be christ, is borne of god, there is joined,
of the kind of causes, that is to say (to believe) with the effect, which
is, to be borne of god, I may not say we be borne of god, or we believe, but
that we believe, or we be borne of god. And this resembles that english
speech, before declared. He that couenau^teth to serve me is my servant, But
if the scripture were thus, He that shall be saved, is borne of god, the
understanding must needs be, that we be borne of god or we be saved. For
this is like the other speech in english, (he that follows me is my
servant) which implies that he was my servant or he followed me, which
diverse consideration arriseth upon the diversity of placynge theffecte
before the cause, or the cause before the effect. And he that does not mark
this may easelye say, an horsemyll, for a mylhorse, and in the mistaking of
the sense of the scryptures, all heresies be grounded, and they that be in that
darkness, subverted in their judgment can not abide the light of the truth,
and means to dyscerne it, but be learned to abhor, that should clear the
matter, and call their darkness, light, and the very light, darkness. But
(good reader) consydre again and again, what Joy gathers of the scripture,
how vntruelye he gathers it, and by what sleyght he conueieth it, into the
heads of the ignoraunte, that take him for a great master. He says, we be
borne of god, and so called to receive belief, where in deed we be called to
receive belefe, wherewith, but not with it alone, but with it as foundation to
be borne of god, For he that is borne of god, we shall not say, he is called
to receive faith, but in his birth of god, has received it all ready,
without which, he is not borne of God. For fide purificat deus corda^, as
saint Paul says, and yet you would teach, that men's hearts were purified by
birth in god or they received faith. For if a man, be borne of god, old Adam,
is cast away, ye weight of sin is unladen, man's state is recreate and renewed.
Et quod natum est ex spiritu, spiritus est, and yet by you man is brought to
this state, or he knows god, for hitherto he is but called to receive faith,
by your teachinge, whereby he comes to light of knowledge, if we will give
credit unto you, who declare your self herein, a master of error,
perniciouslye to seduce the people, from the true teaching of the catholic
church using the scriptures, as boys do in grammar scoole. Quid est latinum
propter, for their excuse, and then iangle after in englyssh, as long as they
list. Ye cry scripture, scripture, and in dead speak nothing but the idol
of your own imaginacion. And because you have so peruerslye and untruly
recited the sense of the scripture. Io. i. and.i. Io. v. as I have declared,
and yet ye make that untruth for a pryncypall part of your matter to declare
your iustyficatyon, and incontinentlye after a truth, chop in a lie: I will
not pass it over, but here make a stay, and desire the reader, to mark that
here ye go out of the highewaye of the truth, and therefore, in that ye
follows, break up hedges and leap over diches, travailing, in a roughe and
an vnleueled matter, for want of the playnnes and smothenes of the truth. How
stands it I pray you together, you a man is borne of god, to be called to
faith, and yet has forgyuenes of sin imputed unto him, for only faythes
sake? seeing the birth of god implies forgiveness of sin, which birth, ye say
is wrought before faith received: Note this (reader) I pray the, and also this
that he says, sins be not imputed, for only faithes sake, Are ye come to
this now, to encourage your beleuers, that only faith, has worthynes, for the
own sake, to obtain remission of sins? It is an other matter to say, by
belefe only, men obtain remission of sin, as your sect says, then to
speak as you do, for only faithes sake, after which sort, they neither
spoke ne meant, that put meritum de congruo, et de condigno, which ye will jest
at although ye understand it not, and so much the sooner, because ye know not
what it means. Christ (by you) deuydeth his glory in remyssyon of sin,
with beleuers, so as belefe for the own sake, shall obtain remyssion of
sin, but workers be abiected, ne charity shall challenge any such
prerogative. What so ever ye like to say, there is nether faith ne works,
has any such respect of only sake, as ye speak it, but only christ, for
whose only sake, our faith, our charity, being given unto us of god, be
accepted and rewarded, by the goodness of god. And so hear I note that like a
ship without anchor hold or rother, ye wander as the variable wind tosseth
you, and so make yawes in and out, without any right course, which no man
can keep being swarued from the truth. Now this I would know of you, where
is your scripture to prove that faith certifieth each man of his election, and
so declares and opens unto him, the book of predestinacion that each man by
faith might say, In capite libri scriptum est de me, The knoweledge of
scripture assures and certifieth each man, ye covetous me^ glottons,
fornicatours, and such as fall from that truth they have received, shall be
damned. And who is asserteyned of his frail nature, yt he shall persevere in
the truth received? Faith assures that god will not fail, if we fail not from
him, but where find you our frayltye assured? But contrary wise continual
admonysshmentes, To bydde us watch, because we can not tell when the thief
comes. To work whiles it is day, because of the sodennes of the night. To
beware of the devil, that goes about like a lion, roaring, sekyng whom to
devour. To labor by good works to make sure our vocation, which were spoken
al in vain, Special revelation b^ out of general doctrine and as Gregory
Nazianzene says, specialties in certain, be no rule of the church.
if we were assured by faith. God shows much to his familiars, such as have
by his singler plenteous gifts, and their hole endeavor, of their heart and
mind, with a fervent desire, to be continually with christ, having their
conversation, in heaven, and not upon the earth, to such god has reveled as
has pleased him, where upon they have of the^ self (taught by the holly good)
spoken, as by special revelation has been showed them of their assurance, as
saint Paul said, Certus sum, and certain other martires. But let us be
content with gods general revelation in scripture, and being expedient for
us, by fear of falling to encreace our study* to exercise gods gifts,
apply our self to do as is ordered, and commanded without curiosity to
search that assurau^ce ye speak of, which is frutefullye hydden from us, In
which matter the Germans first authors of the dream of such assurance and
most certain certaynte by faith have in their agreement at the diet of
Ratisbone yielded in that fondnes, and grant that godly men being in faith be
troubled with the doubt of their astate. But let us se what ye say further, in
the process of justification.

Thus we elect, called and renated of the spirit, know the father in christ
and we know christ by the father which knoweledge and faith draws us to
love god and to keep his precepts gladlye. Thus to know the father in christ
and christ in him is life eternal. Out of this plentuous knoweledge
iustifienge us as I^a^e says springs repentance, for here the sinner
prays god to convert him saying with Jeremy, Lord convert me and I shall be
converted, for thou Lord art my god, wherefore as soon as thou shalt
convert me I shall repent me and anon as thou make me to know my sins I
shall smite my hand upon my hyppe. Now tell us Wynchester, who is the author of
repentance? or is repentance before faith iustifienge or no? There is no man
having this knoweledge and faith in God through christ but he will anon with
the publicane fall down smyting his hand upon his breast saying, Lord have
mercy upon me a sinner. In this knowledge we se^ our sins buried in christ's
wounds, and no more in the st^^mye tables for anger cast of that most mylde
Moses agenste the ground altobroken. We feel them by our faith forgiven in
christ's death and our selves justified by his resurrection, our hertes set at
peace and rest with god in christ dead for our sins and risen again for
our iustificacion. Which merciable goodness who so beholds in christ
crucified, he can not but of love unto god in christ lament and be heuye in
heart that ever he should commit such grievous sins, which could not be
forgeuen without the blodsheding of that most innocent and immaculate lombe
suffringe for his enemies, which love as it is unspeakable, so is it
incomparable.

A man (says Paul) will skant dye wyllyngly when he must needs and justly
dye, but perchance will put him self in perel of death for his goods to be
saved, or the mother to save her child. etc. But god, he commends his love
toward us, in that when we were sinners christ would dye for us, much more
therefore now we being justified in his blood, shall be preserved by him
from wrath. What faithful heart towched with this incomparable love out of
faith and knoweledge, is not humbled with fear and confession of his sins to
god, and is not heuye and repentaunte detesting his sins, saying? Shall I any
more commyt that thing which has brought this my so loving a savior to so
shameful and paynefull a passion. This is our faith which cleaves to the
most certain promise of god, and not to Wynch. waueryng unstable condition.
This is our faith and substaunciall certitude the most ferme persuasion,
without any wauerynge, of the merciable free forgeuenes and gracyous absolucyon
of our sins by the promise of our father celestial in christ's blood: and
has her own proper correlatiue the promise of god ever correspondent, and not
Win. knowledge of the fulfillynge of his condition. This is the form of our
justification by faith only which attributes all glory to god as did
Abraham and his chylderne and as many as have unfeignedly received christ's
gospel. But let Wyn. work on still his wicked works unto thattaynement of
his pharisaicall justification before men until the axe now bent unto his
rotis, he be suddenly smiten down of god. For Passur must be turned (as Jeremy
says) into Pauor, his arrogant vpclymyng and extollynge of him self above god
must have a shameful soden fearful fall. These arrogant articles, may be
well called the false articles of Winchesters false faith, and not of christ's
faith. For Christ confirmed his articles evermore with the law and prophets,
but Win. brings not one word of god for him to prove his. Wherefore let them
be his own articles armed with his own proud authority. For we may not believe
him thus exalting him self above Christ which ever alleged the scryptures
for his doctrine to be confyrmed, we may not believe my Lord vicare general
for his high lordely supercilious pharisaicall looks. Wherefore if this
Gardener will seem to be learned, let him answer now with gods word and
not dispute with poor men in his fetters and presons with his fumisshe
threats, fyery fagottes, presonyng and persecutyng the pore innocent members
of christ for weldoinge, purely, frelye, and faithfullye preachinge gods
word, castinge of his blodhoundes into every city and town to hunt out the
christen simple sely flock of christ, as he of late made Wyllyam Castelyn
Gouerner of the merchant aduenteres at Anwerpe cheiflye to hunt out such as
purely and freely write and set forth books unto the glory of god edifienge of
christ's church, and to warn men of Wynch. false doctrine. For this Gouerner
of other men, which could never well govern him self, is more mete to row
in a galey, or to hold the plough, then to govern so worshiple and honest a
company. But the lord is a live and hears of these Moabites pride and blood
thirstinge, he sees their secret wiked counsels and hears their bostinge
proud crakes, their supercilyous arrogance is well known unto me says the
Lord: but yet for all their luciferine pride, promotyng and extolling them
selves and one an other to serve their traitourouse turns and mutual
mischief, yet shall they never bring about their wicked enforcementes. For it
is God that deposes such mighty mischeuouse from their seats and exalts
the humble. It is the lord that skatereth their wiked counsels and trappeth
them in their own pride and blodye cogitacions. But let all christen kings
and Princes beware how they give their sword into such popisshe prelates
hands lest the innocent blood be-required of god at their hands, to whom be
praise for ever. Amen.

Truth it is, that he which knows nether the father nor christ shall never
believe Christ to be an hole perfyt and sufficient savior and forgeuer of
sins, but he shall wind in this crooked condition of Wyn. and deuyde his
iustificacion part (if he give not all) to works, and part to god, as did the
Jews and now the Turks and such like heithen miscreauntes which never knew
god the father in, and by christ. yea they shall deuyse and imagyn in their own
opinions (for true faith have they none) such works for gods honor as the^
selves think to make most for a great kings honor, as to be accompanied with
many men, and fetched in with many torches and candels at none day lyghted to
him which is the very light it self. These blind worshippers will make god
an image thereby to worship him, which idollatrye the second commandment
utterly forbyddeth. They will worship him with gold perle, precious stones,
veluete clothe of gold. etc. They sense sing and ring him in with belles as
they were wont to do the bishops. They pipe him up with orgaynes, and all the
costly pleasant externe rites and ceremonies (as sencinge processions) that
can be devised for to please great men: they use the same to worship god
withal, when Christ said God my father is a spirit and in spirit and truth
will he be worshipped* yea these wordly wicked blind Bisshops are so far cast
away and for their wickedness turned up of god into their own hertes lusts,
and into a reprobate dampened mind that they know not god fro man mortal. Oh
good god what mind may this be. Verelye Paul expresses it and the cause why
god worthelye thus casts them up, saying. What so ever men ought to know of
god, the same has god showed them, as his almyghtye power and godbeade: yea
and that by the creacion and creatures of the world if they would diligently
and humblye look upon and expend them, so that they be without any excuse of
any ignorance. But when god had given Wynche. this knoweledge of him, then
yet he worshypped nor glorified him not as god, but as he would worship any
other worldly prince with outward rites and ceremonies, neither does he give
him thanks, but shows his own vain curiosite and curiouse vanite in his
own reasonynge and disputinge for gods most glorious honor, in so much
that he has now blindened his own ignorant heart, and wherein he thought to
have done most wisely for gods worship and glory, there does he most
folyshlye and cruellye, showing him self a very fool (as Paul says)
turnynge up the worship of god incorruptible through his own imaginacions to
worship him after his own fond devises. And for this cause has god thus
cast him up through his own hertes lusts into al manner prodigious and
beastlye fylthynes receiuinge into him self the worthy reward of his own
error. And forbicause (says Paul) he does set at naught so present
knoweledge of god now opened unto him and to all other that will embrace
christ and his word, therefore does God turn him up into this detestable
opinion of his own false justification and into so lothelye and abominable
reprobate bloudye mind, that in prisoninge, persecuting, fagottyng, burning,
and slayeng the true professors and preachers of gods holy word, he shall
(as Christ says) seem to him self and such like, to do god high worship and
by the fulfillynge of such wyked works even his own condition, to attain to
his own iustificacion before the devil the prince of this world, his
antechristen Pope of Rome, Cardinals, preistes. etc. whose vicare general
worthily and justly he yet plays up and down. And all this (says Christ)
shall this vicare general do to you because he knows nether my father nor
me. This is that reprobate mind into which this Gardener is now turned up of
god which dampened mind he declares saying. Woo be to them that say that
thing to be evil which they know to be good, and that to be good which they
know to be evil. The lord preserve his church from such a vicare general.
Christ keep every Diocese from such a Bishop. The holy Ghost teach al
christen Princes to beware of such a counselor.

So be it.

you and me is, whether it be before iustificacyo^ or no? and to that purpose,
for your part, ye bring in no scripture, but only your by talk, after ye
have named scripture, and occupied the simple man's wit, with a strange
phrase of the prophette. I shall stryke my hand upon my hyppe. And whiles the
unlearned man thinks of that, he forgets the issue of the matter, and
calls you a noble clerk, being so full of scripture, as ye could talk of
it from morn to night, and need were, and thinks I were such one, as ye do
paynt me. But to the matter you say, faith iustyfyenge bryngethe forth
penance, and before ye have told, that faith iustyfyenge for the own sake,
obteynethe remyssyon of sin* So ye teach that after remission of sin,
springs penance, which your teaching, the hole trade of the scripture, in
the new testamente impugneth and condemns. For as saint John^ came before
christ, so penance goes before remission of sin, Penance goes before
remyssion o^ sin.
Saint Paul says. Johannes baptizabat, baptismo penitentiae, dicens in eum
qui uenturus esset. And Christ said. Johannes baptizauit aqua, uos autem
baptizabimini spiritu sancto. Saint Peter taught after this sort, when such
as hard him preach, were moved and asked what they should do? Do penance
(says he) and be each of you baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, to obtain
remyssyon of sin. When Christ expounded the scriptures, in the mids of his
discyples, after his ressurection, he said it was behouefull, christ should
suffer and rise from death the third day, and to be preached in his name,
penance and remission of sin for all people. S. Peter also preaches thus,
Do penance and turn, that your sins may be taken away. The prophet
Ezechiell speaks after this sort, If a wicked man does penance. And you
apply penance only to them that be justified. In all these places, no man
has been so mad to say that a sinner, that is so blinded with sin, as he
can not see god, can of him self, turn as he should do, to god frutefully
without the light and grace of god. Who can wake out of sin, without god
call him and says. Exurge qui dormis. Rise up that slepest, And onles god has
given him ears, to hear this voice of god, saying: Surge and illuminare
Jerusalem. How is any man being lame with sin, able to take up his couche
and walk, unless god says. Toll grabatum tuum and ambula? Christ said he
came not to call men that bosted their justice, but to call sinners to
penance. That god calls man, for christ's sake, who by his glorious passion,
has merited fully the reconciliacion of man, no man contendeth, and that god
does ministre special grace, and help man to turn to god from sin, it is
agreed on with you. Moreover that man can not know god, but by faith, all must
agree, and that it is impossible, to please god without faith, and that who
comes to god, must have faith. The point of variance in teaching of
penance
Hitherto we agree, but herein ye only differ from the faith catholic, and
catholyque teaching, that ye will have man justified, with remission of sin,
straight incontinently before his faith be any thing warmed, with such an
understanding, as though remission of sin, should go before penance,
contrary to the order of true doctrine. And all this wranglyng on your
behallfe is, because ye would not allow* any good work, before remission of
sin. And ye are feign to turn all the scripture vpsidowne, for the
mayntenaunce of it. And when al is done it will not be. We be taught to pray
for forgiveness of our sins, And by your doctrine, we be forgiven, or we
begin to pray, seeing without faith iustifienge (as ye say) I can not
worthily pray. I pray god, send you a better mind, truly instructed with his
doctrine, and grace to turn to him, from the vain glory of the world, wherein
ye reign, and with the tyranny of your tongue, persecute other men's name and
fame, most cruelly, with a counterfeit forged sword, of authorite, under
pretense of gods word, wherewith ye take upon you, to be co^ptrollers of ye
world: Al such armor of wit, lernyng and understanding, as god has given
you, to help, to maintain the semely state of Christen religion, to thincreace
of gods honor, love, quiet and tranquillite, among us: ye convert all, to
the confusion of it, and handle the matter so, as though god had need of your
lies, as Job says. Nunquid eget deus me^datio, ut loquamini pro eo dolos?
Find you any example in the prophets or the appostles, that they would
sclaunder men wittynglye, for auauncement of their purpose? As for my self, I
have used your enemite so, as I have great good by it, I thank almyghtye God,
Ye have been to me, occasion of study and dilygence, to spend such hours as I
might have at liberty, to thincreace of knowledge, yt I might be ye abler, to
maintain such truth, as I have learned, in gods scriptures, wherein percace I
should else have been more negligent. And although I have facioned, my self
outwardly, in the world, not to co^tente your eyes, but have, showed my self
not dismayed, with your controlementes, yet I confess, I have by your
occasion, at some time called for grace, to refrain worldly tentacions, Your
cause, I judge extremely naught, to thextinction of gods honor and
subversion of the world, and therefore the more ye mislyke me, and the wurse ye
speak of me, the more cause have I to thank god, to suffer so easily for his
sake, as your malice and envy, should engendre me an honest reputacion in the
world in honest men's hearts, to be noted adversary to you. And as I learn, in
the scriptures, and such holy men, as have expounded them, whereby to judge
your enterprise abominable: So the malicious railing of you; that be the
masters, and the spiteful hatred without cause, of them that be your scolers,
daily more and more confermeth unto me, the detestable noughtynes of that ye
intend. The falsehed ye teach, in the understanding of scriptures, corrupts
all other truths, in you, and transformeth them into lies. Your learning can
not be of god, that preach so like the devil. How so ever ye diffame me of
cruelty, I know it is not my fault, and yet I am a sinner, and have many
other faults. I never enterprised, to defend the truth, but in my place of
order, where the kings most excellent majesty has placed me, far above my
deserte and expectation. You triumph out of your place, and make your self,
high judge of ye realm, whereunto god has not called you. Can ye find in
your heart, to do so much injury to ye kings majesty as to think, the state of
this realm, to be directed, not by his high wisdom, to whom god has committed
it, but as I and such other for our purpose (as ye note) would have it
governed? And if ye think therein otherwise then ye say, (as for the mutual
intelligence, in the fraternite, ye can not in your absence, but know, how
public things go) is this the charitable divise in the brotherhed, to chose
out me for a raylynge stock, and in iestinge at your pleasure of me, bring to
the kings maiestees knowledge, that ye would he should here spoken of you?
Suppose ye, the kings majesty, can not understand, what ye mean by
Winchester? when ye attribute all the fashion of the state of the realm, to
Wynchester? call the acts that myslyke you Wynchesters? all statutes
Wynchesters? all just punishments (how so ever ye call them) Winchesters? and
charge al upon Wynchester, that in so doing ye name Winchester, not for
Wynchester, but use the name of Wyn. instead of that ye dare not name and
speak out. Ye abuse herein to much, the kings majesty's most excellent
gifts, and I am ashamed, that any part of his maiestees glory, in defense of
religion from your corruption, should be derived unto me, by any mean who have
deserved no part of it. And so shall it appear in the end, how soever ye
sclaunder it, in the mean season. I will no further answer to your raylinges
in the conclusion of your book, but exhort you, to call for grace, that ye
may turn, as Jeremy says, and clappe your self on the hyppe, and remember
with repentance, how many men's consciences, ye have perplexed, with your
controversy in religion, and labor as ye can, to refourme what ye may. Ye
have scourged us sharply with your own torment in the mean season. If I
delited in your punishmente (as ye would it were persuaded of me) I could not
wysshe you a more miserable state then thus, to here you rore and cry out
like beasts, and by excess of malice, to speak ye wot not what, Prison and
bodily death be not esteemed of al men alyke, and ye have used them for a time,
as false wytnes, to conferme your falsehod for truth, with sclaunder of the
just mynysters thereof, Now that has for a while ceased and ye by lurkinge,
be at liberty in talk, ye have so disgorged your abhominacion, yt lay hydden
in your breast, as no man longer need doubt what ye be. We could never get so
much by examinacion, as ye confess in books and profess. Ye should by
justice have died, with opinion of symplycite, among some, and now ye live
with a manifest declaracion what ye have ever meant and intended. Ye set your
self in prison of an encombred conscience, and dye daily, yet living, in
prosecutynge your mischeuouse enterprise. But return you unto God, return to
your sovereign lords obeysaunce, return to be a good christen man, and an
english man. For what so ever our faulty works have been, they nothing serve
to the iustificacion of your doctrine. Let us all pray together, for mercy,
mercy, mercy, now most necessary unto us. The name and works of god,
have been so familiar in our talk, that the reverent fear of his majesty is
almost extinct among many. Unhappy be we, in whose time learning should be
ministered, to such effects. God grant us to know him truly and according
to his will, so to worship and honor him, in body and soul together, as all
contencions, debates, malice and hatred, clearly extirpate and pulled out, we
may live here like christen men, with christen men, and english men, with
english men, which of a good season, has been by dissension of opinions,
somewhat let and hindered, whereof those have most cause to be sorry, to whom
any part of the fault may be ascribed, And yet all must be sorye, for that is
amysse, and each man for his part, begin to amend, and with the prayer of the
church, continually pray, Deus qui errantibus, ut in uiam ueritatis possint
redire, ueritatis tuae lumen ostendis, da cunctis qui professione christiana
censentur, illa respuere, quae huic inimica sunt nomini, and quae sunt apta
sectari. Per christum dominum nostrum. Amen.

Imprinted at London in Aldersgate street by Johannes Herforde, at the costs
and charges of Robert Toye, dwelling in Paul's church yard at the sign of the
Bell. Anno dn^i. 1546.


