THE HISTORY OF TREBIZOND, In four Books.

By Tho. Gainsforde Esquier.

Quest. Quid dignum tanto feret hic promissor hiatu? Resp. Sic iuuat indulgere
fugacibus horis.

AT LONDON, Printed for Tho. Downs and Ephesians. Dawson. 1616.

TO The Right Honorable Countess Dowager of DERBIE.
RIGHT HONORABLE;
EXperience makes Ignorance confess, that the best composed private Letters
resemble the passage of a Ship, leaving no print or impression of her course:
and the mememorie of such an improuident and unfortunate Man as my self, is
like spilt abroad Water, never to be gathered up again. -- But do what
Contempt and Greatness can: this shall outlast a Tomb, and be more glorious
then the proudest Epitaph or Structure: Not that there is any thing in the
same, otherwise then a Spiders Cobwebbe, fitter to be swept away with a
huswiuely hand: But because your Fame may survive thereby, and many ages to
come demand, which Lady of DERBY excited such commemoration? And then the
answer shall be; Earl Ferdinandos Widow, Countess DOWAGER of DERBY; who was
thus far beholding to Nature, that Love, Beauty, and Comeliness, exposed her
as a work of her choycest Storehouse: who was so far beholding to Virtue,
that she united many Graces, as you see a rich Diamond augmented in his
lusture by the workmans skilfulnesse: who was so far beholding to Fortune,
that she sheltred under the covert of the greatest and magnificenst Prince in
the World Q. Elizabeth; and she so ouermantled her with Favor, that King
James kept her still glorious under the same: Who was so far beholding to
Providence, that from a second Husbands Worthiness and Wisdom, they went
arm in arm to the house of Perfection, and made it thrive the better under
the warm: roof of Abundance: Who was so far beholding to Honor* that she
affronted the strictness of Law, and from his Maisties Warrant kept her
greatness secure: and who was so far beholding to Fame, that she trod upon
the swelling Serpent Envy, and raised good wishes from their hearts, who had
formerly pretended cause of distasting.

Therefore I can be no contrary amongst so many iuditious obseruers, but
presume, that so great goodness will not be diuerted by any malign
circumstances; and assure my self, that your Honor may look toward me with
a gracious aspect, or at least in this triuiall abruptness condescend to a
charitable endurance of men's imperfections: For Wisdom, or a thriuing Fortune
is not bought in the Market, and I amongst some others may well complain, --
Fato prudentia minor.

Your Honors humble Obseruant, Th. Gainsforde.

The principal matters and Stories contained in these Books.
Lib. 1.
THe Story of the Shepherds of Nagania. Page. 4. Marpsias Cave. 13. Marpesias
Story. 15. The Shepherds Daughters. 18. The principal Shepherds. 23. The
story of Franio. 47. Idlemen described. 48. The story of Rugio and Deltona. 62.
Lib. 2.
The History of Mengrelius and Kalucki. 86. The History of Xantippus and
Encelidon. 104. The description of Delphos. 116. The Oracle it self, or
Prophecy. 124. How Gelida and Perinthum saved the Empress Children. 130. The
story of Praxus and Menedemus. 144. The story of Cleonidas and Perinthum. 151.
Lib. 3.
The triumph at Deltonas discovery. 172. The History of Artabazes and Olmus.
180. The settling of a Government in a Kingdom. 183. The story of Gestarius.
193. The story of Cleonidas and Artabazes. 201. Anzitemus marieth Brizaca,
formerly called Montanus and Deltona. 208. The story of Artabanus and Astiages.
209. The story of Medormus and Gliranda. 213. The Combat between Anzitemus and
Medormus. 221. The story of Ormisdates and Damafloris. 233. The story of
Anzitemus and Astiages. 245.
Lib. 4.
Anzitemus his own Story. Page. 261. A King described. 263. Artabazes Father
of Anzitemus, slain by Cleonidas the Pirat. 269. The story of Cleonidas and
Artaxata. 275. The description of a Giants natural Disposition. 277. The
story of Sagarenus and Artaxata. 280. Armenia of Armenus. 287. Roxanas
description. 291. The commendation of Conference. 295. Anzitemus King of
Armenia. 300. The story of Trezoboro the Emperors son of Trebizond. 303.
Trezoboro returns to Trebizond. 308. The story of Kalucki and Mullumalla.
310. Kalucki Emperor of Tartary. 313. Kalucki challenges Trebizond. 326. The
Battle between Mengrelius and Kalucki: two brothers. 330. The story of
Mengrelius and Trezoboro, father and son. 339. Mengrelius slain by Anzitemus
and Trezoboro Emperor, as in the Prophecy. 345. The story of Cleonidas after
the Battle at Sea with Anzitemus. 354. Cleonidas death. 359.
FINIS.
The first Book of the History of TREBIZOND.
SO long continued the fight betwixt the valiant Anzitemus, The Battle
betwixt Anzitemus and Cleonidas at Sea.
and the Arch-pirat Cleonidas, that extremity wondered to be maintained, and
the night (as a common decider of Controversies) hasted for very pity to
determine the fury, not remembering what terror her haste would add unto the
fury: whereupon Anzitemus enraged to be disappoynted, commanded to grapple,
and the task imposed, chained their Barks together; the effect whereof,
produced the lamentable Stratagems, wherewith Confusion, Slaughter, and Death,
terrifieth the beholders: For the fighters with Swords seemde to play in the
choice either to divide the Body from the Head, or separate the Members from
the Body: Such as used Pikes, might either wound or kill; such as throw Stones,
either brain, or endanger; and such as trusting to their strength durst
cloose, either strangle, or toss ouerboard: Thus were some thrown into the
Sea, some stifled in the Ships, some slain outright, some irrecouerably
wounded, some thronged to death, some sprauling half dead, and some fainting
ouerweatied; none escaping one mischief or other; and all confounded, because
they saw all things confused: the faythlesse hearted trembling before death, as
dismayed at their fellows outcryes: the valiant hoping to live to revenge
their companions wrongs: At last, Destruction lifted up her horrible
countenance, as if she meant to distract them with this assurance, that
neither Policy, nor Endeavors could direct to any way of security; which
when Anzitemus (even betwixt the contraries of Pity and Rage) apprehended,
he then cried out: Let all cease, and Cleonidas and I determine the
controversy.

But, whether Cleonidas despayring in the success, stomaked the misfortune, or
remembering his fault conceited the revenge; or impatient at the difficulty,
forgate the means of redress; or enraging to be ouer-mastered, became
absolutely desperate: He put in practice more fear A desperate action of
Cleonidas.
and more terror: with his own hands like a hired Servant of mischief
setting the Ships on fire, and commanding the rest of his party to heaw them
a pieces, or otherwise to shift for themselves. This was so well liked of the
Mariners, and so soon performed, that you would have imagined, Confusion meant
to decipher, with what variety she would entertain Death: For what with
Axes, Hat-chets, Sawes, Dragges, Winches, Croes, Engines, and other
Instruments: the Ships were splitted, spoiled, broken, disioynted, and all to
pieces shiuered: besides, the Fire playing the Tirant, quickly disseuered, what
before fastened the maine Beams together; herein only acting the part of a
Friend by soon ridding out of the pain, and concluding (seen we must die) to
die with resolution.

Thus were such interdicted with necessity of saving them selves, who before
striued to intercept others: Thus did uncomfortable Cries condemn the cruelty
of Revenge; which would not be satisfied without so small a massacre: Thus were
pitiful yelles the last testimony, how many hundreds exclaymed on the
ambition of men: Thus did horrible Curses sound out the wicked minds of such,
as neglected the true use of a good Conscience: Thus were all the causes of
amazement united, to show the formidable effects of Enrage and Despite, so
that the most part perished, and very few summoned up new hopes to prolong
their lives: Yet had Anzitemus this fortune, to light on the hinder quarter of
his enemies Ship; and if before affrighted with the hideous spectacle he
stood incapable of any The Shipwreck of Anzitemus.
resolution, now reduced with the enforced conditions of life, he bestirred his
consideration to inhibit unkind and untimely mischaunce: whereupon compelled to
leave the ornaments of his valor, because he was to make use of his arms and
lightness, he quickly stripped himself, and as quickly took up his seat on
the broken piece, which resembling some Boigh or Sea mark, was no doubt the
occasion he was the better marked. For as the uncomfortable Night finished her
progress, the bounty of a sunshining Morning laid open her treasury, and
he had the choice of many seuerals; fair Weather, sweet^ Wind, calm Sea,
clear Air; and sight of a Fisher-boat, which seemed a Messenger of life, in
regard it approached so near, that he was understood in craving their help;
and they helped, when they understood what he craved: But to strengthen your
knowledge in this accident, you must allow of some circumstaunce.

AFter the Earth like a magnificent Bride had apparrelled her self in her
beauteous attire, the Inhabitants of Nagania on the Northren Caspian Shore,
(between whom the The story of the Shepherds of Nagania.
melancholy Winter had compelled a discontented separation) began their solemn
Spring feasts, and set forward the herds of Sheep, Goats, and greater
Cattle to the Downs, which were in a manner purged by the gentle ebbings and
flowings of the Sea; where both one and other seemed to make use of a pleasing
theft, pleasing to the Beasts in finding so good a pray as the sweet Grass
affoorded; pleasing to the Earth, in being ordained an instrument of such
relief: the effect whereof produced, that Riches without Envy, Good order
without Flattery, Quietness without Imperfection, Peace without Intemperance,
Plenty without Inordinatnesse, Increase without Repining, and all other
blessings of the Land, as it were in one league combined them selves: Besides,
the Sea disbursed a recompense to their industry, which caused them to
maintain certain Boats to fish with, and every one according to a well
applauded custom watched his course: amongst these Placandus (whom years and
gravity had much graced) lived with such love and liking, that whenever his
journey importuned, some Placandus fishing night.
one or other attended the work in hand, and at this instant bare him company
in his fishingnight: so that by Art united to industry (the only enemies of
idleness) their nets were filled with great store, and their Trunks stored
with excellent Fish, the dispatch whereof (as unwilling to tempt prosperity
with an unnecessary journey) concluded a return, had not a sudden cry directed
their pity to regard what they heard, and that detained them to consider, how
they might administer relief, the rather because a man appeared sitting on a
broken piece of a Ship, neither much dissmayed at so great an enemy as
death, nor now seeming over ielous for so sweet a friend as Life: But such as
he was, did their industry assist, their assistance help, their help
recover, their recovery welcome to Comfort: now when Comfort came to act her
part, like the Sun, who scorning to be checked with every slender Vapor,
quickly lifts up his glorious head: Fear and palenesse was made ashamed of
their wrong disseisure, and he seemed the very Son of Valor, and darling of
love.

This at the first, raised a kind of reverence, wherein they would more orderly
have proceeded, had not a pleasing utterance pacefied their importunities
Anzitemus saved by Placandus changes hisname to Montanus
to understand, who he might be with his earnest desire to take him as he
was, which (says he) I cannot but presume on, because I find such a unity
of goodness: Be therefore satisfied, that my simple truth tells you, I am
Montanus of Carberia, unfortunate in being that I am; and ten times unfortunate
in remembering what I was: mean I confess, but now the meaner by loosing all
means of my estate and living, as having with some substance and friends not
eighteen days since burdoned one small Bark, and after some variety of
Storms within these eighteen hours tasted the very bitterness of
adversity, which many with the meditation put me in mind of some misfortune:
But things remediless, are past care and cure; therefore I will teach my
tongue to forget her own language, and ouermaster Misery with an ill respected
Virtue called Patience.

But Placandus took an other course, and from troubling him with any more
questions, applied the ordynary means of help in such cases, telling that
they were men of Husbandry and Cattle in the Kingdom of Nagania, and not
Fishers; if then their supplies could stand him in stead, or estates induce him
to be one of the company, he might be sure neither to fail of succor, nor
complain for want: and if my self seem not less worthy then another, I will
welcome thee, and upon good deserving, add to thy welcome, a reward,

By this time, had Montanus youth showed a scorn of the mischief, which the
Seaes vnmercisulnesse pretended, and he remained in some ecstasy, remembering
his own affairs, but especially, that in so remote a place, he must
represent the fruit of a foraine Land, which the Inhabitants have no other use
of, but wondering at: Yet hoping to spend out the extreamitie of sullen
conceits with this variety, and perceiving the rest as it were to stomach
his slacknesse, that apprehended no sooner the courtesy proposed, he presently
opened the treasury of the poor, thanked all in general, and gratified
Placandus in particular, accepting the kindness with many wishes, that his
honest endeavors might draw on success to confirm him a dutiful servant.

Thus they returned with effectual dispatch of their journey, and extraordinary
news of this adventure, which over a day or two, was willing to participate it
self to the rest: Yet not in so slender a manner, but every one amplified
report, as their opinions received impression, some praised his Feature, some
his Countenance, some his upright Comeliness, some his well knit Joints, some
his Demeanor, and some his Constancy in the affliction; nor wanted there
others, which supposed him of better fortune, then his present show portraited,
so that for the time, Placandus house was never empty; many coming to see him,
many to praise him, many to judge of their praises, many not to be beholding to
another report, many to give notice, how well they had profited Montanus as
Placandus servant saluted by Coranus.
in the School of Civility, and many to perform Goodness, because Virtue
delights in action: Amongst this number, Coranus though the last, which came,
yet was not the least means of his comfort, because having him self
experienced distress, he told, how counsel and relief might be seasonably
confirmed, and here, like the discreet Physician, knowing the state of his
Patients body, reduced him to some moderation; so that their humanity, and
Placandus good usage, made Montanus believe, he was ordained to this
quietness: For with a kind of delight he put in practice willingness, and
exercise the ouermasterers of difficulties, which under propped his knowledge
with these particulars, how to pasture the Cattle before the Suns pride might
prevent their stomachs, how to guide them ere the Evening had determined their
rest; when to water, and where to refresh them; when to drive them to the Fold,
when to retire from the Field, and in what sort to use the instruments of
command his voice and Pipe, all which were done with so good a grace, that
the beholders woondred a^ the action, and he mused how necessity had so soon
acquainted the action: they loueing, his Master liking; and he satisfied to
be thus loved and liked.

BY this time, Fame was not so nigardly, but Coranus not only relates the
story of Montanus, but describes him to his daughter Deltona.
the women as well as men (to whom in deed curiosity seemed more proper)
entertained the news, and had not a customarie modesty restrained their
desires, they would sooner have satiated their longing then they did; yet
because their Summer Feast approached, in which many meetings, and ancient
ceremonies had their several passages, their forward desire was a little
suppressed, and the feastiuall approached to put them in remembrance, that Time
had strengthened their increases, and this Stranger expected the setting them
selves forth to best becoming: In the mean while, Coranus returning home,
told his Daughter Deltona (for the Man was wiuelesse, and a stranger amongst
them) of Montanus ariuall with amplification of the circumstances belonging to
his shipwreck, which because it agreed to their fortune, she was willing to
hear, and he ready to dilate. Truly (quoth he) I never saw a man of a
better presence, his stature comely and tall, yet not exceeding mediocritie;
his members so framed, as if our first Mother looking back on the work, had
like a skillful statuarie new polished, what she escaped; his Shoulders
Coranus describes Montanus to Deltona.
large, and Body upright; of mighty Bone, and not overmuch Flesh; the Neck in
equality of length made to support a well proportioned Head; and an amiable,
yet stately Countenance, which like some fair Planet in a frostie night, by
special marks does warrant him of Noble birth: For the Tresses spatiously
plighted seem to boast of extraordinary curiousness, and the Tyara
sumptuously fashioned, to propose unto us a very certainty of wealth: his Eyes
according to the course they intend lovely, compelled to distemperature
fearful, and enclining to sadness, very Adamants of Compassion: to be
plain, he may be what our greatest thoughts can comprehend; but as he is, we
repute him Placandus servant by name of Montanus.

Deltona could not but like her Fathers description, and allow of his opinion;
yet was not satisfied because she had not seen him; and wished to see him,
that she might be satisfied: wondering how her desire took upon it such a
liberty, and half ashamed, least her Father might perceive her mind
distempred, but he poor man, had a world of conceits to think of: for
though he looked on her with a kind of demureness, yet was it to ouerlooke
her, least she might have discovered his sighing and tears; which to prevent
he cunningly led her forth into a larger feeld of other conference; and so
they remained with a reciprocal gladness not to be seen perplexed.

Now the Feast coming forward, Placandus much moved with the desert of his
new Servant, and as it were enriched with the care he had over his charge, and
the prosperity following his care, thought to gratify him with a thing of
some worth, and therefore one Evening by way of relation, he told the Story
how his Wife, his loving Wife, his loving loved Wife Iapeta, miscarying long
since in childbirth, left him a fatherless, and a sorrowful Widower, which
for the time had such impression, that for fear to be so again called to the
account of passion, he vowed in Marpesias Cave, he would never marry; and
although I have found it a matter almost of impossibility to tie our frayltie
to such strict rules: yet my honest Montanus, I have waded through the
difficulty, and I hope reserved my self to some good (...)

the Hair untied without curiosity, but that the hanging down seemed a
curiousness, hung down with sufficient comeliness, their Loins were loosely
girt with a kind of Belt, which at pleasure made the neither part of their
Mantell resemble a full blown double Rose; their Countenances were amiable,
youthful, rather smiling then sad, and bending to another, respected none but
them selves; the Head was decked with a Corenet of Flowers, as if they meant to
tell us, Virtue compels Honor as well as commendation, and the whole
portrature so well graced, that a man could not but afford a reverence. In the
midst of this room was a square Table serving to many purposes, as contracts
of Marriages, the parties enterchangably embracing overthwart, then kissing,
then with a settled countenance laying one hand upon another, swearing an
inviolable League, Bargains and exchangings dispatched, both buyer and seller
promising no more, then they meant to perform, and performing no less then
they presumed to promise; offerings of their increases presented, which ever
returned with advantage, according to the willingness of the party and the
honesty of the giver: sacrifices for pacification fulfilled, as their
consciences laid open transgression, or their desires meditated Religion,
knowing the Gods were to be adored, and their neighbors to be beloved, The
Anchress was extracted from the blood of Prometheus, whom they superstitiously
believed a great God, and once had his residence on Mount Caucasus, and so
began a Family amongst them: she ever lived unmarried, and had six servant
Maids likewise to attend her her reputation was the greater, because she never
fed the people with untruths, nor exacted from them more, then their own
willingness extended unto: the inward Room she kept shut, and yet stood open,
while anyes business imported it, because the next commer might have warning
the place was supplied: but why the name of Marpesia received estimation
amongst them, you must be thus advised.

IN the mighty Kingdom of Scithia, at such The Story of Marpesia*
time, as the first Amasons, women of Heroiecall courage, gloried to make
themselves instruments of virtue; reigned as Queen the excellent Laciana: a
woman of great Industry, and greater success in her Industry: for much
affecting the magnanimity of Tolmilanda, against the Tartarian Mulmashag, she
fortunatly determined diverse famous exploits, and after governed the countries
with such majesty and wisdom, that other Kingdoms feared her displeasure,
with loving her virtue; and her own subjects had the practice of singular
discipline, which so much the more grew beneficial, by how much the employment
tended to their good: of her proceeded Deiophaeba, and from her the fair
Poligambis, under whom an envious anger, that women should so raise the
Trophies of Honor, excited the adjoining Kingdoms to conspire their
destruction, and Fortune never constant but in vnconstancies, permitted a
wicked Fury to massacre the wonderfulnesse of nature: wherein, though the
large circumstance, and the strangeness of the Action keeps my tongue from
her full discourse; yet this must I discover, that the course of time
disappointed their ambition, and dissolved this imparadised company: only
Marpesia sister to Poligambis, as it were allotted from the beginning to some
deuinesse retired hither, and erected another Regiment, but of diferent
quality: For though she grew in favor so Beautiful, and in Beauty so
Celestial, that the greatest Princes devoted their endeavors to her
acceptance: yet she proclaimed against vanity defiance, and Cupid stormed to
be so counterchecked: this made her abandon all Courtly fashions, least
deceitful temptation might at advantage entrappe her weakness, and here
repose herself in a solitary Grove, that a quiet dispensation from the
company of men, might settle obedience to undefiled thoughts. But some Writers
have justified, how the desire of revenge so exasperated her anger, that ere
three years had resetled the Company, and drawn back again her dispersed
Forces, she returned with a new Alarm, and prosecuted her attempts with
sufficient success; leaving the example of her glory to animate Lampedo to
maintain this second industry, she prospering induced Antiopa, from her
proceeded Penthisilia the mother of the gallant Thalestris, and the last
Marpesia: with whose renown other Kings offended, Envy never desisted, vutill
they shrunk indeed under destruction. Howsoever, the reziance of the former
Marpesia gave name to this place, and occasioned these Ceremonies; so that
after a civil consideration had acquainted the people with husbandry and
tillage: in the felling and stocking up the wood was this Cave found, for the
wonderfulnesse religiously preserved, and the conueniencie in manner aforesaid
regarded: and now begins our Festival.

AFter they had sacrificed at the Cave, the The Shepherds feast, wherein
Mountanus and Deltona meet.
Custom allowed Montanus with his Batchellers to divide themselves amongst the
Virgins, as Fancy led opinion the way to judgment: but who had seen the
lovely Deltona coming forward, must needs have remembered, that Diana with her
Nymphs added something to Natutes allowance, when she was to entertain so
great a Lady; and Jupiter determined the Rape of Calisto: for whether the
behavior of this Stranger taught expectation the practice of other things, or
whether time had ripened their estates, that they began to take benefit of
their wealth; or whether their own conceits meant to make much of the blessings
of Nature, as not willing to continue in a barren rudeness; or whether the
acquaintance with ciuell Cities induced them to immitation, I dispute not, but
the fortune of this day was such, that every one in a manner sequestered from
the common baseness of Tartary, detayned the lookers on with the several
presentation of beauty and comeliness.

Next to Deltona came Crolaca old Silenus The description of the shepherds
daughters.
Daughter, who manifested she was begotten in a time of discretion by attyring
her Head after the plainest fashion, and because no devise obscured any
imperfection, she might the better have satisfied a judicious Censurer, had not
the near approach of a prying look marked the equality of her forehead
tending to a little flatnesse.

The second was Enseria very ill placed so near the foremost; her attire seemed
rather fantastical then costly, and added this to suspicion, that she
determined some strange course of life, because her beauty was adulterate.

The third was Hiale, pleasant Parastoes daughter, who might well have brought
liking with admiration on her side; but that a little smiling somewhat more
then cheerfulness (as if mirth determined not to go out of a generation)
called her modesty in question, and ouer-wrought the ornament of her face, the
mouth.

The forth was Niphe, from whom some quarter of a year before, Deaths Harrold
summoned both Father and Mother; who amassed the beholders with the appearance
of lively colors naturaly embelishing her cheeks, only a dead eye accused
her of fullennesse: yet it might be former remembrance admitted the unkind
ghuest sorrow, and limited commendation from ouer-reaching too far.

Now marched Ladra Daughter to Argias, (to whom for his excellency in Music,
they had given a Pension) and was quickly seen: For having her Hair large,
long, and of a singular amber; she ware it in a kind of loosnesse; but so
kindly, that it seemed an excellent carelessness: because she was fair and
upright; yet kept pale Lips, the full life of beauty aside.

Then presented her self Carista lusty Darpanos Daughter, who of purpose to
show variety, or unwilling to patrizare being a Maid merited a choice
commendation, had not a kind of sobriety made her strangeness reputed a
littell pride, whereby a liveliness wanted to set forth her worth to the best
becoming.

The seventh was Gralle Temellus only Child, in whom the best cunning might be
deceived, because, though now a favorable countenance seemed dimmed with
overmuch Blood, yet imputing it to a kind of blushing, or allowing time the
effect of moderation, without doubt she was an amiable president of delight: so
that Envy added not this as an other fault, her speech was over loud.

The eight was Ranata, whose cost questionless exceeded her fortune; in
regard, that beside a well proportioned Body, the face could boast of no great
Beauty, and wanted many parts to make it favorable.

Now approached Tarina rich Pleios Daughter, who made demonstration of her
Fathers Wealth, by her own stateliness, yet in so good an order, that it
seemed a prerogative, and had not a seucere Censor exprobated Nature for not
allowing so sweet an aspect a perfect clearenesse, to all others it either
appeared no defect, or appearing durst not so be counted, considering her own
countenance better marked, dispelled the former conceit, and made a new
impression applaud all deserved worthiness.

Next her came Carix black Alcastoes Daughter, whose Hair enclining to a more
then brownnesse, added that bie name: yet was she full of favor, which seemed
attractiue as joined to a sober demeanor; so thou could not choose, but
repine at Nature for uniting two contraries together, because the choysest
lover was astonished, when that nakedness (which modesty allowed to be seen)
surpassed the rest for dellicacie and color.

The 11. was called the strange Duplana, who having no good part exactly looked
upon, possessed yet every part without exception; because her sweet carriage
and dellicate behavior strocke an amazement, ere you could examine the
particulars.

The last of especial note, was Sabetha, and in outward show the least; but
such a least, as shined like a sparcke of Pleasure: for the Eyes were able to
inflame, the Countenance to enamoure, and her self so well fashioned to
ravish: so that if a man would have wished to be the beholder of a dellicate
creature, the outward show warranted, and the inward persection confirmed her
the same.

But to return to Deltona, like a brave pointed Diamonde triumphing over a
border of pretty ones, not altogether so well foiled, she warranted her Livery
to be sued out of the Court of Perfection, and with all united a magnificent
portlinesse; that Montanus imagined strange things, and suspected himself
surprised with the imagination, as though he durst have sworn, she deserved
far better then a simple Cottage: yet allowing as a Stranger the judgment of
so many, that took her for Coranus daughter, he quieted his thoughts, because
the business in hand disappointed Meditation, had not the business disquieted
him with Meditation. For he was to salute, entertain, welcome them, and to
place them at the Table, which according to their old Customs (least error
might breed repining in wronging one another) he orderly performed: but taking
Deltona by the hand, as if Love and Fortune had used some conference about it,
he made her his own object.

By this time it was a world to see, how a little strangeness can alter the
whole company: For the upper Table consisting of the better, and elder sort
weeried Placandus with many questions, and in a manner seemed emulous against
the other for having Montanus amongst them: They again rejoiced in his
presence, and were soon induced to allow him some preeminence, and truly
howsoever he liked their fashions, or fashioned himself to their liking, or
was now settled in the advantage of his own amiable and portly countenance,
he seemed, as if a good Husband had preserved a stately Cedar in a convenient
Grove of smaller Trees, whereby he might boast of one surpassing all the rest:
but do not suppose he was so generally regarded of them, as particularly
noted by Deltona, who could not so moderate her neerenesse, but she must eye
him at the full, and when it seemed a pleasing thing to behold, she took the
occasion of beholding him to be pleased: then she attempted to refrain, little
knowing the restraint, made her next looking passionate: yet excused by the
courtesy to Strangers, she again emboldned her self to look, and to speak,
both performed with such Loue-infusing sweetness, that Montanus protested
majesty was betrayed to the meanest deiection. For how could so great beauty
seem kind, but he must be friendly? How could she demand, but he must
answer? How could she view him, but he must review her? How could she crave,
but he must allow it? How could she execute any thing, but he must be pleased?
Insomuch that this first acquaintance warranted delight in the highest manner,
and soothed their desires to wish the continuance; yet those wishes were not
ready toadmit any steadfastness, because Montanus was to forward the Dances,
which for the first day concluded the pastimes, wherein no sooner settled he
himself to the measure with Deltona, but as if a soft Esterly wind had with a
sudden strength sturred the thick leaued trees, a certain wispering of the
company from mutual eying them proceeded to liking; from liking to affecting;
from affecting to praising; from praising to wishing them some good; and
debating wherein, confirmed it by marriage: the rather because they had
demeaned themselves so well before, and seemed now suitable in a Liuerie of
preeminence: but other Coples presented occasion of new speech: yet Montanus
still in sight was still remembered, as busied in ordring the next comers out to
the Dances.

Here then was deciphered sober Eugenio, who by the outward countance assured,
his The description of the shepherds.
care was greater to increase his wealth, then his pleasure.

Lovely Miletus a man still practicing of good as one, which knew no bad.

Rich Polio, whose ability outcountenanced imperfections, which without doubt
would else in poverty not without scandal have appeared, besides he
published this error, that counting Virtue but the passage of breath, he
esteemed Money before a Friend.

Rude Sciscus, who in an ill accomplished pride, showed rather a willingness
to the vice, then was fashioned to any Grace or good Manner.

Unfortunate Pleistos, whose Fancy was ever haunted with a counter-changeable
crossenesse, as a man playing with his Shadow running from that, which followed
him, and prosecuting, what seemed to fly from him.

Quiet Dromos, who yet was abused for his opinion of consience, and a
slacknesse to reueng every disgrace, gave suspicion of cowardice.

Peuish Derson, who carlesse either of Order, or good Manner belonging to
education, manifested a very scorn of behavior, and harsh extremity of
humors.

Modest Ergastus, as one speaking little, but meditating the more, loath to give
occasion of offense, and unwilling to remain sullen.

Froward Romero, who indeed having a natural gift of utterance was not
tongne-tyed, as supposing his speech to be still pleasing.

Stubborn Bustosa who had no good quality, but plainness.

Pleasant Tedanus, who graced with many qualities was as gracious to several
Companies.

Sturdie Philastro, who thought well of himself, because he was able to match
his hardest il willer.

Besides that did not dance, Envious Franio, who was not only ill in himself,
but compassed to make all others like himself.

THVS proved their Actions to be the servants of time, and with making their
Procession The continuance of the Feast, with the Exercises of the shepherds.
once again about the Pastures, that days iollitie was ended, so they thought
it convenient to depart, which without further curiosity they would have done,
had not Montanus by taking leave of Deltona, given notice to the rest, that
some Ceremony of good observation, adds a grace to each Action. But depart
they must, and depart they did, which being no longer then the next Morning:
The next Morning they thought it over long, until the swiftness of their
^ooteman-shippe gave the Reward to the best deseruer.

But when Montanus saw Deltona hold the Garland, at the upper end of the
Lists, which The secodn meeting of Montanus and Deltonae
he quickly did, because the place and her self were of specialtie; or else
Love (if he durst have so persuaded himself) is quick sighted, he stood
amazed, almost neglecting what he had in hand: yet lest the company might
ouer-looke his distemperature; or that his own disposition still desired, what
was excellent; or ielious, that any other should watch Deltona with the like
regard; or emulous to hazard his credit by being ouer-mastered, he gallantly
set forward; and was indeed so forward, that while the rest repined at Fortune
to suffer a Stranger to glory in their disgrace, he had time to tell her, that
her matchless beauty was attractiue, and had added wings to his willingness:
with that she gave him the Garland to wear, and forgave him a kiss which he
stole: Now? Whether kisses produce strange Effects? Or some natural secret was
infused with the new breath? he remained distracted, and seemed more pleased
with the theft, then the son of Maia, when he had beguiled the ever waking
eyes of Argus: but the Company coming forward divided his desire, and
ouer-wrought his countenance by bestowing liberal praises on his desert.

Thus did a second meeting increase more virtue, and liking. For many qualities
in one man, help forward to excellency; and diverse interviewes in
well-willing parties, conclude affection: which (to be plain) proved here
in short time a strange devise of Fortune, but we are not yet ready for such
contentment, because the third days Exercise, which was Wrestling (Placandus,
Silenus, and Argias, Judges) presented it self with an excellent temprature.
Imagine yet Montanus was not so hasty, but he looked up to the Mount. to see
Deltona, who soon apprehended the motion, and looked too; by which he supposed
she bade him to remember himself, as if the secret of his desaster had been
discovered: In this feruencie he stepped forth uncalled, never seeming angry
till now; not to be feared, till he was angry, and then were all comers
ouer-throwne: what he yet did, proceeded rather from a necessary virtue, then a
vain ostentation, unless it were in the contention with Franio, whom for ill
looks and base manner of Play, valor scorned, so that adding a little
violence to disdain, the fall brake his arm; no man so sorry for his hurt, as
glad of Montanus estimation which by a general Plaudite, and theyeelding up
the Prizes, gave him testimony of regard.

NOw the Custom shadowed the secrets of passion, if perhaps there happened a
mutual The third meeting of Montanus and Deltona.
liking of Parties: For it was an honor to the preuailer, if he bestowed the
Prize (which was a Watchet Scarffe of curled Cypers, embrodered over with
Stars of gold) on any worthy subject: Whereupon Montanus with a wanton
pleasantness, much gracing his demeanor, presented the same to Deltona; who
took it, but in such a manner, that she knew not, whether the gift, or the
handsomnesse in the delivery pleased more, besides: her sudden blushing
matched to contraries together, fear and gladness. But here ended their
Pastimes, which according to the true nature of pleasure, least a continual
^atiating should rather glut then delight, did they use with sparingnesse: so
that every one applied their several affairs, no man imagining any ill, and
therefore not practicing; no man practiling, because they were enemies to
dishonestie; no man dishonest, for friendship helps up and down the burdens
of the weak, and leaves no fault vnexcused. Else you must think; here were
such, as did love, could hurt, might malice, durst control, and knew to
revenge; all which were afterward put in execution, when folly and impierie
entered the breach against goodness. But the time importuned their care over
their estates, which consisting in the prosperity of their cattle compelled a
general retyring to their Herds and Flocks.

NOw; what was this retyring, but a very Montanus in love with Deltona.
tyring of Montanus, in whose conceit Fancy already had made Impression? For
though the outward show discovered no distemperature, yet the wit much out of
frame, striued to restrain it self from any base scope: and whether other
company put him in mind of the absence of Deltona? Or that the nature of
absence bred a greater desire to possess the thing vnobtained, he suddenly
began to be angry with himself for suffering her departure, and increased his
anger with despair of her return; but giving that stop a dash with an
heroical presumption, that nothing was impossible, it somewhat settled him in
the hope of a new meeting: at last he began a strict examination, why his mind
should so run on Deltona; his sleeps in broken dreams of Deltona; his
dreams, that he meets Deltona? his waking fancy recounting the worth of
Deltona; steadfastly supposing a shepherds daughter could not be Deltona? But
the more he meditated, the sooner he received a foil, for lack of
resolution, so that by this time the want of the thing longed for was not so
great, as the means to obtain it dangerous: his fear, mistrusting the
practices he meant to set on work, and his desire importuning some
satisfaction: this willed him to repair to solitariness, where he quickly
ran over the rugged Fields of disquiet; sometime condemning fondness and
folly for consorting together, then exclaming on his own weakness, for
yielding to such degenerate companions: other-while he met with consideration,
that man was subject to many inconveniences; anon he encountered with patience,
a strange virtue to pull on heavier burdens; sometime he up brayded his
peevishness for his submission, after the Battle with Leonidas; and by and by,
he protested to abjure both the place and the company: But this seeming a
counterfeit stoutnesse (as if he had offended by such imagination) set him
forth to the recourse of his Friends; but alas, their Welcome proved like a
traiterous Banquet, wherein mischief counterfeiteth to betray a man, and
sounded in his ears, they were the enemies of Reposednesse; whereupon he
practiced again to be alone, had not so many by ways of Fancy confounded
him, that he durst not abide the fearfulness of being alone. Thus every
thing framed the vnframing of his health, and brought him at last to the unkind
acquaintance of a Fever, whereby he wanted orderly rest, and natural diet, the
soul bearing the body company in tollerating many changeable inflictings, as
it had yielded to a sence-weakning violence; sometime leaning the head against
a firmness, as if he meant to settle his Brain: otherwile the Arms crossed
with strength, resembled two strong Bars, which bound in the Heart from
flying out of her enclosure: Sometimes his Feet stood him in stead to pace out
his grief: anon a Palle^ seemed proud of the ease it affoorded: presently
the Ground was his resting place, and at last by his unrest, he could abide in
no place; which when the good old Placandus had discovered, the care and
opinion, which he conceived of his new adopted Son, made him pity his
distress, and put in execution his pity.

My Son (quoth he) doubt not to unlock the treasure of thy thoughts to me:
For as I have respected thy desert, and loved thee with the same respect; so
has my love ouerwatched thy grief, and that love made me partaker of the
sorrow: Be therefore perfect in thy former Wisdom, and think there is a
remedy to each desaster; by my Zeal, and thy own Virtue I therefore conjure
thee, let me know the occasion, whereby thou have admitted this
coffeehouse, and welcomed so unkind guestes as Grief, and Disquiet. Look
how a man hearing the sound of some sweet harmony, and unwilling to deceive
his sense of the pleasure, bids a silence; so stood our passionate Montanus,
while Placandus had thus broken the enclosure of his sullenness: and finding
Silence a tyrant maintaining this faction of distemperature against him, he
thus replied. O Father, this childishness, folly, and negligence, is worthy
reprehension! yet pardon my unwillingness either to be childish, foolish, or
negligent? And this I do protest, unless some secret influence had
ouer-wrought my spirits, no peevish Humor could have thus mastred me. For to
be plain; I like Deltona, I love Deltona; yea and live in the love and liking
of Deltona: But suppose not? this brevity marches with the same slightness:
For a world of secrets depend on my speeches, yet my tongue has now mittigated
the burdensome pain of my heart, which otherwise like a well stopped Oven, had
increased the burning heat fo^lacke of vent.

When Placandus heard the name of Deltona pronounced, you might have compared
him to a man meeting an Adder in an unbeaten path, and starteth for fear, as
if indeed the worm had mischieued him, so gave he a sudden motion
prognosticating further mishap: Oh (says he) what does Montanus attempt? I
think she has vowed her self to scorn, and proclaimed defiance against
Fancy: Else would she never have checked Fortune in her full flight of
happiness toward her? For Rugeo Duke of Fortuna tempted her constancy, and
attempted to persuade a more glorious alteration: but she to all our amazements
denied the honor, and ouer-prised this quietness beyond Courtly vanity: yet
(my Son) because Love and divine appointment has some secret in store, I
wish thee not despair; but use my credit, and thine own desert to hold the
beam, wherein Love weighs the fancies of women: only as a Caveat, beware of
Franio; for besides the general ill conditions wherewith he is infected; I
hear he whispereth, yea murmureth against thee, which proceeding from malice
has this property, never to desist, till with advantage it prove inficious.
Far be it from my obedience answered Montanus, not to make use of your
advice and encouragement, I will therefore by the great eye of heaven, go to
morrow to Coranus house, a day wherein as the world agreed to yield me life, so
may Cupid assent to afford me joy to my life; but while he prepares for his
journey, let us see how Deltona is willing to admit him.

AFter the Feastiuals had end, Coranus with his Deltona in love with Montanus,
and how they came together.
Daughter returned home, who poor soul very quickly began another manner of
Banquet: For somewhat too curious in the musing at her own weakness, to be
ouerswayed with conceit, she lived extreme pensive; now whether continual
pensiveness debarring life opens unto grief, grief unto distemperature,
and distemperature unto sickness, I know not; but she seemed suddenly
surprised; and neither waked with quietness, nor slept in soundness, she
would look sad, figh often, practice extrauagant actions, and yet say little;
which questionless kept the more in store against she discovered her passion:
But her Father was mightily perplexed, because his care extended to the highest
degree of regard; and her sorrow continued with the sorest manner of trouble:
therefore finding the body distempered from the mind, he settled to ouerwatch
her, if at any time he might discover the cause. For though Physic can cure
diseased bodies, when the Infirmity is known, yet has it small power over
troubled Passions arysing from hidden Distemperature: At last (some excuse of
business emboldning her to presume on his absence) his patience over matched
ignorance, and one morning acquainted this abruptness.

Surely (quoth she) I cannot believe my self the servant of Virtue, when I
find the best part of my self subject to baseness, and ^he rest carried with
as ill violence: An Gods; a Shepherd; a Stragler; an outcast; thus to
entrappe me, and reuerse my devotion? what worst temptation? where is the
goodness my resolution boasted of, ever countermanding incontinent thoughts?
what quite exiled? where is the magnanimity which gaine-sayed the Duke in his
greatness, and kept chastity upright in a simple Cottage? what? worn with
time, or out of countenance with allurement? why then I see continency has
secret enemies, and constancy hidden foes, who like traitors in an ambush
cause an overthrow by advantage? But oh divine Love, this foolish presumption
of ours is but a mockery to withstand thy violence; and the glory we seek in
striving against nature, an unkind detention from happiness: as though we
were t^xed and indeed desired to finish some excellent work, and yet kept
back our selves in beginning the same. I therefore recant and recall my
devotion; yet dear virtue turn not thy face from me, for before any occasion
open the way of incontinencie, I will seal my covenants to thee with my
dearest blood: and blessed Genius, what do I know, but thou have ouerlooked my
patience; and brought M^ntanus to pattern out the perfection of me^ for to
speak with a liberal truth, what ere he is, virtue and honor has
questionless taught him the way to full gracing goodness. Here those
excellent lights of her body were dimmed with moisture, and passion had so
racked her spirit, that though the smart caused her to confess any thing, yet
the extremity of pain, ouer-wrought the instrument of utterance, and with a
sweet stillness enforced silence, which her father was moved to pity, and
could not choose but accompany her with his tears, being once minded to have
discovered himself, but fearing to out-countenance her by being intercepted,
he suffered the humor to have a little scope, and so retired somewhat
pleased; he now know the cause of her grief.

AS these fears and sorrows had their several Montanus comes to Coranus
and Deltona.
passages between Coranus and his Daughter, one morning (yet not so early to
except against good manners) the opening of the outward Door gave them warning
of some Strangers access, and the old man hastening to unlock, the other found
Montanus in the Court with a ready message from Placandus to speak with him.
Truly (said he) welcome, and it the word welcome might last so long, as my
desire to bid you welcome, I should do nothing but repeat welcome. In this
extrauagant manner, as if Montanus presence had struck both a reverence and
delight, or his daughters grief entreated redress, he vsherd him through two
rooms into a low chamber, and bad him tarry till he prepared his
entertainment. But when Montanus beheld Deltona sadly couched on the Rushie
flore, they strewing the ground, and she bestrewing them with her Tears,
which (as water cast on a white Wall leaves a show of spotted impression,
seemed shadows of pale Pearls) in a kind of general pity he condemned
Distemperature for maintayning a quarrel against such rarenes: then finding it
touched him nearer, as liking the party, the eyes of affection bade him look
for relief; had he either known what to do, or durst have done what he
knew^ at last checking his foolish fear, seeing Love had in deed chayned his
heart to her devotion, by many made paces, as if Orpheus were again to pass
by the euer-waking Cerb^us; he approached unto her: To whom when he came, and
that a little disdain had scorned to be entrapped, whereby a womanly
remembrance hastened to lap her clothes together, which for her ease she had
unlaced: the strangeness of the accident overcame her former desire, and a
pretty shame to be watched, made her affrayde of what she wished; and her fear
only put in practice a confused flight, which Montanus durst not yield unto,
and therefore with a reverent speediness caught hold of her arm, almost bare
by hasty massacring the artificial garment, whereby his eyes settled now their
quickness, and new thoughts immagined a very fire to burn his presuming hand:
As for what was treasured unseen, he imputed that to the cunning of the Ieweler
who first laying abroad to the contentment of the beholders his smaller prised
Riches, does only declare, he has a Iem of that inestimable vallew, as may
well suffice to be a present for the greatest Monarch: with the like
disposition was Montanus transported, and therefore loath to loose the benefit
of what his hope assured was precious, he entreated her abode; and perceiving
her somewhat more tractable, thus disputed the matter.

Most worthy of the greatest worth; neither are tears the Antidotes of grief,
nor grief a prevention of trouble: yet do we complain to see Mortality the
tennisball of Fortune, now stroke low, then mounted high; anon beaten back
again, and at last banded quite away, little remembering that Virtue remains
immaculate, and brings Patience to ouermaster Adversity, which in very mean
spirits vpholdeth weakness and fraylty, by considering divine providence has
ordained, what neither industry can prevent, nor man's cunning avoid: but in
greater courages, when soever crosses chance, there must be a representing of
the Sun, which at the lowest seems biggest; and indeed affliction retyreth,
when she is with constancy tolerated: Deny not therefore Virtue her due in
subiecting it to so bace an enemy as Despair; nor Beauty preeminence in thus
disordering thy most fair amongst the fairest fairness: But leave this
sadness, and by the immortal powers I swear (which with an Emphasis he
pronounced) no coffeehouse shall affright thee: for my self will undertake
the office of a neighbor to comfort, of a friend to assist, or of: which he
would feign in a more kinder term have uttered, but not knowing what it was,
he left her to imagine, what it might be.

Here a mannerly stop, and a pretty fashion of amazement caused his strength
compassing her tender wrist to suffer some changes, and withal a sad kind of
look waranted his words to proceed from true desire: but when she marked the
orderlinesse of his behavior, and that a different grace warranted a greater
desert, then his present fortune: a blessed hope sent to her countenance the
Messenger of delight, and erected up a well proportioned body to her better
becoming: yet had a powerful reason in the time of this parlie so tempered
her joy, that she meant not over suddenly to consent to her own mind, nor
yield him too hasty liberty of presumption; like a discreet Master, who
though his servant be painful will not ouer-familiarly thank, but with good
order embolden him to go forward in his duty: therefore as if she could have
entertained an angry mislike, she thus replied.

Why, who is Montanus? that thus enueigheth against Fortune, as if honor had
read a Lesson of magnanimity unto him? or from whence proceeds this audacity
to poison my virtues spring with the dregs of peevish Love? Or what maleuolent
Planet was over this day predominant, that I must be thus intercepted? Believe
me, I am afraid I have played the truant in the School of Modesty, and
forgetting my rules by over courtesy allowed this stranger some hardiness:
Assure thee therefore, that in the very mislike of this boldness, all other
good parts are eclipsed in thee, and howsoever I could be persuaded to suppose
any goodness in marriage, Placandus son must take another course: for my wits
were never so enchanted to repulse the offer of a mighty Duke, and submit to a
shepherds flattery: but to be plain, I have devoted my self to another Saint,
and offered my incense on the pure altar of Continency.

When he had heard her out, as if a sudden fear fatally prognosticated some
following mischief, or sullen anger kept the motion of the tongue from true
liveliness? he stood amazed, scarce able to yield a reason why he was amazed:
like a man meditating in secret stillness, who looks, yet perceives not on
what, by reason the mind transporteth the use of sense to other purpose: But
knowing custom taught all women the denial of what they wished, as though he
would have chid her for such general peevishness he once again replied. By
the giver of my life, this peremptorinesse shall not accord with success, nor
will I hazard the loss of what I esteem so precious: Remember therefore the
wrong thou shall do to nature in obscuring her blessings from the delight of
men; remember the displeasure to the world, in depriving it of the fruits of
Marriage: Remember the injury to me, who can balance thee beyond expectation,
and boast his regard meriteth a better recompense, then despite. With this
the countenance began to readmit a pristinate excellency, and Deltona supposed
she saw a new Montanus; which questionless much imboldned her, and bade hope
entertain an other Joy: Now when Joy came to play her part, no device served
to counterfeite Disdain: only Wisdom limited her Passion within sure
bounds, and she somewhat relenting, thus answered, Well; if the meditation of
this business perswad me to a sweet mischief, I will not altogether reject
your remembrance; and if my Genius having hitherto protected my Faith and
Chastity, think it now time to supplant it with a necessary ill, I am content
to lay open the records of your merit and loyalty: Yet presume not in this as
an answer, nor allow Hope any liberty to suppose, that I shall ever be
persuaded to love. But he hearing her name Love; with a portly demeanor
stepped forward, and caused a mannerly neernesse to make impression on her
lips, saying withal. My dearest life; by thy Beauty I swear, it shall
return from whence it came, and thus will I keep in this loue-breathing
sweetness, that it may diue back again to the heart, and work there
convenient motiones of delight: now whether the sudden audacitie countermaunded
prevention; (or the grace united purchased atonement I will not dispute, but
she neither seemed so angry; nor so sad, only she told him, her customs a^ted
not so much as a circumstance of wantonnese.

BY this time the aged Coranus prepared his viandes, and coming unto them
found as it Corauus is pleased with Deltonas recovery, and Montanus company.
(...) were a new cheerfulness in his daughter, which loath to disturb be
framed all his speech to Montanus, saying; that it troubled him not a little in
the wanting iufficiencie to enteraine him. Leave off such ceremony (replied
he) I am more troubled to find Deltona pensive and distempred, but time and
her own constancy will frame her thoughts to better purpose. I do purpose so
indeed (quoth she) but to the greatest purpose; how shall I requite the
courtesy of the good Placandus, that wishes so well to an undeserving
creature? By the increase of our ^ockes I swear (quoth Montanus) he should be
a contrary to all men I have conuersed with, who did not more then wish well to
such all pleasing goodness: say you so: answered Coranus, then? would my
d^lling, my self, or my daughter had any means to inuit you to contenment
promise for your self good Father (replied Deltona) For company works
temptation, and Yongmens flatteries are the baits of out modesty, which they
suppose with a few idle praises to supplant. Nay (quoth Montanus) for my part I
will not abuse what is of worth with flattery, but think, that praises
proceed from necessity. Then belike (said Deltona) you make praising a
necessary help to flattery, that was cunningly concluded. But I hope
(answered he) you will not so hemme in my speeches with unkind exception. No,
no, (replied Coranus) be sure my daughter means well, whatsoever she sait^
and quoth Deltona, Montanus speaks well whatsoever he means: and Deltona
looks well (answered Montanus to be spoken unto. But words said she, be like
the passage of a ship, leaving no show behind of her course, and promises
resemble fading shadows. Then try performance (replied Montanus) virtue
appears in her liueliest colors in action. Nay, yet objected Deltona, better
live with want os something may be wished for then in certainty of every thing
breeds trouble. Why (quoth Montanus) is there such trouble in Marriage? I
assure you not (said Coranus) for if the parties love upon a sure ground, they
resemble a building strongly founded, and one part depending on another equally
deuideth the comfort: again, when inconueniencies arise, least the burden
prove too grievous, a yoke fellow helps, and between them it is made
lightsome, besides the tirannie of want is surprised with content, and mutual
agreement over comes necessity. But letting this pass (believe me) Montanus
we are very glad of your company, and since your adventure, me thinks there
appears (I know not) what alteration. But I know (said Deltona) to look
smooth, to dispute cunningly, to seem ceremonious, to bring presents, to use
protestations, and commit errors: and if all this tend to good purpose, I see
no cause of mislike, nor I of liking answered Deltona, but to despise all these
and make account of simple truth. Well, quoth Coranus, let us set our teeth on
work, as we have done our tongues, and for conclusion Deltona and I will
visit Placandus to morrow.

Thus passed away the time, and this meeting with the time, yet could not
Montanus (after thanks for his entertainment) but take a kind leave of
Deltona, leaving her indeed musing at the departing with these terms: My life
and Love once for all live to be happy, and suppose, there is more in Montanus
love then thou can imagine; so farewell, and let them fear ill, that wish
not Deltona to farewell. But least he should ouerprise this iollitie,
misfortune presented him to an ominous chance, the meeting with Franio: the
same Franio, whose willingness to mischief exceeded Montanus meets with
Franio, coming from Corauus.
his power, yet had his power compassed some hateful stratagems: The same
Franio, whose arm was broken in wrestling with Montanus, and whose heart
received infection from the sirruppe of malice: The same Franio who therefore
pryed into Montanus actions, not with a desire of imitation, nor with a slender
wickedness, only to find fault at imperfection, but with an implacable hatred
to supplant him, as the least occasion happened: every way playing the Monster of
Nature; neither daring to execute his own revenge, nor willing that he should
perceive him reuengefull: For still his countenance was as full of flattery,
as the heart of Deceit: This appeared in his ceremonious saluting of Montanus,
which continued with terms of good will, and by way of insinuation gave him
notice his Iorny was discovered; insomuch that he knowing excuses would
increase suspicion, in good fashion told him, how Placandus had entreated
Coranus and his Daughter to visit him to morrow. That is very strange (quoth
Franio;) for ever since the Duke threatened to steal her away, we never saw
her but at the Feast. Here might Montanus have easily stepped into a little
curiosity, as not yet acquainted with any certainty of this story, but loath to
be beholding to such a man for a discourse, he somewhat cunningly shifted him
off, and by excuse of business, as contraries, departed the one full of
diuolish mischief the other of honest desires.

When Montanus came home, he told his Father the substance and circumstance of
his Journey, the sickness of Deltona, the entertainment of Coranus, (...) ^lke
at their dinner, the manner of his departing, and the meeting with Franio:
withal he asked Placandus, if Deltona were borne in that Country? and the
reason, because he thought her behavior ouerstately, and that she managed a
different carriage from the rest. To be plain (answered he) it is full twelve
years since her Father and she were cast on shore by shipwreck; where ever
since they have continued with such applause and regard, that of him we have
esteemed as a man industrious and peaceable; and of her, as a very spark of
delight. Well, (said Montanus) she will be here to morrow, and then I per wade
me we (...) hear of news. But returning to Deltona, she finding it but
densome to keep her meditations so enclosed; conceived of relief in revealing
them. Truly (quoth she to her Father) my mind gives me, this man is but the
subject of some (...) for a time; else from whence comes this grace* this
gallantnesse? this majesty? withal? His last speech* there is more in
Montanus discouerre then (...) ^agme. Then belike, quoth Coranus, he spoke to
you of Love I cannot dissemble (answered she) he did, and it his own speeches
had not cond^ed me into the fields or expectation, he might questionless have
marched in the tryumpd or his virtuous conquest. Now was Coranus (...); for
remembering his troubles past, the greatness of Deltonas birth, and the
wonderful matters depending on her discovery; he trembled to give his (...)
to any ^paragement, and yet (...) not (...) thoughts with her own Story:
again in a prescience of Montanus, he suspected a worse displeasure, it it
should afterward appear that he had been an obstacle to his desires. Therefore
with a kind of indifferency, like a skillful Rider, that neither checketh too
hard for fear of disordering the mouth; nor yet gives that liberty to
countenance any headstrong defect: he thus replied. Well Deltona, hitherto
all is well; and since you are thus amended, think the Gods keep their mercy
in store, and powers inscrutible: Let not us then subvert the frame of their
workmanship by being wilful or preiudicate, but rather consent to direction
and advice, which resemble the props of a ruinous Building: Be therefore
affable; yet use it as a virtue, not imperfection. Love with relation to
deserving worth: yet consent not too soon, least thy good meaning be
misinterpreted. Consent at leisure; yet keep chastity secured, so shall thou
be sure of more desire, and more reverence: For though men say, they can be
contented with a virtuous familiarity* yet is the conquest of that, the India
of their treasure. With all be not an enemy to Nature, in suffering the fruit
to perish without use; but let a timely Harvest reap up the Come, least it
shed as (...) stands: Thus shall thou be worthily counted a rich manured
ground, and to that end were thou part of our first Fathers Inheritance. Oh,
but (answered Deltona) How shall our weakness over sway strong passions? Fancy
(...) no limitation, and offection is only subject to the outward demeanor, as
you see in the world so many matches concluded in despite of reason. True said
Coranus, where Virtue prevails not against Idleness, or good council
helps to see the deformity of Folly, which is as easily suppressed with
careful endeauours, as maintained with retchlesse liberty. But think you
(answered the half fearful Deltona) that inferior means can reuerse
appointment? Questionless (replied Coranus) Destiny is inevitable, and Fate
an Irreuocable decree, yet is it convenient to tell wilful youth the contrary,
that restraining their frowardness, they may suppose it a treason against
wisdom, not to be directed by the Clue of advise. Well (concluded Deltona)
let the Gods be Controllers of mischief, and men the possessors of reason.
Thus posted that night to the Kindome of darkness, and the next morning like
a bitter root thrown into a dish of sweet sirrupe approached, wherein Fortune
threatened to be in this manner maleuolent.

LIttle knew Montanus of Franio^s affection The Story of Franio, an envious
opposite, and rival of Montanus.
to Deltona, and less suspected what inconvenience the former parlee had
concluded, and therefore simply nourished the infant Hope of success: But
Franio as it were conferring with Malice, exasperated the same with these
particulars; that Montanus should so suddenly attain to be Placandus. Son:
then from the natural Countrymen so carry away the Prize with the good
opinion of the beholders, next amongst all others to triumph in his disgrace
and hurt: Lastly (as it were to despite him) to seem acceptable to Deltona;
so that with the spider only looking the venum; he soothed Envy to malign
him: Now when Envy saw her self Mistress of conceit, she desisted not, until
her associat rage were entertained. Rage again interdicting reason yoelded to
the violence of Hate* and Hate tyrant-like, boiling with the heat of cruelty,
meditated nothing but revenge: with these humors gathered Franio together some
special coadiutors, though Wicked idle men described:
not altogether so wicked as himself; yet easily seduced, as men intractable
to good, and therefore vnesteemed for their apparent bad, as men living in a
liberal opinion of conscience, therefore never solicited but for devilish
attempts, as (...) wilfully uncivil, therefore by their harsh demeanours
debarred from the better sort* as men wanting, having no settled estates of
their own, therefore careless from whom they did purloyne; as men supposing
Religion but a matter of Policy, and therefore scorning further fear or
punishment. To these besides mercenary reward, and strict alliance, he thus
colored the extremity of his malice.

Although I know your loves and resolutions concur in one course toward me,
whereby I shall but seem idle humoured; either to insinuate into the first, or
pupil the latter; yet must ^countenance the occasion of our now meeting with
the strength of reason, and say something to put you in mind, that life is a
tedious burden, ouerpressed with disgrace: It is not therefore unknown to you,
how far the pride of this Stranger (I mean (...)) has extended, insomuh,
that i^ before we maintained our estates with Wealth and credit, we now
remain impaired in the one, and scandalized in the other For, whose Flocks
and Herds have prospered, but his? Whose name is remembered, but his? Whose
remembrance applaued, but his? as though we durst not put our selves forward,
or seemed unworthy regard: yet this were somewhat tolerable, if yielding to
good parts, Virtue were prized accordingly: But with self ouerweening he has
set open the enclosure of an arrogant spirit, not sp^ring to despise us all:
For besides the hurt in the fall, and the disgrace in the hurt, he boasts of
it, and threatens further: Besides, Deltonas scorn of my good will, he
allows the contempt, and makes a tush at my desires: besides, the naming us
with carelessness, he cou^teth with terms o^ ostentation, and in a iollitie
promises strange things, which must needs agg^ate our misery, if we
prevent not the worst, which will follow by perceiving the ill, that has
chanced: For my part therefore I neither can brook her peevishness, nor his
presumption; but have thus concluded. To morrow (...) is to go with* her
Father to Placandus: now because the Duke, as a Prince stomaking her base
contradiction, is not to be worse abused with a meaner prevention, I mean to
intercept her Journey, and present her unto him, as if the Heavens had taken
no^ise of his passion. Be therefore lovers of your kindred, and credites; for
though fears and terrors should be proiected, the exployte will advance us as
men of action; my self will prostrate my estate in profuse manner before you,
and the Duke shall remain a powerful friend, like a maine Rock to break the
force of impious Violence.

When he had delivered his mind, they only considering the present complaint,
and falsely misconstring the renown of the business, soon consented to what
he persuaded (for indeed here were none to persuade otherwise then he would
consent unto) and so they promised with four on horseback, and five well
appointed, to be in readiness; which though it seemed very slender against an
enterprise of difficulty; yet had they reason to presume sufficient against a
silly Maiden, and old Man. But returning to Montanus; eye the next morning had
fully drawn the Curtains of light, his remembrance brought him to a kind of
fear, that he had ouerpassed good manners in not attending her, on whom his
very soul and thoughts attended: therefore he prepared himself, not
forgetting some addition of comeliness, as if indeed love had taught him the
way to handsomnesse; and so he saluted Coranus, and again and again the much
attractiue Deltona, whom Hope had long since persuaded to think on nothing,
but new delight. Thus passed courtesy counterchangeably between them; and so
coming along, they entered the freedom of other conference, until the
freedom and conference presented them to the bondage of Franios treason; who
had no sooner, a sight of them, but suddenly step^ed forth proclayming
quietness, and all should be for the best, considering resisting increased
reueng: whereupon one of them irreligiously profaning a Virgins privilege by
maine strength advanced Deltona toward Franios lapp, had not Montanus stepped
to the Weapon, as he laid it from him, and ran him quite through; whereby the
steely point catching hold of her Gown in his falling, made her fall too. But
when Montanus saw her fall, it was not a fear, it was a very despair of her
life hastened his race, and by ouer-great desire to save her, he might have
lost himself; but that Deltona cried, I am well, if you take heed. This
directed his other sense to perform the best part of his function, which saw
Franio hastening against him with his Sword drawn. Now was Valor almost
betrayde for want of Resolution, because on the one side Death appeared in a
desperate encounter; on the other, Shame in a da^tardly retreat: But when
Deltonas distemperature seemed to complain of the wrong, and that wrong in his
own nature but in mind of redress, he advanced the colors of a magnanimous
heart, and so as a man experienced in the many changes of execution, he wrapped
the Mantle about his arm, and told the beholders they should see a strange
sight, a man on foot and unarmed encounter with another o^ horseback well
provided* In which spirit he put by the blow with his left hand, and joining
close to the Horse, pulled him out of the Saddle with the other, not yet letting
him escape masterles; but continuing the action, put him self in possession of
the Beast, and scorning to defile his hands with slic^a poisoning bacenesse,
thought to pash out his brains, had not fear to die, taught him to
counterfeit death to live: so that Montanus seeing him sprawle, as killed with
the bruise, left him to wander to the borders of Desperation, and pressed to
another, in the same rage, making him loose his head for not keeping his Sword.

But who had seen Montanus on horseback with a Sword drawn in his hand,
might questionless have been deceived* for though the Horse wanted either
comeliness or quality to grace a man^et was there in him both horsemanship
and stateliness to beautify the Beast, whereby the Vilanies were quickly
dispersed; and Mischief complained, her servants had not well learned
instruction: only Coranus heartned with the likelihood of success, and
striking Bustofa Franios chief coadiutor, had submitted to his youth and
strength: but that Montanus undertook the quarrel, and with a violent
reuerse, divided the Sword arm from the body; which only gave him this
notice, He might better run away then fight, as having two Legs, and but one
Arm.

In the mean while Deltona freed her self of the dead body, and seeing Franio
panting, another slain, a third wounded, a fourth armelesse, Montanus on
horseback, and Coranus well, she was well too. Thus is the danger ouerpassed,
and the hurliburly appeased; only Franio miraculously recovering was glad to
live, glad to submit, that he might live; and in the submission excusing
himself by the power of love, which (though as a riual had been cause enough
of his confusion) yet because there wanted all those motives of Ielowsie, he
being so unworthy a person, Montanus framed a patience, and left him to the
dishonor of the action, entreating Deltona to take in worth this poor piece
of service, and set forward with a more emboldning comfort. Nay (quoth she)
fear and coffeehouse are now to act their parts; My Father therefore and I
will surely home, and attend the welcome of better success; In the mean
space, haste you to Placandus, and let the truth of the matter blason your
credit, and your credit with the circumstances exasperate the wickedness,
that the rest remain without grudging, and you without blame. This he wi^ed
him to do, and this he did, because she willed: but Fame of her own
disposition had quickly diuulged the accident, and one of the parties enlarged
it with many circumstances showing some property of goodness, as if Remorce
had bade him first confess, then be sorrowful; and last, endeavor
satisfaction: The truth of whose report, quickly struck both a fear and hate:
For who could not but fear the loss of that beauty, the hazard of such
persons, the slaughter which did, and might have ensued? Who could not, but
hate the malice put in practice, the manner of the treachery, and the parties,
that so showed them selves the slaves of villainy.

But when Placandus stomaked the disgrace, and that a little meditation had
considered on the shame, if such a president might pass with our, controlment
or correction. Montanus had much ado to dissuade him from present complaint to
the Duke, intimating that it could not choose but he must be made acquainted
with the matter by a general murmuring; now if it pleased him to apprehend it
as an exorbitant action, without doubt in his own honor he would take the
cause in hand: but if any other humor would suffer his conniuencie thereat,
then the better course were to supresse it, considering justice in
supernatural pity had awarded so good a verdict on their side. This modest
behavior of Montanus, produced more love, and more regard; more love for those
Virtues abounding in him; more regard, for that Wisdom, which knew to put
them to gracing uses. All this seemed yet insufficient to his satisfaction,
without bringing his Ship into the safe and desired harbor; wherefore he
thought it high time to vnuaile the Mask of his metamorphosis, rather then
thus to hazard his souls life, or tie his own greatness to this course any
longer; besides, delay was a kind of torment to his passion; and the fear of
being ouer-watched with malicious eyes, bade him dispatch: to which resolution,
he fastened his anchor-hold, and Fortune once again thus dallied with him.

DEltona safe at home, thought this safety an exceeding disquiet; yea a very
intermixture Deltona is resolved to know what Montanus is, and what shall be the
issue of their love; and so goes to Marpesius Cane, where she entertaineth
Montanus.
of torment, considering she saw so many tokens of greatness in Montanus, and
found her heart violently carried in the stream of affection toward him, and
yet was debarred the happiness, which her hope flattered to enjoy: like a man
brought to the delight of a dellicate Orchard, and by standing on a Bancke
ouerlooketh the same with a longing desire of entrance, according to the
Gardners promise, and yet is delayed with excuses: Whereupon she assured her
Father, her felt was up, and she would refer it to no other trial. He
poor man still doubtful, durst not answer to the purpose, but thought by
cunning rather to mittigate the violence, then with reason to resell the
argument which perceived by Deltona (as if indeed she could have welcomed an
unmannerly guest wilfulness) she bade him not trifell, but conclude with
effect. Why then (quoth he) we will go to Marpesias Cave, as well to be
thankful for the escape of our late peril, as to present our Offertorie,
which we have not yet done: there shall the Anchresse warrant your success, or
control to a new course. Glad was she of this: glad was he of her gladness:
the one allowing any thing, might add life to her desires: the other,
disalowing every thing, might disparage her worth: yet the next day he brought
her along, not desisting from a mild passage of speech tending to
instructions, by the way.

TO this place (O happy Fortune, that conducted Montanus comes to Marpesias
Cave, and finds Deltona.
him to this place) did Montanus single her out: for as the working of his
spirits drove him to pace out his fancy in the fields, he saw Coranus and
Deltona pass the Grove toward the Cave; and knowing the limitation of his
aboade would be quickly measured: he very covertly entered the Sanctuary, as
soon as Coranus had yielded her the freedom of being alone, and in a kind of
distemperature betwixt fear and gladness hasted into the room of Statuas,
where Deltona was off ciously disposing her affairs. But when she saw her
Devotion intercepted, and Montanus so strangely audacious, she neither knew
what to think, or to say: for her thoughts were at variance between Desire
and mistrust, and her speech was stopped with amazement; so that she almost
fainted for fear, had not fear in an other nature, least she might be
surprised added life to her fainting. On the other side, when Montanus saw the
error of his rashness, the first liveliness was quite rebated; and the
conceit at her distemperature, made him check his folly for being no better
advised; at last finding ouer-shamefastnesse to be more childish then man-like,
and that a retreat would rather show a demissnesse, then audacitie a fault, he
thus framed his treatise of pacification.

My most dear, and dearer then my dearest life; Fortune ever maleuolent unto
me, has now taken pity upon me, and weary of her tyranny, brought me to
this place of delight: By Loves chief happiness, I therefore pray thee, make
my Hopes legitimate, and my worthily bestowed Affection, the fortunate child of
contentment; least you ouerpasse the glory of a strange conquest, which may
add to thy desert, what the greatest thoughts can imagine, and I repent too
late for submitting Princely majesty to the censure of a Shepherds Daughter.
Till this, her amazedness at the accident rather tolerated, then admitted,
what was done: but hearing him name a title of that consequence, a new joy
quickly revived her spirits: like a friend in ambush reuiewing a private
Combat, and seeing some dangerous inequality rusheth out either to divide the
contention, or assist the weaker side; this made her thankful to the Nimphs,
as if her Orizons had wrought the propitiation, and accepting it for answer
from the Oracle, (as if she had known before he had taken this counterfeite
upon him) she replied.

Little needed Montanus, (for in that title my liking consented to Montanus) to
have boasted of Genealogies, or names of Dignity: so that (to be plain,) I
was ever carried with the stream of Fancy; yet durst I not betray my
forwardness to the violence of Passion, until I was assured of her respect to
virtue, (to whom, seeing my vows have specially combined me) be thou
virtuous, and be Montanus, or Prince, or what thou will; and I shall then love
thee for virtues sake. What call you Virtue, answered he, by Marpesias Altar?
By the sacred Nimphs, by these starlike Eyes, (which I will charm with my
kisses) I mean truth, faith, constancy, marriage, and what soever Deltona
would, that I mean: But think you I can live in this fire unconsumed, and see
this excellency without desiring? What should you desire? (replied she:) I
hope you will not your self destroy your self; or affecting my estate, seek
to diminish my wealth: for if you like me for goodness sake, will you attempt
to bereave me of that goodness, whereby you would like no more? Far be it
from my fraylest imagination (said Montanus) to prosecute any sinister means
against your own will: for by this Table of Contracts I swear, I intend
nothing less, nor applaud any thing more, then to behold you like a fair
Planet in a beauteous evening; or a pleasant Plant in a well manured ground.
Then (concluded Deltona) except incontinent thoughts, and incongruent actions
to honor, and my own resolutions, use the benefit of victory with
moderation; and so I confess my self subjected: Yet let me know to whom,
considering I determine to challenge the performance, as you enlarged the
promise. First, (quoth Montanus) be this place, and these Statuas, witness of
our League; and Heavens confound the violation of our truce, and maligners of
our loves. With that they mutually embraced over the Altar, according to the
manner of Contracts; then kissed: and finding it a circumstance strengthening
the band of Love, kissed again. Then Montanus swear to let his desire run no
further at random, then to chaste entertainment, until conueniencie
solemnised their Marriage: And Deltona protested, no alteration should dis^ her
opinion of him. Thus gave Love a plaudite to this meeting; and Success seemed
glad to be the period of such reciprocal liking: Yet Deltona perceiving the
place and opportunity agreeing to his remembrance, which already procured
certain wanton changes, with a pretty kind of allurement enticed him out of
doors; which he very carefully yielded unto, as well to maintain her
judgment of his loialty, as to support his own expectation for the fruition
of such inestimable worth.

Here met they with Coranus, who more then astonished at his Daughters being
alone with Montanus, seemed so confounded, that they verily thought they had
done amiss in being authors of his fear: but he scorning the interception of
every obstacle quietly pacified him, that nothing had passed, wherein Verue and
Honor was abused; nor shall any thing proceed without liberal satisfaction,
if a Crown and Kingdom may counterpoyze her worth. But this troubled him
more, as suspecting he was deluded, till Deltona razed out the scruple of
Diffidence by making demonstration of his Princely demeanor; and reassured,
nothing had, nor should impeach her vows to Chastity, but death. Well (quoth
Montanus) I see there are many entries, windinges, turnings, and difficulties
in this Laborinth of Love; and my own Fortune tyreth me with unkind
meditation; but I will dally no longer then to morrow, if you come to
Placandus, a strange truth shall direct you into the plain discovery of my
Story: But mischance once again, to their better trial, thus outfaced
Delight, and interposed this crosnesse.

Never did any express the conditions of wickedness in more ample manner,
then Franio betrayeth Deltona to the Duke: with his story a^loue to Deltona.
Franio: For first coustome made the greatest faults scarce seem
imperfections, and sin like a bottomless pit; (from whence it is easier to
keep ones self from falling in, then once fallen to recover out) had already
entrapped him: Next vild suggestion bussed in his peevish ears, as good
execute something to recover his credit, as be still suspected: yea hated in
the soil received: then the bond, in which he was tied to his Coadiutors, as
if the mischief they were brought into begged a redress and satisfaction:
Lastly his own malice taught him, there was no hope of constant love, where he
wished and determined confusion: So that hamm^ring on the Anuile of Envy he
quickly framed this piece: After many watchings both of Deltonas retierings,
and Montanus actions, it was his chance by Coranus attending at the door of the
cave to suppose his daughter entertained there a time of devotion, whereby he
devised to obscure himself, and by reason of a hollow Pine saw unseen, and to
his souls torment heard the kind parting, and appointment of Deltona and
Montanns, whereupon he went to Fortona, where Duke Rugio, was at this time*
resident, and rather to satiate his own revenge, then for any love to the
Prince, he yet made love the excuse of his revenge, telling (though fortune
helped not his d^ers to express his duty toward him) he might with little
company shrouded in the Caves, where the Beasts do use to shade, recompense
his honorable passion with her moderate Rape: For she is determined to go to
morrow to Placandus, where, and whither Montanus with vain promises has
intised her; so that if he please to take notice of her peevishness, and his
contumacie, it was apparent there was (...) danger in the attempt; and his
Faith could in nothing so well be seen, as in venturing life and credit for
his sake. But ere the Duke entertained this motion, we shall hear the Story
from the beginning.

AFter Katabasy had brought the Tartarians The story of Rugio Duke of Fortona
and Deltona:
to subjection, that live between Caucasus and the Caspian, his valor quickly
disciplined them in martial exploites, and wisdom reduced them to ciuillity
and state of government, which consisting in nothing so much, as magnificense
of a court, and well ordring of Cities, he presently erected after his own
name the mighty Katabasy somewhat near the Northen ^ore of the Hircanian or
Caspian Sea, and having (...) ar^ed Ickatasa Queen of the hither Scythia saw
the pleasure of many years, and the towardly (...) of too sonns: Of whom Zalby
as eldest succeeded, and at this time enjoyed the prerogative of a great age:
Fortona the youngest had the province of Zaga as a large Dukedom designed, who
induced by the royal example of his father built (...) the Estern Fortona, and
had questionless made appearance, from whence he proceeded: but that death
stomaking his over boldness of his bodies constitution, as promising long
life, called him to an unkind account, and in his manly progress showed the
strength of a stronger arm, by which occation was this Rugio left like wax
fit for any impresion to augment his prodecessors glory, or submit to the
vanity of his youth and liberty: but he, like a discreet traueler, that not
presuming on his own experience, chooses a skillful pilot for his iorny,
selected men of honor and virtue to manage the affayers of his Realm, with
whose assistance he made his government complete: the hope whereof induced
Busimorus King of Bactriana, to bestow his Daughter Palestra upon him in
marriage, whom though his prerogative did not fully grace with the height of
Majesty, yet being a mighty and absolute Prince, flourishing in the very pride
of years, and beautified with outward and inward excellencies: her love and
liking ouerswayed further conceit of ambition; so that she lived to the great
applause of the people, and indissoluble respect of the Duke, the rather,
because she proved a gladsome Mother of many towardly Children, had not a
lamentable vntowardness disprooued her a Mother at all: For quietly traveling
in her hopes to see them prosper like men, she was interdicted from making any
further progress by the archbaily of the Earth, who condemned her as
inexorable to his perpetual mansion, whereby the princely Rugio had many
causes of sorrow, and only one of comfort in the expectation of her issue, to
which he added this covenant, never to e^angle his opinion with any stepmothers
deceit: Thus remaining a widower, and assured of further succession, by reason
his sons Philano and Kasteppi marched arm in arm before the colors of
Honor, he began to be careless of a second wife, for that as a man graced
with external comeliness, and other causes of entisement, he might either
command a wanton Love, or make choice of his own satisfaction, and had he not
in this manner over liberally paid tribute to his pleasure, surely both for
government over others, and many choice accomplements in himself, he might
well have been inserted in the Records of good Princes: yet this must be
alleged, the vice never grew so contagious, that it extended to spoil or
rauishment, otherwise then as gifts and greatness compassed.

In the time of this wantonness flourished Deltona, amongst the Shepherds of
Nagania, like an especial flower in a curious Garden, on whom the work man
bestowed extraordinary cost and labor. To her amongst others, Franio, whether
persuading himself to like, or because he would be thought capeable of some
goodness, framed a motion of Love: but she (as if you had seen a Cup presented
to a man willing to drink, and perceiving poisonin the bottom stands
amazed, and so desisteth, suddenly started back, and hireing for the time an
extraordinary scorn, assured him, she conceived, that the heavens maligned,
and the earth found him burdensome: with this answer, the cumbersome weeds of
despite quickly choked and ouer-spread the fruit of true Love, and so falling
back to his own inclination, he presently nourished a kind of hate, and
hate not only wishes ill, but oftentimes practices means of revenge; though
some Politicians more cunningly contriue their business, making the outside a
false insinuation, and covertly work vilainy and deceit: in which humor did
Franio enter familiarity with Guleppo a man very near the Duke, and for the
performance of some pleasing matter of great trust with him: For you must
understand, Rugio did not so privately satiate his inconinencie, but that
diverse according to the liberty of that time, gave their several verdicts:
some saying, sin was intolerable in Princes, by reason example quickly
reduced the people, and the persons gave easier notice of their imperfections,
like spots sooner seen in pure linen, then courser cloth. Others would not
dispute so vehemently, alleging their actions had diverse Privileges, and
themselves were sacred from reproach: some whispered; that a second marriage
(considering his years and ability) would divert his carelessenesse of the
common wealth to a more sufficient regard: others alleged his love to his
Children, (least the secret emulation of a Stranger might be prejudicial)
detayned him through diverse examples from subiecting them to a Stepmother: Some
feared the expense of the Treasure, which must needs be too profusely consumed
in charge of Apparel, devises, and rewards; others took in good part that
course, because diverse private men were enriched, and the money dispersed within
the Dukedom: Some true lovers of virtue (as far as they durst) counseled the
retreat to the secure fort of Moderation; others framed themselves to the
Princes appetite, nere disputing who esteemed them else for bace and demisse:
Of this sort was Guleppo, a man ever about the Duke, and employed only for
matters of lasciuiousnes: To him did Franio declare the perfections of Deltona,
and by way of circumstance, inferred the facility of the Rape, which might
questionles be effected without infamy, danger, or repining. This brought him
to secret conference with the Duke; who searching no further into the ground of
his malice, supposed the fellow was willing to make a fortune by any course,
and therefore with reward, for that time dismissed him. But presently
proclaimed a general Hunting, which corresponding with their Summer Feast,
made him an eye witness of Franios description; and the first interuiew so
pleased his apprehension, that he took the benefit of the two days
following; and to color his meaning, pitched up diverse Tents, imparting the
best of his game with a plentiful hand unto them; and the honest Shepherds
imputed his access to an honorable affability. Now when true Regard had thus
satisfied his fancy, Opinion (though many times the mother of Errors) did not
now deceive his judgment, but (as she was indeed) he supposed her excellent,
and without doubt of a better hope, then Coranus child. Here some secret
wrought a strange alteration; for Honor awaked the remembrance of Virtue, and
assured him, it was not to be betrayed to transitory vanity: yet loath to give
notice of any distemperature, he commanded a return; and one time taking
Guleppo aside, urged him with invention and endeavor to help his Lord and
Master. But alas (for all his first confidence) he seemed as a man distracted at
her admirable presence, rather then officious, like him, which having sore
Eyes, and presuming on comfort by refusing his solitary Lodge, little knew the
Sun was more obnoxious unto them) and protested he was never so ouerwrought
in conceit; for he utterly despaired in the success. Yet (quoth the Duke) thou
shall carry a Present to Coranus, and a Jewel to Deltona; which accordingly he
did: But as soon as his trembling fear had delivered the message, al
impatient she replied. Thou subtle enemy to frailty, and bace broker of
wantonness; hence with thy trash, and assure thy careless Master of honesty, that
virtue remains like an inestimable Diamond, which is still a precious Stone,
though never so meanly obscured, and content represents a strong foundation;
whereon lay what burden you will, it easily supporteth it. With this answer
Guleppo against his will returned, and the Duke in a manner stomacked the
contempt, had not the manner of the contempt made him suppose there was some
excellency she meant to keep him from, which without doubt by the denial
inflamed him the more, and according to the nature of violence drove him
without respect to go to Coranus, assuring him by a Princes faith he meant no
circumuention, but an honorable marriage: this wrought his admittance to
Deltona, who seeing she was to wrestle with mightiness durst not clogge her
self with over many impediments, but with a Sence-rauishing Modesty appeared,
as if she had known her own Metamorphosis, which so inflamed the amourous
Prince, that with protestation of remaining a kind loving, and constant
husband, he persuaded her to accept of the Duchy of Fortona.

This offer Coranus would have taken hold of, as thinking it a happiness from
Heaven, that her Honor should be so well preserved, so prosperously
reintegrated: and a fortune on Earth, that his fears and dangers should at
last receive their period; had not her answer amazed them both. Although (most
mighty Prince) it were impossible for me to deserve so great a portion of
happiness, so that in all wisdom I might welcome the blessing, as a donatiue
from the Gods: yet has a certain resolution impugned all thoughts of marriage,
and my Vows tied me to the expectation of everlasting quietness in a single
life. Deltona refuses to be Duchess of Fortona.
By the small benefit of my Beauty (for which you have let loose the stream
of liberal Promises) I therefore expostulate at your hands, to remember your
self, that is to pacific your Greatness, from being distempered with the
denial of inequality and meannesse; if not, then let a hard hearted
stubbornness assure, I will admit of nomotions, tending to the disenabling of
my poor resolutions.

This sharp repulse much disquieted the Heroic Prince, and confounded the
simple Coranus; yet the manner of her delivery, and grace-gracing
Graciousnesse somewhat pacified (though not altered the passion: For he
reasoned, Coustome had taught Women denial; and the strongest Towns with time
and industry were subjected: so with a kind of impatient patience ^e
departed. But absence used him more unkindly then other men, because by often
iournies (which the vehemency of his passion occasioned) he thought Fortune
very spare; that still enticed him to the enchanting abode of beauty, and
allowed him no charm to prevent the peril: he complained on Love as
tyrannous, that bound his affection to an unworthy subject, and urged against
Nature, for being too too partial; that she against nature should despise him
with scorn, and he (against reason) should prosecute a matter of such
difficulty: so that every thing (for the time) conspiring against him, the
violence at last conspired against her; either by policy to allure her to the
Court, where delicacie and pleasure might fashion her to other humors, or by
strong hand to steal her away: for which purpose Guleppo for the Duke, and
Franio for Guleppo; and both, as venomous spiders in an unswept house, with
industrious subtlety attended, and as you have heard, acted one part of the
Tragedy already, which although diverse in a manner complained of: yet because
it was a stone of the Dukes own rolling, he made only show of mislike,
neglecting indeed the true use of mislike; somewhat discovering thereby the
errors of greatness.

For men of power in this world sometime by strong hand bear out the actions
of others having relation to their pleasure or profit: sometime extenuate the
fault, and by way of circumstance excuse the same; like artificial Painters,
whose greatest cunning consists in the curious shadowing of things, though
the rich exclaim; and poor resemble them to flies escaping the Cobweb by
strength, when the little ones are catched and destroyed: sometime in mere
wilfulness they repugne reason and persuasion, either not perceiving nor
suffering other to tell their faults: or under color of state, imagine it
demisnesse to be attentive to each exbrobration: sometime finding the secret of
delight to consist in variety, one vice is quickly let in after another, and
so the Brokers for the first are politickly discarded; like Flowers worn no
longer then their scent lasts; and new Factors cunningly admitted: sometime
their affairs are managed with Alexanders fortune, who seeing the Gordion knot
too intricate to untie, showed the force of a strong arm to uncut. In which
manner played now the Duke his game; for he embraced the deviser of this Plot
with gladness, and put it in practice with speediness, so that he welcomed the
next Sun in solemn intercessions, not to obscure his face the day following,
and hasted to the ambush accordingly, wherein an hours tediousnes had not
detained the^, before Franio gave the watchword, Il tempo, and they leaving
their covert The Duke steals away Deltona.
suddenly surprised Coranus and his daughter, as an unlooked for tempest
turns the sails about, when the sight of harbor cheereth the poor
afflicted Sailers. By this means is the Duke in possession of his much desired
happiness, and seeing her advanced up before him, commanded away; none remaning
but the aged Coranus weeping, and devilish Fran^o laughing. But who had beheld
the beauteous Deltona in this captivity, would have sworn constancy meant to
out-braue mischance, and an honorable mind was not to be suppressed with
misfortune? For she was not altered, nor much dismayed, only stomacking to be
so circumuented, in his arms thus spoke. Traitor both to virtue and Majesty,
take heed of an intent of wickedness, least divine Justice gather all the
servants of Revenge against thee, as for the least hope to expect any thing,
but hate and disdain; let my scorn of thy presumption make thee answer; but
concerning the thought of wantonness, by the euer-reuerenced Marpesia, I
swear these hands shall first rende out my heart, and throw it in thy face.
Be not so extreme, sweet and fair Deltona answered the Duke, I protest nothing
is meant against thy chastest wishes: be only pacient and moderate, letting
time work his will, thou being willing unto tinnes working. Thus he brought
her to Fortona, and indeed (as if he had known her to be the mightiest
Empress of the world) gave order for her entertainment accordingly.

NOw plays Report her part, for mingling certainties with untruths the
uproar of the The Duke steals away Deltona through Franios mischievous
device, who is slain in the business.
City, and the muttering of the people, shuffled together many and strange
opinions: because a seldomnesse of doing amiss, makes small faults wondered
at; and the favor of the party wronged strikes a compassion, which quickly
breeds scandal and repining: For how-euer favor or power may support an
unjust Action, or protect an Offender from the penalty of the Law; yet can
wise men see the conniuencie, and the better sort will exclaim on the
partiality.

This appeared in the Dukes stealing away of Deltona; at which some murmured,
and diverse presumed to reprehend the incontinencie. Amongst whom the youthful
Egerius Minion to Philano the Dukes elstest Son; as if some natural respect
compelled the remorce, assured the Prince, that the Duke much impaired his
renown to deal so violently with such modesty and goodlinesse. Peace (quoth
Philano) be advised in the reprehention of Princes; yet because thy virtue is
pure without diffused compounds, I ouerpasse the inuection: and seeing thou
desire she should be choycely entreated, I protest to loose the benefit of
my birthright, before she have cause to complain.

This Egerius was son of a Stranger named Bertosas, dwelling in the City,
whom those attractiue Virtues, which grace Princes themselves, did so
accompany, that all men affoorded him their love and liking; and the Duke
applauded his Sons choice. Thus for the time, was Deltona quieted, the Duke
in some hope, his Son in strange expectation, and Egerius in a kind of
repining: But thus is Coranus in all despair; as much vexed with Franios
laughing, as his Daughters loss, whereupon he hasted to Placandus, and
stuttered out the matter to Montanus, as though fear had made him forget an
orderly method, yet not omitting Franios despite, who indeed (supposing
mischief insufficient without bosting of it) followed grinning and clapping
his hands: but when Montanus had heard him out; like the Kings of Beasts, who
once enraged roareth and beats the ground with his tail, not in the nature
of lamentatio^, but because he cannot be revenged: so stormed he, and seemed
in such manner wrathful, that the rest tre^bled: for without further
reasoning, taking only his simple she ephooke, he flung out of doors and
almost at the house met with Franio crying, Deltona was gone, and dare thou
Villain, (quoth he) triumph in such a loss? with all letting a blow flee at
his head; either fear, or the smart; or fear of more smart, made him fall,
wherein his cowardly submission discovered the fault: But Montanus bade him
dispatch, leaving tediousness and falsehood: With that, he began his
discourse, had not the other interrupted him, exclaiming; Oh divine Justice?
Let not my cares be defiled with this wretched breath-broker nor my hands
forbear to purge the earth of such a venomous monster; but let him perish in
his own shames, least others be impoisoned with his infections, and
mischievous life. This he uttered with great fury, and fury not passing
without action, struck with such quickness at his head, that the brains
spurted from their broken enclosure: The death of Franio.
which not regarding, he hasted toward Fortona, and have increasing
distemperature, gave him no leisure to meditate on the diffusednesse of his
journey. But when Coranus was assured of his departure, he corected his own
slacknesse, that made no more haste, considering the many secrets and strange
occurrents, which his only knowledge must discover: where upon he followed
with speed.

Now what estate was poor Placandus in, who left alone with dead Franio, and
seeing the Hurlyburly had gathered the Inhabitants together, knew not which way
to excuse the murder, nor durst begin any circumstances, but the plain
truth; which after his reverent Age had revealed, and the pitiful story, with
an unkind scope deciphered the wickedness, they quickly converted all
suspicion and hatred for Franios death into counsel, the strength of comfort,
and chiefest proppe of Placandus life. Why then (quoth he) am I indeed
revived, that like men, like honest men, like honest wise men you will accord
unto reason; and like friends, yea true-hearted friends, you will not fail in
adversity: let us therefore give the dead his due Ceremonies, and live our
selves in good hopes, that Montanus and Coranus will return with glad tidings.
But other affairs detain them beyond expectation, and we must have to
Fortona, to know the certainty.

Finis Libri primi.
THE SECOND BOOK OF the History OF TREBIZOND.



Imprnited at London by W. White, for T. Downs and E. Dawson. 1616.

To the right Honorable Countess of HVNTINGTON.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
BEsides the scandal imposed upon idle Discourses, there is ever a wanton
error depending of presumption in the choice of some Patron: so that when
other men had flattered my own easy ouerwrought conceit to be an aduenturer
in the troublesome sea of Opinion: I thought it most befitting to look out for
some handsome props of supportation, and so have placed the Daughters in one
circle with the Mother: Yea, such Daughters, and such a Mother, that me
thinks you move together like fair Planets in conspicuous Orbs; from whose
influence can proceed nothing, but sweet presages: So that hereby you cannot
choose, but breath with her one spirit of happiness; and I be cheared with
strong assistance against any calumniation. I pray you therefore pardon this
intrusion, and examine my Character no further, then my confidence that so
great Honor and Worth, will not dissent from their own properties, and give
me leave to wish your merit the Wishes of such hearts, as leap for joy at the
naming of loveliness and Beauty: To both which, with all other excellencies
in your Honorable ^^^lfe,

I am truly devoted: To. Gainsforde.

The Second Book of the History of TREBIZOND.
SVch was the haste Montanus, Montanus follows the Duke into the City to
see what will become of Deltona who is discovered to be an Emperors daughter.
made after the Duke, and Coranus after Montanus; and of both to deliver
Deltona: that you might have deciphered in Coranus the properties of Fear and
Hope: his Fear, in the untying the intricat knots of Deltonas fortune: his
Hope, that the Duke would not degenerate from honor and virtue. And in
Montanus, of Love and Anger; his Love, supposing nothing impossible to be
attempted; his Anger, assuring to be compassed, what so ever might be
attempted: and thus went he forward unaccompanied, until Coranus ouertooke
him entering into the Town, which they found full of rumors by reason of the
accident. This imboldned him to bid Montanus stay awhile: for Wilfulness
repents, when Reason opens the eyes of Understanding, and his Counsel must
be the Thread to direct him out of this Laborinth. Counsel how you will (quoth
Montanus,) so it tend to recover Deltona. Then must you be attentive a while
(replied Coranus;) for strange and dangerous is the Story. Is it time now
(answered he) to tell tales, or to tryfle? No, no: Pleasure and conceits are
not suitable to this feate and haste: besides, in matters of necessity, delay
opens the sluice of Inconvenience. Tush (said Coranus) you mistake me much.
But O eternal Powers! whom do my eyes behold? Coranus meets his brother
Bertosus in Fortona.
Bertosus, loyal Bertosus; my brother and dea^fellow Bertosus? With that, they
saluted a comely Old man of the City, who moved with the first uproar, and
like a right Naturalist thirsting after News, posted to the Court to be
beholding to Truth: for having a Son named Egerius, of secret respect with
the princely Philano the first borne of the Duke, he presumed on his knowledge
and credit; but thus intercepted by Coranus, whom in thirteen years he had
not seen, nor ever supposed to have seen, as long since seeing the never
satisfied Ocean swallow him up, he was confounded: the strangeness making
them both as strange, until the ecstasy moderated, gave Remembrance leave to
play her part; then appeared Knowledge and Comfort in full life; and after a
second ceremony of kindness tuned the organs of Speech to this purpose. But
does Brizaca live (quoth Bertosus?) I, if Trezoboro be preserved (said
Coranus?) Then has the Gods mightily favored (Coranus replied) Bertosus. And
miraculously protected Bertosus, (answered Coranus.) Now was Montanus astonished;
for these new names, increased new thoughts; and the strangeness of the
nouelty rebated his first heat, distempering him with a trembling desire. Oh
(said Coranus) now shall you hear a discourse of some trouble! be therefore
more considerate (good Montanus) and let Bertosus salute thee. With that, a
mannerly ceremony passed between them, until Bertosus counseled to return
to his house, where the benefit of Advice might be thus far aduantagious
unto them, that the Duke made acquainted with the matter, would questionless
proceed in a new course.

But ere they were entered into a full passage of speech Egerius all ready
enamoured on the excellent Deltona, and tormented to se another in possession
of his delight, came home to his father very sad: yet was he the sadder for
coming home, because ignorant, whom his father accompanied, his determination
of solitariness seemed disappointed; and but that the gallantnesse of
Montanus, as it were naturally attracted a respect, his first course had
entertained a further fullennesse: yet being a Courtier, who seem to be the
professors of humanity, and indeed arrogate to themselves the essential
knowledge of courtesy and good manners, but especially induced by some
regardable appearance, he saluted them with a very good grace; whereby delight
it self seemed to play in the greeting. For Egerius countenance (not so much
as down'd with the difference of Sexes) kept an extraordinary gravity, and
Montanus comeliness an unaccustomed temperature, which pleased Egerius, and
Egerius pleased Montanus; who demanded many questions tending rather to
necessity then curiosity, answered without ambiguitie or circumstance.

In the mean while Coranus and Bertosus pace^ out the very secrets of their
knowledge, and concluded to participate the same to Egerius, who having the
greatest interest in the matter might remember himself, and remember the Duke,
that Deltona was far surpassing her self; whereupon Bertosus not without a
reverent contrariety taking Egerius by the hand, thus began. If the Gods had
not their Judgments inscrutible, and united to supernatural power, a
prerogative beyond man's capacity, we might slightly estimate their
mightiness, and step into presumption of our industry: but because they will
give us notice of their all working preeminence, miraculous and strange
accidents draw us to admiration, and that men may be subjected, even the
greatest estates feel the scourge of affliction: This appear thin the
Discourse now intended. For concerning your self; no longer Son, nor
Egerius, but Egerius and Deltona discovered to be brother and sister, the
Emperor of Trebizonds (...).
princely Trezoboro. Concerning Deltona; no longer Deltona, nor Coranus
Daughter; but priselesse Brizaca. And concerning us no longer the reputed
fathers of Mengrelius children, but loyal vassals to the Emperor of
Trebizonda. With that he unfolded many intricate circumstances of his birth,
loss, and fortune; whereby it appeared, that Egerius was son to the Emperor
Mengrelius of Trebizond, by the name of Trezoboro; that Deltona was his twin
Sister and called Brizaca; and Coranus with Bertosus were brothers, to whose
trust the charge of their infancy was committed.

But think you, did Montanus hear this? or did he wonder at the hearing? or
remained he silent at the wondering? or seemed he amazed in the silentnesse?
Surely he heard, wondered, kept silence, and (...) amazed: yet quieted his
thoughts; and gave Time a little scope to play with the nouelty, expecting a
prosperous event: But Egerius adding a new spirit to (...) to wardlynesse, and
yet retayning his wonted affability, replied. Seeing it has pleased the Gods
thus to make you the instruments of their power, let not me be ingrate^ either
in the diffidence of their (...), (...) neglect of regard to you: whose
honesty, love, and pains, have made trial of so many inconueniencies for our
sakes: Yet least the Duke coupling Power and Wilfulness together, yield
Intemperance full liberty (and so we may ^ment, but not redress the misehiefe)
I think it requisite to awake his sleeping honor; by sounding the trumpet of
strangenes into his ^ares and telling that Fortune has an (...) and to relate.
(...) was ^ered with such an allacrity of spirit, and (...) of speech, that the
hearers promised to them selves, what so ^uer the expectation of a Prince could
afford whereupon the next morning they accompanied him to the court, and
Egerius saluting the princely Philano, was answered as if love had in sumpathy
pleased one another. Then (quoth Egerius,) let this love acquaint the Duke,
that a matter of importance is to be discussed, and how I am to impart the
circumstance. Here omitted friendship no part of her duty; for the willing
Philano presented himself before his Father, and certified their access and
the cause.

But whether a fear to be prevented of enjoying Deltona made every conceit a
suspicion of her hazard, or some uncomfortable misdoubt fore-tolde another
interest to the thing he usurped; he quite degenerated from his own Customs:
until Philano seeing his Egerius attend unregarded, conferred again with the
Duke; and he sommoning his Counsel, as if the Commonwealth claimed a
redress, was at last ouer-ruled by them to pensil out his virtue in more
lively colors: whereupon Egerius encouraged, when the day of hearing lifted up
her head to be seen, advanced his speech to be thus understood.

AFter Samarchanus (most mighty Duke) son The History of Mengrelius and
Kalucki.
of Rhecus, Son of Demorgus, the ancient Inhabiter of the Caves of Sarmatia,
had reduced his people to a civility by his discipline, and with the example
of valor countenanced their courages; he attempted the Empire of Terbizonda,
and preferred for prevailing, so relied on their obedience and loialties, that
Colchidos, Pontus, Iberia, and Capadocia were also subjected, with which
renowned; a time of peace afforded him leisure to recompense the time of his
pains with the reward of delight. But he apprehending the royalty of other
Monarchies, applied himself to immitation; never desisting, till he had his
Government and Court, a very Nursery of state and glory: so that you might
lawfully have given that Lustrum the preeminence, considering the people had
the practice and observation of glorious things, and Samarchanus himself
seemed a man complete in all circumstances of prosperity.

For concerning the gifts of the mind, they were such rare qualities, as
contained more virtue in their operation, then show in the worke-manship: yet
such work-manship as made adellicare object to the eye, and enriched the
possessor. His direction in public affairs consisted of such parts, that
very aspiring minds rather submitted to him, then soothed their own ambition;
and in his private Court the palace was a receptacle of the nobly disposed,
and well inclined attendants, whom neerenesse to the Prince, made rather study
for his Honor, then their own pleasure: His state commanding affection, for
moderation of greatness, rather then fear for mightiness of power; yet was
his power of such sufficiency, that diverse Kingdoms were in tributorie
subjection: His liberty admitted Millitary exercise and honorable expenses,
neither lavish to satisfy a vain ostentation; nor too sparing, to discover
any defect that way, His goodness in general a sufficient subject to talk of;
and in particular so many by-ways to perfection.

As for Fortunes portion, she distributed it with a plentiful hand, and
contrary to her self, with a judicial foresight: His Territories many and
rich; yet none so rich as well governed: His Magnificense augmented in goodly
Buildings, and costly furniture; yet neither so much respected, as their
orderly use observed: His Treasure amassed by regardable providence without
exactions or cruel penalties: not yet omitting, what princely bounty should
remember; nor admitting, what powerful licentiousness might infer: His
royalty beautified with ceremonious pomp and regal necessity, his
happiness consummate in a glorious Queen, towardly Succession, honorable
Allies, dutiful Attendants, sure Subjects, and friendly Neighbors.

Touching the Bodies alowance, the first Parent of the earth boasted in her
own workmanship; for his Liniaments had a decent uniformity, and Favor
triumphed to be settled in Majesty: His Countenance retained as well an amiable
Cheerfulness, as manly Gravity; yet neither inclined the one to childish
Effeminatenesse, nor the other to secure Exaltation* His Speech was ever
reposed, and the manner of his carriage such, as neither showed any wrested
motions of Bounty, nor degenerating conditions of Princely demeanor: and
although the continuance of a long age might have brought her accustomed
tediousness; yet health corresponded to his lustiness, and an able body
emboldned him to the natural discharge of his Fancy; so that the greatest
were his favorites, and the young Russian Duchess Balutasa his Spouse. Of whom
(most excellent Duke) the curiostest Rhetoric will rather manifest a
willingness, then ability to speak; and in whose praises the best
sufficiency will shorten the journey to her estimate. For in being so great a
person, her worth appeared the more, (like an illustrious Carbuncle set out to
the best purpose, that we may perceive how Art can beautify Nature; and
because a reverent love tempered other passions with Reason, she lived famous
to the world, and gracious to Samarchanus, joining to other blessings goodly
Sons, and fair Daughters; divided into such couples, that for Men, who might
compare with Kalucki and Mengrelius: for Women, who could match with Arcabella
and Pisana.

These being the choice fruit of a flourishing Graft had perfected the beauty
of this Garden, and made an vpshot to prosperity, but that the contention for
a Kingdom eclipsed the glorious sunshine; and disdain of partnership in the
wearing of a Crown, ware out the print of blessed continuance: Yet did the
life of their Father contain ill will within limitation, and his death make
the strife the greater; because it was for such a soueraignety. For no sooner
paid Samarchanus his debt to Nature, yielding to the sommons of not so hasty,
as vndalliable a Commander, leaving Balutasa in sorrowful mightiness, his
Children in doubtful expectation, his Subjects in suspicion of now troubles,
his adjoining Confederats in opportunity of revolt, and every one fearing
their own loss, by the loss of so good a Prince: But Kalucki through the
prerogative of his Birthright, claymed the Diadem; which clay me was yet
reclaymed by the great working spirit of Mengrelius, and partial affecting
love of Ballutasa, who imboldned with her alliance in Russia, and the Northen
Europa: but especially presuming on her sons virtues; with which he had
drawn out the peoples loves to the greatest length, resolved to endeavor his
advancement, so much more gracing him, by how much opinion thought him to
surpass Kalucki, not differing from our kind of Cockering mothers, which
commonly dally with the youngest, and without apparent reason make sometimes
their affection partial: yet had not her wilfulness been carried with so
strong a current, if other stepps had not helped her up, as some special
coadiutors, amongst whom Corambello Duke of Raganda, Putrasso Steward of the
Palace, and Hardubax Lord of seven Islands, were men of great sufficiency.
This made her go forward, and her forwardness bade him not faint in the
project; whereupon incited with his Mothers resolution on the one side, and the
glory of the exployt on the other, he prosecuted a wonderful attempt, and she
sommoned the assembly of estates, urging many reasons for the preferring of
Mengrelius.

But Kalucki all impatient at so unlooked for beginning stood amassed, rather
sullen with anger, then affrighted with fear, till at last, the general
silence (for who durst presume in a cause of such importance) reduced his
distemperature to conceive, that if the project were a matter premeditated, she
then had a faction prepared, and his sufficiency was doubtful: But if it were
only a Mothers partiality, he supposed by the intimation of Treason, and the
penalty to depose her Regencie, and contract their Security by honorable
insinuation. Why Lords (said he) shall Samarchanus living so well, be now
rewarded so ill? that daring not presume to immagine him the least wrong, you
now go about the greatest injury, by manifest repugnancie to neglect his
appointment, and odious defamation to disenable his Son? And Mother, (though
unworthy the least letter in so loving a word) either will it fall out to your
shame to dishonor so well deserving a Husband: or to my proch to be vpbrayded
with Bastardie? else can neither the law of Nature prefer any besides my
self; or of Nations give so much as a color to a younger Brother. But as for
you, whom stricter allegiance combineth to the observation of our state and
person, wherein dare you hassard your selves, and suffer Judgment to be
abused, as though you respected not, whether the drink were poison, so it be
brought in a Golden cupp? As though Mengrelius, because more effeminate, were
therefore more fit to revenge your wrongs: And Kalucki (because a peevish
Woman, thinks not so fashionable) must therefore be disseised of his
Birthright? Take heed in time, as yet your Providence may dam up the fluce of
our Justice: but if you suffer your selves to be carried against your duties;
by death I swear, no submission shall make an atonement. Now to you Sir: (an
unpleasant countenance threatening his Brother with a following mischief)
remember that Principality abides no concurrent; and prosecuteth an Enemy to
confusion. Besides, the name of a Traitor, resembles a consuming Leprosy,
which infecteth all the body, and leaves scandal to posterity. Do not
hassard therefore the benefit of life, by vain Security; Nor be so besotted
to think, that a fleeting look, or bace popularitie can alien the loyalties
of so many trusty Subjects: But assure you, I challenge this Empire as
hereditarie; thy self for a Subject, the rest obedient, and all confederats
assistant. Thus somewhat forgetting his first intent of moderation, he
approached the royal Throne, and had without interruption ascended, but that
Ballutasa interceded, and in this manner set the fire of Rebellion on a blase.

I deny not but thou may boast, as the immediate successor of Samarchanus,
and wast in times past reputed as a blessing to a Mother: But do not think
we are so simple and inconsiderate, that having the choice of two seueralles,
to admit the unworthiest. I do therefore without evasion or circumstance,
condemn thee for froward and badly disposed; and conjure these rather to take
compassion on the prostrate necessity of the Commonwealth, then pity thee
for a private complaint, seeing those degenerating humors, which make Princes
odious, are already ripened in thee: the remembrance whereof has exasperated
my displeasure, and moved these to remove thee, as preiudicate. Besides, it
is the will of the Gods to advance a Steward, which may husband their Plenty,
and not ruin their Inheritances. How can it then equipage mine Honor, that
the name of a fond affectionate Mother, should make me forget the duty of a
provident Princess? Wherefore you lovers of Goodness, it is for your sakes, I
digress from my self, and for the common prosperity I disable Kalucki;
considering Obedience is rather the servant of Virtue, then titular Dignities;
which can seldom be incident, where Deformity makes loathsome. Pride
ouermastreth, Hear^burning incombreth, and Tyranny threatens a very conuulsion
of your government.

But as a forward bitterness might have aggrauated his disgraces; the wrathful
first borne of this disquietted Queen in impatience made a sudden approach
unto her, and directed a most dangerous blow (for by this time quickness had
unsheathed the blade,) as if the unpleasing messenger of Revenge meant to
proclaim the strange death of an Empress, had not Mengrelius waled with his
own body, and by securing her, sustained the smart of a grievous wound;
whereby seeing the fire was kindled, he betook him to his Guard; and making
forward, had the assistance of other coadiutors. Now when Kalucki perceived the
gates of Treason were set open, he exclaymed on the mischief, and commanded
the true lovers of their Prince to perform their duty. Whereupon many set them
selves on work, and the place bred rather confusion, then the confusion
dispatch; so that every one shuffled up some action or other. Mengrelius set
Policy and Valor on work to extenuate the fury: Kalucki countenanced Rage
and Despite to punish the reuolters: As for the rest; some pressing forward
could neither avoid a pitious slaughter, nor keep possession for the body to
stand upright: others (unwilling to be so endangered) were ere the midst of the
hall had shortened their journey, either in the throng stifled, or by the comers
in, compelled back: Some used such weapons for necessity, which in quietness
were borne but of fashion; others having none wrested from such, as could not
resist: Some took the Palace furniture, as not regarding how they helped them
selves; others made every thing offensive, as not caring how they injured the
rest: Some exclaymed on the revolt, crying, The Gods protect Kalucki; others
ready to innovation, wished Mengrelius Emperor: Some with unseasonable
wisdom persuade a pacification; others with strange hearts fraughted with
Treason, ran away with the violence.

THus was a dangerous unquietness begun Kalucki dispossessed of the Empire by
his younger brother Mengrelius: seateth himself in the further Tartary.
with a few men's deaths, which no doubt had ended with the loss of many men's
lives, had not Carambello, Putrasso, and Hardubax, taken the cause in hand for
the Empress, and by force ouermastred Kalucki: For Carambello rather addicted
to Rallutasas wilfulness, then fearing the division of the Empire, made yet
this fear a color of his pa^iality, and so contrived the matter, that Kalucki
consented to a surceance of his rightful claim, and subscribed to a
compulsiue deposition: This necessity conuented, and the day of truce in
Bellonas Temple ratefied these particulars.

That Mengrelius should reign during life: but Kaluckies successors, or him
sealfe ouerliuing to reposses the Diadem.

That Kalucki, and as many as would make trial of his fortune, after certain
sums of money disbursed should within twenty days depart the territories of
the Empire, and within twenty howeres the Verge of the Court:

That if Mengrelius by the benefit of marriage were blessed with the effect of
marriage, the comfort to be frustrate in loss of their lives, and the name of a
Father forgotten in respect of the Male children:

That if Kalucki taking notice of these covenants infringed, within one year
convicted not the cleceite, the government to remain subject to election, and
no man culpable to resist any vnestablished:

That no subject to the Empire, should repine at these particulars, and the
abettors of any couen remain faulty, as in case of high Treason:

Thus was Kalucki compelled to take his farewell of an ungrateful Country, and
disobedient people: But magnanimity showing rather a scorn then a grudging at
their disloialties, left them with out ceremony to the reproach of their errors,
and posted to the hope of better fortune, wherein his expectation was not
deceived. For no sooner abandoned he these Confines, but he was acceptable to
other Countries: and the place, which after Kalucki settled in Tartaria.
much variety settled his abode was the further Tartary, a place yielding a
receptacle for his state and with a strange fortune opening the Gates of the
magnificent Coralla to his wishes. Here in short time, he proved a worthy
soiorner, the Country rejoicing, where he remained; and the world trembling,
whither his fame was dispersed. For honorable industry increased Riches,
Riches amplication, amplication reverence, and reverence fear; which though
against others engendered hate, yet toward him, was the cause of love, in regard
he was loath to acquaint them with any displeasing Newnes; and they respectious
to give no occasion of inconsiderat neglect: but remained in one unity of
love, as he did in one method of discipline.

When Mengrelius saw his Joy triumph over Anoyance, and that he had leisure to
actuate his Ambition, he proclaimed a public Celebration, as if he meant to
make the day of this Peace, a glorious Feastiuall, whereby the people were
acquainted with unacquainted Ceremonies, and confirmed the manner of the State,
knowing when to appoint, and to whom proportion both Honor and respect. This
was made manifest, because they solemnised his Coronation with willingness,
beautified his Pomp with cost, augmented his Triumph with Presents, and
diuulged their good Opinion with acclamations. And truly (most mighty Duke)
wheth^r he had a desire in him self, to make his Renown a worthy subject of
Report; or that his Fathers example suborned his industry, he performed so
many things tending to perfection, that every one adored him as a God in the
world, and magnified the time as the years of true comfort, wherein he might
have tempted the revenger of all contempt with scorn of alteration, had not
remembrance of the Oath to his Brother, and Couenaunts to Carambello, dashed
out all ouerboldning conceits: much like an April tempest chancing in a
moment to the dismay of a Gardner, boasting of a sun-shyning morning to grace
his handy work; this strocke a pensiveness for a time, and did indeed add an
outward countenance of demission: For considering, that in having a Wife, the
blessing of a Wife was to be quite extinguished; and the name of a Mother a
most wretched title in her own Children, by reason of their murder: Who could
but tremble at the conceit, and exclaim on the unadvisedness of such
enforcement? Till at last, Time the consumer of all things, ware out the print
of that fear. Youth, the maintayner of Carelessness, would needs have
recourse to Pleasure: Nature, an enemy of Devises, scorned to be
counterchecked with Appointment: Fortune, the Mistress of of Alteration,
stomaked the steadfastness of man's Proposing: and Love, the Father of Fancy,
raged to be suppressed with a peevish Promise: Whereupon they conspired in a
league, and brought him to the house of Wantonness; where he was welcomed
according to his worth, and ouer-esteemed for his wealth and greatness. For
whether he meant to satiate an incontinent liberty, here were such, as knew
the power of a Princes dalliance; or whether he meant to limit his affection
to a virtuous choice, here were such as secured chastity with a victorious
army of good thoughts; but when that Judgment was to be given, though his
communication extended to variety of disport, he only liked his sister
Arcabella to their greater despite; whom favor for beauty, beauty for
countenance, countenance for comeliness, comeliness for delight, and all for
Majesty, had so extraordinarily graced, that neither kindred interposed her
neerenesse, nor conceit of mischance to come rebated his desires, but he made
trial of her modesty, and laid down his Crown as the reward of consent:
and she considering that Menarelius marieth his sister Arcabella.
Emperors make no Prentishipp of their Contracts, without delay or nicetie,
took hold of opportunities hayrie top.

Thus was the Marriage happily concluded, and speedily celebrated with glorious
Triumphs belonging to state, and stately continuance appropriate to Kings, so
that Ballutasa as a gladsome Mother rejoices, and Arcabella as a happy wife is
comforted, till requited with an husbandly duty; and making show to the world
of an irrecouerable loss by her swelling Womb, an unkind remembrance checked
her iollity, and affoorded occasion to others in this manner to descant. What
means Mengrelius now, to perform the covenant so unnaturally granted? or
violate his oath so dangerously made? Shall an Emperor be a bloody executioner
of his own Child? or a Tyrant over his Country? Must Trebizouda be reproched
for immanitie, or reproved for perfidiousnesse? Can it stand with natural
piety to destroy faultlesse Infants? or regardable Honor to tryfell out so
strange a composition? Surely Content repineth at the inequality: For either
shall Kalucki have occasion of new War, or a wretched Murder continue an old
Peace.

NOtwithstansting these doubts, though Arcabella might have made him a joyful
Father, Mengrelius kills his first Son.
yet he ere nine hours; caused her to be a sorrowful mother. For the Child
was marked to the house of death, as soon as the birth gave notice of his
sex; which done, unkindly pacified. Arcabella vuderstood it must be so; and
the too late repenting, Balutasa was assured it should be so. Think not yet
any outward Mask so obscured the continuance of sorrow; but many perceived the
Emperors allacritie dulled, and the very life of the Court discouraged. As for
Arcabella, whom dellicatenesse made more subject to grief, grief manifested
in her the effect of grief, sadness, and tears, which by reason of neglect,
resembled Spots made by the envy of an unlucky hand on a white wall; O^
vnluckly stains disgraciously chancing to some pure Linen: nor was this
ungentleness so satisfied, but enforced as many sighs as tears, and pangs as
sighs; with whose violence the heart had broken, but that the spirit driven as
far as the passage of the mouth by the life of the tongue procured some ease.

O inscru^ible powers (quoth, she) whom the frame of (...), and the wonders of the
world compel to acknowledge, can you seem so inexorable, that after so many
and forcible intercessions, I yet am destitute of relief, and subject unto all
wretchedness and oppro^ry. For is not the glory of my life quire raced, when the
benefit of having children, in the having them is disappoynted? Who else
lamenteth not, when this blessing is wanting? Who else complains for enjoying
the Prerogative. Better had it been, that I had never been the loving child of
a happy mother, then to be now the unhappy mother of an unfortunate child; whom
impartial Destenie has not only denied, but an unnatural Father
despightfully murdered: Murdered? yea too too cruelly murdered; yet witless
and impatient? To complain of my Emperor must proceed from passion; for he is
bound to honorable strictness, and I am subject to duty and alleagence: To
complain of Fortune, will detect more weaker ^s: for she distibuteth with
carelesnes, and is inconsiderate in her favors: To complain against the Gods
is execrable: they framing all things to good purpose, and we vnframing them to
bad appetites. What shall I then do? cast over the account again, and then
even I, hapless Arcabella must support the burden of this horrer; I consented
to disappoint the first borne of his birthright, and am now revenged with my
first borne lives right; I infringed the law of nature: and am now tormented
against the law of all nations; and am now (...) because my hopes are abortiue,
and am now without all excuse? For I was an Actor in Kaluckis tragedy, and
must concontinue an agent in Mengrelius misery.

These broken speeches had not their passage in stillnesse, for Sabina her
quondam Nurse pressed with duty and care ouer-watched, and ouer-heard her
distemprature, and for fear she might have burdened her tender heart with to
^ore conceit, discovered her self, and thus presumed to try whether counsel
and comfort had made a league together. Leaving (most peerlesse, and long I
hope to continue most peerless Princess) to agrauate your grief either with
as much grief, or more tears; I hope my former vnd^ Zeal shall ^fie, that
the imparting of your sorrow has divided the same, wherefore I thought it part
of my duty to study for redress, which the God^ I hope have consented unto
in this manner: Let a journey be made to Delphos; There will the Oracle either
disanull the unmerciful co^ts as over ruling by divine revolution, or ratify
the cruelty, as a distributive justice in revenging abus^ wickedness in after
ages: by the one must Kalucki remit the composition, as unreasonable, by the
other Mengrelius maintain it, as prodigious,

This was so well liked of Arcabella, that present joy chased away the enemies
to health, grief and despair, making way to cheerefulnes, with whose help
beauty appeared in more lively colors, and so she hasted to the Emperor,
whom finding at leisure, or causing other affairs to tarry her leisure (after
some debating of the matter) she confirmed to her opinion: yet for a while she
was unanswered by his musing on the success: resembling a man ready to taste
of an enchanted Cup, whose property by shedding or saving the drink
warrenteth a chaste or dissolute wife: and reasoning thus, what do I now
attempt; If she be found constant, it is no less than I expect; If
incontinent, it is that I would not know; without doubt I will therefore make
no such trial, but in this point Mengrelius kept not correspondencie. For
though he impugned the journey by many arguments, yet at the last he promised
Arcabella to go in person, and sealing the covenant with an amorous kiss
dismissed her, to entertain a greater delight, and applied himself to the
convenient dispatch of the Progress.

Stay a while (my Egerius, quoth the Duke) and let us be resolved, what
adventure has enforced this hurliburly in the City: With that they might
hear the Alarum-bell of the Haven ring out, and a Messenger discovered King
Zalbys approach, whom a strange accident had drawn down into the nether
Comagena; the dispatch whereof and neerenesse to the place where the Duke his
Nephew was reziant, gave liberty to a motion of kindness to put it self it
practice, and thus occasioned his access to Fortona.

IN the settled time of King Zalby^ government, The history of Xantippus and
Encelidon.
the neither Comagena was famous for the River Gozaxs, playing the wanton
betwixt the Palaces of the Lords Cusanach and Soltimos, which as you see a
Messenger bring glad tidings to one, and so return to another, ran through a
pleasant valley to Cusanach, and back again to Soltimos; proportioning both
the sides of a Peninsule, with a current of 15. Leagues. For first, it went
forward with iollitie to the East, and then (as if it had been proud of some
good News) with a stately compass (least too short turning might hinder his
good speed) whirled back again to the West; and by often recourses at last
acquainted the inhabitants with the birth of two sons: two sons famous to the
world for Natures first life* famous in the world for lives strange love;
famous from the world for loves unmatchable continuance, which made death
stomach the (...): For as the work finished in them both showed but one person
in both, though parted in motion: so the minds of both grew with their bodies
to a Sunpathy, and resembled sweet music made by the well tuning the strings,
only their names accorded to this difference, that Cusanach taught Xantippus
the duty of a son, and Soltimos showed Encelidon the affection of a father:
and surely how ever greatness breeds many times contempt, the secret enemy
of conversation, and absolute hinderer of former amity: yet here did the
fathers live without grudging, and the sons proportion their affections
accordingly; as not debarred by the distance of their dwellings from
counter-changeable meetings, and inseparable familiarity, in eating, lying,
living, and loving together; keeping time in their actions, as if they had
determined to conclude some wonder of friendship in the world, and indeed
appeared like Twinne-brothers of one mother; both in habit, fashion,
demeanor, and what circumstances soever may make any thing like another: yea,
it grew to that rare and admirable effect, that when Xautippus had with strange
conflicts resisted his passion, least the love of Eucasta, beauteous Eucasta,
and in being beloved of Xantippus fortunate Eucasta, should divide the love of
his friend, he yet continued the same Xantippus, and would not permit Encelidon
to depart from Xantippus, nor could indeed Encelidon digest any thing, but
what liked Xantippus.

AT last Fortune despighted to behold such a mirror of immutability, bribed
the son of Venus, (as the Poets use to sing) to sow the seeds of Division;
which how ever they rooted, were sprinkled in Encelidons heart, and began to
spring forward, as sweetened with the graces of Eucasta, which like the
translucent beams of so me fair Planet, showed tokens of admiration, rather
then knowledge: so that Encelidon could not but love Eucasta, Eucasta could not
but like Encelidon, because he was like Xantippus, and Xantippus loved Eucasta
the better for liking Encelidon; till the controversy grew betwixt a passion
ouerruling Reason, and true Friendship ouermastring Idle humors: But when
Encelidon perceived no way of comfort, but by being a traitor to Zantippus,
friendship prevailed, and he chose rather to die, then to be found dissoyall;
so that after many circumstances of coffeehouse, he would have killed
himself, had not the working of his spirit compelled the tongue to entreat
Death not to be too too cruel; by which occasion with the fortune of
ouerlooking his de^neanor, Xantippus was made acquainted with the error of
Encelidon, and Encelidons distraction exposed both fear and trouble: yet the
admirable innated love expelled the combersome enemies of his quiet. Ielosie
and Mistrust, and by way of kindness, he expostulated with Encelidon the
cause of his grief, distemperature, and now desperate attempt: But as you see
a guilty man disconsolare with the judgment of Conscience and Law concluding
his final end: so stood Encelidon having nothing to answer, but amazing
looks, and a dejected countenance, wherein Xantippus might read the mischief
pretended, and by his abashed unwillingness to reveal, found (and at last
compelled him so to confess) the first discovery to be true.

Encelidon had no sooner cursed the day of his Birth, Fortune, Love, Heaven,
Earth, and Hell, that thus had tonspired against his Faith; but faynted with
remorce, and as if he would plead the defect of Nature, not Malice, fell down
in Xantippus arms, and bade him not spare to ridd the world of such a wretch.
But he in a strange contrariety comforted him with prevention, and that there
was nothing remediless; yea coniured him by all the names of life, manhood,
settled love, inseparable contracts, and what else a sweet oratory might
infer, to raise up his spirits; and if need were, not to desist: For although
his infamy and dishonor must leave a scandal to Xantippus in his partiality;
yet what would he not do to save the life of Encelidon: Cheer thy self
therefore, and only change the name of Encelidon, and Eucasta can know no
other, but that thou art Xantippus: For Xantippus only can discover, who is
Encelidon. Be not dismayde, I prise thee at a great rate; and rather then
Encelidon should miscarry, Xantippus will be without Eucasta. Here grew the
contention between them to some unpleasant particulars; the one pleading for
Death, the other scorning every thing but his Friends life: At last persuasion,
some reasons, and Xantippus enforcement, compelled him to take the name of
Xantippus upon him, and so the love of Eucasta overcame his fear, and brought
him to reap the Harvest of his strange desires. But when Love came to flourish
his Colors, (Oh pardon the fortune and error of Passion) how could those
beauties appear? How could those sweet embracements continue? How could that
ever burning impression remain in stillness, and he not be thankful to
success for the same? Yet fly Friendship from sight of this treason. For
Encelidon like a man ravished fell senseless in the arms of Eucasta, and
Eucasta confoun ded at Xantippus ecstasy, striued to help, and helped when
she knew how, though she little knewwhom; till at last (as no extremity can
last) Encelidon recovered some life, and with passionate tears showed tokens
both of trembling fear, and enraging desire: but pitiful Eucasta wretched in
the ignorance of her Xantippus distemperature, accompanied him with a sadder
weeping. Now when Encelidon saw to what straights he had driven his Bark, and
that the delight of his soul was disquieted with the error, all impatient he
discovered he was Encelidon, and not Xantippus; leaving out no circumstance,
which either might reveal his love, or publish the glory of his Friend,
beseeching her to love him nere the worse for taking this course in her love;
nor Xantippus the less for loving his friend; nor her self for being beloved
of Encelidon, who had once made choice of death, had not the love of Eucasta
persuaded life, and Xantippus commanded, that Encelidon should live. But alas,
Eucasta durst not trust her own senses; she heard the voice of Xantippus, she
saw the shape of Xantippus, she felt the motions of Xantippus; only he swear
he was Encelidon. Some times she feared a policy to try her weakness: some
times her fear accompanied with Ielosie, that Xantippus mistrusted her
Constancy: some times a pretty kind of anger swear to Xantippus, this was too
great unkindness: some times she entreated him to desist from this
circumuention: and at last on her knees coniured him by the secrets of her
love, to love his Eucasta, to be her Xantippus, and suffer Eucasta to be
nones, but Xantippus: till Encelidon added the oaths of the sun, and by other
circomstances of more particularitie brought her to the right path of
understanding, that she was resolved it, was Encelidon. This a while her
patience forbear to stomach, and love to her Husband forbade to discover: But
as when you see the Fire put out by supposing the Ashes to cover and hide the
same, and yet the next day some Sparks of life are remaining by remoouing
their Veyle. So fared it with Eccasta, she wisely raked in her Discontent with
the coldest Embers she could, till Misfortune brought her to toss them
abroad, and then appeared, that the fire was not quite extinguished; that her
conceit was not altogether eased, but stomaching more and more to be so
betrayed, she acquainted her mother Iugeroth with the History from the
beginning: A woman of that working spirit, that if the Country had affoorded
means of setting Ambition on work, she would have scorned the name of a
Subject: A woman so imperious in her will, that no action was unattempted, nor
after the attempt undetermined, which might add wings to her desires, though
sometimes they tended to lasciviousness: A woman of that implacabillity, that
once subject to the error of mislike, before she would admit of remiission,
she dared discover an absolute malice: A woman of that apprehention, that the
least abuse was an indignity to her house, and then followed a prosecution of
revenge: This appeared in the discourse of the fearful Eucasta; the memory
whereof stroke such impression, that the impatient Iugeroth without care of
Conscience in plain terms urged the Murder of Xantippus, and to be effected
by the hand of Encelidon: nor desisted she from reason and argument, as the
breach of Honor, the hate of her Husband, continual heart-burning, secret
mislikes, the discovery abroad, and the renown of the revenge, as if because
the body was distempered through the pain of the Head, no other remedy served,
but to bereave it of his capital member without further search of redress.

To this was Eucasta soon persuaded, as supposing her honor and renown
ecclipsed, yea broken in pieces, and so suffered her love to receive the same
foil: besides (as it were insorcered, with her mothers deuillish Impostures)
she was the less careful of her duty, and therefore dared to reason with
Encelidon to the same purpose; yea sometimes to Xantippus instead of
Encelidon: For but by their names she never could know one from an other, who
seemed to divert her from such immanitie enforcing some arguments, though to
little purpose, whereby if the fear had continued, he might indeed have
suspected his friend, but the worst part of such a conceit was quickly cut off
by the hasty (and peradventure unlooked for) coming of Encelidon; who once
again prostrated his open breast to Xantippus, and bade him not spare to rid
the world of such a recreant traitor, whose wavering loialtie was subject to so
many temptations; with that he went on in the strange discourse of his murder
concluded by his wife and her mother; which with many protestations he
disclaimed, and proceeded so far, that after Xantippus had denied to
entertain the least thought of suspicion against him, he stabbed himself in
many places, till prevented from the full effect of his fury, Xantippus was
enforced to a new course; at last his help brought recovery and encouragement
seemed a reconciliation to the eternal strengthening the bond of friendship.
But Eucasta all impatient at Encelidons slacknes, and more then persuaded, how
Xantippus was made acquainted with the fault, presently fled to Mastricot,
where after a pithy intimation of her disgraces, and the wrongs offered her
fathers honse (to which her mother added forceable reasons) she raised a
strong party, and determined to repair by force of Arms, what her slender
policy (as she termed it) had almost ruined: so that Xantippus was compelled
to stand on his gaurd, and (when he perceived, how he which only lies at
defense helps himself but a little withdefence) after to make an offensive
war. To this Encelidon, and the house of Soltimos was auxiliary, and the two
friends gloried in their constancy, and cared not who stomaked the success of
their business: till at last the many slaughters and distractions of the
Provinces pleaded for redress; and king Zalby was cornpelled in person to come
into Comagena, to limit or restrain these mischiefs: yet wrought his presence
no other atonement, but the surceance of the war. For Eucasta (or Iugeroth
in her daughters behalf) would not hearken after any reconciliation; and
Xantippus denied to be divided from Encelidon, because Encelidon concluded
never to be separated from Xantippus.

THis was the occasion of king Zalbys coming King Zalby comes to Duke Rugio
to Fortona.
to Fortona, at such time as Egerius related the History of Mengrelius,
whereupon they all dissisted from the work in hand to attend the Duke who made
it a matter of respect and specialitie to remember the Kings worth, as being
his Uncle in blood, and father for directions and corroboration in his estate;
whereupon the Officers of his Household omitted nothing, which belonged to the
state of his person, and the dignity of the present Court. Thus is King Zalby
feasted, and much satisfied to be so magnificently feasted: thus is the Duke
established in the strengthening amity of such a mighty Prince: thus is
Deltona cheered, that no action of Rugios ouer-passed the limmits of
moderation: But thus is Montanus perplexed, as confounding desire and distrust
together: at last the Duke imparted to the King all the circumstances of his
love and Rape; of Deltonas demeanor and contempt; of Egerius complaint and
discourse; which the King (because he had bin long fince cursorily made
acquainted with Kaluckies banishment, and Mengrelius advancement) desired to
hear at large: Like a man tasting on delicates, who more longs to fill his
stomach after the proof of the sweetness, then before: whereupon the Duke soon
conferred with his son Philano conceruing the matter, who as soon certified
Egerius of the Kings pleasure, who as soon confented to obey the pleasure, and
dispatch the matter, wherein he thus proceeded.

THe great Eye of heaven (most mighty Princes) Engerius prosceutcth the
History of Mengrelius.
had not fully viewed all the parts of the earth, nor time chased with such
swiftness the course of the year: but that the fruitful Arcabella once
again gave notice of her pregnancie, and signified to the world, she was borne
to be a mother, what Disaster soever went about to disappoint her: which only
hasted the Emperors journey forward; who setting on work all the parts of his
thoughts made a hundred several fashions of one piece. Sometimes with more
quickness then good speed, running over all the course of former occurrents,
with a certain heartbreaking at his Brothers exile; but surfeiting on that
dish, he loathed the diet, and choked himself with the delight of
principality; next he remembered the contract, whereof the very terror made
him abashed to think, in what madness it was ratified then, and with what
remorce repented now: anon he conceited how his subjects were affected, if
either the murder of his children should continue, or the breach of such
inhumane covenants be attempted; afterward he reasoned, why Arcabella
importuned this travel; and last of all, whether the sentence should be
reputed Canonical: Butthe fear of that diffidence extinguished at the first
puff the flame, and yet gave light to go forward in the other path; as if
there were as much necessity to propitiate Apollos displeasure, as to
determine his own affairs: whereupon he sent out Commissions, for the
artificial housing the Sea; and defensive furnishing and rigging his Navy; in
which the benefit of a Sun-shining morning (nothing then practiced but
honorable necessity) without further delay embarked him, and time (not much
intermingled with strange occurrents) brought him at last to safe harbor.

Thus proved this Voyage prosperous at Sea, and was not altogether ominous at
Land, because Scalitorax King of Phocis truly advertised of the Emperors
coming, and the cause, found it a matter of small suspicion, and therefore
made an honorable Welcome, a forward Spring of his own greatness, and a very
life of Mengrelius hope: But when his brother Misocrapus and Apollos Priest had
returned answer, he would attend the Emperor at Delphos, not doubting of
auspicious success, he seemed ravished with gladness; and in that point of
extremity only affoorded occasion of suspicion, as when we see a sudden
Storm immediately succeed a glorious Heat: yet durst no man make such
interpretation, because the Art of Deuining was peculiar to the Priests. So
the Emperor went forwatd, and had Scalitorax company to the Town; where he
found the reverent Misocrapus ready for his conduct to the Oracle.

THis Delphos had the report of others illustred, and the rareness of it self
made admirable: The description of Delphos.
in respect the place was supported by the euerflorishing Pernassus, which
seemed glad to be the foundation of the Building; but ten times glad, that it
resembled some Bulwark to secure a tresurie; and yet it appeared more
beholding to Nature then Art: For the cragginsse of the Hill resembled a very
net of Rocks, as if the Stone and Earth were laid countercompony together:
next the passable ways were so many, and hemmed to cross turnings meeting one
another, that it made a confused Laborinth. Lastly, the entries into mighty
Caves, represented so many Doors of the house of Darkness; and by the many
changes of Lightnings, Thunders, casting up of Stones, Sulphur, flashings,
filthy stenches, and suffocating Dampes, seemed the very entries of Hell; which
Xerxes made proof of by loosing four thousand men in going about to rob the
Treasure, and Brennus Duke of Gallia experimented, when he prosecuted the like
theft: Contrariwise, all peaceworking gentleness, and sence-pleasing sweetness
welcomed the necessary comers, and liberal Benefactors.

On the topp of this Mountain was the Oracle erected; a place beautified with
the cost of Kings, and venerated by the access of chiefest Monarchs: for
therein none might enter, but especial Priests, religious Princes, and strange
Ambassadors. Concerning the Monument it self, Fame confirmed it a Temple
unmatchable; and Time designed it the Palace of Apollo, allowed both for an
honorable dwelling, and a consecrated Sanctuary: the substance whereof it was
compounded, made show of a costly Marble, and the form it retained, seemed a
spacious Goodlinesse, staying the eyes of the beholders with variety of
object; wherein the Workmen had so played their parts, as if indeed they had
determined to make their memories immortal. For Agamedes and Trophonius the
supposed Attificers, are for this cause made famous: It was well Leaded on the
top, strongly bard with Iron, vnusually windowed with Iaspar, mightily
underpropped with Pillars, substancially roofed with Cedar, surely locked to keep
their Treasure, and cunningly enclosed for obscuring their Secrets: the inside
allowing more daintiness, then the outside goodlinesse; and both united to be
a scence-rauishing Miracle: and the trouble to others arose from conceit,
rather how it was finished, then in the labor to them, which concluded it.
Round about were Trees planted, in which did always Oil burn; Houses
established to lodge the company, and Vestries appointed for the ornaments of
the Sacrifice. At the Door stood an Idol, which they did kiss: a hollow
Truncke, in which they did offer, and a Lauatorie to wash in. Within hunge a
silver Bell to be rung, stood a perfumed Lamp to be sti^d, and a golden Altar
supporting a massy Image, before whom they must kneel.

The Priests were the first which apparrelled themselves, opened the doors,
sweetened the rooms, bedecked the Tables, brought out the Rellicks, hung the
walls, furnished the pillars, spread abroad costly Carpets, set out their
Jewels, trimmed the cup-boards, and entertained the Ambassadors. After them
other Officers and Attendants were to celebrate a triumph; and last of all, the
parties approached to receive their answers, which were sometimes diffused and
obscure; sometimes ambiguous or Amphibologies; sometime brief and very
peremptory; sometime true, certain, and enlarged.

Now is the Emperor magnificently entreated, and orderly instructed; whereupon
he lodges his Retinew, watches his Nights, shaueth his hair, apparrelleth
his body, approaches the Temple, washes his hands, offers his presents,
kisseth the Idol, knolleth the Bell, sturreth the Incense, allows the
Orizons, begins his Sacrifice, stands his Circles, and marketh the
coniuration; which began with terrors and darkness, until two burning Tapers
suddenly flaming by the naked side of the Image, discovered the wonders of the
Chapel, and made him attentive to hear the vnliuing massinesse divuldge the
pleasure of the Gods. This finished, the reverent Misocrapus (in his Priestly
habit) drew the stately trauers before the Altar, and with a sad demeanor
presented himself to Mengrelius more sadder, kneeling upon the ground, til the
holy Priest fastened an enameled Tablet, to a twisted string of black silk and
gold, putting it over his head next his body, and departed awhile with a
silent blessing, leaving the Emperor to the dispatch of the Ceremony, but the
Attendants of the Palace, brought Mengrelius solemly forth to his company,
who as solemly welcomed him, and so they took leave of Misocrapus, and
returned to the City of Delphos, where Scalitorax King of Phocis expected his
adventure.

By this time either fear or fury hastened his departure to his ships, wherein
he quickly disposed himself, and without other interception, then the
tediousness of the journey, came in safety to Trebizonda, where each one
imparted the manner of the Voyage, and made this division of their discourses;
some amplified the description of the places seen; others the discovery of the
wonders heard: some took occasion from those changes the Sea afforded; others
made remonstrance of what each country maintained: some ouer-passing what was
impertinent, disputed of the hill, and the Oracle; others more curious
intermedled with the Sacrifice and the Orders, which not admitted to behold,
they were therefore more desirous to understand: some presumed to ask how the
Emperor was pleased, and others dared to enquire, whether the Commonwealth
should be disordered: but the fearful Mengrelius made his access to the
Court, an astonishment to his Nobles, and a heavy welcome to Arcabella; they
sorrowing his answer was frowns: and she trembling his salutation was a
command out of presence, who accustomed to no other disposition then obedience:
displeasingly dutiful accorded to the hard doom, and lovingly impatient
effected his will.

But unkindness had not thus her period: For Mengrelius findnig the Oracle to
threaten his destruction, in the Belief grew so impatient, that the promises
of comfort, and sweetness of counsel seemed ircksome, scarce abiding to hear
of redress, and absolutely denying to discover the reason: resembling him,
whom cruelty bereaved of his principal member the tongue, because he had
nothing to talk of but woeful looks, nor any thing to discover, but soon
moved displeasure, which astonished the beholders, who yet desisted not to
pacify his trouble, and beguile his passion: but he despighted to see any
inclination to delight, and perceiving his actions were so generally marked,
retiered himself, and was only humorons in the worst part of melancholy: at
last the extremity drove him clean out of doors, and made him echo in the
fields, what he durst not wisper in the Palace.

O Gods (quoth he) what avails life, if to live be worse then death? What
profits honor when the shame of deiection shall extripate the glory of
former credit? What benefit in a Crown, when every dram of gold must be
balanced against a hundred of cares? What preeminence in the title of
dignity; when confusion shall make ridiculous dignity, titles, and
preeminence? O Fortune! O false Fortune! Well may we call thee blind, when thou
strikest those who offered no wrong; and fawnest on him, that detesteth thy
favors. Well may we call thee unconstant; for if by chance a Morning manifest
thy smiles, yet shall the same Evening detect thy malice. Well may we call thee
deceitful, seeing thy pleasures are like the waters of Alphastus, sweet to the
pallat, but poison to the stomach. Well may we call thee a tyrant, for thy
hate is implacable, and thy revenge inexorable. O Sun whose glorious beauty is
the life of all creatures, and comfort of the earth; what comfort can I have,
that must be deprived of thee dying, or despighted with thee living; and so
has my prognosticated discomfort assured? O walks of solitariness, how
agreeable only are your shades to my passions, had your trees sable barks,
and your boughs black leaves? For the heavens have conspired, the earth
consented, and hell it self concluded my destruction. Why then base Dieties,
injurious Fortune, unprofitable Sun, and uncouth Deserts; spare not your
malice, and power out the liquor of your deadliest poison: if not so? yet what
terror intrudeth with suspicion: But witless and impatient: whether am I
carried with these outrages; either there is truth or falsehood: if the first,
what prevention? if the latter, why was any journey? yet shall I be so childish
to shrink under this fear; as though each paltry ceremony were the arms of
Religion, or coosening device of Priests a countermaunding of the actions of
Kings? tush; I will not submit to such mockery, nor suffer my self to be the
stall of derision. No, no; before I consent to be so sottishly baffled: Murder,
Fury, and Contempt of all Women shall revenge my distemprature.

In this mood he hasted toward the Palace, but the instant violence of his
Resolution was thus stangely rebated: Ear the tract of the grove had fully
conduced him to the end, a sodden storm intercepted further hastiness, and
compelled his retreat to a place of shellter: now; whether the nature of the
tempest effectuated drowsinesse; or his spirits weried with meditation desired
rest: or the very brain dried with sorrow shruncke up the stringes of his
eyeliddes; or him self was willing to this course to ouerpasse his fear; he
quietly fell a sleep, had not his sleep the more disquieted him, like a man
reparing a ruinous house, and pulling down aparte haleth also the whole to his
greater charge: For a formidable dream thus surprised his repose. An Eagle
mounting to her Mengrelius troubled with a Dream.
nest had only too young ones to feed, but whether she conceived unkindness
against them or in the misfortune of her rauin brought not wherewithal to
succor them; or displeased at some other accident, she threw them to the
ground, leaving, her self childlesse, and them liuelesse: yet they recovered,
and miraculously gathering new life, and extraordinary stature returned, ere
their mother had made a second flight; seeming by their demeanor as though
they come to comfort her: but she stomacking the courtesy, converted her love
to rage, and began a manner of contention against them; they seeing the danger
desisted awhile, till very necessity of life drove them to offense; and
offense increasing with anger, anger forgot it self, and so between them the
old one was torn in pieces, which when a better consideration deliberated on,
with a monstrous howling they departed: the noise whereof awaked Mengrelius, so
his Dream ended, and the tempest ended, but a worse dismay began then before.

At last remembering himself, he hasted to a private Posterne of the palace,
where finding the appointed Comptrollor of his house, he with him imparted
such secrets, that as the charge was of importance, his dispatch was with
speediness. For he presently returned with sadness from the Empress, and
trouble from the Court; she submitting to his appointment, and they appointing
that nights liberty, if it pleased him to visit her; where upon he hasted up,
and dismissing all from his presence, conferred only with his mother about
strange things and told his sister Pisana his cruel resolution; wherein the
suspicion was so terrible, that forgetting the weakness of his Empress, he
left them and thus astonished the helpwanting Princess: with a soule-vexing
preamble: Unfortunate Arcabella, not in that thou art the daughter of
Samarchanus, but wife of Mengrelius: understand by me; that I am accursed for
my own sake, and thou art cast with the same verdict for my sake, as being the
isntrumental cause of unhappiness: the Oracle confirming thee a mother of
strange Issue, pronouncing my deiection by my son, death by my daughters
husband, and confusion, if I infringe the oath to Kalucki; nor imagine I am
carried away with supposes. For what I have rufully reported, thou may
pitifully ouer-looke, with that he showed them Misocrapus Tablet, and they
read the Prophecy thus insculped.

Apollos doom will not the King delude,
Yet breaths terror, vengeance, and despite:
A male, and female shall one birth cone^ude
By Princely means obscured from thy sight.
The son shall live, howeuer rage conspire
To cut the thread our Destinies have spun,
And in thy life against his own desire
Possess the Throne, which Samarchanus won.
The daughters Love a Shepherd shall obtain
By strange adventure vndisparaged,
And he must end thy peace, life, Kingdoms reign,
When Trebizonda shall be foraged.
Believe, or not; all is one: I yet conclude,
Apolles doom will not the King delude.
This they read, and to this was some reply in readiness, but Mengrelius
interposed this brevity; that my former Oath may therefore be kept inuiolate,
and my vexed spirits from sorer outrage restained, I command (what ever
unreasonableness seem in the command) that as soon as Nature has brought
thy children into the light, thy own hands deprive them of the light; this see
thou regard to perform, and perform as thou regardest thy life; but Arcabella
permitted not the freedom of this bitterness, for she thus adventured to
repel it.

What inhumane cruelty is here threatened, and unmanly prosecutions devised;
nothing but inordinate passions, distempered behavior, broken sleeps,
fearful outcries, inconsiderate vows, and unnatural tyranies? Near tell
me of unprincely protestations, better resolve to transgress enforced
contracts, which satisfaction may counteruaile; then continue in settled
wickedness which repentance cannot mitigate? better submit to inscrutable
mercy, whose goodness ever exceeds formidable appearance, then execute
malicious wilfulness, whose outrages are seldom prevented? What Law,
Judgment, or Reason will allow, condemn, disappoint? The massacre of innocent
Babes; the Preuiledge of sacred Princes; the right of Legitimate Heirs. But to
the purpose; has heavenly revolution threatened an overthrow? What earthly
means can prohibit the pleasure of the Gods; has our fear taken root from
the Oracle of Apollo? What humane cunning shall hinder the course of their
springing? Yet peradventure you have mistaken: what was prophesied, or
prophesied what your self have mistaken: besides each fond Dream must not be
believed, or lying Priest allowed; as for divine resolutions, neither can the
reaching wit of man impeach the credit, nor Fury of devils control the
enforcement. By the pains therefore of Ballutasa in our birth I desire; by the
tears and sadness of Pisana: by my own chastity; by thy advancement to this
Empire; by the secrets of our marriage I conjure; either your patience to
tolerate the burden of heavenly Imposition, or resuscitate your allacritie to
recover your renown: by the one you shall be sure to proceed in a good course;
by the other confirm the faith of your subjects toward you; who settled so long
in a happy peace, and confirmed in the Love of a Royal Prince, will neither
hazerd the one, nor leave the other, though Kalucky should immagine there were
cause of innovation.

ut what was this otherwise, then to spit against the wind, whose violence
returns the filth into thy face, or to impart the sweetness of music to a
deaf auditorie. For he either not hearing, because he minded it not; or not
minding, because it liked not: or not liking, because it pleased not; or not
pleasing, because it disagreed to his humorous suspicion, answered; My will
shall now stand for a Law, and pronounces death to thy children; or loss of
thy own life; with which conclusion of death departing, as the beginning was
death, the proceeding death, and the end death, so no doubt had it finished
with a double death, if provident carfulness had not prevented desperate
quickness. For the Empress all enraged, put in practice diverse motions of a
broken spirit; as rashing of her ornaments of Majesty; scratching her lovely
face with a manifest rebellion against beauty, disseuering her dainty
plighted tresses in scorn of comeliness, and bethumping her panting sides
swelling with the life striving within; so that the Ladies had a tax of
difficulty imposed to withhold her from a desperate cruelty, til a new work
proposed it self: for her spirits weakened with the threanes of her pangs;
and her pangs increasing with childbearing travel, subjected her to
necessity of life, and induced them to further her deliverance, which was done
in such reverent manner, and womanly order, that the secret was secret to
themselves, and the hurliburly consisted in the action, which busied, and not
in the parley, which troubled them.

THus may the next Morning send fame abroad The Empress is delivered of two
children, the one named Trezoboro, the woman Brizaca.
to declare the hazard of Arcabella her self, and the birth of two Princes;
who though they seemed marked for the court of life, yet durst they not but
appoint them to the house of death; allowing only this favor, to name them
before they went that their entertainment might be like Empress children; so
the man was called Trezoboro, and the woman Brizaca, and thus began their
Tragedy.

No sooner had the careful Ballutasa clogged the mothers arms with so
precious a burden, but she affoorded them ghastly looks and sore outcries,
the children smiling but new borne, and laughing the faster for her threatening
the greater; which had she warily marked (though the dangerous choice caused
the preferment of her own life, whereby she demanded the instrument of of
death) yet surely would the heart never have consented to so pitiless an
action, nor the tongue so quickly expressed the consent of the heart. For in
dimnesse of sight (tears still hindering the fulness of seeing) beholding how
pleasure and delight made reziance in their countenance, she forgate either to
do or to speak; and proceeding further, burst forth into abrupt speeches,
threatening to kill her self with them. But the mother foreseeing the
inconveniences of a troubled spirit, by policy wrested the knife from her
hands, and by force took the children out of her arms, employing another in
that butcherly office, who had charge to have with diligence, and dispatch with
secrecy.

The Lady daring not deny, what yet she durst not complish, had liberty
(tears and kneeling procuring this liberty) to depart out of sight, and so
retired her self into some obscure corner; mistrusting the light would have
made her ashamed to murder infanrs: but here a conscience not to dee amiss,
over wrought with a sudden timerousnesse, that the heart repented, and the
hands could not: Then she tried a place where she might see what she did; but
now their smiles caused so many tears that she was neither able to abide them
laughing, or her own self trembling: Once again she posted to the corner of
a Grove, but here a sudden quaking turned the sharpened edge to her own heart,
as she proffered her hand to their throat: At last remembering the penalty,
she concluded her own life dearer then all the Princes in the world; so that
growing half angry, she took again the knife, and more stoutly went forward;
yet proffering a stroke roared outright, fainting for fear, and fearing ever
after so to presume: thus as she went she returned, prostrating her self both
before the mother and the mothers mother, desiring to abide a thousand
torments, rather then imagine a thought amiss against them; so that a new
course of immolation must be taken in hand, or some strange devise of
concealment put in practice; whereupon they reasoned among themselves on the
fame of the action, the charity of the deed, and the honor of the attempt:
nor left they out the difficulty of the enterprise, the penalty of infringing
the Emperors pleasure, the way to prevent the greatest mischief, which was the
access to see them murdered, nor the recompense, which time might recover, if
the Princes should be preserved: so that Ballutasa made Arcabella strengthen
her self with the returned spectacle, taught Arcabella means to be patient;
and patience in her anguish, told Arcabella, Trezoboro and Brizaca should live,
and rejoiced with Arcabella, for that Gellida and Perinthum undertook the
matter.

THese were two daughters of the King of Capadocia How Gellida and Perinthum
saved the Princes.
Opacus, who kept his abode at the City of Archelaies, so famous for the
circomferenciall Channel, which the River Halys by winding it self about it
does make; and in a iollitie proud of the action, hastes to the great Euxinum
to boa^ of his passage. Now by reason he was cotributotie to the Empire, and
had settled his brother Cicotroxus in the great Office of Dianas Priesthood in
Taurica, these Ladies from their Uncles privilege wrought the Idea of the
childrens security, and presently posted to Cicotroxus, to whom they
discovered the whole process, the penalty of the Law, the cruel
determination of the Emperor, and the shortness of time, as being limited but
fourteen days of return: When the reverent Archpriest, heard the discourse,
rather conceiving well on the piety of his Neeces with their Honorable
pollycie, then disputing on fears or troubles depending, like a man prising
integrity before worldly respect, He confirmed the action, and thus briefly
warranted likelihood of success: Although (Royal Ladies) as a man subject to
the weakness of our first ^ailty, I might seem amassed with your strange story
and pains taking: yet sometime made acquainted with the like occurrents, and
peraduenturo^ matters of greater secret, though not of such consequence, I
desist from unnecessary questions, and thus give light to your furtherance.
Dianas sacrifices are every Moon cellebrated the first day; and consist of
humane blood from the Veins of young infants, wherewith we besprinckle the
altares and then consume the bodies with fire, other ceremonies are infinite,
and easier to be known by eye witness then report, now by virtue of my
authority will I proclaim the necessity of a new supply, out of which you
shall choose a cupple a Male and Female, and with them depart to Trebizond,
presenting the Empres this sign of my affection, and duty. For if Mengrelius
importune the murder, which he will quickly do, then may these tolerate the
cruelty, and you with the true Princes escape to Capadocia, if this please;
detract no time? but return in peace: if not; to morrow is the day of
pacification, and you shall understand the pleasure of the Goddess:

But the Ladies quickly apprehended Cicotroxus device and thought it bootelesse
to make further trial, therefore gratifying their Uncle they returned to the
Empress, as you see the friend of a faulty subject to some great Prince; who
either condemns to death or bannishment: for she remained all this while in
discomforts and doubts, because whatsoever chanced, she must be deprived of
her Children; but by that time Gellida and Perinthum had pacified with reason,
and enforced argument of two inconveniences, to bear the lesser burden, she
cheared herself, and somewhat raising her body with a heart enforcing
fearefullnesse, and tears compounded of sorrow and gladness delivered her
Twins to the Ladies; who received them with a modest stillness and departed
accordingly, leaving the strangers like silly lambs in a Butchery:

No sooner were they thus dismissed, but the Emperor (infringing the
particulars of his own state) would needs visit Arcabella, and in person
behold the execution: For thus it chanced: since the time of his suspicion and
fearful Dream, he was much conversant with Belgorundo a magitian now counted
in Court, but till this necessity never esteemed, nor reputed worthy such a
title, had not fortune been the Master, and mere happ the Minister of his
renown, because Mengrelius first acquainted him with the couenantes between
Kalucki and himself, and after with the vision of the Eagles, which he
enterpreted by himself and his Children, wherein he so iumped with the Emperors
ielosie, and indeed seconded the Prophecy of the Oracle, (which was not as yet
discovered to any body,) that he seemed to dote on his skill, and graced him
with a Roabe of Purple, a Cape of Maintenance, and winged rod like Mercuries
Caduceus: withal he commanded the Court to honor him for his respect, so
that his reputation accrewed from Mengrelius, will and he made his own power
the means to continue it; which he might the better do, because the birth of
the Princes chanced as was before intimated; besides Belgorundo (underhand
acquainted with the Empres unwillingness to the murder, and flat denial to be
the executioner) he revealed it to the Emperor, and wrought a further
ampliation of his credit, by inferring the new discoueries, concerning his
brother, and the wars likly to ensue, if the covenants between them wear
infringed: Whereupon the Emperor seemed in a manner distracted conceiving it
would be so, and fearing it should be so, as if indeed it wear so, and with
the misdoubt of he knew not what, rather raging then distempred hasted to
Arcabella, threatening nothing but fire and sword, if they once immagined to
deceive him: they again exclaimed, as far as they durst, and dared to
execrate all incantations and deluding sorceries: but neither exclamations nor
execrations, nor the sweet infants themselves mollefied the hard hearted
Emperor. For he beheld the Massacre in person, leaving them to what
pacification, they could procure; and returned himsealfe to see, who durst find
fault:

By this time are Gellida and Perinthum welcomed into Cappadocia, as gracious
to Opacus their father, and gratified by the subjects of the kingdom: yet
concealing the secrets of their journey they watched an opportunity thus to
dispose of the Princes, Coranus and Bertosus too brothers dwelling together in
one house, and having married Dalie and Phemon, too sisters not altogether of
Ignoble parents assured the world, that love and good order can affright Envy
and Contention: For whether their delight one in another convicted those
displeasures, which pass between man and man, nothing was offensive, or if it
were the offense never appeared, or whether the time affoorded no scope to the
ambition of men, or peevishness amongst women, the husbands carefully
endeavored to look to their business, the wives modestly agreed to content
their husbands, and both like a The Empres Children delivered to Coranus and
Bertosus, too Brothers in Capadocia:
well made bundell of sweet smelling flowers, yielded comfort to the sense and
life: To these (most mighty King and Duke) wear these Princes delivered, and
these (pointing to Coranus and Bertosus indeed) be the men accountable for this
reckning; so that if their Fortune be worth the discovering from their Infancy
forward, no doubt by their discourses the truth will in more lively colors
appear.

NOw by the plentious times of Katabasies Montanus hearing the History of
Mengrelius is much troubled when the Duke confesses that he loves Delte na
victories (quoth King Zalby) I am much satisfied in the redaction of this
Chaos, because till now Fame has been to sparing of her secrets, and the
report of the Trebizondian turmoiles was either denied the truth, or augmented
according to the disposition of the author. For we knew that Mengrelius
possessed the Diadem, and Kalucki meant to be beholding to his own valor for
another kingdom: whereunto (as if an heroical presumption had been the breath
of some heavenly voice) Fortune quickly lifted him up, and gave him the further
Tartarie in reward of his pains, which first made him passage through my upper
Comagena, and after wrought his acceptance with the magnanimous Mullumalla the
widow, Empress of the late deceased Barka: so that by your favor (Nephew
Rugio) I will gratulate Egerius for the participating this Novelty; and entreat
Coranus and Bertosus (seeing we are so forward on our journey) not to leave us,
till we come to safe harbout. All this and more (answered the Duke) shall be but
part of my duty, yet does the eyes of fear foresee, that the end will be
worse then the beginning; and both beginning and end unite a crosnesse against
me. For Egerius himself is displeased, Bertosus dreadful, and Coranus
mistrusteth my love to Deltoua.

But when Montanus heard the name of love, so sadly pronounced, and the name of
Deltona, and the name of another lou^ to Deltona (like the Indian Odonta, who
by the hunters noise is ^ured of trouble and disquiet, and yet rowseth himself
rather to prepare his courage to resist, the by policy to escape) he started
up, and somewhat angerly (for his associate fury was moderated), spoke to this
purpose. Great Princes, as you expect duty and allegiance from your subjects,
so must you be the author's of justice and virtue in yourselues; else may you be
feared for tyrants, and hated for being feared; else may you incurte the danger
of repining, which at advantage is subject to innovation, and will questionless
a subborne every traitorous revolt; else may ye awake a sleeping enemy, as
sometimes the priuare occasions of one Kingdom makes partes-taking from
another. Let Honor then ouer-looke his Index for particular directions, and
you maintain goodness for the enlargement of renown: as for the matter in
hand, a compulsiue love is absolute incontinencie, and the disseising of
another right is worse then tyranny, especially in a matter of such
consequence as the disturbing the beauteous Deltona, whom some heavenly
influence has warranted that I and must enjoy: assure you then no device, or
force of man shall bereave me of my claim, considering my interrest.

Look how some strange apparition does set on work the eyes of such as are
moved with novelties; so did the suddenness of Montanus speech amaze the
hearers: for the King maruailed, Rugio stomached, Egerius gazed, Coranus with
Bertosus trembled, and all were silent; until the Duke grudging at the
reprehension, durst not give way (as he supposed) to such audaciousnesse, but
thought to slake the violence in this manner. Boldly spoken what ere thou art,
yet ouer-caryed With presumption (which many times ouer-throweth a good
purpose, by taking a wrong course to suppress a badde) thou abusest a Prince,
and have waded further then strength is able to deliver, or policy to
refrain: besines it is not for Shepherds and men of base estates, to
entermeddle with the actions of persons privileged, and sacred: But to permit
a straggling vp-start thus before my own subjects, the King in presence, in my
Court, and to my face, to distaine my honor, which never was impeached? I may
not, I will not, I cannot abide it, though my pleasure maintained a fault
indeed.

A fault (replied Montanus) by Marpefias Altar such a fault, that unless you
determine otherwise, then to affright the peerless Deltona; it is not
menaces, or titular dignities, shall keep revenge from sending her ministers
amongst you; or make me subject (against virtue) to imperious will.

The King Zalby was much moved at this, but Rugio more; as suspecting a
purposed neglect of duty: yet perceiving a settled countenance, and undivided
speeches to conclude the rebuke, they knew not how to enterpret it; considering
the party reputed an inferior amongst them; at last they called Coranus, who
more fearful to oppose against the Duke, then firm in expectation of
Montanus, told them of his shipwreck at Sea; Placandus entertainment; his
love to Deltona, the Contract at the Cave, and in a sparing manner, how he
promised her to discover a further secret: which wrought thus much, that the
King foresaw there might be cause of affliction; and he seemed likely to be of
better account, by which reason the Duke was pacified, and Montanus moderated
his forwardness: but who had seen Egerius behold him in this ecstasy pleading
for Deltona, would have sworn he had been contemplating some Prodegie:
presently Philano advanced himself, and asking Egerius what troubled him,
bade him withal tell his opinion of Montanus. Truly (said Egerius) accidents
of admiration chance in the world, and men are subject to high direction, so
that it must needs fall out, that he has been ouer-burdened with extremity,
and is sure of better desert then the outward habit or appearance, which he
the rather allowed, because by his own example he might immagine as unlikely
possibilities to come to pass. Well said Philano, ere we have done, I
believe, we shall have much to do; for as yet we are in the midst of a
confusion, and ignorance tryumphes she has, and must make us astonished. But
the Duke (loath that a time of mirth and entertainment should be out-faced with
trouble and dismay) dismissed them awhile, every man to his own course, and
employed himself to honor the King with entertainment befitting; whereupon a
solemn hunting invited him to variety of pastime, and no man was wanting,
whom place or pleasure induced to attend: and as you see a cunning enemy
obscure himself in some remote place of advantage, when he apprehends a
stronger force is coming against him: So played the Inhabitants of these
woods, after they understood now they were besieged; till suspecting the ill
success of a trial, they took advantage to escape, little thinking that
their steps betrayed them, and gave notice to the adversary of their being;
who by this time discrying their flight, shooted for joy, as if already victory
had administered both renown and reward: in the end, least delay might breed
disadvantage, the Hounds (with the addition of their Masters policy in laying
of Toiles, and orderly following the execution* quickly ouer-tooke them in the
Retreat, and them subjected to a furious slaughter. But the Officers loath to
make too tyrannous a spoil, sounded the rechaite, so the rest at random were
assured of more rest; yet rested not the Duke, till he conducted the King in to
a gallant Arbor, so cunningly handled, that a man might have said the deviser
determined to grace the walks of the Palace with a work of specialtie, and
set forth his own praises, as if he were by it to commend himself; for who
could but ask his name to know him, and extol him once known.

Here was a royal Banquet prepared, and an after time of Counsel (sorting
with the conueniencie of the place) concluded, that Bertosus should end the
Story of Mengrelius; who as willing to be disburdened of her own fears, as
they seemed to be acquainted with others fortune, sent for Montanus to come
within hearing, and thus began.

AFter Gellida and Perinthum had taken notice Bertofus proceeds in the story
of Mengrelius.
of our solitary life, knowing we retired our selves in the fullness of a good
opinion, least the deceiving vanities of the world might endanger or entrappe
us, they committed the Infants unto our charge; not without some circumstances
of the peril in the discovery, the fear of both the Empresses, the troubles
depending, and their own reverent care toward them, as if the hope of many
Kingdoms lay heavy either upon our diligence or negligence. Thus were we
much esteemed for the resort of the Kings daughters unto us, who indeed often
visited, and as often rewarded us; so that we had cause to be careful, as
well for their sakes that commanded, as theirs we had in custodte: this we
performed with reasonable success. For the time of Nursing ouer-passed, the
Princes seemed to scorn their Infancy by entertaining a third year, to which
they posted with such a gallantnesse, as if indeed they had known with
judgment to have welcomed all gallantnesse. But (most Noble King and Duke)
look how a sudden storm is so much the more terrible to a well burdened
Bark, by how much it is in iollitie of a good beginning, and almost in sight
of safe harbor; so was the pride of our hopes rebuked; and when we least
suspected alteration in such a kind, there happened a most unkind alteration.
For as my brother and I solaced the Princes in the walks of a pretty Grove,
whereon the handy-worke of man had bestowed addition, and stood playing the
wantons with conceit of their towardliness, who by this time seemed the
Heavens charge, as well as our charge; comes the Arch-pirate Cleonidas, and
altering the manner (though not the profession) hurried us together toward the
Haven, where his ships lay at Anchor.

With that Montanus in sudden motion interrupted his speech, and hearing the
name of Cleonidas pronounced, cried out: O Eternal Powers! has Cleonidas been
an Actor in this Tragedy, and do I live to hear so odious a sound to my
senses? Or shall I live to thank the gracious Nemesis for his destruction? Or
may I live to revenge my disgraces: if the Ocean have scorned to be poisoned
with his carkas? O Princes! pardon my impatience: this is the head from whence
my affliction springs, and runs into a strong channel of disquiet this is
the root supporting a stock of misery, and spreads into branches of all
unhappiness to shade my happiness: this is the author of such immanitie, as
my tongue trembles to report it; though he seemed raised from the deepest hell
to put it in practice. As he was setting forward this inuection, King Zalby
perceiving he had awaked some conceit of importance, rose up with a mild
intent of pacification (least in counterchecking the humor, it might either
grow to violence, or exasperate his discontent) and thus persuaded him:
Princely Montanus, We are not so incredulous of those infinite accidents,
which are directed by highest influence, as to oppose against your desert; but
lay the fault of our slight respect upon ignorance, and permit Bertosus to go
forward: then by a Kings protestations, I swear, your desires shall not range
to such a scope, but we will bring them within limitation; and if need
requires, with a royal consent alsist your desires. By this time had
discretion won the field, and Montanus seemed half ashamed, yet loath to make
any demisse appearance, he thus replied: Virtue (great King) I see will be
like a square Die, every way cast standing upright: your wisdom has
ouer-ballanced my distemperature, and in a manner recovered my despair, I will
therefore fasten my anchor on the hold of your honorable promises, and attend
more chearefully the discourse: with that he sat down, and Bertosus proceeded.

Cleonidas having ranged far from his ships, ouer-tooke us thus
accompanied, and as we thought to rudely, questioned our names, estates, The
Empres children with Coranus and Bertosus taken prisoners by Cleonidas.
and dwelling; we supposing the reverence of our King would have made our
peace, and the respect to the Princely Infants assured our liberty, boldly
made answer, whatsoever you be, or intend; We are the Kings servants, and these
be the Kings children, and you and these (quoth one amongst the rest) be now
prisoners to Cleonidas, and so shall remain, til the tyrannous Perinthum
redeem them with the price of her honor; by this time we understood enough,
and more then was pleasing (unless you may immagine an offender standing
before a severe Judge, urging his fault to as cruel a Jury, and after their
verdict giving sentence of death, pleased with the same) For Cleonidas we knew,
and his despite we knew, and the cause of Cleonidas despite we knew flowed
from the current of this venomous stream.

ARtabazes was no sooner invested with the roialties of Armenia, but Cleonidas
taking The story of ^xus and Menedemus.
his banishment in disgrace exprobrated his simplicity, that had not more
iudicially proceeded whereupon (as he supposed, to recover his credit, rather
then for any malice to the King) he attempted a second innovation, but herein
his will exceeded his fortune: for the valliant Pelorus Artabazes Admiral, ere
he once set foot on land discomfited him at sea; and enforced his reculing to
the dry Island: where Cleonidas took a new course of life both by Piracie,
whereby he gathered infinite wealth, and mercenary assisting other Princes,
which obtained him many friends. In the time of this wantonness, on the
borders of Capadocia was resident as Prouincial Governor Prazus, a Gent, of an
ancient house and great estate, had not the cruelty of the wars wasted the
same; but now somewhat resetled by his own endeauours and policy, and in
reasonable good grace with the king Opacus for his service; he thought upon
nothing so much as the addition of Honor to his house: but apprehending a
kind of error in the kings wants, who was counted to exchang favor for money,
and unwilling to give him cause of distasting, considering that aduancements
depend on the pleasure of the Prince; he conferred with his friends about the
king, and such whom service at Court had especially graced: so that perceiving
the use of their favor, he compared himself to a man ready for entrance in to
some pleasant Gallery, whereof he had the right, but another keeps the Key: at
last reason, reward, or his own worth prevailed with them, and they inferred
to the King the necessity of the government, the deseart of the Gent. not
without addition, how he had lost his Goods, spent his Revenues, and
hassarded his Life: thus was the King prepared. Then proceeded they further by
putting him in memory, how the Virtuous expect a Recompense, as well as the
Wicked deserve Punishment: And lastly, as the string, which yielded the sweet
sound of the Music, they touched this, that a present sum of Money and
yearly Revenues, would come into the Treasury. I will not say it prevailed;
but the King most graciously ennobled him with the title of Exarchate, and
constituted him Governor during life, according to the Laws of the Land;
whereupon now the Lord Praxus was enforced to try Menedemus for a competent
portion of money to defray his charges, that the entrance into his new Honor
in good fashion might establish the opinion of the people by applauding his
worth. This was a wretch living in the strength and delicatest place of all the
Kingdom; and had culled out the sweetest dwellings, and pieces of Land to make
his Inheritance sufficient, like a skillful Merchant who determining to journey
into a strange Country, and contriuing to return with credit and gain,
searches every Shop of a City, and selected the best Pieces, the curiostest
Stuff, the choysest Dellicats, and what else he needs to serve his turn: Yet
for all this was the thread of his life drawn from such a mind as seemed made
of filth and dirt, and the very dregs of Misery: For abroad his complaints
were of the ill thriuing of his Cattle, the untoward groth of his Corn, the
ill payment of the Tenants, the want of Money; when yet it was well known, he
had always great sums lying by him; so that the bad use of Natures
blessings, made him want indeed; and that v^de disposition, wrought him odious
to Man, hateful to God, and irck^some to himself: Within doors the Servants
were negligent, the wife too lavish, the Children too importunate, the
Strangers too cumbersome, the Kindred and Friends bent to undo him: Besides,
he was accompanied with these ill Conditions, ridiculous Pride to make men
imagine, this baseness the means to have him self glorified; heart-vexing
Envy to see any thrive by him, or possess their estats in good order:
Impudent delight to hear of an others Overthrow, or Decay; and inhumane
cruelty, if the error or inconveniences of life drove men into his danger:
But to see him about his own house accompanied with Pesants all ill
apparelled, as himself sweaty, greasy, dusty nasty, and what-els makes a man
odious, would show a very comicall Tragedy: And if necessity wrested the
disbursing of some small sums, he would excruciate him self; but when the
State compelled his acc^sse, what cursings, what execrations, what torments?
yet go he must, and in such a manner, as I cannot with patience describe it;
himself like a Peddler with foul Linen, beastly Garments, patcht, seamerent,
and greasy, and worse then a Slave: His men brought to his own bent, Carters,
Ploughmen, Shepherds, and such as were employed in the greatest drudgerie: His
Horse and Furniture part old, broken, and foul; part such as he used in his
business, and part paw^ed, forfayted, or bought at second hand: Only this I
must needs say, some things of his Ancestors he used in sparing manner, which
were good, and made the rest more rediculous.

With such a fellow was Praxus to deal withal, and had so many delays, such
excuses, such foreswearings, yea tears from his eyes flowing from an
hipocriticall heart, that he knew nor whether to laugh, or to be angry: at last
upon sufficient security of a Morgage; a Lordship, on which he had long since
cast his eyes for his younger Son, like him that ouerlooketh a flock of
Sheep to see which be ready for the Butcher, or to enrich his Purse; the Money
was sent, and Menedemus tormented him self, not so much for fear of the
security, as to depart from the company of his Treasure. Now between the time
of repaiment, Menedemus had brought to his house the beauteous Lausana, a
Ladies daughter left in ward to the King, and by this Monster of Nature bought
out, more to make benefit of, then for love to his son, or any other, whom
her own worth without addition, might well satisfy. With her did L. Praxus
fall in love; and feeing the forwardnes of so many Graces in so gracious a
person, assured him self, they could not chose but grow up to the becoming of
the place wherein they were set, and bring all wealth, happiness, and
coutentment to him whose fortune had allotted the Harvest; but perceiving the
diff^culty of obtaining her, by reason of Menedemus bad disposition and
ielosie, and that he was aleady engaged, and within his danger, (as you have
heard) he knew not well how to proceed; at last he contrived not to pay his
Money, and by a little stretching his Authority, sent a band of Soldiers to
keep possession of the Place; all which, he said, was for the wretches good,
because if he would consent to the Contract of Lausana, he might at one payment
receive the Money borrowed, and what he had disbursed for her Wardship;
otherwise he would infer to the King and Counsel, the complaints against
him, the mischiefs he had procured, and some other enforcements, which would
overthrow him for ever. Here was Menedemus in an ecstasy, having so many
Crosses, (as he termed them) to be cleared of as to be utterly undone for
want of his Money, to be vexed in soul with the fear of this accusation, and
to be put to greater charge in contesting with the gouerner: but the secret of
this terror depended on a private command from the king not to cellebrate
Lausan as marriage without his consent; nor to yield to any contract to another
unlicensed from the state: This he told Praxus with a strange kind of
trembling, that he hoped he would not seek his ouer-throw, nor put him to
trouble in recovering his own: but Praxus by fair entreaty not to suspect
displeasure, considering she should rather be advanced then disparaged, won
him to think well of the Marriage, and by engaging his Honor to see him
secured or otherwise not damnefied, made some return of comfort, but indeed the
absolute denial of his Money, unless he consented to this course, enforced
him at last to forget duty and honesty; and so with a cheerfulness in the
receipt thereof, he delivered Lausana to Praxus: for which, he gratified the
wretch beyond expectation. Thus either returned; Menedemus to his miserable
life, and Praxus to solemnise the Triumph of his delight: wherein without doubt
(if he had proceeded with the Kings favor) a happy contentment had been the
reward of counterchangeable worth, and liking.

By this time is Opacus acquainted with each circumstance, whereupon he sommoned
both Praxus and Menedemus to appear at Archelais, which Praxus would have
done, had not the other for fear of expenses absolutely denied it, and putting
him in mind of his promises, and how for his sake these dangers were
threatened, detracted the time so long, that Opacus stomaching the contempt
proclaimed them both Traitors, their goods and Lands to be confiscate, and
their persons infamous and subject to the Law: this news had almost made
cowardice the servant of Valor. For Menedemus would have killed himself, or
rather hanged himself, least he should have seen his one blood, had not
Praxus awaked his drowsinesse with warrantice and comfort, that rather then
for so slight offense extremity should open the gates of cruelty; Curatsax
king of ^beria (to whom Praxus was of alliance, would not suffer him without
cause to perish: this made them stand on their guard, and exasperated the
kings displeasure, who came forward in person to repress the insolency,
whereby Praxus was enforced indeed to expostulate the matter and after true
intimation of the cause, and the kings extremity, drue Curatsax with a
sufficient Army as auxiliary: so a ciuell war (which more and more like a
new kindled fire suffered to wast the wood by degrees) burst forth at last
with flames of dispight and desolation, especially to Capodocia, wherein it
continued and began, and Opacus was constrained to higher Cleonidas, who at
this time kept about the River Cirus, and when he list to come up into the
Country carried his Boats on Camelles backs over the Mountains, leaving his
ships sufficiently conducted and secured, with his aid and the death of
Menedemus, (who in a time of ^uce would needs go see his Land, and in what
estate his inheritance stood, but was intercepted by certain of Cleonidus new
Soldiers, to whom his own Tenants had betrayed him, and so submitted to their
fury, was the Wars ended, Praxus restored ^o the kings favor, and the King
of Iberia dismissed.

THis business thus ouerpassed Opacus invited Cleonidas to the Palace, as
well to gratefie his The story of Cleonidas and Perinthum.
virtue, as to pay his Soldiers: here had he sight and conference with
Perinthum the Kings second daughter, and whether the opinion of his own
worth, or the unfeigned affection unto her, induced; in very good manner he
demanded her love, had not love commanded the contrary, which at the first
was taken as a coustome amongst women, till a continual repugnancy both in
speech and action showed rather a scorn, then neglect of his suite: this
agrauated his grief, but not extenuated his passion, because questionless
subjected to her perfection, and now debarred from the thing he desired, he
resembled a man in a continual fever, still longing for what he is forbidden,
and loathing what is prescribed: At last rather enflamed, then e^amored, he
urged Opacus consent, who to be plain neither durst deny, nor would accord:
resembling a man holding the Woolfe by the care, which if he hold fast he is
sure to be bitten, if he let loose, he is in danger of life: So he feared on
the one side Cleonidas revenge in the denial, and his daughters defamation in
the accord: yet seeing the necessity of the business, and the others
importunity for an answer: kindness had reciprocal passage between them,
and the king took time to confe^re with his daughter.

But Perinthum assuered her father, that her faulcon pitched a higher flight,
which he not much misliked, and therefore to avoid all inconveniences sent her
with Gellida, her other sister to attend the Empres of Trebizond, and informed
Cleonidas, as though their own wilfulness, or desire to be acquainted with a
place of such renown had undertaken the progress: To this excuse he knew not
how to oppose. For finding Opacus rather wishing a pacification of the
displeasure, then countenancing the Unkindness, he moderated his Indignation;
and so departed, neither warranting his love, nor expressing his hate to the
Country: Till understanding of the Ladies return, he practiced many means to
circomuent her; and failing in them, as many forages to disquiet the Land,
which some times with success had outrageous effects; some times with strong
hand, as forcible repulses; till at last, Fortune willing to do him a
pleasure, as the Champion of her quarrels, brought this prey to his choice, and
him to this place at such time, as we were playing with the Princely Infants:
so that the action related his pride in unmannerly hastiness hurrying us away;
and thanked Opportunity, as it should seem, without further questions in
improper cruelty tying us in bands: For all we entreated with tears,
threatened with anger; lamented with sighs, anon rayled on their presumption,
after offered sufficient ransom; and last of all, pleaded conscience, manhood,
and the Law of all Nations. The Infants in the mean while, smiling at the
vproare, neither dismayed with the company as Strangers, nor action as
troublesome: But neither entreaties, promises, prayers, offers, threatenings,
nor exclamations, could prevail: Forwith tedious Iornies they brought us to
the Sea side, where their Ships lay at anchor, and were ready to attend the
caulling of the Wind, who by this time, began to chide our negligence, that
was not thankful to so kind putting us in mind of our business: only we
expected the coming back of the Captain; whom Cleonidas had sent to certify
Opacus of the accident.

But when his return assured an illusion, and that the king disclaimed any
right to the infants, warranting withal the fiction, but a device to set our
selves at liberty: never was so fit a time to pattern out wrath and fury, as
in Cleonidas whose ^ies glistered like Fire, and impatience scarce forbore with
his own hands to tear us a pieces, commanding us to be tortured for deluding
him; which as a villain was forward to execute four great Quinquiremes
scowred first by us, and after winded about, as if they meant with advantage to
set upon us: which when Cleonidas had beheld with the eyes of advice, and
perceiving they were but Messengers of some mischief following, (for by this
time he had descried the whole Fleet,) we were a while forgotten, and he (to
our amase) proceeded with such courage and judgment, that in applying the like
to generous performaunces, he might have proved a sufficient member of a
political body: for the Soldiers were placed each one in a congruent
distance, least shuffled together, might have bred a confusion: The Fireworkes
were prepared, the Fights were ouerseene, enclosed, and well flancked; the
Weapons were considered on either to skirmish a far off, or to grapple, if
need required; and the unable and insufficient, were separated into some remote
corner from troubling the rest: Amongst whom, was our account cast; yet some
honorable concite unwilling to be tyranous against Infants, and men unlikely to
be prejudicial, remitted us from bands, and embarked us into a very good
brigandine to be transported to the Dry Island: where the strength and
conueniencie of the place both secured, and contented him, when he list to make
his retreat.

THus were we parted from the company of The Shipwreck of Coranus and Bertosus
with the Emperors children, who are here discovered to be Egerius and Deltona:
But by their proper names Trezobor^ and Brizaca.
death and danger; for Cleonidas presently made toward the Galleys, but (Most
mighty Princes) how the wrathful Nemesis, or his fortunate Genius determined
of him I know not, because, until this occasion, his name was never once a
subject to talk of, though his wretchedness yielded many times sufficient
matter to think on. But we kept a steady passage to our Harbor, and had
cause of comfort, when the travel of four days brought us within the sight
of the Island: Yet look how a spark of Fire even at the very present of his
taking leave of the heat gives the greater light; so we gave a sudden shoot
of joy, with a Swanlike dittie, at the instant of our destruction: For on a
sudden, a North-west wind whirled the Bark about, and though the Mariners
endeavored the contrary, we as quickly lost, as enjoyed the former delight:
Then followed a Storm, which with continuance united to the Wind, raised a
dangerous Tempest: last of all, approached a second Darkness, wherein the
night drew her Curtains to hide us from the face of Heaven, had not the
contention in those upper Regions given us more light, then we wished, because
bringing terror with the Thunder, we neither durst behold either Earth, or
Heaven. On the other side, the Sea hearing the bigg voice of the Winds, awaked
her sluggishnesse, and perceiving such variance betwixt the Fire and Air for
superiority, would not imbace her self, but thought to make her greatness
appear, as well as they; and so swelled beyond measure, growing to that rage,
that we thought it better to be subject to Men, then implacable Waves.

This continued a whole day and night, and the continuance wroughteffect to put
us in mind of our frailty, and to make preperation for another dwelling,
because the Barcke unable to house us, was willing to dislodge us; and we
likewise grew weary of being such Tenants, especially my poor Brother and I,
who seemed dying, before death; and ten times dying, to behold the sweet
Infants cling to us for succor, who were not able to help our selves: Yet at
last Nature preuayling against Wilfulness, we determined to tarry for, rather
then to run to so bad a friend as Death, and therefore agreed to strive with
Redress, if we could, and to tie the Children to our backs, concluding to
change their Names what ever chanced; and withal, changed our Places, settling
our selves near to some strong Planckes, and Chestes: So, by that time our
Genius assured the splitting of the Ship, I was safe in this vnsafetie on a
seasoned Truncke of Fur, and my Brother on a spare Mast; both which, floted
for a while near the dismembered Bark, like silly Birds houering about their
Mother entrapped in a Net, and leave her not, till the Fawkner assure, he is
the messenger of death. What should I say (most mighty King) the fear was
more then the danger; and yet may the greatest scorner of Perils, confess the
danger exceeded any means, which human pollecie had to avoid it,
considering our burdens, and combersome company, which did rather augment, then
diminish our grief. For alas, to be in hassard of drowning amidst the cruel
Billows, desperate of succor, on vnfirme seats, and with infant Princes tied
to our backs, who can but think we had sorrow sufficient, and suppose our
heaviness a wonderful temptation: At length we seemed cheared with a life
cast in a new mold by perceiving fair weather approaching, resembling a
condemned person meditating with repentance, and sadly casting his looks on
the ground, as not daring to lift them up to heaven, till the sound of a Pardon
infuseth strength and courage into his decayed soul: whereupon we settled up
our selves, and began to appease the Children, who as if they meant to find
fault with Fortunes discourtesie, exclaymed on her unkindness by pleading
their own innocence; which whether it were with the inforcement penetrable,
or that the Gods meant to show their power in contrarieties (I dare not
verdict) but presently to our amaze, and their pacification, a gallant calm
succeeded, and the outward face of heaven suffered her blacknes to be wiped
away, whereby it appeared like the mild mother of the earth; so that it was my
good hap to drive under the Walls of Fortona, where a Fisher stood drying
his Nets, whom as I learnt afterwad, was the old Piscaro; and as I had cause
to acknowledge, was the honest Piscaro: For seeing some strange thing floting a
far off; he watched to help, if he could; and graciously helped when he
could: So my safety increased with his comfort; in which loath to appear
defective, he had me presenty to his House, confirming his Charity by his
good Works.

NOw when he presumed on my strength, he questioned with me about my
Shipwreck; Bertosussuffering shipwreck is taken up by Piscarro and names
Trezoboro Egerus.
and to be plain, I made a round excuse, as though Cleonidas had set fire on
my poor dwelling in Persia, and carried me Prisoner to his Island, till a
tempest divided us, and sent me floting, as he found. I but (quoth Piscarro)
would a Pirate permit you so much leisure to tie your Child to your back, and
give you liberty to make such shift? Questionless (replied I) you have made a
pretty doubt; yet must the truth thus resolve you, and favor him, that out of
fury, he is most pitiful, and worthy of a good report. This was the excuse
I made, and with this excuse was my peace made; so that I remained with him a
while rather willing to please, then to complain of my own coffeehouse:
but when he found my endeavors consorting to his disposition, as though I meant
to check ingratitude, he professed a further liking, and very suddenly
imparted his wealth unto me: to be breife with him I continued some five years
not forgetting the bringing up of my son, who seemed of that forwardness (as
quickly learning and gracing whatsoever he learnt) that my contentment sprang
from his expectation: but this manner of life did not long last, because
Piscarro, lasted not himself, as summoned to a stricter trial by the
irreuocable sentence of death: and preparing for another world made an
oueraffection adept me his heir in this world, and left a stranger to be
subject unto their malice, that saw me possessed of his wealth, which though
it amounted to no great matter, yet I compassed the dwelling I now enjoy, and
was able to bring up Egerius, as you all can partly witness: But seeing the
wings of time have thus spread out themselves, and the book of heavenly
reuolutions turns to this leaf, let not us degenerat with dullness or
wilfulness, but take out a new lesson, and with reverence acknowledge him the
Emperor Mengrelius Son, and remember his true name to be Ptincely Trezoboro:
For this is he, whom Gellida and Perinthum gave me such charge of.

But say Coranus (quoth King Zalby) after Bertosus was thus unkindly separated
from you, what favor found you amongst the tossing surges? Not much unlike my
brother (replied Coranus) only in being thus divided my sorrow the rather
increased, and I seemed to lament his loss, as much as suspect my own danger:
Now belike mischief weary of her own handyworke gave liberty to an other
scene to alter the act. For within two hours* after, the calm presented it
self, I kenned a far often a Fisher boat; who conceiving of our extremity
made as much have as my tongue did require their have: thus was I saved, and by
their industry recovered, the old Silenus one of the Shepherds of the Downs
commanding it should be so, and I was glad to find it so; but more glad, when
he brought us home to his House, where with loving care; and sufficient means,
we had the comfortable effects of good diligence, and ^onest looking unto.
But when I told him I was a man of Husbandry in Armenia, and was taken in a
Passage-Boate by the Pirate Cleonidas, as I was traueling into Media to an
elder Daughter there bestowed, with this Child, he much pitied my distress:
But when I told him, seeing Fortune was so cross unto me (and poverty must
needs prove combersome, and the discouerer of imperfections) I would take any
pains in an other Country to help my wants, rather then be a scandal to my
self, a laughing stock to my Enemies, and a scorn to my Friends; or at least
such, as in former time professed so; he liked me as a man of sense, and
added somewhat of his own opinion. But when I told him, that the bond of his
Kindness had tied me to the strict observation of Satisfaction; and that I
offered him the fruit of my endeavors in his service, Coranus suffering
shipwreck is taken up by Selenus and names Brizaca Deltona.
he took it in good part, made trial of my industry, and welcomed me
accordingly.

There I remained until Deltona (for so I named Brizaca) was able to apprehend
my instructions, and loath to let her loose the benefit of this towardlynesse I
obtained of Selenus a Cottage by my self, wherein we lived, till she in her
life flourished, and I in her flourishing prospered: For as if the graces had
doated on her, each action she attempted was gracious, and I (as if fortune
men^ to turn her Wheel indeed,) in every thing had good success: in so much
that with the admiration of her beauty and gallant behavior Deltona obtained
the chief place at the feast: and with regard of the company, and my own
good usage, the poor Coranus held the reputation you found him in: therefore
(most Noble Duke) look on her now with other eyes? for no longer Deltona, but
the Emperor-Mengrelius daughter; Brizaca.

By that time Coranus concluded his discourse, a general muttering was heard,
and raised a manner of confusion amongst them, wherein we will leave them, till
the ecstasy have end: and as they begin to confer of the strangeness, shall
the time acquaint you with the story.

Finis Libri Secundi.
THE THIRD BOOK of the History OF TREBIZOND.



Imprinted at London by W. White, for T. Downs and E. Dawson. 1616.

To the honorable Lady FRANCIS EGERTON.
HONORABLE LADY,
I Could flourish the colors of your Praises from Virtue, Beauty,
Gracefulness, Magnanimity, and such like enriching gifts of Nature: But at
this time I will extend your worth no further, then that you are a fair
promising Fruit of a glorious Tree; and so have chosen you with the rest, to
ouer-shade me from the tempests of Detraction, considering I am now like a
ceeled Dove to fly abroad with strange disguises, and have as it were
matriculated my self in the School of Folly, by writing of Books: Yet if you
will relieve it, as a poor cast-out Orphan, then are you charitable: If you
entertain it for any cause in it self, then do you Justice: If you pardon
the faults, then are you Virtuous: If you protect it, then are you Heroyicall:
Nay, if you make it contemptible, I shall impute it to my own ill deserving,
not any deficiencie in you. But casting these doubts aside, I am confident,
that you will either give me leave to make use of your Honorable supportation;
or lift me up your self with so strong an arm, that neither Envy nor
Derision of others, shall shoulder me aside from your acceptance; or come
near you, that are willing to be so gentle and graceful unto me,

Your Honors to commannd, Th. Gainsforde.

The Third Book of the History of TREBIZOND.
THe truth had no sooner Deltona thus revealed does not yet forget Montanus:
but confesses her love.
triumphed in Deltonas discovery, but seemed impatient at restraint, and
therefore commanded fame to diulge it abroad: yet who had at this instant
beheld her, would have sworn she meant to participate to some excellent artist
a very pattern of modesty and humility rather then state and magnificense:
For there neither appeared alteration, nor any new countenance; only that which
seemed new, was a manner of scorn to think, how a vain titell should produce
such regard before virtue and desert: Neither would she have admitted those
ceremonies, had not Egerius now her brother Trezoboro persuaded, that though a
diamond (howsoever set forth) is still precious, and a stone of estimation: yet
arteficially pollished makes apparent a greater luster, and augmenteth the
vallue and sufficiency: So no doubt virtue and beauty in Deltona Coranus
Child, were guiftes of singular delight and account, but in Brizaca the Emperor
Mengrelius daughter, they were perfections and excellencies of admiration: thus
she was contented to dismiss her former stillness and fear and appeared, as
if majesty had framed a work of ostentation, which made the king, Duke, and
the rest, burden ignorance with the error of their slight respect, and desired
her to pardon the former negligence: to this she was soon directed, and by her
excellent behavior, gave notice of all those additions, which make Princes
famous to their eternal renown.

In the time of this celebration, Montanus seemed forgotten: For every one
busied themselves with the matter in hand. The king to gratefie Rugio to
purchase atonement; Trezoboro to acknowledge a Sister, Philano to honor his
friend, Coranus in recounting of secrets; and Bertosus in discovering of
circomstances: so that Montanus too curiously stomaching the operation of joy
extended alto^ather toward another, entertained an unkind suspicion of her
neglect, which made him retire to Bertosus house, where his meditation was
quickly welcomed to Ielosy and misdoubt, had not Coranus brought him tidinges
of better cousequence upon this occation.

Brizaca settled in glorious alteration, began to ransacke the Closet of
affection, and found the remembrance of Montanus mourning, that there seemed
need of a new search, which made her challenge the company for his loss; as
if she meant to give them notice, that on his saftie depended her chiefest
content. Now was a new hurliburly in the Palace, and a new humor in the Duke,
they busied in the execution of her pleasure, and he repining to find a
concurrent in his love: For if before her Comeliness and Beauty had withdrawn
Power from an incontinent liberty, now her Greatness and Majesty rather
inflamed, then enamored; which suggested emulation against Montanus, and might
have nourished those despights increasing between riuals, had not the presence
of Brizaca caused the return of better consideration, and her last denial
assured she was engaged with the bond of Faith toward him.

Thus was Rugio imperiously ruled, and for her pleasure displeasingly pleased:
so be sent Coranus and Bertosus abroad, who coming home, found Montanus in a
manner ouercharged with grief. Why how now (quoth Bertosus,) is this the
conqueror of Misfortune? and terror of Licentiousness? Did you exclaim
against Rugio, to our amase, and disquiet the King with your heroyicke
reprehention? Is Brizaca less regarded an Emperors Daughter, then when she
was Deltona, the reputed Child of Coranus? Where is Courage and Magnanimity?
Where is Hope and Resolution? Where is Love and Delight? See Love, (replied
Montanus) but little Delight: For what goodness can I expect, when at the very
first, Disdain and Contempt proceeded against me? no man more deserving, no
man less regarded. Tush (answered Bertosus) Imagination is the mother of
Trouble; let me therefore bring these glad* tidings, that how-euer the
strangeness wrought in us, and ecstasy was effectual in them; yet is Brizaca
honorable, constant, and resolute toward you. Toward me (quoth Montanus,) how
can a Shepherd be remembered amongst Princes? Truly (said Coranus) if I may
speak without offense, ouer-liberally credulous of your Promise, she
reprehended me for your absence, and swear she would forget her new name, if
it should be an obstacle to her desires. Well (said Montanus) I allow of the
deceit, and am content to check my suspicion: I request you therefore like
men, let us believe the Gods remain uncontrollable; and like friends, suffer
me to make this use of your kindness, to certify Deltona (for as yet I dare
not name Brizaca) that my life and love depends on her respect; whereon I
will advance the trophes of Honor, when that sleeping Fame shall awake to tell
her, Montanus is no less then a Monarch: In the mean while, I present her my
M^ntanus departs from Forton^.
Heart; but must absent my Bodily presence. Nay, reply not? For Heaven
concludes, my Geniusperswadeth, and I am unchangeable. With that, he hasted
out of the City, and left them to marvel at the wilfulness.

Thus they returned to the Court, assuring the Duke he was not to be found:
But imparting to Brizaca the matter as it chanced, and the manner, as the
circumstances effected; in commending withal his care (exceeding all other
care) to be restored to the possession of happiness: This somewhat settled her
fear, and yet troubled her opinion, considering she could not apprehend,
whither he should go, unless to Placandus. In the mean while, Trezoboro and
the Duke, concluded to proclaim their discovery in all the Kingdoms
adjoining; which Rugio consented unto, as well to make his endeauours plead his
affection and desert to Brizaca, as to amplify his renown both abroad and at
home: whereupon many Messengers assured diverse Princes, that truth and
strangeness had sent them; and they according to the nature desiring
novelties, by Commission or rather Warrants of safe conduct came to Fortona,
ere the limited time had fully spread her wings, and were welcomed
accordingly: so that such as professed in chivalry, made their cost rather
extend to necessity then wantonness; and such as had their Fancies tied to
other subjects, seemed doubly charged, to make a mixture of arms and delight;
but when the day approached, wherein glory determined a solemn inauguration,
the intercourse of people gave notice, as if they went to the Palace of
Honor, and the Duke added to his greatness and everlasting fame, both by his
demeanor and expenses. In this manner proceeded the Triumph, and the Judges of
the Field were conducted to an imperial Tent, equally dividing the Listes,
which were King Zalby: Orcanus Lord of the Blew Islands: and Nestorius Prince of
Oxidracan: the Ladies discharging their nicetie, were as ready as the
multitude, and the Knights came triumphantly forward: Amongst whom the
defendants shall receive this sparing commendation, that their outward bravery
and gallantnesse, made the beholders suppose it sumptuous, and the person
unknown, was worthily liked for his honorable mind and good intent: As for
the Challengers (how ever some censor do except against the time, which had
not yet ripened invention) they may not so slightly ouerpasse my remembrance.

Ligornio heir and hope of Bactriana brother in law to Rugio, and newly
betrothed to the fair Ramira, a daughter of Artaxerxes Prince of Susiana, had
his Caparison of a Sea color satin, so arteficially embrodered with a
tempestuous water divided into broken waves by the purling of the Silk and
Silver, that the contention arose, whether the cost or the cunning exceeded:
for at every corner of the Quarters, you might descry a Ship in harbor of
safety. The Mott was: Tandem,

Sacromirus son of Hircania, ware a purple Velvet, all spotted and embrodred
with Panthers; but so done, as we well might know, Hircania affoorded this
Beast exceeding other Countries, and he affected them surpassing other men, as
if he meant to discover, that look what property Nature bestowed upon them,
he assumed to him self. The Mott: Si saturatus mitis.

Seleucus heir of Margiana, on a curious Cloth of Silver had in diverse places
a Rock deciphered, resembling that, which protected the Country from invasion,
and assured; the place it self was also impreguable. The Mott: Hoc cape et
regna.

Belnidus the son of Carmania, bare a Peachcolour Velvet purled over with
silver and gold Wier; but so artificially wrought, that you might perceive a
cut off Head on an Altar, as if he meant to tell us, that Love was there
obtained with the price of their enemies Heads The Mott: Sic amor. conquiritur.

Culanus King of Sogdiana having matched with the heroyicall Tarina Queen of
Saca, thought no scorn to blazon her excellencies, and therefore on a VVatchet
Satin embost with Gold had her resemblance portrayted, and himself kneeling
before her, wherein the chiefest care consisted to decipher, that Beauty and
Valor, had doubly enforced his yielding unto her. The Mott: Non pudet vinci.

Philano son to Rugio on an Azure Damask, bare a resplendant Sun, so
excellently embost, that the very Rays gave show of a glorious light; but when
we perceived certain Clouds of Silk and Silver, as it were thrust into a
corner, we then remembered a greater force might put a weaker enemy to
retreat. The Mott: Sio gloria desidiam.

Trezoboro on a russet Velvet cut in pierced mascelles upon azure Persian
stuff, had diverse Crowns of Goldsmiths work; over whom an Enameled eye
seemed to take the charge. The Mott: Quis amittet?

The Duke himself ware on an Orange satin an embrodred Arm, shaking a Sword
out of a fiery Cloud, and so wrought, as if it received life from a Heart
threatening despite. The Mott: Vindicta.

Thus passed the Ceremonies of this Triumph; wherein is to be observed, that
Valor and Delight made beforehand a bargain with Mischaunce, not to enter
the Listes, or any way to impeach the Iollitie, being a thing determined for
show and pleasure: Yet when it came to execution, the broken Lawnces flew into
the air, scorning the compass of a small hold. The Horses wearied with ill
managing, disburdened themselves of their unfortunate Masters. The Knights
active in their several encounters, (loving Virtue for her own sake) desisted
not for one repulse; but again and again made their trial: Amongst whom,
Rugio enforced himself beyond expectation (as carried with a passhionate
violence toward Brizaca;) for though he had broken forty Lawnces, and
overthrown sixteen Knights; yet scorned he a surceance, till the fortune of
the day confirmed the Prize to his worth: But as his forwardness insulted with
his merit, a sudden hurliburly at the West end of the Tilt, exposed new
matter of variety, and came thus to pass.

MOntanus went directly to his father Placandus, over whom several fears and
Montanus comes to Placandus: his father and prepares himself against the
Triumph.
sorrows for the murder of Franio, and the dissipation of his friends had an
untoward government: but it was quickly deposed by the return of Montanus, who
by this time was welcomed, as if a traueler having left a loving wife in the
several mistrustes of a dangerous vioage paste hope of returning presented
himself by miracle unto her: which occationed some ceremony of kindness, as
well to strengthen the opinion of Placandus toward him, as to satisfy his
curiosity, which never left over burdning him with questions: Whereupon he told
the old man of the Dukes stealing Deltona, her scorn and Franios treachery: he
told the old man, Coranus had found a brother, himself was entertained with
Bertosus, and what had chanced concerning Egerius: he told the old man
Mengrelius story, king Zalbys coming to the Court, and Deltonas with her
brothers discovery: he told the old man the entertainment, which followed,
the embassage concluded on, and the triumph proclaimed, whither he was resolved
to go; which when Placandus rather wondered at, then impugned, he told the old
Man of his misfortunes, the fight with Cleonidas, and his right to the kingdom
of Armenia: To be brief he told the old man he was the Prince Anzitemus, of
his contract at Mengrelius Cave, and how Deltona remained irremoueable, and
vnaltred: of which though the strangeness slacked his belief, yet was the
truth so modestly urged, and the likelihood of his speeches concurred with such
smothnesse, that Placandus rejoiced in the hope to find it so, and with a
gladsome contraryetie seemed officious unto him, as if he knew it was so: But
when the next morning rumored the like circumstances, he then observed all the
parts of love and secrecy, and according to his directions made ready Money of
his Cattle, moueables and such like he possessed, with which Montanus
furnished him self, as conveniently as he could, and at the time appointed
came into the field with a Caparison curiously embost with watchet silk and
gold counterchangeably laid upon the same color Persian stuff: his devise a
laurel flourishing under a tempestuous Element, the Mote: Salua tamen.

Thus with a seemly Trot he paced to the Tilt, Montanus comes to the Triumph
unknown.
as if he determined to grace their expectation with a thing of some rareness:
For the Horse commanded manifested a scorn of wantonness by a stately
sobriety; and he commanding, managed the beast without any wrested mouinges
or enforced restraintes: nor was the Duke much discontented with his approach
(his courage enterpreting it a pollecie of Honor to add more feathers to the
Wings of Fame, because he had already made trial of as good men at arms as any
in Asia: yet very loath, that mischance should make a mixture with that days
glory, he shifted his weary Horse, and took him to an old Bay, which rather
(as if time had altered the color) seemed a perfect Chesse-nut, and so
supplied the room again, attending the sommons of victory.

But when the Ladies were made acquainted with the novelty, strange was their
desire to know him, strange was their grief, that none could satisfy their
desire: As for the peerlesse Brizaca, though she could have wished him
Montanus; and withal, remembered the good of Montanus: yet not able to think,
what treasury in a place unknown, had opened her doors, she desisted from
supposing him Montanus: But whether, because her mind had run on Montanus,
or that the nature of well wishing extends to the weaker side; she once
again allowed him Montanus; and prayed accordingly for the same success, as
if it had been to Montanus; but the Trumpets sound gave warning to put her
other senses in practice; and so the first course began, which passed both with
liking to the beholders, and astonishment to Rugio, because they perceived a
sweeter cleanness in the division, and he felt a quicker strength in his
delivery: yet knowing conceit was a weakening of courage, and the least
advantage,descried a step to Conquest, he made ready again, and so five times
together with sufficient equality concluded, and might surely have triumphed
without impeachment, considering the deeds of Arms, with whose applause he had
filled all men's cares the day before: but that the Saddle at the sixth encounter
scorned the weakness of his Strappes, and unworthily disburdened it self of
so worthy a Master; who seemed somewhat perplexed to be so disappoynted, yet
was pacefied in the displeasure, when the rest received the same payment.

In this manner was Glory satisfied to see the Virtue of this new Knight
accompanied with good success, and so the Judges with semblant suffrages,
yielded the honor of the triumph unto him: But he utterly disclaymed to
assume it, considering the Duke had continued longest in the Field, and he
came like an Enemy in ambuscado, espying the best advantage for his sallying
forth. To this Rugio opposed, as much pleased with his respect, as opinion of
the rest: especially considering his hopes toward Brizaca were frustrate, and
therefore led him up in great royalty to receive the Prize: where the admirable
Princess, accompanied with many worthy Lapyes expected, to whose portion
Fortune would allot it: But when a full interuiew had taken away the veil of
doubtfulnesse, it was no kind entertainment, but a sense rauishing joy
published him Montanus, wherein she might have passed the limits of
moderation, if Trezoboro had not sommoned her to put her other graces in
practice. Now when Montanus found him self the cause of this confused silence,
and turmoyle, he thought it high time to pollish the rough way, and lead them
to a plain Field of his knowledge; whereupon he used this preamble. Let not
(great Princes) too sudden a censure pass upon my presumption or negligence;
but rather be incensed against Ignorance, and my own Misfortunes, if respect
have not passed with her properties: But because you have already participated
with the discovery of this peerless Princess, and yet still continue as a
longing and loving Mother for the return of an other Son, afford me a
little patience, and I will fill up the measure of your hopes:Yet in regard the
Journey I undertake is tedious, and this days travel importuneth repose, I
will dispense awhile with the time, and procrastinate your desires till to
morrowes conueniencie: But very quickly is the Sun infeoffed with the nights
inheritance, and Trezoboro in his sisters hehalfe (stomaching the delay, he
thought Montanus made) challenged his honorable Promise, and accompanied him
to King Zalby, the Duke, and rest of the Princes; who by this, furnished a
room of State, wherein the chiefest things worthy regard was strange
expectation: So that after Brizaca with her princely assistants, had enriched
the place, Montanus with a solemn Majesty rose up, and with the ceremony of a
reverent obeisance to them, a mannerly cheerfulness to her, and sweet
affability to the rest, thus began.

WHom so ever remembrance favors The History of Artabazes and Olmus.
with the occrurences of an age forepassed, must needs either read, or hear
of the famous victories of Armenus surnamed the great, whose vallure subjected
diverse resisting powers, and gave name to the Country to his obedience reduced:
In which he had not long advanced the Standard of imperiousness, but amongst
others, erected two especial Cittis Sagarena, and Artaxata: The first,
corresponding to his Fathers: the second, to her Name; for whose sake the
Country submitted to a Strangers wroth. In these he constituted Laws for the
Commonwealth, and Orders for the Court; which although seemed repugnant to the
peoples disposition, by reason they sauored of new invention, and combined them
to a strictness, rather wresting their obedience, then animating their
loyalties: Yet the good use by his ouerlooking, settled their grudgings, and
established him in a flourishing prosperity; which though misfortune began to
impugn by some slender reuolts, and the loss of the royal Artaxata; yet was
fully reintigrated in a second Marriage with the magnanimous. Talmiranda Queen
of Assiria; with whom he spent the days of his years, and the years of his
glory, glorying so much the more, because Nature imparted her Bounty in many
particulers, and Time made the vpshot with expectable issue: For his Sons,
Artabazes and Olmus showed in their bringing up great hope, and in their
Fathers life Honorable government. But the aged Armenus must satisfy his debt
to the whole worlds creditor, and leave them in the world like Wax wrought
with a warm hand ready for any impression. At last, sorrow ouerpassed the time
of her ceremonious sadness, and the noble Artabazes without difficulty or
repining, invested him self with the royalties of both Armenias, Assiria, and
many Provinces annexed to his Empire; and so two especial occasions lifted up
their heads to make them selves known to the King: The one, a Celebration of
his Marriage with Euphamia heir of Arach and the three Arabias: The other, a
form of Government, as well to maintain his Fathers good proceedings, as to
avoid the suspicion of his own weakness. In this, after extreamitie
compelled a strong Arm to ouerturne Cleonidas House and confederates, every
one applawded his method and manner, and the people were carried with
admiration toward him, the rather because he assured, that the like justice
should be distributed as well to the poor as rich, and made his own example a
magnes to draw forward the steeliest disposition: But when by many particulars
tending to a perfect establishment, they found their peace and plenty to
flourish, then were they violently carried with zeal, duty, and reverence: and
truly (most mighty Princes) how ever some envious hand did afterward cast
poison into his virtuous Spring, he questionless laid a sure foundation, as
your selves (if you will afford me a little patience) may witness.

For the first thing he undertook, was the peopling a mighty City in the heart
of his Realm, and erecting a sumptuous Palace in the midst of the Town;
that a reseptacle of all sorts, whom controversies compelled to trial of
Laws, this ordained to especial persons, whom honor incited to follow the
Court. The Buildings not yet so much beautified with external curiousness, as
firm stateliness: and the Palace an invention of glory and eternity: as
having sure walls, well proportioned largnesse, stately lights, easy Stairs,
great Entries, Princely Galleryes, convenient Lodginges, wide and magnificent
gates, aparted Offices, wholesome walks, sweet Gardens, and dellicate
Nurseries: But what was this to the situation and polliticke advancement, the
ground work it self mounted two Furlonges higher then the other buildinges,
and the metation finished with the circuit of a Thousand yardes, all contained
within the deepenesse of a double Moat to which industry of man had drawn up
the violence of many springes, and the circomference of a triple Wall: yet did
a stealing hill in such soft vprising direct thee, that what with the bravery
of the Marbell paued streets, and the comeliness of the even built houses
waling four great ways of two hundred foot in breadth, eight hundred yardes
in length from the City gate to the first Palace wall, thou would have
been delighted in the iorny, and wondered with what pleasure thou had attained
to such height: thus was it strong to with stand insurrection, and in the
midest for the better command of the City, and easier provision of the
Palace: like the heart enuiorned with the body, and the nourisher of life to
all the members, they flourishing by the strength of it, and that prospering by
the good order of them: Thus was it princely to resuscitate regard, because
the state of Majesty may not be confounded with community, but retain
special reverence. Thus was it named Armamiranda that the people in remembering
their well affected Prince might conceive he forgot not his much deserving
parents.

The next matter of import was to vnuaile the grosenesse of errors, and to
reduce the government to uniformity, which consisting in the admittance of
virtue and men loving virtue for virtues sake, selected such, whose integrity
of life, and prudent directions warranted their worth for any purpose, as for
folly either of her self loathsome, or bewtiched with impiety abominable,
she was altogether banished: the person whosoever rejected for the
imperfection, and the imperfection imputed rather to scorn of discipline, then
natural defect. This made the good go forward in a well trodden path, and the
bad desist from accoustomed ill life, to which they were as it were directed,
by reason so great a king made himself exemplary by his own uprightness in
judgment, truth of word, reposednesse of speech, cheerfulness of aspect,
secrecy of business imparted, tolleration of inconveniences, resolution of
enterprises, heroyicke proceedinges in matters of Arms, constancy in
affliction, and at all times reverence towrad the Gods.

The officers of his house were such, whose demeanor solicited Honor to
remember their worth, or virtue beautified, that Honor before collated to
them: yet was no man trusted to the liberty of his own will, but received
these instructions, to accknowledge the dignity of a kings person, to
maintain the secrets of state and Court, to perpetrate no fact incurring the
crime of Majesty, to detract no time nor occasion, which might set forth the
honor of his kingdom, to admit no unworthy person, as an officer in Court, to
hinder no man's advancement, that had merited his place, and to deprave, nor
deprive no complainant, till his cause were iudicially heard.

His providence appointed a Hundred Senators, as Presidents of Provinces
dispersed through the Empire; to whom he committed Causes of incombrances, and
Petitions of the people; not yet withdrawing him self from Controversies of
importance, nor forbidding to speak, whom Injuries enforced; so that the
Proud and Mighty were depressed, the Weak and Innocent comforted, and the
Worthily regarded, confirmed.

The Priests had charge to watch late, to rise early, to be spare of Diet,
sober in speaking, patient in suffering, holy in conversation, seruent in
execution of Sacrifice, impartial in reprehention, untainted with private
malice, no hoorders of Treasure, administers of wants, and keepers of their
own houses.

The Noblemen reziant in their Countries received these instructions, To have
their Houses stored with serviceable Attendants, such as should neither be
rash, quarrellers, liars, blasphemers, gluttonous, gamesters, lecherous, or
infamed: All which might be easily avoided, or quickly prevented, if they
themselves were mild, honest, sober, silent, patient, familiar, and devout:
neither murmuring at the haunts of Brothers, Uncles; Coosins, and all other of
their kin; nor denying to succor the necessities of poor Allies; or supplying
the wantes of craving Strangers; whose enforced adversity deserved compassion.

The Judges of the Kingdom, and Justices of each division were prescribed
rules touching them selves, and had a commission concerning others: touching
themselves in no sort to be irregular, not lavish in tauntes, not arrogating
improper titles; no vtterers of base reproaches, no nourishers of impatience, no
deriders of former instances, no despisers of ciuillitie, nor others ignorance,
and above all no deniers of justice, nor strangers to religion: concerning the
people to make strong weakness, to commend courage, to provide before
enforcement, to chastise dissolution, to succor in time, to appease sedition,
to observe conformity, to clear suspicion, to remedy heuinesse, and to
temper the momentary joys of prosperity.

The Gent: whose youth added Iustinesse to desire, and sufficiency to
willingness, were advised (with this caveat not to surpass their degrees, or
endanger their estates) to learn morallitie, as an ornament of the mind, and
practice to be active for the enabling their bodies, either to Courtly
pastimes, as the Prince delighted, or to Wars necessity, as the Common
wealth enforced, whereby was put in use the running of rases, the swiftness of
Footmanship, the wrestling by arms, the breaking of Horses, the sleight of the
Lance, the casting of Darts, the benefit of Slinges, the stroke of the Sword,
the wearing of Armor, and the advantage of other weapons: besides the spare
time of Countries repose was bestowed in taming of Beasts by policy, force,
devise of Toils, deceit of pittes, coursing of Dogs, or cunning of
Horsmanship: In catching Fowls by counterfeit of Voice, limings of bush,
placing of Ginnes, and exercise of Hauking: In snaring of Fish, by skill of
Hook, groping by hand, casting the Net, opening the sluice, or poisoning the
poole.

The Merchant was made acquainted to travel abroad, to observe his Martes, to
learn navigations, to abstain from curiosity, to apply himself to the place
of his Trade, to exchange his commodities, to be certain of his admittance,
and to make difference in the choice of his Merchandise, according to the
variety of Countries, each affording natures bounty, and the earthes plenty,

The Countri-man had these informations to till the ground, to Plough their
seasons, to Sow their Corn, to reap the blessings, to house their Stuff, to
order their Cattle, to Plant fruit, to sow Acorns, to set Wood, to quick
Ditches, to draine Marshes, to stock Roots, to cast Pondes, to sheate Sheep,
to trim Wool, to weaue Cloth, to spinne Linnin, to dress Honey, and to
practice whatsoever labor might attain to, or conceit imagine.

The Artificers were employed to build strongly, to Wall with stone, to
strengthen with Iron, to make warm with Glass, to heaw Timber, to burn
Brickes, to grave in Metal, to cast Armor, to dig Mines, to search Wells,
to devise for Shipes, to Tann Leather, and to furnish towns: so that nothing
was left undone, which belonged to the use of man, nor any thing done according
not to reason and wisdom.

Thus (noble Princes) flourished the Commonwealth five Lustrums together,
until a wanton Security set on work the worst part of man's maliciousness,
and made every paltry Controversy rather a wicked Cauell, then a necessary
Complaint: For in short time, many Sycophants grew in the Commonwealth, ( like
some strange Disease on an infected body, which either carelessness or
wilfulness neglected to cure, until it became vlcerous and past redress,)
who never desisted from wrong information betwixt Neighbor and Neighbor;
whereby they began in Displeasure, and ended in Despite. Many ambitious
spirits not able to bear out them selves, suffered Envy to entangle one
another with infinite outrages; so that if one Cause were determined, ten
Actions were commenced: and many devilish Polliticians prying underhand into
the demeanors of men, either brought them within apparent Default, or suborned
Witness against them as, infringers of the Law; whereby every man feared the
conversation he kept, and repining Hurliburlies in a manner mutinied against
the permitters: but especially when the King (growing mighty and rich, by
reason diverse advantages brought them within penalty of some Statute^ and For
^etures,) became somewhat careless in such particulars, as before his Father
and him self had ouerlookt: Then were under Officers left like unskillful
Pilots in a dangerous Voyage; and the^e arose a very fear of confusion amongst
the people, and lacked but a Head to draw them into action; which though it was
not justifiable in the wrong course so to be undertaken, yet was to be pitied
in the reasons, they inferred of redress.

For speaking the truth, the men in authority (espetially to whom the
determining of controversies wear appointed) not only made benefit of the
contentions of the people, but for the insatiablenesse of the benefit subverted
the first good intent of the laws with quillites and detracting, being cunning
indeed in nothing but detracting: besides, touching private humors, this
ridiculous crossenesse chanced, that where their own originalls were for the
most part base and obscure, they in the scorn and inueighing against others,
labored yet to ennoble themselves and their Children: Here also was added the
errors of higher officers every one striving to advance his friend and follower
to such places, which other men expected for desert, or had won with time of
service and attendancie; nor was this sufficient, but the Common wealth was
burdened with strange impositiones, and diverse Monopolies brought only
benefit to some few persons to the general repining and complaint of the
kingdom: For the better sort stomached to see their honor checked and
controuled: The men of Arms disdained to be used like flowers, which are worn
while they keep their scent, but cast on the Dunghill never so little fading:
The religious, like their profession, were rather esteemed for a pollecie to
keep the people in awe, then in necessity to tremble at any judgment to come:
other Artists poor for lack of practice, and therefore despised: the
Countryman stoubborne, malicious, and yet outwardly humble enough,
understanding but by others instructions, and a little soothed, brought into a
Fools Paradise: Only the Citisen made good shift, by reason navigations was to
be maintained, and the intercourse of people bestowed their Money amongst them:
yet desisted they not from sinister means in gathering of wealth, and cruel
extremity in extorting advantages, quickly suggested by base Brokers and petty
Lawiers, who in the end made them resemble that envious man, who wished one of
his eyes to be pulled out, so his companion might lose both, which wrought so
great fear (by reason Conscience accused them of so many faults,) that they
quickly fined themselves, and when there was no such thing meant, consented to
any imposition to maintain their liberties,

Thus grew the name of Lawyer and Officer more hateful, then orderly
execution: For their Pride and Wealth made them respect no body but them
selves; nor any thing, but their own profit: Now when Pride and Covetousness
were yoked together, like untamed Heifers under the hand of an unskillful
workman, the Plough went quickly aside with ill holding, and the Commonwealth
grew full of Weeds for lack of seasonable tillage; which was a long time
marked, and as long concealed by the Kings brother Olmus, who quickly
apprehended the mislike of the people, and as quickly entertained some strange
hope in the apprehension; nor wanted their means and helps to betray his
conceit. For some induced him to take the defense of the people into his
hands; others dispersed Libels of defamation against the State: Some whispered
against the King for not reforming these enormities; others dared to buzze in
the peoples ears, that Olmus was of an other disposition; who in deed by this
time, affecting a kind of popularitie, soothed each complaint with a pitiful
behavior toward many Suitors, and fair Promises to stand them in what stead he
could: whereupon they flocked on heaps, and Olmus the Kings Brother begins
aninne uation.
made intercession, he would protect the Commonwealth, offering their lives
and goods in profuse manner unto him.

When Artabazes understood the truth, and that Euphamia pleaded the hazard of
Artabazes, stomaching his Brothers, presumption will not induer it but Kills
him in the Hurliburly.
her self and Children, he durst not give way unto the mischief, for there
was no sitting still in hearing of Innovation, but published an apparent
mislike of these beginnings, and proclaimed against his Brother, for taking a
wrong course and cause in hand: Now? because the ielowsie sprung from the
hazard of his Crown and dignity, it burst forth into flames of Despite; with
which he meant to consume him, had not some special Coadiutors underpropped his
ambition, whereby he was a while reserved, like a man traterously asisted to the
Top of an high tree, that his fall might be the greater, when they list to
tumble him down, for presently diverse ciuell Wars ensued, which the people
with great fear and charges maintained, and Olmus with extremity and policy
continued, as fully resolved, that the fault now aggrauated would never admit
reconsiliation: sometime passed in this business, wherein all mediocrity
ouerpassed (both Country and Cities suffering the wrecke of the mischief)
whereupon a truce was taken, and the king seemed contented to have their
greeuances heard, for which a sollemne meeting was appointed at Sagarena: but
Artabazes incensed to be thus Coorb'd, as he thought, would by no means
admit of other Course, then his own pleasure, persuading his great heart, or
at least his great heart persuading him, that the authority of Kings consisted
in commanding, and not in being ouerruled by audatious disobedience: with
which quick conceit he ouershott to dispute or Reason the matter, and so by
forcible entry broke into the consistory, with a strong hand dismissing the
Counsel, amongst whom finding his unhappy brother, he made the case more
Lamentable, because he slew him himself, Artabazes Kills his brother Olmus.
and that the company in a place privileged were unable to revenge it, who yet
performed, what they durst, and durst do no more, then excalime on the action.

But the king careless of any man's repining, retired his forces to the
Principal fortress, suspecting what a mutinous Multitude might unadvisedly
yield unto, especially having already entertained mislike, and now confounded
with new action of distrustes, which accordingly came to pass. For the City
dismayed with the report of Olmus death, and terrefied with the speeches of
diverse, who gave out that the King meant presently to sack it, misdoubted their
own saftie, and were v^d to Master their forces to save their lives, which
Gestarius incited them unto (a Minnion of the slaughtered Prince) and with The
story of Gestarius.
a slender inuectiue quickly exasperated their displeasure. But here Fortune
laughed, first to see a man of judgment deceived in an idle choice: and then
the world bewitched to be carried out of the smooth path of Obedience by a blind
guide into the stony and craggy streights of Innovation. For concerning the
man, he was in great credit about Olmus; yet neither bitth allowing the
favor of a Court, nor education meriting any extraordinate liking, only
readiness of Lip-labor adjoining some outward pleasantness to many abrupt
speeches (of themselves, neither in another gracious, nor from another
allowable) made the ouercredulous Prince continue his love; because he had
begun his liking, and admit the person for pleasing his fancy, loath to reject
so great hope, as his cunning persuaded; and unwilling to bring his first
Judgment in question, which had so much ouerruled him. Touching his Action? as
soon as silence was pitifully entreated, he seemed to excruciate him self
with sorrow, and began to utter his mind, yet could not for deep sighs, nor
sigh long for many tears; which proceeding from affection, detained him awhile
in some abruptness, till at last the strength of his desire to Revenge, gave
liberty to the tongue thus to dispute.

O unfortunate people (said ^e) even after so long goodness with the surfeit of
the same unfortunate, now are you invited to a sower Banquet; in which neither
courtious entertainment allows a welcome, nor wholesome Diet satisfaction;
unless odious Presumption, arrogant Contempt, wilful Negligence, unexpected
Oppression, tyranous Slaughters, and unnatural Murders, be the fare you
attend, and the Dellicates you hope after: For naught else affoordeth the
Disshes of this course, or the courses of this Feast, considering your glory (O
ye that were proud in the fruition of such glory) is quite extinguished; but
in whom? in Olmus; o princely Olmus is slain: But where? in the Palace temple
sacred to the people, and sanctified to the Gods: But how? by force of Arms,
and fury of Tyrants: But by whom? by blood thirsty Artabazes, who with his
own hands chased us from the place, and slew his Fathers Son in the Temple;
which as I cannot declare without grief, so I wish not let pass without
redress, considering you importune to have the government worthy your
obedience; and not to remain in a continual fear of your ruin: For what
shall we expect, when the Commonwealth has been made the Tennisball of
Fortune, and tossed, as his violence enforced? When the Complaints of the
people have been derided, and irregular wilfulness set on foot many devilish
stratagems; as for the Wars, which has made us all smart, they have been but
counted pastimes, and the means to disburthen him of ill willers: But
concerning our selves, How shall we that be Strangers, live without dismay,
when he which was his Mothers Son died without remorce? Let my very Enemies,
whom yet I would not have enemies to their Country, look about with the eyes
of zeal and discretion, and then tell me, if the Kingdom thus distracted,
stand not in need of better direction, when they see in all strong compacted
Estates, either Wise men be advanced to authority, or men in authority
endeavor to be Wise? Nor are-we so slauishly bound to the succession of a
Monarchy, not yet confirmed with eighty years memory, to submit to private
insatiatnesse, rather then provide for public good. What shall I say? I
protest, neither old rooted Malice, nor any private Displeasure of my own,
gives this evidence: Or as the ill willer may infer, perpretrateth a crime;
but the dangers you remain in (most honorable Armenianus) to see your
Privileges taken from you, your Goods dispearsed, your selves made slaves,
your Wives ravished, your Daughters deflowred, and your Cities set on fire,
(as if your names were to be forgotten on earth) compels this aggrauation:
For the Head corrupted, suffers the Body to perish, and the Mind to be
contagious: a Spring poisoned, dissolueth the venom into the running Stream;
and the Prince lifted up like the head of a polliticall body, either of him
self wicked, or of as wicked as him self mis-ledde, quickly ruineth the
flourishing'st Kingdom. Then may the Subjects wish amiss, because they hate,
and hate in that they can receive no good: which seeing we have such pregnant
proof of, let us in time, either alter this untoward beginning, or depose our
new beginning Tyrant: for in our case, we for^y not that good men do die; but
tremble that the vicious do live.

No sooner had his rebellious eloquence soothed the conceits of the multitude,
but with a mutinous hurliburly (not unlike a raging Sea swelling over some
small defense, which caryeth before it what so ever stops his course; or a
boisterous Wind, whose violence hurleth down the greatest and highest
Buildings) did they thronge on heaps against the place, whither safety had
withdrawn Artabazes; and seeing the Ports guarded, were the more enraged,
because resisted; yea altogether out of patience, as finding a likelihood of
Gestarius inuectiue, the most of them not knowing whither they went, nor
advised what to do; yet because they would be doing, did indeed what was not
to be done: Some crying it surpasses Homicide, and no way to be excused;
others wished their silence, and inferred there might be a causing
circomstaunce: Some whispered the danger of delay, and that there was
opportunity to revenge all their wrongs; others gave an assault, vainly
presuming on the glory of the exployte: Some thought it too much outrage, and
therefore seemed half angry; others of a more dangerous courage, fearing a
slacknesse in the division, were the angrier at their anger: Some gave a caveat
to be advised, least the King should prevail; others made use of that doubt,
that no Pardon would ever be granted, and therefore as good purchase their
Peace by force, or make it a general trespass.

Thus unstayed hastiness, the very principal part of traiterous insurrection,
divided their wits, and debarred all motions of allegiance, causing them,
which intended to do well, to practice what was amiss, and such as meant
amiss to continue in tenn times worse: so that Artabazes was amassed at the
wretched uproar, and in a manner confounded to see such a concurrencie of
mischief; but when he perceived their outrage bent to entrap his life, and
that they had begun a work of great trouble, he summoned the best advise he
could of prevention, which concluded to win time, the father of contraries,
and by secret flight to prevent the present fury: reasonning thus, either their
own affairs would divide them to their houses, or the charge in maintaining
the Army would prove to comberfome; or the Queen having strongly fortefied her
self in Belcania, would raise and increase her power, or the neighbor amity
of Media would sufficiently reenforce his Army: this his eldest son Anzitemus
much urged, because Artabanus the Median King was many ways tied in honor
unto him, and to this did they all condescend, making that night a sudden
alarm and with a gallant sally quickly winning the Haven with the Ships
within the River, wherein no man resisting (for the King Artabazes? leaves
Armenia.
commanding, and was now able to be obeyed) they as quickly embarked
themselves.

But here you might have deciphered the operation of base cowardice, and
gallant vallure; this of such virtue, that each danger was as soon
ouerpassed, as attempted: that of such changes, that the hurlyburly amongst
themselves slew more with disorder, then the Enemy with advantage: For as
Anzitemus gave the on set, and that the king followed to second him, whole
Lanes were made through some few companies new risen, and the suddenness
suffered none to rise, who were otherwise overtaken: besides, the night
increased the fear, the fear a confusion, and a confusion a most lamentable
slaughter, which the King not regarded (as supposing Justice had taken his
cause in hand) but thanking Fortune for the opportunity, left them amazed at
the accident, and settled him self to the dispatch of his journey.

By this time some better advised, then the rest, gathered together the
dispearsed Forces: but when the light of their Understanding had united it
self to the light of the Morning, and that they saw so pittious aspectacle,
and knew the King was escaped, then followed another alteration: For the
unsettled multitudenere disputing on the first cause, condemned the present
mischief, and began to enueigh against the enchantment of that exercist
Gestarius, which had so seduced them: but when they ouerlooked their damages,
and conceived the matter, as if Justice had sent them to the house of
Correction, then grew the terror amongst themselves more, then their courages
against their enemies, none now being enemies, but such as enterprised the
defense of Gestarius, who base in very baseness it self allowed each reproach
without Color or excuse, and suffered the wrecke of their rage with the loss
of his own life which done Pleios a chief man amongst them advised to submit
to the Queen Euphamia, whom in all actions they had found a worthy pattern of
Ptincelynesse and virtue, and would not now degenerate, considering Gestarius
had already received the guerdon of a Traitor, and no man remained, Gestarius
death.
but trembled to immagin, what the end would have been, if the King had
miscarried.

This every one applauded; and a present submission made intercession for a
pardon, but by reason of her fear of Artabazes, it received not full life, yet
she accorded, what ever chanced, to make their peace, and they encouraged with
her Princely promise disperced themselves, whereupon she sent forth a Pinace, as
a messenger of these glad tidinges to find out Artabazes, which made such
have, that within three days it ouertooke them overtaken with such ill
success, as if mischief and destruction indeed had called a dismal counsel
to cross a man,

FOr (most Excellent Princes) even when they The story of Cleonidas and
Artabazes.
thought misfortune weary of her tyrany, they descried a Fleet at Sea, the arch
Pirat Cleonidas, whom the Ministers of report had certefied of Artabazes
troubles, and mingling many lies with some truth, persuaded, that most men
desired his return and advancement, to which his former discontentments, and
present means of Revenge seemed to flatter him, that if the worst fell out, he
might join with Olmus, and so make the same Water that drove the Mill, to
drown the Mill by his coming, causing the Brothers so to weaken one another,
that at last he might be warranted to depresse the strongest party: This
advised him to furnish his Navy, and hearing the voice of the Winds sound
comfort unto him, made use of the time, and set forward with speed, until he
encountered Artabazes Sailing into Media, and thought Fortune very liberal in
bestowing such a benefit upon him: For now the choice of reconciliation or
Revenge was exposed, but Revenge sounded like Music in his cruel ears, as
maintained with the life of a more cruel heart; whereupon without parlee, or
other amplifieing manner of defiance (more then that he exclamed, how the
favor of the Gods had sent Cleonidas to cry quittance with the son of
Armenus) he presently assaulted them.

But when the name of Cleonidas, wicked Clenidas, (yea in his wickedness
dishonorable Cleonidas) was understood of Artabazes, never came vallure to be
so miserably checked (as if the sound of Cleonidas had proceeded from the
Trumpet of death) for a sudden stillness (far be it from any man to call it a
fear) made such a Metamorphosis, that when there seemed greatest need of an
embolding courage, then began a misdoubt of death warranting sorrow, which
departed not, till a strong party of sighs and tears disproportioned his
magnanimity: at last he remembered himself, and seeing his son Anzitemus, as
it were ouerlooking him, caught hold of his Arm, and thus spoke: O the
strength of my life? O my Anzitemus? Be not dismayde at this ecstasy, nor
impute the titell of Cowardice to the father of such a son, but the only
opinion, and the now examination of the same, which I conceived of the wise
Dermastro, who long since in a greefe-working sadness assured, that Cleonidas
would be omninous unto me has ouerswaied that allacrytie, which I once
supposed no mischance should distemper: yet I protest, this is not troublesome
in regard of my self, but for thee, whom I have doubly and irrecouerably
betrayed and abused: But necessity made a breach of his speeches: For
Anzitemus (answering no otherwise, then live Artabazes in despite of
Cleonidas?) was enforced to the fight, and so disposed his Ships, that
Cleonidas determining to Grapple, thought to discover some advantage by
Wheeling about, and turning his Sails. And as when two mighty Rams enraged
with the smart of well enforced strokes quickly part themselves, and to the
unexperienced make a Cowardly retreat, butindeed to meet again with sorer
fury: so acted Cleonidas his part, for what with animating of some, terrefieing
of others, and his own example he set forward again, and becircled the ship,
wherein Artabazes was with four greater: Now who had seen the peerless King
for his worthynesse could not, but have thought valor rightly bestowed, such
was the slaughter he made, such was the confusion, which followed: The shipe
full of dead Carkases, full of dying men, full of wounded fighters, himself
bestowing no blow, but like a Messenger of Revenge and ouerpressed with number
like a Minister of rage, as for the rest, the valiant in their deaths outfaced
death, the coward saw his shame rewarded either with miserable slaughter, or
slavish Captivity: the Ships were suncke and dismembered, and Anzitemus began
to be ouermastred fighting with Cleonidas, which when Artabazes perceived, his
impatience was so great, that Terror it self might have been dismayed at the
distemprature: For a strange fury began a strange action overthrowing all
resisters, making some Armelesse, some Headless, some Liuelesse and desisted
not, till he approached the place where his son fought, and displacing him
began the Combat himself, which continued in such a fashion, that Anzitemus
was divided from them, though his handyworke had wrought the Miracles amongst
the company: at last Artabazes (as angry, that it stood him in no more stead)
threw away his sword, and closing with Cleonidas supposed with maine strength
to throw him ouerboord.

Here began a new contention, as if destruction meant to show the beholders
variety, but after many windinges, shouings, and turnings both strong, both
cunning, the Pirat was overthrown, but not with that quickness, but Artabazes
fell two, compelled by the fast holding one another: thus lay, they both
breathing, both fainting, till Cleonidas awaking the very secrets of mischief,
and perceiving the neerenesse of his own Ship gave directions to tumble them
together therein, which whether they neglected think (Noble Princes) Cleonidas
carries Artabazes away prisoner.
when it was as quickly done as spoken, and the Enemy to manhood-commaunded to
vngrapple, and so to depart with their gotten Prize, which though Anzitemus
striued to intercept, yet Fortune unwilling to his destruction infringed his
desiers, and left him dying in seeing his father so captiued: and Tenn times
dying in the succorlesse help remaining: nothing with holding his own
entrance into the house of death, but hope of Cleonidas death, which very
shortly he had time enough to meditate on, though slender means to execute:
For when his eyes returned from their dastardly flight, as they termed it
(because they might as well have Triumphed over him) to regard his present
estate, and that he found of sixteen Sail and two Thousand men but two
barckes, and fifty eight in saftie, suppose he remained rather not knowing how
to dye, then wishing to live: at last the life breathing Counsel of Ardmeio,
faithful Ardmeio recaled his spirits, and thus dispelled the combersome
enemies of courage; Honorable Anzitemus leaving further ampliation of Titles,
let divine resolutions be rather reverenced, then disputed on; let hu^aine
actions be rather accounted the subjects of change, then Anchor hold of
perpetuity; let virtue be still it self rather to redress mischief, then
maintain prosperity; Let time have her allowance, and what we suppose unlikely,
that will dispose unlooked for: This I am bolder to infer, because without
doubt a secret influence does none ouerrule, and might in some persons effect
demissnesse, but in you, where the better part remains unassaulted, which is
magnanimity, let that apply and employ it self to redress, wherein no doubt as
your constancy shall appear, your succor shall approach: proceed therefore in
your journey to Artabanus? Whose aid may set you forward into Persia, or
whersoeuer Cleonidas is supported: or if you please you may return into
Armenia, where I am sure, if you will take the protection of the Kingdom into
your hands, you shall be able with love and leisure to raise sufficient power
to pluck Artabazes out of the laws of destruction.

But Anzitemus utterly neglected, yea in a manner despised the motion of
returning, protesting never to return, unless Artabazes did return; or both
ouerturne their lives right to her contraries usurpation, and therefore took
the other course of going to Artabanus; where he was without scruple or
diffidence entertained. But (most royal Princes) Misfortune followed like a a
shadow; for we found the Noble king in such distress as there seemed no hope
of our recovery: Then belike (quoth the Duke) you were a party Montanus
discovers himself to be the Son of Artabazes.
in this business? Great Duke, I was; and to be plain, am that unfortunate
Anzitemus the first borne of Artabazes, unfortunate in being that I am; but ten
times unfortunate in not being at all.

O Thou life of the World! thou glorious Montanus having discovered himself to
be King Artabazes Son by the name of Anzitemus maryeth Brizaca.
Sun, (quoth Ligornio Prince of Bactriana) Who has not heard of Artabazes
misfortune? Who has not heard of Artabanus success? Who has not heard of
Persias troubles? Who has not heard of Anzitemus victories? With that, he
arose to embrace him: Nor were the rest of the Princes so unsatisfied in
opining his Discourse, as once to suppose there were errors in the same; but
likewise arose, as if indeed the same of his actions, and greatness of his
birth, had read them a lesson of respect and reverence: Whereupon Ligornio
took the King Zalby and the Duke aside, and gave them notice, whom Fortune as
malignant had thus turmoyled, whom Virtue as predominant had thus conserved,
whom Fame as triumphant had thus eternised; which Rugio (having long since
received the division of report) willingly acknowledged and therefore with true
Honor welcomed him by the name of virtuous and victorious Anzitemus: then
followed the King, then the rest: last of all, as the Judges before led him to
receive the Prize from Brizaca, they now conducted him to be received
Priselesse of Brizaca, alleging that never divine favor could open the
Treasure house of bounty unto them, as now to behold the Palace of Fortona
the place for truth and strangeness to display the ensign of admiration, for
love and beauty to March under the standard of virtue, for vallure and
magnificence to flowrish with the Colors of Majesty, for Riches and
contentment to conduct the Vantgard of delight, and here to appoint the
Rendezuous, as if they had concluded a Triumph of happiness; The Gods
therefore forbid (quoth Rugio) that any default of mine should intercept your
desires: love him then Brizaca? Love her then Anzitemus? and long may you live
to love, and not live, except you love one another.

Great was the grace affoorded Rugio for this: great was the joy the Kings and
Princes made for this, great was the amaze the Court showed for this, great was
the applause the people yielded for this: but when the royal Brizaca seized
once again on her comfort, and that her happiness extended in the highest
degree of equality, she thought it inequality in the highest degree no^ to
glory in his love, so firmly before incorporated* and Anzitemus and Brizaca
married.
so fortunately now confirmed; therefore she (...) led a public solemnisation
of a new contract: nor seemed the euer-willing Trezoboro to repine at his
Sisters choice, but made up the defects of the confort with his plawditie. By
this time, the household Officers covered for the Feast, and the Trumpets sound
gave warning of a new work so the observations of good Customs adiorned
further conference, and with several delights posted the several hours of
that day; Rugio striving to set forth his own greatness, and the Princes
much pleased to receive so full contentment: Yet the youthful Trezoboro and
diverse others, to whom the report of strange adventures seemed instigations to
as strange performances in themselves, were unsatisfied in the broken off
Discourse of Anzitemus proceedings, until Ligornio to do them a pleasure; and
least Anzitemus should be too sparing, speaking of him self, (but especially
to allow him opportunity with the much desired Brizaca, to whom he might at
leisure, yield accomp^ of his heretofore well employed time) condiscended the
next day to finish his Story: which Anzitemus gratified as a kindness, and so
left the Prince to pensell on the Table of his renown.

AFter the civil Wars of Persia (quoth the Prince) had made the Servants of
Bellona Ligornio porceedeth in the History of Artabazes, and begins with the
story of Artabanus and Astiages,
weary in executing her bloody Commandments, a pacification was effected in
the election of a man fit for the government (which at last, though Artabanus
King of Media, a Prince of sufficient power, and more suffitient direction, was
nominated) yet fell to the share of Astiages, by reason of his blood,
education, and commorance amongst them. This Artabanus took in ill part, and
was amongst the Medians a reputed contempt; nor wanted there such, which
inferred, that the scorn was greater in the resusall after they had by their
Ambassadors urged it, then if the matter had never been proposed: Of this sort,
the especial of^ man was Medormus, who well hoped for the Crown of Media, if
Artabanus obtained the other: whereupon an ambitious Counsel of War
concluded revenge, and confirmed the manner by invasion, the rather because
Adelphus Duke of Alstratia offered the disbursing of great sums of his own,
and took upon him the conduct of the Army, which consisting of foure-score
thousand foot ten thousand Horse, and four thousand Camels for burden, made
him presume, that Astiages in the inchoation of his Peace, was not able to
raise sufficient forces to withstand him, considering his Soldiers having the
prey and spoil of a Country (worthy any title) exposed unto them, seemed
impatient at restraint; and indeed performed their duties in the best manner;
as when you see a costly Prize erected at the end of a Goal, and the runners
striving to make it the Trophe of their victory: For at their first entrance
they began with subuerting of Houses, felling of Wood, fiering and cutting of
Corn, dryuing of Cattle, ensconsing of Ways, and making of Forts: But
Astiages unwilling that the Earth should be unfurnished of her golden Apparel,
which already the vngentile multitude had presumed to disrobe; and forecasting,
least the best part of his Country should be the Seat of the War, came
forward in person, with a full and well furnished Army, compounded of all those
Soldiers, which in the civil Wars were unnaturally carried against one
another; but now finding the sweetness of a little Peace, determine absolutely
for the honor of Persia, and within seven days made the trial of Swords
warrant their affection to their King and Country.

Thus both the Armies are driven to a mighty encounter, not unlike to a dusty
Path dancing to and fro as obedient to the Wind, till an extraordinary
violence whirleth the uppermost ^olde, that a man would wonder, how one blast
should so soon divide so great an Heap; by which unfriendly greeting, the one
party has great cause to lament; the other small reason to triumph: The Earth
bled for woe, considering the effusion which was made, made her change color,
and receive unnatural moisture: The Beasts whose service consisted in the
skillful managing of the Rider, lay dismembered, the men whose cunning was
countermaunded by unfortunate advantage fell dismounted: The Captive supposing
the law of Arms would have served his turn, is suddenly stabbed, the
Triumpher is overtaken with an others weapon in his own bowels, ere the Blade
is out of the others body: One-while the Persians troop with applause of
preuayling, anon the Medians shoute with joy of victory, as when you see a
mighty press of people, sometime shoouing forward with a murmuring noise into
that corner; sometime backward into this place, and many times confused with
the cry of the company: To conclude, what Stratagem disorder of enrage ever
performed was now for the manner dangerous, and the number lamentable: For had
not the night hasted to decide the quarrel, some other Company must have ended
it, considering it would soon have ended them. Thus are the Persians retired
with great damage, and the Medians entrenched with small gains; who slenderly
moved with this defeature, are not at all removed from their first wilfulnes,
but determine, that new supplies shall make another trial to pay their double
losses: So have I seen an unskillful Archer loosing one Arrow, to shoot
another after to find it, till taking great pains in the search, he like a
fool returns with the loss of both: Whereupon Adelphus sent Poligambus into
Media, who certified Artabanus of the unfortunate disaster, extolling indeed
above truth, the force of the Enemy, to deminish their own shame in their
overthrow; but this news was not so ill of it self, as in the efect it
procured. For Medormus taking aduantag of these particulars, that the loss in
Persia would busy them here with foreign occasiones: that the supplying them
would much troubted the kingdom: that the absence of the kings best friends
gave him opportunity to strike the Iron, while it was hott; and that his own
abillytie seemed every way strong enough for the attempt, made a strange,
cruel, and Traiterous revolt; wherein without doubt a prosperous beginning had
been sustained with vnpropper success, if by the ariuall of Anzitemus the
mask of despair had not been taken off, and a new Countenance of hope smiled
on the discomforted King, discomforted not so much in displeasure of his own
affairs, as in the despite of Medormus unkindness, who had so kindly been
beholding unto him, as your selves may thus witness.

ARtabanus now reigning, was son of Artabanus Otanes, who had the title of a
father The story of Medormus and Gliranda.
doubled in enjoying also a Daughter called Gliranda, and his joy redoubled in
those gifts of nature, beauty, and Majesty, which excelled in her, and the
rather excelled, as yielding to the government of virtue and obedience: until
some violent humor willingly lifting open the Gate of ambytion made a strange
love, the unnatural cause of a strange hate. For somewhat pleased in the
gallant youthfulness, and well deserving towardlynesse of this Medormus, son
of Cestus brother to Artabanus the father, after many circumstances and
endeavors to purchase her liking, she admitted rather with a gennerall courtesy,
then any particular affection, his discourses and desiers: but when his love
was pleaded with resolution, that neither father nor brother should be any
obstacle for her head to be impaled with the Crown of Media, urging his right
indeed by being the elder brothers son, a matter long since (as she partly
heard in question, and determined otherwise) never was virtue so out of
countenance: For admitting his reasons and inducements, she rann Arm in Arm
with him in the race of a violent Treason: yea such an impression had the
expectation of her glory made, that in the infant time of her abortiue
proceedings she stomached less reverence, then what is accoustomed to Queens,
and was not ashamed to proclaim her now title, and defiance against her
Father: nay more, after the discovery, and that they were prevented, she dared
to exasperat the kings displeasure with a kind of impudency, who enraging to
see such offenders past shame, commanded the prerogative of Majesty to
proceed against them, whereby without question they had both lost their lives,
as before they had done their loyalties, if her brother Artabanus now reigning
had not importuned a hard returning mercy: yet could not the father so pass
over the unkindness: For he presently entertained all the Ministers of rage
and coffeehouse, by whom'he was quickly miscarried to the house of sickness,
wherein only able to assure his son, that Kings permit neither concurrent
nor Competitor, with a life fainting farewell, he bad him remember his father,
and look to himself.

Now increased new troubles, because Medormus and Gliranda set on work new
Treasons, as perceiving one only obstacle to debarte their progress to the
dignity, which made them contriue to remove it, wherein they went somewhat
cunningly to work, causing a good mother to bring forth a bad Child, and
under Color of an Honorable exployte to incite Artabanus to the inuading of
Persia, not doubting but he might miscary in the danger, or they by his absence
have conuenyency to revolt: but when the kings sending Adelphus had thus
disappointed them, the very despite discovered, that there is no confidence to
be attributed to a reconsiled enemy, who like the Serpent of Nilus came
fawning, creeping, yea and shed tears, till he was able to reach his prey, and
then Murdered him without remorse, (...) so wrought with them from acknowledging
a life saving benefit, that they once again attempted a death working
Catastrophe: a Catastrophe I may well term it; as having a double reference
both to the king, and themselves: For soothed, or rather betrayed to this
opportunity of Artabanus forces overthrown in Persia, they begann an
intestine broyle and innovation in Media, which showed the countenance of such
miserable towardlynesse, that the king was enforced to fortefie himself in the
City of Abadod, where commonly his Court was kept, and the people were ever
carried with a Zeal toward him: heither did Medormus prosecute him, and within
seven clayes after Anzitemus ariuall (to whom for the strangeness and cross
variety the King imparted both the one and the other War) miserably deseiged
him.

When Anzetemus perceived to what trial his patience was enforced, he repined
at the troubles, rather then was troubled with any repining, because his own
determination for Artabazes delivery was procrastinated, and he himself must
needs be engaged for Antabanus releife: yet making virtue of necessity; and
willing to affright Conceit with some employment, he offered the king two
especial jewels of his treasury, Direction, and Encouragement; that in regard
of his loving Cittisens, whom he meant to protect: this in respect of his
disloyal Subjects, against whom he determined to proceed; whereupon a
summons brought them to hearken after a Parlee, and Artebanus out of the Window
of a Port, thus delivered his mind.

I am gladd loving, and yet disordred loving Friends, that I speak to such,
who by their quiet attention make show at the first, of wisdom and obedience;
I will therefore without evasion, or challenging this unkind and unnatural
bearing of Arms against your King, come to the purpose in deed: If then my
defects and extremities have been so narrowly searched into, that I seem
unworthy to enjoy my Inheritance, I was never so intractable to reject good
counsel and advise: or if they have been so unnaturally urged against me,
that you cannot bear the burden without a revolt; yet you might orderly have
discovered your griefs, and desired reformation: for I protest before the
Reuenget of all Treasons, that I join with you in well wishing to have
Goodness flourish, Prudence direct, Fortitude protect, Justice control, and
Temperance moderate: Or if any better course might like a quiet working Potion,
be administered for the health of this Polliticall body, the patient is not so
distempred to cast away himself: But if private grudges have led you out of
the smooth paths of reason to the ragged and stony streightes of passion,
return for shame, least your foolish choice scandalize you to the world, or
for fear, least you be driven to an vnpreuentable destruction: But if the
ambition of others has detained you in the bondage of impossible hopes and
flatteries, shake off the deceit, and with the eyes of discretion behold your
own weakness,, considering Justice corrects the offender, as well as
rewards the well deseruer: But if M^dermus Treasons (hateful to God and man,
especially to me, that am his kinsman, life giver* and sovereign,) have
bewitched your simplicities, that you can be ^ontent to despise your king,
disturb the commonwealth, slaughter your friends, Butcher up your kindred,
ruin th^s established City, and make a confusion of all* Whether may I
justly (...) on your vnreuerent ^artiallity, ^or the world condemn you for
witless and outraged? but me thinks, I hear some good Angel wisper amongst
you, it is reason and truth I have discovered, and therefore there must be
error, nay monstrous rebellion in these proceedings; defer therefore your
threatninges and keep your vallures in store against your enemies; for hee^e
a^ne but allies, Countrymen, friends, and ki^d, unless like Parricides you are
determined to vnrippe the Bowels of so careful a Mother, I mean your
Country, for whose Honor, if not for my sake; Be not stained with the
loathsome spots of infamy; And behold mercy, peace, and life offer themselves
to your free election, take; and choose? the King speaks, the king promises,
the King will perform; if not; let these be the times of terror, and the day
of my advancement never reckned in the year for this your stifneckednesse;
This was vttred so passhionately, that the extermity burst forth into tears
breeding remorse, yea the manner of his demeanor was such, that the impression
had wrought their defiance against disobedience, had not Medormus, stubborn
Medormus counterpleaded: they were entrapped with subtilty; and ensuared with a
cunning bait, tush (says he) though Artabanus may make you believe, he will
forgive, yet can he never forget this fault, and in the greatest plenty of
your days will once for all make a seizure of your selves and inheritances;
besides? your names and families shall be odious unto him, always subject to
ielousies, and never put in trust with matters of import, as for aduancements
they? shall be so far from being conferred upon you, that like strangers you
shall stand for ever remote; But why bread I this scruple amongst you? You have
Justice on your side, and conscience bidds you assist me, that am wronged, as
for Artabanus, he usurps my right, and as the best of you can tell, so did
his father deal with unfortunate Cestus his elder brother; go on therefore;
go on; I say again go on, divide the Kingdom at pleasure, and make your
own peace and prosperity to flourish. But for all this golden field of
Promises, the third part of his Army the next night shrunk from him; and were
doubly welcome to Artabanus, both in the succor by the uniting his own
Forces, and the benefit in making known Medormus secrets: whereupon Anzitemus
persuaded to sally, reasoning on the dishonor? for a Subject to encage so
great a King in one silly Town.

This was so forcible with Artabanus (who looking on Anzitemus with the eyes of
Judgment, wondered with what settled gravity his Counsels were delivered, as
if maturenesse had brought him from the wanton abode of Youth to the house of
Wisdom,) that the men of Arms were that night divided into two parts: the
one left with the King, as a sufficient guard for the City: the other
committed to Anzitemus, as an able Army for the Field; with which by break of
day, he sallyed forth, and resembled a beautiful Plant newly come to some
show in a Garden, which every looker on praised, as an Ornament to the place,
and feared, least some misfortuue might ruin before his time: But Medormus
made use of his Soldiers reuolting, fortifying him self the stronger,
doubling his Watches, and in person ouer-looking his Camp and Trenches,
whereby he was prepared at all times; and so when the Alarm was given,
quickly made it an equal trial: and although the valiant Anzitemus whirled in
the thickest press, weakening the troops, abating the strength of the Enemy,
reuersing the despair of the fainthearted, and prosecuting actions beyond
expectation, whereby his glory was both published, and stomaked; his friends
amassed to behold magnanimity so well bestowed, and his enemies confounded to
find the vallure of one man so sufficient: yet were the Medormians so
resolute, and encouraged, that Anzitemus would not be further engaged, then his
own forces might purchase a freedom, and therefore made an honorable retreat,
as when you see the afterdrops of a storm continue in the greatest force at
the parting: This he accoustomed many times besides, as if destruction meant to
play the wanton with the company, rather lessning their number, then their
hate; which so discouraged Artabanus, perceiving no other hope then the
calamity of his Realm, and confusion of the people, that he determined by
single combat to prevent these reuenge-crying massacres, resembling the
Pelican, who by hassard of her own life, feeds and preserves her young
ones.

NOw when Anzitemus perceived so gallant resolution, he could not mislike the
same; yet checked his own slacknesse for not being author of the matter; and
therefore to make as it were satisfaction to his opinion, he urged Artabanus
to elect him Champion of his cause, not so much in deed to confirm the King
toward him, as to try Medormus; over whom he was in a manner emulous: Again,
supposing in the preuayling an everlasting league would be combined, or in the
default, his troubles should end with his own end: Here grew a virtuous
Contention between Artabanus and Anzitemus, the one inferring the
unreasonableness of the cause to bring a man of his deserving into so great
danger for an others business: the other, insisting on his desire to match the
Adversary upon equal terms: at last, Anzitemus prevailed, and a Hearrold
Artabanus offers private Combat to Medormus which Anzitemus performs for
the king.
for the King proclaimed the Defiaunce; which Medormus durst not but accept,
because the Company ouerboldly urged him, that a Prince in possession was
willing to adventure both life and dignity; and they them selves were almost
tired with butchering one another. But when Gliranda ever doting on his
strength, and cunning in matters of Arms, alleged the likelihood of
success, he never disputed, but appointed time, place, and manner; which was
by prime of day at a fourtnights end, a full mile from the City, and like a
Knight on Horseback with Lance, Sword, and Shield: And although in the mean
space, some quiet spirits labored between the parties, wishing Artabanus
pacefied toward his Sister and Medormus; and urged Medormus to submit to the
King, whom Virtue would questionless bring to the house of Pardon; yet he
misconstruing the Moderation of Peacemakers, was wilfully bent to put all to
this trial.

Thus is the day come, and the dignity of the King compelled some magnificent
Show for the furnishing of Anzitemus. First, diverse Purseuants at Arms gane
notice of Artabanus approach, and a L. Marshall with a hundred Servants all well
appointed, so divided the disordered multitude, that the way seemed a living
Wall, as if the men had admitted direction by line and level: then followed
two hundred Courtyers on horseback richly apparrelled for their own credits,
and the Kings Honor: Next matched own hundred Gent. on foot all in a Liuerie
suitable, which was a Roabe; Morisco fashion almost to the small of the Leg of
flame coulor Velvet, yet so darkened with black-silke and gold-lace, that you
might easily imagine, there was sorrow mingled with his glory, they had Sea
caps embrodred sorting to his Imprese, semiters according, and half buskins of
white Spanish Leather enclosed on the outside with flame coulor Ribbin: Then
followed twenty spare Horse, on whom rode so many Pages bearing several
sheilds with his device, which was a ship in full Sail betwixt Scilla and
Caribdis, the Mott, As ill is to come, giving notice his troubles were not
ended, though he should atcheeue this adventure: after them rod five Knights
with his caske, Lance, Sword, Shield and Horse, which was trapped in a
sumptuous and curiouse caparison of Cloth of gold, wrought like flames of fire
covered over with rowles made like waves of Sea water green Cipers, in such an
artificial loosnesse mingled with the stuff, that you would have supposed the
water to have quenched the fire, and the fire to have burned the water, besides
they were hooked together with great Claspes of Goldsmiths work ritchly
Enameled, but more ritchly beautified with Diamonds and Rubies. Presently
followed a new fashion Chariot made like a Rock irremoueably standing for all
the waves seemed impetuous against it, which by reason of the motion of the
Wheels tossing water against it indeed, like the violence of a Mill, resembled
a tempestuous Sea: Under it, or rather within it satte Anzitemus and Artabanus,
who in a pleased gravity and yet displeased Countenance gave the people to
understand, his care was not so much for his own glory, as their safty: The
Rock was tied to certain Cables made of black Silk and Gold, which had
their several fastening to six Pinnases, so well devised, that the Horses
enclosed within them gave action full liberty, and they Sailed with the Rock
away, as if they determined to draw it out of the Sea: but the faster they
went, the sorer did the Billows threaten by beating on the sides, yet stood
the Rock strongly founded, assuering that virtue and magnanimity remains
integrate, what aduerce crosses so ever chance. Round about went fifty Gent.
on foot, the younger sons of Noble men with Pollaxes in their hands, whose
neerenesse to the king gave notice of their Honorable place, and credit. After
followed the Officers of his Court, Guard, and Attendance; and last of all,
five thousand armed Soldiers brought up the Rear, who well marshalled with
their Commanders and Officers, was not the least grace to the Trimuph.

Thus Artabanus came with Anzitemus, and Anzitemus with Artabanus into the
^istes, moving his very Enemies with the manner of his caryage, and the state
of his spectacle: and although his behavior neither inclined to exceeding
cheerfulness: nor disconsolate sadness, wher^y they might have used
correspondence in theirs; yet began they to wonder with a kind of repentance,
how they had been all this while subject to such preuarication: but the
approach of Medormus extinguished these meditations, who certefied by the Earl
Marshall, that Anzitemus was already in the Feeld, thus issued out of a Crimsen
Velvet tent, all imbrodred with Crossebowes of Gold with this Mott: Viribus
plusquam ingenio:

First a fame on Horseback diuulging her hate to secrecy sounded a very
Warlike division: next followed diverse gallantly mounted with the several
Penons of all his Troops: then came fifty Gent. on foot all apparrelled a
like in an upper Roabe of Arabia; the stuff Crimsen Velvet, the fashion open
before, cut up behind, and of each side: all places yet enclosed by reason
great Gold-lace Buttons made of intricate knottes, were folded within the
circuit of the like Loopes: On their head the attire now used in Turkestan, but
long since in Siria, made of Crimson and yellow Cipers rolled compony
together, and thick beset with Spangles: behind almost to the Calfe of the
leg hung a Scarf fastened to the rowles of Crimson-Taffata, all over embrodred
with Crowns: By their right side a short Sword, guilt in the like coulored
Sheth, as if they had been all left handed, and signified, that what
enheritance could not challenge, by one means or other he would obtain: their
S^ockinges were of Yellow famitt, and Shoes of red Leather, as if they
purposed for their Masters sake to tread in Blood: Then rode forty Knights
his Allies and confederates, Armed in guilt Armor pounced with a Garden of
Marigoldes, and a heaven ouerspredding with a glorious Sun in it, as if he
were the Sun of their glory, whom like the Marygold they would observe for he
had given them already Guilt maces in their hands, resembling Scepters with
intent to inuest them kings: After followed tenn Pages on somany spare Horses
richly caparisond with several devises, but their sheeldes had one Imprese,
which was an Arrow flying out of a Bow to the Element: The Mott higher then
another: next attended three Knights with his Helmett, Shield, and Lance:
Then came he himself proudly mounted, his Armor sumptuously enameled with
certain Crosse-bowes, which were no way to be bent but by force, but to see
them of Goldsmiths work richly embelished with Rubies and Opalles, orderly
marshalled all over a Crimsonveluet Caparison; you would sure have taken him
for the Son of Mars, or Servant of Honor: On his left Arm he ware a Scarf
of Orange curled Cipers all over tufted with Woman's hair, made fast under
buttons of Gold, quadrated with rich Diamonds. This Gliranda bestowed upon him,
as assuring she would spare neither Hair, nor Heart, to forward the
enterprise. Last of all followed diverse companies of his Army, not in mistrust
of any unlooked for surprysing, but to give the King notice, their obedience
unto him was not altogether forced.

Thus is the comicall Show presented, and many sportiue observations streamed
about in a smoth channel: But now enters Death and Destruction to bring in a
Tragedy, and the Princes summoned to do their deuoire, with a gallant
speediness make a stop in the midst of the race; so that what with fullness of
their Strength, the swiftness of their Horses, the surenesse of their Armor,
the cunning in their Division, and their just Meeting together: the Lances
were weary of their length, and the Knights might for neerenesse embrace one
another: But this was soon forgotten, and their unsheathed Swords put them in
mind, they were drawn to some purpose: so began a gallant Turny, which
likewise had his passage, till Medormus quietly gathering up the raines of his
Horse with his Bridle hand set him again loosely forward, and indeed was the
first, which stroke a blow of advantage; wherein if he had not ouer-liberally
yielded to his haste, it had made an excellent try all of the delivery, whereas
it now slided by without any settled damage: But when Anzitemus felt him self
burdened with smart and shame, he reprehended his slacknesse, and set a task
on his courage to requite it, which by this time, made anger follow apace; yet
loath to strike him behind, and unable to wheel about, with a reuersse he hit
him on the side of his head, and coming fortunatly forward, stroke him again,
as if he meant to tell him, there was two for one. Quite was Medormus out of
patience, and so put an action of distemperature in practice, by bearing his
Shield over his Sword with a maine careere at his adversary, who apprehending
the mischief, fortunately received it on the outside of his; which unable to
resist the force, unwillingly divided it self, and Anzitemus was glad he
escaped so, supposing a slender loss sooner recovered, then a greater, which
made him employ both his wariness and diligence the better, that he desisted
not, till Medormus best defense was broken, disioynted, and unable to stand him
longer instead; who (...)

iected, for assured of her husbands death, bad death go forward: and
entertain her for a slave, that would not be the friend of life: so stabing
Gliranda kills her self.
her self, left an instace of Traiterous ambition worthy lie rewarded.

THis was for the manner and the parties querimoniall, but soon over passed,
in regard Anzitemus Anzitemus meditateth on his own affairs and his fathers
imprisonment.
feeling his wounds begin to cool enforced their best care toward him, and so
by the skillful and fortunate Surgeon received presently some ease, and that
hasted them to the City, where the applause of the people, his welcome, and
Triumph was so magnificent, that he seemed vnpained in his pain, and
acknowledged sufficient satisfaction, though his debt to nature had been paid
in the bargain: But by that time the wounds of his body began to heal the
corasiues of his mind craved some cataplasme, as his own business, Armenias
troubles, and Artabazes captivity: all which, like the humble suitors for a
friend in distress, pleading to a King his merit, and how well bestowed his
favor should be toward him, urged Anzitemus to go the next way: whereupon he
counsayled Artabanus to recall his Forces out of Persia; reasoning, that a
virtuous Peace, was to be preferred before an unjust War; and concluding to
offer Astiages a present of everlasting Amity, by matching Roxana his Daughter
to Darius, Artabanus Son. Never was Counsel better bestowed; for though
Anzitemus thought by this contract, to reduce his confused business to some
form, and so to be able to circumuent Cleonidas, where soever he lurked; or
at least to redeem his Father: yet they apprehended it, as the voice of some
good Angel for their happiness, and without more ado, elected the Honorable
Mulcasses to the Embasie; by whose Commission, Adelphus Artabanus Lieuetenant
general in Persia, was against his will discharged, because in deed the
Soldiers were disappoynted in their expectation, as ever loving better Booty
and Spoil, then Pay, or strict Obedience to home Commanders. But certified of
Medormus treasons, and how honorably Anzitemus had behaved himself, they
quickly returned to the sweet walks of love and duty, and allowed Mulcasses
authority: So Adelphus leasurely gathered up his Army, and yet departed not
quite out of Persia, till he understood Astiages answer; who keeping his
Court at Susiana, (whither he had withdrawn his Forces to garrison)
entertained Mulcasses as a Messenger of peace; and after audience, limited a
time to receive his satisfaction.

But after he was fully dismissed, the monstrous enemies of Prosperity, Envy
and Wrath made an onset against the Kings honor, and so battered the citadell
of good thoughts, that he could not depresse his malice without discovering it
thus to his Council.

My Lords: I am sure, you will not be so sparing in your regard toward the
renown of Persia, and my Honor: but you remember the disgraces offered my
fathers house by the first Artabanus, who many years turmoyled with a
Ciuell-warre our Country, and denied our right to this Kingdom: and now you
see Artabanus his Son, as his Father against the Law of nature would have
disappointed us, against the Law of nations, has intruded himself, my
ancestors cast clean out of doors by a mutinous rebellion, and I not
permitted the saftie of my hard gotten peace: yet you see Justice has taken my
part a little and Fortune opens now the doors of a further recom pence, I
mean the Croune of Media it self, but how? not by base relaxation and
accordance to their wills, but by our own vallutes, and prevailing excursions,
pressing now forward, as if a Tree cut to the heart and hanging by a small
hold were with a strong push to ridd the workman of m^e labor: Let us therefore
sooth this opportunity, and catch the Gods by her goodly foretop, least she
take in scorn the disdain, and we preposterously repent the negligence: But
the most of his Council interposed their negatiues, and forecasting the
benefits of a flourishing Commonwealth through sweet peace, deciphered the
mischiefs, yea the miseries of the best war. Then Astiages replied, the
Honor of a King was more then a Million of lives, and the Gods had appointed
them their vicegerents, sometime like good stewards to husband their plenty and
increase their inheritance, sometimes like severe Masters to correct offenders
and to be the scourges of Iuorath: howsoever, he would not remain ouerinsulted
by the wrong of an other, but be famous in after ages for some exployte of his
own: They again inferred that contentions arose from prestigious spirits
which delighted in the blood of men, that their late scares of desolation and
adversity were not yet worn out, that plenty like an Orphan went mourning in
the streets, and that his election to the Diadem challenged no such bondage at
their hands, because they well hoped in his conformity to good purpose, and had
^eofaild with Artabanus in the promise of the Kingdom; but this put him beyond
all patience, as ever stomaking the house of Media, and watching an
opportunity to be revenged, though in deed the first error proceeded from the
incontinencie and tyranny of Persia upon this occasion.

ORmisdates not long since King of Persia, The story of Ormisdates and
Damafloris.
having matched with Garifeola, Artabanus Otanes Mother of Media matched her
likewise with Nobleness of birth and mind, and by reason of their loves, the
Kingdom like a well manured Ground, brought forth increase of much
happiness, to the inestimable enriching of the possessor: For although the
Queen was barren of her body, yet her inward excellencies so flourished, that
they added life to good conceit toward her; and indeed moderated to the
admiration of diverse, and the honor of the King, that wanton liberty, which
such a Prince in enjoying many concubines, presumes on. But the oldest Wood
does soonest burn, and Ormisdates in his declining age was soonest allured to
lust-breaking faith, and did degenerate from himself, I mean stood not so
strongly on his Guard of virtue, when there was expectation of settled humors,
as in the heat of youth when the errors of life might have passed with excuse:
For as he passed through the streets of Magranopolis to cellebrate the feast
of the Sun, he cast his eyes upon a window, wherein a Lady (at left her
outward show bare the same record) sat with a countenance compounded of
cheerful affabillity, and lovely modesty, little thinking, that cunning had
taught her eyes both to allure, and draw compassion, that experience had
brought her countenance to the use of many changes, that necessity had made
her tongue deny, where she wished, and demand, where she knew there was
nodeniall; that time had wrought her heart sometime like wax to melt with the
warmth of desire; sometime like stone to be hardened with disdain: and that
coustome had custructed her demeanor Matronlike, if there were occasions of
sobriety: Courtlike, if great estates importuned, and fantastique, if there
were inducements of wantonness.

This was Damastoris, a woman of reasonable good Parentage, of reasonable good
years, of reasonable good estate, a Widow childles, and wealthy, two helps
in all conditions and Commonwealths; and a wanton taking the benefit of her
time: and belike finding inconvenience in the obedience of one man, would not
so subject her youth and liberty any more; whereupon she made use of her
experience, and indeed ouerliberally satisfied her pleasure: Yet with that
delicate conueyance, that the fault seldom appeared; and if it did, could not
be urged against her. With her Ormisdates fell in love, or at least in such
liking, that he persuaded him self it was love, and so determined to persuade
her: this yet was the doubt, the means of access, he not able to come to her
without special notice taken, and for special purpose; she not likely to
come to him, neither willing to attend in Court, nor having cause of Petition
or complaint: At last Desire bred Imagination, Imagination Conceit, Conceit
some Disquiet, and Disquiet must needs have Redress: Now when Princes come to
seek Redress, I hope no man will imagine, that any worldly means can be
wanting; and when the King of Persia importuned dispatch; who would not? nay,
who did not endeavor to please and to pleasure him? yet herein he only
employed Pasquito, a man of reasonable comeliness, exceeding good behavior,
dellicate ellocution, settled experience, (as having all his time like a cunning
Merchant, seen many Countries, and never daring to venture his Wealth in one
Ship) and honorable secrecy, such a quallytie that sometimes all other good
parts failing it simply preuayleth: who at the first, pleaded many excuses to
the King, of disgrace in the action, hassard of preuayling, and so incurring
his displeasure, danger of temptation, ielosies, mistrustes, and the cunning of
Women: At last the king commanding, or he being willing to obey, Pasquito
furnished him self, and came to Damafloris with all the graces of a Princes
solicitor: first beginning with her own worth, that she did Beauty wrong, to
keep it like a Flower in a close Pot, making no use either to please the
scent, or the sight: that she was a present for a mighty King (and
peradventure a King indeed did like her. (This he said, to make her
inquisitiue, knowing Women were subject to curiosity) that he had heard and
knew she was Wise, and therefore would not refuse the fortune was toward her;
and that he came from Ormisdates, who wished well unto her, and had sent a
Present of kindness by him; so that if he were not an unworthy Messenger, and
a man hateful, it could not choose, but she must apprehend the blessing meant.
This was uttered in so good a fashion, that though she had known, how to have
reproved Incontinencie, yet could she not much mislike him, that did but his
duty to his Prince; nor the King, that offered favor to his Subject; nor her
self, for being solicited by the mighty Ormisdates: But with a kind of
abashed drawing back, rather studying to contriue her business to the best
purpose, then willing to entertain any cause of mislike, she yet made him
believe, there was cause of mislike, saying, (and almost weeping in so saying)
that the King wronged her much, to suppose she would make sale of her
Chastity; that he wronged her more so to motion her dishonor, having neither
seen nor heard any tokens by her of immodesty. All this, said Pasquito, is
confessed: yet, quoth he, the love of a King is of that prerogative, that he
protested, it was more for her own sake, then the Kings satisfaction he came
thither; and so by degrees of insinuation, fell to appeasing her; from
appeasing to persuading, from persuading to counsayling, that howsoever she
determined (which says he, I will not urge further against your virtuous
resolutio) it were not amiss to speak with the King. Here she stopped
again, falling to the examination of particulars, how, when, and where, the
King should take notice of her? All which, he certified with excellent
circumstances. Then she made many doubts of the Queens jealousy, the Courts
opinion, and her own journey. Nay, says he, if you vouchsafe me the Author
of this good News to my Prince, neither Queen, Court, nor your self, shall
know your self, or once have cause to entertain the attributes of Ielosie.
Thus it was concluded, that she should be disguised like a Merchant of
Arabia, and so under color of the sale of rich Jewels have secret conference
with Ormisdates, and this she did with that gallant demeanor and attractiue,
that the King was rather ravished then ^amored toward her, yea she behaved
herself so well, that at a second meeting he promised to inuest her a Duchess,
and if he had issue by her to proclaim him heir to his kingdom, which was
performed accordingly: For with in one year after, she brought him a son
named Ascrasapes, and he thought himself a happy man to be the Father of a
Child: This made him dote on her the more; and that made her deal with him the
cunninger: so that the Queen Garifeola seemed altogether forgotten, and her
former deserving was ouergrowne with the rank weeds of a Strumpets
flattery, which she could not but repine at: yet at the first, she gently
behaved her self, till finding the nature of some things, as Nettles and
Burres to sting the sorer by the softer handling, she remembered her great
birth, and plainly told him the wrongs done to her and her house were
intolerable; and that she would be revenged both on the the other and the
Bastard: this incensed the king, and mingled with the Counterfeate fear of
Damafloris contrived a strange course, which was by deuorce (under color of
barre^nesse) to be separated from her, nor desisted he so: But as a man
tumbling down a pair of Stairs never lins falling till he came to the
bottom, did ^e cause the same resemblance in the Queen, absolutely putting
her by all government, and proclaiming Damafloris in her stead. But when
Artabanus Otanes her Son understood of these proceedings, the indignity was
too heinous to tolerate, and the revenge too difficult to attempt: yet
something must be done to keep his Honor intigrate, and his Mother from so
strange infamy; whereupon without further ambagie, finding himself incapable
of the Scepter, by reason that the Laws of Persia debarred a Stranger (which
yet they afterward went about to disanull) and unable to make a conquest in
regard of home encumbrances, he determined to cast it on some other, whose
(...) and ability might second the enterprise. To this counsel was Tautaxes
called, a Noble man of Persia of the honorable family of Od^nates, and next
heir to the Crown; to him did Artabanus infer the scandal of the Kingdom,
the wicked life of Ormisdates infaming them all, the bastardy of Ascrasapes, an
unlawful stop to hinder his course, the desire of the people to have
reformation, (who most commonly under that goodly show, begin inuouation,) and
his own power to assist him; touching sparingly his Mothers wrongs, as if he
would leave out somewhat for him to remember, and so might be sure of his
apprehention, which consorted to his wish: For Tautaxes ambitious enough of
himself was willing to be thought worthy to be a Prince, not remembering the
danger of that point, but now incited by such liklyhoodes, he gathered his
forces and friends together, sending Artabanus word, that if he would come in
person (because he would have the name of a King and credit to the action)
there should not any oar want to ^owe the Boat to what stream he liked.

Thus began the ciuell Wars of Persi^, and this stone never left rolling,
till Ormisdates house was clean extinguished, and the Crown at last united to
Media: yet many battles were first fought, and the several alterations gave
only notice, that this world is a stage of uncertainties: For as Artabanus once
brought the King to a narrow straight, and Tautaxes if he had followed his
Fortune might have ended the War, Ormisdates thus despighted in the worst
manner made the wronged Garifeola bear the burden of his rage, and striking
off her head sent it her son as a present: I will not say he lamented a
remediless matter: but he prosecuted his revenge and went forward apace, had
not his own misfortunes in despite of resolution recalled him, and this was
the first revolt of Medormus and Gliranda in Media: yet T^taxes proceeded as
well now to live as to reign* For there is no Medeum between an Emperor and
Traitor, and in a gallant encounter show the mi^ed Ormisdates, and returned in
triumph toward Magranopolis, where the incontinent Damafloris kept her Court,
of purpose to show the greatness of her state in that place, where once she
had lived in mean degree: But as he was marching, a Brother of the Queens
under color of Embasie from Artabanus, and craving private conference, stabd
him to the heart with a poisoned Knife.

Now was Damafloris sole Queen, and with her cunning and authority, handled
her business so well* that by advancing of some, bestowing of Offices on
others, placing reconsiled Friends (least far off they might prove dangerous
Enemies) nearest her seat, and forbearing a time the usual impositions of the
Kingdom, her former error was forgotten, and they were contented to admit of
her Son Ascrasapes for King; who by this time was able to conceive of matters
of government; and seeing the miseries which the Wars had in a manner
deuasted all the Kingdom with, pollitickly matched with Mitrea the Daughter of
Tautaxes slain by his Uncle; hoping by uniting both the Families together,
to leave no scruple nor doubt for his succession. In his time many troubles
were appeased; but what he purposed the strength of his state, was his own
overthrow, like a man determining to spit poison out of his mouth, but doing it
against the wind, it flies back again in his face, and inuenome^ as ill:
Which came to pass by having a Son this Astiages now reigning, whom his
Mother Mitrea brought up very carefully, as looking on him with reuengefull and
ambitious eyes to maintain her own greatness, and by his means to bring to
good end, what she had long since devised. First then, the remembrance of her
Father helped forward her hate against Damafloris; and that ended not without
effects, and they procured Ascrasapes to depose her from her regencie, by
suggesting a conference happening between the Mother and Son, wherein she
dared to tell him, he must respect her as principal cause of his Honor, and
that he was tied in a kind of duty toward her, for advancing him in this sort.
Little needed the Spur to a forward Horse; little needed Mitrea to urge this
against her, because he took it in ill part, and the Son of such a woman
had malice enough in store; which according to the Queens own desire, made
his Will stand for a Law against both his Mother and her partakers. The second
attempt was against the King himself; for finding her heart to stomach she
was matched with a Bastard, for whose sake her Father was slain; and her self
more in pollecie, then honor and love thus confirmed, she cared not what
troubles were procured, or mischief might settle her mind; so that after many
circumstances, Ascrasapes died, not without suspicion of poison, and she in
her Pha^tons flourish was sole Queen of the East. But the Noble men of Persia
casting up the account of these strange distractions of the Commonwealth,
thought by taking away the cause to remove the effects; and by quite
abolishing the race of Ormisdates, (especially the offspring of Damafloris) and
some what fearing the violent humor of the Queen Mitrea, determine for
another King, and looking toward Artabanus of Medea, as well for his own
worth, as his Grandmothers sake, and Fathers loss; who though he perished not
in the Fields of Persia, yet by his being here, his troubles in Media were
occasioned, nominated him to the place, and sent accordingly to bid him provide
for all their goods: Yet by the good behavior of Mitrea, was this judgment
reuersed, and Astiages her Son appearing with some towardliness, made them
repeal the former Edict, as it were pitying his youth, and that he deserved
no such punishment; but indeed the desire of satisfaction toward the noble
house of Tautaxes bound in their duty and obedience with stricter observation:
So they all submitted to Astiages, and misfortune weary of tartying long in
Persia, passed into Media, as you have heard: in which time the Kingdom of
Astiages recovered some part of her former glory, until Artabanus took upon
him the burden of being wronged, and so lay in wait for revenge; which he
went about, but was frustrated by his forces defeature under the leading of
Adelphus and so shot another shaft of all peace working goodness, bythe
sending of Mul^asses: but how he sped the Prince, Sacromirus beer canbest
tell: For as I suppoose the beauty of Roxana daughter to Astiages had then
drawn him into Persia: Indeed said Sacromirus: indeed said the Duke; by your
Princely leaves we will be sparing of this delight. For pleasure used with
extremytie loses her sweetness, and best property: therefore let us first
diue and remember the Ladies, as well love exercise, as discourses; and yet the
hearing of other men's matters does little touch their own praises: so that day
passed with the variety of Courtly pastimes, and the next with the flying of
Hawks, the third with hunting, and the fourth made the time seem very long,
had not the company entreated Sacromirus to finish Anzitemus story: who thus
began.

AFter Aistages was in in a manner restarined Sacromirus son of Hircania
proceeds with Artabanus history.
by the wisdom of his Council: he yet most ingenerously scorned to be so
courbed of his will, and enraged, put in execution a terrible revenge,
imprisoning Mulcasses against the Law of Arms, and surprising Adelphus against
the Law of honesty: within the time of truce gathering his Army together,
and one night came upon him unprovided, he yet used the advantage of his
Trenches, and some straight passages he had fortunately Barrocaded: But alas
this rather sharpened, then rebated their courage; So by reason of ouernumber
and home assisted, they quickly made a breach into the Camp, and Triumphed
with a notable slaughter: Adelpbus dangerously wounded, and hardly escaping to
be the messenger of more harder tidinges.

When Artabanus saw him self thus subject to the malice of fortune, and that
he resembled a man, who once stumbling never left reeling, till he came to the
ground, or one whom shrewd Turns, (as it were in sequence) followed after one
another: his modest anger could not refrain from inuection, and pashionat
complainning against his Fortune: But when Anzitemus stomached the dishonor,
because his Council consorted The story of Anzitemus and Astiages.
not with success, and that he saw a further procrastination of his business,
little needed Arttabanus to trouble conceit, how to wind up the Wheels of
this engine: For he importuned the journey in person, and opposed against the
difficulties objected: Whereupon the Magi and Haruspices were commanded to
attend, who by their sacrifices deuined the greatest and happyest event, and
Anzitemus with a well provided and sufficient Army passed through all the
borders of Persia, possessing the strongest holds, and after in three
encounters prevailed against Astiages, enforcing his retreat to the strong
Town of Susiania, where the place almost impregnable made him lie a while
houering like a skillful Faulken, that with advantage he might sease on his
prey.

By this time had report added much to his glory; and that made the comparison
between his true virtue and Astiages ill disposition stand him in great stead.
For when untoward remembrance had laid open the records of all their strange
accidents, which turmoyled Persia, they reckoned themselves in the rank of
unhappy subjects under an unhappy King, the rather for that the Royal
Anzitemus came orderly to demand Mulcasses delivery, and to propound the
former articles of peace unto them by the Marriage of Roxana to Darius Artabanus
son, and so to dismiss Astiages murdreth Mulcasses.
his Army. But the disloyal Astiages not only entreated him with scorn, but
barborously murdedred Mulcasses, and like a Monster in nature, brought him in
several Dishes dismembered before them all: and thus with a violent gesture,
vngorged his malice. Why base fugitive? Art not thou the wretched son of a
more wretched Father, whom his Country scorned, and people exiled? what
monstrous presumption has besotted thee to terrefie Persia with wonder-making
devises, as if I were an infant under a foolish Mother to be beaten with a Rod,
and appeased with a trifell? Or do thou suppose with thy untoward
proceedinges, by the help of my own subjects, Traitors to our God' and me, to
affright or dismay Astiages, who if the worst fault will tear out his heart,
and throw it in thy face? thou art deceived, Vacabond as thou art: yet because
you counterfeite a kind of embassage, your journey shall not altogether be
frustraite; here is Mulcasses; here is Astiages that brought him; and here is
the contempt of Armenias power, and Artabanus, that sent him: Thus is your
farewell concluded, unless you mean to supply the defects of my entertainment
with this cheer.

But what cheer could the vncheered company make; when the hideous spectacle
daunted the stoutest courage? or what answer might they frame, that knew not
how to speak, because they could not; nor could, because they durst not; nor
durst, being so appauled? the company of his own obedience strangely altered,
and the rest sooner altered, as having no cause to obey: yet do not imagine
they sat long to behold, or durst, as they sat, behold so vilde a sight: But
rising in a mutinous turmoyle, spent the shortest time in exclamation, and
offered such violence, as the place and number permitted: but in vain do they
attempt further, for fear, and shame; or shameful fear has carried his
hatfull body into some remoat corner, where affraide to see the mishappen
deformity of his mind, he smothered all the motions of reformation with a
working conceit of more mischeife.

By this time is the City in Arms, as terrefied with a suspicion of their
own ruin, and most of (...)

But by that time the next morning had wiped Astiages desperate of recovery,
considering Anzitemus possessed his Kingdom, flies to Cleonidas.
away the dolefulness of the night, a new Alarm raised the Army, and
disturbed them all: For Astiages certified of this disaster, wherein his
wilfulness had entoyled him, and how he was in a manner caged up within his
own City, of which before his eyes a Stranger had the possession, took it
so ill at Fortunes hands, that all enraged, he thus encouraged his favorites.

Oh (says he) there is no trusting to any place we have wronged; besides,
our provision cannot long last, though the Hold (as we may fortefie it) seem
impregnable, and to drive you to vnpreuentable mischiefs when the enemy will
increase, as well in number as in Pride; and former disgraces set other on
work to revenge, is that I may not, nor will not suffer. Let us therefore now
set upon them, as they are debating the matter, and by fyering the City, we
shall draw the most of them to look to their private and so in not preuayling,
prevail to make our escape in the hurliburly: For the rest, let the changes of
time determine, as they may. These speeches, and the performance, had but one
hour: for his Soldiers with Firebrands in their hands, came running through
the streets, killing all they met, and casting them into every house they
could enter, and although the necessity of their business proiected only
escape for Astiages: yet as if they had been to Sack the place, the miseries
of such change succeeded, murdring all sorts without difference of sex or
age, pillaging, taking of prisoners, rauishing of women, and mingling a cruel
victory and dissolute pleasure together, till Anzitemus ouertooke them Whirling
down the street to the watergate, wheresome forces had intercepted their
passage, whereby an equal met manhood grew to the greater proof, when the
straightness of the place compelled to fight or defense, and Astiages played
his part so well, that all men had him in admiration. For the troops were
weakened, the arayes broken, the assailants slain, the retierers dismembered,
and this new fear bread new confusion: But when Anzitemus had resembled him to
a ravenous Mas^e in a hunger starued night, who carlesse of the owners welfayre
breaks into a company of sheep, mangling more with the chase, then
necessity, he pressed nearer to single him out, and his modest anger could not
refrain from thus reprehending him. Oh insatiate homicide! What Tiger
cherished thy infancy? or did thou suck the Tears of cruelty, that thou
scornest all virtue, humanytie* and true manhood: and soothest each venomous
motion with a false obedience to stubborn will; surely the Gods are not such
as our reverence adore; If this impiety have with her spring alike repining
Harnest; Nor are men worthy the earths increase, if they suffer this outrage,
and let Anzitemus be for ever defamed; if he endeavor not to punish such a
wretch. But when Astiages heard the name of Anzitemus, and knew that this was
he, which entered his Realm, withdrew his Subjects from him, took his
Towns, was now Master of the City, and had driven him to these streightes;
the outward franticknesse proceeding from inward distemperature, beat the
Earth, gnashed his Teeth, and bitt the very Corselet he wore: Yea the rage
changed his countenance to a duskish blackness; which showing the strange
effect of hate opened the joints, whereby the veins spurted out their
fullness; and not able to proceed any further, then oh ye infernal powers;
he made his Sword the Hearald of a dangerous Defiance, whose force tried,
whether Anzitemus strength could abide it falling, or courage uphold him self
staggering, the standers by imputing it both to Cunning and Fortitude, that
that one blow had not finished the trial: Now was Anzitemus put to the
policy of an out-facing retreat, not in any diffidence of the Combat, but in
hope of better advantage: For perceiving his Adversary bent to ouermaister him,
with active wariness he bare off the burden of infinite strokes; but finding
at last, the Tirant wearied with making too much haste, and that his Strength
being spent, his Fury passed with a kind of slacknesse, he advanced him
self; and rebuking Shame increased his courage, that Astiages might not avoid
unlacing his Arms, dividing his Shield, nor wounding his Body. And thus have I
seen a new made Fire tarry a while, until heat had dried the moisture of the
Fuel, and then in a sudden flame to make reflection of greater warmth: yet was
Astiages loath to discover either disabillytie or suspicion, but striving with
an excellent courage, made it a perilous fight, and the peril bade them beware
of the effects, which was utter destruction. And as when two mighty Lions
having both their Females in necessity of food, happening at an instant on a
little pray fall at such variance, that the scorn of distribution settleth
them to besatisfied in the blood one of another: So these as mighty combatanta
not acknowledging the least difference, determine, that life shall depart,
before Honor be subject to disgrace, whereby the strangeness wrought an amase,
and the manner a kind of delight. For they taking up the narrow Rome of the
street, the rest had liberty to breath as if they seemed weary in the
Butchering one of another, and apprehended the end of all their troubles in the
end of this controversy: But Astiages seeing no hope of the conquest, and
beginning to misdoubt him self, fell back again to his first resosution of
escape, and remembering his League with Cleonidas, thought there was
possibility to return with sufficient Fortune and Revenge, if he could get
thither by any means: Whereupon, lifting up the failing legs of Courage with
all the remainder of a worne-out Fury, he whirled at the turning head of his
adversary a blow of too great peril, had not his eyes twinkling at the
brandishing of the weapon, been a caueate to other motiones, whereby a sudden
starting made his right foot slip, and the earth yield, so that thinking to
give forward, the body measured the ground with his length; which Astiagas
took Astiages flies to his Ships.
hold of, and by crying Auzitemus was slain, in despite of opposition made
for the time a fortunate escape, every one confounded with the sorrowful
news, and hindering one another with a rumerous intercourse: But their fear
and grief with a cheerful contrariety is soon reuersed by the vprysing of
Anzitemus, and although they could not satisfy him with revenge on the person
of the King; yet did they recompense him with the gift of the Kingdom, and
with Panegericall ceremonies conducted him to the Palace, not doubting, but as
the Bear displeased with natures deformity by often licking fashioneth her
young ones to an appointed shape: So would he deal with their dissolute Common
wealth, and reform what had misled the company amiss.

But because I have brought him to so good lodging, and that he found the
beautiful Roxana there, I will qustionlesse leave him, as unwilling to enter
into unfortunate discourses, either concerning himself and father: or touching
Brizaca who might be suspicious to heat Roxana named. Nay (qouth Trezoboro in
his Sisters behalf) things past are past care, and therefore I dare avouch
Brizacas content shall consist in Anzitemus future respect, but they I persuade
my self, will well agree. So shall we never (replied king zalby) unless we be
thankful to the Prince for his discourse, and entreat the gracious Brizaca
once again to impose this task on Anzitemus, For I proteste, I long to hear,
by what chance the director of all chances has consented, that this meeting
should be recorded in the volumes of admiration. But Rugio said, there was no
reason in the suddenness: For he had a purpose to show the Princes the Arbor,
which King zalby so much liked, and they after they liked, so much commended:
in this taking the benefit of the next suns advancement: the Feast was
prepared, but till it please them to rise from their solemnytie, I dare not
begin to trouble you with the discourse.

Finis libri Tertii
THE FOVRTH BOOK of the History OF TREBIZOND.



Imprinted at London by W. White for T. Downs and E. Dawson. 1616.

To the Honorable Lady CHANDOS.
HONORABLE LADY:
HOweuer Honor has appeased your repinings, and as it were coosoned your
Birthright with the courtesy of England; so that it seems a disparitie to
place you the last, that are eldest in blood, and as worthy as the best: Yet
would I not exempt you from my own poor Wishes; nay I durst not divide you
from your Mother and Sisters, least I might want the full participation of that
grace and Virtue, which I proposed to my self from your favor: Therefore I
pray you give me leave to warm all benumming despair with the Sun of your
Honor and acceptance; and amongst your other Virtues, let me both affright
Despair, that you will pardon my Error, and strengthen my Hopes: that you
will entertain my good meaning, though it be but in the presenting of a Book:
For I protest, when I ran away hoodwinckt with an opinion, it would pass in
the World as the deceit of Idleness, there was a pleasure in pretending your
Patronage; and more then a Hope, in naming my Lady Chandos, as a Mistress of
this Dedication.

Your Honors humbled in all impositions: Tho. Gainsforde.

The fourth Book of the History of TREBIZOND.
NO sooner was the Solemnity Anzitemus proceeds in his own story.
of the Feast ended, and the conueniencie of the place renewed their desires to
beguile tediousness with delight, but Brizaca proposed to Anzitemus the
importunity of the Princes to be made acquainted with his Story, and he
surrendering obedience thus proceeded.

I cannot deny, but the fortune of that Victory (if I add not an vnpropper
Title to the success) flattred me with better hope, then Astiages tried in
his election: Yet I protest, Ambition had no such scope, either to elate my
fra^ltie, or admit of their proffers, although peradventure with my own, and
other auxiliary forces, I might have awed both foreign and domestic repining:
So that I made slight answer to them, and urged again in a manner denied to be
so incombred: But they supposing a further worthynesse by my aba^shed drawing
back oppressed me with reasons of their love, choice, and necessity, and
compared i^ my behalf abillity, virtue, and deseart: I again remembering my
fathers captivity, and the trust reposed in me by Artabanus, meant not to
commit my faith to a strange government of deceit, nor betray a good
beginning to contumely: Therefore gathering together the best reputed amongst
them, I thus demeaned my self.

I understand (worthy to be beloved Lords) that The Persi^us would choose
Anzitemus king but he refuses.
some slender towardlynesse in these proceedings, has ouerswayed better
consideration, whereby you determine to impose this soueraig^ety upon me: but
Wisdom advises you ^o take ^eed in a polliticall body, what Head you admit,
because if that exceed not in all aptness, the i^eriour members, no concord
can continue a peace, nor conformity make a perfection: For though in a
Monarchy settled in many degrees of descent, some one degenerating from the
virtue of his predecessors, for those virtues, and those pr^decessors sake is
not all together impeached: yet in such a kingdom, as this, if the place be
(...) be supplied with a man from the choice of others, neither must your
obedience be abused, no^ his wilfulness maintained: Let not then my defects so
bewitch your opinion with a sparing regard of your selves: considering all that
is, or should be in such a person (though I wear no alien and might live
without fear of any concurrent) are in me wanting: For to be more particular*
a King must as well seek to have his mind guarded with virtues, as his body
with armed Soldiers; and if it be pleasing to call these by their names, it is
convenient to know them by their natures; which (if I be not deceived) are to
be thus deciphered. Affability without Affectation, least a partial
admittance keep such next his person, as are noted with infamy, and a wilful
conniuency ouerpasse the great faults of his Officers. Liberality with Advice,
that his Revenues and Royalties may supply wantes without exactions, rather
upon necessiti^ urging Beneuolences, then wantonness commanding Impositions.
Magnificense with Reposednesse, whereby the honor of the Court may extend to
timely Princelinesse, either at the access o^ his own Peers, or
entertainment of foreign Ambassadors. Mercy with Discretion, least the
Wicked insult through presumption, and Imegritie complain to see Vice
unpunished. Recreation with Judgment, least Pleasures reign without Limet,
and the Common wealth remain neglected and disconsolate. Loyalty with Secrecy,
least sin abroad purchase hatred at home, and like recompense cause Jealousy
and Mi^oubt to be depriuers of liberty. Concerning the troubles of
disagreement, either in public or private hostillytie, he must have Depth of
wisdom to remember, respect, and foresee. Height of Courage, as well to
embolden others, as defend himself, considering many times challenges are made
among^ Princes: and one man's death, is the preservation: of a Million of lives.
Largenes of Bounty to honor, reward, and advance, according to the well
deserving, and not opinnion of me^. Regard of Majesty: that his state may
strike a reverence, and louelynesse a desire: and though last named (yet the
chiefest of accoun^) (...) of ^rizones, whereby either hope of blessing^s will
detain them in good courses, or fear of Judgment coerceate a bad disposition.
These Jewels (noble Lords) are the Ornaments of King^; whereof the fruition is
not so plausible, as the w^ dangerous; such is the difference in greatness by
descent and desert: but concerning my self, I am engaged already in the like
expectation of (...), and ^ed to the necessity of my fathers redemption; (...)
me therefore neither betray your loves to negligence, nor entangle my self with
such difficulty: but because your de^s shall not be altoge^er ^strate, I do
thus advise you. Da^ Arta^us son a neighbor, a King and sufficient, yea so
sufficient (that I need not exemplefie his virtues) matching with Roxana
Astiages Daughter, will in the match ouermatch all your troubles, and new
fashion your mishappen government; which if you admt, as urged by my self,
Armenia s^all be forever confederat, and Anzitemus an assured friend to Persia:
besides, two such ^gdomes united, will terrefie the greate^ ill will* and make
ample your mightiness for ever.

To this, or the like purpose, did my speeches tend, whereby I somewhat
pacefied the first enforcement; but had a sparing answer concerning Roxana:
For there wanted not those, which replied, how her beauty and desert merited
better at my hands, then so slightly to interest another with the possession of
such life, and excellency; whereupon Zaleppo a chief peer of the Realm,
either stomaching my carelesenesse, or yet making me believe I should not leave
them so unprovided, hasted to the Palace; and returned with the Lady, as if he
meant to exprobrate my simplycitie, that would ouerpasse a matter of such worth;
and truly (most gracious Brizaca) such was the goodlynesse of her person, and
the appearance of other perfections, that an exact amorist would not have
wished for better becoming: To be plain, divine, influence ouerruleth man's
purposes; For what a continual presence might have wrought, I know not; but
Fortune ever Ominous unto me, (except in my now happiness) intercepted this
progress of affection, and by the return of Astiages with that Monster of
nature Cleonidas, whom I shall never name with patience, ouerturned both the
foundation and the building of my desires.

For Astiages stomaching the indignity of the Astiages returns with
Cleonidas who brought Artabazes into Persia.
revolt and his own discomfiture, presently fled to his ships (as he had
before contrived) and putting into the maine Caspian the next day encountered
with this damnable associate; between Whom for the time passed some
difference, the one impeaching delay, whereby mischance Triumphed to his great
discomforte: the other, excusing the matter by the Battle with my father, and
that he also heard Adelphus was returned into Media, which offered him leisure
to the new rigging his ships and supplying his men: but when Cleonidas had
fully conceived the desaster of Astiages, he bad him quiet himself, and
infused new life with the sight of Artabazes in Captyuitie, which the King
took so passhionately that he confounded two contraries, joy and anger
together: For neither remembering his virtues, nor greatness, nor allowing the
present magnanimity outfacing his misery, with a sullen abruptness he plainly
told him, that if at the first motion I did not deliver up the possession of
Susiana, and depart quietly out of Persia: he would Torture him before my face
in view of the City: in which humor they Landed their Army, and Soldierlike
marched forward, surprising many places I had forrefied, till a timely alarm
gave notice of their pretenses, and occationed expedition to intercept them.

But to decipher the variety of humors, which the accident wrought, were to be
as tedious now, as they were troublesome then: Some under Color of remorse
began to vpbraied their disobedience, that so soon consented to the deposing
of a King for a casual effect of distemprature: some ignominiously cowards
began already to prepare for a flight, and these the only bosters in security:
Some absolutely wicked respecting nothing but themselves, made a continual
reuoult to the stronger side, a polliticke prevention of their losses, though
the obloquie remained: some with a kind of cunning spared both a reprehention
of the enemy, and palpable flattery of the preuayler: some stomached the
deiection of their houses, as rather wishing their own aduancements, then
repining at my success: some neither hopeful to others, nor helpefull to
themselves, only wondered, that Persia should be so barren to elect a stranger
over them; these men had willingness, but no power to do hurt; some true
Lovers of the Commonwealth proclaimed me Protector of the Realm, and
maintained the charge of the War with their own, and the Cities Treasure.

Now was I some what perplexed to be resident amongst so many unstayed
dispositions: yet unwilling to receive notice of every slender occation, I
applied my self to the time, taking a general Oath of the City, wherein I
reserved the hostages of diverse Noble men: besides Roxana remained as a pledge
for my securytie, and seemed contented, so her fathers life might be spared:
but not ^eaning to trust my self within a place, where death had a hundred
ways of treachery, nor desirous to be affrighted with the mutinis and
turmoyles, to which the people upon every alteration are incident: I chose from
amongst them eight Thousand of their Principal men, and mingling them with my
own forces, was assured no man durst wisper mislike, nor slack his manhood,
when it came to the trial: with these I encountered Astiages and determined to
put all to the deciding of one day; which he took in very good part, and made
me believe his resolution corresponded: For presently his Army suffered a
fourfold division, one part whereof attended the cariges, and secured certain
passages; the Rear was committed the trust of Cle^nidas: the Battle was
ordered by Pyragmon a brother of Zaleppos, and the Vann (crossing the method of
former directions) impatience made Astiages himself to conduct: When the skout
Masters of our Camp certefied thus much, I prepared accordingly, and would
willingly have given the first charge, in hope to single out Astiages or
Cleonidas: But I was not permitted to make use of such forwardness, because as
they said they would not hassard me insuch sort: so that Alcastus had the
Honor of the first encounter, and the battles in a manner stood idly
outfaceing one another, by reason whereof I saw Astiages coming gallantly ^o
the charge: he was easily known by a (...) on the Tope of his caske Crouned
and crisped, and Round about lay many living Creatures dead, out of his mouth
issued a scrowle containing this Mott, In Visu Mors.

His Troop was well armed* appointed; and as it should seem, encouraged: for
they assaulted the strongest Cataphracts flancking our foot, and performed
actions worthy the best report; but too too preiudicate he was so quickly
engaged, that Danger lifted up her voice, as if it came to tell him, Death was
the reward of Tirany and Pre^umption: But yet such was his fortune, that
exclayming on the fugitive Anzitemus, the banished Anzitemus, the traitor
Anzitemus: Anzitemus quickly presented him self, though neither fugitive,
banished, nor traitor; and of purpose to reba^e the wrath of the Soldiers (who
by this time, had heavven him a pieces) offered a private Combat, if upon the
determination my Father might be delivered, and the Articles of peace renewed.

But as I expected the return of some assurance The cruel unfortunate death
of Artabazes Anzitemus father, in reueng whereof he follows Cleouidas to Sea,
and there encountreth him, as in the first Chap. of the first Book.
of contentment, Cleonidas acquainted with Astiages distress, hastened to the
place, and vng orging his venomous stomach, suggested he would strike off my
Fathers head, if I did not presently set Astiages free. O Gods! that I live to
report my disgraces, considering Cleonidas lived unrevenged: For whether my
impatience hindered the Organs of my voice, or the Zeal of my well willers
transported them to the enterprise, I know not; but I was not able by threats,
entreaty, or promises, to prevent the mischief which followed: For they not
admitting so childish a terror, made at Cleonidas, and with some wounds
enforced his retreat; the rest ouercharging Astiges, The death of Astiages.
gave him neither leave to repent, or (...): and not appeased with his death,
added reproach to his fall: For a Brother of Mulcasses dismembered the body, and
threw the cut off head at Cleonidas before us all; who taking it in (...)
manner, swear he would solemnise his exeq^es with as equal Sacrifice: and in
that impatience, made his passage through the Troops, crying, Revenge,
Revenge; and contrary to all manhood, or honor, posted to his Tent, where the
ever resolute Artabazes was the subject of his wrath, Cleonidas kills
Artaba^es.
and shrunk under the burden of a sauadge hand. In whose untimely death, the
case was the more lamentable, because so sufficient means, as I was interessed
in, might rather warrant a recovery, then suspend his hopes. But why trifle I
my Discourse, when it is a courtesy to tell the worst of a man's misery
quickly? So soon as his perfidious hate had brought this Tragedy to (...)
period, with a slender repentance he wished it undone, and sent me word of
the remorce; which I taking in scorn, found the message rather to exasperate
my revenge: in which mood, I hasted ^o the enemy of my soul; who mistrusting
him self, fled to his Ships, and quickly make Persia ashamed of their trust
reposed in his valor: but the most of ^is Fleet was unready, whereby he was
enforced to take such as he found, and ordered the rest to follow with speed.

Now had I time to condemn the treachery, suspect some plot of mischief, blame
the unable company to intercept him, exclaim on the cowardice of the
Soldiers, and make faulty I knew not whom, or what: Yet at last, Advice
recalled me to suppose, that deferring would occasion him to be the better
provided; and if he once escaped, to be settled in his strength; it would
prove an adventure of more danger and difficulty to disseise him: I therefore
allowed Direction no further scope, but made after with all speed, and
embarked in the rest of Cleonidas own Ships, which we enforced to serve our
turn: But by that time extremity was a little moderated, I began to cast many
doubts, as how Cleonidas was attended, which way his resolution accelerated,
and whether our own company were sure to us or no. These particulars by
examining the Mariners, and some others attending in the Ships, were soon
answered, that Cleonidas had eight Ships, and would with out doubt, make
toward the dry Island. Other questions were of less importance, and yet
expected their solutions: so we cast many of them over board, lerning as few
to consume or hinder (as we could) and seeing we possessed twelve, nothing
was thought on, but a fortunate encounter; which ere the next Sun had mounted
to the height of his majesty, bade us be our own Judges of: for we
ouertooke the Pirate, who mistaking us for his own Company, somewhat slacked
the wind, and in a manner tarried our approach.

But when our defia^ce produced a strange contrariety, never made his
mischeuous conceit any show of barrenness, till now: For out of all comfort
either by conuention or conuulsion to avoid the imminent peril, he
blasphemed both. Heaven, Farth, and Sea, storming at the accident, as though
he had been betrayed to destruction, which almost made him open the door to
death with his own hands: yet being remembered by some one better considerat
of the many changes depending on the actions of men, he recalled both
Judgment and Courage, and began the fight in such manner, as you see a Feast
marshalled to make the statelyer show by good order: For our losses were equal
a long time; and as a man fell amongst them, another dropped amongst us: as
their Slinges and Arrows endamaged us, our Stones and Engines slaughtered
them: as their Fire-workes were thrown with effect, ours were not cast without
proof; at last, the smallest Barckes felt the i^conuenience of many dangerous
leakes, and irrecouerably suncke with their Burdens before our faces; whereupon
I commanded to grapple, fearing indeed the Sun had fled from our
wretchedness, and disdained to ouerlooke so ruthful a spectacle: Besides, the
Night like an unwelcome guest coming both unlooked for, and unbidden, approached
to disappoynt us, and made us enforce our selves seeming most brauest, when we
could least hurt; and in the end of our fury beginning a new work of
woefulnesse. But Cleonidas Cleonidas and Anzitemns fight at Sea as in the
beginnig.
either of despayring the event, or loath to disproportion his tyranous mind,
even when Death seemed weary, commanded to set fire of all, and heaw the
Ships in pieces; whereupon followed so lamentable a Catastrophe, as I thought
no man happy, but such whom death had absented from the unhappiness, which
many hours continued in pitiful cries, and heart-renting exclamations; nor
wanted there horrible scriches, and execrable Apostasy. To this the fire added
a wonderful terror, appearing as if it determined to quench the Ocean; but
most aptly I thought it a pollecie of Destruction, to light us to Hell. And
truly (my most gracious Brizaca,) though now dearer to me, then my dearest
life, yet were I not sure of the felicity collated by your self, I would not
again behold such another Stratagem, no not in hope of an other Brizaca: For I
am certain not four men lived, though none escaped what was ten times worse
then death; and how some divine influence ouerlooked me, I know not; but I well
remember, unless I should have haled death with my ownehands, it could come no
faster toward me: Yet it was my chance to light on a broken piece of
Cleonidas own Ship, having no other comfort, then in the meditation of my last
end, resolving never to pollute my then clean thoughts with any dregs of
worldly compounds. In this manner Placandus sound me, and within a while
again I lost my self: but how that recovery chanced beyond my desert, you
can best tell, that have paid the ransom of my redemption.

Now by the blessed escape of those dangers, I swear (quoth Brizaca) you have
affrighted me with this Discourse; But seeing it is your pleasure to take hold
of a new Comfort, and suppose me the Antidote of these greeuances: Let your
Hopes be never interdicted; and cursed be the occasion of infringing our
desires: which was uttered with such vehemence, as if true Love determined to
tell the passengers, here was his Mansion: For the tears distilled from her
eyes, as if the heart melting within had sought out a passage for the moisture:
So have I seen thee sweet Rose leaves quickly covered with a Still, and
feeling a change by the working heat, drop out his dellicate savor amongst
us. When Anzitemus saw those excellent Lamps filled so unkindly, he stepped
unto her, and meant to dry them with his kisses: but not preuayling, he put his
own upon them like Spunges to soake them up.

While this ecstasy continued, diverse matters were debated betwixt the King and
the other Princes, who well pleased in Anzitemus discovery, and transported to
the admiration of his Virtues by considering his worth, presently made offer of
them selves and powers, to the effecting whatsoever was expedite for his
Honor. Yet (quoth Trezoboro) seeing Cleonidas has commenced so often untoward
occasion of remembrance, let us exact of your kindness a relation of his
estate and condition. What can I deny such desert? (answered Anzitemus) and
though you have taxed me with a dangerous imposition, as that I must aggrauate
my sorrow with the repetition of the cause, and awake Impartialitie to say the
truth of my Enemy: yet do I well vouchsafe to be thus his Historiographer.

AFter the aged Sagarenus of Thessaly was The story of Cleonidas and Antanata:
with Armenus taking her part possessing the Kingdom and denominating the
Country.
made acquainted with the honorable expedition of the Iouialists to Taurica,
(where Dianas silver Tree exposed such honor and reward in the atcheeuement)
in manner of a fatherly exhortation he counseled his son Armenus to make
trial of Fortunes courtesy amongst the rest, who more forward, then fortunate
prepared for the journey, and was enrowled amongst the other Princes to
accompany Telpinas (whom the casting of Lotts had made their Captiane in the
enterprise:) Now by that time the Soldiers had taken possession of the Harbor,
and Telpinas was newly settled in Cherona aduising how to proceed: Artaxata a
Queen extract from the greatest blood of Cilitia and the spacious Countries
under the Mount Taurus, came in person to the Court, where this Noble assembly
kept residence, and had by this time filled all Asia with wonder at the
attempt:) and like a Prince in whom a magnanimous Countenance seemed the
Ornament of an Heroijcke spirit with her associat affabillitie, neither
manlike, nor effeminate thus excused her self.

I am come to thee (thou Honorable Grecian) induced, as much by the hope of thy
virtues, as fame of thy actions: For this is subject to alteration by the
reporters partiallytie: that remains like a squared die every way cast
standing upright, I will therefore firm this Anchor on the sufficiency thereof,
not doubting but to move some spirit to add to his own Honor and my glory,
when he shall understand a woman, a Virginn, a Queen, is wronged and in
distress: For true Nobillity is decipherd in those famous exploites of
relief, not in vain ostentation or enticementes of ambytion: So long then
has my fathers house continued in prosperity, that either the Gods envied
our established mightynesse, or Fortune (stomaching the razing and subuertion
of Colosseum a Temple once dedicated to her) consented to have this neglect or
rather contempt punished, and performed it with the indignytie of a Traiterous
revolt, at such a time, as when Majesty scorned the presumption of a Subject,
and Love fled from an unkind Compulsion: For no sooner was my Fathers Exequies
celebrated, but my estate bade me step into the Chair of Controulment,
wherein I prepared to sit with the applause of all my Subjects, had not
Cleonidas, an ancient enemy to the peace of many Provinces, persuaded an
inuiolate perpetuity, if I would admit of his love, which (as he said)
proceeded from the fountain of true Desire, and acknowledging my Virtues: But
I took it otherwise; that the greediness of Ambition had taught him a
polliticke lesson of passhion, and rather hasted him to counterfeit his liking;
which made me impugn the forwardnes, and not without some terms of
reprehention (yet far from reproach) dismissed him, as if I expected a further
corroboration of my estate. At last urged again with a kind of presumption, or
rather carelessness of my Royalty, in a quiet manner of disdain I assured
him, I neither feared his Malice, nor regarded his Favor; but in despite of
Confederats, would have him an exemplary obedience to the rest of my Subjects.

This he took in great reproach, and soon made apparent the Barrenness of the
ground, wherein the Seeds of his love were set: For under Color Cleonidas
conderateh with Colphurnus a Giant,
of indignity to the Realm, that such a jurisdiction, and so many worthy men
should betyed to the wilfulness of a woman, he raised a dangerous faction
against me, and for the better countenancing his Treasons seduced, and with
great sums of Money hired Colphurnus the Giant of Taurus to be his Colleauge:
a man or rather a monster respecting nothing but disorder, and loving no
creature save himself: a man never terrefied with prodegies, allowing religion
and conscience but a pollycie to restrain the forwardness of some bravely
disposed: a man implacable in his fury, and over insulting if chance or
mischance afforded him superiorytie: To conclude, such a one, as scorned my
simplicity, and mocked Cleonidas ambytion: yet gave wings to this attempt,
rather that his own greatness might appear, then for any willingness to
assist the other. Thus in ouerdaring manner they came once again to demand my
consent, which I protest I now reserved more charylie, and rejected him as
rediculous, to see a man profess kindness, and express hate, sue for favor,
and threaten despite: wish peace, and procure War: propose goodness, and
dispose mischief: plead for remorse, and determine revenge, using me as some
in-descreete fathers their Children, who many times beat them without cause,
alleging Conscience, and the necessity of correction: But when Colphurnus
heard my denial, (only maligning that his presence wrought no better with
me) he stormed beyond all the limits of reason, and rayled at me, as if the
name of a Queen had never been heard of: which though I was not so happy to
prevent, yet was (...) so bold to disclayme. Proud beast (said I) whom the
Heavens have excluded, and the Earth supposes burdensome, though thy Senses
never participated any civil sound, and the name of Virtue had only the
estimation of such a word; yet how durst thou neglect the due regard to a
Prince, which the unreasonable creatures in their kind fulfill? But seeing
Nature sometimes yields to Errors, that the perfect may be discerned by the
imperfect, I allow thee a Monster amongst Men; and yet resolve, neither shall
thy body escape unpunished, nor thy soul (if I may suppose it in such
deformity) unpardoned. Think (honorable Lords) this much impeached his
patience, and hasted them to trifle no longer; whereupon they spoiled my
people, depopulated the Country, subverted my Towns, and weakened my Forces;
which with my own person, they had utterly defeated, had I not took advantage
of the strength of a Castle, wherein I remain at this instant besieged; and
unless some fortunate Aspect do here look upon me, I must submit to the
untowardness of a heart-vexing necessity, (as for the place, I suppose it for
a time impregnable in the continuance of their loyalties possessing it,) and
not without some strange stratagem, or surrender to be quickly commanded. Now
suppose much more might have been spoken, and much better: but if I be
understood, I am satisfied; and if assisted, comforted otherwise.

Nay (quoth the Heroijck Armenus) by your Armenus Son of Sagarenus assisteth
the Queen Artaxata.
patience Royal Queen no more; and their Lordly leaves no less? then what
soever the Gods have imparted unto me, to prostrate it before you; if then you
dare commit so priselesse a Jewel to so slender a Guard, my faith and
endeavors shall surpass outward means, and yet I make no doubt the Justice
of your cause, and the trophe of my reward shall incite me to effectuate any
exployte within the reach of performance, so that if ever action were attempted
for reasons sake, here is reason upon reason, and he an unreasonable coward,
that dare not make so honorable a progression: By this time her countenance was
invested with a new form, and her gallant demeanot bred a desire in the rest
to send fame on their Errands: But Artaxata urged no further, nor troubled
Telpinas with other importunity, more then that she gratified him for his
virtuous kindness and care for alotting a reasonable company to attend her,
and sending a Messenger into Thessaly, to acquaint the aged Sagarenus with his
sonns fortune.

In this Iollytie made Artaxata her return, and because some questions may be
enforced, concerning the Iorny, let me answer; such was her imparadised
beauty, attractiue comeliness, gallant youth, sweet demeanor, and all gracing
virtues that he seemed rather ravished, then enamored: such again was his
seemly person, firmness of manhood, portly behavior, delightsome countenance,
and all helping Courage, that she remained rather overcome, then pleased: So
that with thankesgining to the Gods for this happy acquaintance, and seemly
desires to be acceptable one to another; they concluded the Sunpathy of
conditions and liking, should tie the indissoluble knot of Armenus and Artaxata
contract.
affection: yet left he not thus, but with a serious enquiry of her affairs
made way to better conceit of his wisdom: Whereupon she acqainted him with
the peoples liberty, and the seeldome matched obedience in the liberty: the
factions amongst the better sort, the alliance and privileges of her own
family, the manner of her fathers government, and lastly made a distinction
between men Enobled for the Court, and embled for the Commonwealth: she also
imparted the abillity, state and conditions of Cleonidas, the beginning of his
love, and the proceeding of her troubles. But (quoth the respective Armenus) by
what means escaped you the enemy in this flight, I will tell you that too,
said the Queen.

After the report of your Greekish expedition had liberally acquainted us with
so many Princes, so many men of Vallure, as accompanied Tlepinas in the
enterprise, and were then resident in Taurica: one time amongst others, as I
was obsequious in my sacrifice with many impetrations, that they might be
propityatory, and many many devotions to expiate my offenses, me thought the
Penates beckned a silence, and bad me have to Cherona for redress, wherein sure
they determined my delivery, for though the time of the year almost warranted
better weather, yet that night and all the next day fell such a Snow, as if the
heaven meant to show us some variety: now by reason of a vault letting in the
River to the use of the palace, I conceived how to escape by covering my self
and and some few others in whight Linen, and truly I will not now boast, but
with an extraordinary life did I then pass upon the Bancke, which the enemy
had cast out of their trenches, at such time, as for very pity they would not
put forth a Sentinel to watch, and so escaping to a place of more trust, then
strength, I made such provision as my have permitted. But how now shall we
enter (replied Armenas.) As for that, (answered Artaxata) the Influence, which
has hitherto over ruled; will not leave this work imperfect. Now by the
protection, which follows us, you have over reached me (said Armenus) in
resolution, yet if it please you not to presage me ill by fear or misdoubt, I
have thus devised.

According to your description of Colphurnus, I geather his Courage and
strength to be great, but his presumption and pride to be more, whrein such men
go forw ard in immanitie, not that they are unvanquishable, but because
opinions is terrefied with their hugeness; and indeed resemble such Weeds,
which while you handle daintily, will sting till you smart; but use them with
violence, they loose their force and efficasie. So that to offer private
combat (which I am fure his insolency will rather deride, then reject) may be
the easiest course (though you may suspect not the safest) to reuerse your
fears: For if I shrink under the burden of a heavy disaster, persuade your
self the old Sagarenus will draw all Greece to your aid: or else your patience
must prove an unkind virtue: if I peruayle, what would you desire more; but
that I should prevail? Here a still manner of behavior continued awhile, but
at last brake up with a yielding cheerfulness: for it rather proceeded from
the amasement at his Virtue, then despair of the success; and yet was there
great disparitie between them. Thus they approached the Enemies Trenches, who
every day expected surrender, or composition; little suspecting that the Queen
was absent, or that these new come troops were worthy the name of a Supply;
imputing it rather to their madness and folly, which would wilfully put them
selves into danger without hope of recovery: Which when Armenus perceived, and
that they forbore violence against them, the next day like a Herrold of
defiance; and yet summoning a Parlee, he in this manner tried their patience.

Although (ye abused Cilitians) man's malitiousnesse has put in practice
infinite prestigious devises, in so much that they have not desisted to rebel
against Heaven, and with monstrous Apostacy to fight against the Gods; yet
have not those faults passed without punishment: For subuersions of Kingdoms,
stratagems amongst Estates, alterations of Commonwealths, massacres of Armies,
and murdring one another, have followed; witness the Titans, the translation of
the first Monarchy, and such infinite Wars as have filled the world with
tears and reproach; and shall no doubt, appear as an instance amongst your
selves, for treason, immanity, and perfidiousnesse. But why trifle I with
circumstances? It is to thee Cleonidas I speak; it is against thee thou Tirant
Colphurnus I enueigh: the one a wicked Rebel to Souerainty and Beauty; the
other, a monstrous enemy to Majesty and Virtue: and both as scandals and
reproaches to Valor and Honor. Was it ever allowed, that a Subject durst
infringe the Laws of Duty and Alleagence against a Woman, a Virgin, a Queen?
Was it ever heard, that a man of Valor, durst offer violence (without
impeachment of villainy) to such a person, whose virtuous Renown has moved
the Heavens to pity her, as though you had been framed to terrify the world,
and sent from Hell as Monsters in nature? If it be so, by all the names of
precious Goodnes^ by all the power of divine Beauty, by all the worth of
pearelesse Artaxata, I conjure you return from whence you came: If not so; I
challenge the one to repent his Insolency; the other, to reform his Cruelty.
But if my speeches resemble a loathsome Potion, or seem unseasonable, as
attempting to compass with a slender Oratorie, what many Thousands of armed
men have failed in. Know then, that the royal Artaxata taking compassion of
her Subjects, and Kingdom, and to avoid further effusion of blood, offreth
by me the first borne of Sagarenus of ^hessalia, a private Combat; wherein
she submits to the event, so Cleonidas do thereupon surcease the War.
This has the Queen Armenus offers private Combat.
concluded with princely steadfastness. This does the Grecian Armenus confirm
with resolute willingness.

Here the Soldiers stood amassed betwixt remorce of their own faults, and
fear of their commanders: but Cleonidas stormed the more, as remembering the
desert of the Queen, and his misfortune to be rejected, or disappointed: and
Colphurnus raged beyond reason and (according to the insolency of such
persons,) yielded to the motion though there came Tenn such Knights, wishing
the dispatch, least his fury might put in practice further distemprature But
little needed such have to destruction. For the next morning came Armenus into
the field like a Knight well mounted, and orderly provided, expecting
Colphurnus, who made the more have, by reason Cleonidas found the Army in
fears at the accident: but when he perceived the Giant might not Ride, because
of his highness, he quickly yielded his Horse freedom, and very gallantly
attempted the onset on foot: beginning the Battle with that bravery, that
the standers by expressed a very gladness to be eye witnesses of such spirit
and life; yet when the contention grew betwixt wary nimblenesse and furious
strength, and that the continuance detained them in suspicion, it increased
both pity and amasement: the one, least such a loss of Virtue should chance
by ouermatching: the other to see a Giants force equalled; who indeed pressed
Armenus with unkindly strokes, but that Heroijcke dexterity avoided the
seasure, and sometime gave him liberty and time to wound the other, whereby he
spent much blood, and increased his impatience so far, that he fastened a blow
which struck the Prince to the ground, to the terror of both the Armies; who
in their hearts wished him fortunate, and shooted for ^y at his recovery: of
which Armenus took the advantage, Colphurnus death.
and seeing there was no enduring long, adventured a cloze, and had the chance
to run him under the short Ribs, and so made room both for Death and
Victory to divide them selves: Whereat Cleonidas blasphemed Heaven and Earth,
rather now showing his willingness, then sufficiency to maintain the
quarrel.

By this time Artaxata discovered her self, and like the Sun clearing the
interposition of thick Clouds appeared the more glorious: so the Soldiers
yielded to mercy, and the people submitted as being before enforced; and
because they would give notice of their duty for a beginning, with the same
Water that drove the Mill, they drowned the Mill, quickly chasing Cleonidas in
his retreat; Cleonidas prisoner and restored.
and taking him by force, brought him bound to the Queen; who at Armenus
intercession, gave him life, liberty, and settled him in former estate, little
suspecting, that courtesy to a Traitor, is a thankelesse office, and most
commonly gives but occasion of further hate and repining.

With this beginning was the whole Kingdom pleased, so that the Queen might
publish her will with success, and Armenus succeed with publication Armenus is
king and names the Country Armenia.
and good will, possessing thereby a gracious Artaxata, and a spacious Country,
which by way of recompense and sataifaction was contented to change her old
name, and to be called Armenia for his sake: In this as a thankful steward
under an Honorable Lord he dedicated two espetiall places Sagarena and Artaxata
after his Fathers and Wifes name, which in time grew to be Rich, famous, and
Populous Cities: but assured of the dissolution of any state without
government, he established Laws, as well to detain the people in obedience,
as to maintain his own prerogative, to which (because they seemed strict and
contrary to fo^r Customs) he had much a do to bring them, but at last, by
polliticke insinuation, and true magnanimity the great men applauded his
carriage and temprature, and the people like their shadows yielded to what
they allowed: so that few misliked, and such as misliked durst not complain,
until Cleonidas rebelled again, as reprehending Cleonidas rebelleth again
and dies.
his own baseness, that he had been beholding to a stranger for his life, but
a suffitient discomfiture made him fail in the attempt, and his death
warranted Armenus peace and establishment.

This had yielded a full recompense indeed, if he could have prevented a double
mischance: The one in suffering Cleonidas the son to enjoy his fathers bad
conditions with his estate; the other in being divided from his Royal Queen,
whose life was now brought to an untimely period by a heart vexing sickness;
but herein some supernatural power wrought for the best, because now
Childlesse, he after matched with Tolmiranda the Assirian Sophy, by whom he
enjoyed the fruits of his body in great towardliness, and continued the rest
of his time in a gracious peace, had not time ripened the wicked disposition of
Cleonidas the son, and hate as it were innated within him enforced many
exorbitant actions, setting again Cleonidas the Son is banished Armenia and
becomes a Piratte.
the kingdom in combustion, which at last was better ordered and prevented. For
his places of refuge were leueled with the ground, his Lands and wealth
confiscate, his Allies and associates under arest, and himself exiled the
Kingdom, who otherwise might have lived a glory too the kingdom.

These wars and Armenus life had end together, whereupon my father Artabazes
began his Royal raze at such time, as this Cleonidas entertained a conceit of
revenge by this course of Piracie, wherein thirty years continuance made him
an archmaster; and custom in wickedness so blinded him, that great faults
were reputed slender, and small ones not so much as imperfections: but the
chiefest proppes too this wicked life; were the confederacy of many Princes,
and his own wealth unjustly amassed, with which in this latter time he
maintained thirty well appointed Ships, and amongst other Stratagems (as you
have heard) was beholding to the warth full Nemesis for Artabazes loss, but
whether divine Justice took my cause in hand, I know not. For the best part of
my Fortune extended to see him cursing and raging Anzitemus declares his
fortune with Roxana the heir of Persia: and how he was prevented from Marrying
her by reason of his pursuing Cleonidas at Sea.
amidst the ouerraging Billows.

AT this Period Anzitemus made a stop, and king Zalby with the Princes
acknowledged the delight of the story: but the great affairs in (...)
^portuned a further matter then (...), whereupon it was concluded, that the most
of them should accompany him into Armenia, as well to secure his estate there,
as to contriue, how Trezoboro might purchase his reconsiliation with
Mengrelius: because if it were effected, it must be done by Anzitemus and
Brisacas means; but she finding, how this business would detain them awhile
together, meant belike to make some use of the spare time, and therefore like a
true Lover, stepped into the first path of Jealousy, and could not forget the
short, and passhionate description of Roxana, which caused her to use a little
cunning in the matter, and by making pity a branch of virtue, she questioned
with him of matters of Government, of Geneolagies, of Petigrees, what became of
Mitrea Astiages Mother; and lastly, as if it fell in by chance of discourse, of
Roxanas years, how he satisfied the Princes, and how he could neglect such a
proffer, as the mighty Persia contented? My only content (replied Anzitemus)
mistrust no idle disposition: For divine appointment has reserved us one for
another: yet will I assure you, such was, and I hope (I may hope) such is the
preeminence of her beauty and louelynesse, that I protest excepting the
incomparable Brizaca, she lives peerless, and well deserved a better regard,
then my business permitted; and because you have sturred conceit, and by a
Rauishing presence increased that sweet delight, which your company ever
affoordeth: I will once be humorous in a slender description of her, so the
lovely Brizaca find not too many faults, and apply that to her selse now,
which I am sure might be allowed Roxana then,

What Cunning can depaint her praises forth, The description of Roxana.

In whom appeared such exceeding worth:
The outward substance all at once behold,
And think the Gods a secret to unfold:
Each part apart commend; then Nature will
Afford thee choice of her approved skill:
The Head resembled some rich golden Sphere,
Which all the chiefest Lines aloft did bear:
Yet round about the Paralels did meet;
So f^ll her beauteous Locks even to her feet:
The Face it self scarce durst a curious eye
Watch at the full: yet there we might espy
Favor and Love join hand in hand together,
To welcome a rare Guest Perfection thither?
This made her smile, and blush; and blushing smile,
(The lookers on deceived all the while,
As though two colors had for mastry strouen,
And White and Crimson been together wouen.)
The Neck did any counterfeite surpass
In outward show: for Princely life this was;
Showing a way where Cupid vs^ to stand,
Telling the lookers on, Venus own right hand,
Cast up those pretty Mounts, whose sides between*
A pleasant Valley keeps delight unseen,
Till it conduct thee to a bending Hill
Made like an Iu^ry Arch by curious skill,
Fair hanging over a well fashion^ Door,
Wherein are hid ten thousand ^oyes and more:
Yet Chastity holds sure both Key and Lock,
Unwilling that the Gods them selves should knock,
For though Gods use to Paradise to go,
Yet did they here a Privilege bestow,
That none might enter against Virtues mind,
Least forced admittance prove the cause unkind*
Her Body bolt upright in comely grace
Outmatched Pallas for a stately pace: (thought
Mounted on Horseback, you would sure have
Bellona had some gallant Battle fought:
Marching on foot, Diana could not be
Amongst her Nimphs more gallanter to see.
With these, her years were like a timely Spring,
Which in an ouer-ioying Hope did bring
Her Blossoms forth, all happiness assuring
To him more happy in the soyles manuring.
With these her Virtues did proportionate
The qualities belonging to the state
Of high Magnificense, that we might know,
She was ordained a Princes pace to go.
With these, a Kingdom was a mighty Dower,
A Kingdom full of Riches, Pomp, and Power:
Then think I had good cause to wish her well,
Who did with such great Privilege excel.
I protest (quoth Brizaca) you have praised her well; but I rather allow it for
a custom of Idleness, then Necessity, and find it unbefitting to Judgment
to admit of ouerpalpable Flattery.

What call you Flattery (replied Anzitemus?) Assure your self, that the Gods
framing Man to A circumstantial commendation of pleasing conference.
command all the Creatures under the Sun, neither shuffled up their
workmanship, nor were so careless afterward, but with a great regard sent him
forth to pubish their glory; and for that purpose gave him prerogative of
excellency both in body and mind. This especially appears in your selves,
to whom they have vouchsafed devotion, as finding time, and your own virtues
to perfect the work, which they but began: And from hence proceeds our
resemblance of this outward substance, to a rich Treasure house made to secure
more richer Wealth: Now, as Wealth is dispersed over the world to use and good
order, and without that lies hid like Earth within the ground: So your-selues
are left in the world to comfort and benefit, according to the fortune of him,
that possesses you to happy purpose. Here then rests the cunning and grace,
in the means of the seizure, which I avouch is first wrought by the
instrument, the Tongue: For though some have made a principle, that a woman's
Eye does guide her wit, yet unless occasion be offered to discover the
liking, what good can follow. But to speak more generally; Are not Presents,
fair Entreaties, and the causes moving Presents, prayers, praises win women-
(your deserts) which must be praised, the ordinary means of winning all
women? And are not all these like dead Ashes without living conference,
besides? the necessity of conversation, and the true regard of Natures
excellencies in you allows virtuous courses to obtain your favors; which
howsoever is determined, is yet begun with protestation; and when it extends
to great persons, compels a surther search, then in common Courses: For
never was Misanthropos nor Tyrant so implacable, but beauty has reduced: never
was Beast so furious, but man has tamed: Never was any thing so strong, but
truth has overcome: and how? by reason and sweet enforcement. Belike then
(answered Brizaca) you suppose us so simple, that we delight in vain speeches;
and because in Courtesy we entertain communication, and would not altogether
outcountenance you with disdain; we are therefore to be carried away with
slightness. (Far be it from my frailest immagination (replied Anzitemus) but
to proportionate withal reverence your virtues, yet unless it be amongst
Pesants, or wretched Parents, that frame contracts by endenture, where love
melts with the Wax, and wears with the Parchme^t, I see no reason, but to
sue for goodwill, and practice the best means to establish (the happiest life)
contentment: As for Princes, though they make no Prentishippes of their loves,
yet in the violence are they more passhionate, then another, like a strong body
put to more pain in sickness, then a weak. But say there is inequallitie of
persons, as many times it chances, (for Poets make love blind,) I hope then
the inferior person applaudeth his Fortune, and studieth with the helps of
art, nature, and industry to demean himself. For it were ridiculous, nay
inhumane; to see a sottish-man use presumption toward you without insinuation
and consent, which I never will esteem happy, if there be not a preparing by
discreet parle: besides, love loses his sweetest pleasure without appearance
of difficulty; Indeed (answered the half yielding Brizaca) I think of an
unfeigned tongue as an excellent instrument to work with, yet must no man go
about a Building without other provision: For the greatest deceit is shaddowed
by smooth Oratory, as we sound the deepest places in the calmest Channels. Not
unlikely said Anzitemus, but because a villain does a mischeife with a
Candell, shall we therefore use no light? do not so conclude: For I am
resolved, that both contract of Marriage, and discovery of fancy are Dull
enforcements without liberty of speech, and ceremonious complement: therefore
blame me not for praising Roxana, and ratefying, she was a deseruer of all
justifiable desires: yet I protest the sorrow for her father, and her duty in
the same, made me to study to pacefie her Corasiues, rather then display the
Colors of delight; and when I was urged to solicit a new Course (which a
messenger from Artabanus to please my self emboldned) thereturne of Astiages
with Cleonidas quight diuerted me, and so I reassure you, she was unacquainted
with my thoughts, and left to be a Lady of wonderful expectation.

IN this manner did some days post after their Anzitemus preparcth to go into
his own Kingdom of Armenia and after to present Trezoboro to the Emperor
Mengrelius.
forefathers, the spare time bestowed in acceptable communication to the better
strengthening their loves; and the rest in serious matters for the dispatch of
their business, wherein Anzitemus after a little debating, went effectually to
work, desiering a loan of Fifty thousand pound, and a general League for
the intercourse of Merchants; as for the kind proffers of the Princes to
accompany him into Armenia, he woul not oppose against it: yet gave he
reasons, that he meant in no sort, to detain them ftom their home occasions.
These points were moved in the Senate of Fortona by Trachinus the City
Orator, whom Philano for that purpose had sent for, and had received his
instructions to this end, to certify the people, that though Anzitemus desert
compelled the greatest regard; yet would not the Duke without their consent, so
slightly part with so great a Sum out of the kingdom, as for the Leauge,
whereby freendship and Traficke might increase, he referred that to themselves:
much time was not spent herein: For the Cittisenns enterpreting the motion to
to proceed from the Dukes wisdom and love were doubly drawn to consent, as
well to remain gracious to Rugio, as to seem men of respect and abillytie to
Anzitemus: besides they offered a benevolence toward the charges of this great
entertainment (with such extremytie are they carried, that never so little
crossed in matters of wealth and superstition, they are hardly drawn without
murmuringes to trifeles: again quietly soothed with a mean allowance of
liberty, they profusely offer their Money, and applaud that, which otherwise
they have dared to contradict.)

Thus was Anzitemus supplied, and which proved aduantagious unto him, he
bargayned with certain Merchants by great for his conduct, never troubling the
Dukes Navy, nor his Prerogagatiue to muster up new forces; whereupon with all
conueniencie they provided him forty well appointed Ships, and became
creditors themselves for four Months pay and victuals: In the mean while, the
magnificent Company departed, and King Zalby to augment his Nephews honor,
gave Philano in present possession the Province of the nether Comagena; which
he in great courtesy acknowledged: yet modestly respyted the ceremonies of
his enstawlement, till his return. For he would questionless accompany
Trezoboro and Anzitemus into Armenia; wherein he wrought a double contentment.
First, the Soldiers and Citizens were ouerliberally pleased, as imputing love
and care toward them, the motive of this journey: next, Anzitemus apprehended
it to his comfort, not doubting but Philanos presence would keep obedience in
form: besides the Treasure returned by so convenient a Messenger would
disburthen him of care and chardge to make a particular vioage. Now are all
things ready for the departure, and the Duke accompanied them to their Ships
committing their iorny to auspicious influence, so the farewell suffering a
ceremonious division, gave the one occation to return, and the other to step
into the tract of worldly felicity: but as Anzitemus studied to contriue his
business, he stopped at this doubt, whether he should make directly for
Armenia, or take Media in his way, where he was sure of Artabanus aid, and the
Persians loves: then again remembering the Message of Euphamia, he supposed the
seeds of dissension were buried past growing, and so he might be warranted of
their true faith: yet for all this to give way unto their opinions of his
wisdom and government, he called a conference, to which were especially
desiered Trezoboro, Philano, Coranus, Bertosus; as for Ardemio, Mitranes and
Obecam, they thought themselves Honored in the matter, besides Placandus (whom
he determined to fashion to the world, and bring his aged head with Honor to
the grave) gloryed in the favor Anzitemus began wih. All these resolved him,
that the fame of Artabazes death, and Astiages overthrow, was altredy diuulged
in Armenia, and that the dissentions betwixt Media and Persia received a
period: only the Marriage of Roxana was deferred, as not knowing how he was
affected, and therefore without doubt he might determine for his own kingdom.

Whereupon they made forward apace, and according to their expectation without
difficulty (more then the wonder of his return, because they supposed him lost
in the fight with Cleonidas) Landed in Armenia at the River Erix, from whence
by easy Iornies over the Mountains, they came to Armamiranda, where Euphamia
was resident; to whom the people upon report of Anzitemus ariuall, had flocked
on heaps, desiring her to stand as a guard between them and his displeasure,
considering their obedience since, and the revenge upon Gestarius, who had
opened the Door of the last troubles. To these she only wished the continuance
of their loyalties: but to certain persons drawn into the faction with Olmus,
and of inueterate malice for Cleonidas, (who made her believe they would be
warranted their safety) she absolutely denied to be compelled: For if they
determined truth, and vndissimuled duty, no doubt her Son (though Artabazes
loss was irksome to them both) knew what belonged to a remediless matter.
But little needed these suspicions; for Anzitemus knowing that strange courses
bred as strange alterations; and that in a good beginning consisted the hope of
success, proclaimed a general Pardon, and establishing of all men in their
estates, offices, and places, that would ratify his succession.

With this comfort was the whole Kingdom Anzitemus returns into Armenia and
is invested King.
appeased, and for the better assurance of their faithful hearts, they
confirmed the prerogatives of his Majesty, and conferred to him whatsoever
belonged to a Kings person, establishing those Laws, wherewith his Father and
Grandfather had swayed the Commonwealth. The people brought in a gift of a
thousand Talents; the Officers to continue their places, liberally fined them
selves: the Nobility to renew their Immunities, sent many Presents: the Cities
to strengthen their Privileges, disbursed great sums: the Gentry to advance
them selves, spared for no reasonable matter; and the Courtiers to purchase
favor, exceeded in cost and diligence: But when the incomparable Brizaca was
published their Queen, they passed in extremity of applause, and sacrificed to
the Gods for restoring their peace, and establishing the Monarchy in such worth
and royalty.

THus was Anzitemus and Brisaca solemly invested, and looking back with regard
upon the worth of Euphamia, affoorded her the dignities of her Widdowhead, and
permitted her the fruition of many Palaces and Privileges: besides, in all
Assemblies there was a Throane erected somewhat higher then his own, that the
people might know, she was the Kings Mother, and how highly he desteemed her.
Now though Fortune dad taken off the mask of Despite, and showed him a
countenance of favor; yet neither seemed he vain or elated, but reposed, and
indeed moderating that excess of joy, which sometimes many Princes after their
aduancements, cannot hide. But it may be the meditation of his great affairs
reduced him, because three especial matters lifted up their heads to be seen;
and by being seen, to be remembered.

The first, was the discharge of the Zagarians, and dismissing Philano, which
he royally performed with a Princely overplus, confirming the League, and
wishing, if the Persians and Medians did not agree, to hearken after Roxana:
but when Trezoboro came to take his leave of his Friend, it exceeded a Passion,
and the lovely Philano truly deciphered the force of Affection: So dividing a
Ring between them, because subject to adventures, they might be sure not to be
unknown, they parted in body, but the love of their hearts ended not in death.
The Ring was artificially wrought, and enclosed with an enameled Scalloppe made
of a Stone taken from the eyes of a Panther; but divided, was not to be matched
without the other: both parts had impression with their own bloods from this
counterchangeable Mott; Nonaliud admittit.

The second proceeded from his care to Artabanus, to whom he had engaged him
self, especially about the redaction of both the Kingdoms to one Monarchy:
But this was happily without further trouble determined; for not three days
before Philano departed, the Ambassadors of Media and Persia arrived, and after
the ceremony of gratification from all estates was ended, they showed him a
Commission containing four principal points. First they tied them selves to
yearly Tribute, as acknowledging him the life, by which their polliticall
bodies did move in peace: The second exposed a perpetuetie of Allegiance: for
Love and Duty was but a slender counterpoise to Life and Honor, which he had
so often adventured for their sakes: The third concerned the Marriage of Roxana
with Darius Artabanus Son: The last entreated for Cleonidas, whom destruction
had miracuiously spared, and his own penitency much bettered: To these he
briefly made answer, the Tribute he did disclaim, as foreseeing such a
Challenge might either grow to intrusion, or move their denial, so here after
debate be the destruction of one another. Their love and frendshippe he much
relied upon: The Marriage of Roxana he anulled, dilating besides the happiness
depending: but concerning Cleonidas Anzitemus, interceded, as resolved the
differences between them, were not so slightly to be ouerpassed,

The third and espetiall matter of importance consisted of many diffused
parts, and therefore intermixed the more trouble to uniform it: and this was,
how to reconcile Trezoboro to his father, considering the inconveniences
proiected from the prophecy: First the Emperors goodwill hung in suspense, for
he that feared before they were borne, could not but tremble now they were men;
and of abillitie to defend themselves: Then the return of Kalucky was
doubtful upon the notice of the deceit: Thirdly the discussing of the Oracle
finding part true in the Marriage of Brizaca must needs hasten dipleasure: Next
the mislike of Opacus, because his daughters had so presumed, would stir up
some troubles: Last of all the ielosie of himself, as the Principll cause of
mischeife: For commonly men fear most the blow, that comes last, and the
Oracle concluded, that Mengrelius must be slain by his daughters Husband.

THese particulars were orderly debated: at Bertosus is sent Ambassador to the
Emperor Mengrelius and discovers the story of Trezoboro.
last his love to his Queen and Trezoboro prevailed, either to make a
peaceable atonement, or compulsiue entrance into Trebizonda: for which purpose
Bertosus was sent Ambassador from the Armenian King to the Emperor
Mengrelius, to whom the report of Anzitemus recovery seemed so strange, that
his fear of he knew not what, presaged mischief to follow: yet remembering
the Prerogative of Kings; and that Bertosus desired audience, he appointed a
day of hearing; and for the better countenancing his Majesty, summoned all the
Princes and Nobility of his Empire; the chief was the Empress Ballutasa:
then followed Opacus of Capadocia: Curatsax of (...): Phorcanus of pontns,
Schidrothemis of Syno^, Rhemus of Paphlagonia and Mithridates of Taurica all
Kings, confederats, and Tributaries: amongst his natural subjects Carembello
Duke of Raganda supposed the fauorit of the widow Emprese, Putrasso, Hardubax,
Marquidan, Theoricus and Deiphoebus, were principal: diverse others of great
worth and Nobillytie added to the state by their presence: as for his Sister
Pisana she was long since invested with the Royalties of Russia, whereby a
Crosse-mariage increased many. Friends resembling a Sheafe of Arrows, which
bound together are not to be broken; but disioyned, are subject to a slender
fury.

When Bertosus perceived the Emperor determined to set forth the ampliation
of his glory; and that this stately show was of purpose to make apparent his
greatness, he not much mislyked the same, though it tended to cause him to
use the more reverence, whereupon after the ceremony ended, and that their
expectation had wrought a still silence, he laid open the records of
admiration, and red thus distinctlie before them all:

Subjects (mighty Emperor) entering into great and important actions are to
consider, whether they be commodious to the Commonwealth, Honorable to
themselves, easy, or at least not difficult to be effected, and respectious
for whom, or against whom they deal: but Princes, or Princes Ambassadors by
all constitutions, are licensed to deliver their Message freely, and to be
answered or dispatched honorably. This I am moved to infer, because of the
strangeness, wherewith you must be acquainted; yet such may be my fortune,
that I shall rather seem a trusty Mercury from Heaven, then a tedious Herrold
on Earth: But howsoever, this is the will of the Gods, and the pleasure of the
Armenian King.

Although the first inconvenience in the Oath to Kalucki has produced strange
alterations, and in a manner sequestered you from the happiness incident to
other Princes, but quite debarred these from the comfort of a natural
Successor: yet if you can be thankful to supernatural Power, and loving to
your self in the receipt, I offer you a rich and inestimable Present. To be
more plain, I bring you glad tidings of a Son; and to these of a true
Prince, yea such a Prince, that you may presume on Divine bounty, and Worldly
felicity, considering his preservation, and perfection. With that he unfolded
the wrapped up secret of Trezoboros and Brizacas infancy, his own troubles in
their bringing up, the theft of Cleonidas, their Shipwreck at Sea, the
adventure of Anzitemus, the Marriage of Brizaca, and the now settled greatness
of Armenia, where the heroijcke Trezoboro expects the love of a Father, and
is ready to perform the duty of a Son.

But ere Bertosus had fully concluded, such was the excessive joy of the Court,
and the joy exceeding all joys of Arcabella, that Mengrelius was quite
disappointed, and in a manner compelled to the same passion, least he should
seem a contrary, amongst so many pleasures: whereupon he rewarded Bertosus
according to his estate, and confirmed the privilege of his place: yet loath to
detain him longer, then was convenient for fear the people might immagin him
Ielious of the news, he took order for his dispatch, and appointed
Mithridates Prince of Taurica to accompany him to Armenia, and attend on
Trezoboro to Trebizonda: but neither Arcabella nor Ballutasa could so slightly
dismiss him, the one like a true Mother asking diverse questions touching her
Children, wherein she was much satisfied, yet beginning again and again asked
many things worthy of selution: the other like a gallant Princes seemed to
glory in the action, and because success answered her expectation, was very
proud to be author of so Famous a deed, nor left she to enquire of the manner
of the delivery, when Gellida and Perinthum carried them into Capadocia, for
which service she had contrived to Crown the eldest Queen of Phrigia, and to
match the other to Omphalus King of Lidia: but the desire to see the Princes
hastneth Bertosus return, who coming to the Empresses took his leave with
gladness and, was glad to leave them in such a taking: but parting with the
Emperor, it seemed rather a farrewell of necessity, then delight, the manner
whereof at his return he imparted to Trezoboro and Anzitemus,

In this sort received his iorny a limitation, and the faithful dispatch
thereof moved Anzitemus to remember, that virtue meriteth a recompense, and
Honor florisheth with the countenance of the Prince, wherefore he determined to
advance both Bertosus and Coranus: had not Trezoboro entreated him not to
entercept his good meaning toward them, considering they were subjects of a
another kingdom, and how much they were endeered Placandus made Duke by
Anzitomus.
to him: so that Placandus at this time Triumphed alone, and was invested with
the Royalties of the Dukdom of Taurasim, the cellebration whereof put Trezoboro
in mind of his iorny, and Mithridates urged it the rather, because Brizaca
cheared her self with the Society of her own Ladies, whom Arcabella had very
considerately sent unto her and seemed reposed in the fullness of Princely
greatness and happiness, had not the very name of a Father and Mother imposed
a task, one desire to see and know them.

THus was she left to the fruition of her ratefied mightiness, and the Prince
sets forward toward Trebizonda, but understanding the Court Trezoboro
returns to Trebizonda and is entertained for Prince.
was kept in Samarchanda, a rich and populous City, he studied how to make
his entrance, least Mengrelius might except against an ambitious beginning, or
vain popularitie: yet the more he meditated, the more intricate were his own
conceits: For never till this apprehending the incombrances, wherewith Princes
were entangled, he now perceived the difference betwixt a great and a mean
estate: At last, as it were playing his Fathers Scene, he would needs
enucleate the Prophecy; but a very bitter taste followed, and it represented a
Toil, from which a man striving to escape, tied himself the faster therein.
For no hope remained, but in descrediting the latter part, considering his
miraculous preserving, and Sisters Marriage had given life to the first; yet
remembering time must have his course, and all was to be committed to highest
direction, he only framed himself to give no cause of mislike, nor by any
demeanor to move his Father to renew his thoughts of the Oracle.

As these particulars had a kind of mutinous passage, he passed still forward,
and came at last within sight of the City, which indeed prepared a day of
solemnity for his welcome, and that neither durst the Emperor interdict, nor
Trezoboro gainesay, least he might seem the occasion of a preposterious
beginning, so that he was enforced to moderate that spirit of Majesty, which
his Heroical disposition ever maintained, and saluted the companies in order
as they came with a still behavior, and when the applause of the people seemed
more then a Triumph, he went forward in quietness, until the Emperor
presented himself, who hastened by his wife and mother, (but especially least
in the retradance the people might immagin strange matters) was now to give and
receive the reciprocal comfort proceeding from so blessed a greeting. Here
Trezoboro dismounted, and with obedient demeanor prostrated himself to
Mengrelius, who could not but like a father, make his joy the more appear; and
like a Prince rejoice with his subjects for such a recovery: So he took him in
his Arms with tears, and conducted him to Arcabella and Ballutasa with
gladness, but they seemed transported to a another world with his sight and
seasure, and as when the Sun at his going down is taken into heaven from the
sight of the earth, so was the Prince conveyed from the rest between them into
a new glory, and sense rejoicing delight, which continued in firm strength
(without so much as any man's whispering the least mistrust of alteration)
until the cause of their now goodness effected the troubles ensuing, by
reason Kalucki made acquainted with this discovery, laid claim to the Empire
and came in person to plead his right: but we must take a progress into
another Kingdom, before he be ready to come hither.

Howsoever Historiographers have written of The story of Kalccki and Mullumalla
many strange Customs tending to inciuilitie amongst the Tartarians, in regard
of the many strange Nations within so spacious a Country; yet have they all
concluded, that no people are of better observance toward their Emperor, nor
Emperor so imperious over his Subjects; by reason whereof diverse Wars and
Stratagems has made them believe, the Crown was held in the hand of Victory,
to be bestowed on the preuayler: But amongst others, the most famous chanced
between Barka and Allau, both Noble, valiant, beloved, and at one time
nominated Emperors; yet by no means consenting to Division or Competition:
Now because in such Conuulsions, there is no medium between an Emperor and
Traitor, either striued as well to live, as to reign; so that the dissension
continued with great difficulty and extremity between them, at such time, as
Kallucki dispossessed in Trebizond, came with his accomplices into this Country;
and politickly considering his estate, made offer of service in nature of a
mercinarie Soldier unto Barka, who superstitiously imputed his coming, as
sent from Heaven to his assistance, and therefore without curiosity quartered
him by himself and sent a Treasurer with other officers to attend him: but it
was not long ere he made Trial of his virtue in some slender Skirmishes, which
with admiration of discipline and valiant execution he performed: Then he sent
him to surprise a place entrenched, whether Allau had drawn his chiefest
strength, and by the same both kept the passages and him self from danger,
this seemed a matter of difficulty, yet with diverse pioners, and by lodging
near, they were able to make a Mine (a thing as yet unknown amongst them)
out of which in the dead of the night they issued on the enemy, and committing
a notable slaughter, leueled the place with the ground, and so returned in
Triumph: Lastly he put him in trust with Managing the maine Battle (for Allau
would tryfle no longer, but appointed a day of Trial) wherein his Fortune and
vallure joined in Leauge. For in that encounter he slew the strong reputed
Allau, discomfited his forces, and settled Barka in a quiet possession of
greatness, as himself in a strange commendation of goodness, because the
people apprehending him the means, whereby their troubles ceased, and peace
flowrished, performed intercession to the Gods for his prosperity, and made
proferre of themselves to support him in any enterprise of his own.

This was soon perceived by Mullumalla chief Empres (for their coustomes
allowed many wives The Empres Mullumalla in love which Kalucki.
and more Concubines, and yet was the Law of adultery severely punished
amongst them) who long since found her self surprised with his love, and
hunted after every opportunity to discover her affection, which (having
received impression from the report of so many, who seemed to dote on his
worth, and was after strengthened with her one opinion and judgment from his
presence and virtues) grew to a kind of vehemency, and that hindered by many
reasons, and further incombrances, increased to impatience, because she thought
there was yet means to do her self good, and he being a stranger would to be
glad to be the fauorit of an Empres: But as she went forward in this path of
incontinency, success not always respectious to virtuous proceedinges
attended without her own seeking and prejudice, as arising from the I^rors
injustice upon this occation.

No sooner had the virtue of Kalucki showed her excellency, and the people
more and more had him in estimation, whereby the new established Barka was to
determine something for his recompense and advancement, but a certain ielowsie
of his insinuating into the favor of the kingdom, and misconstruing his royal
birth and right to Trebizond, which all sorts began already to pity, and so
to favor, slacked his love toward him, and weakened the strength of his
willingness to advance him, nor leaft his conceit so: but a further
peevishness whispered, that he sought to rob him of his subjects hearts: now
when strange humors were entertained, strange distempratures followed, in so
much that he one while resolved quite to dismiss him, as having no further
occation to employ him, but that he thought was too inhumaine, and his
Subjects would never condescend, unless it were to recover his Empire:
Another-while he studied to proportion him some remote corner to inhabit in:
but here he mistrusted, it would be reputed a disgrace, as proceeding from a
wearisomnesse of his Company, and then the opportunity to think it a
disgrace, might cause him to revenge it, as if it were a disgrace indeed. Anon
he imagined to send him further, under color of an honorable atchieuement
against India; but suspecting the increase of his Renown in success, he
happened by the way on another doubt, a revolt by the same Army committed to his
charge. Thus did the uncertainty of the best course, inhibit the certainty of
any course, till at last the very fear of Alteration, increased every Conceit
to prevent the fear: and when no means of contentment Barka determines to
murder Kalucki.
without his absence appeared, he depended on this, by some course or other to
make him away: as for his Followers, the head being cut off, the rest of the
members would quickly perish: Yet lay he awhile in wait to intrappe him in
some heinous mulct or other; but failing: he concluded by secret callenture,
or other devilish imposture to finish his tragedy.

This was neither hid with so close a veyle, but Kalucki perceived the
Emperors incongruent behavior toward him; nor debated with such trust, but
Mullumalla foresaw the mischief, which she not much repined against, because
she had so good a ground to work upon, and so might raise her ambition,
faitsfie her love, and suffulciate her glory: yea though the life of the
Emperor paid for it, and although her own spirit would questionless have
ripened conceit to satisfy her desires (for what cannot; nay what will not, a
woman, a Prince, and in love, effect:) yet Fortune added wings to her
intiention, and now helped to roll the stone, which at last tombled Barka out
of the world: For as the Emperor under Coulor of favor would needs carry
Kalucki to the Palace of Concubines, but of purpose to make their beuties a
bait to allure him, and so by enfringing the severe edict in that kind, to
have cause of accusation against him: the Empress took occation of passage by
the walk, through which Kalucki must return to the Court, and perceiving he
had been left alone amongst them to make trial of his abillytie in resisting
the temptation, she somewhat cunningly asked those about her, who it was, that
presumed so to come within the Limitts of these places sacred, and prohibyted;
and from whence he had now brought him self? Answer was made, it was the
Prince Kalucki whom the Emperor licensed to view the other Palace: that will I
know faith she from himself, call him therefore heither, least his ignorance
by being a stranger breed further error: But when Kalucki perceived, it was
the Empress, his inward motions were at variance, and the very blood of his
veins seemed troubled, like as Wine rises into bubles, when a lump of Sugar
is throne into the Glass, or is sturred with a greater strength: yet come he
must, and fall down he must, and rise again he must, and answer many
questions he must, as how the Emperor pleased to grace him? how he liked the
Ladies, and their attiyre? whether he knew the fault of his being there? and
many other to the same purpose: all which he answered like himself a man, a
Prince, and unmoved with novelties. At last seeing the prerogative and custom
had taught her attendants to stand so remote, that they were out of hearing,
she left things impertinent to give him notice, there was some good toward
him, and preparing his attention, used these speeches.

Before I enter (thou honorable Stranger) into the channel of my Discourse,
let me give thee notice of the Countries wherein we live, and the Customs
we observe. The first mighty, large, rude, vncitied, and in many places
deformed: yet somewhat capable of Discipline, and assured Friends to Valor:
The latter, not greatly Religious, nor carried away with the nicetie of Virtue,
seldom maintayning Justice: For the stronger Arm supprefseth a weak; and
hating, or at least neglecting any Stranger whatsoever, only your self may
boast of great happiness in the love of the people, and opinion of the better
sort, (though I must confess far short of your desert) and presume on
exceeding specialitie never affoorded any other, but withal, as you see a Fire
of filthy weeds to give a glorious light, but to leave a long time after a
most odious stincke: So has this applause carried a pleasant show toward you;
But no less then your life must answer the displeasure arysing from the same:
For the Emperor intoxicated with a violent suspicion against you, trembles at
the fear, and has concluded already your death; What rests now, but
prevention? That cannot be wrought but by my means: nor can I proceed, but by
your consent, and respect of such a Friend, as must and will save your life. Be
not therefore curious of my mislike to Barka, breach of Vows, affection to
your self, and such petty questions. But suppose after approved goodness, I
shame to see thee subject to apparent inhumanitie; now rests in thy choice
either life or death. To this, a hundred several Mullumalla contriueth to save
Kaucki.
passages are open: To that, only one Door is unlocked, and looks both to
life and Majesty. To be plain; either the Emperor must yield to the summons
of a hasty Death, or thy self to the arrest of a violent Execution. If then
with understanding this abruptness, thou can remember thy self; and by thy
self, the danger to be acquainted with the affairs of Princes; and by that
danger, to contriue the contrary saftie; and by that saftie, to rejoice with
her, that determines all honor unto thee, I am satisfied: and hope in
conceiving me a right, neither is your Courage, nor Wisdom so rebated, but
you can put a difference betwixt a happy life, and miserable death.

This sudden brevity, but full of substance, and so well graced with a
maiestical Spirit, brought with it her accustomed companion Amazement: yet
because there was nothing here inferred (except the love of the Empress)
which he before suspected not, his Answer seemed the redier; and with
addition of extraordinary demeanor, strengthened her liking the rather toward
him. For when he saw that counterpleading would rather show a Demissnes, then
Conscience; and that all good courses were unprofitable with intractable
people, he graciously submitted to her behests, not without protestation, that
her Beauty and magnificense, had attracted his regard more, then desire of any
Greatness: So that he rested like Wax molded with her warm hand, ready for
what impression it pleased her to bestow only he impetrated, that if it were
possible, he might be exempted in the bloody attempt; because he would not
pollute his hands with a Princes massacre. This she took as an excellent part
of Generositie: So that as much inflamed with his Virtues, as Person, she
dismissed him to his own care, and settled her self to the strange course of
the Emperors death; which led her up by casier stairs, then she could
imagine.

For the Emperor fully resolved to his murder compacted with Chamus, Ilion,
Iodda and Tarachim to be the executioners: but Tarachim either a secret
instrument of the Empress, or taking remorce to see injustice rebel against
virtue or pollytickly forecasting for his own private, as perceiving to what
end her desires tended: once again discovered the substance and circumstance
of the cause to Mullumalla, and that he wanted nothing but a time to put it in
practice. And has he no body (says she) to make the slave of wickedness, but
a man endeered to us for his Nobillytie of blood, and ever till now the servant
of Honor and virtue? Believe me I think you are bewitched so strangly to be
drawn into your own ruins, for what trust can he repose in you, that can be
hired with Money to do mischeife: without question it is but a plot of trial
against your selves, who will ever make account of the Murderers of a Prince;
yea such a Prince, to whom the kingdom must yield the Tribute of your peace:
but if there were possibillytie to belecue, that any many durst immagin such a
thought: by the silence of the night I swear, were he not my Emperor, I judge
him worthy of death in his base submission to such villainy, therefore Honorable
Tarachim deceive not thy self in Barkas meaning, nor be again deceived,
though he mean as thou say, For then can it prove no otherwise then
absolute tirany, and to free the Common wealth of a Tyrant is indeed an action
of renown: This she spoke to put his disposition to the touch, and finding him
willing to be diuerted, she then strengthened him in that resolution: this made
him more flexible toward her, and that persuaded a wondefull contrarietieb,
ringing in the Ielosie of his own life, so the fear to prevent it submitted
to her directions: again, she with a doubtful manner of speech, that if he
had said the truth it were better a wicked Emperor miscarried, then men of
virtue and good deserving: and last of all with reasons, promises, and
protestations to make the fact justifiable, took his oath to kill the Emperor:
Which he very opportunely performed in a walk adjoining to the Palace, as
conferring together in secret about Kalucki, and no sooner shruncke the
bleeding Carkase to The murder of Barka.
the ground, but he wounded himself in many places with the Emperors Semiter,
quight conueying away the instrument of death, and so stood crying for help in
a pitiful manner.

By this time has the strange report of the Emperors murder possessed both
Court, and Country with amase, and the murderer without any pursuit quickly
submitted him self: but brought before the Empress and the rest to whom such
a cause papertained, he confessed the fact: yet desiered that he might take
away the shame, though not the fault in the misfortune, by discovering the
secret as it chanced, now because his bleeding wounds induced commiseration,
and that his present sta^ made show of violence against him, it was thought
convenient to hear him, and if it were, but to bolt out the rest of the
conspirators. Most divine Empress (quoth he) and Honorable vpholders of this
mighty state, I intend neither to entreat for favor nor life, (for in the
very misfortune of the mischeife, I am worthy to dye) yet give me leave to
extenuate your displeasures against me, and to disclaim either a natural
disposition to such impiety, or now willingness to lay violent hands on such
a person: wherein that my true simplicity may somewhat countenance me, and
that I plead for my Honor and renown, give me leave to Lance my Barcke into
this Channel. Who does not remember the misery of our Country through the
ambition of our Emperors Barka and Allau, deceassed? Who does not acknowledge
the blessings conferred unto us by the Prince, Kalucki, who with all virtuous
industries has proceeded for our good? yet (mighty Peers) I shame to tell it,
without respect of worth, royalty, honor, or the benefit it self, some
wretched Jealousy so misled our Emperor, that very ingratefully (if I make not
too great offense in the term) he contrived many ways his destruction,
misconstruing our Loves, and his Valor, to tend to an aspiring reach: and
when nothing appeared to appease his misdoubts, he flatly concluded to murder
him secretly: To which bestiallity, he suggested Chamus, Iliod, Iodda, and my
self, ouerreaching our Obedience with Imperious will, and insorcering out
fraylty with Reward and Preferment. Now what ever good or bad Angel was over
this dismal night predominant, I know not; but sending for me into the Walk,
he conferred about the Murder; and because my slacknesse seemed rather
inclined to remorce, then dispatch of the tyranous decree, all impatient he
flew upon me, wounding me in this manner, never repressing his fury, till I
lost the use of respect and consideration: then life straue with necessity,
and compelled her servant strength to the cloze, hoping only to save it self;
wherein, howsoever it chanced, the Swod in the fall, struck him to the heart:
which how grievous it is unto me, the immortal powers, that have delivered
Kalucki, and preserved all your glories, can witness.

This unlooked for contrariety, made them all amazed, yet when the examination
of the rest, and other circumstances agreed with the truth, most strange was
the confusion amongst them: For the people with great acclamations cried out,
Live Kalucki, live Tarachim. The Empress took heavily her Husbands
misfortune; but seemed more troubled with his infamy. The Princes of the State
knew not what to say, or how to proceed. The people they continued with zeal
toward Kalucki; and in a manner protested Mullumella could not do better,
then make him satisfaction by marriage. Here Wisdom played a kind (...)* For
though her Desire burned within her to the same purpose, yet a still modesty
kept her from making show of any such motion: and when the greatest Lords (as
not knowing how to suppress it, being a matter of that consequence, and the
party a man of that high deserving) urged it again. She said it was a time of
sorrow, and the love toward them, would not consent to any thing unbefitting:
But when indeed another and another time was spent in yielding reasons of the
likelihood of happiness; and that her cunning had drawn them to believe their
importunities should prevail with her, she welcomed the fortune, that had
thus smiled upon her, and took Kalucki into the tuition of her love; which
quickly invested him Emperor, and swear the Subjects to loyalty and obediene.

Now was he to play the part of an Emperor, and by reason of the natural
rudeness of the Kalucki Emperor of Tartary.
Country, and inciuility of the people; the one to be refined, the other
reduced, the greater was his need of those excellent ornaments of Kings: but
being him self a naturallist of Majesty, he soon put in practice
Magnanimity for his State and Court; Wisdom for the common causes, and
(extracted from her) Policy to keep the great men in obedience, Affability
(as far as their Customs permitted) to obtain favor, where it hung in
suspense; and Justice to strengthen the love got by mere good hap. Besides,
he knew how Mullumalla had proceeded, and therefore was she to be regarded
with extraordinary behavior: But here was no place for Mistrust or Jealousy,
because she proved an admirable Wife and Mother of many Children; and the
people continued in their love, as having no cause to mislike.

But as he went forward in this towardly Iornie Kalucki informed, how his
brother had broken promise and covenant with him, determines to be revenged.
to felicity, fame that ever scorned to be pend in a Corner came to tell him,
the Emperor Mengrelious had infringed the covenants ratefied, and a Prince
lived in scorn of his composition, which somewhat distempred him, as forseeing
the troubles impending, or shame to let his Honor be abused: but when Scaroxus
the brother of Queridock, whom Mengrelius had dispossessed of the Royalties of
Sinopis by placing Scydrothemis King, had in person urged other particulars:
then was Mullumalla made acquainted with the story from the beginning, and she
Calucki certefied his brother had a son.
(though desire could have pleaded, that no satisfaction was answerable to his
company) yet stomached the indignity, and in her Heroiick spirit concluded, his
renown hung in suspense without revenge: Now rested the doubt, what course to
take: And therein many times and much debating showed as well the duty of a
wife, as Honor of a Prince: at last she willed him by sommoning the Estates of
the Empire to make trial of their affection; (which he performed, because it
pleased; and it pleased, because she wished: and she wished, because he was
so great a person: and greatly beloved) to whom after the Ceremonies of the
assembly were ended, he delivered these speeches.

Although (loving and worthy to be beloved Lords and Subjects) the divine
providence and your favors has collated this Empire without desert or my own
first seeking: yet must I not now either degenerate from that I am, or appear
other, then I should be, least you may immagin former baseness, or present
demisnesse: but because matters of Arms and martial exploites are intended
(and as may be objected rather for my private satisfaction, then your general
good) I determined to acquaint you with the story from the beginning, and so
fell into the addition of many circumstances, with this last news of Scaroxus,
which they never heard of: Now, if you think it meet, that so great a
commander over so many valiant people, and such spacious Countries should
digest a defamation, which petty Princes would adventure to revenge, I must
submit, and for your sakes, or peace will make the War of a distempred
conscience: But if my calamitous discourse has wrought any impression, whereby
with your loves and assistance I may proceed, then do I expostulate your
constancy, and account my self more happy, then Fortunate: For if you have
rightly understood me, my meaning is not to lead you to destruction, or drive
you like a Tyrant to a slaughter house: but I expose unto you the recovery,
Cities, Possessions, Riches, and what men can desire, of a large and fertile
Country to which without doubt the Gods will consent, so your abashed drawing
back be not signs of ill success.

When it seemed he determined silence, the company rather wondering at his
perfections, then misunderstanding his speeches, gave a great Plaudite, crying,
the Gods preserve Kalucki; the Gods protect our Emperor; and with vnfainednesse
offered themselves and goods freely to the enterprise: this made him feast them
all sumptuously by way of gratification, and that brought them to care and
reverence toward him the easier: so a Council of War disputed the matter,
and dispersed the several Commanders to raise up Forces to make his Army the
greater: For though he had ever in readiness a hundred thousand in Arms,
besides his own, Companies brought with him from Trebizond, and now
foure-score Thousand serving for a Guard to his person; yet were his Four
principal Kingdoms; that is to say, Ieckomongall, Sumongall, Merchat, and
Metrit, assessed at Forty thousand a piece, mustred and orderly trained (in
respect of their former disorder) at Coralla, where the Rendezuous was
appointed.

THus with a mighty Army he marched along, Malucki returns to challenge the
Empire of Trezibonda.
leaving Mullumalla Regent in his absence, who the morning of his departure had
sacrifised two whight Hearts to Diana, and by their forward going to the Alter,
presaged good success, and his return: and having framed an Imperial Diadem
set on many degrees, and beautified with inestimable Precious stones, which
were supported in every bar with her own pro^ature (a thing questionless
both for worth and workmanshippe of admiration) she Crowned him therewith in the
sight of the Army, and so with a Warlike ceremony committed him to the tuition
of the Sun: Thus is he come to the confines of Albania, and there rested
himself, studying which way to proceed in the best course, and at last
creating Queridock Prince of his Imperial tent, made him an Ambassador to
Mengrelius with these instructions: That whereas he had been dispossessed of
the Empire of Trebizonda by wrong and despite, and was contented to embace him
self to strange conditions to avoid effusion of blood: they had yet, to add
to his indignytie scorned him, and infringed the Laws both of Honor and
nations: that seeing this contempt was intolletable, and the Covenants enjoined
him to lay claim to his right, he came in person with an Army of three
hundred Thousand well appyoynted Soldiers to perform the same, that if it
seemed good to the Emperials to admit him to quiet possession, considering it
was but a small satisfaction of his first wrongs, no worthy man should be
displaced, and he would desist from the way of conquest: That if they impugned
his desires, then to denounce open hostilly, and give them warning, the
business was remediless, and he merciless.

This Embasie did Queridocke deliver with a gallant spirit and grace, not
without intimation of injustice concerning him self, and diverse others
banished their natural Country* which in a manner distracted the hearers, by
reason they could not deny what he said, nor durst accord to what he
importuned, and had not their present peace, but espetially the undoubted
towardliness of the Heroijck Trezoboro suggested infinite miseries, and
wretchedness in the best change, without doubt there would have followed a
most terrible confusion.

But now is Mengrelius perplexed many ways with the arrogant Message, the
opinion of his Subjects, the remembrance of his first wrong, the trouble of the
Wars, the errors of his Mother and Wife, the alteration of the State, the
displeasure against Opacus for his Daughters saving his Children, the duty of a
Father now they were preserved, and the fear of the Prophecy, which indeed
dogged him at the heels, and followed him like a shadow: So that no way of
safety appeared, but in his Sons destruction; which as he supposed, would
both satisfy Kaluckies claim, and settle his own ielosie, yet loath to
discover his fears in public, or enterpose such a mischeife in the times of
rumors and occations of War: he went more cunningly to work, and under
Color of the common good thus spoke to the estates of the Empire, which he had
assembled at Samarchanda.

So great is the mischeife threatened against us (most happy people, but in my
unhappiness) that I searce know, how to prevent it: because on the one side my
fatherly affection and your loves, must and will disclaim any strange courses
against my son, on the other side, my dignity importuneth a Prinsely
connection of soueraingtie, and nature it self Countermandeth the Tiranous
composition, which I am sure began in Injustice, and you may object will end in
destruction: but because my Country and people are in a degree before my
Children: yea my own life and least the commonwealth should complain for
vexing her with these intolerable wrongs: if there may be reason in this
unreasonableness: I abjure the name of a Father, and offer my son as a
Sacrifice of atonement: I renounce the Royalty which now seems like a
glorious Sun; and submit for your satisfaction: I cast down my life to be
put into the other Balance against your affliction: For neither Mengrelius,
nor Trezoboro shall be themselus to make you worse, then your selves, yet be
not too sodden in censuring me careless of him, whom you see the heavens have
cared for; nor too submisse concerning my own Honor which I have so charylie
preserved; For if you will vouchasafe to join with me, all helps of pollecy
and courage shall be united, that the body and community of this Empire
remain undissolved, and before I submit to any division of Titles, which now
your respects have conferred, the world shall tremble at the report of these
stratagemmes, and death give a plaudite to my last Tragical act, but once
again like a loving mother, which is still taking her leave of her departing
son, and haueing one spetiall matter to counsel him in, does often and very
often remember it: so like the Father of the Commonwealth, do I put you in
mind, while it is time, to think upon the horrible end of this trial: For to
affright us the more, we are to contend with Beasts, and men worse then
Beasts, Anthropophagi, Misocoli, Monsters in nature, and all Barbarism, so
that nothing but blood and death, or utter ruin of us all (which the Gods
interdicte) must follow in the prevailing: Prevent therefore, Prevent in time
your troubles here; is Mengrelius began the inconvenience, here is Trezobro
the cause of your fear, here is both father and son the Ransom of your
disquiet.

But as a further vehemency might have vnshadowed the heat of other humors,
the people unwilling to see their Prince so distempred, and unable to dissolve
their firm rooted zeal, cried aloud, the Gods confound the disturbers of our
peace, the Gods dispose of all things to their pleasure: live therefore
Mengrelius sacred, and irremoueable: spare not to defend your kingdoms, for we
will neither hassard our Princely Trezoboro, nor permit any dissipation of our
government.

THus is Kalukies Embassage contradicted, and Mengrilius is resou^ed to put it
to the Trial of a battle but is prevented by miracle.
Queridock dismissed back, which caused defiance to rumor terrible things,
and the best dispositions were shuffled betwixt fear and hope: At last Kalucki
unwilling to trifell, least provision for so great an Army might be wanting,
sent forward the greatest part of his Forces divided into three Battles under
the conduct of Sicambus, Mallau, Petroslol, Zami, and Xantippus, all in times
past of hereditary possessions in Pontus, Iberia, and Colchidos: and followed
himself with the rest quartered in five parts, under the command of
Misogambus, and Olippo, two of the Empress Mullumallas brethren, and
Barsangol and Iubar, sons of Mithra and Delium, two Queens of late the
Concubines of Barka: In the midest was Kalucki himself sequestered in an
Imperial Tent, and according to the ceremonious respect of his estate, neither
to be seen nor spoken withal, but at spetiall times: The ordring of this
business was not committed to such a secretary, but the Emperor of Trebizond
knew the manner of his proceedings: and by that time he had passed Cularopa
furnished himself reasonable well: For from Taurica, the heither Scithia:
Russia, and Hiperborei, he had one hundred Thousand Auxiliaries: out of
Colchidos, Pontus, Iberia, and Paphlagonia he mustered eighty Thousand: and
from the Cities of Samarchanda, Trebizond, Merlanes, and Xantippi he received
twenty Thousand well appointed, and of better spetiallitie, by reason they
were the sons of Noble men, and Citizens glorying in their ancient
freedoms: these he kept next his person, and appointed Curatsax, Pharcanos,
Scydrothemis, and Mithridates overseers of his Guard, as for Trezoboro he
suffered his forwardness to direct the whole business as if his hope received
life, that some action or other might work his miscarying.

Thus is the Trumpet of defiance ready to sound on both sides, yet mean not
the Trebizondians in such suddenness to put it to the Trial of a field,
because by being possessed of the streites and passages: the enemy was sure to
lessen his numbers, and they winn time the Father of many contrarieties: but
the Circumstances of this great War are referred to my book of Battles, I
therefore ouerpasse them now, and only certefie you, that when Mengrelius
perceived he was not able to detain them longer from a day of terror, he took
a Truce for seven days, laying open the Trenches, and making the way plain,
as if he determined to entertain slaughter with handsomnesse, or let death
have a larger freedom by easy passage: So that the stoutest Courage was
appauled at the preperation, and had no other hope but dismay and confusion:
yet fears are enemies to the Progres of victory, and therefore all abatements
of Courage were absented, when it came to the trial indeed, and Kalucki
contrary to the coustomes of his greatness, thought good to ouerlooke the
parts of his Warrelike body, that if need required, the helping a disease or
fault in time, might prevent a greater mischeife: nor desisted he so, but
Mounted on a throne of purpose to be seen and herd, he thus took his
farrewell.

I intend not to use many words unto you, as suspicious of your loves and
vallures: For if there were such a slackenesse, it is now too late to murmr
or Trifell; but because my regard toward you may be the better expressed, I am
the bolder to speak, yet do but determine to put you in mind of your own
minds, and knowledge: Remember then, what humor soever the enemy entertain,
we are succorlesse, and far from home, therefore must vallure make your way
into new possessions, or if you suppose the ostentation of the enemy, is a
glorious spectacle, you have Arms and Hands to vnplume them, and bedeck your
selves with their spoils: but what is this to your own lives and glories,
which in a manner enforce you to shake off all incombrances of fear as for my
self? (though I am loath to degeneratte from the ancient prerogatives of your
Emperors) yet will I be the first to give the onset: For the cause being mine,
mine shall be the Honor or the shame; and yours the spoils, wherein besides
the renown of the exployte, the poorest vassaile shall think himself well
rewarded. The Country you see is pleasing, and the blessings you have already
tasted of; go one therefore go on: Fortune bidds you go on; and Victory
looks already with a pleasing Conntenance. Here a wonderful clamor seemed
to threaten heaven with the noise, by which the Trebyzondians had warning of
their enemies ill meaning toward them: For till this they had been awtentiue
unto Mengrelius, who very well knew, that a seasonable encouragement with
addition of the worth of the party speaking, was a veary whet-stone of
Courage, and had wrought great effect indeed with whole Armies almost ready to
faint.

Littleneed I (said he) debate any particulars concerning the former occasions
of your now imminent troubles: For your own Loyalties and resolutions have put
a way all fear, and continued the steadfastnesse, which I now find, yea
hurried you to the Gates of danger to make demonstration of your constancy: I
am therefore sure you will not now relent, what ever mischeife is threatened,
nor would I have you discouraged, in that neither spoils of Cities, nor
riches of a plentiful Land shall be the recompense of your charge and
endeavors, but rather annimated in regard you are to support a flourishing
Commonwealth, and a Country (thanks to the eternal Powers, beautified with a
blessed plenty: If this seem a slender enforcement, then look on your Byrths
and the places challenging natural regard, your Mothers, that bare you, your
Wives endeered unto you, your Children, that exclaim: your friends and Allies
depending upon you, and your selves, knowing the necessity of life: as for the
Enemy, I assure you, they have not that advantage by the number of men, as
your selves by discipline, vallure, and good order: But why should I so much as
wisper misdoubts amongst you, when never appeared more love and duty; and what
will not love and duty effect? And the immortal Powers are appeased, giving
notice of in scrutible secrets, as you can all witness the Haruspices have
promulged, let not us then consent to surquedry or demisnesse.

As he was going on, the sign was given to the Battle: But behold, a strange
interception divided the Armies by the descending of a thick and spacious
Cloud, which stood as a Wale between them at last a sense dismaying thunder
made a horrible The battle prevented by Miracle.
rupture, and a strange voice with a passable lightning cried out Trezoboro
bariona: Trezoboro bariona; Whereupon the Magy, Gymnosophists, and Haruspces
were called on both sides, who interpreted it to this sense; that there was no
striving against divine reuolutions. For the Gods had proclaimed Trezoboro the
son of peace; and when Mengrelius urged it was by the way of sacrifice, they
repugned, as finding no blood must be shed: by this, the former terror
vanished, and the Armies seemed Metamorphised into sober expectation, which
caused the Magnificent Prince to mount himself like the son of Honor, and
stepping before the maine Fronts with a seemly Trotte he paced to the
Tartarians, desiring to present himself before the Emperor Kalucki and king
of Kings, who informed of the gallant demeanor, and presence of his Nephew,
called the principal commanders of his Army, and settled in his Imperial
Tent with exceeding Majesty and Pomp, admitted him audience: but when
Trezoboro took notice of the state, and the Emperors person, he quickly
alighted and with a respectious ceremony of obeisance, entreated his favor to
give him leave to speak: which belike was obtained with order; For he thus
began.

I have not presumed (most reverent, sacred, and unvanquishable Emperiour) in
any impudent manner to neglect my duty by this Course, or desperate contempt to
weigh with slightness your high Majesty, or great Army, but by divine
inspiration whereof there is none, that has not in some sort participated: I
present unto you the strange truth of my birth, life, and bringing up, whereby
shall appear a very destiny to this titular happiness, or (as it may prove)
incombrance; and that the wrongs, which have thus sturred you to revenge, were
neither determined in malice, nor mean now to be continued in contempt,
because the Triumphs of murder and destruction will then be lamentable: which
to prevent, the Gods in their accoustomed mercy have given a Prodigious
warning: Let us not therefore with the Giants fight against heaven, nor reject
the blessed favor, which now shines upon us, as if it were to de clare the
will of all working power, disclaimeth effusion of blood: and for my self,
which am the reputed cause, you see I come as a simple Hollocaust to redeem
the lives of infinite Thousands: yet give me leave (how ever it pleased you
to submit at that time to unkind banishment) to exprobrate the unnatural
covenants ratefied, which as it should seem the whole senate of heaven
contradicted. With that, he discovered at large the Oracle at Delphos, the
manner of his Birth, the piety of Opacus daughters, the theft of Cleonidas,
the Shipwreck of Bertosus, and the marriage of Brizaca. Now said he, if you
think it convenient to impeach this secret, here I prostrate my self to the
sauagest cruelty, but if an honorable atonement might pacefie your just
conceived displeasure, and reward this Army, we offer a yearly Tribute to
thy byrth-right, a satisfaction for all charges, and a Million of Treasure as a
donatiue to the Soldiers: besides, the world shall tremble at the unity of
your houses, and ages to come, reverence the Fame of two such brethren; For
you being the servant of the great God, and ruler over all rulers, Mengrelius
will be your servant, and submit as far, as such a Monarch may do to his
elder Brother, and highest Lord.

These speeches iudicially delivered (his outward countenance tempered between
an amiable and modest behavior) breathed a contentment, as if a soft Wind
sturring the sweet Flowers, should thereby infuse delight to our Senses:
whereupon succeeded the effects, a still Desire to be fedd with the Pleasure:
and Pity challenging Mischance, which should hinder them from that walk. So
Trezoboro was for a time graciously dismissed; and a Truce of fourteen days
gave them intercourse one to another: in which space, the assembly of Estates
sat daily to finish this strange building of Peace: As for the Soldiers,
their conceits stretched no farther, then to wonder at the Story, to be
moved with the miracle, to pity Trezoboros youth and comlynesse, to wish an
attonment on all sides, and to return with wealth, liberty and credit: at
last, such was the apprehension of their present state, and miracle disposing
their humors to contrarieties, that Kalucki (after Mengrelius consented to
readmitte those Trebizondians, that would return to former liberty and
estates, or like recompense) sent Misogambus and Olippo with presents of
ratification, who with sound of Trumpet in both the Armies proclaimed an
inuiolate Truce: whereupon a stately Colosseum of brass was erected between
the Armies, insculped with the whole occurrents, as they chanced in order, to
which bargain of felicity Ballutasa and Arcabella set their seals: the one,
thanking the Gods for the advancement of her Children: the other, sacrificing
to Fortune, that had so many ways increased her happiness. Thus do the
brothers to the great applause of the people, greet one another; and the state
of the Spectacle would make a vollume in the description: but time must
determine all things, and these great Armies be divided: so Kalucki with
treasure, Honor, and reverence returned to the magnanimous Mullumalla; to whom
he made an offortory of himself and riches, and Mengrelius with peace,
liberty, and delight, was welcomed to Trebizond; where prosperity seemed for
the time, to keep her mansion, had not the wrathful Nemesis (who never
leaves wrong and injustice unpunished) sent for Ielosie and Suspicion to
attend on her in the progress of visiting Mengrelius, least the will of the
Gods should prove a mockery, and the inevitable decrees of Destiny be not
accounted of: and thus she means to contriue her entertainment.

NO sooner was the Trebizondian Army dissolved, The story of Mengrelius and
Trezoboro: with the fathers ielosy against the son by reason of the prophecy.
but Trezoboro sollemly proclaimed the Prince of peace, as well to cellebrate
their late quietness, as to practice Martial exploytes, went about some
fruits of idleness with glorious shoes to the people, and many Tri umphes to
the Court: whereby he made way to the peoples love to come in at, and every
man's eyes were fixed upon his youth and comeliness: as you see some foreign
Plant gracing a curious Garden, and the comers in regarding the rest to no
purpose: this was despightfully pried into by some hateful polliticeans, that
terrefied the Emperor with blasoning his sonns demeanor, which might winn the
hearts of the kingome from him: to these certain old Councellers, rather
stomaching to see their impatience and peremptorinesse abhorred, then daring to
set a foot Broils and discentions, added the greatness of the charge
(considring the Treasure was much wasted with their last business) the
disorders of idle attendants, the pride of his followers, the slenderness of
the present Court, all which set his thoughts at random, and some of them
stumbled on the wrested interpretations of the prophecy, which Mengrelius
(fearing most the blow, that came last) absolutely believed, began to draw
nearer and nearer to the full effect, and so began a strange manner of
Melancholy, sequestring him self from conversation; and when necessity
compelled him abroad, he grew impatient and irrigular: but the greatest cause
of his disquiet, accrewed from the suggestion of diverse, who through the
credit of Belgorundo, made every paltry appearance of a little skill to carry
the true countenance of Learning and Divination, by putting in practice the
Cabalisticall Art, Egyptian Characters, Astronomicall Figures, Hierogliphicall
representations, Augurings, and Pithonicall Incantations; which with some
slender likelihood were intermixed: so that the Court swarmed with a troop of
devilish Astronomers (a kind of people always forbidden, and always retained)
whose strange Attire and Demeanor, gave occasion of laughter and astonishment:
the people counting them wise and extraordinary; the better sort deriding them,
as buffonns and deceivers.

With such illusions was Mengrelius quite carried from him self, and on a
sudden consented to a decree, that none (of what estate soever) should
intermeddle with the Emperors retyering, nor appoint extraordinary meetings
without the verge of the Court, which was strangely taken at the first: but
Trezoboro discovering the secret, was contented to repair to the Palace;
which his presence quickly filled with intercourse of people, and the applause
range by the Emperors ears; who in short time misliked it far worse then the
other, as almost by eyewitness perceiving, he meant to infinuate into the
vulgar opinion to irrite a faction: From hence a plain displeasure arose by
commanding the Prince to depart the Court: then wrought his absence belief of
every thing reported; and added withal, that the opportunity made him study
on the disgrace, and so prepare the revenge; (For indeed there wanted not
those, which proposed to Trezoboro his Fathers cruelty at the beginning, his
wretched hate now, the errors of many men about him; and that there was no
reason he should permit the indignity: but these he suffered as Spiders in an
house serving to gather the Poison and Venom of the Air, that the rest may be
more sweet and wholesome:) till at last, a wretched surmise displaied the
ensiugnes of hate against him; which was too true, by reason all his favorites
and attendants were removed, or neglected. Calisthenes aman of an high lineage,
and dilicat wit, which by some extraordinary pleasantnes got the name of Good
conceit; and yet till now made gracious with the Empress, was checked with the
term of mimus for slender glauncing at the Emperors melancholy. Another
demanding but the cause of the Princes sequestration, was imprisoned. A third,
making a Satiricall Inuection against especial persons, was publicly whipped. A
fourth, saying, the Prince was more worthy submitted to the execution of a
severe Judgment: which made a great alteration; and to be plain, slacked the
reverence and duty ever borne toward him.

Thus remained all places full of rumors, wherein confusion spread many
dispositions abroad: some saying the Emperor was ill directed, or worse
inclined: some that the Prince was causelessly wronged: some laid the fault on
private persons, who having a long time swaied the Commonwealth, feared least
the quick conceit of others would detect their ill government, and therefore
meant under public pretenses to prevent private mischeifes: some blamed the
Emperors credulytie of the coosening sort of Magy: some affirmed he was quite
distracted, and some dared exclaim, that fearing he knew not what, he would
ruin the Commonwealth, and Butcher up his Children, as he had done before:
These speeches had diverse effects both with Mengrelius and Trezoboro, the
father assuring it a practice of defamation, and the son suspecting his
fathers cruelty; which was the more grievous unto him, because he had deserved
so well: so that now to secure himself he was enforced to stand on his Guard,
and that incited the Emperor to proclaim him Trator, Trezoboro in Arms and
proclaimed Traitor.
the severity of which edict divided the kingdom, and an unnatural Ciuell
war ensued, wherein many stratagems and Turmoyles dislocated the Pillars and
stays of the Empier: for Mengrelius with his years grew wilful, irregular,
and dangerous, mistrusting his most trusty Servants; and when any dared to
request a Pacification, he would not abide it. His Mother and Wife were
ircksome, and all things at home framed them selves to the vnframing his quiet.
Abroad he was sure the Cities would regard their preservation to come. The
discontented persons would adhere to his Son, as well to avoid the Laws
penal against them, as in hope of recompense and reward. The Noble men and
Gentry, by reason of former neglect, would questionless make them selves
acceptable to the Prince. Some yet advanced, would not degenerate: and others
in Office or Account, for their own safeties would continue allegiance: with
these, and such, whom the very name of Emperor mustred up, he made an
ouer-maistring party, and in his own person performing actions beyond
expectation, strengthened the opinion of such, as stood wavering betwixt duty
and pity.

But when Trezoboro perceived, that he which stands only on defense, is
far from Victory, he then showed his Father the force of a mighty Arm;
with which he held out a long time: but at last, was compelled to retire to
Pelagium, a place designed him for his Estate, and convenient for Victualing
and relieuing his Army. Hither did Mengrelius prosecute him, and Trezoboros
flight somewhat ouerswayed the common opinion, never certain, but in
uncertainties; so that the Emperor seemed cheared with his good proceedings,
and his Sons trial; whereupon somewhat cunningly thinking to press the
Enemy, while they were yielding, he proclaimed Pardon to all those, which
would forsake the Prince: the rest he denounced guilty of the Crime of
Majesty: Then seemed he to dally with cruelty, promising one hundred Tallents
to any would bring him in dead or a live: and last of all, encountered with his
forces to great advantage, which Trezoboro perceiving would in time work him
out, and that his retardance gave liberty for a Russian Army to help his
father, he dispatched a messenger to Anzitemus, and an other to Opacus of
Capadocia, who by reason of the Emperors ielosie and stomach against them, as
the causes of his fear, were not used, not sent unto in their late troubles,
and therefore conceiving they were neglected or despised, a displeasure arose
against Mengrelius, and this opportunity made them the willinger to join with
the Prince: especially Anzitemus, who with four legions of old soldiers came
in person to his aid: as for Opacus, from Phrigia, Lidia, and his own
kingdom, he made an Army of one hundred 20. Thousand, and gave the Honor of
their conduct to Delano a man of experience, great years, and well beloved;
yet suppressed from advancement, by reason Cuprax the son of the Duke of
Pantalia, seemed a favorite in Court, and would have drawn the managing of
Martial affairs to him self, had not Trezoboro by name entreated for Delano,
and the Soldiers compelled out of their Country disclaimed any other.

But when Mengrelius understood, that Anzitemus was come himself, a sudden
trembling disproportioned his former Courage, and the Oracle (like a hellish
vision appearing) mightily perplexed him, and was indeed the author of strange
courses, which at last ouerturned his good success, yet he went orderly to
work, and encountered with the Armenians, before they were united to his sonns
forces, who had much a do to make their passage by reason the Boats were not
yet come from Trezoboro, and Anzitemus had commanded, that no man should lay
violent Auzitemus joins with Trezoboro: kills Mengrelius, fulfilleth the
Prophecy, and inuesteth Trezoboro Emperor.
hands on the Emperor, but this interception ended with the name of a
skirmish: For Anzitemus with Delanos assistance quickly passed their Army by
a Bridge made of the Boats: and helped with great Furre-trees keeping equal
distance of Twenty foot, and although the water was very broad; yet industry
with the conueniencie of the place for wood, laid Plankes upon the Beams,
and so in one day both Horse and foot passed over in a manner within sight of
the Enemy: For some two mile from the River they had so entrenched the
passages, that Mengrelius supposed they meant their to have encamped, little
thinking Delano played the Lapwing, who cries farthest from his Neast: and
when he seemed most busy to fortefie a place of securytie, the maine Army
marched that night under a Woods side to the River, and the next day put over,
while the Trebizondians prepared against the Camp, which they supposed was so
near them: But being thus disappointed, they had liberty to complain, but
small means of revenge, only the Emperor united his Forces again, and
assured he was better provided, determined to dally no longer, but put it to a
trial; wherein if Fortune failed, he was certain to weaken the Adversary,
and renew his own Army at pleasure; and so one day might afford, what
another did deny.

By this time is Anzitemus and Delano welcomed by the Prince, who hoping by
course of pacification to end the War, sent to Mengrelius by fair entreaty
not to conceive so hardly of so worthy a son, and they would engage their
Honor, he intended nothing but faith and duty: this message wrought no
otherwise, then if Trezoboro would absolutely commit himself to his fathers
tuition without hostage or other covenant, it might be the Emperor would
forgive him, to this Anzitemus opposed, yielding many reasons, and by a second
treaty urged the burying under foot of all displeasures, the remission and
restoring his followers, and the confirming him Heir apparent. Here again
Mengrelius disdained to be abridged of his will, or courbed by his son and
subjects, whereupon defiance was proclaimed on all sids, and a day appointed to
entertain destruction with solemnity: at which time Anzitemus tried another
way to appease these mischeefes, by sommoning the Armies to audience, and the
Emperor to understand, what must be trusted unto. To this, the fear of the
Soldiers, rather then his own willingness, compelled him: and so Anzitemus
in the front of his Army thus delivered his mind.

I am not ignorant (great Emperor, and misled people) that Wisdom and good
Counsel are sometimes unseasonable, especially in a time of fury and hate
amongst men of War, commanded and countenanced by the Kings own person; yet
have you no such cause either to put in arms these men, or Armed to make them
butcher them selves: For though the Father fight there, the Son is not absent
here: though the elder Brother understanding not the truth, is with
Mengrelius, the younger attendes on Trezoboro: And though a Friend is enroulled
with you, one of the Family is amongst us: and were not this lamentable, though
necessity compelled it? But now to proceed with out order, ground, or reason,
what scandal can be more opprobrious? What cause more detestable? All men have
written, that Violence continues not: yet have you begun in the Cradle, and are
not appeased after many years: and why? the Emperor is terrefied with an
Oracle, and suspects his own Children. Has the Gods preserved them for this?
Has his Towardliness deserved this? Has his Valloure in your late Broils
been showed for this? Has his Life been so often hazarded for this? Has your
Peace been wrought for this? Has your Prosperity followed for this? Yea, has
Strangers been ashamed of the Composition; and the mighty Kalucki received him
to favor for this? And will now the Commonwealth tear her own Bowels? the
Members seek their own destruction by despising the Head; and the Father
murder his own Child? It is execrable and abominable. But touching the
Prophecy, to believe it not, what needs this fear? To believe it, what way
of prevention? But you will say, it is ambiguous. I reply, Malice must not
misconsture, nor Wisdom be ouerruled with Supposes. For concerning the
Prince, (by the Divine power which rules all Princes) you can allege neither
cause, reason, nor likelihood. How then have you wronged your Renown, and
insorcered their Obedience? else would they never consent to destroy one
another, to ruin their Country, make havoc of their own increases, see and
suffer mischief to knock at their doors; and with the Giants fight against
Heaven: or like that unnatural Bird, denowring them that hatcheth her; seek
to destroy the Successor, on whose safety depends all their lives. Leave off
therefore for shame: leave off; either yield a reason of your actions, or
desist from your unreasonableness? But you will answer, It is sufficient the
Emperor commaundes. I do say no; he is but the Steward of the Gods, subject
to account; and ordained to form, not dissolve the Commonwealth.

But as a further vehemencle might have agrauated the matter, the Soldiers
began to repine, some demanding whether the Prince raised the War, or
desired to save him self? Some for what cause Mengrelius prosecuted his Son?
Some stomaked to see intestine Dissipation. Some hardly believed the Prince
began Innovation, considering he was to expect the Kingdoms to flourish
hereafter. Some said, though the Emperor were offended, the submission of a
Son might appease any Father. Some absolutely denied to destroy the Prince,
and the rest liked not, a wise man to be carried away with dreams or devises,
especially when the ruin of the Empire must succeed: but Mengrelius enraged
with this division exclamed only on duty and allegiance threatening the
reuolters with death, and attempting with stripes to terrefie diverse in the
speed of escape, but it smally prevailed. For the greatest part fled a fore his
face to his son, which Anzitemus took the advantage of and encountered with
the rest in sollemne manner of hostillitie, so that a terrible fight began, and
a little time ouerlooked a dangerous conflict: in which the victory was a
mournful Triumph: For it ended with the cries and tears of Orphans for their
Fathers, Fathers for their Children, Brother, for Brother, one Kinsman for
another and friend for friend: yea such was the misery and mischief of the
error amongst them, that a son was found mourning over a Carcass, whom he
had slain, and perceiving it his own father after a ruthful complaint, killed
himself: the horror of which sight, daunted the stoutest courage, and made
them all cry out upon the cause of their troubles; which Anzitemus took hold
of, and knowing the Emperor had escaped (and as he afterward lernt) to
Samarchanda with a quiet demeanor recalled them together, and though the
Skirmish and their own fears had disperced them far off: yet handled he the
matter so well, that they were contented to return; and finding Trezoboro as
sad for their greifes, as his own misfortune, which by his Honorable
protestations in the necessity to save his life, and unwillingness to
disquiet so good subjects, they saw apparent, in so much that unkind tears
brake off the Princely discourse: they shouted for joy, and with a new Comicall
applause swear, they would obey no other Emperor then Trezoboro: as for
Mengrelius seeing his ill disposition had taught him the way to Tyranie, they
saw no reason to betray virtue, or be in subjection any longer to inhumanitie.
Surely said Anzitemus, the Gods have taken compassion upon you, and you and we
will now be one body, but of necessity the body must have a head, or else the
Members perish, therefore we will inuest Trezoboro your Emperor, and he shall
renew your peace and comfortes: This (as according to their own desires) they
soon consented to, and so in midst of all the Army was he advanced, invested,
and solemnly proclaimed Emperor of Trebizond, and all the Mengrelius deposed
and Trezoboro chosen Emperor.
Kingdoms adjoining; Prince of Peace, Lord of the great Sea, and Servant to
the high Gods. Then sange they a Himne in his honor to Bellona, and a Song to
Diana. And lastly, with Panegericall Ceremonies, they brought him to Mengrelius
royal Tent, which the Soldiers had reverently preserved in the defeat.

But when unfortunate Peristoll (whom for his ill news he commanded to be
slain) had informed the proceedings of the Camp, and that the Prince had
taken upon him the Diademne, never was impatience apter to be described: For
now he raged indeed, and put in practice many actions of distemperature, as
assuring him self the Oracle was complete; only the last point (which was his
death) yielded more terror in the suspicion, then a thousand mischiefs in
full execution: Yet he lifted up once again the countenance of Valloure, and
with his supply out of Russia, many Mercenaries from Scithia and Europa, and
the rest, (worthy to be beloved for being true to their Master,) he set
forward a mightier Army then the first; which in short time confronted his
Adversaries, who were coming forward apace to take possession of the Cities:
So that nothing was to be expected, but forcible and confused Profanation both
of love and duty; wherefore they gave Revenge full scope to make one day of
death for all: And the Battle began with a horrible and impetuous violence,
wherein to see the distempred Mengrelius with a well graced fury whirling
amongst the troops, would have pitied his degenerating humors, and admired
his strength and valor; but Trezoboros approache divided these thoughts, who
finding the Emperor enclosed to his great danger contrary to expectation,
commanded them to desist, and so yielded him freedom to work his madness on
some other subject. An other time Anzitemus chanced where destruction indeed
was coming apace, and delivered him: which he took in greater scorn,
because the Soldiers cried, See the kindness of Trezoboro: see the piety of
Anzitemus. But this I say carried him to disdain indeed; and perceiving him
self spared by special appointment, he changed his Horse and Armor, coming
into the Battle unknown, (For by this time, neither Order nor Discipline
served) and determined to single out his Son, with such a mind, as a man
after a solemn Vow, which he is resolved to keep, endeuoreth to bring to
effect. But Anzitemus (having seen Perneades sequester him self from the
company, with purpose to draw forth such men as he provided in ambush)
supposed the Emperor had been he, and so encountered with him before the
sudden approach might strike a fear amongst the wearied, and already fainting
troops; and after a gallant Battle, Death rushed in with a blow, which the
King with both his hands stroke at his head, whose steely Covert not firmly
settled, yielded to the violence; showing that nothing in the world is
permanent, nor any man in life secure: so the Emperor shruncke under the
burden of this misfortune, and yielded to an honorable vntimelines: Mengrelius
slain, and the Prophecy fulfilled.
which was the more lamentable, because he sought the destruction of his
Son, and came to a ruthful end by his Daughters husband.

But when Anzitemus had time to ouerlooke, and know it was Mengrelius, unkind
remembrance confounded him with sorrow at the accident, and cursed the hand,
that yet pleaded ignorance in the deed; remaining confounded, until the rumor
and intercourse of people brought Trezoboro thither: at last came Calisthenes,
Orchanes, Hardubax: at last came the rest; all more troubled with grief, then
proud of their own quietness: so that the Victory represented variety of
Discomfort, rather then solemnity of a Triumph: For what with recording those
many Virtues abounding in him, whereof every one had bountifully participated;
and the present spectacle so full of remorse, they sorrowed beyond measure, and
Trezoboro was compelled to make his entrance into the Empire with incongruent
demeanor, and had celebrated (if the State would have permitted it) with one
solemnity his fathers Exequies, and his own Coronation. By this time, was the
Oracle published abrod, and wisdom interdicted an unmeasurable discomfort in
a matter-remediles, and appointed inevitable: so to make a new account with
delight, Anzitemus was importuned to send for Brizaca, least she were
altogether deprived of that benefit, (which Children receive from the
knowledge of their Parents.) This asked a little time of deliberation: but the
importunities of the Empresses prevailed; so the charge of the Journey was
committed to Philtranus Prince of Cilicia: As for the Army, he divided that
into two parts, sending the one by land under the command of Kazopletus; the
other by Sea with Pelorus son of Pelorus, Artabazes Admiral: both to remain
undissolved, till he him self returned; in the mean while, his Mother
Euphamia to rest Regent by a new Commission.

These matters had the effect of diligence and loyalty, and Philtranus came
fortunately into Armenia, and informed the Queen of all occurrents, with the
plausible directions for her progress to Trebizond. Here the intermixtion of
contraries, kept her from the full entertainment of joy; so that her Fathers
Catastrophe extinguished the delight of her Brothers advancement: to which an
other home mischief was added, the return of Cleonidas, who presuming on the
absence of Anzitemus, and the Navy under Pelorus, entered the Confines of
Armenia, and attempted a ridiculous Innovation. But before we certify this
Adventure, let us see, how Fortune ouerlooked him in the danger after the
Sea Fight with Anzitemus.

BY that time, Cleonidas and Anzitemus (through The story of Cleonidas after
the Battle with Anzitemus.
the effect of his devilish revenge) were divided, and their Ships burnt and
dismembered, the horrible lamentation of so many men so many ways yielding up
the last powers of their souls, stroke him to the heart, and (because his
pestilent humor had no subject to work upon) it boyld within him like a
Furnace, ouerheating all the parts of his body and mind, so that he could
have been contented to have made his own separation, considering a guilty
Conscience laid open the records of so many faults: But even when Death had
been most beneficial, the necessity of Life, with the kindness of the
impartial element, drove the vnfirme Seat whereon he sat to another piece of
a Ship, from whence ouerburdned, he saw fourteen cast into the Sea, as
supposing it the nearest way to Heaven, through the reflection the Heavens made
in the Water: On this by great chance he got, and was tossed too and fro with
the Billows, as if Destruction meant to make a Game of his danger: at last
after two days, he was driven on a sandy Island not far from the Continent
of Persia; wherein he mused at his own ignorance, that having so long time
scowred all the coast of the Hircanian Sea, he was yet unacquainted with this
place.

Here a very instinct of Nature put him to his shifts, and by striking two
Flintes on certain Reeds lying in the place, he shuffled up a Fire; whose
effects made the return of warmth and strength, the maintainers of life: at
which the inhabitants (who were only Servants and Officers attending on the
Priests here living) wondered, who had presumed without order of Ceremony, to
dishonor the place: For this was called the Island of Fire, and had two
Chapels therein; one dedicated to Vulcano, the other to the Sanne; in which
after the Persian manner, the Priests were appointed to live, who only had
power to give leave to the Inhabitants to make their Fires for necessities
sake; which yet was not done without presence of a Religious man: Whereupon
they apprehended Cleonidas, and brought him to Sicambus the Archpriest in the
same manner they found him: But when with an extraordinary courage in the
Sirian language (because he was to speak to a man of his profession) he
discovered him self, and that Sicambus vnueiled his ignorance, remembering he
had seen him with Astiages in Persia, and by many means heard of his fame, he
comforted him the best he could; but the best he could, prevented not a
strange Sickness, which with an unkind detention kept him full two years
retiered, and confirmed their opinion, which supposed him perished: in the end,
the firmness of his complete manhood, and well seasoned body, ouermaistred
the tyranny, and he recovered both in health and reformation: for after his
penitency had protested a remorce of the action against Artabazes, and abiured
his ill manner of life; the religious Father cheared him with the comfort,
which follows true repentance, and by examples confirmed his willingness to
amendment. Upon this, they appointed to go into Persia, and accordingly arrived
at Suziana much about the time Anzitemus fortunes were published through Asia;
which he rather woondred, then stomaked at, not doubting to make his peace and
reconsiliation, which his hope supposed by Zaloppos means (when the Persian
Ambassadors went to Armenia) to bring to pass: But their return certified
Anzitemus slight answer in that behalf, and he smothered the indignation for
a time; but unable to suppress it, gave Liberty at last, to burst forth into
flames of Despite, and in this manner proceeded.

Certain sums of Money disbursed for Astiages, he demanded of the Queen
Roxana: which awhile bred scruple and doubt, by reason of their Articles with
Anzitemus and Artabanus; yet after a little debating, they were repayed with a
plenary cancelling of all accounts: For being a matter chancing before this new
Contract, and in her Fathers behalf, she thought it dishonorable to trifle
him out with devises or excuses. Many of his Soldiers settled in their Towns,
which the have of his business permitted not to carry with him, he requested
again: This was left to their own desires, because in this space married, and
brought up amongst them, they would not seem to banish them by compulsion: So
the most of them loving Spoils better then Pay, hasted to Cleonidas. With this
Money and this Supply, he departed to his own Island, and gathering his Friends
and Confederats together, with forty sail of well appointed Ships, and
fifty Hulks for the transportation of his Army, he took the advantage of the
Kings absence in the Trebizondian Wars, and made speed for Armenia, landing
his Forces at such time, as Kazopletus and Pelorus were returned from
Anzitemus; and Philtranus came with directions to attend the Queen Brisaca to
her Mother. But this they were ignorant of, and diverse unsettled Humors, as idle
persons, and endangered to the Law; upon the tumor of Cleonidas ariuall, to
the number of fourteen thousand, made a head in nature of Particeans, and
certified, they were ready, and resolved to join with him; for their hearts
and discontentments, had engaged them already; as if they meant to give this
notice, that in the best Hiue there be Drones and robbers of them that labor:
but as their willingness set them forward, their forwardnes pulled them back, as
disordered without a Head, and having bad intelligence: For the vnlooktfor
coming of Kazopletus ouertooke them with that speed, that Cleonidas had scarc
notice, before the distraction dispersed and Justice quickly scourged them all.

Thus was this fanaticall Company discomfited, and Cleonidas in a manner as
soon overthrown: For upon report, how Mischance had put on a double visage
against him, he made a retreat to his Ships; but ere he could house his men,
Kazopletus by land, and Pelorus by Sea, had so hemnd him in, that though it
proved a gallant and tedious Skirmish, full of observation and example; yet
his Fleet was suncke and dissipated, his Companies quite defeated, and him
self taken prisoner, and sent to Sagarena, where Brizaca kept her Court; but
she unwilling to proceed against him without directions from Anzitemus, by the
counfaile of Euphamia, committed him to Ward in the same place, where his
Father had once besiedged the beauteous Artaxata.

When Cleonidas saw him self thus disappoynted and captiued, and that the last
Act of his Tragedy was in hand, to which the Gates of Shame and Death; or
Death with the shame stood only open, he made it a matter of some repining:
yet as a man of excellent Resolution, he neither seemed much dismayed, or
abated: For to complain of Gods, or Men, of Fortune, or the World, he thought
it a property of such, as desired to live. Again, to crane pardone, sue to
Friends, and make base Submission, he imputed to such as feared to die; so
that Death appeared now like a welcome Friend, if the reproach might be taken
away, which made such an impression, that he protested Anzitemus should not
triumph in his disgrace, not use his living body contumeliously: yet when there
seemed want of means to effect this glorious Act (as he supposed) being
left destitute of all provision, he then boiled for very rage, and was
enforced to cool him self with a Cup of cold Water; which working a better
temperature, somewhat reduced him, and then he reprehended his dullness, that
conceived not the infinite ways, whereat Death might make her entrance;
whereupon with circumspection (as if Desperatnesse meant to entreat her
contrary advise) he searched about the Chamber, at last finding a rising in
the Wall, where a Flint shoued out his Corner, with a maine careere he dashed
The death of Cleonidas.
out his brairies, leaving rather example of Manhod, then Conscience.

With the death of Cleonidas, remained Armenia fully quieted, and Brizaca
without further suspicion, might prepare for her progress; to which the
industry of Philiranus, and the duty of her Subjects added outward Riches
and Pomp; nor was she behind them for State and Majesty: So that she set
forward to their Joy and Amazement from whence she came, and to their Delight
and Contentment, to whom she went. But when Anzitemus understood of Cleonidas
death, he took the news (as it were in ill part,) because he thought him
self disappoynted of a great deal of Honor in the courses meant toward him:
yet ballansing the assurance of his own Peace and quietness withal, he gave
way to more seasonable desires, and seemed satisfied with the wantonness of
the time, and the pleasure of the place, which delighted with variety: so that
if his own importunities had not compelled his return into Armenia, he might
very easily have usurped the felicity of another Kingdom.

FINIS.
Scribimus indocti, doctique Poeniata passim.

