PROFITABLE INSRVCTIONS FOR THE MANVRING, Sowing and Planting of Kitchen
Gardens.

Very profitable for the common wealth and greatly for the help and comfort of
poor people.

Gathered by Richard Gardener of Shrewsberie.

Imprinted at London by Edward Allde for Edward White dwelling at the little
North door of Paul's at the sign of the Gunne. 1603.

The Author his Preface, to his loving neighbors and friends, within the town
of Shrewsburie in the County of Salop. R. G. wishes all happiness and
felicity in Christ Jesus.
RIght well-beloved in Christ Jesus, neighbors and friends of this my native
soil of Shrewsburie, I wish you all felicity and happiness in the true
knowledge of our redemption in the merrits of our only Savior Jesus Christ,
to whom with the Father, and the holy ghost, be all honor, praise and thanks
for evermore. Beloved it is generally known unto all men in this town, that
I have ever in good mind, desired the prosperity of the same, and in all good
actions to my power and knowledge have preferred the same, without desire of
lucre or gain thereby, and did always desire to do the uttermost of my
skill, as well to the common causes, as also to private men's works, and now in
my old age, or last days, I would willingly take my last farewell with some
good instructions to pleasure the general number: as for spiritual instructions
and good aduertisments therein, I leave you to the good admonitions of the
godly Clergy, and to your good proceedings in the same, which God grant for
his mercies sake, Amen. Amongst all the practices, knowledges and experiences
which ever I received from Gods mercies in temporal blessings, I do
undoubtedly persuade my self, that my practice and experience in Garden
stuff, or the good benefits therein, does best benefit, help and pleasure
the general number of people, better then any other practice that ever I took
in hand in temporal causes whatsoever. And therefore good neighbors and
friends (of this my native soil) accept this my short and simple penning of
this my practice and experience in Gardening causes herein mentioned. And if
any other man, now or hereafter find occasion to better in writing any thing
which I have omitted for want of full perfection by experience therein, I do
most heartily desire him, (that so shall find cause to better any thing omitted
by me or amend any thing by me penned) so to do, that God may be glorified in
his good gifts, the general number the better comforted, and the poor the
better relieved with Garden stuff: whereas yet in this County of Salop,
Gardening stuff: is to small purpose, but I hope in God as time shall serve,
my good beginning will be an occasion of good proceedings therein, and no doubt
(b^loued) if any man will heartily desire to do good in these actions, then
vain, fruitless and superfluous things may be taken out of good Gardens and
sundry good commodities, to pleasure the poor planted therein: then no doubt
the Almighty God will the better bless your increase, and bless your walking
in your Garden in that mind: and then no doubt but your good conscience will
delight you as well as the great blessings that God will bless the Garden
withall^ Then shall you no doubt visibly behold in your Garden, the blessed
favor and mercy of ou^ most merciful God to your everlasting comfort, not
only in the great increase there to behold, but also other ways to your
great comfort, which I omit at this p^esent. And when you make sale to the
poor, consider you are the Lords Stewards to sell with consciences^ and to
lend and give: also do it willingly, for we have the vnfallable promise of God
for double recompense, if we so favorably will perform to all, and specially
to the poor and needy: which God grant for his mercies sake, we may have
grace to do, and also to have ^ special care to satisfy, content or pay the
tithes thereof to the ministers of the holy word, and not to suffer a bad
custom to corrupt the conscience therein, which God forbid. And also I desire
thee good reader to bear with my gross and simple penning in so good a cause,
and willingly to accept my good will therein. And in so doing I shall think
my trauail herein to be well bestowed, and my good purpose the better
performed, which God grant for his mercies sake. Amen.

Edward Thorn Gent. in commendation of the work, and the Author thereof.
HE that desires with skillful hand,
to frame a Garden plot,
And to manure and make it apt
For Herbs that serve the pot,
Or choice to make of seeds and Plants,
and best of both to know:
And them in seasonable time,
to plant, to set, and sow,
Let him peruse this little Book,
which undertakes the charge,
Of all the fore recite^ points,
to show the course at large,
Of Carrets first, and Cabbage close,
and how to keep them sound:
And Pars^ips also to preserve,
and Turnips fair and round.
Of Lettice next, and garden Beans,
and Onions of the best:
Of Coucombers and Artichockes,
and Radish with the rest,
These and such other herbs and seeds,
has Gardner, in good will:
Unto Sallopi^n neighbors his,
entreate^ of with skill.
His talent lent h^ does not hide,
if all were understood,
But sets it foor^h with willing mind,
to do his neighbors good.
The poor which late were like to pine,
and could not buy them bread:
In greatest time of penury,
were by his labors fed.
And that in reasonable rate,
when Corn and coin was scant,
With Parsnep and with Carret rootes^
he did supply their want.
The rich likewise and better sort,
his labors could not miss
Which makes them many times to think,
that Salop London is.
Then rich and poor in friendly sort,
give Gardner all his due,
Who shows himself in all his acts,
so kind a friend to you.
And wish as he does well deserve,
his welfare and his health,
That has so greatly profited,
Salopians common wealth.
How to make choice of the best Carrets, to plant for good seeds, and how and
when to plant them.
AFter the Sun his entering into Libra about the twelfth of September, then
prepare your ground ready to set your Carrets, for seed, make choice of the
fairest Carrets and best, yellow colors, to the number as you will set your
beds, being made ready before you take up y^ Carrets, every bed being a yard
and a quarter broad: then set your carrets in two rows, one row on either
side the bed, six or seven inches from the edge of the bed, and full three
quarters of a yard one from another.

Then have you nothing to do with them until about the last of April, at
which time they will be grown about a yard in height: then you have need to
take care of them, for the wind will easily break them by the ground: then
must you prepare some kind of packe-threed or lynen thread to ^et about them
as a girdle, about two foot high from the earth as need shall require by the
growing of the branches: gird some higher then other some. Then shortly after
you must have stakes in a readiness, and as the Carrets must stand one against
the other in the bed: so likewise the stakes must stand one against the other,
to every four Carrets two stakes. The stakes must be a yard and a half
above the ground, and a sure hold within the earth for danger of wind: then
must you prepare pack^-threed or other thread to go from stake to stake all
the length of the bed, one course of lines must be about two foot high, and
another course of lines must be n^ere the top of the stakes, so that there
must be two courses of lines on the utter side of the stakes on both sides the
bed. Then must you have cross lines, to every two Carrets a cross line made
fast to the side lines, the cross lines must be both above and beneath, as the
side lines do go, and a cross rod to every two stakes tied fast with
somelynnen thread or thrumbes: then both the upper course and nether course of
the rods and the short lines must have a line going amidst of the bed, so that
by that means every Carrets branches will stand in a square both in the upper
and nether coarse of rods and lines, in sure manner for the wind. If this be
not done perfectly, the loss of Carret seeds will be more in value then the
Charges of stakes, rods and lines. The stakes must be set in this manner:
First two stakes at the end of the bed, then over pass four Carrets, and in
the midst between two Carrets set a stake on either side the bed, and the
lines and rods as aforesaid, then as the Carret branches do grow, they must be
somewhat tended to keep them in good order within the lines: this being done
about the last of August, the Carret seeds will begin to be ripe, and as they
do change to some brown color, so to be cut from time to time, until the
last be sufficiently ripe about the first of October: Then place the Carret
seeds as you do cut them on a Chamber floor to dry, and when they be dry,
beat the seeds out with small staves, or beast with the edge of a lath, and
cleanse them from the composte or refuse (as you find best by experience) with
ridle and sieve. There are three kinds of Carrets, two of them are profitable
and the third is not: The great long yellow Carret, and the great short Carret
are principal good, but the common or wild Carret, which is pale yellow
colored and small and long, is to be refused, for they yield small profit,
neither are they so good meat as the other two kinds by much. The seeds of
the two best kinds of Carrets do change into diverse colors: and if you
choose a root of any color that does best like you, then set the same for
seed, and so shall you have store of roots of that color that so is set for
seed when time serves: if you do make choice of the best Carrets and set
them for seeds as aforesaid, then your seeds are very bad and not profitable
to be used by any, but deceives the sower and yields not so good roots as
the set root seeds do by much.

How to have principal good Cabadge seeds to sow, whereby you may have good
store of good Cabadges as time serves.
WHen you have Cabadges in your garden that be ripe to cut, make your choice
of the best and fairest Cabadges for seed in this manner, that you may have the
benefit of the best Cabadges and good seed of the same stocks or roots. Also
when your Cabadges be ripe, take a hand saw and cut the Cabadge off, as near
to the Cabadge as you can, and have so much of the stock as you may: but take
heed least you rent the stock in cutting it with the saw, you must cut those
Cabadges which you would so preserve for seeds in the new of the Moon, of the
first ripe Cabadges, and so let them grow to bear seeds the year following,
and that seed will be as good as may be (whatsoever is said to the contrary)
And if you desire to have much Cabadge seeds to sow and to sell: then your
best way is to provide some place in the Garden where the shadow of them may
do least harm to other seeds or fruits. Then prepare the ground in narrow
beds and take up the Cabadge roots with as much earth at the root as you can
in the new of the Moon in October: and place them one row in a bed almost a
yard a sunder, and then another row in an other bed likewise: so that every row
or every root be almost a yard one from another, and then let them stand
until they be grown almost a yard high, then beset the branches with rises
and gird the branches and rises, with a string of pack thread or such like,
or else the weight of the branches and the wind will break them to the loss
of the seeds: and when the seeds do begin to be ripe, then take heed to
them, for the birds called the Bull Finch will destroy them suddenly, unless
you do provide to save the seeds with nets to be set thereon sundry ways as
seems you best to do: and when your Cabadge Seeds be ripe, cut them and
dry them, cleanse them and keep them until the best times to sow them: of
which times I will make mention at large, as he^^eafter follows in order. If
you take heed to choose the principal Cabadges for seeds as aforesaid, you
shall both the better pleasure your self, and do^e good to the common wealth:
Also let not gain nor deceit alter, nor corrupt a good conscience herein to
the hurt of any.

How to make your best choice for Parsnep seeds.
PRepare such place in your Garden as is most convenient for the setting of
Parsneps for seeds: first dig and make your ground ready in beds, like as you
would sow any other seeds, then make choice of the fairest Parsnep roots, and
plant them in the beds a row of roots on either side the bed, about six
inches from the edge of the bed, and a row of roots along the midst of the
bed or beds, and set every root so near as you can, to be xv. inches one from
another: and when the first seeds do begin to be ripe, then cut them daily as
cause requires: for the seeds of Parsneps are very apt to fall when they be
ripe, to the loss of the best seed (if they be not heedefully looked unto.)
Thus done, you shall have good Parsnep seeds to pleasure any person in that
behalf, otherwise it is not so good nor so profitable.

The best way to have principal seeds of Turnips to sow.
THere be sundry kinds of Turnips, and to write thereof particularly would be
somewhat tedious: but the best kind for the common wealth, is the large round
Turnep, which are but of late come to this County of Salop: The best way to
have excellent seeds of those Turnips, is thus: Make the beds a yard and
quarter broad, then choose the only round and fair roots, and set them
three quarters of a yard one from another, two rows in a bed.

These seeds will not abide or brook any binding or supporting of them: but
your best way is to let them grow in their own kind, and let them fall to
the earth (as they will by nature) and when the seeds do begin to be ripe,
take heed, for sundry kinds of birds will devour it, keep it with nets
or otherwise, which I omit to your bent consideration therein: and when the
seeds be fully ripe, cut them and dry them to your purpose: your best time to
set them for seeds, is in the new of the Moon, in October or November.

The best means to have principal Lettice seeds, which will be both great,
hard and white Cabadge Lettice.
THere be sundry kinds of Lettice, the one is principal, the other two are
indifferent, and the fourth is the wild Lettice. The best are very white
seeds: the second are russet white seeds, and are callad Lumbard Lettice: the
third are black seeds, some of al these three sorts will close, but the perfect
white is the best. This sort is to be chosen and the seeds thereof to be
sowed, and when the Lettice are young and small, then you must take the weeds
clean from them, and also you must weed so many of the Lettice away until
they be two or three inches a sunder, and when those remaining, do touch almost
one another, then draw away more of them until they be 6. or viii. inches a
sunder, then they must grow until they be closed, and if there be any which
seem that they will not close, take them away, and let those which are best
closed remain for Seeds, and so from year to year ever choose the best
closed for seed: and you shall have such Cabadge or closed Lettice, by these
means in two or three years, the best that may be had. This being mine own
order for close Lettice seed, I commonly have such Lettice, that many do say
there are not the like to be had in London, or so good. The manner of sowing or
times when to sowe^ I omit until in order in this my treatise it shall more
at large appear.

The best way to obtain seed Beans for Gardens.
THere be three kinds of Beans, whereof there is but one perfect good for
Gardens, that is the great and large white Bean: and when your Beans are
fully ripe, choose yearly the greatest of them for seed, and you shall find
great profit in so doing, if you have cause to sow many of them, and your
Beans will prove very profitable in the common wealth.

For to have good Onion seeds.
ABout the first of February when you perceive the extremity of wint^r to be
past, and the weather somewhat fair, then take your Onions and set them ^or
seeds in the new of the Moon, where the Sun is always to shine in his course
both Winter and Summer: and when they grow high, dress them with rises or
rods ^or breaking with wind: and when the seed is ripe, dry it well in the
heat of the Sun, then let it remain with the pulse or refuse till after the
first of February: I desire that all which would sow Onion or others aforesaid
in Gardens, to provide seeds of their own growing and not to be deceived
yearly as commonly they be, to no small loss in general to all this Land, by
those which be common sellers of Garden seeds. I cannot omit nor spare to
deliver my mind, concerning the great and abominable falshoode of those
sorts of people which sell Garden seeds: consider thus much, admit that all
those which be deceived in this land yearly, in buying of old and dead seeds
for their gardens, had made their accounts of their losses: First their money
paid for false and counterfeit seeds, their great losses in manuring and
trimming their Gardens, and the rents paid for Gardens throughout this land:
then consider how many thousands are yearly deceived in this manner by them,
and also consider how many thousand pounds are robbed yearly from the common
wealth by those Catterpillers: I do undoubtedly persuade my self if a true
account might be had thereof, those that do willingly deceive others by false
seeds, do rob the common wealth of a greater sum then all other the
robbing thieves of this whole land do by much, and more worthy in conscience
to be executed as the most notorious thieves in this land, (one other
profession of people excepted.) And although the laws of this realm as yet
take no hold whereby to punish them, the almighty God does behold their
monstrous deceit, and except those do repent with speed, both God and man
will abhor them as outrageous thieves: The Almighty God turn their hearts
or confound such false proceedinges against the common wealth: And also I would
wish all those that are seed sellers would have a care to sell good s^edes
for Gardens, and would also have a care to sell in reason^ and conscience, for
the dearth of Seeds for Gardens is a great hindrance to the profit of Gardens,
and a great loss to the common wealth. Also my good will shall not be wanting
to do good therein, whiles it shall please God that I do remain here in this
life, his holy will be done at his good pleasure. There be many other seeds do
belong to gardens of less account and so common in use: that I purpose to omit
leaving them to the practice of others which use Gardens, because I desire not
to be tedious, but to proceed to my special purpose in those causes which
best do concern and benefit the common wealth, which God grant for his mercy
sake.

And before good seeds (provided as aforesaid) be used or sowed in any garden,
I wish you to prepare to mucke or make your garden sufficient rank to receive
such seeds as is convenient, or else you make spoil of good seeds to your
own loss, and then shall you miss greatly the profit of your garden in your
house keeping: you must have a special care to mucke well your garden once in
two years, or else you shall lose more in the profit of the Garden, then the
mucke is worth by much: if your Garden be pared, and made clean from weeds
about the first of November, then it is good to lay your mucke thereon all
November, and till the midst of December, and if you can so prepare your garden
in this time as aforesaid, then it is best for to fallow or dig it so far
as you have so mucked, and in so doing, your Gardens will be most excellent to
recei^e good seeds in the last end of February or in March, according to the
nature of the seeds therein to be sowed: and if you omit the dunging and
fallowing the Garden till after the feast of Christ Iess, I^ take it best (as I
find by experience) thus to do. When you purpose to sow your garden, some
few days before, let it be clean pared and the weeds carried to some
convenient place in the Garden to rotte, then mucke well if there be cause
that year, then dig the garden very small, and as you dig it, pick out
the roots of the weeds as clean as you can, and rake it well, then will it
be in good order to sow: but the first manner of fallowing and dunging is
best, if you do not omit the time: and when all the parings and weedings all
the whole year is well rotten, then it will be very fine and good earth to make
level or plain any part of the Garden and is very good to rancken the Garden
in want of other mucke.

A declaration of diverse manners of seeds to be sowed in Gardens, and a reason
by experience which is the best manner and most profitable.
THere be two manner of sowing of Gardens here in this County of Salop, and
as I find by experience those two manners usual and common, are very
unprofitable. The one manner is to open the bed and set the earth on both sides,
then to sow the seeds on the bed, then to draw with a Rake the earth from
both sides to cover the seeds, but when the seeds do grow in sight, there
is nothing growing within a quarter of a yard to the edge of the bed, whereby
much ground is lost on both sides of the bed, and very unprofitable to the
owner.

The second manner of usual and common sowing of Gardens, is when the bed is
made, the seeds are sowed thereon, and then earth is sifted thereupon, to cover
ye seeds, and when the seeds be sprung and begin to grow, they be so ebb
under the earth, that every small frost or cold rain which comes does
destroy the new spring of the seeds, and sometimes all is lost thereby.

A third way there is, but not usual or common, which is when the bed is ready
made^ the seeds are sowed thereon, then one takes the Rake and choppeth the
teeth of the Rake very thick over all the bed, then the seeds do fall into
the hoales which the teeth of the Rake did make, and thereby many seeds do
fall in one hole, and do destroy one another, except you do remedy that by
pulling some of them away the first weeding^ The only best way to sow beds in
gardens, as I did ever find by experience, is when the bed is made^ to take a
staff of the greatness of a man's thombe or somewhat greater, of a yard and a
half long, making the end thereof somewhat sharp, and then with the sharp
end thereof strike a small Rigall or Gutter on either side of the bed, within
two or three Inches of the edge of the bed, and about an Inch deep, then sow
your seeds in those two gutters somewhat thin, the^ strike other two rigals or
gutters in like manner, and so by two and by two till you come to the midst of
the bed, and those gutters must be made four or five inches a sunder
according to the nature of the seeds which you do sow: so that the bed ready
made being a yard and quarter broad will take for Onion seeds seven gutters
or rows, and for Carrets and Parsneps likewise seven, and for Turnips five
gutters is sufficient on either side the bed, one in the midst, and then two
other, as you may well see the places where: but for expedition in sowing time,
the best way is, as one person does strike the gutters or rows, with the
staff, so let another follow in sowing the rows, and you shall find great
expedition therein, for two persons in this manner will sow^ more in two or
three hours, then two persons will or can sow otherwise, in a whole day, and
this kind of sowing does save the one half of the seeds, and defends the
seeds best from weather, because it is reasonable deep in the ground: you
must have a special care that the rows be stricken straight, and you must take
heed to sow the row or gutter, first stricken, before you strike another row
or gutter, for the striking of the second row will fill the first with earth,
that it will be too ebb to be sowed after, then it is both comely and
profitable. I do assuredly prove by experience there is no manner of sowing
so perfectly good as this manner is, for all kind of seeds, but only
Pumpions, Cucumbers, Beans and Radish seeds, they must be otherwise set
further a sunder as reason and experience do agree therein, and in manner
hereafter more at large is expressed: and when your seeds be sowed in rigols
or rows in manner aforesaid, then they are to be covered thus: ^ake the Rake
and with the head thereof draw it very light over the Rigols along the bed,
until the bed be plain and the Rigols filled, with the back side of the head
of the Rake, and if you then do beat them plain with the head of the shouel,
the beds will be the more comely, and breed less weeds by much.

The manner how and when to sow Carret seeds, and what grownd is best to their
liking, and the manner to use them in their growing.
FIrst see that your grownd be sufficient rank as aforesaid: then sow your
Carret seeds very thin in the rigols or rows as aforesaid, the best time is
about the last of February, or beginning of March, when the weather is
seasonable and fair, then you need not to care for the age of the Moon, so
that it be not within three days of the change, for I do perfectly know by
experience, that any time else is not amiss, so that the weather be dry and
fair. Carrets do best like in a dry ground: and if the Garden be in shadow or
somewhat wet at sowing time, then it is not perfect good for Carrets. Such
ground is better to sow Parsneps and Cabadges in, then Carrets, for the
Carrets will mislike in the Spring time, and also be eaten with worms that
breed in themselves, by their own kind and nature: and when your Carrets be
fair and young above the ground, then you must prepare people to weed: when
the weeds are able to be taken up, then must you have special care to the
Carrets that grow in the rows or other ways, for you must weed or take out
of them, til there be two inches between every one of them, and throw those
drawn Carrets away with the weeds, if you do take pity to pull them out, or
detract the time too long before you do weed them as aforesaid, your Carrets
will be very small, and yield you small profit: you must weed them well from
weeds as need does require, and so soon as they be of any bigness, about
Midsommer you must draw away so many of the Carrets till those that remain be
at the least three or four inches a sunder, and also if any of the Carrets do
happen to shoot to bear seed, pull them up likewise, for the best seeds of
Carrets, some of them will shoot, and must be taken out least they hinder the
rest that grow, throw the^ away: if you miss so to do, your Carrets will be
small to your purpose. The good Carrets which are to be drawn from the rest,
will easily be drawn into a good ground with hand, and the easier to be
drawn in the fore noone and best after a shower of rain. And you may have
good profit by those Carrets so drawn and sowed, for they are novelties and
desired of many so timely in the year. Then about the twentieth of July, your
Carrets in a good ground will be somewhat fair to sell: and if you sell them
then or shortly after, so that you take them up before the fourteenth of
August: you may as you rid the ground of Carrets, sow Turnips seed or Radish
seed in their place, so that you have the best kind of Turnip seed to sow,
and in so doing you may have two croppes every year and both with good profit.
And if it happen that the Carret seeds do fail in the spring time by
hardenes of weather, or by worms of the earth: Then about the midst of May or
the end of May you may set Cabadge plants in those places, where the Carrets
do want, and in want of Cabadge plants you may sow good Turnips seeds, or
Radish seeds thereon. And thereby have good profit: Also the short kind of
Carrets will grow in worse and colder ground then the long Carrets will, and
do well agree with the clay Land also.

How and when is best to sow and plant to have good Cabadges, both timely
about Midsomer and late in the year.
IF you will have timely Cabadges, then sow your Cabadge seeds in Rigols as
before said about the last of August three or four days before the full of the
Moon, where they may have the warmnes of the Sun in winter. so near as you
can, and keep them clean from weeds, then let them grow, till three or four
days before the full Moon in March or April next after, then set your Cabadge
plants a yard a sunder, and as you choose plants to set, choose the fairest
and lykelyest of them for your purpose, for the small and refuse plants will
grow to be small Cabadges, and as many as do seem either wild or very
small throw them away, for the loss is not great, and in this manner you may
have timely close and hard Cabadges: Also it is a principal time to sow
Cabadges in February or March, three or four days before the full of the
Moon as aforesaid, then sow the seeds very thin in rows, and keep the^
clean from weeds, and when they be fair and large to plant, in May or about
the first of June, is best to plant them three or four days before the full
of the Moon, and if necessity do compel you, it will serve the whole quarter
after the full of the Moon: And also as they grow, from time to time take care
to kill the worms which eat the leaves: and take heed that no leaves be
broken of those which you would have to be Cabadges, for it is hurtful to the
closing of the Cabadges. And when the first planted Cabadges be ripe, sell or
spend them shortly, for within fourteen days after they be hard they will
grow so fast within that they will rent and cleave a sunder, and so perish and
rot: And when your Cabadges do ripe and be hard sell them or spend them, for
there is small profit to keep them, because the snailes and other worms do
pearce them daily, but those which do close far in the year in September
and October may be better kept in Winter for your purpose: but of al worms or
caterpillars Knaves, which are the greatest deuourers of Cabadges and do
consume many of them at one time: those catterpillers do never repent, until
they come to Tyburne or the gallows. Therefore take good care to your
enclosures for your better safety.

For sowing of Parseneps, and best using of them.
SOme will sow Parsenep seeds at Michaels tide, to have timely Parsneps, and
does serve their purpose, to have them about twenty days sooner then those
which do sow in February or March, but it is not best to sow many in that
order, but a few for novelties: but to sow to have best profit, as when the
weather is fair in February or in March, sow your Parseneps, not respecting
the age of the Moon, but the goodness of the weather, and when they be ready to
weed, have care to weed them clean in time: if they be too thick sowed,
pull them out also with the weeds, till every Parsenep be two inches a sunder
at the least, the^ weed them as cause is, and let them grow till they be to
serve your turn. Parseneps will grow well in worse ground then Carrets, and
reasonably well in cold Gardens: and if you do sow your Parsneps in rigols
as my accustomed manner is, it is best for your purpose and profit: and this
kind of sowing in Rigols does save the better half of the seeds, of any
kind whatsoever, as by experience is proved.

For sowing of Turnips, and the best time when.
IF you desire to have timely Turnips, you may do thus: a week before the full
Moon, or a week after the full Moon, in the end of April or in May, sow
your Turnep seeds, and when they are ready to weed, then pull out with the
weeds, so many of the Turnips, till the rest of the Turnips be a hand breadth a
sunder: and as they do grow ripe about Midsomer, draw the greatest first, to
make them thinner all over, and when they be of any greatness, sell or spend them
away, for those timely sowed Turnips will not tarry good but a few days: for
they will be hard roots, and be eaten with worms, and grow to seeds, and so
will many Turnips, which be sowed before Midsommer. But those which are sowed
in July, and to the 14. of August, will remain good all winter. And when they
be to serve your turn, take the greatest first, and let the rest remain, and
they will increase much, when they have some liberty, and at all times it is
to be chosen, to sow and weed as aforesaid: and look from what ground you
take your first fruits away before the 14. day of August, you may thereon sow
good Turnep seed to good profit. But if you sow after the 14. of August, it
is to no good purpose, but to have small Turnips little worth, and empayre your
ground for no profit: you may in this manner have two croppes of Turnips in one
place of land in one year, and both perfect good.

The best means to have principal close Lettice, and to have them as timely
as is possible.
THe first of September or within fourteen days then next after, is best to
take your Lettice seeds and sow them in a dry bank, or dryest place in the
garden reasonable thin, weed them clean when there is cause, and let them
grow as they do prove, till three or four days before the full of the moon
in March, then take them up and plant them in new dug ground, six or eight
inches asunder, and keep them clean from weeds, and you shall have timely
Lettice. And by this means I have yearly such close or cabidge Lettice,
better cannot be had, and they will be ready some years in April, and the
beginning of May: I do also sow Lettice seeds in February and March, in manner
aforesaid, and plant them again as aforesaid. And thereby I have principal
close Lettice: till Midsommer you may have very good Lettice, and not remove
them: so that they be well asunder, but the other manner is best. And keep
some of the best of them for seeds: my Lettice be yearly sold for two a
penney, for one of them is a reasonable dish for a table, and as white as is
possible, and many do say, the like Lettice are not to be had in London. And I
do suppose, that this kind of Lettice is not common to be had in London as
yet, or else the Gardiners there no doubt do not carefully provide for
principal Lettice. But if any request me for principal Lettice seeds: I have
ready to perform his desire, whiles they do endure unsold, yearly if it
please God, whiles I remain living.

The nature and quallity of Garden beans, and how you may have best profit by
them.
IF you desire to have timely beans to serve your purpose, as a few for
novelties, set them about the midst of December, where the sun has some
power in the Garden. And if you desire to have profit by beans, this may be
your best course, in any shadow Garden, or under the shadow of fruit trees,
where nothing will grow but nettels and other weeds, pare clean that ground
about the midst of January, or all February, and then dig the said
ground, and in digging thereof, let the roots of weeds or nettles be clean
picked out, then set your beans therein, and as there is cause weed them
clean, and when the beans be fair blowed five or six joints of them, then
you were best to pinch off about a handful, or a span of the tops of them
with your hand, or cut them away, but they will more easier and sooner be
pinched then cut. Then by this means the beans so pinched or cut, will stand
stiff of themselves, that there needs no rises nor boughs to be sticked
amongst them, to keep them for breaking with the wind, And they will also
bear the more beans, and the sooner will be ripe, because there be no rises
or boughs to shadow them. But if it happen that great tempests of wind or
rain do throw some of them down. Then take a few rises or sprigges to
support them which so do fall, and in this manner, of one pecke of beans so
set, I have received sixteen peckes of seasonable dry beans in gain, In
shadow ground where nothing else will grow but nettels, and other weeds under
trees, those beans so set in shadow places or under trees, must be somewhat
thin, about seven or eight inches a sunder. And in this manner they will
bear beans sufficient good store either to be eaten green, or kept dry for
seeds to be set again.

Of Onion seeds to be sown.
THe best time and season to sow any one seeds in the marches of Wales, is
about the first of March, when the weather is somewhat fair and seasonable,
then prepare to sow your Onion seeds. And if your Garden be dunged or fallowed
in December as aforesaid, then is it most principal for sowing of Onion seeds.
And the drier the garden is, the sooner you may sow it. And if it be somewhat
wet and cold, then the longer you can tarry, the better it is. So that you do
sow before the last of March, according as your garden does prove in
dryness, for cold and wet earth is altogether bad for Onion seed. And when
your Onyon or Iubballes do begin to wax somewhat ready to be used or spent,
then make them reasonable thin, for if they grow to thick, they will be
very small, but if you draw them reasonably, you shall have fair Onyons and
best for your profit. The best time to sow Onyon seed, is a week before the
full of the moon, and the week after. And best when the weather is very dry
and fair.

The means to have fair large Cucumbers, and the best order for them within
the County of Salop, or in the marches of Wales.
ABout the last of April, or the beginning of May when the weather proves to
be somewhat fair and warm, then take the seeds of Cucumbers and put them in
new milk over night. And if the next day after prove a fair Sun shine
day, take the seeds and put the milk and all in a pewter platter in the heat
of the Sun three or four hours, then put the^ into the earth where you
would have them to grow, and they will spring and appear above the ground
within four or five days. And if you do not so place them in the heat of the
sun, then the next day after their wetting in milk, set them in the earth
likewise, and when they be sprung above the ground, the snailes and worms
will devour them, except you find means to prevent them. The ground upon
which you sow cucumbers seed must be very rank and fair, where the sun
gives best heat in the garden, or most principal in a fair bank, that
shows it self to the noone Sun. If your cucumber seeds do happen to grow
too thick, then take out the woorst till they be a yard a sunder, for the more
room they have, the better they will bear the fairer fruits, you may remove
the plants of Cucumbers when they be young, and plant them in another place,
convenient as aforesaid: there are sundry other means used with horsedung to
set and plant cucumbers: which is not to my liking, and which I omit, as not so
good as aforesaid. And to have milons, gourds, or pumpions, do the like as is
expressed herein by cucumbers, if the spring season do serve your purpose
thereunto.

The means to have principal fair Artichokes, and how to have them in all
Summer time.
IF you desire to have timely Artichokes, then take up your old roots, in
the latter half of September, or the first half of October, then choose the
fairest plants and pull them from the old roots, then plant them in a very
rank earth, trenched about three quarters of a yard deep, with dung mixed with
some earth, and set your plants therein, and you shall have timely Artichokes
in the spring next following. And al^o in the beginning of March take up the
old roots which have borne fruits three times, then take the greate^ plants
and set them as aforesaid. Take also the middle ^ort of plants, and set them by
themselves, likewise as aforesai^ well dunge^. So by this means I have had
fair and la^ge ^^tic^o^es all the Summer. And many of those which be set in
Se^tember and October, as aforesaid, will be^re fair Artichokes both betimes
in the spring, and al^o in August and September the same year: best time o^
the age of the moon to plant them, is three or four days before the full of
the Moon. The old roots of Artichokes, and the small slippes growing on
them, are not to be set for Artichokes, except you plant or set the small
slippes for increase, or to sell or give for increase to others, for commonly
they will not bear fruits the first year that you do set them: there be
sundry kinds of Artichokes, the largest kind is best to be chosen for your
purpose, there be but two kinds principal good here in this land to my
knowledge, if you desire to have great store of Artichokes to sell, then your
best way is to make (as it were a nurcerie for plants) in this manner, make
certain banks the greatness of a bushel, round like a loaf of bread, so
that you may go betwixt them, and set one plant in the top of every
hillocke, and from thence yearly choose the fairest plants to set.

The means to provide Radish roots best for your profit.
IN March or April where you have sowed either Carrets, or Parsneps, or both,
when your carets or Parsneps are above ground, then you may perceive where the
ground is bare, then set the seed of Radish a few, five or six in a bed, and
so over all your beds, if you so please, and when this radish roots be
ready, then take them away, for those timely radish roots will tarry but a
few days good, for they will shoot for seed, and they will also hinder the
growing of the other fruits, if you sow Radish only without mixing of any
other herbs or fruits, you may set them from March, till the first of
August, at which time it is too far in the year for that purpose. And if you
do sow radish by themselves, set them six inches a sunder, and let them be
kept clean from weeds, and when they be ready to be spent, away with them as
you may, for they will perish both by growing to seed, and also by worms: if
you do desire to provide radish seeds for another year, your best way is to
sow a bed, and when the roots be ready to spend, leave the best and
fairest for seeds, and let them so left for seeds, be half a yard a sunder,
and when the seed does begin to be ripe, then the birds will de^oure it,
except you do provide in time for safeguard thereof: and your radish for
seeds must be sowed in beds in the Month of March.

The best use for Porret and Leekes.
BEcause Porrets and Leekes is a necessary and profitable herb for
housekeeping, I cannot omit to write therein: if you desire to have Porret for
your purpose, then you must first have good seeds thereof, and to obtain good
seeds: In August or about the first of September, prepare your ground well
mucked and well dug, in place where the sun has reasonable power in the
garden. Then take up your Porret and set them before the twelfth of September,
or else the Porret will not take sufficient root to bear fruit the Summer
following: if you fail this to do, you shall not have profitable seeds, for
they will be light and deaf, without perfect substance to grow when you sow
them. And also you do loose half the weight of seeds, which otherwise is to
be had by timely setting of Porret, and the buyers are deceived by those
seeds of porret which is set so late in the year. Porret seeds will grow in
some shadow place reasonable well and large, so that you do not sow them to
thicke^ And the Porret for Leekes to be spent, will also prove well in a
shadow place, and you may set or plant them to be eaten or spent in Leekes when
you please, in August, September, or October, do very well, for seeds as
aforesaid.

How to preser^e and keep Carret roots, and to have them ready to serve all
the winter, and till the last of March next after with very small charge.
IN the two months of October and November, when you have leisure in dry
weather, then provide a vessel or wine caske, or some other: then lay one
course of sand on the bottom of the vessel two inches thick, then a course
of the carret roots, so that the roots do not touch one another: then another
course of sand to cover those roots, and then another course of roots, and in
this manner until the vessel be^ full to the top, and if you have a ground
seller, you may pack them in some corner in this manner, you must cut away all
the branches of the carrets close by the root, and somewhat of the small ends
of the Carrets, and they must be so packed in sand unwashed and about the last
of December: sometime when the^e is no frost, you must then vnpacke them
again, and then the carret roots will begin to spring in the top of the
root, then if you desire to keep them until a longer time, then you must
pare off the upper end of the root, that they cannot spring any more in the
top, and then pack them again in sand as aforesaid, so may you keep them
well till Lent or Easter. And in this manner you may preserve and keep the
roots of Parsneps and the Turnips, for I have proved it to be true and
profitable. I could yet herein take occasion to write of diverse roots and
herbs, for sallets, to be planted and sowed in gardens, which do not serve my
purpose, for I rather desire to provide sufficient victuals ^or the poor and
greatest number of people, to relieve their hungry stomachs, then to pick
dainty sallets, to provoke appetite to those that do live in excess, the
which God amend.

Beloved in Christ Jesus, I desire you to accept of this my good enterprise, in
respect I desire the benefit of the common wealth herein, and is a special
mean to help and relieve the poor, as by experience was manifest in the
great dearth and scarsitie last past in the County of Salop and else where,
for with less garden ground then four ackers planted with Carrets, and above
seven hundredth close cabbedges, there were many hundreds of people well
refreshed thereby, for the space of twenty days, when bread was wanting
amongst the poor in the pinch or few days before harvest. And many of the
poor said to me, they had nothing to eat but only carrets and Cabedges,
which they had of me for many days, and but only water to drink. They had
commonly six wax pounds of small close Cabedges for a penny to the poor.
And in this manner I did serve them, and they were wonderful glad to have
them, most humbly praising God for them. And because I did manifestly see and
knew, that so little garden ground, as less then four ackers, did this great
effect in the common wealth, and especially in helping the poor thereby:
Therefore I desire all good and godly people to accept of my good will therein,
and to put in practice this my experience and knowledge herein mentioned. And
then I have my wished desire. That the Almighty GOD may be glorified in his
own works, and the poor the better relieved thereby, and thus for Gods love
and your own profit also. And if any person desire to know of one further then
I have herein expressed, if you come to me, I hope you shall not want your
desire, for as I was willing to write, so am I willing to instruct as many as
will request my good will therein, most willingly while it please God I remain
in this mortal life to the end. And thus the Almighty GOD bless your good
proceedings therein.

It is not unknown to the City of London, and many other towns and cities on
the sea coast, what great abundance of carrets are brought by foreign nations
to this la^d, whereby they have received yearly great sums of money and
commodities out of this land, and all by carelesnes of the people of this
realm of England, which do not endeavor themselves for their own profits
therein, but that this last dearth and scarsitie has somewhat urged the people
to prove many ways for their better reliefe^ whereby I hope the benefit of
Carret roots are profitable, I will reveal my knowledge herein: and first
the use of them amongst the better sort by the Cooks. The Cooks will take
Carrets divided in pieces, and boil them to season their stewed broth, and
does wonderful well therein as daily is known in service to the better sort.
Also Carret roots are boiled with powdered beef, and eaten therewith: and as
some do report, a few Carrets do save one quarter of beef in the eating of a
whole beef: and to be boiled and eaten with Porke, and all other boiled meat
of flesh amongst the common sort of people, and amongst the poorer sort also:
Carrets of red colors are desired of many to make dainty sallets, for roast
Mutton or Lamb with Uineger and Pepper. Also Carrets shred or cut small one or
two of them, and boiled in pottage of any kind, does effectually make those
pottage good, for the use of the common sort. Carrets well boiled and buttred
is a good dish for hungry or good stomachs. Carrets in necessity and dearth,
are eaten of the poor people, after they be well boiled, instead of bread and
meat. Many people will eat Carrets raw, and do digest well in hungry
stomachs: they give good n^urishment to all people, and not hurtful to any,
whatsoever infirmities they be diseased of, as by experience does prove by
many to be true. Carrets are good to be eaten with salt fish. Therefore sow
Carrets in your Gardens, and humbly praise God for the^, as for a singular and
great blessing: so thus much for the use and benefit had in the commonwealth by
Carrets. Admit if it should please God, that any City or town should be
besieged with the enemy, what better provision for the greatest number of
people can be, then every garden to be sufficiently planted with Carrets?

I do desire al people, which have cause to sell Garden fruits or seeds to
the use of others, that they would sell in reason and conscience, and for their
better instr^ctions, I have herein mentioned a brief rate, how they may well
be offorded and soulde, and how I do make sale of fruits and seeds to others
as herein is expressed. And so long as it shall please God I do remain in
this mortal life, I will be ready to perform the same to the uttermost of my
power in good will, to the benefit of the common wealth, and especially to the
poor inhabitants of t^is town of Shrewesburie.

The price of Carret seeds of both the bent kinds: that is to say, the large
yellow Carret and the great short yellow Carret, the best and fairest roots
chosen to set to bear seeds as before is express^d: my price of those
principal Carret seeds, is after the rate of two shillings the wax pound,
without deceit.

Large yellow Carrets of those two best kinds after the rate of two pence the
stone, ten wax waights to every stone, and also the like large Carrets which I
(...) ^^epe and preserve in sand as aforesaid, til January, Fe^ru^^y, and
March, my price is iii. pence the sto^e.

The small roots of yellow Carrets, of both the best kinds all the rate o^ si^e
wax pounds for a penney.

Principal close Cabadge seeds, after the rate of iiii.d. the ounce, the which
seeds are hardly saved in this c^un^^e of Salop, for being devoured with birds.

Fair and large close Cabadges, after the rate of two wax pounds for a
penney: and the small close cabadges better cheap ^o the poor, as occasion
shall serve.

Turnep seeds of the best and largest kind, after the rate of xii. pence the
pound.

Fair and large Turnips, at y^ rate of ii. pennce the stone.

Principal garden Beans of the best kind, good and dry to s^t, after the
rate of ii. pence the quart.

Like garden beans green to eat, at the rate of i. d. y^ quart.

Fair Harticho^ks^ of the grea^est sort, at i. d. a peec^e, and the other, two
or three for i, d. as they prove in greatness.

These aforesaid, and all other garden fruits, roots and seeds whatsoever,
which I have to sell, are at a reasonable price, and perfect good without
deceit, and so many as will be content to buy with reason, come and welcome.

And if any other person desire to buy any store of principal carret seeds,
as before is expressed, to sell for reason to others, to benefit the common
wealth, I am willing to serve his turn better cheap the^ before is declared,
because I am willing to procure the use of carrets, known as well to all people
in this part of England as Wales, which God grant for the better help and
comfort of the poor, and although I do not know in all this land where to buy
the like ^arret seeds for v, s. a pound, yet my price is i^j s the wax pound,
or less, as cause is to my liking, till the peole may have store of their own
growing for their gardens, which is my desire, if it may so please God.

An exhortation to love, whereby all good works do effectually proceed either to
the glory of God, or benefit of the comm^n-wealth.
Beloved, the holy word says: That if we have faith to remove mountains, if
we have not love, it does not prevail us any thing. This love required of us,
does consist in few words, that is. Love God above all things, and thy
neighbor as thy self. To love God above all things, is humbly to give him
most hearty thanks for our creation and our redemption, in the merits of our
only savior Jesus Christ, and also to love him in a hearty desire, to obey
him in the precepts contained in his most holy word, and also to love him for
all his benefits both spiritual and temporal, to love him for his wonderful
providence of heaven and earth, and all that is therein, for the help and
comfort of mankind, and to love thy neighbor as thy self, is to cherish him,
and courteously to admonish and entreat him, to avoid sin, and to comfort
him with those blessings which the Lord has made thee steward of for that
purpose: and when the Lord calls th^e to make account of thy Stewardship, if
thou willingly do endeavor thy self to perform the love aforesaid, then true
faith, and true repentance, will bring thee (as it were) hand in hand, to the
presence of the Lord, where thou shall make a joyful account, only accepted
in the merrites of Christ Jesus.

This is the total sum of thy Stewardship, whatsoever thou be, and if thou
careleslye omit to do thy office herein, thou make a hard account for thy
self, which God forbid, if it be his good pleasure therein. And therefore
love God above all things, and thy neighbor as thy self. And then I shall
surely and effectuallye have my desire herein, and greatly for the profit of
the common wealt^. And thus I desire thee good Reader, to take in good part
this my last farewell to my nati^e soil of Shrewsburie, except I be urged in
conscience further to proceed, as cause and time does require therein, and
for the better ^xpelling of sin, which is the only hindrance of all good
works: let us humbly end with hearty prayer to our heavenly Father as
follows.

O Heavenly Father, have mercy upon this commonwealth and congregation, and
grant that we do not resist nor quench thy holy spirit any longer, but that
we may utterly abo^ish and ^orsake cont^nt o^ ambition, ^aine glory, and al
manner of cruelty, periuerie and sm^oth dis^e^bling ipocrisie, and all other
greeuo^s sins daylye^ committed against ^ay divine Maie^tie: Grant al^o O
heavenly Father, that the P^ea^^er^ and distributers of thy holy word and
gospel, have not cause any longer to mourn, lament, and gree^e, in that they
cannot prevail against these notorious sins aforesaid, and many other^ daily
committed, not in the space of ^ortie years past, to any good purpose, whe^eby
sin is grown to be rotten ripe, daily urging the presence of thy judgments
against vs^ and grant likewise if it be thy good pleasure^ that our own great
number of books, wherein thy hol^ word is contained, and by thy great mercy we
do poss^sse them in peace many years past, that they be notwitnes against us
in the day of thy fearful visit^^ion. Grant also for thy mercies sake that
all th^se which do seem to profess thy holy word and Gospel, may also truly
and effectually practice the same in their lives and conversation without
shamele^ ipo^^sie or blind self lou^. O Lord behoulde and reform the great
m^ltitude of seditious persons, that have presumed into the place of ancient
pe^ce^makers, whereby thy holy word and Gospel has taken s^all effect in ^his
comm^^ wealth, for ma^y years past, by reason thereof O Lord re^orme their
abuses, and shorten their contentious proceedi^gs, for th^ne elect sake, Grant
also O heavenly father, that v^fained love and charity, may possess the
hearts of all men: and that sedition and b^inde self love may be v^terlye
vanquished unto Satan, from whence it does proceed into the hearts of the
ungodly, against the true peace of thy holy word and Gospel. Grace mercy and
peace from God our heavenly Father, be with v^ all, now and euermo^e. Amen.

FINIS.

