THE RICH CABINET Furnished with variety OF Excellent discriptions, exquisite
Charracters, witty discourses, and delightful Histories, Divine and Morrall.

TOGETHER WITH INuectiues against many abuses of the time: digested
Alphabetically into common places.

WHEREUNTO IS ANNEXED the Epitome of good manners, exttracted from Mr. John de
la Casa, Archbishop of Beneuenta.

LONDON Printed by I. B. for Roger Iackson and are to be sold at his shop near
Fleet Conduit, 1616.

THE PRINTER To the courteous Readers.
GENTLEMEN.
Having had the good hap (among other adventures of Press) to Print (not
long since) sundry small fragments full both of honest revelation for Wit, and
useful observation for Wisdom; fit to please and profit the wel-disposed. And
perceiving the same (accordingly) to have found general approbation and
applause: howbeit (I must ingeniously confess:) neither so orderly disgested
by the P^nne, nor so exactly corrected at the Press (by reason of some
unseasonable have:) as both the Author and my self have since seriously
wished. Now therefore, at better leisure (for your greater delight in reading,
and ease in finding:) I have here (with the help of a skillful and
industridustrious friend) Methodically reduced all into this Rich Cabinet;
doubly furnished with ample Addition of new Treasures of diverse kinds: which
(...) you accept no worse, then the former, I shall be the more encouraged to
endeavor your further content to the uttermost of my faculty. So fare you
well.

R. I.

An Alphabeticall Table, containing the heads of all the principal matters in
this Book.
AEfinitie. fol. 1 Anger. 3 Atheism. 6 Beauty. 7 Birth. 10 Benefits. 11
Covetousness. 13 Cruelty. 15 Courtesy. 18 Courtier. 19 Clergy. 21 Citizen.
27 Country life. 29 Cuckold. 31 Death. 32 Diseases. 35 Drunkenness. 37
Effeminatenesse. 39 Elloquence. 40 Envy. 41 Folly. 44 Fortune. 47 Friends. 48
Gentrey. 51 God. 58 Grauety. 61 Honor. 63 Humility. 65 Hypocrisy. 67
Inuection. 68 Ignominy. 70 Idleness. 72 Kings. 74 Knowledge. 76 Knavery. 79
Laws. 81 Lechery. 83 Love. 85 Liberty. 88 Merchant. 89 Man. 91 Modesty. 9^
Money. 94 Negligence. 97 Nobody. 98 Nurture. 100 Oeconomick. 101 Office. 105
Order. 107 Oaths. 109 Pleasure. 111 Poetry. 112 Pouer^y. 113 Player. 116
Pride. 118 Profit. 121 Quietness. 122 Reason. 124 Religion. 126 Remembrance.
129 Resolution. 130 Statesman. 132 Scholar. 134 Soldier. 135 Shifting. 137
Singularity. 139 Sin. 140 Sorrow. 141 Temperance. 144 Time. 146 Traveler.
147 Troubles. 149 Vanity. 151 Valor. 154 Virtue. 855 Wars. 157
Wilfulness. 159 World. 160 Woman. Whore. A Treatise of Manners and behauiors.
THE RICH CABINET: Containing Descriptions, Characters, Discourses, and
Histories; Divine and Moral.
Affinity.
This well may be the weak ones strong defense;
And strong ones weakness may proceed from hence.
Affinity cannot have greater glory, then when the father is wise; the
children virtuous; the brothers kind; the cosins loving; and the kindred
conformable.

Affinity is happy, where cosins and nephews are well bred, and kind
consorts; sisters are modest and gracious maidens; brothers are natural and
individual friends; children obedient and pleasing to their parents; wives are
virtuous and submisse to their husbands, and wise and careful to govern their
households.

Aff^nity degenerating in honesty, is like foul scabs in a fair skin: such
Affines brings as much credit and comfort to their friends, as do lyce in their
clothes; and they are much like of a lousie condition: they will cleave close
unto you, while you have blood to feed them; but if you begin to die, or
decay, they go from them that breed them.

Affinity does sometimes show a catalogue of kinsmen, but a blank of friends.
For it is not the similitude of titles or names, but the resemblance of like
true and tender affection and hearts, wherein the reality of right, and natural
affinity consists.

Affinity of fair words and false hearts, are like Tantalus his apples, they
are ever hanging round about him, but he may die for hunger, before he shall
taste them. Or they are like the apples of Sodom, that are fair without, and
dust within. Good for nothing but to deceive hungry passengers, who would, but
cannot feed upon them.

Affinity is pleased, when the children and childrens children, prove the
Parents delight; but if ungracious, they are more charge then comfort.

Affinity with needy and penurious friends, is like a stem, that has many
suckers or vnder-plants; which are still drawing the juice away from the great
and maine root, but themselves never bring forth a handful of fruit.

Affinity has that privilege, that in lordly houses, and of inheritors, there
ought to be the haunts of brothers, cosins, nephews, uncles, and all other of
his kin; bearing good will to their affairs, and supporting their necessities:
in such wi^e, that to them is no hour forbidden, or door shut; nevertheless,
there are some brothers, cosins, and nephews so tedious in speech, so
importunate in visiting, and so without measure in craving, that they make a
man angry, and also abhor them; and the remedy to such, is to appart their
conuersations, and succor their necess^ties.

Affinity makes men presume in offenses: but here lies the danger, when
kinsmen fall out indeed, they are at deadly food, and commonly irreconcilable:
therefore a care must be had of the occasion, and a cunning to contriue a
pacification.

Affinity sets whole families many times at variance, even to the drawing of
strangers to take part: but when an atonement is contrived, the rest are not
only condemned, but pay for the mischief, when a man's blood returns, and
fear of overthrowing the whole family keeps malice in restraint.

Anger.
Ire's good and bad: if good, it still does swell
At ill: if b^d, it frets at doing well.
ANger is the heat of blood, as fear the defect of nature: but in both
temperance brings men to perfection.

Anger and Envy makes the body lean, and ma^erates the mind, when it had need
of rest^u^ation by rest.

Anger is sometimes manly, as grief with reason is natural* but to be
outrageous is beastly, and to cry, childish.

Anger without discretion turns into fury, and continuing without restraint,
ends in sorrow.

Anger upon good cause is wis^dome, and against sin, honesty; and without
sin, holiness: but to braule and swagger is vnciuell.

Anger without force, is like a lustful Eunuch, willing but weak; or like a
mocked old man, that holds up his staff, but cannot strike: in both, a man
shall show folly in willingness to hurt, and inability to execute.

Anger brings hasty spirits in danger of hurt; and when the passion is
cooled by consideration, repentance follows: but if it be too late, it is
subject to derision.

Anger and excess of meats, are great enemies to health. For meats do
corrupt the humors, and anger consumes the bones: so that if men did not eat
overmuch, and would not be ouer-angry, there should be little cause to be sick,
and much less of whom to complain. For the whips that do most scourge our
miserable life, are ordinary excess, and deep anger.

Anger, made great Alexander (like the least part of himself) kill his
minionized friend Clytus: for, had it been drunkenness, he would have tapt
out his heart blood before he heard him speak: for* drunkenness is an
afternoones madness, and can do nothing advisedly. But it was bold, through
friendly reprofe from Clytus, stird Alexander to ire; ire increasing by
exasperation, became fury; fury enflamed by the wildfire of desperate rage,
could not be quenched but with the life-bloud as it were of his own (or one he
loved as his own) heart. Whereupon ensued too late repentance; which grew to
such excess of sorrow, as divided the King (as mad) from himself; and almost
life from the King; who would have made his proper hands revenge upon himself
that improper act, had not his friends watchful care matched his bloody
carelessness.

Anger makes men sad, melancholy, heavy, sorrowful, and of an evil color:
whereas those that be merry and glad, be always fat, whole, and well colored:
so that without comparison, there be more which grow sick by anger they
entertain, then of the meats they feed upon.

Anger must not revenge every injury; for so shall a man never want work,
never want woe, but shall put his peace and felicity in the power of every
enemy, vassal, or boy. He that will go to law upon every wrong, shall sildom
gain either credit or coin by the bargain. After he has forsaken his rest,
imployd his cogitation, spent his time, money, friends and pain, turned slave to
his Lawyer, and his own passion to have his will on his adversary, he shall
be a great looser by such a victory.

He that will live in the world and put up no injuries, is like him that sits
and fights with a hiue of Bees: he may crush, and kill many of them, but were
much better to let them alone. For he shall be sure to be continually stung, in
body or mind, in goods or good name.

Anger of a Superior provoked by just ocsion, may with conscience and credit
proceed to moderate castigation: but must take heed of tormenting, least the
offender enforced to repel outrage and violence, return a mischief in his
own defense: or at lest discredit his Superior by an outcry or vproare, if
he can do no more.

Anger must needs be avoided in officers of authority. For they ought to be
honest in their lives, upright in justice, patient in injuries, measured in
their speech, justified in that they command, righteous in judgment, and
pitiful in execution.

Anger is many times so beastly, that Magistrates or ministers of justice, do
dishonor, misuse, shame and despise such as come to audience: so that the
sorrowful suitor does more feel a rough word they speak, then the justice they
dilate.

Anger is no other thing but an inflammation of the blood, as Aristides says,
and an alteration of the heart. Possidoniu^ calls it a short foolishnes: Tully
says, that what the Latins call anger, the Greeks name vengeance. Aeschines
says, that ire was caused of the fume of the gall, and the heat of the heart.
And Macrobius says, that anger grows of some occasion, and testiness of
evil condition.

Anger has certain privileges, or if you will, notes of discovery: not to
believe our friends, to be rash in attempts, to have the cheeks inflamed, to
use quickness with the hands, to have an unbridled tongue, to be fumish and
overthwart for small causes, and to admit of no reason.

Anger put us to the trial of reason, whether we differ from beasts. For
they indeed enraged, run upon one another for revenge: but men must consider
the cause, the event, and circumstances of repentance.

Anger not only transformes us into fools, but also makes us to be abhorred
of others.

Anger is sometimes a touchstone of wisdom: for Socr^tes holding a dagger
ready to strike his servant, remembering himself, refrained because he was
angry, and so might have exceeded moderation. Which meditation brideled Plato
also upon the like occasion.

Anger lifts the heart to a man's tongue, when a wise man keeps his tongue
in his heart.

Atheism.
When beasts and kind ^iends God confess, what the^
Are men denying him? ^iends made of men.
Atheism makes men worse then beasts, or devils. For they believe and
tremble, when men neither fear God, nor the devil, and therefore deserve a
double hell.

Atheism makes Witches and Coniurers hells agents; and he that seeks to
them for help, goes to the devil by atturny.

Atheism brings men to disobedience: for they are neither comforted with
promises from God, nor terrified with the punishments from hell; whereas yet
the Ox yields his neck to the yoke, the hound is at command of the huntsman,
and the hawke stoopes down to the lure.

Atheism and blasphemy are the highway to hell, and makes lies and stabs
agents for the gallows.

Atheism makes plenty of oaths, and he that trusts them, is like him, which
talks to the wind, and may have air for his answer.

Atheism is the study of the damned, and the devil is author of the
doctrine: for although men believe there is no God, and so by consequence no
devil: yet therein is the cunning of the devil more apparent, to harden their
hearts against the truth.

Atheism is disputable, whether it proceed from pride or ignorance: for
although Idolaters are not properly called Atheists, because they worship a
dietie in the abominable deceit of representments; yet was Pharaohs host
destroyed for hardness of heart, and contempt of religion. So we may say of the
worlds inundation, the building of Babel, and the burning of Sodom.

Atheism made the Giants war against the Gods, and Salmoneus of Italy invent
fireworks to throw up into the element against thunder and lightning.

Atheism can yield neither reason for the wilfulness, nor comfort in such
opinion: for if there be no world after death, nor other life to be expected,
how miserable is man to endure affliction, and how wretched satisfy a present
lust, neither danger is feared, nor any following event mistrusted.

Beauty in a fool is a disgrace to nature; and for an old man to dote on a
fair face, is a discredit to wisdom. For a gray head, and wanton heart are
ill suited.

Beauty in a woman that is honest and not proud, is like fair weather in
harvest, both to comfort and profit.

Beauty of nature is virtue, and the due of virtue is honor.

Beauty blinds a vain eye, music drownes an idle ^are, but reason rules a
good wit, and grace does bless an humble soul.

Beauty is the witch of nature, as gold is the god of the world: so that a
woman without beauty has few followers, as a man without money has few
friends.

Beauty is much blemished, when a woman wants her teeth, and a man his
beard: but virtue in the one, and wisdom in the other, overcomes natures
imperfection and defects.

Beauty that is painted, resembles an idol, and he that worshippeth it is an
idolater. For as the one is made artificial to the dishonor of the deity: so
the other is marred by cunning to the disgrace of nature.

Beauty that breeds love is the forgetfulness of reason, and their wits are
troubled with the study of idleness.

Beauty in a strumpet, is a fair ripened fruit to please the eye, but if it be
rotten at the heart, it cannot relish the taste.

Beauty of women ouercomes the weakness of husbands; whereupon Themistocles son
merrily upon a day brake out into this pretty speech, touching his mothers power
in the state; What I will, my mother will, what my mother will, Themistocles
will, and what Themistocles will, the people of Athens will.

Beauty is one of the three things, that alters the condition and nature of
man: for Aristotle observed, that pride, women, and wine, overcame all the
world.

Beauty of Apame in Esdras, ouerawed Darius greatness. For as he took her in
his arms to gaze upon, she would take the crown off his head to play withal:
sometimes putting it on her own, and then again on his.

Beauty is held a divine grace, and of the ancient Philosophers much esteemed.
For Socrates named it the tyrant of short time: Plato a privilege of nature:
Theophrastus, a silent deceit: Theocrites, a delightful hurt: Carneades, a
solitary kingdom: Domitius said nothing was more grateful: Aristotle, a
tongue-tied eloquence: Homer, the glory of nature: and Ovid, a grace of God.

Beauty of the world pleases the eye of nature: but the contemplation of
heaven rauisheth the souls of the Elect: so that there is great difference in
outward and spiritual beauty.

Beauty and comeliness even make beasts proud: for when a horse is young, well
shaped, perfectly managed, and richly adorned, he is as proud of his own
beauty: as his master, that has him to serve his turn.

Beauty of a new house may consist in outward building, and fail in
serviceable continuance: when an old Castle is stronger for defense, and will
endure to the owners profit.

Beauty of the proudest is momentary: for age and sickness are her enemies, that
many times they prevent her ostentation with untimely accidents.

Beauty sooner overcomes old men, then enflameth youth: for old wood does
sooner burn then green sticks. But then it is strange, how ridiculous they
make their gravity, which should rather be employed to study in books for
wisdom, then look on babies for recreation.

Beauty of a curtisan is a mere trap to deceive one, and a worse danger: for
the one peradventure catches but our goods, or bodies; but the other rauisheth
both our senses and hearts.

Beauty is a very Lamia of wit: for Samocratius, Nigidius, and Ovid writ many
books of the remidies of love, and used none themselves. So they all three
died, persecuted, and banished, not for those offenses they committed in Rome,
but for the loves they attempted in Capua.

Beauty of curtizans cannot be avoided, but by flying the conversation, and
eschewing the occasion: for in causes of love; we do see many escape, that
absent themselves; but very few, that tarry and abide it.

Birth.
Birth to the bodies life does entrance give*
And Death unto the souls: then die to live.
BIrth brings life into light, and a good life is better then a learned: for
he knows enough, that from his birth keeps an unspotted conscience.

Birth is like a messenger of gladsome tidings: for how ever the night may be
full of sorrow, yet joy comes in the morning, that a man-child is brought into
the world.

Birth and life enjoy the use of sense, but the soul has the use of reason:
and therefore as the reasonable soul is more precious then life: so ought the
life to be spent to provide, and regard for the soul.

Birth brings us into a laborinth of sorrows, and therefore not to be loved:
when death is but a short pain, and therefore not to be feared.

Birth and life full of offenses make men miserable, but to die unfaithful, is
unpardonable. (...) to be borne to destruction; and (...) to die (...), then
live without (...) but when a happy life, and godly end conclude our time,
then is the soul at rest.

Birth is the cause of life in this (...) cannot warrant how long. For (...)
life is but a span, and the continuance but a shadow: so that nothing is so
uncertain as life, nor so sure as death.

Birth sets the loome of life (...) whereon we (...) many days, and many
dangers.

Birth is the cause of (...) of many fathers; yet (...) who is the (...)
answered the (...) lies, of which (...) the world.

Birth and (...) think of any (...) remember (...) is a mere birth (...)

Birth of friendship (...) kindness: so that (...) dies, love and (...)

Benefits.
Unthankful men hurt others: for they let
The hand of Grace to pay kind Natures debt.
BEnefits without all exaction require all thankfulness: we must therefore
bless God for his bounty; be joyful in his mercy, and faithful in our love
toward him for both.

Benefits have sometimes a taste of bribery, and there is a fault both in the
giver and receiver; if honor be thereby purchased.

Benefits of magnificence are not measured by the small desert of the receiver,
but the noble bounty and disposition of the rewarder: so Alexander giving a
city to an inferior person, who thought it overmuch for his merit, answered
him, that though it was too much for him to receive, it was not too much for
Alexander to give.

Benefits grow weary even in common passages, when men be ungrateful: but to
make comparisons for good turns, breeds an everlasting hatred.

Benefits that are weak make a man's travail grievous, and when they seem
wrested perforce, they lose a grace in their acceptance; whereas a timely
reward is like rain to a barren land, or a pleasant shewer in a distempered
drought.

Benefits have an excellent sound in their signification, and Etimologie: for
being derived of bene-faciens, or doing well, they must needs do well, that
bestow good turns, as they do not amiss, that deserve them.

Benefits makes beasts remember their benefactors: For in the story of
Andronicus the slave, when he was to be cast into the Lions den at Rome, the
principal and strongest amongst them, not only abstained from hurting him
himself, but kept others apart from any outrage against him. And this was the
cause; this Lion he had healed long before in Africa, when he ran from his Mr.
and hid himself in his cave, which now remembered him in requital in Rome, when
he was there to be devoured. The story is in Aulus Gelius, and enlarged by
Gueuara in his Epistles.

Benefits bestowd without desert show some want of judgment, but received
without requital, or thankfulness, absolutely conclude an unmannerly and ill
conditioned man.

Benefits in time are the true blessings of friendship, otherwise, they may
come when we need them not, and so lose the grace of acceptance: or too too
late, and so lose the life of their effects: thus an early frost is ill for
fruit, and great rain noisome in harvest.

Benefits from God are blessedness in this life, and eternity hereafter;
which who will attain to, must give much, take little, seek nothing, and be
thankful whatsoever falls out.

Benefits from the suns light are not helpful to the blind, and little
profits riches where the miser is: we must therefore do good, while we live,
and bestow our good, where we may do good.

Benefits of good are quickly forgotten, and nature is corrupted, where the
dross of the earth draws a man to the devil.

Benefits sometimes make a man proud and elated, when a man requited for a good
action supposes by and by his own worth extraordinary; and so either
vilipendeth the recompense, or esteems better of himself, then he deserves.

Benefits after death makes the grave thank a man for his bounty, and he that
is miserable in life is a steward for hell.

Benefits received for flattery, are worse then punishments suffered for truth.

Benefits are excellent trialls of men's dispositions: for he that takes in
worth a small reward, shall be sure of a greater: but he that grows proud of
a great one, shall want a small one; and he that cares for none at all, means
never to impart any to others.

Benefits wherein Courtiers rejoice, are as they are bound to serve Princes,
they have license to crave of them: as they endure many encombrances, so they
hope for great preferment: as they toil in many iourneys, so they participate
of diverse pleasures: as they endure night watches, they are glad of daily
news: as they spend their own substance, so they supply their home
necessities: and as they weary out their toilsome bodies, so they recreate
their disquieted minds, and at last according to their degrees grow forward
to preferment.

Benefits multiplied to temporal prosperity, and loved after with continual
greediness, show some token of following mishap.

Benefits tie us to observation, and keep an honest man from speaking his
mind: so sometimes virtue is betrayed to wealth, and conscience made a slave to
respect.

Covetousness.
This is an ill which does good most abuse,
Because it loves the good it hates to use.
Covetousness makes rich heirs for a time, but he that is blessed of GOD, is
happy in his posterity for ever.

Covetousness is a spiritual idolatry, an unnatural misery, a rich man's
beggary, a wise man's mockery, a proud man's theeuery, a poor man's tyranny, a
great man's infamy, and a mean man's disquiet.

Covetousness eats up the beauty of a commonwealth, the honor of a kingdom,
the heart of the poor, and the soul of the rich.

Covetousness fills the Usurers chest with trash, the poor man's eyes with
tears, the good man's ears with wroth, the mouth of the distressed with
curses, and the devils hands with souls.

Covetousness is base in a King, uncomely in a Court, dishonorable in a
Captain, profane in a Churchman, unnatural in a whore, miserable in a
Gentileman, unprofitable in a fool, and dangerous in a Merchant himself.

Covetousness is such an enemy to the magnificence of Princes, that Titus the
Emperous was wont to say, he had lost that time, wherein he did not some
good turn, or bestowed a reward.

Covetousness is so great an enemy to the happiness of life, that Alexander
cried out, there was nor life, nor delight in life, but to be liberal, and to
requite good turns.

Covetousness is so contrary to the nature of a noble and valiant Captain, that
Theopontus the Thebane gave his shoes off his his feet to a soldier
demanding money to buy bread, saying plainly, though I have no money, it is
better that I go barefoot, then thou an hungered.

Covetousness is an enemy to charity, the inuenter of usury, the plotter of
misery, and the breach of amity.

Covetousness feeds upon prodigality, lives in penury, delights in
scarsitie, and dies in misery.

Covetousness makes the whores spring, and the bawds harvest, the usurers
Christmas, and the prodigalls lent.

Covetousness makes the Lawyer unconscionable, the Judge uncharitable, the
thief ungracious, and the hangman unmerciful.

Covetousness made Laban a deceiuer, Naball a churl, Gehezie a leper, and Judas
a traitor.

Covetousness is the root of all evil.

Covetousness should be so far from the heart of Kings, that they must not only
abhor it in others, but not practice it themselves. For thus one way Galba lost
his life and Empire; and another way Dionisius the tyrant reprehended his son
for keeping certain jewels he had: saying, Son, I gave thee these jewels to
bestow, and not to hoord up.

Covetousness and Honor be so contrary, that they never dwell in one person,
nor at any time had any aff^nity.

Covetousness is contrary to all other vices, for every other vicious man has
some taste in his sins, and intemperate humors: but the most unfortunate
covetous niggard is tormented with that, which others do possess, and takes
no comfort in that, which he has himself.

Covetousness is ever accompanied with fear and suspicion; either the raging
floods carry away his mills, the cattle eat up his meadows, the mildew
blasteth his corn, the hunters break his fences, the thieues rob his
treasure, and the family spends more then he is able to maintain.

Covetousness is a wicked and secret theeuerie: for how ever a miser keeps
his goods from others, he robs nature of her blessings, and debarreth
himself even of necessary substance.

Covetousness seeks ever to hoord up: wishes that no man crave of him: hides
his head from spending: keeps his hands from giving: dares not stir out of
doors, nor cannot sleep for disquieting himself with mistrust and despite.

Covetousness is so terrible an enemy to conversation, that no honest man will
approach him, no man will talk, no man will accompany, no man gives any
thing, no man enters his doors, neither will any man fetch fire at his house.
For who will hope to receive good from him, which never afforded to do
himself any?

Covetousness keeps the heart in fear, the mind in care, the body in
travail, and the soul in sin.

Covetousness makes the woe of nature, the want of rest, the wonder of reason,
and the way of hell.

Covetousness debarreth the possessors from all love and friendship: for who
will be a friend to him, that is an enemy to himself? who will remedy his
necersity, that never succored others? who will send him a present, that never
gave an alms? who will succor him, that suffered others to starve? who will
give him wood, that warmes himself with straw? who will lend him money, that
hides his own in a corner? nay, who will wish him well, to whom God has
threatened to do vengeance.

Covetousness is worse, then honest poverty: for the poor man is contented with
a little, when the rich miser with his abundance seems to be in necessity.

Cruelty.
Divine is mercy, devilish, cruel bents;
Then men (like God) must pardon penitents.
CRuelty is not so raging in beasts, as in men: for they pray, but for mere
necessity; when men rage of wantonness. Yea in a great hunger, the Lion will not
sease on a Lamb, nor the Eagle catch at flies, nor diverse others insult over
inferiors. etc.

Cruelty makes rich men's alms miserable, when the beggars wealth is liberty.

Cruelty and covetousness sometime go together, and at all times procure
infamy, as by the story of Andronicus in Aulus Gellius may appear, where to
this hour it is upon record, that the Consul Dacus was so cruel and
covetous, that he gave his slave neither coat, shoes, nor shirt, and yet made
him earne his own living daily: which by any chance neglected he was not only
debarred his necessary food, but whipped, and beaten with rods.

Cruelty and pride are sometimes companions: which make rash and bloody
officers: who because they would have a name of severe justice, they will
commit a thousand cruelties in their Countries.

Cruelty and fire have both one condition: for they consume all things, and at
last themselves.

Cruelty offers wrong and reuengeth injury; makes him unhappy that receives
it; him infamous that offers it; him guilty that preuents it not; and him
accessory that winketh at the violence and inhumanitie.

Cruelty corrects beyond authority, and shameth honor: for to punish for
every trifle, breeds rather hate, then commendation of justice.

Cruelty is the effect of rage and madness, wherein if a man, especially in a
great estate, do not restrain passion, he may well be feared and hated, but
never loved or esteemed.

Cruelty is increased by the power of wrath, and enforces despite; whereas
clemency is the grace of nature, and continues respect.

Cruelty and ingratitude are sometimes companions, when we rebuke him, whom we
ought to reward, and punish those of whom we have received good turns: the
right nature of a dog, and wit of a devil.

Cruelty makes men fitter for a butcherie, then a commonwealth: when we will
not harken to a reasonable demand, nor relieve a poor distressed petitioner.

Cruelty has deaf ears, while pitties eyes are subject to tears.

Cruelty cares not, whether revenge be base, nor regards the blood of the
innocent: but the one is a blot to honor, and the other a worm in conscience.

Cruelty can make no man's arm mightier then Pharaohs; yet was Pharao^s
interior to the waters.

Cruelty kills the poor with famine, when we see him starve for hunger, and
(...) relieve him.

Cruelty that reuengeth every transgress^on leaves no part, nor place for
indgement.

Cruelty is the fuller of indignation, when we have an enemy at advantage,
whom we have abused before, and know he will revenge it, if he survive.

Cruelty and beauty are sometimes united, when a proud contemptuous woman
insulteth over a poor lover, and knows no reason to deny, but because she
has heard, she must not yield at the first.

Cruelty and Envy many times are companions, especially in old women, who past
the world themselves, speak ill of al sportiue exercises for vanities, because
they cannot be agents in the business themselves.

Cruelty keeps men from all assurance or hope. For when a man shall use
cruelty for charity, which in this world in obedience and love to God he
owes his brother, how can he expect any favor in the world to come of his
heavenly father?

Cruelty is ever accompanied with forgetfulness of Christian duty; when furious
and fiery Judges execute the laws extremity, whereas true justice is full of
humanity, and a noble mind replenished with pity.

Cruelty possessing the heart of the proud, makes poverty be put to the height
of her patience.

Cruelty in men of power without mercy, in punishing the poor distressed
creature, pulls down more merciless plagues from the mighty Creator, upon the
head of the oppressor.

Cruelty makes a Tyrants frowns to be feared, when the threats of a coward
are smally regarded.

Cruelty makes the crying of children pitiful, the tears of the aged
lamentable, the complaint of the orphan miserable, the wringing of the widows
hands woeful, and the confusion of a Commonwealth execrable.

Cruelty is seen both in fire and water, which have their force and course to
overthrow strong holds: yet when they encounter, they destroy one another.

Cruelty breeds curses, when a man remoueth the mark of his neighbors land;
how then can he think to be blessed, when he would wring him out of his
inheritance?

Cruel hearts are more harder then stones: for they are pierced with drops of
water, when the other are not moved with the the tears of our cries.

Courtesy.
I rob men of their hearts, if I be true;
And give them, for it, what to them is due.
CVrtesie and Charity do commonly hold hands together: for though an enemy
have been malicious, yet by a courteous man he shall be remitted upon the least
submission.

Courtesy does sometimes deceive with fair words, and then is it flattery: but
if it speak the truth, it is honesty.

Courtesy is seen and known by civil specches; as modesty by civil looks.

Courtesy that is common, is but a laughing ceremony; yet it reproves rude
behauior, and makes ciuillity commendable.

Courtesy teaches great Commanders to deal with the meaner sort, as with
sons: with the equal as with brothers: with the ancient as with fathers: and
with the strangers as with fellows.

Curte^y makes a wise Lord to be more beloved then served: for by that means
he shall get the command of the hearts and goods both of neighbors and
strangers.

Courtesy will not tread on a worm in distress: yet he that kneeles to a
thistle, deserves the blessing of a nettle.

Curtesy shows, that a Gent: is of good bringing up: for strangers do love
him, and his own do serve him, whereupon curtesy and friendly behavior is more
honor to him that uses it, then to whom it is done.

Courtesy, according to Plato, is united to magnanimity, and then it
consists in three special things; salutations of people, relieuing the
oppressed, and kind usage of friends.

Curtesy sometimes leads a man to piety: for king Alfonso being one day by
one of his Counsel found fault with for his too much pity toward great
offenders, answered, that he would be ready to make account of his sheep, that
he had charge of, when God called him to account, and deliver as many safe and
sound, as he could.

Courtesy and kindness is naturally incident to diverse beasts: for the
Elephant will lead the wanderer into his way; the Lizard will wake a sleeping
man in a danger; the dog will follow and attend him, though he be beaten; and
the horse is most gentle to his rider, and master.

Courtesy debarreth us from presuming either in jest or in earnest to speak to
a gentleman any malicious or suspicious words; whereof he might remain shamed
or despighted: and commands to perform the request of any Lady, or Damsel,
which lies in his power to do.

Courtesy winnes the hearts of inferiors; and noble kindness teaches virtue
the measure of grace.

Courtier.
Bright, often too light, with words (...) smooth as oil,
(Lamp-like) he spends himself; and time does spoil.
The Courtier that is all for show and complement, is the only professor of
humanity, master of courtesy, vain promiser, idle protester, servant of
folly, and scholar of deceit: for in one word; he neither performs, what he
commonly swears, nor remembers in absence, what he has formerly protested:
so that his oaths and words are like smoke and air: and his deeds and actions
merely shadows, and far from substance.

The fantastic courtier is an antic inuentor of fashions, and so subject to
newfanglenes, that ere a suit of apparel is worn on his back, he is
devising another to please with variety.

A courtier is not a name incident to every one that follows the remooues: for
so you shall have many sluttish grooms, and slouenly vnder-seruants: but is
appropriat to such, as either are voluntary for the Kings honor, or their own
preferment: or in place of eminence, fit to attend on men and women of Honor.

A courtier is sometime taunted with the term of effeminate, and carpet
Knight, because they know not how to tread, but on rushes of a chamber; nor
where to bestow themselves, but on a beds side, or wanton places of rest.

A courtier must needs be hansome in apparel; neither ouer-garish, nor
ouerplaine: but orderly comely, and extraordinarily fashionable, according to
some private occasions, or public solemnities.

A Courtier must be serviceable to Ladies and women of Honor, dutiful to high
officers, graceful amongst Councellers, pleasant amongst equals, affable to
inferiors, and courteous to all.

A courtier depending on a faction in palace, is like a man that laggeth on a
cart going up an hill; which if he hold fast, will in time draw him up with
the same: but if it roll down the hill, he must either let go his hold, or
sink to the bottom with it.

A courtier hoping for preferment by order of service, must not only give
attendance accordingly, but endure with a great deal of patience; yea sometime
with despite, to see an inferior person preferred before him.

A courtier is sometimes terrified with wants, and losses of time: for we
commonly say, A young courtier, and old beggar: therefore it is wisdom to
prevent the worst, and policy to provide before wants knock at the door indeed.

The meaner courtiers life may many times be resembled to Humble-bees, which
fly abroad the pleasant fields all day, and then retire to a cowshard at
night: so they frequent the palace, and sometimes are in presence of the King;
but how they lie and rest in their lodging, it is pitiful to relate, and
barnes and stables are good resting places.

Courtiers are bad pay-masters; and when the money is once in their purses, it
is hardly got out again. For how ever they swear and protest, they dispense
with the time, and make their creditors attend their leisure.

A Courtiers life is as bad as the Merchants: for he travels and leaves his
wife at home, longing for the end of a progress; and this takes a long journey,
and cannot return when he would: in both, discontinuance does many times
diminish love; and while their husbands are troubled with the affairs of the
world, their wives are delighted with the pleasures of their bed.

A courtier scorneth to be counted uncivil; yet esteems it a grace to be
brave and high minded: so that when pride is in fashion, men may be vicious,
and when familiarity breeds contempt, it is an error to be humble: thus are
Courtiers the corrupters of virtue, and mock-apes of time.

Courtiers are companions of soldiers: and and how-euer they are curious and
dainty in the palace, they are noble and bravely disposed in the field.

Courtiers are companions with Scholars: for without learning and observation,
they cannot practice humanity and good manners: and unless they study and
read histories, they will fail in discourse and conversation, the principal
end of a courtiers life.

A Courtier and Citizen are many times eye-sores to one another: and so foppish
we are by custom, that we think derision a kind of virtue. Thus when a
Gentleman reprehends his servant, he threatens him with playing the merchant
with him: and when the trades man vpbraides his, he says, he has serud him
like a gentleman. So fares it with the women; She is but a Lawyers Lady says
the Citizen: she is but a London Lady says the Lawyer. Again, These Merchants
are cutthroats, cries the Courtier: These Courtiers are cosoners complains the
Merchant.

Courtiers of the vainer sort, are puzzeld in amorous encounters, and a cross
answer of their Mistres crosses the arms, hangs down the head, and puts a
willow branch in the hat-band. Again, a dissembling look raises a feather of
her colors, cuts the footcloth as her ^ut-worke, and sets an Emblem on his
Pages livery.

Clergy.
You cannot know me by my sable weed,
If lust and riot in my bosom breed.
CLergy men are at this instant the subject of all discourses: because some of
them do resemble Physicians; who prescribe their Patients thin diet, and
barlie water, when they eat themselves high nourishing meats, and drink good
wine: so they admonish us, how to live, what to forbear, wherein to continue,
and teach a way to serve God; but are licentious in their own example, and run
all the course of violent and vicious behavior.

Clergy men are sometimes so corrupted, that I have known such as will not
preach in harvest, because they are busied and ouertroubled; and may not preach
out of harvest, because they go visitations; nor cannot preach at others
times, because they do not study; nor dare not preach at all times for
weakening their bodies, and disquieting the auditory.

Clergy men, if they be ambitiously bent, being once beneficed are never
contented: but suppose themselves seated on a staire of degrees, which leads
to a room, into which they must go: and thus they ascend higher and higher,
as they still sue for better place and better.

Clergy men of the common sort, suppose they live sufficiently religious, if
they observe morning and evening prayer on Sondaies, read an Homely, come to
Church, receive the Easter offerings, and keep the orders prescribed in their
canons: but neither examine their own lives to amendment of their manners, nor
endeavor the reformation of their neighbors by their good words, or good
examples.

Clergy men, that live religiously according to their profession, are worthy of
their living and maintenance. For if the Physician that cures the body, must
have a fee, surely he, that saves the soul, deserves a reward.

Clergy men are some way resembled to burning tapers, who consume themselves to
light and pleasure others: so should they weary themselves, and tire out both
body and mind to bring the ignorant to understanding.

Clergy men have been and are many times so ignorant, that both Prophets and
Apostles have cried out with our Savior: If the blind lead the blind, they
must both fall into the ditch: and if they which should direct us out of the
path of damnation, are unskillful Pilots, how is it possible to follow them in
uncertain courses.

Clergy men discredit their profession, and and make even rascals vilipend
it, when they see them fail both in life and doctrine. Nay, when they give
ill example of profaning the Sabbath, keeping bad company, following wanton
sports, talking at random, want of charity, and vnlimitable licentiousnes.

As a Clergy man, if an idle or unprofitable Preacher, or profane liver, is
the most hateful and pernicious person of all others, both to himself, and
his auditors: so if he be a learned, faithful, sincere, and painful Preacher,
and godly liver, you shall hardly find any man whatsoever, whom God has
dignified with so many terms of true honor. Calling Ministers the Angels, or
Messengers of God; the Ambassadors of Christ; the Disposers of his hid
mysteries; the servants of GOD, and of Jesus Christ; the Paranymphs of Christ;
the witnesses of the truth of God; the voice, or mouth of God; the trumpets of
God, to denounce war to the wicked, and to stir up the godly, by sounding the
alarm to the battle against sin and satan. The proclaimers or publishers of
the Gospel, or glad tidings of salvation by Christ, to all that believe in
him. The coadi^tors, fellow laborers, or fellow-helpers of God. Gods
husbandmen, that plow up, and harrow men's hearts with the law, and cast in the
immortal seed of his heavenly word; the builders of the church fallen down in
Adam; and the repayrers of of the ruins of sin, and satan. Stewards of Gods
house, who after his precise rule, and prescription, divide aright to every
one, his portion of meat, and work, in due season: keep the keys of heaven,
open the door to all faithful servants, and shut out the obstinate, and
unbelievers. The light of the world, set on the hill of every Parish, to
dispell the darkness of ignorance and sin, and shine before men both in life and
doctrine. The salt of the earth, to season men's unsavory souls, and keep them
from corruption; making their persons and actions lively and sauoury
sacrifices, acceptable to God, and well pleasing. Fishers, or catchers of men's
souls, out of the dead sea of their sins, and satan's dominions. Fathers or
begetters again of sinful men, heirs of wrath and perdition, to be the
sons of God, and heirs of heaven. Bishops or overseers, watchmen, or
obseruers of men's souls, to discover and give warning of the stratagems and
assaults of sin, and satan Guides or leaders, shepherds or feeders of men's
souls, with heavenly bread, and living waters. Saviors of men, and remitters
of their sins, under God, as his instruments. Princes in all Nations. Royal
or kingly Priests, and shall shine in glory like the brightest stars. Of such
high and precious account are these with God, tendered as the apples of his
eyes, and graced with super eminent titles above all others.

Yet are they in the estimation of wicked worldlings, and proud Popelings,
reputed as the offscouring of all things. Themselves as poor almesmen, or
baser abiects; their wives as lemans, their issue as bastards.

Their lyuings are thought superfluous, their labors tedious, their zeal
ridiculous, their exhortations frivolous, their reprehensions malicious, their
comforts hartlesse, their co^minations envious, their religion puritanicall,
their profession pharisaicall, their conversation hypocritical, and their
persons, provisions, professions, mere needless burdens, the best of them
all.

The godly Preacher is the General of the field, with who^ all the parish must
fight against their spiritual enemies: he is the man that must furnish and arm
them with christian and complete armor, where-wth (through his help) they shall
encounter, and conquer the huge armies of pernicious ignorances, pestilent
errors, and poisonous heresies. He the singular Surgeon to apply the soueraign
salve that must heal the wounds thy receive from the fiery darts of their
fleshly lusts. He the high Marshall, that has received the sword of the
spirit, to suppress the mutinies, and bring into obedience their rebellious
wills. The high Controler of Gods house, that has power to reprove the
outrages of their unruly affections, and riotous actions, and to punish their
disorder by spiritual censure. The sovereign Physician, that has the precious
preservatives against all tentations; present remedies for perilous passions;
the word of truth, to resolve all doubts; Christ his infinite merits to free
them from all fears; his precious promises to cure their cares; his
heauenly-reposed pleasures to support all sorrows; and he procures the general
panacea of patience, to ease all pains.

In a word, he has the only heavenly receipts to heal all the diseases of
their sinne-sicke souls; their boiling lust, their raging anger, their open
hate, their close envy, their covetous desire, their deadly despair. He
strengthens their fainting hopes, confirms their trembling fears, reuiues
their dying hearts, beats back their devouring enemies. He comforts them, when
their conscience condemns them; he confirms them, when sin, death, and
damnation dismaies them: he stands by them, when Physicians, and friends, and
all the world forsakes them.

To conclude, GOD by his ministry or means, regenerates their natures,
illightens their minds, conformes their wills, orders their affections,
reformes their vices, confirms their graces, sanctifies their lives, assists
their deaths, and is the Mydwife, that brings their souls out of endless
torments, into immortal joys.

The best of all men, are good Christians, the best of good Christians are good
Ministers; but are the worst paid for their pains of all others. They vvatch
many nights, burn many candles, read many books, write many quiers, spend
many spirits, preach many Sermons, convert many sinners, save many souls; and
for all this, are defrauded of their tithes; which their parishioners take not
to be necessary duties, but voluntary alms. The Minister must comfort all
them, and all they may cousin him; he must feed them, but they may starve him.
They make him like a captive or bond-slaue cook, who must dress them
dainties, but (without their leave) may not lick his own fingers. All the
week ^^ng he must dig in Gods Myne^ to bring them thence, Sabboth-siluer,
gold, and precious stones; for which he shall be sometimes called to say grace
at a Sunday supper, and like the lowest trencher at the table in lieu of hi^
labor.

Time was when they thought the third part of their wealth, was too little for
^^^ls Priests; but now the thousand part is too much for Gods Prophets. An
ewdent argument how little the profane people in all places profit, and
increase in any Christian duties, when their love is so cold to God and his
Ministers: and how unlike they are now adays to those good ^alatians, who
entertained their Pli^l as an Angel of God; yea, as Christ Jesus: not only
willingly supplying all his wants with their goods, but also (if it had been
possible) with their own eyes.

A learned, zealous, honest, and industrious Minister, has (by common consent,
and manifold reason) this privilege given him above other men, to be truly
termed a Divine, for his divine calling by inward inspiration, for his divine
ordination, by Christ his own institution, for his divine function, which
meddles with no matters but only divine, he studies the divine books of the
holy Scriptures, conceiues divine meditations of heavenly things, works with
divine instruments, the word, the spirit, and holy sacraments, has divine
objects, immortal souls, offers up divine and public prayers for spiritual
blessings, produces the divine effects of all theological virtues, proposes,
and obtains the divine ends of the glory of God, and salvation of souls. Now
the Minister in these, and many more divine qualifications, and gracious
respects, being so divine, is for that very cause, so mightily maligned by
worldly men, having so little or no correspondency with him. For they are
altogether earthly, and for the earth, as he is for heaven, by his heavenly
calling, his function, his objects, his (...) his instruments, his effects,
(...) as they are vlterly opposite unto his in all these. Whence because every
thing hates his contrary, the rich despise him for his poverty, the proud for
his (...) the Politician for his simplicity, the liber tine dislikes him for
his strict discipline the licentious for his reprehension, the contumacious for
his excoinmunication, the hypocrite hates him for his sincerity, the heretic
for his vefity the infedell for his Christianity, the Atheist for his d^^nity,
the Profane for his piety, the kn^ue for his honesty; and in a word the wicked
worldlings for his whole course, which is so opposite to his own. When
notwithstanding the lives and estates of all these, their health, wealth,
liberty, pe^^e, pr^^^erity, and hope of heavenly felicity (...) have any) are
all the blessing of his minis^ry.

When the King of France thought it bo^n honorable and charitable to ex^ell
the G^thes and the Vandals out of Ita^y and by his counselors was assured,
that men and money were the sinnewes and the life of the war. For men quoth
the King? be you careful to fill the treasure, and let it be my imputation, if
reward, and the name of a Prince draw not millions to affront any danger:
whereupon they replied, that the wealth of the Clergy might supply their
wants, and the very, late and challices of religious houses, would coin so
many crowns of the sun, as would discharge the army, and recompense the
soldiers. Not so quoth the King, a thieves alms cannot prosper, nor good
actions thrive with wicked purposes: besides, I had rather have one godly man
to pray for me, then a hundred ruffians to fight for me; and thus you know,
when the Princes of Israel were discomfited in their wars, they repaired to
the Prophets for intercession to God, who is not compelled with the power of
swords, or strength of men: but enforced with the tears of the penitent, and
devotion of the religious.

Citizen.
By trade and traffic I enrich the state,
Supply the wars, and foreign foes do hate.
A Citizen is a professor of civility; and living in a glorious quiet, makes
the Commonwealth to flourish: and how-euer he is condemned for too much ease,
yet cannot the soldier repulse the enemy, or maintain the war, except the
Merchant add fuel to the fire.

A Citizen had a time of honor even in the title: for to be a citizen of Rome,
was once as glorious, as to be a gentleman of Venice.

A Citizen, how-euer he may be noted for covetousness, and corruption in
trading: yet under color of private enriching himself, he labors for the
public good* ^or abroad is navigations maintained, and the foreign kingdoms
explored: and at home the Cities are enlarged, the country supplied, the
commerce of people maintained, the streets filled, the houses adorned, the
subjects increased, and the Prince honored in the multitude of obedient
seruitors.

A Citizen is master of dellicacie and neatness: for what in other men we
sometimes call pride, in him is but native hansomnes, and profession of
cleanliness.

Citizens in times past did not marry beyond their degrees, nor would a
Gentleman make affinity with a Burgess: but wealth has taught us now another
lesson; and the Gentleman is glad to make his younger son a tradsman, and
match his best daughter with a rich Citizen for estate and living.

Citizens, how ever they are envious one against another for private respects;
yet as the triumuiri of Jerusalem against the Romans, will they unite their
forces for the public good: yea, if a stranger fall out but with a servant in
the street, let him be sure to have a swarm of fists or clubs about his ears.

A Citizen, if he will, may boast of his title: for I can tell him wherein he
is more noble then a Prince. For to be a citizen of heaven, is to be preferred
before a King on earth.

A citizen is more troubled with his wife, then his wares: for they are
sorted, locked up, and never brought out, but by constraint for the profit of
their master; but his wife is decked, adorned, neatly apparrelled, sits for the
gaze, goes at her pleasure, and will not be restrained from any sights or
delights, or merry-meetings; where they may show their beauties, or riches, or
recreate themselves.

A Citizen is in great danger of displeasure, if he deny his wife any thing
which her mere fancy conceiteth: as she is in peril of despite, if he
would restrain her liberty upon suspicious jealousy: in both, love begins
to break as ice, which once crakt, runs further and further.

Citizens are never so out of countenance, as in the imitation of Gentlemen:
for either they must alter habit, manner of life, conversation, and even the
phrase of speech: which will be but a wrested compulsion; or intermingle their
manners and attire in part garish, and in other part comely, which can be but
a foppish mockery. Whereupon, I remember a story of Sir (...) Cal^hrop in
Norwich, who commanded his Tailor to make him a gown of tawny cloth against
Christmas; which John Drakes the Shoemaker liked so well, that he would needs
have another of the same cloth and fashion. The next day, the Knight coming
along, and seeing more cloth then his own, asked what the matter meant; and
being told the truth, he willed the Tailor to cut his, all to iagges, and
small cuts, of which fashion the Shoomakers was also made: but when he came to
put it on, and saw such a spoil, all enraged he chafed with the tailor; who
answered truly, that he did no more then he was bidden; for he made it like
Sir John's in all proportions: whereat the shoemaker swear, he would never be
in Gentleman's fashion again.

Country life.
The City cannot stand without my store,
Nor Court, nor kingdom, yet I live as poor.
COuntry life is toilesome: yet experience makes the labor more easy, and
the pains more pleasant: especially if profit come in apace, and a rich
harvest fills the barn.

Country life is wholesome; for the body is strengthened with exercise, and
diseases repulsed with simple, moderate, and orderly diet. For whereas other
men living in idleness, prepare their diet according to their stomachs, these
have good stomachs for any meat and wholesome viands.

The Country man is chu^l she for k^owing nothing but plain honesty, he
pr^ctiseth the same; and making a wonder at flattetery and ceremonies, he
either absenteth himself, or coming abroad uses his own customs.

The Country man is the nurse-childe of war: for whereas a soldier must
endure misery and wants, it may be done the better, if the body be accustomed
to labor and sparing.

Country life is unapt for cunning: for when a husbandman would practice
deceit, he resembles the fielde-mous^, that would feign come into the
Mer^^ants buttery with the City mouse to seed upon be^te^ and delicater viands,
then his country (...): b^^ when the Butler came rushing in, the city mouse
had his place of retyring, and ^he other knew not where to go, and so
continued in a great perplexity, till set at liberty, he would adventure no
further to hazard his safety, to live sweetly by subtlety.

Country life is blessed in imitation of nature: for they use the night for
rest, and the day for labor: whereas idle livers incur the woe in the
Prophet, by making day night, and night day; sitting up by candle light in
pleasure, and sleeping in the sunshine in idleness.

Country life is seasoned with experience: for he says not to his servants,
Go ye, but, Let us go; if he cannot do so, he were better keep the plough
at home, and his cattle out of danger. For the eye of the master makes the
field rich, and the horse fat.

Country life has a touch of pride: for how-euer the huswise be attyred at
home, she will go as neat and cleanly as she can to the market, and as
finely to the Church: though a carnation girdle, a silk apron, a hat lined
with velvet, and a fringd pair of gloves, are ornament^ for a five hundred
pounds portion: and in this generally the excess of women deserves restraint
and limitation, that they spend not above their husbands reuenew, nor exceed
their place and proportion.

Country life is every way commendable when it comes in her own colors:
but to adventure on the Cities nicetie, the Courtiers bravery, the Gentleman's
liberty, the Soldiers prodigality, the I awiers cunning, and the Merchants
subtlety, resembles a hansome woman, that to follow the fashion, spoileth her
face by painting.

A Country man in times past did not know, what Usury meant, but by
hearesay: for many a good housekeeper lived well, loved his wife, broug^t up
his children, paid his servant, (...)ged the taxes, gave alms, and invited
his neighbors, yet never ^avv t^nnepounds at once in his coffers, nor ^uer
desired more then means of in honest life.

A Country man is thus far a good fellow; he will meet you at the Alehouse to
make merry, at the market to bargain, at the fair for provision, at the
Church to pray, at the field to do his work, and at the next Pari^n to renew
his acquaintance: but will sildome come to your house, or inuit you to his,
lest a greater charge come upon him, and the spending of time hinder his
necessary business.

Country life is peaceable; and he that will serve God quietly, may there be
exempted from the worlds vanity, though not from the devils subtilty.

Cuckold.
It Is not the name (so full of game) I fear,
But hate the falsehood, and a foreign heir.
A Cuckold is a kind of creature (as mad fellows say) which God never made,
man cannot endure, women cannot justify, the devil cannot challenge, the
world cannot banish, nor time cannot alter.

A cuckold is a devise of the devil against the peace of mankind: for as at
the first he caused the woman to deceive the man to his utter condemnation; now
he instructs her to abuse man, to his infamous derision.

A cuckold is an vnpreuentable destiny, the breach of loialtie, and an
insufferable wrong; not for the loss of credit in himself, but for fear of
bastardie in his children. For when a wife care once play the whore, the man
dare never after tr^s^ her: and even those children which by probability are
his own, shall be ever after subject to suspicion.

A cuckold has many signifi^^nt explications: but only one true definition,
which is, when a man having married an honest maiden, finds her afterward
transported with the love of another, and only one other, who divides the
stakes, and conuerseth in friendship.

A cuckold is abused with this secret of nature, to love him best, that (...)
wife, and trust him most, tha^ (...) soonest deceive him.

A cuckold many times takes vp^ (...) own clothes to be beaten: for in
bringing wanton company to a wanton woman, it is as putting fire and toe
together. Nay, such is the baseness of some men, that they marry wives of
purpose to make them whores; and care not for any reputation, so they may live
at ease, and riot by their dissolution.

A cuckold thinks himself safe if he can avoid the name of wittall. For he
thinks, men may conceive, much water goes by the mill, which the Miller knows
not of, and an honest man may be ignorant of his wives wickedness; but to
give way to filthiness, and yield to a wives prostitution, is a beastialitie
contrary to nature and reason.

A cuckold is mocked with horns, because of double injury: another man lies
with his wife, and his child has two fathers.

A cuckold that knows it not, is questionless of a good belief, and so
bears with that, he cannot remedy: but he, which knows it, is of an
admirable patience, and endures more then man can suffer.

Death.
I am the end, and yet beginning too
Of life; for life, then take heed what you do^.
DEath oftentimes makes the simple heart afraid, while the faithf^ll soul is
half way at heaven, and ready to meet with God.

Death makes the wicked to rave with fear of their damnation, whilst the
righteous are ravished with joy of their dissolution, and neerenesse to heaven.

Death is no more to be feared then age: for one follows another; and (...)
of both to be prevented by any ^^iendshippe, authority, wit, force, or
entreatie.

Death in it self is indifferent to all: (...) much the more dangerous, by how
much we are afraid of it, and know not what follows.

Death depriueth a worldly man of all ^is treasure: but the devil cannot rob
the faithful of his comfort.

Death may boast of famous and gorgeous sepulchers, but no man would willingly
be buried in them: for what man had not rather live in a narrow houell, then in
a large sepulcher?

Death happens to young men suddenly, to old men timely. It stands upon old
men's thresholds, behind young men's doors, before old men's faces, behind young
men's backs; young men may die soon, old men may not live long.

Death commonly presents the rich with fears, the poor with comforts,
concerning their future estates. For she tells many poor men, who are buried in
Churchyards, that their souls shall rest and rejoice in heaven; and many rich
men, who are buried in stately sepulchers, that they shall be tormented in hell.

Death well ended is birth to eternity: and a true faith purchases felicity.

Death is not to be feared, when it delivers from misery, (...) be refused,
when it leads to endless fel^^ity.

Death of a good (...), is the mis^ry of a good servant; (...) of a good
father, the joy and rejoicing of a reprobate child: but he is not worthy to
live, that is sick of the father.

Death both untimely and shameful, is commonly the end of thieves and lechers.
For the one furnishes the hateful gallows; and the other is commonly
finished by loathsome surgery.

Death undesired of age, shows little feeling of grace: as youth does little
sign of good nature or breeding, that does not love and reverence his elders
and betters.

Death ends the sorrows of the righteous, and begins the miseries of the
wicked.

Deaths music is sounded, when we begin the song with sighs, end it with
sobs, and keep time with tears.

Death belongs to him that kills his enemy; but hell to him that kills
himself.

Death is one and the same to all, how-euer diverse Nations differd in their
several burialls and sepulchers.

Death amongst the Salamines and Agarens had an extreme enmity: for they were
buried with their backs turned one against another; so that, if in life they
were enemies, after death they scarce remained friends.

Death amongst diverse Nations had as diverse entertainements. For the Hircanes
washed their dead friends bodies with wine, and afterward anointed them with
oil, which they kept to eat and drink. The Massagetes drew forth the blood,
and did drink it, burying the bodies. The Caspians burnt the bodies to ashes,
which they did afterward drink in wine; so that the entrails of the living,
was the sepulcher of the dead. The Schithes buried no man, without one alive
were joined with him; which if any friend denied, a slave was bought to
maintain the custom. And so in many other Nations, according to the several
conditions of life, they had as many devises of burial. Yet death is but the
privation of life in all.

Death of good children wounds the Parents hearts: but the life of a wicked
wife, is the woe and misery of marriage; so that in such a case, it were better
to be honestly dead, and worshipfully buried, then live to be continually
tormented.

Death eternal, and life abreuiated, is the reward of the wicked and damned.

Death makes an end of all living creatures, whereas derth destroieth but some
kingdoms, wars depopulateth but some countries, and fire co^sumes but some
cities. Death is so much the more grievous to the rich, by how much they made
more account of long life. For when a man shall bid his soul to live at rest,
what a terror is it to have it taken from him that night? But life is irksome
to the miserable, because they cannot live, as they should, nor die when they
would.

Death of suits proceeds from denialls; and they commonly come by corruption of
bribes: and delays are the mi^eries of hope; unkindness the scourge of love,
and combersomnes the breach of friendship.

Death and murder are wrought by unskillful Physicians, and ignorant, idle, or
illliuing Ministers: the one receives money to kill the body; the other,
benefices to destroy souls; either for want of good Sermons, or by corrupt
examples of their loose and lewd lives.

Death is often wrought by mere conceit of a faint heart, as the fight of a
drawn sword is formidable to a coward.

Death is sweet to a quiet conscience, when life is irksome to a distempred
mind.

Death that is honorable, is far to be preferred before an ignominious life;
and life that is untainted, cannot but end with a glorious death: in both,
necessity must prevent disquiet, and hope of hereafter good, extinguisheth the
grief of present bad.

Death is no way hurtful in it self; but the manner, and the cause makes it
most irksome and odious.

Diseases.
The mind and body subject are to sin,
And so to sickness: but the worst's within.
DIseases amongst the Greeks, were prevented without physic, when they did
gather sweet herbs in May, were let blood once a year, did bathe once every
month, and also did eat but once a day. Diseases torment the flesh, as sin
wounds the soul: patience applied to the one, and repentance to the other,
(if applied in time) will prevent destruction.

Diseases unfelt of the patient, are like sins unthought of by the reprobate.

Diseases at Ephesus were cured without money, or other instruction, then
their own experience, and reading: for the tables of medicines were hanged in
the temple of Diana for every man to read; and such as had judgment, to
practice.

Diseases are a bridle to the flesh, and pull down the pride of lust: yet
sins that infect the soul, are far more dangerous. Diseases are not easily
and lightly cured, when the patient is either inordinate or unruly, the
Physician ignorant, or unfortunate, and the medicine ill compounded, or
untimely.

Diseases that continue are grievous to nature: as wants vnsupplied are woeful
to reason.

Diseases are not cured in one body so soon as in another: nor are the same
medicines to be applied to all constitutions alike at all times, and upon the
same occasions.

Diseases most times are bred by gluttony, except such as grow from
infirmity; and when the appetite is choked, the stomach is made sick; whereas
hunger being orderly fed, and nature moderatly supplied, preuenteth that
distemprature, which shall tend to sickness.

Diseases of cruelty, are the gowt, colic, toothach, stone, and strangury;
but of senselessness, love, and the lethargy.

Diseases have had new names with new times; and although in truth they have
been one and the same: yet are men so subject to variety, that they must still
say, It is the new disease; have new physic, and entertain new Doctors.

Diseases are bred by infectious air, as a venomous tongue may procure death.

Diseases of the mind are bred by opinion, which beguiles us with a false
taste of true happiness: for false opinion leads us into vain delight; which
is indeed the superfluity of desire, and enemy of nature.

Diseases are not cured without medicine, nor fools made wise without
instruction; which neglected, the one may die in his grief, and the other run
mad in his folly.

Diseases are most dangerous, that are not prevented betimes: for if the body
be corrupt, they pull on still diverse infirmities; so that it many times
chances, that when a Physician has healed that disease, which he was sent
for, yet the rest remaining, bred by the former, procure the ruin of the body.

Diseases and wounds are of one nature, and both resemble the conditions of
sin: for if diseases continue long, and putrify, they cannot be healed without
corasiues, and sharp burnings: no more can a long sinner and corrupted heart
come to heaven, without true contrition or repentance, and troublesome
afflictions.

Diseases weaken the body, but sin ruins the soul.

Diseases of the body may be sometimes cured, if the causes be apparent: but
the torment of a guilty and desperate conscience is incurable, though we know
that sin has infected it.

Diseases are sildome cured with words without mature medicines; which while
the Physician museth on, but misseth the true cause, or royal cures, the
patient hits the way to heaven before he can agree upon his ingredients.

Drunkenness.
Who has to friend a Drunkard, has a foe
That with his friend, can neither stand nor go.
Drunkenness makes men worse then beasts; for they do never exceed the
measure prescribed by nature, but man will not be measured by the rule of his
own reason.

Drunkenness and pride are hardly hidden, when other wicked actions are many
times covered, and most times excused.

Drunkenness dimmeth the brain, dulleth the heart, spills the stomach, and
spoils the whole body. I could say, inflameth the stomach, burns the liver,
infecteth the breath, dazeleth the eyes, loosneth the teeth, increases the
palsy, weakneth the joints, swells the flesh, and overthrows the perfect
temper and sound constitution of man.

Drunkenness loves to open the follies of men, the shames of women, the gates
of cities, the secrets of Commonwealths, the weakness of Princes, the
discoueries of treasons, the burnings of incontinencie, and the errors of all
ages and sexes.

Drunkenness is many times cause of madness, but most times occasions of
infirmities: for when the interior senses and parts are brought into distemper,
the exterior are weak in working, or work in disorder.

Drunkenness is contrary to all other vices: for either they leave us, or we
leave them through wants or age; only drunkenness is made worse with
continuance, and the older we grow, the more beastly we are.

Drunkenness brings forth shame and impudency: and it fares with men in
this vice, as with improuident sinners; who are so far from repenting
themselves, that they are sorry they have done no more. Which makes me remember
a certain Father; who having a Son given over to this beastliness, brought
him into the streets to see a drunkard wallowing in the dirt, and wondered at by
many standers by; supposing that the lothsomnesse of the sight would have
wrought upon him, and the odiousness of the example diuerted him from
offending. But he was so far from both, that he asked his father where that
good wine was, which made the man so drunk, that he might go and take his
part.

Drunkenness misconstrueth kindness, mistaketh friendship, mistearmeth good
fellowship, misuseth Gods creatures, despises good counsel, scorneth
assistance, and forsweareth his own senses.

Drunkards sin against God, who forbids the abuse of his good creatures;
against the poor, that want them for their nenessary uses; against their own
bodies, which they fill with manifold diseases; against their own souls, which
they defile with their swinish sins; against their whole persons, which they
turn out of men into beasts; and against their eternal salvation (if they
repent not) and forsake not that beastly and abominable custom.

Drunkenness makes a wet surfeit, a full stomach, a sodden liver, and a drowned
soul.

Drunkenness puts a Carpenter by his rule, a Fencer from his ward, a Poet out
of his vain, and a Player out of his part.

Drunkenness makes the vict^er rich, the rich man poor, the poor man a
beggar, the beggar a roge, a thief, and a murderer, and so the end is a
halter.

Drunkenness, as it is beastly, so it is remediless, and makes the father
ashamed of his child, and the child careless of his father. Which brings to my
mind a story of a wise man, who sending a son to travel, and informed of his
wanton courses resident in a lascivious city; yet excused the same, and hoped
of reformation of all, till it came to drunkenness. For when he was told of he
was fallen into this filthy vice and abominable beazeling, O (says he) youth
may be wanton, and hereafter stayednes may reduce him; puffed up with pride, that
may be moderated by conversation, or religious advise; given to gaming, either
wants, or the discovery of falsehood may make him leave it; delighted with
lechery, either age will tame and cool him, or an honest wife divert him; he
may be carried away with ambition, it showed a noble spirit, and something must
be gotten by men of worth: but when he is drawn to drunkenness, he is to be
lamented as utterly lost, without all hope, but worse and worie.

Effeminatenesse.
A man that is a woman, never considers
He is a Peacock* all foul but the feathers.
EFfeminatnesse hates exercise, is an enemy both to strength and wit, when
labor perfecteth the understanding, and raises manhood to a full height.

Effeminatnesse makes happiness but an imagination; and then hope is a vveake
hold: but when virtue and valor build the house, the frame stands on a good
foundation, and the workmanship must needs be honorable.

Effeminatenesse is ridiculous in a Courtier, when a young man wears furred
boots, dares scarce tread on the ground, smells of perfumes, holds a fan
in his hand to keep the wind from his face, rides too softly in the streets,
and must always tread on a matted floer.

Effeminatenes is contemptible in a Knight, when he rides on a slowe-paced
Mule, like an old Judge; painteth his face, boasts of wrought night-caps and
buskins, keeps his bed because it is cold, dares not stir out of doors
because it is durtie, and will ca^e no meat but tender and minced.

Effeminatenesse is lamentable in a soldier, when he must needs have a
downe-bed to lie upon, a warm wastcoat, an oiled gauntlet, a sweet shirt, a
perfumed armor, lined greeues, and a quilted burgonet.

Effeminatenesse is unseemly for a Mariner, when he cannot endure a storm,
girdeth his gown to work in, is afraid to foul his hands, and finds fault
with the smell of the pitch.

Effeminatenesse is an enemy to good huswiferie, when either the man dares not
plow, because it mizells, nor the wife rise, for that it is a cold morning.

Effeminatenesse is a fault of all mothers; when their children may not go to
bed without warming the same, nor rise till the curtains be all close, nor
stir out of doors, till their girdle be aired by the fire, nor go to
school, till they have their breakfasts.

Effeminatenesse is the adversary of health; when a young man will not walk
without a candle, nor stir, but in fair vveather, nor ride without a
foot-cloth, nor dance without a Mistress, nor do, or wear any thing but
tending to curiosity.

Eloquence.
Did I not make the wrong right now and then,
I were an ornament to law-full men.
ELoquence is the beauty of learning, if it proceed from wisdom; and in the
ear of virtue truth is the best Orator.

Eloquence that overthrows the speaker, is as bad as an ill perfume, that
poisons the brain.

Eloquence with beauty, makes nature gracious, and wit honorable.

Eloquence of heathen men, has corrupted the heart of christians; but venomous
is that breath, that poisoneth men in their souls.

Eloquence of lively words cannot be expressed in dead lines and letters: for
he that gives, what he sales in writing, binds himself to lose his credit.

Eloquence was so forcible in Demosthenes, that he had many times money offered
him to hold his peace, when other men looked for great rewards to debate the
matter.

Eloquence was so much labored amongst the Philosophers, and Orators of
Athens, that Damonidas flourishing in the time of Pisistratus the tyrant, on a
day he said unto the Senate of Athens, All men may freely come and speak with
me in their affairs, except the Philosopher Damonidas; who may write unto me,
but not come and talk with me: for he holds such efficacy in his words, that
he persuades to what he will.

Eloquence is rather the gift of God, then the perfection of learning: for many
worthy men have attaind to great knowledge, who for want of elocution, have
lost their honors, and memorable renown.

Eloquence applied to purpose contains great efficacy, which king Philip,
Alexanders father knew very well: for besieging a certain city, he came to
this parlee, that if they would suffer Theomastes to enter, and make an
Oration, he then would depart, and raise his siege. Sure Theomastes had great
eloquence in his words, and forcible persuasion in his speech: for they not
only rendered themselves, and opened their gates, but acknowledged king Phillip
for their Prince, as he did the Orator for prevailing. Thus had eloquence more
force in words, then the King in his Armies.

Eloquence has secret enemies, Folly and Ignorance: the one cannot understand
the secret; and the other cannot learn the quality.

Eloquence and Wisdom are not always companions: for many times a ridiculous
matter passes in the eloquent delivery; and weak thrusts pearcing the heart,
dispatcheth the combat.

Eloquence and discretion must needs be observed in writing letters of
importance; and to a man delighted with variety, and volubility of speech.

Eloquence makes a man desire glory, and then he writes with aduisement, and
speaks with judgment: and as you see the plough-man reuiew his furrow to
straighten what is amiss: so must a wise man examine his writings, to make
them seem more meet and orderly.

Eloquence in writing a letter is discovered, when it is pleasant to read, and
discreet to be noted.

Eloquence and honesty are sometimes enemies: for a wicked matter enforces
attention by persuading speeches, and procures dispatch by a timely compulsion.

Eloquence is no way available with God: for the simplest prayer of a good man
shall be truly heard, when the vain Oratory of the brauest Philosopher shall
not prevail.

Envy.
I (like the devil) naught but Good pursue;
Whereby I waste to naught, yet Good eschew.
Envy frets the heart, and marres digestion in the stomach; nay farther, the
fire of malice feeds on hellish fury.

Envy of neighbors watch thy actions, and make thee stand on a guard of
circumspection.

Envy cannot speak well of virtue, nor endure to hear another commended:
especially in an enemy, or in him, with whom we contend for superiority, or
glory. And if therein our adversary prevail, we cannot sleep in quiet, nor
eat with content.

Envy and hate do commonly go together: so that Timon who envied good men,
because they were so good, being asked, why he hated all men; answered, I hate
wicked men, because of their wickedness; and I hate all other men, because
they hate not the wicked.

Envy is somewhat contrary to othervices: for they commonly extend to the hurt
of others, when the envious man hurts himself; and then most chiefly, when
he cannot prevail to do mischief, and fails in practicing revenge.

Envy wrought the destruction of Pharoh and his host, by his own contempt
against God: the troubles of Joseph by his brethren: the death of John Baptist
by Herodias daughter: and the crucifying of Christ by the Scribes and Pharisees,
who knew, that he was the Savior, and yet repined at his humility.

Envy made Caine murder his brother Abel; the Sodomites repine against Lot;
Saul murmr at David; Ioab kill Abner; Shemei rail, when Absalom rebelled
against his Father; and the Devil himself tempt the woman to bring all
mankind to destruction and ruin.

Envy makes men worse then devils: for they being a legion, yet agreed
together in one man: but two brethren can scarce agree together in one house.

Envy breeds a frown in the forehead, a leere in the eye, vvrinkles in the
face, leanness in the body, malice in the heart, and a mischief in the soul.

Envy bred by the pride of Lucifer, caused his fight and contention with the
Arch-angell; but especially made the Devil vvatch the Woman in the
wilderness, to devour her child, when she should be delivered.

Envy will do himself hurt to procure his adversary a greater mischief.
Which makes me remember a story of an Envious and Covetous man vvalking
together, who at last met with Jupiter, and had the fortune to have their
petitions granted with this prouiso, That whatsoever the first man wished, the
other was sure to have it doubled upon him. Whereupon, the covetous man would
not wish, because he would have had all the good to himself; and the envious
man durst not, for doing another double good. But at last, in casting of lots,
it fell to the Envious man's turn to ask first; and so he desired to have one
of his eyes pulled out, that the Covetous man might lose both: which was
immediately effected; and Jupiter wondered at the malice of the wicked man.

Envy breaks the knot of amity, sowes the seed of sedition, and brings forth
the fruit of ruin and destruction.

Envy loves no number but one, no judgment but partial, no power but
absolute, nor wisdom but will.

Envy even remains in the grave: for the Salamines buried their dead, their
backs turned against the Agarens, which were their mortal enemies; in such
wise that their enmity endured not only in time of life, but also when they
were dead.

Envy is of that property, that it sometimes produces a miracle. For after
E^eocles and Polinices had killed one another in battle, and that their bones
and bodies were to be burnt and sacrificed together, the very flames divided
themselves asunder, and showed the envy and disunion of the malicious brethren.

Envy is an incurable disease, a torment of the mind, a vexer of the spirit,
corrupter of the blood, canker of the flesh, rust in the bones, and consumer of
the very soul.

Envy and malice have no mercy in case of victory, when weakness is forborne,
when it is under the power of true fortitude and valor, and ignorance is
instructed, not derided by Christian wisdom.

Envy makes quarrels upon cold blood, to the hazard both of body and soul:
and how-euer they be dangerous upon sudden heats, they be this way unpardonable
upon premeditated malice.

Envy is ever a supplanter of the virtuous; who if they once rise to the favor
of Princes, let them be sure of enuiors; yea, and peradventure of such, as
flatter them to their faces.

Envy produces horrible effects: for when Porrex had killed his brother
Ferrex, whom the mother loved extraordinary; she so stomacked the matter,
that finding her son the suruiuing King asleep, she stabd him to the heart.

Envy is not to be trusted, nor reconciled: for questionless, at an
opportunity her malice will return, and do a mischief, if she can.

Folly.
I am turned Goddess, and have sacrifice
Of men and women, now turned Butterflies.
FOlly, which in Scripture is the same with sin, makes the pride of the
flesh swel to lust, and then asswageth it with wounding the soul: but
wantonness is overcome, when the wise grow temperate and continent, by
virtuous disposition and conversation.

Folly makes men weep, because they were not borne a thousand years ago,
nor can live a thousand years after: yet it is worse folly to think, there is
no being after death; no hell nor heaven; which can not be conceived but by
Atheism. It is the Athisticall fool that says in his heart, There is no God.

Folly makes fools proud of gay coats; and so the apparel be gawdie, it
never cares, though it be painted cloth, or guilt leather.

Folly is shown, when a man may be wise and will not; thinks himself wise,
and is not; supposes other fools, that be wise indeed. He would be wise, but
cannot take any pains with his addle wit.

Folly makes us not fear sin; keeps us in love of vanity; loses time
about trifles; and brings her followers to scorn and confusion.

Folly makes a man prattle with less delight and more hurt, then a Parret and
other birds, that speak but as they be urged, and taught: but fools run at
random, without enforcement or reason; and such a glib tongue is (for the most
part) as void of truth as it is of discretion.

Folly both wants understanding in it self, and scorneth counsel from others.

Folly thinks it self wise and is not, and so is as short of wisdom, as he
which supposes he is at his iourneys end, and is but half way.

Folly loses her wits in a wood by prying into other folks thoughts; but yet
to hate the simple, is wicked subtlety.

Folly beats the air with words, but wise men penetrate the senses with
matter.

Folly makes him lose his wits in his way, that travels further, then he can
return: but he that sits still, and does nothing, is unprofitably borne: yet
better to be a fool, then a knave, and to sit still, then rise to do
mischief, or walk to practice revenge.

Folly makes one care for that, which is needless, and neglect that, which is
necessary.

Folly will not be taught any reformation; and he that goes about it, loses
his labor: as he that would wash an Aethicp white, loses both his soap and
his water.

Folly makes men incapable of schollership: and to nimble spirits are as
dangerous to deal with: for wit and folly are commonly married together,
unless discretion asks the banes, and give them orderly in the Church.

Folly presumes of overmuch goodness, and sees not his own, nor cares to do
another hurt.

Fools are not to be troubled above their capacity: no more then a dwarf
should strive to reach heaven with his hand.

Fools are more troubled with opinion then matter: subject to fear, rather
then faith: yet sometimes for lack of discretion, vnapprehensible of danger;
and so as desperate, run into irrecouerable peril.

Folly makes men esteemed pratlers for five causes: much speaking; false
speaking; idle speaking; desire of speaking, when he should hold his peace;
and not speaking at all, when he ought to declare his mind.

Folly shows a shallow brain, in babbling quicquid in buccam, without
discretion; in boasting of knowledge without moderation; in revealing secrets
to every unwise or unworthy acquaintance without distinction; in flattering him
as a choice friend, and only man, whom he would trust with such a thing,
which he could not keep himself, when it was in his keeping.

Folly proceeds from simplicity of judgment, wantonness of disposition; or
idleness of living: in all which, a well-meaning man many times may be taken.

Folly is not here meant of natural Idiots, in whose difference from other
men, God sets out his glory by such variety: but of such, as either
counterfeit for worldly respects, or are obstinate of devilish despite, or are
ignorant indeed for want of instruction, or good will to learn.

Fools are sometimes Fortunes minions, but wisdom is truly, if not only
precious; and is of the more reputation, by how much less it is more common.

Folly lies couched at Fortunes feet, as she rides at triumph in her Chariot;
and when she rises to visit the world, Folly catches hold of her skirts, and
will go with her, or cry like a baby for being left behind her.

Folly sets all men on work against the great voyage, wherein the ship of
fools is Admiral of the journey.

Folly speaks much, and knows little: reads much, understands little: spends
much, and has little: so that in little time he must needs be little worth.

Folly makes a wise man in hope of a nigh way, to leave the high way: and to
find a by-way, let him thank himself, if it prove a wry-way.

Fools and villains are commonly exempted from sorrow: for the one cannot,
and the other will not take thought.

Fools are not to be affected, least they disgrace thee; nor wise men to be
abused, least they reprehend and control thee.

Folly cannot hide herself from discovery: for though she apparel herself
never so demurely, look soberly, go gravely, and still fit quietly; yet will
she be speaking to no purpose, and even in the manner of delivery, discover
her folly.

Folly may come by want of education, by ill accident, or by nativity: but
when it is counterfeit, it proceeds from mere knavery.

Fortune.
Often am I idle; yet my wheel still ply
To bring the high, to low: the low to hie.
FOrtunes wheels are full of cogges, driven with uncertain winds, vain
desires, venturous brains, violent hands, and have unworthy, wondrous, and
ridiculous events.

Fortune, when she is feared, flowteth the weakness of your faith: but once
braued, flincheth at your fortitude.

Fortune has many Emblemes; as standing on a wheel, which turning about,
mounteth the beggar to the top, and whirl^^h a Prince to the bottom: and so
she shows her inconstancy.

Fortune is painted blind, as if she saw not, where she distributed her
favors, nor cared not to whom: and so she shows her impartiallitie.

Fortune is deciphered with a hairy ^^retop, and a bald head behind: to
signify, that we must not let slip any good occasion, but take all times to
do our selves good; and so she shows her opportunity.

Fortune is figured naked, and cares not to be cast into the Sea: fore she can
save her self without swimming; and so she shows her power.

Fortune resembles a woman, who commonly plays with men, as the body with the
shadow: run thou away, and it follows thee; follow thou it, and it flies
from thee: and so she shows her peevishness.

Fortune stands on the globe of the world, as if she commanded all like an
Empress: and so she shows her imperiousnes.

Fortune is the fiction of idleness, and fancy of a frothy wit.

Fortune brings high floods to low ebs, and low ebbes to high floods:
teaching men not to miss their passage, but take time while time is, and the
tide as it falls.

Fortune is a term profanely abused: for what the heathen called a deity, as
Adrastus built a temple to Nemesis, and in Rome she was honored as a Goddess:
we Christians call Gods providence; or at least should think and believe so.

Fortune is inexorable; for she will not hear the best prayers, nor be moved
with the greatest tears; it is not sighs can control her, nor sobs make her
flexible; and so she shows her cruelty.

Fortune flies the encounter of sury: for where she fights the field, many
mischiefs follow by inevitable fate and destiny.

Fortune makes order out of confusion: for as Christopherus Laucius said;
Fortune is an influence, which proceeds from the revolution of the heavens;
and she, as they, do continually turn about: for riches beget pride; pride,
impatience; impatience, revenge; revenge, war; war, poverty; poverty,
humility; humility, patience; patience, peace; and peace, riches.

Fortune is then most execrable and odious, when she so carries the cause,
that one is punished for another offense.

Fortunes wheels mount aloft like raging waters, which quickly throw down
slender banks: right so she shows her suddenness, and violence.

Fortune laughes to see one fret at her, knowing he hurts himself, and not
her: like an Adder in her hole, who lies safe when she has stung thee: it is
in vain to charm her, or conjure her, or curse her, when thou can not reach
her, nor revenge thee upon her.

Friends.
A house declining, underpropped must be,
And thou true friends, when Fortune ruins thee.
FRiends think themselves discharged of their duties, if they remedy one
another in necessity, and comfort them in adversity.

Friends are not to be lost for trifles, nor should a wise man cause himself
to be beholding to an enemy for any needful thing.

Friends once tried are to be made much of; and thou must both bear and
forbear, where thou expectest a kindness.

Friends that fail, breed deep dislike; and there is no such grief, as to be
deceived, where we trust.

Friends untried or unknown, make men unwise to build upon them; but he that
has true friends and loves them not is unwise, and he that betraies them, is a
villain.

Friends that are faithful, are not to be suspected: yet a reconciled enemy,
though he seem a friend, is not to be trusted.

Friends in their absence are uncomfortable; in their wants grievous; in their
importunities combersome; in their unmannerliness irksome; and in their death
lamentable.

Friends are parted by unkind breaches, as kingdoms are divided by the
tumultuous seas: but wretched are the occasions, that separate united friends.

Friends that are kind, are sweet companions: but a malicious man is a
neighbor for the devil and his damme.

Friends that have sound hearts, have sildome frowns; but false joys breed
true griefs.

Friendship is delicatly expounded amongst the Philosophers: for Aristotle
being asked, what he thought of friendship; answered, that it was one soul in
two bodies.

Friends that are kind, are pleasing companions: but if they be constant, they
be rich jewels.

Friends may be trusted, when they have been tried; strangers when they are
known; dogs when they be muzled; women when they be in sight; and enemies
when they are under ground.

Friends are so privileged, that sometimes we may labor for their good, when
we cannot speak for our own. As for example; there was a law amongst the
Romans much used, and observed; that upon pain of death, none should presume
to approach the tent where the Emperor did eat and sleep: which yet in the
time of A^relius a certain Greek did infringe, and so he was taken and
condemned to die: but the Emperor understanding the matter by the hurlibu^ly,
spoke with a loud voice: If this man did come to sue for any thing for
himself, let him die; but if for his friend, he shall live.

Friends that are sildome seen, and much less spoken and conversant withal,
are less familiar, but more sure; in that they love not for rewards, but for
virtue and goodness.

Friends before they make a perfect combination, must observe these
circumstances If our friend be poor, we must give him; if he be rich, we must
serve him; if he be favored, we must worship him; if he be wilful, we must
obey him; if he be impatient, we must bear with him; if he be vicious, we
must dissemble with him; and if he be malicious, we must beware of him.

Friends in their wants may be perilous unto us, and in their importunities
tedious.

Friends that are old and acquainted, once changed for new, make men resemble
little children, who refuse an old angel for a new counter; and cry to go from
their true parents, to strange nurses.

Friends are thus far unprofitable, that they are the thieues of time; and
come to seek us, not to do, what we think good, but to persuade us to what
they think convenient.

Friends, though they be kind, are sometime troublesome to suffer; as enemies
are perilous to endure.

Friends remedy in adversities, comfort in necessities, bear with
imperfections, pardon transgressions, and endure in troubles.

Friends cannot be rightly so named, that afford their persons for private
respects, and deny their goods upon plausible pretenses.

Friends are (in some Philosophy) denied to be in the plural number: for as
long as a man has but one heart, he can have but one friend: who being
united in love, are as it were one mind and soul in two bodies.

Friends that are unkind, are uncomfortable: but an unquiet wife is
intolerable.

Friends come in at all hours, yea into all places: for sure to whom I have
afforded my heart, I will never deny him my house.

Friends are privileged above kindred: for a man may have many kinsfolks, but
few friends: yea kindred do daily increase, but a friend once lost, is hardly
recovered again; and once dead, never recalled.

Friends, so far as they impouerish not our estates by lavish expenses, may
command our purses; but a great discretion must govern our passions. For he
cannot well be said a friend, but an enemy, who makes us lose our time by
frivolous or foolish importunities, or to unnecessary or untimely employments.

Gentery.
Highness of blo^d is base, unless it be
Made bright by virtue in a high degree.
GEnerositie is a special prerogative amongst all people. For to be descended
of noble parents, is commonly a sign of noble conditions: and as you see a
fair Diamond made more rich by Art and embelishing; so is virtue more gracious
in a Gentleman, then in an Artificer.

Generositie teaches her possessors so to recreate themselves, that thereof
rise none offense; neither to themselves by immoderate exercise, nor to others,
by inconvenient abuses.

Generositie ought to use none but honest recreations, performed with moderate
and harmless cariages, in due and seasonable times, directed to honorable
and profitable ends.

Generositie is a great help to persuade the people a man is thereby more
worthy to be a Prince: but that kind of ambition is subject to great malice,
and supplantation: so that many have lost their lives, for fear lest their
nobleness in blood, and good conditions should prefer them to high and
honorable places.

Generositie teaches men to be temperate in feeding, sober in drinking,
liberal in giving, considerat in receiving, short in sleeping, reposed in
speech, affable in business, patient in hearing, prompt in expedition, gentle
in chastisement, and benign in pardoning.

Generositie teaches men never to be idle, or ill-doing; not to be a follower
of wine or women, or every effeminate fashion; not to brawle with any man; not
to hurt enemies, nor to be ungrateful to friends.

Generositie is of so delicate a condition, that in any matter of controversy,
conference may be admitted; but contention utterly condemned: for nobleness
and despite did never accompany in one gentle person.

Generositie makes knights and soldiers of so valiant a courage, noble minds,
and worthy demeanors, that they are never inflamed with choler, but in the
field against enemies; nor angry with their friends, but for desperate vices.

Generosity teaches knights and gentlemen, in the time of war not to write
from their own houses, but the camp: every man in his own rank; the priest
prays, the husbandman ploweth, and the knight fights.

Generositie does not account him a gentleman, which is only descended of
noble blood, in power great, in jewels rich, in furniture fine, in attendants
brave: for all these are found in Merchants and Jews. But to be a perfect
Gentleman, is to be measured in his words, liberal in giving, sober in diet,
honest in living, tender in pardoning, and valiant in fighting.

Generosity has pre-eminence of Honor: for H. 8. answered a man, that desired
to be made a gentleman, that he could make him a noble man, but not a
gentleman.

A Gentleman without means, is a painted bardge without oars; fair to look
on, but there is no use of him, neither in calm, nor storm. While he is tied
to his post, and stays at home, he either rots as he stands for want of
rowing, or trimming; or else takes in such soul water of every vice, that
flows unto him, as either in short time corrupts within him, or speedily
sinks him.

But if you untie his rope or chain, and lose him from home, he is not able
to strike one stroke toward the stairs of a fair fortune, though it be
never so nigh him: especially, if the least wind or tide of any opposition be
against him; but is carried down the stream of headlong passion, without
stern or reason, or hand of friend to stay or direct him. So that if some
luckie and unlooked for Neptune join not with Venus, to hale him in, and land
him in the lap of some lusty Lady, or rich widow, he is driven into some dirty
ditch, where he rots, if not unseen, and unknown, yet vnpittied and
unrespected for all his rich painting.

A Gentleman without means, is like 2 fair house without furniture, or any
inhabitant, save only an idle housekeeper: whose rearing was chargeable to
the owner, and painful to the builder, and all ill-bestovved, to make a
mock-begger, that has no good morrovve for his next neighbor. Who may knock,
and have no answer; or if he enter, he may go into the kitchen, and be never
the warmer; into the celler and be never the wetter; up into the chamber, and
lie down on the floer, and come out again as much the near for his need, as
he came in. It was cost cast away upon a fair fruitless frame, that brings in
no rent, but is still in reparation, or running to ruin.

A Gentleman without means is a pretty plant, but without rind, without
root, without leaves, without fruit. He is a tender creature that can wear
his clothes in good fashion, if his Mercer and Tailor will trust him. He can
borrow with as plausible and pitiful persuasion, and put off payment with as
pretty invention, and soader every allegation, with as fast and firm oaths as
any man. His mind reaches to the Court, and cloth of State, but his horse
tyres ere he comes at Court gate. He salutes, and swears as courtly as any
man, and wears bad clothes in the best fashion.

He is a loving and frequent friend to his wealthy neighbor or countryman,
whersoeuer he meets him: and not overmuch reserved toward any free-hearted,
and openhanded Gentleman. He is of a fellowly condition, and comes to a feast
(and that with the soonest, if it be of free cost) upon the first inuitation:
and to any merry meeting (if the shot be not high, or the guests ouer-fine) he
fails not to come. He feeds as choicely and freely, drinks as sweetly and
soundly, and talks as boldly and bravely as any in the room: and yet
vninuited, upon necessary occasion to dine at home, he can eat as moderatly,
and fit as soberly, as any other man.

He shall wear a cloak, and a pair of boots as long, borrow your horse as
often, and ride him as well as the best in the town: and shall as respectively
diet him, and shoe him, as if he were his own. He can hold up the lower
salt, with festival and timely table talk, in competent, and commendable
sort: and (bar distinction, and orderly speaking) he will ouer-argue a scholar
in his own profession. He can hold your cards, or play your game; fill, and
light, and taste your Tobacco with as good judgment as the Merchant that
bought it, and sold it: and if it be not of the right, he can tell you, where
you shall buy it.

He can hold a trencher hansomly for need, upon an extraordinary occasion:
and carry a token, or message, and deliver it, that no man shall mend it. You
shall need no better Intelligencer to bring home all the news from the Burse
and Poules, and other public places, to be repeated at dinner. None shall
sooner spy out a fit match for your son, or daughter: do your person and
state more credit, or sooner clap it up, upon loan of your nagge, and
reasonable profit.

Take him to a play, and trouble not his cogitation with the water-man,
entrance, or sitting: he shall laugh as heartily, observe as iudiciously, and
repeat as exactly for nothing, as another man shall for his half crown.

Yea, you shall find him able (or forward) in short time, to correct the
Actors, and censure the Poet. Nay, if any want of his own, or envy at the
excellency of another man, or indignation at his better fortune, do much
importune him; you shall see him choose some pleasant theme suitable to the
time, and write a tolerable tract, or passable Poem. He can flout a stranger,
scorn a scholar, and scoff a Minister, no man better. He is the only medius
^erminus, or man to conclude a merry meeting, or to set down the conditions,
place, and time.

You shall find him in the Cockpit, in the upper ring: he offers a Iacobin,
but at next dangerous blow, lays half a crown; if it be six to one. He can
mew or man your hawke; enter and train your hound; show you where to hunt,
when the hounds go counter; how to break the fault; follow the game; and lie,
if not run, as fast as the huntsman; who if he call him not up before day, yet
of his own accord he will rise before dinner.

He lays not many wagers, but stands as tightly on his reputation, and has
his pedigree as perfect as any man; and can readily recount, what a royal
housekeeper his great grandfather was in every particular. He sowes his crop,
and carries in his corn, with the best expedition. But as he never lends his
neighbor his teeme: so is he, neither at season, sheep-sheere or harvest,
beholding to any man. His rent to his Lord, at the due day is never unpaid; his
houses are never in reparations; no idleness or disorders are ever seen in
his servants. He discommends the vanity and variety of costly clothes, as the
fox did the grapes. He railes on Usurers, the dearth, bribery, and corruption
of the times. He abhors Bayliffes, Sergeants and Sheriffs. He hates
collections for any uses. He hunts on Sondaies, and wrangles for tithes; yet he
sildome or never goes to law with his neighbors. His fences are so good, that
no man's cattle can come into his ground: and his own are so ringed, and yoakt,
and lawde, that they never trespass on any other man.

He is always in pursuit of some good widow, but scorns to make his way by
base briberie: only the maid shall be made, by fair promises, and kind
kisses. His own mothers maid shall give her word, that he is good for
propagation and breed: none so good to plant a colony and people a country.

The dislike of his own, inclines him to seek better fortunes in other
countries: and bar stormy winter, dry byscuit bread, and cold water, no man
shall travail a league further. He well approues necessary wars, for those
that have bodies fit for cold and hard beds, short commons, and sharp swords:
but only desperation of means drives himself to the vvarres; yet not unless
he want heart to be hanged at home, for taking of purses. Which should not
seem so, by the often quarrels he entertaines with his inferiors, upon equal
hazard of life and lands: save that only respect of reputation, and honor,
withholds him, from fighting upon unequal terms, with base companions. And
as for his betters, he is very temperate and discreet in forbearing them; and
bearing their injuries, who may be his benefactors. He less fears to offend
God then his rich idols, to whose deity he offers the incense of all his
endeavors: being ever superstitiously anxious to delight their eyes, tickle
their ears, observe their desires, sooth their humors, second their opinions,
applaud their speeches, pick their thanks, by finding, and aggravating the
faults of their servants.

This weak and worthless luie, must either not live, or lie down, or else
lean to some substantial rich oak or other, as his sycophant, parasite, or
iester; or else as his beadesman, or bayliffe, to go afield with victuals to
his woaders, or weeders, to ouerlooke their labors. The top of his hope is to
attain to the chamber of some Court-fauourite, grand Councellor, grave Judge,
or great Officer. Where being soon slypt into his satin suit, silk stock,
treble ruff, and beauer hat; he is not long in learning his occupation, and
the due respects he is to have, whose cause he furthers, and whom he admits:
knowing that the profit of his watchful providence herein, will in short time,
enable him with means, to impropriate a pretty punk, and purchase good lands.

But if this, and all other means fail, why yet with a little labor, he
would prove a pretty excheator, a prowling promooter, or a good land-spaniel,
or setter for a hungry Courtier, to smell him out a thousand pound suit, for a
hundred pound profit. But to say the truth, the only ordinary vocation he is
most naturally apt unto, and has dexterity in; that he likes, and likes him,
that he lives by, and lives in, is the Art of cheating.

For conclusion, this beggarly Gentleman, is too proud to be a seruingman, to
poor to be a Merchant-man, too weak to be a husbandman, too wastfull to be a
tradseman, too lazy to be an artificer, too idle to be a scholar, too tender
to be a soldier: and yet has matter in him, to make him fit for all this,
with good moulding in tract of time. For full and final description of this
indigent gentleman; he is a rational creature, potentially apt for any thing,
but actually good for nothing.

A Gentleman without manners, is like a custard of addle eggs, in a silver
coffin, which promises sweetness, by his sugered crust; (...) p^ooues
unsavory, and loathsome to the stomach and taste: fair to look on, but
fulsome to feed on. Or if you will;

An unmannerly Gentleman, is like an vnparboyld pastie of tainted venison,
which graceth the table, and pleases the guests, as it comes out of the oven;
but being cut up, forthwith fills their noses, and offends their stomachs: so
that that, which ear^^ delighted their eyes, does now loath their appeties. It
was ill employed cost, of pepper and salt in the seasoning, and butter and
cream in the crust. Right so, the outside of an unmannerly gentleman, seems
an object of worth, where he is unknown: but if you taste him, or try him, by
more near commerce, or inward conversation, you shall find him, for ignorant
prating, for impudent lying, for scornful scoffing, for rude railing, for
quaffing and quarrelling, for swaggering and swearing, for bawdery and
blaspheming, of so riotous and rotten; so contagious and stinking a condition,
that of all others, you may least endure him: as the sweetest and best meats
once corrupted, yield of all other, the most vnfauourie stinks.

The first sight of an uncivil Gentleman, is the best; the further you see
him, the better you like him; the nearer he comes, the worse you brook him.
It Was all lost was laid out on the education of so costly a caryon. To this
purpose I remember a story in the time of H. 7. who was led after the
sedation both of foreign and domestic encombrances, by the hands of prosperity
to the house of a great Majesty and Honorable wealth: insomuch that the Court
increased to statelines^e, the City prospered, the Country thriued, and all
sorts of people thought it the greatest glory to live in the florishingest
show: whereupon it is recorded, that a husbandmans son having been employed
in some services, where example had raised his spirits to immitation,
demanded of the King, as a recompense to be made a Gentleman. The King,
neither angry nor pleased, quickly dispatched him with this answer, he could
not: For though Princes can raise men to Honor, nobleness, offices, and
authority: yet lay it not in their power to enlarge virtue, good conditions,
and the renown of ancestors, whereby and wherein a true Gentleman is best
known, and shines most brightly. Besides, my friend (quoth he) with what
colors of prosperity can thou flourish thy estate? And it like your
Majesty, the Farmer replied, my inheritance is raised on the degrees of forty
pounds a year. Alas, said the King, the times are now corrupted; and that may
keep thee as an honest man, but will never maintain thee for a Gentleman.

Generosity disclaimeth vileness, sluggishnesse, niggardliness, maliciousnes,
lying, and cowardlinesse; so that in a Gentleman, though there may be found
somewhat to be reprehended, yet there ought not to be contained any thing,
worthy of reproach and infamy.

Generositie is more advanced by noble and virtuous ancestors, then by wealth
or inheritance: for to descend of noble blood, does not only honor us, but
prouokes us to be virtuous.

Generositie does lead us to honor, and teach us to amend our estates; whereas
infamy does tempt us to be desperate.

Generositie does cause us to attend and be serviceable to all Ladies and
Gentlevvomen; but especially to forbear them in matters of contention, and
with courteous demeanor to persuade them to the right.

Generositie was so esteemed amongst the Romans, that the law Prosapia
ordained, that when contention did arise for the Consulship, then those which
descended of the Siluians, Torquatians, Fabricians should be preferred.

Generositie is an ordinance of GOD: for Christ himself came of the noble
Tribe of Judah.

GOD.
Use reverent words of God that rules all,
For at his pleasure, thou shall stand or fall.
GOd is incomprehensible in wisdom, absolute in power, unsearchable in
essence, glorious in his graces, infinite in mercy, invisible in person,
infallible in word, unspeakable in bounty, matchless in majesty, and endless
in his abiding.

God makes men wise through his fear, affords honor by his service,
yields life to his belieuers, sends happiness to his lovers, yields
comfort to his obseruers, and crowns his martyrs with everlasting happiness
and eternity.

God has his seat in heaven, his footstool on earth, his church both in
heaven and earth, his kingdom among his Saints: and blessed are those souls,
which make their bosoms his temple.

God is more dishonored in blasphemi^, then Kings endangered by conspiracy.

God will have mercy, where faith pleades penitencie, and not sacrifice: and
the angels rejoice at the conversion of a sinner.

God has told us what we ought to do, and therefore we ought to look no
further: for if we turn back again to men's inventions, we shall seem to
despise God and trust in man.

God is of that excellency in his properties, that even heathen Philosophers
(especially Clcero) have said, that as man by his will moves the members of his
body: so God by his almighty will moves all the parts of the whole world.

God is more honored with the heart, then the lips: and the poor more relieved
with the hand, then the tongue.

God the Father.
The fear of God is the learning of the wise; the grace of God is the glory of
the learned; the peace of God is the rest of the faithful; the love of God is
the joy of the Elect.

God for his greatness is to be feared; for his goodness to be loved; for his
wisdom to be admired; for his love to be honored; for his grace to be served;
for his mercy to be praised; for his justice to be reverenced; and for his
glory to be adored.

God only is the height of power; the essence of goodness; the depth of
wisdom; the life of love; the spirit of grace; the nature of mercy; and the
eternity of glory.

God was before all times, and is above all things: the only life of being,
and being of life.

God the Son.
God so loved the world, that his son Jesus Christ lived in the same, and
died for the same, to redeem the Elect out of the hands of the Devil.

No man ever spoke as Christ did: for he spoke as with authority and power.

No man ever lived, as Christ did: for he lived without sin.

No man ever loved, as Christ did: for he gave his life for his beloved.

No man ever did, as Christ did: for he healed the diseased, drove out the
devils out of the possessed, and raised the dead to life.

No man ever healed, as Christ did: for he only spoke the word, and it was
done; touched the sore, and the party recovered; yea the hemme of his garment
had virtue sufficient to stanch blood.

No man ever sailed, as Christ did: for he walked on the seas, and bad Peter
come unto him.

No man ever sweat, as Christ did: for he sweat water and blood.

No man ever feasted, as Christ did: for he turned water into wine; and fed
many thousands with a few barley loaves and fishes.

No man ever died as Christ did: for he conquered death and hell by his passion.

Therefore is he above all: for his wisdom to be admired; his life to be
commended; his love to be loved; his power to be feared; his death to be
honored; and his passion to be glorified.

God the holy Ghost.
God the holy Ghost is the full perfection of the deity; the third person in
Trinity; the spirit of life; the life of grace; the comfort of our souls; and
the assurance of our salvation.

God the holy Ghost, is neither created, nor begotten, but proceeding: is the
breath of heavenly influence; the protector of our weakness against the
strength of the devil; the conqueror of tribulation; and the assurance of all
spiritual gifts.

God the holy Ghost is the clenser of our filthiness; the preparer of our
hearts to receive good gifts; and the preserver of such infused virtues as are
poured into us.

God will have his own word stand for a law; his law to give us directions to
know the truth; his truth to be embraced before the earth, or the world; and
the world to be hated in respect of eternal salvation.

God will have all or none: for we cannot serve him and B^all: we may not
look up to heaven, and think on transitory things: we may not lift up our
heads on high, and have our hearts below in the world.

God and the Devil are so opposite, that though the Devil never stirs, but
as far as God permits: yet does he practice nothing but to abuse God, and
confound man.

God cannot be resembled to any living thing, nor worshipped under any form
or shape of a creature.

God is the author of truth, the devil the father of lies; man the inuenter of
vanity: woman the seducer of man; and all other things and creatures the
subjects of man.

God is only the searcher of hearts; the discouerer of hypocrisy: the revenger
of injuries: the entertainer of all persons, without respect; and the maker of
wisdom foolishnes.

God is not to be deceived with man's devises, nor ouer-reached with mundane
policy.

God is love; and he that means to dwell with him, must love his brother,
love himself, love God, love all that God has made: for God made nothing, but
what is good; nor must we love any thing, but what is good.

God yields such plentiful matter to discourse on, that I must conclude
with the Philosopher; and take two days respite to tell you, what God is: and
if you come then to know further, I will take four; and if then, I will ask
eight; and so ask longer and longer. For the more you meditate, the more you
may: and when you suppose to have done, you have further matter to begin
withal.

Gravity.
Like me they look, that well do signiorize
Themselves, and others: Rulers that are wise.
Gravity is an honorable ornament, but sometimes it represe^teth bad colors
to shadow a deformity: for a fool and an hypocrite may appear both sad,
demure, and sober.

Gravity and orderly silence show a true understanding; when a fleering
countenance discouers dissimulation and folly.

Gravity in a Tyrant is a dangerous note of tyranny; and when he seems
settled to study, it is commonly to contriue some bodies destruction.

Gravity is not so suitable to a young man, as an old: yet does it not amiss
in either, if not counterfeited, or overmuch affected.

Gravity cannot be dissembled by a fool: for as soon as ever he setleth his
countenance, he discouers a change; and in the very restraint, bursts out into
ridiculous action in one manner, or other.

Gravity is most necessary in a Judge over criminal causes, as well for the
reverence of his place, as to strike a terror against offenders not to hope for
mercy, how ever it may be affoorded upon ture repentance.

Gravity is made known by a quiet mind, reposed speech, decent actions,
comely gesture, sober countenance, stately gate, civil behavior, and
sildomnes of laughter.

Gravity must not dally with a matter of importance, nor incline to derision,
when a man in distress stands at his trial for his life.

Gravity may be dissembled by corrupt officers, to the abuse of justice, and
overthrow of suitors, who have confidence in the Magistrate.

Gravity in religious men has a due of reverence, when they study Gods
glory, their own salvation, and the peoples edifying: but to make gravity
only a step to vvorldly preferment, is the devils policy.

Gravity is the fame of a Matron; the reverence of a Bishop; the comeliness of
a Judge; the majesty of a Commander; the cunning of a Scholar; the hope of a
Physician; the dignity of a Lawyer; the honor of a Councellor; the
loveliness of age; and the deceit of youth.

Gravity cannot endure scurrulous foolerie, idle Iesters, inconsiderat
talkers, palpable ribaldry, wanton enterludes, impudent behavior, lascivious
demeanor, and childish exercises.

Gravity sometimes couers ignorance; and although pride may be suspected, yet
it tempers it from violence and rage.

Gravity is commonly a companion to Religion: for from a Countess to a
country-wench, if she but seem to serve God, she will show it in a sober
look, and decent attire.

Gravity keeps both men and women from outward burstings out of folly; and
indeed shadows many imperfections.

Gravity is much abused, when an officer under color of State, will not
orderly admit a petitioner to tell his tale.

Gravity is assumed on a sudden in the selfsame persons upon notable
changes: as when a Courtier is preferred to be a Chancellor; and a Chaplen to
be a Bishop; a servant a master; a young Gentleman a Justice; a Merchant an
Alderman: and such like.

Honor.
On Virtue still I wait; and though I do,
The virtuous wait both for, and on me too.
Honor, that breeds forgetfulness of goodness, is wicked; while the true
eye of wisdom sees all the world but vanity.

Honor that is gracious, is gotten by virtue, and noble merit: and is never at
full height, till virtue bring it to heaven.

Honor in his true definition is a certain reverence, which one man yields
to another extraordinarily, for his virtuous merit, and worthy desert: so that
it should not be wealth, but virtue, which should make an honorable man.

Honor is more great, that maintains others, then that, which obtains for
it self: as wisdom, which is employed for the good of the Commonwealth,
excels that, which aims at a man's private ends.

Honor is persecuted by the envious, riches and liberality by the covetous,
and virtue by the vicious: so that no man advanced to honor, can behave
himself so well, but he shall be sure to be watched by envious eyes.

Honor has certain marks of pre-eminence both in high titles of dignity,
and many ceremonies of attendancie: and this they receive by imitation, and
example of scripture. For Abraham was called the friend of GOD: Moses the man
of God: Joshua the great Captain: Gedeon a valiant man: Judas the strength of
his brethren: and Christ Jesus a Savior, and Eman^el, or God with us.

Honor in some cases is inferior to Gentilitie: for the auncestrie of blood
must needs have pre-eminence over a family newly erected. Whereupon I
remember a story of Henry the eight: who being entreated to make a clown a
gentleman; answered suddenly, he could make him a noble man, or person of
Honor, as in the estimation of the Commonwealth it passed current: but a
Gentleman must boast of his famous ancestors virtues, and his own worthy
merit.

Honor without desert is like a word without substance, sense, or wit: and
both may be incident to a fool.

Honor cannot consist in riches; for so clownes may be honorable: but in
truth there can be no true honor in the love of the world. For Diogenes being
asked who were the most noble; answered, the despisers of riches, glory, and
pleasures of this life, and the patient endurers of the contrary. And Socrates
said, that true honor consists in the due temper of the body and the mind.

Honor, though it be never so glorious, cannot be greater then Salamons, nor
Salomons, then the Lillies of the field.

Honor makes worldlings happy in their titles: but heaven is the joy of the
blessed.

Honor of a Soulder consists rather in pitying captives, then subduing of
enemies: this made Scipio so famous in Spayn, who having a virgin of
incomparable beauty brought unto him, when he understood how she was betrothed
to a Prince, he not only abstained from her, as remembering his own honor, but
gave the ransom which her father brought to redeem her; with as much more of
his own unto her husband in dower.

Honor is truly established, when virtue is embraced; but both must depend
upon grave and good actions.

Honor may be graced by fortune, and fortune may be great: but the virtuous
are truly wise and honorable, and the godly truly noble.

Honor without desert is like a painted post without life: or a fantastical
idol without a spirit, or a flower without any sent.

Honor is most famous, when men are borne of gentle parents; rise to live in
great dignity; die in glorious liberty; are buried with ensigns of vallure;
and leave a memory of their fames and glories to posterity.

Honor of the world is a mere chance of fortune: but to be truly virtuous, the
gift of God, and delight of his Saints.

Honor is never so out of countenance, as when men of noble eminence descend
to base actions, and practice vile conditions.

Humility.
Without me, though men Angels be in sight,
They are but black ones be they never so bright.
HVmilitie suffers wrong, though it be enormous, and detaineth us from doing
any which is impious: so that, if it be for Gods sake, we are glad of the
persecution, and humble our selves to the rod, leaving the revenge to him.

Humility and love gains the favor of honor; and the necessity of obedience
caused the law of allegiance.

Humility upon comparisons confesses want of power to be liberal; want of
ability ^o be serviceable; want of liberty to visit; want of wealth to
recompense; want of judgment to conclude; want of wisdom to determine; want
of experience to advise; want of power to advance, and want of favor to bring
others in grace.

Humility cools the heat of ambition, and is notwithstanding the stairs to
honorable ascending.

Humility brought salvation to all mankind, and Christ became man, to bring
men unto God. By him were the burdened vnloden; the wearied refreshed; the
hungry fed; the thirsty quenched; the lame restored; the lepers cleansed; the
God of the world riding on an asses colt; the child of grace laid in a manger;
the conqueror of hell fled into Egypt; the commander of Angels buffeted on the
face; the tamer of devils scourged with rods; the ruler of heaven led away by
soldiers; and the savior of the world cast down into a grave; and all this
was done, when in the molde of love, he did melt the law of fear.

Humility in Christ did the work of his father; and that was to convert
sinners, and save the penitent souls.

Humility rather forgiueth the dissembling and treason of friends, then
reuengeth the injuries of enemies.

Humility teaches us rather to repent for doing of ill, then proudly to
boast of doing any good.

Humility keeps the heart from swelling too high, as fasting keeps the
body from growing too fat.

Humily is commonly in league with love, and so turns rough into plain,
black into white, bitter to sweet, angry to quiet, malicious to simple, gross
to discreet, and the heavy to light.

Humility takes in worth many despights, never reuengeth injuries, will not
murmr at them that anger him, deny them that ask him, resist them that take
from him, answer them that reprove him, disgrace them that shame him, nor
absent himself from them that send for him.

Humility teaches us to pardon friends, and release offenders: but of all
things will not suffer any to be proud, theeuish, murderers, adulterers,
gluttons, malicious, nor blasphemous.

Humility strives for no superiority, is not proud of advancement, boasts
not of knowledge, triumphs not for prevailing; nor insulteth over the
dejected.

Humility pleases God, is the gift of God, makes men fit for God, rejoices
Angels, afflicts devils, helps men, and preserves the whole world.

Hypocrisy.
I holier seem that each religious rout,
Like a lean kidney, only fa^ without.
Hypocrisy turns the prayers of the wicked into sin, when the righteous
prevail with God by penitent petitions.

Hypocrisy makes a corrupt heart show a dissembling countenance: and as a double
face makes a monster in nature; so a double heart makes a devil incarnate.

Hypocrisy may deceive a good eyesight: for he that sees the face, knows
not the heart, as when a man beholds a hansome shoe, yet cannot tell where it
wrings, or pincheth him that wears it.

Hypocrisy and singularity commonly walk together, and discover each other:
for in the attire, gesture, countenance, words, and actions, there shall still
appear some thing ridiculous, as if nature were forced by some cunning of Art,
and the mind restrained from his own bent by filthi^ deceit.

Hypocrisy is properly the poison of true religion.

Hypocrisy is so great an enemy to man's peace with God, that he will pardon
the sorrowful conuertist before the proud iustifier: for he that stands upon
terms of doing well, when he determines to continue bad, is worse then he
that looks up to heaven, and falls into some durty puddle or other.

Hypocrisy stands upon terms of practicing and fulfilling idle ceremonies
for outward vainglory; and leaves undone all charitable actions and true
devotions. Thus did the Pharisees wash their hands, when their hearts were
defiled; cast up their eyes to heaven, when their feet were fastened on the
earth; went to the Temple to pray, when they devoured widows and orphans at
home; knocked and thumped their breasts before the pillars, when their mind
was on rapine, avarice, and augmenting their inheritances.

Hypocrisy does tell his own secrets to learn out the affairs of other men,
and makes you believe she would run away with the Hare, when indeed he
determines to pinch with the hound. Thus are friends betrayed, husbands
abused, virgins entrapped, orphancs deceived, masters impouerished, counsels
discovered, treasons contined, and above all, God and religion dishonored.

Hypocrisy seems to ask advise of Gods servants, how to proceed in
religious courses, or justifiable actions: but if the answer return any thing
against their own minds, they repine and follow their own wilful humors.

Hypocrisy will endure disgraces for advantage, and seem to be humble and
submissiue, when indeed he lies in wait for opportunity of greater advantage,
or sorer revenge.

Hypocrisy is the Genus or maine spring, from whence the riuulets of flattery,
cogging, fawning, dissembling, vain-praises, superfluous speeches, and all
cunning actions ouerflowe man's natural reason, and even disperseth poison into
the veins of well inclined dispositions.

Hypocrisy takes root in the heart, and so bursteth forth like a growing
tree into many several geftures, counterfeit shows, seeming devotion, vain
apparitions, wicked deceits, and absurd contrarieties.

Inuections.
No one thing in the world brings such a curse,
As to detract the good, and make bad worse.
INuections savor of detraction, and both proceed from envy: impair not
therefore another man's credit, nor spend on his purse. For the one is his
countenance, the other his maintenance.

Inuections of a venomous tongue, are the ruin of a multitude; as the blasting
wind withers the fruit, or unkindly mildewes withers the corn.

Inuections proceeding from jealous anger against horrible transgressions, and
impudent sinners, are commendable, and represent sharp corasiues to festered
and inueterat sores.

Inuections that are defamatory without cause or good ground, are diabolical,
and took original from the serpents railing on God to the woman; whom he
knew well enough, that as soon as ever they should eat of the apple, their
eyes should be opened, like Gods, knowing good and evil: and therefore he
prohibited them; but indeed, it was to debar them of so excellent a
privilege.

Inuections find great grace with the world; for men's ears do more itch to
hear of other men's faults and ouer-sights, then of their virtues.

Inuections need small oratory: for to rail on a man, bitter words are quickly
found; when to commend virtues, the sweetest phrases are hardly believed.

Inuections are not accepted at all times alike: for in a settled State, libels
pass as Pasquills; but in a time of innovation or confusion, they are
dangerous in themselves, and perilous to the author.

Inuections may be both ways matters of policy, and both ways dangerous;
especially in millitarie affairs. Thus did the explorators of the land of
Canaan terrify the Jews: thus did Caleb and Joshua comfort their brethren.

Inuections are merely wicked, that deprave praue the good, when they merit
well; extenuate their worth, when they deserve far better: and of a
molehill of imperfections, make a mountain of transgressions. But if he be
cursed, that remooueth the mark of his neighbors land: surely, he must needs
be accursed, that kills him olive, and takes away his good name.

In^^ctions are so far from the rules of vertu^^ that whereas humanity pardons
iniurie^, these will not remember good turns; nay, from an ungrateful mind
they repine at small ones, and take the best but of duty and necessity.

Inuections are commonly taken in ill part, and may briefly be defined to be a
too too vehement rebuking of others, when we are more faulty our selves.

Inuections without cause, are in a fool ridiculous; in a Divine irreligious;
in a great man ignominious; in an officer malicious; in a mean man dangerous;
in a wise man ungracious; and in all men, unworthy of commendation or
allowance. Inuections with cause, must be moderated against superiors;
mittigated against inferiors; sparing against equals; and confined within the
borders of charity toward all.

Inuections are unhappy ratings, when men shall be told of their faults in
public, that may otherwise be reprehended ciuilly in private: this way good
advise does many times make the wicked worse: and and so the fault remains
with the shame; and the very best are rather obstinat, then reclaimed.

Ignominy.
The fear of me, diue^^s all gentle minds,
Though high in state to live like honored Hinds.
IGnominy is due to those that hold the place of justice, when Clyents are made
miserable by the delay of Courts, and partiallity of Judges.

Ignominy follows sudden falls; which if it be from dignity, is the anguish
of the heart: from wealth, the grief of the mind: but from (...) death of the
soul.

Ignominy and ^^^ll^ame, may well be compar^d to a glass that is cracked*
which without great circumspection cannot be preserved, but once broken, can
never be recovered.

Ignominy follows several men in several sins; and is the more heinous,
by how much more their offenses are unnatural: as for a Divine to be an
hypocrite: a Musician mercenary: a rich man a thief: an old man lecherous: a
young man impudent: a matron unmannerly: a wife a gadder abroad: a Prince
covetous: a noble man proud: a gentleman servile: a scholar ignorant: an
officer vainglorious: and a grave man a great talker.

Ignominy is the shame of dignity, when honor is the grace of virtue.

Ignominy was so fearful to the Romans, that they have chosen rather to die
honorably, then live infamously: nay, many of them merely to avoid shame, and
open opprobry, have slain themselves with their own hands.

Ignominy must be avoided in our lives; as a Gentleman must not consent to
dishonorable actions for (...): no, not poverty it self; or else we cannot
prevent it (...) death. For he that ^ared to be ^ (...) traitor, or committer
of servile crimes, must look to have his actions registered on record, and his
infamy left to posterity.

Ignominy is no other then a fearful shame for some base and degenerating
courses taken in our lives: as when a noble man is auaricious, cruel,
vnciuell, a receiver of bribes, and scornful: a soldier to beg or pilfer: a
gentleman to prove a pandor, and such like. In all which, the great man must
not presume on his power, nor the mean man be desperate of his poverty.

Ignominy or reproach done to noble Captains, stir up revenge, and is not
pacified without blood. Thus was Narsetes revenged on the Empress Sophia: and
many others despighted with scorn and taunts, incited to strange courses, to
reintegrate their honors. The former story is thus; When Narsetes governed the
Western Prouices for the Emperor Justinian, and had been famous for many noble
exploits; his enuiers suggested, that he ambitiously sought the Empire:
whereupon he was enforced to pass from Rome into Asia; where appearing before
the Empress Sophia, she thus taunted and defamed him; Since thou Narsetes art
less then a man, and half a woman, being an Eunuch, I command thee leave
the government of the Empire, and get up to weaue, where my maidens knit
caules. Which words made so forcible impression, that he changed countenance,
the tears brake from his eyes, and his choler thus vented his grief; Serene
Princess, I would you should chastise me as a Lady, but not defame me like a
woman: It grieves me not so much for that you have said, as the occasion you
have given me to make you answer; I therefore presently depart for Italy, but
to weaue, knit, and frame such a toil, as neither thou may comprehend, nor
thy husband undo.

Ignominy is never more aggrauated, then when women are cruel, which should be
pitiful; nor more deserved, then when subjects are disloiall, who ought to
be faithful.

Ignominy is like an Adder in a path, from whose very sight a man would start
back: but not be tainted with the poison upon any condition.

Ignominy makes taunts so fearful, that even mean men have answered great
Emperors distastingly to save their reputation. As when Alexander the great
reproached Cle^nidus the pirat for a thief and rouer: It is true great Prince
said he, because I rob but with one or two ships, I am therefore defamed; but
thou that fillest the Hellespont with mighty nauies, art therefore a mighty
Emperor, and Monarch of the world. Thus again was the Lady Mary of Padilia
reproved for her ambition and treason, when the commons revolted in time of
Charles the 5. Emperor in Spain. If histories deceive us not, says the
author, Mamea was proud: Medea cruel: Martia envious: Popilia unchaste: Mirrha
malicious: and Domiti^ rash: But I have read of none that has been disloyal
and a traytresse, but your Ladyship.

Ignominy is worse then blows: for they punish but for a time, or at most our
life time; but shame and reproach continues after death: yea, makes our
posterity dishonorable by our vile conditions, or base proceedings.

Idleness.
With monstrous births I commonly do burst
Of shame, diseases, pennury, and lust.
Idleness will rather beg, then vvo^ke, and then correction is needful: but
when the rich will starve the poor, the plague is a good scourge of a
Commonwealth.

Idleness is an enemy to Honor, and sloth brings pride to poverty.

Idleness cares for nothing, makes men graceless, and joined with sloth,
quickly vvitlesse; as jealousy increases madness.

Idleness is the ground of ignorance, and a fool is the scorn of reason: but
exercise makes the fallow field fruitful, and a good wit pleasant and
plentiful.

Idleness again is the sister of doltishnesse, both enemies to Art: whereas
exercise, conference, and experience make both art and wit to yield forth
fruit and exornation. Idleness is cause of lazines, diseases, corruption of
blood, and dulls the spirit, which peradventure by nature would produce
commendable effects: but wearines may come of weakness and great labor, and
then rest and idleness is a refreshing to nature, and recovery of strength.

Idleness works contraries against kind: for commonly idle men sleep a
days, and walk a nights: but woe be unto them that make day nigh^, and night
day; for questionless they cannot prevent poverty.

Idleness is called the grave of the living, and was so odious amongst the
Persians, that to avoid idleness they would whittle sticks, or rip the seames of
their coats, to ^end and sow them again.

Idleness is a privation of goodness, and it is ill to do nothing, worse to
do bad, and worst of all never to repent and amend.

Idleness makes a fool miserable, when travel makes a wise man honorable.

Idle men amongst the Philosophers were banished, the covetous hated, the
traitors hanged alive, the vicious were buried, and the lascivious were whipped.

Idle Bees gather no honey, and so become drones to rob the hiue: thus are
pampered iades unapt to travel, and lasie rogues unwilling to work.

Idleness is to be hated as unprofitable, and wickedness to be abhorred as
damnable.

Idleness causes sleep out of season, which must be avoided: for sleep is a
kind of death, and therefore so much as you take from sleep, you add unto
your life.

Idleness is the mother of poverty, the rust of reason, the enemy of health,
the spring of malice, and the fountain of vices: whereas labor is the
improuer of wealth, the preserver of health, the andidote of vice, the seed of
virtue, the mistress of experience, as experience is of art, and art of wit
and delight.

Idleness may be excusable in gross and fat men; yet Joseph Bet^ssi being
asked, what a fat man did, who stood sweating in the sun, answered, that he was
either trying of suet, or warming of water.

Idle shepherds makes the Woolfe shi^e wool.

Idleness knows not where to bestow itself, nor how to employ the time: but
when wakefull and working villainy makes a cloak of honesty, God is dishonored,
and Gods nature abused.

Idleness never prefers to honor, wit is not challenged by inheritance,
wisdom comes not from ances^ors, nor can we leave virtue to our posterity,
except by example and imitation.

Idleness boasts of sleep, as if it were a praise to live at ease: but a
great sleeper shall go in a ragged coat.

Idleness many times begets frenzy, and then the lunaticke and frantic are
full of mischief, which cannot be avoided, but by industry and good endeavors.

Idleness sleeps out the morning, to the loss of the whole day: but the night
watches are the bodies weakness, and immoderate sloth, the poison of health.

Idleness is hateful; yet better lie still, then go about an ill business: and
better be asleep, then awake to do villainy.

Idleness is casie to a corrupt mind; yet willing labor makes the task more
pleasing, and when all is done, no goodness can come by the ease of lasines,
whereas great matters are compassed by industrious indeauors.

Idleness makes men nasty slouens, loathsome and unwholesome; as weomen out of
coiues, pride, and folly, become ridiculously fine.

Kings.
We Gods on earth are still enstil'd; what then?
We should fly pride, since we must die like men.
KIngs as they be gracious and worthy of their scepters, are Gods Lieuetenants,
and so they make Nobles virtuous, Officers just, Judges upright, Lawyers
perfect, Preachers zealous, Merchants industrious, the Citizen honest, the
Countryman laborious, the Scholar studious, the Soldier vigilant, all
estates orderly dutiful, and the whole land peaceable and plentiful.

Kings have glory through wisdom and increase of happiness, by the loialty of
the subject, and the confederacy of foreign Princes.

Kings crowns seem glorious, but the burden of them is heavy: for they bring
more cares, then their heads have hairs.

Kings confederate themselves by divine wisdom and counsel, but civil
discord is a work of the devil.

Kings maintain not their maiestly by big looks, but by wise counsels, and
reserved cariages, nor magnanimity consis^eth in high words: but in bountiful
and royal deeds.

Kings that are gracious, make the state beautiful and sure, as castles well
fortified the indwellers secure.

Kings love high flying Hawks: but if they stoop to the Lure, they are the
better manned.

Kings wear rich Diamonds as Jewels in their hats; but a gracious Queen is a
jewel in his heart, and wise counsel a iem at his ear.

Kings that are good; are called gods: but those that are wicked go to the
devil for all their titles.

Kings are Gods Lieuetenants upon Earth; where if the Officers be not Saints,
the Devil will creep into their companies.

Kings hearts are in the hands of God, how ever the heart of the Kingdom is in
the hand of the King.

Kings courts are best for favorites; yet such as be young and unexperienced
may suppose it a pleasure, as the wars are a bravery to those that are
ignorant.

Kings must take heed of violence, or outrageous actions: for Dionisius hearing
that his son had deflowred a virgin of honor, caused him to be brought before
him, and in great anger rebuked him; asking if ever his father did the like? to
which his son answered? No? For you had not a King to your Father; nor quoth
he shall thou have a King to thy son, if thou use these vild actions.

Kings (after Alexander the Great his opinion and answer to one, which
demanded how he came by his Monarchy;) maintain their estates by counsel,
elloquence, martial discipline, and courteous liberality.

Kings are more glorious in their wise and virtuous government, then in their
sumptuous palaces: but above all their mercy shows a divine spirit.

Kings are blessed when God chooses them for his servants, and the Kingdoms
are blessed when such a King is chosen over them.

Kings can neither endure comparisons, though the subject should excel in some
enriching quallity; nor contestings, though they are in the wrong themselves.

Kings have scepters and swords, the one their subjects, the other for enemies,
and both for the honor of judgment, and ornament of majesty.

Kings fighting for kingdoms, make a valiant conquest: but he that fights
for his conscience, makes a heavenly victory.

Kings come to ruin by private profit, inward hatred, and civil war.

Kings keep their Crowns by arms, and preserve their kingdoms by
government, in both labor and art must make a league.

Kings that get their Crowns by the sword, enamell them in blood: but
possessed with peace, they are brighter then a Diamond.

Kings are Masters in their own Kingdoms; but every servant shall be their
fellows in the kingdom of heaven.

Kings that flourish, are the beauty of the Earth, as Courts that flourish, are
the beauty of a kingdom.

Kings may not be abused in their titles, nor God profaned in his name: nay,
to conclude; you must not think evil of the King in your heart, no^ practice
against him, be he never so wicked.

Knowledge.
The world might starve, except I make the feast
And man by me does differ from the beast.
KNowledge and understanding join hands with virtue and industry, to crown
the life with wealth and honor: so that by them four men of base parentage
have come to place of high preheminency.

Knowledge has an ear, wisdom an eye, truth a tongue, and virtue a heart,
which hears soundly, sees clearly, speaks wisely, and thinks heavenly.

Knowledge is like a tree, whose root is in a reposed heart, the blossoms are
elloquent words, and fruit worthy and commendable actions.

Knowledge teaches how well to live, not how long: the one wicked men commonly
desire, the other good men only attain.

Knowledge makes a Prince maiesticall in his Kingdom, and the care of
Counselors is the key of the Commonwealth: for thus are foreign affairs
discovered, and home (...): and as for the (...) and flourishing of a nation,
it can no way be established, except all men know and understand one another in
those places* wherein they act the History of then lives.

Knowledge sets the (...) working, and labor is the instrument of
understanding.

Knowledge remoues passion, and makes virtue predominant ^uer folly; so that
her persuasion is both sweet and powerful with the auditory.

Knowledge preuenteth a mischief before it come* when hadiwist sees it not,
till it is past and gone: puts on the helmet after the head is broken, and
shuts the slable door when the steed is stolen.

Knowing much, and doing little, is lasines: but to have much, and give little,
is mise^^: (...) action is the life of knowledge, as good works is the fruit
of faith.

Knowledge takes instruction of occasion, and circumstances help knowledge to
a method in proceeding: but of all things, the end must be first foreseen,
and then the means applied in their due time.

Knowledge in the wisest m^n is troubled, yea, tormented with the losts of the
flesh, the temptations of the devil, the treason of enemies, and the
importunity of friends: In all which, though we know what we ought to do, yet
we practice the contrary, and take part against knowledge with our wicked
affections.

Knowledge is grauelled about the secrets of the soul, because God has framed
it after his own image, and no man can tell what God is by description.

Knowledge directed all your Philosophers, and learned men in their exemplary
learning, especially such as studied divine matters, whereupon Thales Milesius
has taught us, that the most ancient of al things was God, for that he was
always: the most beautiful thing, the world: for that it was the work of
God: the most capable, was place, because it comprehended all other things; the
most profitable, hope: for that all other things gone, it only remained; the
best thing virtue, because without her, there could no good be spoken off; the
most swift, the mind of man; for in an instant it runs through the world;
the most forcible, necessity, because it goes beyond all other actions, and
accidents: the most easy, to give counsel to other: the most hard, for a man
to know himself: and most wise, Time: for that it follows, and observes
all things.

Knowledge more delights in the food of the spirit, then the body: Whereupon
Charles the 4. Emperor, entering one day into the school of Prage, and there
staying more then four hours, to hear the disputations of excellent
scholars; was told by some of his Lords, that it was time to go to supper:
whereupon he replied, Ye that love your bellies, get you to your victuals; for
I am better pleased thus to increase my knowledge with these disputations, then
any other refections.

Knowledge teaches us, that books are faithful counselors: for Alphonsus of
Aragon was wont to say, that without fear, envy, flattery, hope of reward, or
any other passion whatsoever, they did faithfully tell him whatsoever he
demanded. And Cicero called them deerly beloved books, a pleasant household: for
if he would, they would talk with him, if not, they were silent at his
commandment: they were nigh him without importunity, neither rash, cruel,
ravening, nor malicious: but every way affording satisfaction.

Knowledge most deceives a man, when he is proud of his own conceit, and so
grows to self-love: whereby he starteth aside before he come to true
knowledge indeed.

Knowledge does not consist in much reading, but in judicious observation, and
orderly conceiving, how to adopt, what he reads, to good purpose and use when
he shall have occasion.

Knowledge teaches men both secrets of Art, and wonders of Nature. By it
amongst others you may observe, that these three things are most firm in their
operations, suspicion, wind, and loyalty: the first, where it once enters,
never parts: the second, never enters, where it cannot get out: and the
third, where it once goes away, it never returns.

Knowledge leads to virtue, virtue to estimation, estimation to honor,
honor to observation, observation to love, love to heaven; and these be the
steps of the ladder of life.

Knowledge instructs thus far of the soul; that the soul being always
one and the same, by her qualities and powers assumeth diverse different
titles; as a spirit, whereby we contemplate; a sense, whereby we see, and
feel; a mind, whereby we conceive; a knowledge, whereby we understand; a
reason, whereby we discern; a will, whereby we consent; a memory, whereby we
record; and an essence, whereby we live: and all these are but one soul.

Knowledge of Philosophy is a good study; but a man must beware, least in
seeking for gold, he lose not his silver. For Alchumistrie is rather a knavery,
then a knowledge.

Knowledge discouers the errors of ancient writings, and present experience
fears not in many things to go clean contrary, and as it were flat against
the face of antiquity.

Knowledge teaches a Gardener to cull the weeds from the wholesome herbs:
the husbandman to till and plough his seasons: the Physician to decipher the
operation of simples: the Artificer to fashion his work to the best forms, and
with the best advantages: and all estates sexes and degrees, perfection in the
works of their callings.

Knowledge of a man's self only makes a man wise, how ever his books teach
him the knowledge of many other things.

Knavery.
All feasts and companies I do frequent,
But best I fare among the innocent.
Knavery makes men seem good, which are not: but at last in deceiving others,
they deceive themselves.

Knaves and Pandars are the venom of a Court, parasites and flatterers the
poison of a Prince; brokers and usurers the cormorants of a city, and couseners
and cunny catchers, the undoing of the country.

Knavery sometimes gains credit by chance, as cunning without learning: but yet
the seed that is sown by knavery, for the most part makes an unhappy harvest.

Knavery makes the heart false, and a face of brass to blush at nothing, and
outface any thing.

Knaves are impudent, as fools be importunate: both a grief to the honest,
and trouble to the wise.

Knavery boasts of shifting wit, and yet ends with beggary; while a
virtuous heart is sull of grace, and either obtains temporal blessings, or
is contented with that which it has.

Knavery is mere fraud and mockery of friendship, when under color of love and
kindness, a man either discouers his friends secrets, or works upon his
estate, or makes way to entise and obtain his wife, or deceives the trust
committed unto him, or leaves him in misfortunes, or indeed makes a
dissimuled show of love, and falls back when there is a trial to be made.

Knaves in their knaueries, are like swine that are wallowing in foul and
filthy places, who not only bedurty themselves, but raise a stink to trouble
others.

Knavery makes the Officer take bribes, the Lawyer plead in a wrong matter,
the wife to cuckold her husband, the Merchant to play her querout when he need
not; the citizen use false measures and weights, and every tradesman to use his
peculiar deceits, the Mercer to mingle mice turds with his pepper, the
Artifice^ to loiter, the countryman to water his corn, to make it weigh heavy,
the plowman to make his furrows too shallow, and all men to abuse themselves,
and cosen other in their calling.

Knavery is an ouercunning of wit and craft, which has twenty tricks to cosen
others; but at the last, of all others coseneth the author most. Yet an idiot
is a disgrace to nature, and is neither profitable to himself or any other.

Knavery of one man troubles a whole town. For as the winds do make the
seas to work, which now do toss, now sink the boat: so when knaves practice
their intended plot, the trouble or mischief lights on some man's pate.

Knavery is an instrument out of the devils budget, and serves for as many
purposes, as his workman will apply it unto: It is never idle, and yet not well
employed: it is ever busy, but deserves little thanks for his labor.

Knavery still tends to deceit, and yet is sometimes caught in its own
craft: for a fox seeing a cock sitting upon a tree, called to him with these
words; Good morrow cousin, (...) tell you good news* There is a great peace
made amongst all the living creatures of the world, so that none may offend
another; therefore I prethe^ come down, and let us talk a little merrily
together of this world. Indeed said the cock, these are good news; but what
(...) those two dogs, that come with open mouth toward thee? Whereat the fox
in a fear starting, and looking behind him, stayed a little. Why how now,
quoth the cock; if the news be true, why fear you the dogs? O, quoth the
fox, I believe the dogs have not heard of it, etc. But by this means, his
knavery was detected, and he went without his prey.

Knavery makes a villain laugh even going to hanging, and as we say, break a
jest of the gallows: but an honest heart finds matter of grief and
displeasure, at every offense of God and his neighbor.

Knaves can do great evil out of a little wit, when honest men can do little
good wanting wealth.

Knavery is commonly either in wicked words, or villainous actions: yet
sometimes sullen silence dissembles, when most mischief is a working.

Knavery is the cause why the wicked are flattered, and the good depraved. The
devil sets both on work, and he will pay them their wages.

Laws.
All Nations live in order, peace and right
When laws do rule, and sway an arm of might.
Laws make treason like the eyes of a Cockatrice, which kill, if they espy us
first with their venom: but are killed, if we discover it in his poison.

Laws make a sword the servant of justice, and a scepter the instrument of
mercy; and as justice must be showed to the reprobate; so must mercy extend to
the penitent.

Laws in misgouernd Commonwealths are compared to cobwebbes, through which
the great flies break well enough and escape, when the little ones are caught
and entangled.

^awes were first made for want of love* so that a Realm without justice is
the harbor of vnright^ousnes.

Laws, or if you will, going to law, require both charge and travail; but
miserable is that breath, which is sold to injustice for money, and terrible is
that travail that undoes the Master.

Laws are broken by scorn, and custom: as for the fools excuse ignorance,
howeuer it may go current, when favor admits it, it is no plea against the
fault, or the penalty.

Laws that are commanded by God, are to be obeyed before such as are
commanded by men; and thou shall find it better to go to prison, then to hell.

Laws are like a pair of tarriers; and he that enters into them, is like the
treading in a Maze, who goes in with ease, and out with labor. Or if you
will, the fellow in the horn; who leapeth lustily into the great end, but is
squeezed at the going out of the small.

Laws are made to terrify offenders, as Surgeons use burning irons to festred
(...) and although a sharp knife cuts quickly off, yet now and then the
violenc^ is flayed, when it meets (...)

^awes are ridiculous without execution, but an upright conscience fear^s
neithe^ one, nor other, no more then a sound man fears the Surgeon.

Laws that are quickly dispatched are the suitors lubilee: as a fortunate voyage
makes the Merchants holiday.

Laws of all Nations and Kingdoms are reduced from three laws; the law of
Nature, which is governed by reason, when a man does that to another, which he
would have done unto himself; the law of Nations, which are sometimes framed
by opinion, when Kings and Commonwealths make ordinances for themselves and
people; and the law of Custom, when an use or rite by little and little is
brought in amongst the people, which ^ependeth upon the well or evil observing
the same, etc.

Laws are infinite, but they unite the people in peace and concord, which
otherwise, would soon fa^l a-(...) sheafe of arrows is quickly broken one by
one, when the bundle is untied (...) the people of Commonwealths and kingdoms
not united in love and obedience to their laws.

Lechery.
When lust does master reason, man's a beast
Raging in sin; most loathsome at the least.
LEchery is love abused in carnal delight: and as scoffs are the superfluity
of wit, scabs of humors; so is lust of desires.

Lechery is a filthiness belonging only to men: for they against kind, and
times, abuse both themselves and others without any respect; whereas beasts are
limited by nature: and how-euer they rage in their seasons, yet are they
moderate when the heat is past, especially the female, and will not abuse one
another in an unnatural or unseasonable sort.

Lechery is an inward infection; for all other sins are without the body, but
this is an offense against a man's own body.

Lechery is a filthiness of such beastly variety, that men may sin with
men, women with women: man may sin by himself, by and with his own wife,
with beasts in abominable prostitutions: with their own bloods and kindred in
incestuous manner: with other men's wives in adulterous copulation: with all
sorts in filthy licenciousnesse: and in all, both abuse GOD, and confound
themselves in body and soul.

Lechery corrupted the vprightnes of Lot, weakened the strength of Sampson,
befooll'd the wit of Solomon, profaned the holiness of David, confounded the
peace of Israel, and brought a curse on Baal Peor for seducing the Jews.

Lechery weakneth the body, shortneth the life, corrupts the mind,
impouerisheth the state, infameth the credit, dulleth the understanding,
dampeth the heart, and damneth the soul.

Lechery is so fearful a temptation, that as a Father of the Church writes,
Paul was stung with the love of a virgin, which followed him in the service of
Christianity: how then can a man be safe alone with a bad woman, but he shall
fall into the snare of the devil. And if the choice Apostles have entered this
combat of concup^scence, how shall worldly men, and obsceane livers prevail in
the same?

Lechery, after Aristotle and other Philosophers, is the ruin of the body, the
abridgment of life, the corruption of virtue, the breach of the law, and the
effeminating of manhood.

Lechery named the first whore, made the first ^^ckold, brybed the first bawd,
and bred the first bastard.

Lechery was begot by ease and idleness, is maintained by pride and
wantonness, decaies by want and weakness, and dies in shame and filthiness.

Lechery is an enemy to virginity, the death of honesty, the breach of amity,
and the nurse of iniquity.

Lechery is remedied with fasting, and the body tamed with exercise: and if a
man would be continent, he must avoid the occasions, and means of the act.

Lechery is naturally attended with shame and fear: for the violentest man in
his ragingest heat, would be loath to be seen, and afraid to be known in such
an unlawful action.

Lechery will prove an unprofitable plea in Gods law: for if he could not be
excused, that said, he had married a wife, and therefore could not come; he
cannot be excused that is with a whore, and therefore will not come.

Lechery makes age dote, youth mad, a servant a commander, a free man a slave,
a fool civil, a woman impudent, a valiant man temperat, a coward valiant, a
beast fond, and a tiger mild.

Lechery breeds a painful pleasure, a woeful repentance, a miserable delight,
and hellish reward.

Lechery is in plain terms extreme lust, unlawful love, brutish desires,
beastly wantonness, and the itch or scab of old concupiscence: so that when a
lascivious man has as it were no ability to sin, yet the polluted heart has a
good will to be sinning.

Lechery ravished Dina; deceived Judah with Tham^r; destroyed Gomorrah; traduced
Ammon; murdered Vriah; wrought folly in Israel; and brought fiery serpents into
the host.

Love.
O^ love alone depends Gods royal law;
That is, when love of God does stand in awe.
Love breeds awful subjection, and willing obedience, without murmuring or
questioning.

Love is a hidden fire, a pleasing wound, a sweet poison, a bitter sweet, a
delightful disease, a pleasant punishment, a flattering death.

Love which is dishonest, ends in a thousand sorrows and travails: for many
times, if the woman do not dissemble, play false, and impouersh one; yet do
men become wounded, watched, abhorred, flowted, defamed, and bepilled.

Love of Princes glads the heart of the subjects; and when the reward of virtue
is not delayed, then is virtue proud of good government.

^oue is the joy of the heart, as faith is the salve of the soul.

Love of many, like a divided flame or stream is weakened by division; but he
that loves not at all, is of a strange condition and cold constitution.

Love can sometimes yield no reason even in sensible men; as hate no measure in
an enraged humor.

Love makes a man hansome, that peradventure cannot reach to pride, and
teaches him civility, that otherwise wants common humanity.

Love breeds melancholy, and melancholy requires solitariness; and
solitariness sets the thoughts on work: but wisdom preuenteth the
mischief, and makes exercise a dispeller of wantonness.

Love is commonly both praised and possessed by constancy; but fear does
frustrate all desire, and is indeed loves only enemy.

Love is in his glory, when it is enamoured on virtue: but where beauty
bewitcheth reason, there is a base, and (usually) an unlucky passion.

Love has a language in silence, which is rather seen in action, then
protestation.

Love thy wife as thy self; thy children as of thy self; thy friend next to
thy self; but GOD above thy self.

Love trusts our wives with life, our friends with our goods, our kindred
with our liberty, the commonwealth with our honor, and the Divines with our
souls: but God is to be trusted in all, and over all.

Love, that makes ones head a cushi^ for his Mistress feet, shows that he
finds more force in her eyes, then in his own^ heart.

Love with jealousy and a mad man, are cousin germans in understanding: for
questionless love is a madness, and then had Bedlam need to be a great house:
for he that never was in that predicament, is either blind, or babish.

Love, and the cough, and a woman with child, can hardly be concealed.

Love is happy, where eyes speak, hearts answer, and faith is firm.

Lovers that are eager and affectionate, are like fighting hens, who in hope
of victory think they have spurs on their heels.

Love that is wanton, breeds but loss of time, and malicious humors bring the
soul to destruction.

Love not without a cause, and leave not a sure hold: for affection may be
deceived, and fortune is faithless.

Love is painted like a Chimera, which was a monster according to Fulgentius,
with three heads: the fist a Lion; the second a Goat; the third a serpent:
signifying, that love was fierce and proud as a Lion in the beginning,
libidinous and luxurious like a Goat in the midst; and in the end, full of
poison like a Serpent.

Love of goodness begins in the loathing of evil, as the declining from good
breeds inclination to ill: but both good and ill cannot agree in a godly soul.

Love has not her perfect objects or best conditions, if men love the world,
which is so full of deceitful flatteries; or their own humors, which draw men
into many dangers; or themselves more then their neighbors; or God not more
then themselves.

Love relieueth the miserable, and sends souls to heaven; makes the beauty
of the Church to shine; and taking the name and effect of charity, is the
pathway to salvation.

Love is not love but sorrow, not mirth but displeasure, not ^aste but torment,
not recreation but confusion, when in the enamoured, there is not youth,
liberty, and liberality.

Love, according to the world, enstructeth young men to serve; the liberal to
spend; the patient to suffer; the discreet to have skill to talk; the secret
to keep silence; the faithful to gratify; and the valiant to persevere.

Love the Be for her honey, and allow her a good hiue: but trouble not her
labors, lest her sting be unpleasant.

Love is seen even in creatures void of reason: for the Pellicane makes her
breast bleed, yea sometimes to death to feed her young; and the Stork is not
unkind to feed her old one in age.

Love, of all passions is the sweetest, and treason of all villainy is the
vildest.

Love in youth, is full of kindness: in age, full of trouble: in folly, full of
vanity: in ielou^e, full of frenzy: and in necessity, full o^ misery.

Love was an old nothing to exercise wit in idleness: and is now a new nothing
to feed ^olly with imagination.

Love is begotten by the eyes, bred in the brains, walks in the tongue, grows
with the flesh, and dies in an humor.

Love does trouble wit, hinder Art, hurt nature, disgrace reason, lose time,
spoil substance, cross wisdom, serve folly, weaken strength, submit to
beauty, and abase honor.

Love is wills darling, patience trial, passions torture, the pleasure of
melancholy, the play of madness, the delight of varieties, and the deviser of
vanities.

Love is the virgins crack; the widows cros^e; the bachelors bane; the married
man's purgatory; the young man's misery; and the ageds consumption: a fained god;
an idle fancy; a kind of fury; and in some, a frenzy.

Love is the abuse of learning; the ground of envy; the stirrer of wrath; the
cause of mischief; the disquiet of the mind* the distracter of the wit; the
disturber of the senses; and destruction of the whole man.

Liberty.
I rather had abroad my self engage,
Then with the Lark live in a golden cage.
LIberty is such a privilege of nature, that the bird had rather fly in the
open fields, then sing in a silver cage, or princely banqueting house: from
which even with gladness, if an escape can be made, she flies away.

Liberty has bin so precious even amongst Cities and Countries, that many of
them have destroyed themselves, rather then be subject to their conquering
enemies. Witness Numantia, who from her ancient original of Greeks, and
immitation of their honorable maintaining their liberty, set fire of all they
had, and after killed one another.

Liberty is so sweet a delight, that it has made kingdoms forsworn, and
Princes break their vows, which necessity enforced: witness all the tributs
that France, England, Denmark, and other Countries have paid to one another:
and for which whole Armies have been levied, battles fought, thousands
slaughtered, Cities deuasted, Countries overrun, and people brought to
ruin; and all to maintain^ their liberty.

Liberty has caused many rebellions, and taught great Princes admirable
lessons of magnanimity. For when Zenobia Queen of Palmira had lost her husband
Odenatus, she raised wars in Syria against the Romans to maintain her
liberty: but at last, overcome by Aurelianus the Emperor, and carried in
triumph to Rom^, she there died in sorrow for the loss of her liberty.

Liberty is a bewitching pleasure; for it brings us to poverty: for rather
the^ we will take pains, or serve in some honorable attendancie, we will be
idle, as vagabonds, and abuse liberty in wicked and abominable lives.

Liberty is cause of all disorder: for if the licencious be not restrained by
law, and terrified from offending by punishment, and detained in obedience by
denial^ of liberty; they would run at random to all vices: and set open a
larger field of intemperancie.

Liberty is the mother of wantonness; and therefore as in a Citi^ there be
many watches, Courts of guard, gates defended, rounds walking, and Sentinells
standing to keep men within their houses at unseasonable times: so in the
liberty of our lives, there be diverse virtues to suppress our rebellious
thoughts, and as it were, put in prison our impious cruptions of frailetie.

Liberty many times proceeds from honorable respects, and causes loss of
life before loss of reputation: as in the story of Sopho^isba may appear;
whom when Masinissa had promised Scipio to deliver into his hands: because he
would perform his word, and defend her glory from captivity, he caused her
to poison herself; and so rendered the dead body to the Romans.

Liberty is the jewel of life, and comfort of our very souls. For if we be
free, it makes us the Lords servants: and if we be servants, it aduanceth us
to be the Lords freemen: so still we must be at liberty from sin, to avoid
the servitude of Hell.

Liberty is a good mother of many bad children: for sloth, idleness,
licentiousnes, vanity, wantonness, abuse of time, poverty, and wants are many
times the birth of her travels, and become monsters in the world through the
abuse of liberty.

Libert^e in a young man is as dangerous as laciuious talk to an a^^orous
virgin, for both tend to destruction, and without special graces there is no
prevention of ruin. Liberty makes the dear leap^, the horse neigh, the calfe
skippe, the lamb^ play, the cony ^risk, the dog wag his tail, the ^ouirrell
gamboll, the ape mount the trees* and all creatures rejoice for this benefit
of nature.

Merchant.
I am (if royal) of that dignit^^,
As bright, by right, makes my posterity.
MErchant is a worthy co^mon-wealths man, for how ever private commodity may
transport him beyond his own bounds: yet the public good is many ways
augmented by mutual commerce, foreign trading, exploration of countries,
knowledge of languages, increase of navigations, instruction and mustering of
seamen, diversity of intelligences, and prevention of foreign treasons.

Merchant is only traduced in this, that the hope of wealth is his principal
object whereby profit may arise, which is not usually attained without
corruption of heart, deceitful protestations, vain promises, idle oaths,
paltry lies, pedling deceit, simple denials, palpable leaving his friend, and
in famous abuse of charity.

Merchant must be cunning in diverse arts, nay: need both learning and
judgment, especially Arethmaticke, Cosmography, morallitie, Rhetoric,
understanding to make use of time, and place, and skill in his profession to
know what is cheap to be bought abroad, and dearly soulde at home? where
ready money serves the turn, and exchange of commodity supplies the want, how
he shall be entertained, how long, and how many times welcomed, because in
some places they are tied to precepts, and limited to proclamations.

Merchant is no common freeman over the world, as we suppose: for every
country has her several restraints, he that travels in the East, may not go
into the streights, he that goes into Indy, cannot trade into Turkey, not he
that sends to Turkey have business in Stood, or other places of our principal
marts, except he be free of those companies, and have served accordingly in his
prentiship.

Merchant is a ciuell and conuersable man, rich in money, delicate in apparel
dainty in diet, sumptuous in furniture, elloquent in discourse, secret in his
business, careful in his losses, watchful for his profit, and above all,
sparing in his lending of money. Merchant continuing his estate, may setle his
fortune, and augment his credit: but if he once turn Gentleman before his
time, he is like a gamster that plales at a game he knows not for a great
deal of money: wherein I will give you only one reason, whereas before he
employed his time to get wealth, he now spends it in consuming his substance:
and whereas before he remained in his own element, and so had some luster, he
now is counted but an intruder, and purchases only vanitle.

Merchant commits this error in his native opinion to speak ^uill of
Gentlemen, when all that he labors for, is to be esteemed so, or at least to
leave his son so, both in name and liberty.

Merchant is a substantial commonwealths man, how ever some pedlary fellows,
and paltrey brokers have abused the title.

Merchant must take heed of keeping his word and credit: for if he fail at
his days, and absent himself from the common place of intercourse, as we call
it the Bursse, let him be never so rich, he loses a good opinion, and
hazardeth his reputation for ever.

Man.
A little world I am, and all control.
As Gods vicegerent, but the inward soul.
MAn seeming wise, and is not, is no better then a fool: and he that is wise,
and seems not: is a flower without a sent.

Man though never such a dwarffe grows not on the highest hill: or never so
tall, loses any thing in the lowest valley.

Men (as Astrologers do dream) do receive qualities according to the
condition of the plannets under which they are borne as from Saturn a man has
understanding, from Jupiter strength and honor, from Mars courage, from the
Sun virtue, from Venus motion, from Mercury sharpnes of wit, and from the
Moon seed of generation: the Physicians again agree, that man in his creation
receives his spirit from the Sun, his body from the Moo^e, his blood from
Mars, his wit from Mercury, his desire from Jupiter, his voluptuousnes from
Venus, and his humors from Saturn.

Man that lives by love, and dies in faith: finds in his soul the
everlasting comfort of both.

Man is subject to such blindness of mind, that he will fast, pray, and take
pains for a momentary pleasure, but will do neither for the true and heavenly
pleasure.

Man that is carnal, persecuteth the spiritual, through ignorance or Envy:
but the spiritual man pardons the carnal through wisdom and mercy.

Man pleases his stomach in nothing so well, as in meat disgested: nor his
soul as in Gods word truly belee^ed.

Man and his ages are described by the four times of the year: as the spring
his infancy, the summer youth, the harvest manhood, and the winter old age.

Man was formed without Paradise, yet had he the name of superior: Euah was
framed in Paradise, that had the name of inferior: so it is not the place, but
the perfection, that gives the title to nobleness.

Man is the image of God, the choice creature of his love, the commander of
all creatures the lobourer of the earth, the obse^uer of nature the deuicer of
forms, and the student of grace.

Man is the lesser world, the pilgrim of the earth, the traveler to heaven,
the honor of reason, the wonder of nature, the joy of Angels, and the jewel
of heaven.

Woman is the femall of man, the second creature, the care of time, the trouble
of reason, the exercise of patience, the strength of will, the weakness of
understanding, the increase of numbers, the delight of vanity, the pride of
beauty, the abuse of love* the breeder of iealosie, and the deceit of trust.

Man being subject to passion, will quickly overthrow his understanding, if
he do not refrain by reason, so that even worldly love, wherein the best men
are ouerreached, will turn to displeasure without manly restraint, and orderly
remedies, which are absence and employment.

Man of himself can do no good, though he seem to commend all the creatures
in world.

Modesty.
I grace the graceless; but, the vertuo^s, I
Make like abstracted virtue in the eye.
Modesty makes the countenance of ^ woman gracious, her eye pearcing, and her
looks amorous: but a dead eye, and dull spirit, are, if not odious, yet at
lest louelesse.

Modesty will never ^^dure obsceane or filthy speeches: for how-euer the
lips of wantons will run riot to please themselves; yet does modesty
restrain them from impudent discourses, and indecent behauiours.

Modosty restrains men from a greedy desire of vainglory, and cannot endure
any palpable and gross flattery to men's faces.

Modesty keeps women from going abroad; when they are abroad, from entering
into any infamous and notorious places when they come into such by compulsion,
or necessity of time or company, from giving example of any riot, and vnciuell
behavior: and when the company is ouer-seene in either, from tarrying in the
same, or forbearing the like excess, as if they took no pleasure therein.

Modesty is even an ornament in Princes; which made Alphonsus King of Naples
the wonder of his time for many gracious actions; especially when a Gentleman
of ^^ples upon an injury done unto him by a great officer, which he could not
revenge, fell into a frenzy: wherein he having passed many idle actions like a
lunatic, he was further subject to the noble man's envy. Whereupon, he came
one day to the King to beg the government of the Castle which the Gent: had;
alleging it was not fit for a mad man to have any possession of lands or
castles. But the worthy Prince most modestly answered, Alas, thy request is
unreasonable; for if God have laid his punishment upon him for his sins, to
distemper a little his brains, would thou have me play the devil, without
offense, to take away his goods and honors, and so drive him quite out of his
wits? No, I will not add unto his affliction.

Modesty is the daughter of Nurture: and how-euer sometimes it proves the
cunning of nature, when a lascivious woman would appear honest and religious;
yet questionless, it hides the fault, and excuses the imperfection: so that
she passes without public condemnation, and infamous opprobry.

Modesty will not justify dishonest actions; so that how-euer we are driven by
nature to undue courses, yet does modes^^e restrain us from the publication
and impudent defense of infamous abuses.

Modesty shuts a young man's lips, and encloseth a wantons eyes: so that he
will not talk filthy, nor she look lasciu^ously.

Modesty keeps a wise man from scorning ^ fool; the learned from triumphing
over the ignorant; an enemy from insulting over another misery; a valiant
soldier from disgracing a weak courage; a rich man from vp-braiding a beggar;
and all degrees from vainglorious appearances.

Modesty flees from the conversation of the lascivious, and auoideth the
occasion of incontinencie; so that though men do amiss, yet in the sildomnes,
and ciuel demeanor, a pardon before hand is granted, and no man can judge by
the outward show.

Modesty apparrelleth in comeliness, howeuer the heart is wrapped in
wantonness.

Money.
To make or mar men, I will vnder^abe;
For as they use me, them I Will mar or make.
MOney, or if you will riches, (for so remember, that this word shall stand for
both, yea for all) augmenteth the pleasures of life: but the joy of the godly
is in such objects and pleasures, as cause contempt of all worldly wealth.

Money makes a man a ^laue, if he make not a slave of it; and when it has
done, it will be gone, we know not when, nor to whom.

Money employed to necessary uses, and good purposes, brings comfort to our
consciences; but hoorded up, is infectious, and will witness against us.

Money breeds not so many inconveniences in the want, as in the bad employment;
even as there is less hurt in the want of wit, then in the ill employing of
it. But the want of honesty and grace (which is the only true treasure, that
cannot be abused, but makes men immortal if it be well employed) is a greater
want, and more lamentable loss, then either of both.

Money and wit does many wonders in the world; but the virtuous and faithful
are gracious with God, and shall be glorious with him in the world to come.

Money is the Monarch of the world; the maintenance of pride; the nurse of
covetousness; the steward of Lechery; the sower of ^edition; the cause of
war; the sinnewes of war; and the ouer-throwe both of City and Country.

Money is the gluttonous purueyor, the drunkards cupbearer, the theefes
tempter, and the hangmans master.

Money is the misguider of wit, the corrupter of conscience, the blinder of
reason, the ouerthrower of honor, the Usurers God, the poor man's oppression,
the Lawyers hope, and the laborers hire.

Money does good to few, hurt to many; pulls down Churches, buildes fair
houses, makes the prodigal an ape, and the miser a dog: makes furrows in
the Ocean, and fire in men's brains, fetches the beasts from the wilderness,
and the birds out of the air; draws fancies out of fine wits, and eloquence
from learned mouths; makes friends foes, and enemies friends, and serves all
professions, qualities, and conditions, from the King to the beggar.

Money is the relief of the poor, and the ruin of the rich: because the one
does lack it, and the other abuse it.

Money is good, so it be well got; better, if it be well employed; and not ill,
if it be honestly left.

Money makes men to commit idolatry, but he is of a strange religion that
thinks gold a God.

Money for want of grace makes man find means to get riches; wit to increase
them; will to keep them; and power to possess them: but teaches not the
owner the true use of them, nor yields him any perfect pleasure in enjoying
them; but makes them that might be Lords of other men's, to be slaves to their
own proper goods.

Money causes cursed avarice, which is far worse then honest poverty; because
the poor man is contented with his little, and the rich man with his
abundance, seems to himself to be in necessity.

Money is the grand witch of the world, which infects all minds, and works
mischief where ever it comes: no Coniurer can allay the evil, that is raised
by this devil.

Money in the best increase breeds care, and the proudest confidence makes
our chiefest footing a changeable sleeting.

Money was not made to be kept, but well employed: better are the vessels that
pour out mercy, then hoord up metals.

Money makes the passage in all Countries, how-euer learning is good for
judgment, and language for travail.

Money in the want causes much woe: but the want of grace is the souls
misery. Money is a blessing, if the rich relieve the needy, and knowledge a
true comfort, if the learned instruct the ignorant.

Money, wanting to supply necessity, puts a wise man to his wits, as a tired
horse in a foul way to his patience.

Money is dangerous for surfeit in the sweetness, but unsavory and very sower,
when it has once bred the souls distemper: nay, then it is tyrannous in
power, and terrible to the troubled mind of the owner; drawing out the life in
the length of cares, and shutting it up in the misery of repentance.

Money makes the covetous man want that, which he possesses; and the whole
life of the niggard is spent in penance.

Money makes a wretched niggard seek carefulnes for himself, envy for his
neighbors, spurs unto his enemies, a prey for thieves, peril for his
person, damnation for his soul, malediction for his heirs, and law for his
children.

Money and the love thereof makes a wretched man dwell in a house, whose
chambers are full of cobwebbes; the doors vnhindged; the windows cleft; the
locks decayed; the floers uneven and full of holes; the chaires broken; the
chimneyes fallen down: that it is rather a house for hogs, or horse, or kyne,
then for men.

Negligence.
Much blame I aoe procure, and reason too.
Best do I live, when I do men undo.
NEgligence keeps preferment back, for many a man loses the office due
unto him of course, for want of diligence to aetend the same: thus is the tide
lost for not taking the time, and the day lost when a man angles wiihout fit
implements, he shall neither catch fish nor frogs.

Negligence is the cause that water, as weak as it is, throws down whole
cities if it be not prevented, and the Sea in her ouerflowings drowneth whole
countries.

Negligence dares not plough the ground, because the earth seems duskey, and so
he supposes it cannot bring forth dainty colors.

Negligence is the only enemy to good huswiuery, and the only overthrow of
good housekeeping: for as diligence is the foundation of hospitality; so is
negligence of pe^urie and beggerie.

Negligence is the cause that the horse is ill dressed, the cattle unfed, the
husbandry backward, the vineyard barren, the season ill sown, the corn as
ill gathered, as ill grown, the meal mustie, the bread moldie, the malt full
of mice-turdes, and green for want of turning, the drink dead as soon as it
is made, the cream thin, the butter nastie or none, the cheese full of eyes
and as hard as a horn, in a word: that no work is well done, no food
wholesome, no life long.

Negligence cares not, how much is spent, how little is reserved, who eats the
best meat first, nor when provision is prepared.

Negligence of a sleeping sentinel, of the watch in a camp, the court of
guard in a city: causes the overthrow of the Army, the surprising of the
city, and the spoil of a whole country.

Negligence amongst Mariners runs the ship on shelfes and sands, leaves
the leakes unstopped, entangleth the tackling, lets the rudder loose,
suffers the ship to run at random, and at last, is cause that all is lost.

Negligence seeldome shuts the door, brusheth the apparel, fouldeth up the
linen, makes the vessel handsome, cleanses the garners, sweetneth the
chambers, keeps any good orders, or makes any good manners.

Negligence is a maruailous enemy to Princes palaces and profits, whose many
officers might and would better husband their business, if either they were to
manage their own affairs, or did taste of the wants in private houses.

Negligence is the only adversary to all arts, trades, professi^n: and
virtue it self; and although ignorance is a lamentable defect, yet may it be
invincible, and so less to be blamed then negligence which cannot be excused.

No body.
I am a matchless monster in all times:
Who have no Body, yet have grossest crimes.
Nobody keeps such a rule in every bodies house: that from the mistress to
the basest made, there is not (...) turn done without him: (...) band ^^ide
his s^^^ie opened, (...) who did it? he shall find No (...) good wise see her
vtensels (...) demand who displast them, (...) uery servants reply will be
(...) the servants discover the (...) the chambers durtied, it (...) when every
child is (...) children fall and break their (...) scratch one another faces,
and (...) there or nursse seem angry and (...) hurt them, they will (...) body
touched them; and (...) cuse has brought lying to a custom.

Nobody many times makes the (...) man cuckhold, for though his (...) roso
have been at home all day, (...) ask who has been there, she (...)
suddenly, no body, who (...) say again sweet heart, Nobody?

Nobody and Master Negligence may (...) together: for if a door be open
(...) chief done, and a question be made to find out the offender, aniwere
(...) with Nobody (...) the horses run astray: yet did nobody do it.

Nobody in a discomfiture runs away, nor disordereth the rancks: for every
body lays his own shame upon another, and demand of every one in particular,
and nobody began the disorder.

Nobody resembles Robin-goodfellowe, and the spirits of old time, who like
Friars and cou^ining knaves came in the night, and swept the house for good
cheer: and yet nobody did it, or it was done at least by invisible fairies
and devils, and so by nobody.

Nobody at confession abuses her husband, though the men name so many women
offenders, and the women recount how many times they have abused their bodies:
yet when every body examines his own wife, the return is found with nobody.

Nobody is an admirable vndershriefe: for if he favor the party, or is feed
extraordinarily, though he go down with an execution of purpose: yet is
nobody at home, nor nothing done.

Nobody, no thing, and no where: are excellent relatiues; for ask, who did
such a thing, and they answer, nobody? where have you been sirrah all this
while? forsooth no where: or what are you doing all this while? why nothing:
and thus with no, all certainties indeed are put by.

Nobody cut the cloth, nicked the table, scratched the windows, brake the
glasses, croumbled the bread, spilled the drink, durtied the house, tumbled
the bed, ran down stairs, made a noise, talked aloud, let a fart, and made
a perfume.

Nobody came to rob a man that nothing had, and ran away into no place, and
nobody came to look him out: and if they had found him, it had been no
where, doing nothing.

Nobody tells strange news, inuenteth lies, disperceth libels, sets
friends at varience, and abuses many millions: for when a privy search is
made for the authors, nobody is found to auoch the actions.

Nurture.
If Nature be not nurtured in men?
They will be rude, or else most beastly then.
NVrture both helps and beautifies nature, as you may see in many an
vnreason^^^ creature: for though the Falkon will sl^e in his kind: yet is she
taught by high flying to stoop the better, and so the Merlin by nurture and
well manning, will kill a Partridge almost as big again as her self.

N^rture is the mistress of civility, and adorneth all Commonwealths with
that majesty, wherein Princes maintain their estates: for though Kings by
nature have diverse prerogatives, which breed obedience in their subjects: yet
does nurture so sweeten their nature by sweetness, that it allures men's love
much more, and so there is pleasure and honor united together.

Nurture teaches a Noble man affability, a Gent^curtesie, an officer
comlines, a Judge uprightness, a Courtier hansomnesse, a Citizen cleanliness,
a Merchant finenesse, a countriman soberness, and a Scholar civility.

Nurture keeps a great Lady from pride, an inferior from niceness, a
Gentlewoman from rudeness, a mistress from coyness, a dame from stoutenes, a
good wife from sluttishnesse, a Damsel from rudeness, a child from
boldness, and a woman in general from vnwomanhood.

Nurture instructs a father to love, and yet correct: a child to obey, a
master to command, a servant to stand in awe, a husband to begentle, a wife to
respect, a housekeeper to provide, the household to save, a kinseman to
observe, and a friend to endure.

Nurture which teaches the true and easy disposition of worldly wealth,
makes it a pleasure, which otherwise breeds trouble and perplexity to the
unskillful and unworthy owner; for if we know not how to dispose of our goods,
when God does send them, we are unworthy of them: and how can we truly be
said to be wise or wealthy men, if we know not, or do not make use
accordingly of our wealth by discretion, and condition of our calling.

Nurture teaches a school of good man-manners: to salute our betters with
reverence, our equal with love, our inferior in courtesy, to speak orderly,
to give the wall, not to be angry without a cause: and when there is cause to
moderate the same: to look cheerfully, to be apparrelled cleanly, to go
soberly, to live handsomely, to converse without offense, to entertain with
cheerfulness, and to dismiss with freed lives.

Nurture purchases good report, when rudeness and inciuilitie keep a man
from respect: nay, make conversation tedious and odious to all men.

Nurture is such a jewel in a nation: that all others, where it is not; are
called barbarous, for lack of civility, besides the beastliness of
conditions, eat one another in necessity, or rather wantonly or wilfully only
in savage inhumanitie, without necessity.

Nurture is a handsome commendation, and so far from flattery, that when we
say: he is a well mannered man, we mean: there is a great deal more to be
spoken in his commendations then we have yet uttered; whereas in all other
praises we may quickly exceed, and incur suspicion of hypocrisy or flattery.

Nurture teaches us to deal gently with women, how ever men may be answered
with ruder terms, and manly contradictions.

Nurture and ciuility are in a manner all one: for good manners is the end and
scope of their journey, and every man must be a scholar in that school, or
else he shall never be preferred to virtues accademy.

Oeconomick.
Who keeps an house, and knows not me, he shall,
Not keep it so, but it with him must fall.
OEconomick in one brief definition teaches all good rules of housekeeping,
and orderly governing of a family: yet there be some housekeepers, which
keep as ill houses as they do ill orders; as the worm and mole that dwell in
darkness, the thief and cutpursse in a dungeon, the strumpet and vagabond in
Bridewell, the matchiauilian and murderer in Hell.

Oeconomick makes marriage the first degree, and foundation of a family: for
as a ship cannot be governed without a rudder; so cannot a house be ordered
without an ouerseer, which must needs be man and wife, subordinate one to the
other: he to play the good husband abroad, and she the good housewife at home,
and both to consent in a sweet harmoney of mutual help to maintain their
family.

Oeconomick has great necessity and near affinity with nurture and
civility, whereby the wife must have gravity in speech and action: wisdom
in governing, patience in suffering her husband, love to bring up her
children, affability to conuersing, diligence to lay up and save, and
friendlinesse in entertaining, and dismissing neighbors and friends when they
come.

Oeconomick teaches the married man to be reposed in speech; mild of
conversation; faithful wherein he is trusted; wise wherein he gives
counsel; careful for the provision of his house; diligent in ordering his
goods; suffering in the importunities of his wife; and careful in bringing up
his children, maidens, and men.

Oeconomick warns, that men and women too young attempt not marriage or
houskeeping, lest their wives are broken and spoiled in their childbedde; their
strength weakened; their children multiplied; their patrimony consumed; jealousy
inflamed; honesty and honor stained; the household unprovided; the substance
consumed; and the man and wife finally separated, after long discontent, and
great want.

Oeconomick must first of all provide for necessity, and then prevent
prodigality: for after money is gone, and wants are come, it will be too late
to spare, when the barrel is at the bottom.

Oeconomick is opposed and encumbered with manyu inconveniences in married
folks, wherein if fortune cannot be prevented, wisdom must mittigate the
extremity; as commonly, a mild and modest maiden is a poor one; a rich one
proud of her dowry; a fair one of her beauty, and is to be watched; a foul
one is nastie, and is to be loathed; a wise and comely, is both wilful and
costly; a semster, a singer, or dauncer, and no housekeeper; a huswife irksome
and imperious; and an honest one jealous. Besides, if thou make thy wife tarry
at home, she will complain; if she walk at liberty, the neighbors will talk
of thee; if thou chide, she will be sullen and dumb; if thou be silent,
nothing shall be heard for her chime; if she have the laying out, the stock
goes to wrack; if thou dispose thy own money, she scorns to come for every
penny; if thou keep thy house, thou art suspicious; if thou tarry abroad, thou
art vicious; if she be trim, she must abroad to be seen; if she be but in
ordinary fashion, thou art a base minded miserable man: and so may I go
infinitely on the inconveniences and crosses, that are incident to housekeepers
and married folks.

Oeconomick is blessed, when the wife is modest; a housekeeper, no babbler; not
fretting, fuming, nor of any ill condition: for the impudent, prating, angry,
scolding and fighting woman, makes her husband either a sheep or a lion;
discrediteth her kin; is blamed of her friends; hated of her servants; slouted
and avoided of her neighbors.

Oeconomick gives warning that the husbands be not rigorous, especially when
they be new married to their wives: for as the wife is the honor and happiness
of her husband in respect of her chastity: so the husband is the hell of his
wife, in regard of his cruelty.

Oeconomick gives warning, that the husbands be not over ielous: for how-euer
a man may sometimes shut the doors, remove his wife from the window, bar her
going abroad, and detain her from suspicious company; yet must he bring this
to pass with great skill, and show, that he has always more faith in her
liberty, then in his own restraint or obseruant eye.

Oeconomick gives warning, that though there happen unkindness between man
and wife, yet not to impart it to their neighbors, nor give them cause of
whispering; lest from thence it run over all the town, and expose them both to
derision.

Oeconomick teaches husbands to provide things necessary for all domestical
occasions, as to feed and cloth their wives, and their children, and to give
them good education, to pay their servants, and to moderate their expenses, to
cast abroad for their livings, to be skillful in bargainings, to get their
goods honestly, to deal with all men equally, and upon occasion to give
liberally; and in a word, to dispatch all affairs without doors. The office of
wives, is to keep their houses, to gather and save the goods, not to spend
vainly, or to be too talkatiue with every body, to (...) their words and
actions and clothes with modesty, to oder all things within, with discreet
frugalitie, and matron-like to govern her family; and to demand nothing
ouer-costly for her degree.

Oeconomick instructs the husbands, that they bring no suspicious person to
their houses; and the women not to be over (...) with any man, though a near
(...).

Oeconomick causes the women to sow with the needle, work at the distaffe,
spin (...) rock, play the cook, take heed of (...), as the only enemy to
chastity, to (...) about even with her head undressed, and her coats tuckt up,
her arms bare, and feet without slippers, chyding the maids, calling up the
servants, and dressing the children: feeding the chickens, making the cheese,
setting over the pot, tunning the beer, turning the malt; and so orderly
along to every other necessary thing.

Oeconomick te^cheth inferior women to make their own partlets; to wash their
clothes, to air the wheat, to sift the meal, to make the bread, to set on the
pot, and to dispatch every meaner office in due order and place.

Oeconomick more reioceth the husband to see his wife working on the Saturday,
then gossipping on the Sunday: but there can be no good husbandry, or
housekeeping for family, nor good example for the neighborhood or vicinity,
nor commendation for the children, when the wife goes to bed at midnight,
rises next day at a leven, goes to dinner at twelve, sleeps or talks all
the afternoon till supper time, spends much time in trimming her chambers, and
never descends down stairs to look to the inferior rooms. When the
Husband gives not the woman proportionable money to provide for her family,
but hanteth the tavern, looks neither to maid nor man, tilleth not his ground
in due season, and is negligent in all his affairs within and without doors.

Office and officers.
The good, the bad, the high, the low I serve;
But still the vncorrupt does best deserve.
OFfices that are well gotten, make good magistrates to relieve the widow and
fatherless: but he that oppresses them, is both unworthy of any office, and
to be punished for example of injustice to others in like place.

Offices obtained by corruption, make the prosperity and posterity that get
them unhappy, because evil is unpunished, malice covered, justice hindered, vice
nourished, and the inward enemies of our souls so strengthened against the
virtues or our minds, that they are either so weakened that they cannot show
forth their efficacy, or so utterly banished, that they sildome return to
their native country.

Offices are commonly a way for the Prince to know the condition of the
subjects: for as the touchstone tries current and counterfeit metals: so does
the integrity or iniquity used in offices, try the disposition of
magistrates; and by them, the opinion and conversation of the subject. For good
Princes make good laws; good laws raise good magistrates; good magistrates
ouer-see good executions; and good execution detaineth the inferior sort in
obedience and loyalty to supreme authority; in love to the country, in due
respect to their betters, courtesy to equals, humanity toward inferiors, and
charity to all of all sorts.

Offices are still subject to this error; that such as should obtain them by
order of place, are commonly shut out by favor or reward: insomuch that
Princes cannot sometime eat or sleep in quiet for such suitors, as are ever
begging and buzzing in their ears. Which makes me remember a story of
Alphonsus King of Naples; who being at supper, and having on either hand some
or other to whisper in his ear about the obtaining some office of honorable
or profitable place, suddenly with a loud voice cried out; O how happy are the
very asses, that travail with their burdens: for when they are at their bait,
their masters let them feed quietly, which you see Kings cannot do.

Officers ought to look into causes, not persons: that power may not oppress
misery, nor pity hinder justice to the hurt of any.

Officers and Magistrates are to know, that mercy without remissness,
severity without tyranny, zeal without hypocrisy, justice without
extremity, and pity without partiality, not only conserve Commonwealths,
but augment the reputation of particular offices.

Offices abused by wicked magistrates, make the rich murmr, the poor cry
out, the widow wring her hands, the orphan shed tears, the soldier mutiney,
the scho^er complain, and all sorts repine.

Officers that be good may be subject to some imperfections: and then knowing
their infirmities, they must rather with an humble lenity draw others from
their errors, then with a rough tyranny make them destitute of hopes, and more
dissolute in manners.

Officers that are wise, are the pillars of State; as a gracious Prince is the
joy of his subjects.

Officers that are wicked, sometimes do well to gain fame; like healing
witches, that would be thought charitable, and do that they do, merely by
delusion, to obtain an honest reputation.

Officers corrupted, have commonly evil eyes; dissembling tongues;
hypocritical hearts; open hands; and close feet. For they will sit still for
their own profits, but sildome take pains to help others.

Officers thinking of nothing but gain, forget to enjoy what they have already
got with labor and pain.

Offices obtained by money, and not to be continued long in probability, make
the possessors the more greedy to enrich themselves.

Offices bestowed by Princes in court, against ancient custom, and commendable
order, make the Courtiers to murmur: saying, The Prince does not consider; the
Council does not dispatch; the Paymasters delay; the Parasites bear sway; the
Bishops be not residents; the Secretaries have private pensions; Justices take
bribes; the officers compound for duties; the gentlemen play the vnthri^ts; the
husbandmen that drudge for all, are beggars.

Officers ought to be thankful to God, and pitiful to men: for God hates
the sin of ingratitude: and the poor does revenge injuries with tears.

Officers in the administration of justice, are governed by learning and
wisdom: for learning, to give sentence; and prudence, to govern; both which
are two such properties, as many desire, but few obtain.

Offices amongst martial men are bestowed by order of discipline, and
knowledge in the wars: otherwise shall the unexperienced hazard the business
in hand, and give the whole Camp cause to repine and repent. Yet many times
the favor of Generals may be justifiable in the preferment of younger
soldiers, who may be of greater merit then their elders.

Officers that get to preferment with intent of private profit, are not only
void of good counsel, but continue therein to their greater scandal; the
dishonor of the bestower; the infamy of the procurer; the fear of good men,
and fall of good order.

Order.
The heauen's, without me, would confused rest,
But with me, bell may well receive the blessed.
ORder framed the world, ^etled the heavens, proportioned the motions of the
Sun, Moon and Stars in their seasons; embelished the earth with infinite
varieties of flowers and fruits in their seasonable times; limited the seas
with banks and bounds; and fet an orderly course in all creatures. Where only
Hell is full of confusions, horrors, and utter disorders.

Order but a little neglected, makes a small error to grow greater: as a
little spark ill raked up, kindles a great fire; and a little foul and filthy
water, marres the whol^ ^ot of pottage, howsoever the Cook be his crafts
master.

Order teaches us, that an ill favored face, a wicked nature, a horrible
life, and execrable death, do commonly accompany one another. The first is
ugly, the second hateful, the third fearful, and the fourth damnable.

Order teaches the Judge to summon the parties in question, to appoint a day
of hearing, to give ear to both sides, to examine the particulars, to certify
the jurors, to open the truth, to receive the verdict, and give the sentence.
For as a carpenter by his axe and rule squareth and proportioneth his timber:
so in deciding of causes, impertinent points are to be pared, ambiguities
sifted, shyfts examined, the truth discovered, and so the cause orderly and
truly decided.

Order makes the eye, though never so little, see many things, and that a far
off, one after another.

Order setteleth the majesty of a Kings palace, and quieteth the ambitious
spirits of noble men; who from order and princely direction, know how to take
their place without repining: whereas if the offices in diverse men's hands are
disposed without orderly rules, there must needs be unorderly proceedings in
the duties that belong to their several places.

Order in proceeding keeps a hot brain from running into any extreme,
whereby the whole work may be ouerthrown. Whereas the mind is settled, the
body accommodated, the hand ruled, the work perfected, the workman commended.

Order marshalleth a feast, appoints the banquet, disheth the meat, places
the dishes, sets the guests, sounds the music, and sets every ones teeth
on work in his several rank.

Order makes the Physician famous, by preparing the body both for the purge
and the vomit, to cast the cruditie out, and then settling the stomach.

Order altered in nature distempers the body, but perverted in virtue damneth
the soul.

Order is disturbed, when nature is perverted; as when Summer is cold, or
Winter hot; so that the seasons of the year fall out so contrary, that they
are pleasant or profitable to no body.

Order climbs up the mountain with labor, but teaches you to come down
again with discretion and leisure.

Order teaches the eyes to direct the feet, the hands to feed the mouth, the
mouth to fill the belly, the belly to satisfy the entrails, and every part to
assist one another in due time and season.

Oaths.
Swearing contents no sense; then what a devil
Is man to do so ill for naught but evil?
Oaths have been of great antiquity: for even heathen Princes made their
contracts upon the assurance of oaths; as you may read between Abimelech and
Abraham, who durst not offend God in the breach of the same.

Oaths have assured damnation to the wicked: for God did swear in his wrath,
that they should not enter into his rest.

Oaths must not be made but by the name of God, and then are they as dangerous
to be broken, as if you should rebel against him: so then as you would avoid
the name of traitor toward an earthly Prince, you must take heed of the
condemnation of rebel against the Prince of all Princes. Oaths were foreseen
by Good himself to come to corruption, and grow to abuse: therefore was the
law proclaimed, to detain us in obedience; to limit our tongues, to curb our
vanity; to suppress our idle talk; to condemn our profanation; and above
all to limit us, how far we might swear, and must be silent.

Oaths are many times abused, even to the eating them up; as a man will swear
by the bread, and eat it; by the drink, and drink it: but when he comes to
the candle, he will refuse it.

Oaths are very forcible amongst most vnciuell people: for in Ireland to
swear by their hand, their fathers hand, their Lords hand, by Oneales hand,
and such like, are as forcible, as if they called heaven and earth to witness.

Oaths taken in vain, are the more to be condemned; because of the
greatness of the sin, and the easiness to avoid it: for of all other sins
the natural man can yield you a reason, or if you will an excuse, except
swearing: which being voluntary, and not restrained, is the more to be
condemned, because of the presumption, and unnecessary transgression.

Oaths unnecessary are in themselves unlawful, but in their violation
abominable: so that to so swear is wicked, but to forswear damnable.

Oaths are merely accoustomary wickedness, or wicked coustome, and thereby
odious, even to the natural and civil honest man.

Oaths have tied all men to observation: yet Euripides has a saying, that in
cases of love and soueraingtie an oath is not to be trusted, nor man to be
believed: for so sons have ouerreached their fathers, and deprived them both
of liberty and of life. Oaths are the more dangerous, by how much God is most
holy, and cannot endure to have his name unhallowed at any time, much less by
ordinary and audacious custom.

Oaths are the more fearful, by how much the casue is most frivolous: for
you shall hear even vagabonds, roagues, and boys swear with horrible
liberty for trifels, and slender occasions: yea in their ordinary discourses
as they go in the streets, and walk in the fields.

Oaths and drunkenness do commonly go together, and being fearfully
united, make up the devils chain to tie us to damnation.

Oaths are monstrous in a woman, in whom impudency joined with profanation
makes them the more odious and loathsome.

Oaths do commonly depend upon gaming, wherein unthriftiness is joined with
perdition: for with the loss of time, follows the loss of money, the loss
of reputation, the loss of honesty, the loss of faith: and finally of
salvation.

Pleasure.
I am the net of Hell, except you look
For quick prevention, in true virtues book.
PLeasures pass away with as great vanity, as there be passions: and as many
men as live in the world, have their several pleasures to content their
minds, and recreate their bodies.

Pleasures hinder our heavenly exercises, and are main enemies to
contemplative studies.

Pleasures of the world should not be so eagerly pursued by men, because they
are transitory and vain: but the joys of heaven are ever to be thought upon,
because they are everlasting.

Pleasures delight the eyes with delicate objects, the ears with musical
harmony the heart with joy of health, and the soul with the lovely face of
virtue.

Pleasure is a mere net of the devil to catch a man that is idle: but honest
exercise preserues the body, sets the mind on work in some profitable study,
wherein as^uredly makes the labor easy, and the attemptes run on with
pleasure and felicity.

Pleasure must not so abuse us, as to spend the precious treasure of time so
unprofitably, which we ought to employ: first, to the benefit of our souls:
secondly, for the augmentation and honor of our estates: and fourthly, for the
reputation and credit of our persons: fifthly, for the help and comfort of
our neighbor.

Pleasures are dangerous in their extremities: yet is moderate mirth a
recreation of body and mind; music a divine invention, hunting a martial
imitation, hawking a Princely pasttime, riding manly and graceful contentment,
and if skilfully performed, an honorable ornament: and infinite such like
exercises followed in their fit and seasonable times, increase health and
strength and agilitie in men's bodies, delight in their minds and relish and
adapt both to better business.

Pleasure has two great enemies; an over eager desire, and continual fear:
for what we desire to enjoy, we are afraid to loose. Pleasure of hunting
consists in three chaces the Deer, Fox, and Hare: but sin has the eescore
times three, which to hunt from our souls is happiness to our selves, and
heavenly joy to the holy Angels.

Pleasure is but a further degree of contentment: whence a willing travail is
more pleasant then a forced ease.

Pleasure hurts the flesh more then exercise, as pride enuenometh the spirit
above other more painful sins.

Pleasure breeds a lamentable sorrow: or a dangerous mutiney, when the misery
of a whole common-welth, breeds the mirth of a few.

Pleasure is wretched that breeds sorrow, but it is a blessed sorrow that
brings joy. Pleasure of riches in Christian minds consists in commendable
spending, not in covetous hoording: for if the poor starve, the neighbor be
needy, the orphane complain, and the widow shed tears; what pleasure can it
be to thee to have many bags lying by thee, and see them complain and pine
away in their necessity.

Poetry.
I that do make life over death to vaunt,
Can hardly live, without contempt, and want.
Poetry was gracious, when Salomo^ made a love song, and with spiritual
influence described heavenly secrets as David sung his Psalms, and drove away
the devil by the sound of his Harp.

Poetry in his use is an admirable virtue, and a rauishing contentment: For it
raises the honor of renown, illustrateth the actions of famous men,
eterniseth the memory of merit, and quickens the very spirit of the reader to
the same prosecutions: again it sends vice to hell, makes miquitie a
monster, keeps us from sin for fear of shame, and compares the
odiousness of impiety to deep pits, whence it is more easier to keep ones
self from falling in, then once fallen to come out again.

Poetry in his abuse is a mere excrement of an idle frency, a drunken fury, a
scorn of wise men, a popular iollitie, a common may game, a storehouse for
balladmongers, an lnne for rimers, and an idle and unprofitable pastime: living
in poverty, and dying in contempt.

Poetry animated by music are dangerous companions amongst working spirits,
and barbarous nations: witness the bardes and rimers of Ireland, and Wales,
whose Siren songs have excited such hellish treasons, and horrible tumults.

Poetry and poverty march hand in hand commonly, though at first they scorned
to take reward: yet at last it grew so common, that without reward they could
not live by the occupation.

Poetry now adays marches with impudency, for whereas ancient poesy studied
to make virtue famous, the modern endeavors to make vice glorious: esteeming
honesty an idle word, and a simple ornament: but ribaldry a witty mirth and
sweet contentment.

Poetry must take vigor and spirit from Bacchu^ company, and as a fainting
stomach is settled and refreshed with some cordial receite, so a wearied wit is
refreshed with a little wine, and the verses slip more easily out, being washed
over with that pleasant and lively liquor.

Poetry seasoned with piety and learning is a Jewel of estimation: but
corrupted with fancy and scurrilitie a counterfeit Iem, and the worst excrement
and dross of pure understanding.

Poverty.
Although I be not ill, yet do I make,
Men shund (like ^iuels) for their evils sake.
Poverty is subject to many miseries: yet not to be scorned, lest haughty
pride make a man worse then humble poverty. Poverty is borne with patience,
when felicity is corrupted by plenty, and he which is armed with virtue, can
endure misery, when, he which is fraughted with vices, can not moderate
prosperity.

Poverty may come by worldly troubles, and as you call it, unfortunate
mischances: but wretched is that wealth, which is gotten by the woeful wrack
of others.

Poverty that comes by prodigality, is rather to be derided with scorn, then
relieved by pity: and meriteth so much the more reproach, by how much the more
intemperately the prodigal lived in his former iollitie.

Poverty will try the honesty of disposition, and patience the discretion of
understanding.

Peuertie has an inward grief, yet sometimes is, endured with constancy, but
villancy is hard to be concealed by the authors, or endured of others.

Poverty makes men rob the rich, and to excuse it by necessity: but the rich
that rob the poor, have no excuse for their avarice and tyranny.

Poverty triumphs to see the miserable division of rich men's goods. For one
part is given to flatterers, another to Lawyers, a third to Physicians, a
fourth to unthrifts, and the last to funerals: so that the wicked have his
goods, his children his infamy, the grave his body, the worms his flesh, and
the devil his soul: from most of which poverty is exempted.

Poverty comes by fruitless pains: for he that plowes the seas, or sowes the
sands, may have his seed well washed, and a cold harvest for his lost labors
and unprofitable paies.

Poverty is no vice: yet a woeful inconvenience, for friends forsake us in
our miseries, as crows leave the fleshlesse carcasses, that are eaten up to
skin and bones.

Poverty is a pitiful spectacle, and more miserable then a mo^ster: for men
give money to see novelties, but run away from poor men's complaints and
necessities, as from infectious leprosies or ruinous walls.

Poverty is subject to so many inconueniencies, to be suffered of mightier men
then themselves, that poor men may not think on revenge of their former
wrongs, but rather on defense from further injuries and mischiefs: as in this
example appears. A poor country man having lost a calfe, made a vow to
Jupiter to sacrifice unto him a lamb, if he would do him the grace to show
him the thief that had stolen it: whereupon looking up and down, he saw a
Lion feeding on the same; whereat much more affrighted, he lift up his hands
a new to heaven, and cried: O god, whereas I promised thee a lamb to help me
to find the thief that stole my calfe, I will now being found, such as he is,
give thee a bull to deliver me out of his claws,

Poverty is troublesome in it self: but when other mischifes are added, it is
much more grievous and irksome. For when a poor man had a shrewe to his wife:
one day in a fury he had happned to anger her, and she for want of her will
hanged her self on a fig tree in his garden; at the sigth whereof much
amazed, he ran to his neighbors being as poor as himself, and wept
extremely: but at last brought them to the spectacle, which they perceiving
asked, why he was so foolish to weep, when they would feign have a graft of
the same tree to set in their own gardens.

Poverty is a good help to knowledge: for Diogenes was wont to say, that a
Philosopher could not study without an empty belley, thin diet, want of
money, poor apparel, and a good wit; yea, Philosophy persuaded to poverty,
and maintained all the principels of the scorn of wealth and prosperity.

Poverty is a part of the play which we act in this world, and as Epictetes
said: if the master of a Comedy can adapt the dispositions of his boys to such
several parts, as shall well befit their natures and inclinations, to grace
the interlude; so that sometimes a beggars son shall play the King, and a
Gentleman's a vagabond and rogue: shall not the God of heaven dispose of his
creatures, as best befitteth their abilities, either to try their moderation in
prosperity, or patience in adversity? since without controversy, it is only
God that permits poverty as a trial or chastisement, or else sends it as
a plague or punishment.

Poverty bursteth forth into some extreamities, which may be pardoned: but
insolent and causeless mutineys are not to be endured.

Poverty and riches have denominations and effects contrary to themselves in
some persons: for the widow was rich in her mite, when the rich were poor in
their plenty.

Poverty is the greatest profession in the world; for all men are beggars from
the richest to the meanest, for some beg one of another, but all of God.

Poverty is miserable, if it overcome patience: as wealth is wicked if it
breed pride. Poverty in a good scholar is as pitiful a spectacle, as a rich
fool is a scornful.

Poverty comes through a licentious wife, pilsering servants, unthrifty
children, cont^tious neighbors, and combersom friends.

Poverty follows a careless spender, as a long sickness brings the body to
a consumption.

Poverty is fittest for a beggar and a godly life: yet many honest men would
not aim at such a mark, nor walk in such a pilgrimage.

Poverty has more relief by the hand, then the tongue, as God is more
honored with the heart, then the lip.

Poverty makes hunger a good sauce, but too much takes away the stomach.

Poverty without redress, is like a naked body without a raiment: and both
find but cold comfort in compassionate words; For a word without a substance,
is like a small light, that makes the little yield a great shadow.

Player.
I should be virtuous, since to vice I act:
As makes both me, and others loath the fact.
PLaier was not taken in ill part at the first but counted both a glory and a
commendation: for as an Orator was most forcible in his ellocution; so was an
actor in his gesture and personated action.

Player and Historian were gracious in all Common-welths: for as their
Tragedies and Comedies were seeldome used; so when they were used, it served
for honorable purpose: either for the glory of a Court, the private pleasure
of a Prince, the gracing of triumphs, the famosing of great Captains, or the
personating some particular humors.

Plaier was ever the life of dead poesy, and in those times, that Philosophy
taught us moral precepts, these acted the same in public shows: so that
vice was made odious, virtue set on a throne of immitaon, punishment warranted
to the wicked, reward afforded to well deseruers, fathers provoked to provident
love, children taught obedience, and all sorts severally instructed in their
several callings.

Player is now a name of contempt, for times corrupt men with vice, and vice is
grown to a height of government: so that whereas before men were afraid to
offend, they now think it a disgrace to be honest: whence the eye must be
satisfied with vanity, the care with bawdery, ^ the hand with obscenitie, the
heart with lust, the feet with wanderings, and the whole body and soul with
pollutions: in all which Players are principal actors.

Players, Poets, and Parasites do now in a manner join hands, and as Lucifer
fell from heaven through pride: these have fallen from credit through folly: so
that to chaste ears they are as odious, as filthy pictures are offensive to
modest eyes.

Players have by community mared their own markets: for as virtue is the
better by enlargement and communication, so is vice the worse by disimulation
and common infusion of it is contagious poison.

Players are discredited in the very subject of their profession, which is
only scratching the itching humors of scabbed minds with pleasing content and
profane jests, and how can he be well reputed, that employes all his time in
vanity and lies, counterfeting and practicing nothing else.

Player is afraid of the plague, as much as a cowherd of a musket: for as death
is formidable to the one, so is poverty and wants to the other.

Player is afraid of the statute, for if he have no better supportation then
his profession, he is neither admitted in public, nor if he be a roamer
dares justify himself in private, being a flat rogue by the statute.

Plaiers practices can hardly be warranted in Religion: for a man to put on
woman's apparel, and a woman a man's, is plain prohibition; I speak not of
execrable oaths, artificial lies, discoueries of cousenage, scurrulus words,
obscene discourses, corrupt courtings, licentious motions, lascivious actions,
and lewd iesture s: forall these are incident to other men, but here is the
difference: in these they come by imperfection, in them by profession.

Player is a great spender, and indeed may resemble strumpets, who get their
money filthily, and spend it profusely.

Player is much out of countenance, if fools do not laugh at them, boys
clappe their hands, pesants open their throats, and the rude raskal rabble cry
excellent, excellent: the knaves have acted their parts in print.

Player has many times, many excellent qualities: as dancing, actiuitie,
music, song, elloqution, ability of body, memory, vigilance, skill of
weapon, pregnancy of wit, and such like: in all which he resembles an
exceellnt spring of water, which grows the more sweeter, and the more
plentiful by the often drawing out of it: so are all these the more perfect
and plausible by the often practice.

Player is at the first very bashful, as stricken with a maze at the
multitude, which being of various dispositions, will censure him accordingly:
but custom makes perfectness, and emboldeneth him sometimes to be shameless.

Player must take heed of wrested and enforced action: for if there be not a
facility in his deliverance, and as it were a natural dexterity, it must
needs sound harsh to the auditour, and procure his distaste and displeasure.

Player is like a garment which the Tailor makes at the direction of the
owner: so they frame their action, at the disposing of the Poet: so that in
truth they are reciprocal helps to one another; for the one writes for
money, and the other plays for money, and the spectator pays his money.

Pride.
I usher naught but falls: but Angels fell
Before me; no, but with me, down to hell.
PRide is much abated, when a man thinks on his sins: as a Peacock puts
down his tail, when he beholds his deformed feet.

Pride in authority makes poverty look for misery: but wisdom abstaineth
from extremities, and makes virtue gracious.

Pride insulteth over misery, and is for the most part coupled with Malice and
envy: so that when affliction does most oppress his enemy, he not only
rejoices over him, but helps to distress him, till he be utterly ouerthrown.

Prides wings transports us, but to the height of wickedness, and both fly with
us unto wretchedness, or fall back again to poverty and destruction. For they
are but slightly glewd, and quickly melted with the heat of Gods heavy
indignation.

Pride makes fri^^ds ^ lious to one another, as appear (...) following story:
Benedetto de Alb (...) of a friend of his to be advanced a Cardinal, came to
Rome of purpose to see him; (...) observing his stately and proud manner of
behavior, the next day he made him a mourning suit, in which he came again
to visit the Cardinal; who demanded, why he was so altered: Benedetro
answered, for sorrow to see the death of humility, and the life of pride in you.

Pride is so dangerous a vice, that commonly there is no worldly help for it:
whereupon Alphonsus King of Naples, being upon a time demanded his opinion
touching the benignity of nature; made this answer; that nature had provided a
help for all her imperfections: as for lechery, marriage, or fasting: for
hunger and thirst, meat and drink: for covetousness, spending: for wrath,
patience, and forbearance: but for pride, he saw no help: so that it was a
thing not only hurtful unto nature, but hateful both to God and man.

Pride apparrels the wicked with costly raiment; makes them think their speech
like the voice of Angels; and swallows the praise and popular applause of men
with greediness: but let them remember that of Herod, who was eaten up with
lice and worms.

Pride threw the bright star Lucifer out of heaven: therefore must not man in
the darkness of the earth presume too high, lest he fall into the like
precipitation.

Pride makes the mind greedy of power, and then can they neither abstain
from things forbidden, nor contain themselves within the compass of
moderation.

Pride causes a man, that has the eyes of his soul shut up from the light of
grace, to mount up so high unto vanity, that he falls down headlong into
hell: as a blind kite, that has her eyes ^eeled up, being thrown from the
first, mounteth up on high so long as she can carry herself with her wings,
till at last being weary, she falls down and dies.

Pride is the enemy to grace, the scorn of reason, and the absolute impediment
of further progress in goodness and learning.

Pride bred the fall of Angels, the mis^ry of man, the curse of the earth, and
the torment of devils.

Pride bedecketh the body, deformeth the soul, stores the Usurers with money,
and the prisons with mis^rie. For many a man to go in brave apparel, runs
over head and ears in the Mercers books, til stumbling at the heap of his
debts, he falls headlong into a cold and comfortless, poor and penurious
prison.

Pride made the Painters complexion, the fantasticks invention, the rich man's
ambition, the fools correction, and the beggars conclusion.

Pride, or a proud man in gay apparel, is like a pretty virgin, who plays
the counterfeit Queen amongst other mayds; puts on a sober and yet stately
dem^anor, and will all that day scarce speak, nor look upon her fellows; but
at night when she puts off her apparel, then she bids them all good night,
and goes home perhaps to some poor cottage, from whence she came in the
morning. So I say is it with a proud man; who all the days of his life from
the bravery of his purse ouerlooketh all his poor friends and neighbors: but
at the night of his days, when he must be stripped out of his richest rags,
and is going to his grave, the^ perhaps he bids them all good night, when he
is going not only to the earth, from whence he came; but it may be to hell,
from whence he shall never return.

Pride is unprofitable for a Commonwelth, when the superfluity of one night
serves the necessity of many: and the disgrace of a Commonwealth, when a man
shall care more to satisfy his own vainglory, and outward vanity, then
respect the profit of his country, the praise of virtue, the pattern of
humilite, the example of sobriety, the times necessity, the complaints of
poverty.

Pride hinders charity, endures no equality, loves flattery, murmureth at
superiors, triumphs over inferiors, and will admit of no humble thoughts.

Pride robs the heart of wisdom, the mind of understanding, the spirit of
grace, and the soul of salvation.

Pride, or a proud man that is cladde in colors, like the Knight of the
Rainebow, or bedawbed in gold like the calfe of Horeb, feels neither the
burden of sin, that lies heavy on his soul, nor the weight of a whole
lordship, that hangs heavy on his shoulders.

Pride ingrafted by nature, is sometimes tolerated in a great estate: but if
the same party come to deiection, then does poverty expose his pride to the
greater hate and contempt.

Pride is many times augmented by honor, as we say, Honors change manners: so
that a man otherwise well disposed, when he comes to preferment, not only
alters the course of his life, but the quality of his very soul.

Pride without controversy, is the devils hook to pull sinners nearer to
him: and can catch a man a far off without any other bait, then the have of
him, who of his own accord does come too fast on.

Profit.
Ianus they say had double face: but I
Have double hand and tongue to silch and lie.
PRofit is a kind of witchcraft, and draws so fast downward to the earth,
that we have no leisure to look toward heaven: though it be lawful to live
by honest gain, if covetousness carry us not beyond good conscience, through
ignorance, that carelessness of the world, is the way to true happiness.

Profit makes a churl thankful: yet he that is only grateful in
necessity, deserves small praise, and less pity in his penury.

Profit forgets former pains, and patience works a passage through many
difficulties.

Profit which comes by servants, makes them worthy of their wages: as a
horse that travails, is of his oats.

Profit will quickly decay, if either a man sell much and buy little; or buy
much, and sell little, or buy little, and sell nothing at all: so that all men,
which live by profit, must proportion their layings out to their gettings at
least.

Profit makes light balances and false measures, and both are an abomination
to the Lord.

Profit is the desire of many men, and loss their grief: but when their faith
grows to suspicion, their love is at the door to be gone.

Profit many times comes in freely; as the Be brings her honey like a sweet
servant to the hiue; and gathering from many things, labors to enrich only
one: but there is small profit to take from one, and disperce amongst many.

Profit is got by labor; and labor that brings profit, is sweet to the
patient: but the impatience of a fool that will not persist, nor can stay to
expect, loses his profit, and may leave off his trade.

Profit is unlikely to rise to any great matter, when the harvest is troubled
with wet wether: yet may a latter spring recompense the loss of the former ill
season. Profit in a base trade may befoule the fist: but the gaiue of briberie
will deforme the soul.

Profit comes in with cheerfulness, when a good harvest makes the Farmer
feast his neighbors; as fair wether and searoome glads the fortunate Merchant
and Mariner, and makes them spend frankly, when they come home.

Profit, which is honest, needs little cunning, but true endeauours, and
orderly dealing.

Quietness.
Wherein can honor, wealth, or pleasure thrive,
If I their pleasure do not keep alive.
QVietnes is the paradise of conscience, where a man walks merrily, when all
the world is in a hurly-burly.

Quietness of mind is settled with comfort, when we fear not the contrary; and
are so provided against mischances, that when they happen, they cannot disquiet
us.

Quietness makes sleep like a sweet refreshing shower to the senses, but
slothfulness dulls them like a glut of rain. On the contrary, a settled
melancholy makes way to madness, if it be without rest or intermission from
continual and intentive cogitation.

Quietness of mind joined with quietness of body, makes the estates of our
lives happy: whereas either body or mind disquieted, all outward blessings are
but small refrcshings.

Quietness makes honor to shine with a luster, which otherwise is far
inferior to contented poverty, and a settled mediocritie.

Quietness and rest must needs be had after labor, or else, neither body nor
mind can endure.

Quietness and contentation of a Christian, was first procured and proclaimed by
Christ: in saying that his yoke was sweet, and his burden easy; meaning to
them, (...) were a little exercised therein.

Quietness must needs be disturbed in time of general troubles; and whosoever
shall then repine, is as kind to his country, as he is wife that will
complain, that drops fall on him in a storm.

Quietness must not make her end to be idleness, for extreamities are always
vices: but the end of rest and quietness, must be to enable men's bodies and
minds to future pains; as the Inn does rest, and refesh the trauailer, that
he may rise again, and go further. So do we unbend bows, to bring them
again to as strong a strain the next time, lest continual intention should
boow the bow, or break the string.

Quietness seasoneth and sweetneth all worldly blessings, which have no true
taste, but in reposed minds: otherwise, be they never so great or so good,
they are but bitter sweets.

Quietness and fear, are like day and night which cannot dwell together: they
are incompatible enemies, and expel each other. A settled resolution to
sustain all chances, shuts out all fears; and fearful apprehensions, and
fainting expectations, forestalls all courageous and constant resolutions.

Reason.
Wisdom I must confess outstrips me still,
Yet am I author both of good and ill.
REason argues all matters in controversy, it proves truth, and approues it,
it refutes falsehood, and refuses it; it discernes the good and justifies it;
it reueales the bad, and forbids it; whereby the good is justified, and the bad
condemned.

Reason is the ground of the law, which reasonable men will therefore obey. But
such barbarous beasts as will not be ruled by reason, which was given to
direct them, must be ouer-ruled by law, which was made to correct them.

Reason has two great enemies, wilfulnes, and power; who by tyrannous
ouer-bearing all right and reason, do incur the more terrible condemnation.

Reason is much troubled with folly and women; the one cannot understand her,
the other will not stand to her: for we commonly say, It is a woman's reason;
It is so, because it is so: I will not do this or that, because I will not.

Reason is quite casheird in love and passion. For the bold and blind Lover
(neither seeing, nor fearing the many mischiefs may follow him) has his eyes
and his thoughts only on the face of his Mistress. And the fiery cholcrick
companion, being carried headlong with fury and madness in the heat of his
passion, neither heedes the bloody face of fearful misfortune before him, nor
of bleake and pale repentance behind him. Both love and anger if they be
strong, raise up a clowd of clustring spirits, which clean dazel and darken
the clear reason of man, and pervert all wise, orderly, and happy proceeding.

Reason sanctified, makes conscience a good school mistress, but when wit is
wicked, and will perverted, no order or goodness can be expected.

Reason animated by Religion has a power above nature; for if you offer to
throw a child out of a window, it will quake for fear^, whereas bring a martyr
to the fire for Gods sake, he rejoices for love.

Reason erres from the rule of wisdom, when she does not yield the necessity,
or takes not opportunity of time.

Reason sorteth the sound from the scabbed sheep; as in Gardens it separateth
the wholesome herbs and sweet flowers, from the noisome and unsavory weeds,
lest growing together, the infection and offense of the one, take away the
profit and pleasure of the other.

Reason is the ground of law, law the foundation and strength of a kingdom,
and justice the crown of a King; who must add life to the law by just
execution, without which it is neither a buckler for innocence, nor a sword
against sin. The law is, as it were, a dumb or dead King, the King a living
or speaking law: without execution, neither King nor law are worth a straw.

Reason teaches the Gardner to cut his grown herbs, and not pull them up by
the roots, and a good shepherd to sheere his sheep, not to fley them.

Reason should teach us a fearful foresight and flight of future misfortunes,
even by the example of brutish creatures. For the hunted Hare feeds even in
fear, and a dog once burnt with fire, is often after afraid of cold water.

Reason is discovered by speech, which indeed is the image of a man's mind. For
Solon was wont to say, that speech was the life of action, the discouerer of
the inward man, and that as in a glass a man might see the outward lin^aments
and proportion of the body: so in the speech, a man might discern the inward
disposition of the mind; whereupon when the same Solon was to give his
judgment on a youth sent unto him, he bad him speak, and answer him, that
he might see what was in him.

Reason tells you, that the trumpet gives no sound, but by the breath of the
trumpeter, and religion tells you, that the Preacher cannot of himself propose
any spiritual matter, without the gracious illumination of a heavenly
Inspirer. For what high or heavenly thing can proceed out of the blind
understanding of the natural man, corrupted Adam, and a bespotted conscience.

Reason teaches young men to live well, and prepares old men to die well.

Reason delights in contemplation, and the study of wisdom; as youthful
spirits do in sportfull recreation.

Reason is augmented by experience, and tells us, that the strained wit has
not the strongest apprehension; nor a weak capacity is fit for a high design.

Reason vttred by a plausible tongue, makes persuasions passasle with a popular
ear; but judgment that discernes substance from color, the mask from the
face, the form from the matter, will easily find out the fallacy and error:
even as a good pen does help and grace a good writer: but if the paper be
naught, he shall make many a blot for a letter, or commit such slender faults
as will be easily discried by a Scriuener.

Reason rules the mind, as the eye directs the body, and the helm the ship,
the bridle the horse; though bodies, ships, and horses know not their
rulers. So though the year is known by the days, the days by the hours:
yet the thoughts and reasons of men's actions, are only known to God and
themselves.

Religion.
By me is God made known, tossed faith reposed:
Devils confounded, and all sin disclosed.
REligion is set down in diverse books, but the rest and resolution of the
faithful soul is only in the Bible, the only unerring truth of God, which
Christ has sealed with his blood.

Religion is sometimes made a cloak for villainy, but he which does so, may
go to Hell with his cunning, and leave his habit behind him.

Religion consists not in benefices or dignities of the Church; nor in a
covetous zeal that eats up the house of God, nor in a malicious spirit, that
enuieth the revenues of the Church: but in the fruits of unfeigned faith, and
fervent love.

Religion inspired with grace, keeps us in friendship with God, and defiance
of the Devil.

Religion truly entertained, only rauisheth the soul, howeuer Philosophy
delights with knowledge, and look how excellent the soul is over the body:
by so much Religion surpasses all sciences in (...) world.

Religion for the sum and most material points consists of two parts:
either begging of mercy, or giving of glory; either prayers or praises.

Religion fills the mind with Gods graces and then it cares not for worldly
pleasures: as full stomaches even despice honey combs.

Religion teaches us, that in the book of God lies the tresure of the soul,
as pearls are found in shells, and gold dug out of the earths entrails: but
herein is great difference; these cannot be got without cost, labor, toil
danger, torment of mind, and trouble of body: but Gods graces are obtained
without money, yea all may come and buy for nothing.

Religion teaches us to be godly, howeuer the world may suppose it good to be
wise, and better to be rich, etc.

Religion teaches us the way to heaven truly: yet will Astrology measure the
firma^^^t, (Cosmography, describe the earth, Magic search into hell, the
Mathematics discover the secrets of nature, and Philos^^hy direct our lives:
but all is to no purpo^e without the knowledge of God, which consists much in
knowing our selves.

Religion is but one truth, and the only true worship of one God, and he that
is of any more then one, is the devils Chaplane.

Religion teaches all sorts of people, how to find in the Scriptures
sufficient authors and writers for any purpose, whatsoever.

As a statist may look upon Moses.

A Captain Joshua. A stout man Sampson. A King David and Solomon. A Prophet
Samuel, Daniel, and the rest. A Courtier Nehemiah. A Shepherd Amos. A Lawyer
Ezra. A Coustomer Matthew. A fisherman Peter. A Physician Luke. A Gentleman
John. A persecutor Paul. And a conuertist Timothy.
Religion tells us plainly, that he which (...) not into the Communion of
Saints, shall never attain the remission of sins.

Religio shows that he, which seeks God with a faithful heart, and loves
God with a joyful heart, and ioyeth in God with a thankful heart, has a
gracious blessing, a blessed grace, a continual comfort, and an endless
happiness.

Religion says, that the fear of God is the learning of the wise: the grace
of God, the glory of the learned; the peace of God, the pressed of the faithful:
and the love of God, the joy of the elect.

Religion assures us, that he which reads the book of God, finds a glorious
history: he that believes what he reads, has a gracious inspiration: he that
remembers what he believes, has a blessed memory; and he that makes the
right use of his remembrance, has the perfection of understanding.

Religion warranteth us, that impatience is the sting of nature, and
presumption the pride of sin, while humility is the ground and grace of
virtue and, and quietness and contentation, the blessing of grace.

Religion hears Christ by his word, believes in him by his grace, lives in
him by his love, and ioyeth in him by his spirit.

Religion guides us to repentanc^, and repentance powers out incessant
prayers: and true prayers will pierce the heavens, whilst worldly security
goes to hell like Dives and the devil with a merry gale.

Religion is united thus far with Philosophy, that every thing fears a
superior and higher power: as the deer fears the hound, the partridge the
hawke, all creatures man, and man God.

Religion goes beyond superficial knowledge, or worldly understanding: for it
lifts up our souls to God; as to the author, former, and governor of all,
and whosoever knows him, shall need to know no other thing.

Religion makes the stomach to hunger for grace, and so to feed on the bread
of heaven: and the soul to thirst for drink, and and so to carowse the water
of life.

Religion says, that true repentance comes by these degrees, sadness of
heart, sorrow for sin, confession of the mouth, promise to amend, and
endeavoring to make a full satisfaction both in word and deed.

Religion tells us, that such (...) us at the day of our death, such w^ll he
pronounce us at the day of Judgment.

Religion tells you, that the ^^hest jewel in the world is the word of God,
because all the world cannot buy (...) it is the cheapest thing in the world,
because it is to be bought of free cost.

Religion tells us, that when a Churchman grows covetous, and a gentleman
prodigal: while the one is walking to beggerie, the other is coming to
ignominy: and both are going to hell.

Religion teaches us neither to offend the righteous, nor affect the wicked,
lest God revenge the one, and the devil reward the other.

Religion makes conscience to confess truly, when policy causes us to
conceal or beguile cunningly.

Religion is scandalized in the variety of fects, but in the vanity of sin
is the misery of our souls: yet say what you can, there is but one God, and
one faith, nor can be but one true Religion.

Remembrance.
I am the storehouse both of good, and ill:
Then use me well, and I will glad you still.
REmembrance is Cleanthes his library and learning with virtue is a step to
honor.

Remembrance of the goodness of God toward us, makes us relieve the misery of
the poor, regard the virtue of our servant, and respect the love of our friend.

Remembrance of former comforts, and excogitating of future goodness, are the
relief of a virtuous mind.

Remembrance may contriue a way, how a man may best bear his misfortunes,
either by recounting, if he ever had any greater in times past, or to see
thousands of other in as ill estate as our selves.

Remembrance is a great officer in Princes courts: for except all places are
orderly supplied to the honor of the Prince, and the good of many particular
men, which cannot be done, except memory o^der the business: confusion will
ouer^htowe all, and disorder bring the court to an uproar.

Remembrance is sometimes the friend of reuen^e, and many times the enemy of
friendship: for if injuries are not forgotten, and unkindness put out of
mind: displeasure follows, and one mischife commonly draws on another.

Remembrance in some sense is an enemy to our salvation: for if God remember
our sins, who can answer him, or if the devil be admitted to record our
transgressions, who shall dispute against him, or trauerse the indictment.

Remembrance again is the comfort of our souls: for unless God remember
David's troubles, he shall never be released, nor overcome his enemies.

Remembrance is the only treasury of wisdom: for unless a man be able to
make use of his reading by memory, and orderly adapting the observations of
profitable precepts, it is to no purpose to read the principles of art, or
ouerlooke the histories of times.

Remembrance is an instinct of nature even in beasts: for the horse remembers
his rider, especially his feeder: the dog his master, the hawke his
fawlkner: the lion his keeper, and the bear his commander.

Remembrance makes dumb creatures reward good turns, as in the story of
Andronicus the slave, in Aulus Gellius may appear: for when his master Dacus
had sent him bound to Rome, to be cast into the Lions den: it was his fortune
to chance into the hands of that Lion, whose sore foot he had healed in
Africa, which he presently took notice of, and not only saved him from the
rest, but fawned upon him, and relieved him by his obedience, to the amazement
and pleasure of the people.

Resolution.
I compass great exploits, make weakness strong:
Outstrip faint hopes, though time defer me long.
REsolution is perfected by patience: so that valor and time effects even
impossibility to faint hearts.

Resolution is fearelesse, and in a good cause makes a clean conscience, as a
strong castle.

Resolution tends to extremities, and carries wilful men into many dangerous
and desperate conclusions, when without other reason, then that they are
resolute to do so, they run headlong to infinite and vnreuerseable evils.

Resolution has likewise a hand in Religion; for a man must resolve to deny
the world, and dispossess the devil, before he can come to heaven, as he
which determines to take possession of a house, wherein a stronger man
dwells, must needs forsake his ease and pleasures, verter on many dangers,
and thrust him out, either by strength or policy, before he get the victory.

Resolution must prepare you to your travail, for if you cannot endure labor,
want, disgrace, reuiling, discomforts, and diverse other inconveniences, you
were better stay at home then undertake a journey into foreign countries.

Resolution made Caius the Philospher, when he was in a study at his going to
death, answer the tyrant Calligula, that he determined to mark whether the
soul would have any knowledge or feeling of his departure from his body.

Resolution makes women famous for many memorable actions, and worthy exploits
As in the time of the Emperor Conradus the third, Caesar having wars in the
kingdom of Bauaria, amongst other places came to the City of Monaco: where
when he had lost some principal Captains in the assault, he swore: that if
he entered the town, he would not leave a man alive in it; whereupon when it
was in a great distress indeed, and not able to hold out: some of the Ladies
and best sort of women went to the Emperor, and falling on their knees at his
feet, beseeched him so far to mittigate the heat of his wrath, that though
he had sworn the death of all the men: yet to spare the women, and give them
leave to pass away with life, and every one with that which she did carry
orderly away, which solemnly granted, not one woman issued out of the town,
but had either husband, brother, child, kinseman, or friend on her back.
Whereat the Emperor much amazed, commended their resoluon, and forgate his
anger, and in great mercy sent them with all the men into the town again,
gave them all their goods, and took the Duke not only to mercy, but advanced
him to honor, as all the rest unto favor.

Resolution bids us fear no shadows, for their forces are little: nor trust
in dreams, for they are but illusions.

Resolution raises valor to the first step of honor, while excuse and
fear are the disgrace of a noble nature.

Resolution made the siedge of Numantia so famous, and the destruction so
glorious: for as the Romans one way were resolved to conquer it, and so endured
infinite troubles and distresses: the Numantines were as absolute in the defense
of their honors: and so put in practice a most memorable stratagem. For when
there was no remedy but submission, they brought all the substance of their
city into the market place and burnt it to cinders, and presently killed
themselves, so that when the Romans entered indeed, there was neither riches to
carry away, nor persons to triumph over.

Statesman,
I languages with foreign secrets, know:
And for my country do my pains bestow.
A Statesman cannot well maintain the credit of his place, except he have bin
a Trauailer, a Linguist, a Scholar, and judicious: for it is not an outward
fame, that can carry it away, but a substantial knowledge must lead you up to
preferment.

A Statesman many times hazardeth the credit of his honesty abroad: for he
commonly reuealeth his own secrets to know other men's, and seems of any
religion to pry into the business of a Kingdom.

A Statesman steps up a higher degree then a Trauailer, for what time this
spends (...) vanity, the other must consume in ob^eruation.

A Statesman must not only be secret himself, but be very cautelous, that no
man else discouers his secrets: for else he shall only pass with a
superficial knowledge, and never attain unto true intelligence.

Statesmen at home, have agents abroad, who (...) are employed to observe the
business of other Kingdoms, where^^ (...), be (...) to use honesty, and
(...), to certify nothing but (...), to do it with the first; wher^^y
commonly Ambassadors thems^l^es are i^ous of such men, because the affairs are
certified underhand, before their letters are read in public.

Statesmen at home must ever remember the common good, before their private
profit: wherein these particulars are much in use; the honor of the Prince,
the glory of the Nation, the confederacy of the Princes, which may soonest
annoy being enemies: the affinity of such as may best love the country, if
alteration should happen, the armies made sure, the nobility held in favor,
the Gentlemen maintained in their privileges, the commons kept in obedience,
and the public treasury supplied.

Statesmen must not be ignorant of ancient laws, and former antiquities,
least policy overthrow custom, and new cunning supp^ant old honesty:
whereby much mur^uring arises amongst the people, and dangerous grudgings
traduce private men for their private respects.

Statesmen endeavoring to overthrow ancient customs, must work it out by
policy; and to set up new devices, contriue it by cunning; for the people will
quickly espy a rent in the whole cloth, and dare do more then whisper against
the seducers of Princes.

Statesmen must take heed, that Princes do not favor corrupt officers: for
though a Prince be good, yet if his favorites be bad, it is as ill as if he
were bad himself.

Statesmen must not practice any thing against the principles of religion,
least it savor of Atheism rather then policy: and so the devil seem to be
served, and God dishonored.

A Statesman, if he be not careful of his carriage, will incur the
imputation of an enformer abroad, and at home of irreligious: for abroad he
must give intelligence of his best friends, and at home flatter his very
enemies.

Statesmen must observe the Court, promise fair to the City: favor the
country, counterfeit with the Nobles, entise the Gentlemen: pardon the
factious: keep the mighty in league: and detain the commons in courtesy.

Scholar.
I strive for learning, without strife; that time
With Fames fair wings may learn me how to climb.
A Scholar is for the time a prentise to Art, and must serve out his years
before he can sue his freedom: but herein lies the difference between
learning and riches; when a tradesmans prentishippe is finished, he sets up
for himself; when a scholars, for others; as a principle in Philosophy, He
lives not at all, that lives not to the good of his country.

Scholars, of all vices, are not covetous: for they care not how little they
take for their money.

Scholars and soldiers must entertain resolution to bear with all
inconveniences, and tarry the time of preferment: for otherwise, if either
start back, as wearied with some hindrances, he is anew to begin again: yea
peradventure in as ill a case, as he, that goes up a ladder, but slippeth off
the rondells; or when one breaks, falls down in great danger.

Scholars are ever learning: for such is the excellency of Art, that the more
they study, the more they may; and the more knowledge they have, the less
they seem to know: for comparing the hidden secrets with the apparent, they
seem no otherwise, then a candle in the sun, and a river to the sea.

Scholars ought to be penitent for nothing more then the loss of time: for the
Merchant complains of shipwreck; the Citizen of bad creditors; the Soldier of
ill pay-masters; the Lawyer of long vacations; the Artificers of slender
setting on work; the Physician of temperate times and diet; the Countryman of
wet haruests; and the Scholars of ill employed time, and worse spent hours.

A scholar that makes mystical Arts the abuse of wit and studies, imployes his
time ill, to seek preferment by the devil; who yet will never serve his turn,
but to bring his soul to destruction.

A scholar is an enemy of fortune, because they are many times prevented in
their race to advancement, by such as are far inferior to themselves: and
either for want of friends or presents, must lose their expectations.

A scholar may use honest recreation at seasonable hours, as well for the
health of his body, as chearing his spirits: for as a knife, though it have
never so good an edge, may be quickly dulled, with continual cutting hard or
sharp things: so the best wits in the world cannot retain a continual virtue
without rest, and artificial supply from delight and further encourage^ent.

A scholar should not be vainglorious; yet this is a natural imperfection
incident to learning; that in young beginners they go forward the better in
being praised; and in old Doctors, they live the merier in hope to be
commended.

A scholar must be of a spare and moderate diet: for how ever Venus cannot
flourish without the help of Ceres and Bacchus, yet will Minerua and the Muses
live gloriously by the pleasant waters of Hellicon.

Scholars should have great acquaintance with the morning: for two hours well
employed then, is of more force then four afterward, for the attainement of
learning.

Soldier.
O that I were not as the flowers in May,
Which, when the sent is lost, are cast away.
Soldier is a name of that honor, that it is the genus of vallure and valiant
men* for Emperors, Princes, great Commanders, inferior Captains, and military
men, with all their famous exploits, are all comprised under this term, He
is, or was a brave soldier.

Soldier seems the prime honor and glory of a Nation: for in that title all
other professions are darkened, in a sort, as when a man discourses of a
Country he is not first demanded; what Merchants there are; how the Citizens
live; how the Countryman tills the ground; how the Gentlemen lives idly, and
such like: but what able men are in the same; what garrisons maintained; what
soldiers flourish; what exployts they have performed; and this is commonly the
first question.

Soldier in the best common-welth is compared to a nosegay, which is worn all
day, while the sweetness and freshness does last, but at night, when it fades,
is cast on the dunghill: so when necessity calls to our Countries defense, and
that worthy men must be employed, they are much made of, entertained, admitted,
welcomed, and rewarded: but as soon as peace is confirmed, and the troubles
ouerblown, then are the better sort dismissed peraduentute with flattering
words: and the inferior left to the whip or to the gallows.

Soldiers one way are the cause of wealth: for wheresoever they be resident,
victuals grow dear in the market: and those commodities, which the Countriman
must either spend himself, or sell at an easy rate, are uttered for double
value: another way they are the ruin of a country upon fury of an execution,
where all th^^gs are subject to fire and sword.

Soldiers augment their honor in pardoning of enemies, rather then their
valor in killing of the vanquished: so that the greatest virtue in a Soldier
is to overcome by courtesy, when by force of arms they they have got the
victory.

Soldiers must neither attempt any thing by vainglory, nor refrain through
fear: but carry such a moderation and government, that his courage turn not
to fury and madness, nor his forbearance to pusillanimitie and cowardice.

Soldiers are true Christians, and true Christians are Soldiers: for having a
spirituali warre-fare with the flesh, world, and devil: they must be ever in
action, yea prevail at last, or else be utterly destroyed, for no composition
can serve the turn: therefore, that we may neither faint, nor make frivolous
excuses, God has sent us into an Armory to choose such weapons, as under the
conduct of our Captain Jesus Christ, we are sure to prevail with.

Soldiers of the world through liberty and ease: quickly abuse their
profession: For where is in noble designs they are honorable and glorious in
filthy idleness, they are roagues and vagabonds: in the one they are seated in
a chair of preferment, in the other chained in a dungeon of infamy.

Soldiers and sailors are brothers in good courses: for there be but two
Elements, in which mortal creatures live: Earth and Water; wherein the
Soldier at land, and Mariner at Sea, dispatch all our business.

Soldiers must either have pay or spoil, and sometimes love the one better
then the other, because that pay comes by limilation, but spoil by fortune,
which fills many times the bag of a mean man with rich booty.

Shifting.
If I sincke not, I care not who does swell:
I feign would live, though how I know not well.
SHifting does many times incur the indignity of reproach, and to be counted
a shifter, is as if a man would say in plain terms a coosener.

Shifting sets ones wits on the tenterhookes, for he which has no certain
reuenew coming in, and yet would feign hold up his head in the sea of the
world, must make hard shift to maintain his credit, and continue his estate.

Shifting is incident to very good men, who sometimes are compelled to use great
sums of money, which if they cannot procure by their own credit, they must
make shift by others suretiship, or some good pawn: sometimes enforced upon
some dangerous attempt: for if a man he with a wi^e, and her husband come in
the mean while, he is put to his sh^fts to escape the danger: sometimes subject
to ship wrack, and ^o makes hard shift to save his life, and when he has
escaped, must shift himself, or else go in a drunken suit: and sometimes
troubled in a long journey with an untoward Jade, which if he do not shift, he
may either fail in his voyage, 'or fall in the dirt. Shifting may serve ones
turn in the world amongst men: but when death comes, there is no shift for him.

Shifting is a very poor and troublesome trade, if a man have no other means
to get his living: for if his shifts fail, he must either beg, or steal, and
then follows another shifting to put off his doublet, and put on a rope.

Shifting is the mother of cleanliness, and the commendations of a good
housewife: ^or if the servants be not shifted they will become lousy, if the
sheets be not changed they will be nastie, if the trenchers be not turned thee
will be greasy, if the beds be not tossed they will be fustie, and if the
houses be not cleansed they will be dusty.

Shifting is a most necessary thing in Princes palaces: for if they make not
often remoues, the great concourse and continual residence will breed
offensive air and infectious sickness.

Shifting is the only bravery and credit of a Courtier, for if he be not able
to change his apparel sometimes thrice in a day, he is ous of countenance,
and at least thrice a week out of credit, but yet I would not have him make
this shift to pawn his winter clothes in summer, and his summer in winter, his
Sunday-cloaths for working days, and his working days for holy days.

Shifting brings confusion to a man's fortune for he that takes no certain
course to maintain his estate, is like a man in a wood, that runs wildly up
and down whooping and crying, and cannot get out, because there is no certain
path to direct him.

Shifting robs Peter to pay Paul, and borrows of this man to satisfy
that: so that at last, as the pitcher going often to the water comes broken
home: he runs so far in debt to avoid discredit, that he is cast into a
prison, whence he cannot return.

Shifting a side is sometimes excusable, as when an importunate and troublesome
suter will not be answered, it is not amiss for a man to go a little a way,
nor make an honest excuse to rid him of a troublesome business.

Shifting is lamentable, proceeding of necessity: knauish, of wantonness:
wholesome for cleanliness: courtlike for comeliness: Princelike for bravery:
whorish for vanity: devilish for villainy: and hellish for want of constancy
in true faith and christianity.

Singularity.
Who me affects, unless to grace I lean,
Odly to play his part, quite marres the Scene.
SIngularity in apparel makes a man ridiculous, when fantasticalnesse by
custom is neither de^ided not ashamed, ^o odious is it to err from that which
is ordinary and common, and suspected of pride and self conceit to take up a
peculiar habit and fashion.

Singularity discovered the pride of Diogines even in his poverty: for he not
only despised the other sect of Philosophers, but contested with the great
Alexander himself, who yet commended his humor, and made him more proud in
saying; that if he were not Alexander, he would be Diogines: but all others
traduced him for his singularity, and the common people called him Ciricke, or
dog.

Singularity is most odious, if it be seconded by hypocrisy: for so many
attire themselves, look heavily, go demure, sit sadly speak sparingly, feed
privately: and do all things contrary to other men: but are yet mecie
hypocrites, and either cutthroats, hard hearts, or licentious lechers.

Singularity for the most part, is singularly deceived in its expectation,
seeking praise, but finding reproach and derision by an vn^uth fashion. for
singularity even in virtue seldom scapes the note and brand of hypocrisy, but
to usurp a singularity in things of common use and nature, which in themselves
are matters of indifferency (as apparel, speech, behavior,) are ever sure of
the general censure of giddy humerous and ridiculous absurdity.

Singularity has many synonimaes; curiosity, when in all our attempts ^e
strive to hit the bird as it were in the eye; wilfulnes, when in despite of
custom of discretion we will do but what we list, and follow our own fashion;
opposition, when our custom is contrary to all men; ^ancy, when our new
fangled fashion has more lenity, then use or decency: hypocrisy, when we
reprove small fault's, and commit greater our selves: pride, when we scorn
others, contempt when we think none so good as our selves, and finenesse
forsooth when we are afraid to touch or tread on that that may foul our
fingers, or durty our shoes.

Sin.
O Nothing which do all things mar, if made;
Why art thou Nothing, yet do thou not vade?
Sin is the Devils that old Serpents stinge, whose viperous poison it is
far easier to avoid, then being stunge, to expel the venom.

Satan that sworn enemy to man, having matched himself in marriage with
iniquity, had by her nine children, which he placed with several persons,
fitting in disposition to their several humors and inclinations, in manner
following. Viz. Simony with Priests, hypocrisy with Professors, oppression
with Nobles, usury with Citizens deceit with Merchants, falsehood with servants,
sacrilege with soldiers, pride with weomen, luxury with all.

Sin is committed by humane frailty, but continued by devilish peruersity.

Sin is the highway to hell, but a man were better go in a private path,
though a great way about, then follow many in the common rode.

Sin continued with delight, ends in woeful and wretched smart.

Sin is more infectious then the plague, and most deadly in despair: for in
the one sometime a recovery is had: but in the other soul and body are utterly
confounded.

Sin unreproved makes the concealer accessory: but he that delights in it,
shall feel the greatest smart of it.

Sin makes men afraid to die, though they be weary of their lives.

Sins proceeding of ignorance, and confessed with penitency, obtain
forgiveness, and are written in forgetfulness.

Sin is a work of darkness: for Peter denied Christ in the night, but
confessed him in the day, which shows that repentance is an action of light.

Sin is a trespass in thought, an error in speech, a wickedness in committing:
but damnation in the delight and continuation.

Sin followed with pleasure and speediness, makes a man slow of pace to
meet with his Savior.

Sin in us is worthy to be afflicted with punishment for offending of God,
when Christ was plagued in saving of us not for any sin of his own, but
only for taking our sins upon him.

Sin repented in health when we have power to proceed, shows a leaving of
sin: but ^e that in sickness repents, when he has no more power, shows
that sin has left him, not he the sin.

Sin through weakness is against the father and his mightiness, through
ignorance against the son and his wisdom, through malice, against the holy
Ghost and his grace.

Sin killed Saul with his own hand: hanged Absalom by his own hair: slew
Zenacherib by his own sons, and betrayed Christ by his own servants.

Sin is the bait of folly, and the scourge of villainy, it brings the beggar
to the stocks, the bawd to the cart, the thief to the gallows, and the
murderer to the wheel, and all without repentance to hell.

Sin makes wrath in heaven, war on earth, woe for man, and work for the
devil.

Sin is the seed of darkness, the root of rottenness, the tree of
cursednesse, the blossom of vanity, and fruit of bitterness.

Sin toles the passing bell of life, strikes up the drum of death, sounds the
trump of infamy, and makes the whole triumph of hell.

Sorrow.
Sorrow for sin, can never break the heart
For joy within, else life it makes to part.
SOrrow for sin is a sign of grace, and joined with true repentance works
our salvation. For as a warm hand mouldeth and fashioneth wax to what
impression it please: so do tears and true contrition work God to compassion.

Sorrow is sins salve, and amendment of life keeps the soul in health.

Sorrows concealed are killing pains, and repentant tears though they make
less noise are more forcible with God, then fained or strained outcries, with
whom the throbs of the heart are as powerful as drops of blood, and the
sighings of a penitent and sorrowful soul do always prevail.

Sorrows unfelt condemn us for want of sense: but not forborne, proves we
have no patience, nor right use of affliction.

Sorrow bursteth forth many times into tears, which from a true heart are
gracious, from a kind heart pitiful, from a cursed heart scornful, from a
false heart devilish, and from a foolish heart ridiculous.

Sorrow fills the heart full of grief, and makes silence a heavy burden:
yet is it better to suppress sorrow in silence, then let it break forth into
rage with greater offense.

Sorrow is ended by death, and although patience is the ouerruler of passion:
yet delay is the murderer of hope.

Sorrow that is helples, is a heavy passion, and hopeless patience is an
endless grief.

Sorrow, if moderate, may be had for the dead, but extremities are to be
avoided i^ all things. For as a glutting rain is eue^ noisome to corn: for in
seed time it drowneth it, in the growth it lodges it, and at harvest it
rotteth or burns it: so does sorrow and excess of tears dull our senses,
quench our spirits, cloud our understandings, and in conclusion kills all
lively operation of our souls and bodies.

Sorrow oppresses the mind, breaks the heart, and keeps us from our
journey to quietness, as a tired horse faintes in his way, sinkes under his
burden, and sometime lies down in the dirt.

Sorrow, if great, makes the soul burst forth into cries; but if excessive, it
smothers them or choakes them in the very birth or conception: so that in
sorrow, the less the sound is, the more is the sense.

Sorrow makes a contrite heart to sigh, and teaches the penitent to talk
with God in prayer, which indeed is the true sacrifice, and only redress of
sorrow.

Sorrow fashioneth an unruly heart to good order, as a wide and side garment is
cut and pared, and plighted and put together in a sit and comely manner.

Sorrow is renewed with remembrance of sins past, meditation of faults present,
and fear of future offenses.

Sorrow is the cause of a heavy heart, hot liver, bad digestion, unsavory
breath, abstinence from meats, dry bones, swelling eyes, sad countenance,
dejected looks, dull and doleful dispositions, pensive passions, and many
melancholic maladies, and macerations, pitiful gestures, mournful speeches,
and mad actions, sorrow is never so profitable as for sin, nor joy so
comfortable as for forgiveness of sin.

Sorrow for sin if true and hearty, causes in the faithful fear to offend
again, but causes ^eare joined with hope of pardon; whereas the sorrow of the
faithless follows fear of death and damnation.

Sorrow ouercharging the heart, puts it to a dangerous and deadly plunge: as a
Faulcons life is hazzarded by ouer-gorging, and a slender roof by
ouer-burdening; so that a weak heart is quickly ouerthrown, and a strong put
to the more pain.

Sorrow and tears cleanse the soul of her sins, and contrition of the heart
makes confession with the mouth: for all true grief makes a man know and
acknowledge himself.

Sorrow in extremity ouerpresseth a weak resolution, as a ship ouer-loaded,
does sometime sincke with the weight.

Sorrow about worldly business brings pensiuenes, and detaineth us from such
endeauours as may prevent mischiefs, yea, keeps us from godly meditations
and heavenly objects, which are more profitable unto us.

Sorrow for wants cannot remedy them, nor prevent necessities, and therefore it
is the way to proc^ed to action, and over come sorrow with painful
employments.

Sorrow for unkindness in Lovers, must be vented by words, or else the heart
shall never make known griefs, but by fair and friendly expostulations, it
comes to pass often times, that the falling out of Lovers is the renewing of
love.

Temperance.
Nothing too much: mix water with the wine;
The mean is best, which temperance does define.
TEmperance both in judiciary proceedings, and in private men's minds and
actions, procures tranquillity, and preuenteth outrage and calumny in
Commonwealths: for so neither the bad are supported, nor the good oppressed,
the mighty imperious, nor the weak refractarious, the soldier mutinous, nor
the scholar contentious, the rich covetous, nor the poor envious: for
although most of these may be comprised under the government of Justice; yet
must Justice her self be guided by temperance.

Temperance in diet and exercise, will make a man say; a fig, for Gallen and
Paracelsus. Temperance sitting in the heart, and ruling the affection and
tongue, keeps a man from flattering, dissimulation, which is an extreme,
which though the world say; he that wants, has no wit, vet I say, he that
uses it has no honesty.

Temperance keeps us from flattering speeches, which are like smooth waters,
wherein men are drowned sooner, then in rough streams, because they are
commonly deepest, and most dangerous.

Temperance in wine, is a whet-stone to the wit: but excess, is a millstone to
the senses.

Temperance through patience makes the smart of others soars a lenatiue to
his own wounds; but indeed there need no such distinction: for there is no
temperance without patience, and patience is a kind of temperance.

Temperance is pace and moderate proceeding, brings lowly snailes (as slowly
as they go) to the top of high towers, when gaping and fluttering Rookes
break their necks for have, out of their lofty nests.

Temperance is the protectrix of all other virtues: for Socrates was wont to
say, that he which would love his country as his own life, must above all
things love temperance, or abstinence, and fly from self will and excess, as
from a Siren: and Epictetes the Stoicke did as it were knit up all Philosophy
in two words, Suffer and Abstain. In the first whereof we may learn to bear
adversity with a good mind: in the second to abstain from our own wills and
vain sed^cings.

Temperance keeps our affections in order: for otherwise, if our appetite
might seed always on Manna, we would loath it; if our inheritance did stretch
to the plain of Jordan, we would go beyond it; and if we were seated in
heaven, we would lift up our heads above it.

Temperance was surely wanting when E^ah thought not Paradise sufficient for
her habi^aton; the dainties of Eden sweet enough for her taste; nor the
presence of God good enough for her company and contentment.

Temperance teaches men to use riches and endure poverty: yea to moderate
prosperity, and overcome adversity.

Temperance uses wine moderately to the comforting the heart, and quickening
the wit, whereas taken in excess it dulleth the memory, weakeneth the sense,
corrupts the blood, troubles the stomach, infuseth error, and brings us
to ignorance.

Temperance poyseth virtue in a mean and moderate scale, and hope of attaining
future good by moderation, keeps our wicked wills from extrauagant ranging.

Temperance keeps the spirits at rest, and in order, which otherwise would
burst into passions and extremities: but nothing excessiuely violent is
durable; nor any thing orderly moderate is easily mutable.

Temperance brought most of the Roman wars to perfection, and all the great
Captains to glory. Thus Q^ Fabius overcame Hanniball and Scipi^ Spain: yea in
his abstinence from the beautiful captive espoused to Iudibilis, he won the
hearts of all the people, and settled the Roman Empire.

Temperance is diet keeps the body in health, but a clear conscience is the
soundness of the foul.

Temperance joined with modesty teaches apparel to cover nakedness, and
meat to nourish nature: but feasts cause surfe^ting, riches pride,
voluptuousness idleness, and excess overthrows all.

Temperance is the way to walk to perfection: and as when we look in a
glass, and see the spots in our face, unless the hand be li^ted up to make
all clean, it is to no purpose. So though wisdom discover our imperfections,
yet if temperance assist not to reformation, vices will spread farther and
farther to our final ruin.

Time.
This is the cure of grief, the end of hope,
To all thy wishes time affords thee scope.
TIme overcomes all labor, and ends the greatest misery and heaviness: for
how forcible soever sorrows seem, yet there must be an ending, as there was a
day of beginning.

Time amongst many other ways, is not least of all lost in telling lies and
wonders, and seldom are such men believed in true relations; like the
shepherds boy, that called the shepherds to help him: for the Wolf was
coming for a Lamb; who thereupon startled came once or twice bu. were
deceived: for the wanton boy did mock them with a lie; whereupon when the
Wolf indeed was come, they would not believe him, and so lay still until the
Lamb was gone, and the boys was turned to crying.

Time betwixt infancy and age seems long but in respect of eternity it is
much less then a minute: for God is before and after all times, which bear no
proportion to his enduring.

Time is precious to the wise, but vile to a fool; to the learned a treasure,
to the lasie tedious, to the blessed joyful, and to the damned horrible: for
in hell their pai^e is surpassing and perpetual.

Time is unrecoverable, and threfore not to be spent in want on fictions, or
idle fantasies, or vain pleasures.

Time watch th^our life, for the evening tells what the day has done, the
week casts up the days account, the months the weeks, the years the
months, our life the years, and death our life and all our actions.

Time makes the snail^ clime a great height, though he hasten but a slow pace,
the warmth of the Sun recouers dead flies; the grain of mustard-seede
becomes a tree: the small seeds of the earth spread to flourishing branches:
and al naturers works come to perfection in their due time.

Time is not to be let slip: for a bright morning may have a black day, and a
glorious day a gloomy evening.

Time is lost, when we labor in vain, but when we to work evil its to abuse
both wit and time: so time gained is a proof of wit, but abused the reproof
of wickedness.

Time of har^est is joyful to the husbandmen; of receiving fees to to the
lawyer; of taking rents to the Gentlemen; of rest and case to the soldier and
laborer: of expenses to the prodigal, of releeuing the poor to the
charitable, and so in infinite other particulars.

Time is pictured like Fortune with a hairy foretop and bald behind: to show
that we must catch hold of time, while she offers her self, and not let slip
an opportunity to to do us good; for there is no hold fast to be taken, when
she is past and gone.

Time is precious to the understanding spirit, and labor easy to the loving
heart, while loss of time is the shame of folly, and forced pain brings
unpleasing profit.

Time tries all things, and opens the eyes of true understanding, making the
eye of nature to guide the whole world in good order, the eye of reason to run
the course of nature, the eye of art to note the rules of reason: but the eye
of wisdom to take grace for her direction.

Time lost is hardly to be recovered, old sores are hardly healed, credit
cracked is hardly restored, and long quarrels hardly quieted.

Time lost is the effect of folly, the shame of wit, the rudeness of will, the
rust of sense, the rain of reason, the wound of sin, the woe of man.

Time and tides must be watched: for if they will not tarry for kings, let not
inferior persons expect to command the heavens.

Traveler.
I Countries, vices, manners, men, observe;
Learn languages, and would good fame deserve.
Traveler is an excellent hunts-man of idleness, and Physician to cure the
passion of love: for by labor and more generous employment out of sight of the
absent and beloved object, the body and mind are otherwise so set on work,
that lasinesse and love are quite extinct.

Traveler must do more then look on goodly buildings, and gaze on beautiful
faces: lest he be like to his carriage truncke that is remo^ed hither and
thither to serve his idle humors, to make shows, and fill up places: but
makes no profitable observations for public services.

Traveler must have the head of a Philosopher, to carry away all he remembers,
and sees, the heart of a Lion to endure all afflictions, and not be afraid of
any dangers, the mouth of a swine to taste and eat all meats, the eyes of a
Hawke to view the secrets of all places, where he resorts, the back of an Ass
to bear and forbear either floutes or disgraces, the legs of a Cammell to
carry his own body, and other necessaries if need be, and the vigilance of a
Cock to be awake at all hours, and be ready to attend his journey.

Traveler at sea sees the wonders of God, and at land the pleasures of the
world: at sea he must endure both storms and wants: at land he may prevent
extreamities, at sea he must provide before hand, and so may make shift without
money: at land he must always have coin or credit to serve his turn, as sea
he lives at ease without pleasure, at land he has delight with some labor,
at sea he is in danger of Piracy, tempests, and shipwrackes: at land he may
fall amongst thieves, couseners, and curtesans, at sea he is troubled with the
unsavory smell of the ship, at land refreshed with the sweet scent of flowers
of the field. To conclude, at sea he must endure some inconveniences, and at
land he may enjoy great contentment and delight.

Traveler must make use of his labors: for it is not sufficient to go from
City to City, from Country to Country, from house to house, from one delight
to another, except he learn the language, observe the most remarkable things,
converse with understanding men, confer with the judicious, be in person at
solemnities, give ^are to all reports, but believe only truths or strong
probabilities, and not let slip any opportunity to enrich his knowledge, and
pleasure his Country.

Traveler must not take exception to his Inn, find fault with his lodging,
murmr at his bedfellow, grudge at his diet, rail on his waggener, speak ill
of the religion, make comparisons with the state, villipend the place, where he
remains, not take exceptions to the faults and imperfections of private
persons, no though they be apparent impieties.

Traveler need not care for costly or superfluous apparel: must have money
and not show it, learning and not boast of it, secrets and not discover them,
ability of body and not abuse it, courage of heart, and not employ it: and
patience, but not ouerburthen it; for in matters iustisiable all conntries
hearken after complaints, and are proud, when they may do justice to
strangers.

Traveler must take heed of curiosity, either to enquire after dangerous
news, or to seek after others secrets: for so he may be brought to the
suspicion of an intelligencer, and discredit of enformer: in both which, though
there be some things allowable; yet the very title makes a blur. Traveler
must be sure of credit, where he means to reside: for as he cannot beforehand
determine his return; so he may not trust unto strangers for their charity
in unknown places: nay, his own countrymen will fail him, and his wants
defeat and disgrace him.

Traveler may perform his business the better, by how much he makes the
lesser show: For from a priuacy of life, he is unsuspected, whereas public
eminence makes him dangerously marked.

Traveler must be tongue-tied in matters of Religion, and leave disputation of
controversies: for to reise no arguments, to use no contradiction, to make no
comparison, to reproach or dispraise no man, or by nips or jests to expose him
to derision, are secure points for a Traveler to build on.

Troubles.
Troubles are trials, though they turn to loss:
Like gold and silver, that are tried from dross.
TRoubles are incident to an honest life: but sometimes they are so many and so
heavy, that they make honesty weary, and to sell her freehold: but troubles to
confirm constancy in honesty are gracious trials.

Troubles are tokens of Gods favor, whereupon Policrates the tyrant was
affraide of nothing so much, as the sicklenesse of fortune, because he had
never any trouble or mischance in the world, which made him cast his rich
jewel into the sea, because he would have some crosses: but a fisherman having
taken an extraordinary Dolphine, brought it to the King, who found his jewel
in her belley: whereat amazed, he presently swore, there was some great
mischief and trouble toward him, which fell out accordingly: for that night
there was a conspiracy against him, and he lost his life.

Troubles are like sea-markes to direct us in the channel of salvation, least
we fall on the rocks, and shelfes of worldly cares and covetousness: or
sincke ouer-head with cares into the gulphes and skirts of devouring vanity,
or filthy pleasures: from which we are often preserved by profitable troubles.

Troubles that are sudden and not foreseen, puzell our very thoughts; and
perturbe our understandings with pensive cares: therefore is premeditation a
great point of discretion, but it must forecast as well to prevent present
mischiefs, as to provide for future times.

Troubles make men-trust in God, and then they cannot be deceined, whereas he
that trusts in man, shall be sure to be abused.

Trouble is of greater power to restrain the act, then satisfy the desire:
for the body may be weary of sinning, when desire is never satisfied with
sin: as the drunkard that can drink no more, yet calls for more wine; and the
lecher unable to satisfy his lust, yet loves to rub and scratch his scuruey
ytch.

Troubles bring a man much less grief with a virtuous wife; but a vi^ious
woman her self alone, will overcome the patience of any man. They are much
more troublesome to men's hearts, then a smoking chimney is to their eyes.

Troubles are comforts to none, but such as have grace to see, who sendes them,
and why? and so to profit by them accordingly. So imprisonment is pleasing
only to such as know their patience and good carriage for a while, will procure
their greater liberty.

Trouble not the Lion in his pleasure, nor anger him in his pray, it may do
thee hurt, it cannot good; hunting will not make the wild bull tame, but
stark mad.

Trouble of a disquieted mind can no more be concealde then the cough, or a
woman with child, it filles with frowardness and grief, and both will forth.

Trouble is the common place of the poor, they are ever in it, and for want of
means, there is great disquiet: but an unruly wife is a quotidian fever, and
a continual plague on earth.

Troubles are the trials of patience, and passion the trouble of reason, fear
is the enemy of a weak spirit, but faith is the assurance of comfort, as
temperance the warrant of judgment.

Troubles and travail keep the body in motion, as study the mind and senses.
But as overmuch of the one tries the body: so overmuch of the other exhausteth
the spirits.

Troubles happen sometimes to the best livers, and suits in law are a mere
laborinth to an honest man, and quiet mind.

Troubles cannot overthrow godly resolutions, nor wise men be overcome with
trifels.

Troubles of the spirit grow by the infirmity of the flesh, and the infirmity
of the spirit, is the flesh ruined: so that they are both ways cause of each
others calamities.

Vanity.
The world (though Heaven) is but mere vanity
Compared with God? no, with Saints piety.
Vanity in words, clothes, and actions, wherein men do so much glory,
shows them void of wisdom and piety, which if it infused no other
infection to the speaker, or hearer: actour, or beholder; yet were it herein a
great sin, that it is a lavish profuser of precious time.

Vanity and des^re of glory do commonly keep company, for gorgeous
buildings, sumptuous tombs, large hospitalles, outward pomp, delicate
banqueting houses, delightful orchards, and all such fabrics, and sumptuous
works of purpose to be talked of, and add to our fame: are all but vanity,
wanting the substance of good deeds and true humility.

Vanity is often vented with little understanding, and yet great study, while
the hand of wisdom quickly discovers the folly of idle invention.

Vanities are herein venomous, that they so blast the forward wits of youth in
the blossom or budde, that they seeldome come to substantial and mature fruit.

Vanity makes wit a foolish wanton: for he that delights in toys, to
neglect weighty affairs, has little understanding.

Vanity soothed corrupts wit and reason: but the correction of vice commends
and causes wisdom.

Vanity transporteth to unprofitable pleasures, when wisdom delights in
necessary employments.

Vanity of the world is like a smoke in the air, which seems to ascend
unto heaheauen, but it goes and vanishes to nothing, and lets fall the
followers thereof to the pit of perdition.

Vanity is seen in certain things, whereto no trust is to be given. The
chance of the dice, the continuance of prosperity, the fair wether in winter,
or sunshine in April: the tears of a Crocadile, the playing of Dolphins, the
elloquence of a flatterer, the preferment of a tyrant, and the constancy of a
woman.

Vanity is soon seen in vaunting brauadoes as appears by this story. The
Duke of Calabria going to make war upon the Florentines: in a bravery said
he would not pull off his boots before he had entered the city, to whom a
merry fellow standing by said, oh my Lord, you will I fear fret out a number
of shoes then: for it must needs be a longer business then you imagine.

Vanity is a great reproach to true understanding, when we either speak more
then our cause in hand requires: or live above our ability and estates, making
a greater show and pomp then we can maintain by our means: or attempt any
enterprise, which we are not able to finish.

Vanity shows it self much in idle actions and ridiculous jests* as in this
tale may appear. A Gentleman of Naples, whose spirit was too high for his
fortune, lived far exceeding his maintenance: and yet had the fortune by
secret supportation to hold up his head in the sea of the world in despite of
envious eyes. Thus one night he lodged in the house of a baron, a friend of
his, where waking somewhat early: he fell to make his prayers unto God for the
remission of sins, and worldly means, which a certain i^ster ouerhearing,
and lying in the next chamber, answered with a loud voice! oh thou prodigal
child, thou art borne a younger brother, and to keep but one man and a boy art
still begging; but if thou will maintain a number of idle followers (whereof
thou art ambitious) learn to be thrifty, and spare in time* or thy prayers
will not be heard, whereat the Gentleman seeing his vanity, and perceiving he
had committed some error, replied. Indeed I spoke too loud to let thee hear
me: and have committed a greater folly to suffer thee to live upon me.

Vanity of apparel shows the pride of heart: the weakness of wit, the
fantasticknesse of will: the defect of understanding, or unruliness of
affection, the superfluity of prodigality: and a prognosticate of poverty.

Vanity of discourse and foolish table-talke makes men often ridiculous, as
appears by this. A Gentleman sitting at the table of a great friend being his
favorite, the table fully furnished, and the company well prepared to their
viands: the master of the house began to rouse his shoulders in a rich chair,
and himself as richly attired, spoke to a kinseman of his somewhat abruptly,
and then leaving him, he also spoke to the former Gentleman: and then again to
his cousin, whereat all the company amazed, expected to hear some matter
worthy to be uttered: but he gave only a hemme, and with a spit, said no
more, but cousin: what is that pie before you; whereat a iester, cha^ing that
he had stayed his teeth to give time to his ears, replied suddenly: better
eat of a calves head, then hear an owl speak: whereat the ghuests held
laughter so hard, that they were ready to break, and thus is idle ignorant
vanity worthily made ridiculous by hier own folly.

Valor.
Unless I make a man base fear subdue:
He Is but a beast to God and man untrue.
Valor aduanceth to honor, and thrusts misery aside from pressing us down
in the dirt.

Valor proceeding by wisdoms direction, perfecteth such actions, as
otherwise would fail in the execution.

Valor may be accompanied with folly, and and then is it mere
foole-hardinesse or temeritie: so that now in the school of the wisest it is
disputable, whether a wise coward, or a valiant fool is the better man.

Valor makes a Captain with a few soldiers overcome many enemies: but he
that overcomes himself, is valiant indeed; but he which is his own enemy,
whether shall he fly for succor or security.

Valor differs from foolish hardiness, as a wise fear may be far from
cowardice: in bo^^ extremities turn to vice.

Valor scorneth to move the impotent to impatiency, to betray the innocent to
villainy; or to vex the simple with impetuositie.

Valor will not insult over a weak hearted, nor pick a quarrel with one that
cannot answer him, either for impotency, some defect of nature, disabilitie of
person, inequality of condition, or imperfection of sense.

Valor in a good cause does not fear death as true divines in Gods cause are
not terrified with the devil.

Valor is often overthrown by rashness, and had I wist is the worst part of
understanding: for rashness without reason may breed sorrow without compassion.

Valor is glorious in mercy, but a cowheard is tyrannous in victory.

Valor must not attempt impossibilities, nor run into with absurdities; but
carry an equalhead both in the practice of attempts and relation of actions,
neither bosting of its own worth, or extenuate another merit.

Valor of the Captains is a maine means of victory to the whole army;
whereupon the Numantines being great soldiers thus commended the Romans: when
once in a battle, or great piece of service they were put to the worst, and
driven to slight by Scipio Aemilianus: at their sitting down they were
reprehended by their leaders in great rage for their base cowardice, with these
words; are not these the Roman sheep, that we have so often beaten home to
their foldes? to which the soldiers made this answer: they are indeed the same
^^eepe, but they have changed their shepherds, meaning they had now more
valiant Commanders.

Valor is so great a friend to learning, that that it will answer in her
behalf, vnterrified with swearing or swaggering: for so a noble young
Gentleman much given to learning, and a great lover of study sitting one day
amongst his books, was visited by a more hot brain, then wise witted gallant:
a neighbor of his, who at his coming unto him, used this speech? What still
at thy book? ever amongst the dead? come abroad, and live with the living? Oh
answered the young Gentleman I am sorry to hear thee say one thing, and prove
another; for my books are dead in show, but full of life indeed; and thou
do live in show, but to virtue the true life thou art dead.

Valor holds up the sword of Justice, and makes life to shine with a luster
of honor, as the stars through the clouds.

Valor raises mean men to order of her service, and degrees of military
renown so it be seasoned with experience and understanding; otherwise to see a
younger soldier preferred before another breeds repining, and how ever favor
and authority may proceed per saltum, yet it is a mere wrong.

Virtue.
I make true honor worthy truest praise,
And from the dust the humble I do raise.
Virtue has a country in heaven, and when she comes on earth, she is like a
traveler that goes to a friend to persuade him to change his dwelling for a
better.

Virtue makes life famous, and death glorious; and he that neglecte^h her is a
fool: but he that hates her is a devil.

Virtue in youth makes age honorable, and in age makes death memorable: it is
as harmony to life, and a sweet Di^pason in music to the comfort both of the
players, and standers by.

Virtue in misery is the joy of the wicked, as wickedness in prosperity is the
grief of the godly: which makes me remember a saying of a Philosopher, to
Phalaris the Tyrant, who reprehended him for weeping at the death of his
friend, as being a principle against true Philosophy: but he very confidently
replied; I weep not O Tyrant, that the virtuous do die, but that the vicious
do live, and such as thou do govern.

Virtue is blemished with vainglorious ostentation, but to boast of wickedness
and vice, is the top of sin, and most abominable to God and good men.

Virtue in a Prince is the subjects joy, and the peace of all estates is
conserved by virtuous administration, mar^^all discipline, due execution of
laws, worthy advancing to preferment, courageous suppressing the insolent, and
resolute constancy to mainetaine true religion and ciuell administration: all
which must be performed by virtue, and cannot be done without her direction.

Virtue of the wise is to be beloved, the life of the virtuous to be gracious,
the service of the faithful to be rewarded, and the honor of the valiant to
be advanced.

Virtue makes the mind of man to think right upon God, and to do right
amongst men, so that true Virtue begins by good motions, good motions
proceed to resolute meditations, resolute meditations must be expressed by
orderly words: orderly words must go forwards to effectual deeds:
effectual deeds to constant perseverance, and perseverance must knit up the
life with the indissoluble knot of eternal fame.

Virtue is most graced by mercy and pity: for therein do men come nearest the
divine nature, whilst tyrants on earth breath nothing but blood and revenge.

Virtue builds upon hope of reward, and honor is a great spur^e to virtuous
endeavors.

Virtue has her greatest luster compared to the vicious, as stars shine
brightest in the darkest night.

Virtue of the soul dimmeth the beauty of the body, as the brightness of the
Sun diminishes the light of a candell: for virtue will appear in despite
of envy, yet must men take heed of polluting ve^tue with the lest crime: for a
stain is not so soon seen in a course cloth, as in pure linen.

Virtue is gracious in the beginning, famous in the proceeding, admirable in
the end, and glorious in the memory even after death.

Virtue in the deprivation thereof, leaves the soul more bare then the naked
body.

Vetue is like a mirror: for as when a man looks in a glass* and thereby
discovers the spots and stains of his face: so through virtue do we behold
the imperfection of nature, and the deformity of sin.

Virtue cannot be obtained without an industrious heart, and painful
pursuit: ^ therefore let no idle person ever think to attain virtue by
following vanity: for a shadow in show, cannot produce a substance in effect.

Virtue is the gift of God, but gotten by industry.

Wars.
I am a scourge of sin, how ere I seem,
Unjust and barbarous, as fools esteem.
VVArres that are bloody, make even the peace woeful, and those are accursed,
that are sowers of ciuell discord.

Wars dispeople Countries, deuast Cities, defloure Virgins, ravish Matrons,
overthrow Commonwealths, ruinate husbandry, spoil Merchants, empouerish the
Tradesman, and turns topsie turuy the whole Kingdom.

Wars are sent as a Nurse, and punishment of sins, and because sin does
ever increase, till the last hour; there will never be a general peace.

Wars attempted through ambition or vainglory, do commonly end to the
prejudice of the beginner: but if to propulse injuries, then the decider of all
controversies commonly carries the cause with the innocent parties.

Wars are levied to maintain peace: for as a sword is an instrument of
defense, and a cloak a shelter for the rain: so men use wars to keep
themselves from the storms of utter ruin by foreign enemies, or private
subversion, by ciuell, or if you will, vn^iuel friends.

Wars that grow upon ambition, are like to be terrible: but a luxurious
peace is as miserable.

Wars are pleasing in conceit, or for outward bravery to the unexperienced,
as peace is unpleasant to a troublesome spirit.

Wars are fearful in the very rumor, much more in the terrible effects:
for though the Drum and Trumpet ye elda brave sound, yet does the Musket and
Pike give a killing blow.

Wars are commonly foreign, or domestic; the first may be propulsed by like
forces: but the other must be prevented by cautelous endeauours, and both in
the beginning, as we do the bursting out of rivers, which otherwise will
spoil all with their violent ouerflowings.

Wars cannot be maintained without men: Men cannot be got without money, money
cannot be levied without taxes and impositions, taxes cannot be paid without
obedience, nor obedience showed without love, and hearty inclination to the
Prince.

Wars resemble the eyes and beauty of a strumpet, pleasing to the sight,
attractiue and full of favor in outward resemblance: but there is death in her
company, hell in her bed, and damnation in her entertainment: so to see brave
plumes and scarffes, rich cassockes, barbed horses, to hear the cheerful
Drum and Trumpet, to march in martial manner through the streets, and to be
trained in the flourishing fields, our acquaintance beholding us, and friends
smiling on us, is a gallant idleness: but to lie in the durty fields, to watch
in the dark^ nights, to freeze standing sentinel, to famish for want of
meats, to be infeebled by the flix, to fight with cruel enemies, to be shot
with their bullets, to be thrust through with their pikes, to be slain with
their swords, to be trampled with horses, to be eaten up by ravens, to rotte
in the fields, or be buried in heaps, are fearful ishues of fair shows.

Wars that are never so honorable and glorious, are far inferior to peace
upon any honest composition whatsoever.

Wars resemble a new broom, which sweepeth away the unclean cobwebs, and
casts them out of our houses upon our dunghils; so does war consume the
caterpillars of a country, and carry the vagabonds and rogues, and rascal
rabblement to their common graves.

Wilfulness.
No woe is wanting to a wilful Man?
If he be hurt, it from himself began.
VVIlfulnesse makes him fall, that may stand, and then we say he is justly
hurt by his own hand, howeuer we may excuse the stumbling of one that is
blind. Wilfulness brings folly to woe, whilst the wariness of the wise,
runs the course of great comfort.

Wilfulness in steed of law, makes patience subscribe to power, and when wit
wants judgment, what hope can there be had of justice.

Wilfulness is cousin german to madness, and he that will not be advised, if
he perish in his peevishness should not be pitied.

Wilfulness in the General of an Army, many times overthrows the whole
action, because he runs headlong to destruction, and nere disputes what
hindrances and obstacles may intercept him; which makes me remember the
History of Heluetia, when the Emperor Charles the fifth determined to invade
the same, the Noble men and Captains were so wilfully bent, that they
presently resolved without further disputing to enter the Country, had not a
fool standing by thus interrupted them: here are great words among you, that
you will presently enter Heluetia, and go into the mountains: but let me
ask you, how you will get out again: for when you shall be pusselled in the
narrow passages, where ten men, may keep out a hundred, you will repent your
wilfulness: whereupon better advice was taken, and the journey for that time
adiourned.

Wilfulnes brings repentance too late, when irrecouerable mischief has light
on a frantic pate, and made it too late to deliberate, how to prevent it.

Wilfulness of the Governors is the highway to the slaughter of their
soldiers: for when at the first besieging of Belgrade, the great Turk in a
manner saw the impossibility of the attempt, he yet was so wilful, that he
commanded the Ianisaries to come forward; who thereuppon pressing over
tumultuously, were slaughtered in thousands, to the filling up both of trenches
and dit^hes, so that there were slain above 60000. lamentably through the
imperious wilfulness of the Empeour.

Wilfulness made the prodigal child run his riotous race, to the offending
of God, disobedience of parents, grief of friends, consuming his inheritance,
and hazard both of body and soul in misery eternal.

Wilfulness causes strumpets to plead nenessity of maintenance, want of
service, loss of friends, liberty of life, and privileges of love; when yet
it is merely a wilful resolution to do wickedly, and enjoy the pleasures of
sin for a season: for otherwise virtue cannot be poor, nor want
maintenance, if it want not industry.

Wilfulness in prodigal courses, begin and go on with some sense and hope of
delight, but quickly run into poverty, and end in misery.

Wilfulness cannot endure either restraint or direction, but runs on in the
course of destruction, as a seeled Dove flies head long on she knows not
whither, and at last is subject to the seizure of the Hawke.

World.
No doubt I am a Master piece of beauty,
If my less Worlds within me, do their duty.
THe World has so many bewitching properti^s, that we are so much the nearer
to the divine nature, as we lift up our minds from it, or above it for there is
great difference between temporal trash, and spiritual treasure.

The world must be cared for to maintain the body, the body to preserve life,
life to comfort the soul: but neither to nourish us in iniquity, and
dispossess us of eterninie.

The world is but a days walk: for the Sun goes about it in 24. hours, and
the Sea is but shallow: for it is but a stones cast to the bottom, but the
thought of man is unmeasurable, and the depth of wisdom unsearchable.

The world holds him wise that is wealthy: but virtue knows him to be wealthy
that is wise: for many loose their living for want of wit, but very few loose
their wits for want of land.

The world you see is a beautiful workmanship, yet it shall be consumed with
fire for deformity and pollution of sin.

The world resembles a general Merchants storehouse, wherein are infinite
sorts of wares for diverse uses; but if the buyers come more for idle fancies,
then necessary uses, they may spend their money to little purpose, and loose
their time to great repentance.

The world made the Philosophers amazed to consider it: for they could not
conceive the original, were ashamed to see the vanity, and confounded to
consider to what end and issue it would come: whereupon it is recorded, that
three excellent Philosophers gathered themselves together concerning the same:
Heraclites, Democritus, and Epictetes the Stoic. After some disputation,
Epictetes put a fools cap over the Globe, Democritus laughed to scorn the
vanity, and Heraclitus (...) the misery.

The world seeks wealth, the wealthy honor, the honorable respect, but the
true convert cares for nothing but Christ, and him crucified.

The world does commonly persecute men three manner of ways, in soul, body,
and goods: the soul is troubled with unlearned Divines, the body tormented
with unskillful Physicians, and the goods purloined by factious Lawyers:
whereupon the Archbishop of Florence said to Cardinal Alexandrinus, that
Lawyers themselves sildome went to law, Physicians took no physic, and
Divines were many of them scarce good Christians.

The world by the opinion of Cyprian was corrupted with certain abuses,
wherein man's imperfections showed a rediculous disparity, or rather an impious
contrariety, as a wise man without good works, an old man without religion, a
poor man proud, a seeming matron without honesty, a noble man without virtue,
a Christian without piety, a Churchman without charity, a Priest without
learning, a state without laws, a Common wealth without government: Thus are
men carried in the world with contrary humors, and infested with opposite vices.

The world was taught three good rules by Chilo: to know that it was Gods
handyworke, that it was made of nothing, and shall be consumed to nothing: so
man was instructed to know himself, not to desire much, and to keep himself
out of debt.

The World is the toil of the covetous, whose wealth is the witch of the
wicked, while heaven is the hope of the faithful, and grace the joy of the
blessed: Thus again in the world we may say, that impatience is the sting of
nature, and presumption the pride of sin, while humility is the grace of
reason, and patience the blessing of grace.

The world is a shop of such wares, as ^heateth the deluded buyers, who count
wealth as a jewel, poverty a plague, conscience a fool, care is a Lord of
mis^ule, and will the master of the senses.

The world shows us plainly, that beauty is an eyesore, learning a task,
valor a heat of blood, reason a gift of God, Kings Gods on earth, a Nobleman,
a great man: a Soldier, a stout man: a Courtier, a fine man: a Lawyer, a wise
man: a Merchant, a rich man: a beggar, a poor man: and an honest man, a true
man.

The world cannot continue, except times and seasons have their courses: day
and night make their changes, labor and rest comforts men's bodies, meat and
sleep preserve life, punishment and reward proceed from true justice, and
wisdom and folly make the difference of all estates.

The world tells us that a kingdom brings care, learning is full of
trouble, power full of charge, youth full of action age full of grief: and
content is the only happiness.

The world is a laborinth of wit, the consumption of understanding, the
pilgrimage of patience, and the purgatory of reason: so that in trufth he is
happy, that dwells in it to Gods glory, his own comfort, and the benefit of
his neighbor: and to conclude, the use is good; but the abuse dangerous.

Woman.
I longed for dainties, was deceived by lust:
In one marred all men, made the world unjust.
Woman was the original of man's destruction: for he had not disobeyed God,
but by the enticement of the woman: for the which God told him plainly, he
was accursed and subject to damnation.

A woman is a stinking rose, a pleasing evil, the mouse-trap of a man's soul,
the thief of his life, a flattering wound, a delicate distraction, a sweet
death: and the love of her hidden fire; a pleasing wound, a sweet poison, a
bitter sweet, a delightful disease, a pleasant punishment, a flattering death.

Woman is the strength of will, the weakness of understanding, the exercise
of patience, the trouble of reason, the increase of number, the delight of
vanity, the pride of beauty, the abuse of love, the breder of iealosie, and
the deceit of trust and confidency.

Woman is the wonder of nature: for she makes two bodies one flesh, and two
hearts one soul: so that the husband and wife truly loving, so conspire in
all their actions, that they have in a manner, but one motion: for love makes
union, as hate does separation and division.

Woman is a necessary ill, a pleasing yoakefellowe: and a strong supportation,
to weak means of housekeeping; for as in a teeme, except the oxen be jointly
united and draw together: the plough or cart cannot orderly go forward. So in
housekeeping, except man and wife do lovingly agree, and jointly labor in
their seueuerall places to maintain and increase their estates, all will
quickly be overthrown; for a division of love and action, makes a dimunition
of substance, or rather a dissipation.

Woman again is a purgatory on earth, and with contrary humors quenches the
hoatest love, and breaks the hardest heart; for if she be honest, she will be
imperious, if fair, she will be venerious: if foul, she is loathsome: if a
wanton, full of fraud or treason: if proud, costly above thy ability: if
witty, impudent to shame thee* or make thee weary: if sheepish, she will
neither increase thy commodity, nor govern thy family: if familiar and
affable, she will be foolish and tell all: either she has no good quality,
or such as are quite ouermatched by the contrary.

Woman that proves a good wife, commonly continues a good mother, so that
the husband has joy, the children comfort, the servants contentment, and all
the house establishment.

Woman must avoid all occasions of bad rumors: for it is not enough that she
be honest, but that she be so reputed and reported; because the honor of a
man depends on his wives loyalty, and the reproach of children, on the report
of her dishonestie.

Woman is the weaker vessel, and therefore must man bear with the infirmity
of his wife, as she endure the impatience and imperfection of her husband.

Woman is the author to her husband of much good or ill, as she is endued with
the grace of God, or the malice of the devil.

Woman fair, and proud, and wanting wisdom: is a looking-glass of vanity,
and a miror of inconstancy, idle, fantastic, desirous of novelties,
disdainful, chargeable, a dainty feeder, a gadder, a talker, and every way
irregular.

Woman is seldom pitied in her tears: for they commonly proceed either from
anger, or deceit; anger, that she cannot be revenged: deceit, that she
cannot have her will in wantonness and liberty.

Woman is endued with the same virtues as man: for there has been as valiant,
wise, godly, magnaninous, pollitick, judicious, great spirited, and learned
women as men: yea, our histories are filled with the glorious actions and
famous conquests of wo^ as well as Emperors, or other persons of honor,
elloquence, learning, and judgment.

A whore.
I am of shame a scorge, of sin a sincke:
My lifes-flame quenched, it like a snuff does stincke.
A whore has many significant names, as filth, curtisan, queen, strumpet,
puncke, light-hus-wife, concubine, leman, Jove, mistress, and infinite other
fictions, according to men's fantasies; but all concluding, breach of chastity,
and contempt of loyalty, either to virginity or marriage.

A whore once prostituted to lust, will hardly be reclaimed to honesty: and
there is more hope of a branded thief, then an impudent whore.

A whore is like a horse-leach: for as it sucketh the blood from corrupted
bodies and never falls off, till it swel with fuln^sse. So plays the whore
with our substance, and best blood in our bodies, and never leaves a miserable
besotted man, till she have fethered her nest, and filled her coffers: nay,
till she has emptied the bones of marrow, and the purse of money.

A whore is known by the boldness of her face, pride of her eyes, wantonness
of countenance, inconstancy of her looks, gaudines of clothes, giddines of
gate, immodesty of her gesture, looseness of her behavior, licenciousnes of
her words, leawdeof her actions.

A whore is of the nature of Astrology, an art of all men embraced and
practiced; so a whore is railed and reviled of every body for her ^ilthy
conditions, and yet courted and embraced for her wanton allurements, and
pleasing delight.

A whore studieth for nothing but wealth, bravery, and expenses: yet she is
never the nearer to attain to any settled estate, nor a jot the richer at the
years end.

A whore is not to be trusted with a secret, nor can be ^ilent in a matter of
importance especially if a bribe whisper her in the ear and a greater reward
entise her to discovery.

A whore brings a fool into the house of slaughter, and he that goes into
her chamber, is like an Ox led by the Butcher.

A whore cannot be better compared then to deep pits, from whence it is
^asier to keep ones self from falling, then once fallen to recover out: so it
is more easy to absent thy self and never remember her, then by her company
to content and satiat thy desire.

A whore is compared to coals taken out out of the fire, which either burn a
man or besmeere him: so do whores either consume our estates, or our credites.

A whore amongst many other has one lovely condition, that in her lovers
misery she will laugh and sing, and at his entreaties she will fleere and
scorn.

A whore reprehended for her incontinencie stands more stiffely then any
other on terms of honesty, and reproved for her shameless and filthy desire
of change and variety, iustifies with fearful oaths her constant fidelity.

A whore supposes to redeem and wipe aaway her filthy crimes, by going to
Church and giving Alms: but let her know that the sacrifise of a thief, is as
if he had offered the head of Dog, and the charity of a strumpet, as the
stink of a dunghill.

A whore has this usual impediment, that she cannot repent. For while youth
lasts she is loath to leave her profitable sport, and when both fail, she
sees that of a young whore she may turn an old bawd, and so still live by the
trade.

A whore that is mercenary, will hardly be drawn from her filthy life, she is
so fast linked to the love of money, otherwise many faulty women repent their
first o^^ence, and become of bad maids very good wives.

A whore thinks her self excellent witty, when she can practice disloyalty
cunningly, and ouerreach her friends by her subtlety.

The finest whore is but a filthy drippingpan, so often set to the fire, till
she is caught by the flame, and so burns her self, and her basting stick ere
she has done.

AN EPITOME OF GOOD MANNERS, extracted out of the treatise of Mr. John Della
Casa called Galatea.
ALthough virtues and high exalted qualities seem to have a greater praise:
then common rudiments, and simple precepts of life; yet because every man's arm
cannot reach at so high a branch, nor capacity attain to so great knowledge,
and that good mauners is more necessary, and to be put in practice in all
conuersations. I will here briefly show you by way of short and civil
admonitions, how a man should demean himself with acceptance to all noble
societies.

Good Manners prefers as much as Virtue.
First then to encourage thee the more; believe it, that many men have attained
to great preferment by cheerful and pleasant behavior alone, when as diverse
endowed with virtues of admiration, have not yet stepped so high on the degrees
of honor. Contrariwise, rude and uncivil fashions make men both odious and
combersome: for though there be no laws nor punishments articulated against
them: yet is nature a principal corrector in his kind, and makes them
unsociable to mutual commerces, and others of moderate demeanor affraide of
their rudeness; for as men do commonly run away affrighted at savage and
cruel beasts, not seeming once to have any fear of gnats, and flies, and
other lesser vermin: yet by reason of continual annoyance, they complain
more of these, then the other. So fares it in the hate of wicked and impious
livers: but yet by being continually conversant with one another, we are more
affraide of unmannerly and untaught companions, then tyrannous and dissolute
livers.

Flattery.
Next to frame our selves conformable to society, we must live in such a
fashion, that we may please others, and not satisfy our minds altogether:
wherein discretion must so measure our actions, that as we ought to be far
from palpable flattery incident to a Parasite: so must we be remote from
deprauing inuection, the office of a decractor and railer.

Loathsome and filthy things.
We must not only refrain from such things as be foul, filthy, loathsome,
and nastie: but not so much as name them; so that neither the common sense of
other men should be offended, nor the conceit and imagination with matter
unpleasant distasted: as for example; a Gentleman ought not openly to thrust
his hands into his priuities, to reach to his head, or any part of his body,
as if he fished for a louse, to ease himself in public view, and so trusse
himself in a bravery, to wash his hands on a sudden: as giving the company
notice, where he had been, to show them any loathsome thing, as he passes by
the way: nor to offer to their nose any filthy or stinking weed, which may
annoy, or displease their patience.

Unpleasant sounds.
We must not grind the teeth, whistle, make noises, nor offend the ears with
any harsh and unpleasant sound: nay we should not offer to sing aloud,
especially having an vntun^able voice; as for coffing, sneezing, and yawning,
they be things so unsavory, that a man is bound to auo^de them in public, or
at least restrain himself as much as nature may suffer, and tolerate; but
the principal reason is, the vile-pending the company, and taking upon our
selves a greater state of pre-eminence, then either they will allow, or falls
to their proportion to carry.

Blowing the nose.
We must not blow our nose too loud, nor open the hand-chercher at all to
show any nasty filthiness, nor lay it to the cup where another means to
drink, nor smell to the meat, which he determines to eat, no not to that,
which thou have chosen for thy self, no nor reach the cup or meat, which
thou have tasted to any other of thy own voluntary will, except such a
familiar friend, as depends on thee for love, or observation: for though they
seem small offenses, yet beleeu it, slight stripes have power to slay fast
enough.

Vnmanner linesse at the table.
We must avoid all ravenous and greedy feeding, all unmannerly besmeering the
fingers, all filthy bedawbing the napkins, wiping our face with them, sweating
with eating, blowing in drinking, and rubbing our fingers on bread,
table-cloth, or any other place unbefitting; nor should a man blow upon any
thing to deliver it to another, as the dust of a roasted appell, or a fether
from ones ruff and such like: for wind was never without water, nor offer thy
hand-kercher to another, nor come so near in thy talk as to brtath in ones
face, nor indeed any thing which may breed offense, or breach of friendship.

Carelessness of the company.
We must do nothing in our civil conversation, which may give a distaste to
those with whom we keep company of vile-pending, or smally estimating them; as
sleeping, where men be met to commune, and confer together; rising to walk up
and down, when others are disposed to sit and complain to on another, or
dispute the matter; stretching our selves and yawning with other rude iestures,
pulling out of letters to read, as if some great affairs importuned, and were
committed unto them: payring of nails, dromming with fingers, whistling,
singing between the teeth, humming, shuffling with the feet, when other men
would sollace themselves otherwise: sitting with turning our tail to our next
neighbor, lolling with our feet upon a table, or higher form: leaning on
ones shoulder, punching with the elbowe at every abrupt sentence we utter, and
such like, all which show a certain carelessness of the company, and setting
at naught such, as we converse withal at the instant.

Decency of apparel.
We must apparel our selves meet for our age and calling, and not have other
men in contempt by our singularity, but fasshion our selves to common use,
though (...) less commodious or gallant, then ou^ (...) ties and desires would
adventure upon. Again, when all men wear hansome beards, we should not shave
our selves with strange attire of other countries, or (...) of our own, nor
ill shaped, least the world suspect we wear other men's: but fit and comely to
the body without pride, vanity, nastinesse, miserableness, or unmannerly
slouenlinesse.

Curiositi^ and cumber somnesse.
We must not be too tedious in trimming or apparelling our selves: for it
either shows a pride or curiosity, which is as ill a vice: nor must we have
any business to do, when we should fit down at the table, or seem to be
angry, that the meat is brought in so soon, when yet all the company would
feign be at dinner, nor show a manifest pride ^n sitting down first, choosing
the best bed, the hansommest chamber, going in a doors or up stairs without
some ceremonious proffer, and sports and exercises, as if they were rather
masters of the company, then companions.

Brawling and railing with servants.
We must not brawle and rail too much at the servants: much less strike,
especially when company is within hearing; For either it shows a froward and
teasty humor, or foolish pride, which is of all other vnbesitting a Gentleman,
who should boast of nothing so much as an humble mind, pleasant affability,
and well sorted courtesy: nor should we make our table a place of unkindness,
quarrel, or chaffing; for mirth and solace is the physician of feeding, and to
be then froward or fromward, is merely an extremity, and breach of true
friendship. Again we must not be too sad or lumpish, but pleasant and
familiar, so that the company may suppose themselves welcome, and proceed in
their entertainment, this custom must be likewise observed in all civil
intercourse, and salutations: so that when a question is demanded, no dogged
and unmannerly reply must follow: no musing nor extraordinary contemplation
amongst friends or company: no niceness, or effeminate daintiness: no
dangerous exceptions, if friends or companions should talk somewhat
displeasing, or do something, which might be forborne.

Filthy talk, ribaldry, profanation, unseasonable speeches.
We must not defile our communication with filthy and obsceane talk:
profaning Gods name, or intermingling religious secrets, with common
entercourses, and unseasonable conference, and out of time, as telling Friars
sermons to young Ladies disposed to be merry, or talking idly when the company
is in serious discourse, is a thing to be avoided: as also at feasts and
banquets to make relation of wounds, slaughters, or other tr^gicall accidents
is uncivil, and a custom to be reclaimed: nor should we take upon us the
discovery of our visions and dreams, as many will do with a tedious
curiosity, and unseemly confidence: but of all other things an honest
Gentleman must not dishonest himself with any fiction or lie, especially of
his own invention, either in hope of vaineglorious praise of a good wit, or
gross flattery toward any in presence: nay in relating news, and the report
of other men, he must be very circumspect, and observe such cautions; as may
induce the company to good and worthy attention, and not to scorn or deride
him, either for his own vanity in ambitiously discovering some commendable
exploytes, or his detracting others in proclaiming their infamy.

Counterfeiting of greatness, Comparisons.
We must not counterfeit a greater port and bravery, then God has established
us in, nor yet practice high and magnificent gestures, nor ouer-rich and costly
apparel: nor ouer-topping and discountenancing our inferiors, we must not
boast of our hohonour, Ancestors, wealth, exploits, nor contest with the
company by way of unequal comparisons, either to brave our betters, or insult
over others of meaner condition: nor are we too too remisly to imbase our
selves, lest it tend to a secreter pride by contemning what every man thinks
due unto us: as if we deserved far better, and yet seemed to disclaim it,
till it were fully offered unto us: nor should we refuse in modesty to tell the
truth, either concerning our selves or others: but we must avoid a prolixitie
of speech, and fetching about, when we are demanded our advise: there is
likewise a fault to be avoided amongst gentlemen, proceeding from an abject
mind; which is when a man does embase himself far lower then his place, to
the trouble and combersomnes of the whole company: but sometimes it proceeds
from folly and ridiculous custom with them, and then it is lamentable.

Ceremonies.
We must avoid all extraordinary ceremonies, or curious entertainements, as
uncovering the head, bowing the body in token of reverence, using high titles
and styles of honor, kissing the hands, embracing the body, and such like; all
which, as they may be ^sed, are decencies, and things of mere necessity and of
duty: but for every idle fellow in foppish meetings, and saluting one another
without distinction of time, place, and persons, anticke like to confound them
is merely discrepant from generosity and good manners: therefore is it not a
lamentable case for a Gentleman to honor them in titles, whom they despise in
their hearts, and with verbal protestations offer service, when yet we think
our selves worthy to command and control them: yea, sometimes it happens, that
encountering with a stranger, how base and unworthy soever he be: yet we give
him all the attributes of noble and high exalted, yielding as much as unto our
best deseruers, yet I cannot deny, but there be titles by privilege according
to the degrees of men, as Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, Officers, and such like,
wherein yet we must observe a decorum, but not disperage the worthy by
bestowing their graces on the unworthy.

Ceremonies for Profit, Duty, Vanity.
We must therefore consider, that Ceremonies are used for Profit, Duty, or
Vanity. For profit as we see in flatterers, who sooth our humors in every
thing, not in regard of our wills, but because they themselves should be
recompensed, wherein a Gentleman should not be seen: for it cannot be
otherwise, then a lie; and a man cannot honestly make a lie, nor seek by
virtuous courses to pleasure himself, by the hurt of another.

Duty.
But ceremonies of duty are not to be left according to the ciuell custom of
the place, and therefore we say, you, and not thou, to men of good sort: so in
the rest, we must seek to please others, as well as our selves, although
sometimes we can yield no probable reason for the sam^ (...) we do in the
laws of Princes, which (...) not presume to alter, till they in (...) think
them me^t to be repealed: (...) at because custom allows those salutings of
curtesy by term of kissing your hand. I am your servant, and such like, as
they do in Italy, they are not to be left neither in writing, nor speaking, as
for that harsh imitation of example of long former times, it is no more to be
practiced, then to send us to eat akorns; because in the beginning of
barbarism we did so.

Vanity.
We must not be touched with ceremonies of vanity or pride, wherein custom of
conntries is to be observed: for what is convenient at Naples, being a City of
Nobles and Gentlemen, is not so requisite in Florence and Leuca, places
consisting of Merchants, and inferior degrees, as also because in Veni^^ there
is an extraordinary kind of kissing, and saluting one another, by reason of
pleasing one another, in giving their ba^es, and consents for offices, yet must
not every City or Town (...) like.

Combersomenesse.
Ceremonies are also to be restrained, that breed co^bersomnes, wherein the
circumsta^ce of time, age, and condition, must be respected: for a Judge need
not use such humility as another, an old man as a young, a countryman as a
courtier, a servant as a stranger, and diverse others: for where men exspect a
duty, they care for no ceremonies, and where they respect them, they are also
tied to decencies: for as curtesy and humility are graceful even to inferiors:
so too much affectation and foppish motions ten^ to flattery, and make us
mocked with the titles of double diligence.

Book Ceremonies.
For when men are cunningly courted, they are weary of it, disdain it, and
herein is great reason, because these glauering fellows do thereby show, that
they estimate the party, as a vain and arrogant person, or a simple and
shallow-witted gull: we must therefore take heed of Book Ceremonies, which in
Spain of all other places are used, yea, even to the selling of them for
money, and observing how this man must be spoken unto, that Nobleman saluted,
that Lord exalted, that woman magnified, etc. So that nothing passes without
prescription, which when ignorant men have got once, they practice with
immoderate baseness, folly, and cow^rdise.

Slandering, Quarrelling, and Wrangling.
We must not slander or deprave another man's doings: no nor repine at our
neighbors prosperity: for therein we shall imitate the Ox that goreth with his
horns, or strikes with his feet: All quarrelling, wrangling, and
ouerthwarting must be avoided: for as in a combat the victory is the principal
end of the fight; so in verbal contentions we endeavor to seem to be in the
right and prevail, as more judicious then another, so that the gaining the
cause in trifling matters, does many times loose the love of a faithful
friend: for who will be acquainted with such, that every hour are contentious,
and give us cause rather to stand upon our guard to prevent a quarrel, then
to desire conversation to maintain our delight and contentment.

Counselling and Reproving.
We must be careful how, and whom we go about to counsel or reprove: for
commonly it proceeds from self love and pride, that we are wiser then they;
yea, sometimes it seems a check to him for his ignorance and folly, so that
this interm^dling with other folks business, is a dangerous matter: for he
that counsels, has ever a good conceit of himself, and an ill opinion
against the other, and he that reproves others, seems as though he had no
faults of his own.

Scoffs and Scorns.
We must not scorn or scoff at any man: for it is a greater sign of contempt
and disdain to scorn a man, then to do him an open wrong. For as much as
wrongs may be done either of choler, or of some covetous mind or other; and
the nature and effect of a scorn, is properly to take a contentation and
pleasure to do another shame and villainy, though it do our selves no good in
the world: therefore we must neither reprove the blemishes of nature in other
men, nor make a sport to counterfeit their imperfections, and although there be
some difference between a scoff and a mock, as that a scorn shows always
despite, and a mock may be done in pastime* yet must a Gent, avoid both the
one and other, or at least be limited in his mirth, that it turn not to
shaming the party, and so may be counted as ill, as a scorn or depriua^ion.
For it many times chances, that in boording and jesting one takes in sport,
the other strikes again in earnest, so that a mock is no better then a
deceit, and he that seeks to purchase good will, and be well thought on, must
not make himself cunning in mockes and jests, and yet a pretty fashion of
mirth is sometimes maintained from pleasant jests and conceits, and a good wit
is both commendable and allowable: but herein must be a great government and
moderation, because it cannot be good to jest in matters of weight, and much
less in matters of shame, Again, where it is out of time for to laugh, there
to use any jests or dalliance, it has a very cold grace: besides, jests must
bite the hearers like a sheep, and not like a dog: for if it pinch as the
bite of a dog, it shall be no more a jest, but a wrong: so then jests be no
other things but deceits, and deceit cannot be wrought but of men that have
fine and ready wits, and very pleasant. For to jest or taunt is not current
with every man that will, but only with them that can.

Counterfetting, Discourse at large.
We must not for other men's pleasures dishonest, and dishonor our selves, as to
counterfeit to be fools, and unsavory dolts, nor talk at random with far
fetch discourses, and absurd relations, only as I said before, a man may be
merry conceited, and use a pleasant liberty in speech amongst his equals, as
also upon occasion, discourse at large with well disposed speeches uttered to
purpose, concerning the travels of foreign places, or the H^story of Lives, or
the relation of troubles, or such like circumstantiall matter, wherein it
behoues them to use proper names, and not to change them after, but above all
not to say any thing, which unsaid in silence, would make the tale pleasant
enough, and peradventure glue it a better grace to leave it out; yet sometimes
men may dispose and order their tale first with by names, and then rehearse
them as need require, that are proper, as for example who would describe
coue^ousnesse, or any other vice or virtue, may pe^sonate a name of any man
notoriously infamed for the same, or gloriuusly exalted for the other.

Plain Words, No double signification, Apt words.
Our words must also be plain, that all the company may easily understand
them, and withal for sound and sense they must be apt and sw^^t, and not old,
rotten, and out of use, but naturally bred in our (...) without d^ubtfull and
ambiguous aenigmas or amphibologies, to put the hearers in a maze for the
interpretation. They should be also apt and proper to that thing we go about
to deliver, whereby the discourse shall be more pleasing, and the judgment of
the discourser more commendable.

Foreign Languages.
We must avoid all talking in foreign languages, to him that understands not
what we say, nor should we use it at all, but when it is needful for us to be
understood, and merely when necessity enforces to use them. For without
controversy, our own is more natural unto us, and adds a grace to every
discourse.

Words dishonest in their meaning.
Besides this, it becomes every honest Gentleman to eschew those words that
have no honest meaning: for the goodness of words consisteh either in their
sound, or pronouncing, or in their sense and interpretation: so that a man must
not only beware of dishonest and filthy talk, but also of that which is base
and vile, and especially where a man talks, and discourses of great and high
matters: as for example, to scratch the scabbes of sin, to name weomen of the
world scuruy whore^, and infinite of this sort, wherein we must avoid the
filthiness of speech, and rather accustom our selves to such gentle and
courteous speeches, and so sweet, that they may have no manner of bitter taste
in them: nay as I said in the reprehension of sin, and discoursing of
pleasant matters; we must be moderat, and use covert terms and descriptions.
Moreover, a man should not bring a man's faith and honesty in question and
doubt: but if a man promise you any thing and do not perform it, you shall
rather impute it to forgetfulness, then thrust out any stings of complaint,
anger, or choler; you should therefore never speak before you have first
considered and laid the plot in your mind, what it is you have to say; for in
so doing your talk shall be well delivered, and not borne before the time.

Voice and tongue must be pleasant.
We must also beware that our voice be not hoarse and shrill, and when we
laugh and sport in any sort, we must not cry out, and scrich like the pulley
of ^ well: nor yet speak in our yawning: so that if a man do flatter by
nature, or become hoarse through imperfections, it is most meet for him to be
sparing of speech, and rather silent, and attentive to others, then forward to
discourse with displeasing; it is also an ill noyce to hear a man raise his
speech high like to a common crier, and yet not so low and softly, that he that
hearkens, shall not hear him: nay, if he be enforced to repeat his tale
again: he must do it soberly, and not as if he were angry indeed: our manner
of speech must be also disposed, as the common use is; and not vnsorted,
disordered, and scattered confusedly, as many do upon a bravery like a
Scriuener, or some pedanticall schoolmaster: nor must we preposterously place
our words, as versefiers may do: nor should we use the pomp, bravery, and
affectation incident to others; but withal we must take heed of such base
speech, as vile mean people, or as we say the rascal scab accustom; in one
word, as we have partly showed before: we must fashion our selves like
Gentlemen, and professors of civility.

Talkatiue fellows.
As the defects of slow and fumbling spe^ches are to be reformed: so must we
not talk too fast, nor too much, as many talkatiue fellows, who out of
vanity love to hear themselves speak, and trouble all the company; there is
another fault likewise to be redressed, and that is interrupting another man's
discourse, which must not be: for nothing mooues a man sooner to anger, then
when he is suddenly cut short of his will, and his pleasure, be it never so
little and of small importance: If any man therefore be in a readiness to tell
his tale, it is no good manners to enterrupt him, nor to oppose against him,
although he entermin gled some lie or fiction in his discourse: nor must you
divert the hearers from any man's discourse to a new begun speech, and tale of
your own; for as the interrupting of a man is, as if you should take him by
the sleeue, and stop his course beginning to run, so to ask abrupt questions
in the midst of a tale, or offer to begin another discourse, when a man is
telling a story or such like, is as if you should shuffle stones against him
which goes. For every man in his own conceit thinks he can tell his tale
well, although for modesty sake he deny it: yet men must take heed of over
much talking; for he must run into some errors, and commit many faults, that
talks too much, and he that talks all the talk to himself, would after a
sort prefer himself above them that hear him, as a master would be above his
scholars, and therefore it is not good manners for a man to take upon him a
greater state, then does become him.

Silence.
We must not also be overmuch silent: for to use silence in place where other
men walk too and fro, is in manner as much a fault, as not to pay your scot
and lot as other men do; therefore it is good manners for a man to speak, and
likewise to hold his peace, as it comes to his turn, and occasion requiers.

A good grace.
We must also use a manner of grace in our speech and actions; For it is not
enough for a man to do things that be good, but he must also have a care he do
them with a very good grace: and a good grace is nothing else, but such a
manner of light as I may call it, as shines in the aptness of things set in
good order, and well disposed one with another and perfectly knit and united
together, without which proportion and measure, even that which is good is not
fair, and the fairenes it self is not pleasant.

Of Vices, curled hair, sweet smells, custom, condition, country.
We must not offend any man with our vices; for as they be foul and filthy in
themselves; so they produce shameful effects, and turn to our loss and
reproach; it shall then be necessary for Gentlemen, and men of good behavior
to have a regard to this measure, I speak of in going, standing, sitting,
iesture, apparel, port, silence, rest and action; for a man must not apparel
himself like a woman: as in their hair and beardes frisled and curled with
bod-kins: their face, neck, and hands painted or starcht; their perfumes so
hot as a dainty strumpet, and themselves merely effeminate and womannish. As
for apparel spoken of before, we must use them according to the fashion, and
our calling: for we must not take upon us to alter custom at our will: for
time does beget them, and time does also wear them out: yea, we should
apparel according to the country we live in, for what peradventure is allowed
in Verona, perchance would not be suffered in Venice.

Comeliness in going.
We must not run, nor go too fast in the street, least it make one sweat and
puff, which is too unseemly for a Gentleman, nor yet are we to go so soft and
demurely as a maid: neither should we shake the arms, or writh the body,
mince it: or walk with high gate, and lifting up the leg, nor stamp with the
feet, nor go as it were splay-footed, nor stroke up the stockins in going,
nor stare in ones faee, nor look up too high nor muse too lumpishly, nor do
any thing unseemly when we would be professed Gentlemen, who should be
masters of true civility, good manners and courtesy.

Many other things I could here relate: as a table, wherein a true life is
pensilled our, and delineated for example and immitation: but because it would
bring me along, as it were into a confused journey, I will desist from
traveling in unknown ways, and wading further in the deep, then I shall be
able to recover the shore; and so I leave with these few cautions, and
abbreuiated principles, and hope you have the discretion to retire to greater
volumes, and better direction, if these be not fully satisfactory.

BY T. G.
Nemo desperet meliora lapsis.
FINIS.

