THE VISION AND DISCOVRSE OF HENRY the seventh.

Concerning the UNITY OF Great BRITAIN.

Divided into four Chapters.

1. Containing an Introduction. 2. Inducements to Unity. 3. The policy,
deceit, and mischievous spite of the underminers hereof. 4. The danger of
Division.
Related by T.G.

Seneca ad Nouatum, lib. 1. deir^. Beneficijs humana vita constat, et
concordia, nec terrore, sed amore muiu^ in foedus, auxiliumque commune
constringitur.

AT LONDON Printed by G. Eld, for Henry Fetherstone, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Rose in Paul's Churchyard. 1610.

To the truly religious and resolute Gentlemen of England, loving their Country
and the Truth therein professed.
WOrthy Gentlemen, which by your words, actions, or writings, show your selves
worthy of so good a cause: to you which love virtue for virtues sake, without
any other collateral respect: to you which are the stationarie soldiers of
this Kingdom, contemning the thundering cannon of Romish excommunication, and
the crosse-battery of domestical artillery: to you (next to the maine columns
of this state) I dedicate this short Poem, as an applause to your constancy,
and as a Perdu to give notice of the motions of our Adversaries. The reasons
urging me thus to expose my self to an infinity of censures are these. First
the variety of floting humors generally discontented. Secondly, the diligence
of Romish Pirates to surprise them. Thirdly, the drousie security of these
dangerous times. Lastly the unseasonable curiosity of Sectaries, which (like
Archimedes) seriously busy themselves in drawing circles whilst their Country
is in danger. These considerations have been the weights, and plummets, to set
my poor invention on work, to perform some dutiful office to the State, in
the persuasion of Unity, the chiefest bond of peace, and happiness, and the
surest fortress against a million of straglers, which hope to prey upon us in
our disorder and confusion. The Clergy has already done their most faithful,
and most commendable deuoire: many of whose books will never be answered. It
remains, that virtuous Gentlemen, having joined experience to their learning,
and valor to their experience, should show themselves in the first ranks, to
beat back the golden hopes of the Romish Alcumists, Cum semiviro Comitatu:
Never did England enjoy a King more judicious in matters of Divinity then now
it does. Neither was there ever a more happy proiector ^f the Union, and Unity
of these kingdoms then Henry the seventh, Polyd^ Virgi^ hist. l^
by giving his eldest daughter the Lady Margaret in marriage to James the 4.
King of Scotland. The one maintains the Truth, with his own Pen beyond the
performance of any christian King: The other persuades Unity in the Truth by
another report. If mine endeavors herein may any way confirm the constant, or
stay the wavering from wronging themselves, and others, I shall be more then
satisfied. (...) de q. cap. 1
If the event shall prove otherwise, yet sholl it not repent me, Operam
praebuisse reipublicae, si nihil profituram, at conaturam prodesse. Now for the
manner of writing in verse, the ancient custom of Oracles, and visions in this
kind have prevailed with me, to make tender of my best performance herein: And
the incomparable Salust, Lord of Bartasse, has of late so advanced Poetry by
his grave, maiesticall, and pleasing verse that I can neither fear the scorn
of verse in general, nor the objection in particular of the unfitness thereof
for this subject being in his nature nothing so deep as that divine subject of
du Bartasse his Poem. ^arel in ^ife of (...).
Besides it was the practice of Solon by Thales, in pleasing rimes to give the
Athenians the wholesome pills of virtuous precepts: Orpheus, Linus, Pythagoras,
Theognis. did the like. Amongst the Divines, Prudentius, Sedulius, Iuueneus,
Paulinus. Lastly, that King^y Divine Poet, which was after Gods own heart, did
martial his heavenly meditations in a kind of primordiall verse. And although
the number of Balladmongers, and frothy Poems strained for ga^ne to please the
vulgar, may seem to impair the reputation of the ancient Vates, yet there is
no question, but that perspicuous verse well couched, comprising much matter in
a narrow room, full of History, natural Allegories, fit similes, and
material observations, shall always win respect in the most wa^ward and
newfangled age. Not in this assurance (Gentlemen) do I recommend these lines
unto your view, but hoping that being Scholars ye will not misconster, being
generous ye will not carpe, being loyal ye will not disallow my dutiful
devotion. Eminent fortunes have eminent place to show their loyalty, (...). de
(...). cap 3
but private men must learn of Seneca; In privato publicum negotium agere.


The vision and discourse of HENRY the seventh, concerning the unity of Great
Britain.
GReat Plutarch in the life of Pompey.
Pompey in a iollitie did boast,
That if he did but stamp upon the ground,
Such swarms of friends would aid him from each coast,
That Caesar's forces he should soon confound:
So great his fortune, and his prowess were,
That fatal dangers he could never fear.
But my poor Muse an humble pace must creep,
^or fear of waking swarms of secret foes;
My muse some unfrequented pathe must keep,
Least some in ambush her weak force enclose.
When Parsons, and Tortus, wronging the late Queen Elizabeth and King James.
graves, and thrones of Princes are attempted,
How may a meaner fortune be exempted?
Thus far over eeue my thoughts to verse aspired,
Intending Britains concord for their theme;
When suddenly again my muse retired,
Not daring to endure bright Phoebus beam.
"A poem which it self can scarce defend,
"Can little help to other causes lend.
Whilst I for Albions weal did thus take care,
Dame nature craved her due, and closed mine eyes
With heavy sleep, yet fancy would not spare
To represent these stately prodigies.
Me thought I saw the person of a King,
Whom winged Cherubins to the earth did bring.
His spangled mantle was of Azure hue,
With stars like heavens bestudded every where;
Which did foreshew true wisdoms clearest view,
Of all those Kings which did the scepter bear.
His crown was gold, whose spires aloft were seen,
And by his side there stood his lovely Elizabeth the daughter of Edward the 4.
Queen.
Their left hands held the The arms of York, and Lancaster.
Roses white and red,
In whose defense were Philip Con^^^es hist. lib. 4. cap. 7.
four score Princes slain;
Like Cadmus seed their blood each other shed,
Till these by marriage were made one of twain:
And afterward such peace there did ensue,
That never since Mars could those broils renew.
In their right hands they held a scutchin fair,
Wherein the picture of a K. James.
King was drawn,
Which makes his foreign enemies despair;
And for truths life, his own dear life does pawn.
Who still with danger does himself oppose,
Against his Churches, and his countries foes.
They often viewed this picture with delight,
And to the same the King these words did utter,
My son, said he, the sun which cleared the night,
Of Englands fears, against who^ no claim durst mutter,
We joy in heaven that thou on earth do reign,
Which to the heavens so many souls wilt gain.
For first thy drouping clergy thou did rear,
Which are the Isa. cap. 58.^.
trumpets of the King of Kings;
To sound his praise, and to procure his fear;
And arm the elect against serpents poysned stings.
These have endured the front of spiteful Rome,
And yet sustained strong factions push at home.
These are the Math. 10.40.
heralds of the Lord of hoasts,
Which bring his peace, or else denounce his threat:
These faint not for the Babilonian boasts,
Nor Schismatics whose brains on trifles beat:
Thrice famous was their former constancy,
Thrice famous be their new ^ntegritie.
Ye Pilots which do keep the middle channel,
And shun the shelfes, and shores on every side;
A saint-like jury does your judge impannell,
Which in their verdict for your weal provide.
The Chiefe-chiefe-iustice for you has decreed,
That still for you shall stand the royal seed.
Let hellish Miners hellish sulphur lay,
To ouer-turne their faithful steadiness,
Let Atheists rave, and blasphemies display,
Let others show their brainsick headines;
The heavens bright eye sees all, and will confound,
All those which strive to bring them to the ground.
Sometimes his kingly prophecy shall tell,
Sometimes the grave Cecilian Sentinel;
And often his foes shall ring the alarm bell:
And Witness the writings of Watson, and the letter of Tresham.
traitorous tongues shall traitorous plots repel.
"For against the right all treasons are accursed,
"Like poisons they their first inuenters burst.
Long live (my James) for thy true Churches good;
Long live the Church thy true right to maintain,
No King no Church, no Church no King had stood;
The one without the other has a maine:
And since your love with Gods love is united,
With mutual love this land shall be requited.
It never greeues me that mine Henry the eight.
Henry's line
Is quite expired, since I in thee do live:
Since greatest families must stoop to thine,
Which to it self does daily luster give:
Thine Eglets shall this little world enjoy,
Not fearing ought the greater worlds annoy.
Yet must I not forget Elisa's name,
The quintessence of all the femall sex:
Whose virtues did extol her worthy fame
Above her proudest foes which did her vex:
Who often did attempt her life to spill,
Yet had not power so good a Prince to kill.
Like Debora she did the truth maintain,
No Prince atchiu'd more warlike acts then she,
No Prince so many Bartas in the 2. book, of the 2. day of the 2. week.
languages did gain,
Who forreiners interpreter could be.
Her dauntlesse spirit made the stoutest fear;
Yet to the poorest she inclined her ear.
Her court was royal, yet she did not grieve
Her subject hearts with heavy tax, nor tolls,
Distressed states she always did relieve,
Whose Chronicles her great exployts inrouls.
Mean while all England thriu'd and prospred well,
And now her bliss no earthly tongue can tell.
That Phoebe long did this horrizon hold:
And as she fared, so England ebd, and flowed:
At length her crest the highest sphaeres did fould,
Whilst Englands subjects in great darkness row'ld.
When from the North another light appea'rd,
Which nights black mantle quickly had casseer'd.
Once Europes Princes did on scaffolds stand,
To feed their eyes with Englands tragedy,
But then they saw it was heavens all powerful hand,
Which did present a joyful Comedy.
For now the world a Ecclesiastes 4.12. England, Scotland, and Ireland.
threefold cord does see,
Which by no strength, nor force may broken be.
When Rome enui'd Justin. lib. 34.
Achaias waxing strength,
Which to an uniformity was grown,
The Senate sat in counsel, and at length
Decreed, that discord must be quickly sown.
They thought that first their league they must untwine
Or else that state they could not undermine.
To which intent they Commissaries sent,
To draw each City to her ancient laws;
"Who told those Greeks it was bondage to be pent
"Within the compass of the Lions paws.
"That lofty Eagles took no note of Flies,
"Nor great commanders of small families.
"That yearly Praetors were the only Kings,
"Which soon returned their suites, and writts again:
"With these the wronged expostulates such things
"As awful fear with others must refrain.
"Where every Burgess is a Senator;
"And each wise Citizen a Monitor.
"Thus stand prouincials of the Roman state,
"A time they Lord-like live, but at the last
"The meanest may their cause with them debate,
"Of injuries which in their time have passed:
"Then are they feign to plead as private men,
"And fancie-feeders always fail them then.
"For if these petty Kings have offered wrong,
"Within the year in which their powers confined;
"That time expired each Citizen is strong
"To right himself, and to the laws them bind;
"Then are they sure to have a due reward,
"As they have had a right, o^ wrong regard.
"Those sponges then are forced to repay
"The liquor, which from others they did soake:
"Protection may not course of Justice stay,
"Nor venale tongues may venale judgments cloak.
"Thus did Romes conquered countries flourish more,
"Then under Tyrants they did erst before.
"And as for Rome the nursse of liberty,
"It Consuls had which yearly it did change:
"Where worthy men had place themselves to try,
"And had a field where virtue's life might range.
"Yet if within the year they did offend,
"The Tribunes with them shortly would contend.
"Man's chief content is freedom to the mind,
"The heauiest doom is bondage to the heart,
"The one delight in all estates does find,
"The other grief, and never dying smart.
"The sight, smell, touch, the hearing, and the taste.
"Are sour to those which are in bondage placed.
"The Oxen still the heavy yoke do shun,
"The Bird the cage, the Hawke vnman'd the lure;
"Each beast from man with hasty speed does run,
"Least once intrap't it thraldom should endure.
"But men much more, and ye much more then other,
"Should quit your selves, and not your freedo^ smother.
With this smooth speech these Romans did assay
To break the Achaians sacred bond of love,
For never did this state it self betray,
As other Greeks which strangers aid did prove*
"For civil broils, and foreign force or'throw,
"As storms do Cedars which alone do grow.
Now when the Achaians heard this sl^e discourse,
They sounded soon the ground of their intent:
They knew ^ight well conjunction was the nource
Of all their weal, which Romans would prevent:
Then like to Bees they sallyed out in swarms,
And would have slain them but for law of arms,
Whilst In sreta um fluvij ^rrunt^ing. Ac^id. 1.
springs to streams, and streams to sea did run,
Whilst hills made shades, and heavens had stars to shine,
The Achaians concord should not be undone;
And all their hearts in one they would combine:
If Rome by sword their valor meant to try,
Together they would live, together dye.
So would all the English if some were not wronged
By self conceit, and charms of sorreine foes:
They would perform what unto right belonged,
And with their wrack not hazard Britains woes.
"Woes will attend on those which woes contriue,
"And such as peace out of the world would drive.
No other land, nor Church does Babel dread;
Here is the golden mean twixt two extremes,
If any land with veri^y do wed,
It Is Albion, which display's the brightest beams:
As in full orb the Moon given greatest light;
So Britain now is in her power and might.
This is the cause why Rome such pains does take,
Her brain is lymbeck't for some queint device;
Her search does diue into the Stygian lake;
Her broken strength she musters in a trice;
As flies on sores; or waters in a breach:
So are her troops, this I Will to ouer-reach.
Amongst those lands which have disclaimed her power,
This land has still maintained most worthy spirits,
Whose valor, wisdom, truth aloft did tower;
And challenged fame, and glory for their merits:
As far as Titan sends his lightsome rays:
So far the world resoundeth Englands praise.
How often have the English curbed the Mercur^ Gollobelgi cus anno. 1588.158.
Spanish pride?
And vanquished them in their own seas and lands?
Who still did hope all Europe to divide
By colonies, for Austria's line to stand:
But England only has them ouer-throwne,
And ever since their power has backward grown.
The Mid-earth sea, the Indies East and West
Have seen, and felt their prowess, and their force:
Their Crefwe^ Andreas, Philopate^
policy has made them safely rest,
Within their bowres, though Rome did them divorce.
Though Spanish force, and Romish curse agreed;
Yet England has it self from bondage freed.
For since the Welsh all former hate did bury,
And loyal love did vow to new made friends,
All Englands foes since that have felt their fury,
And Wales like walls the English coast defends:
That now the Church and Universities,
Do triumph daily in these firm allies.
So now the English have a new increase
Of Northren friends, in valor like the rest,
So that all broils of bordering wars must cease,
And now this I Will may more advance her crest:
What power so ever dares her Lions wake,
It Is in their power a due revenge to take.
Their blood shall with the English blood be matched,
New bonds of love shall cancel former hate:
They shall not now by fearful eye be watched,
All scorn shall dye the fuel of debate:
Like Justin. l. 44.
Gerion they shall their force unite,
And love with love, and faith with faith requite.
Thus from the world, this once Penitus toto diuisos orb ^ritannos. Virgil.
Eglog. 1.
divided I Will,
Is now become a famous monarchy:
Though long it did it self with blood defile,
Now is it crowned with peaceful amity:
Thus by the Lord of hoasts her storms are calmed,
Thus are her wounds by his own hand embaulmed.
Shall then earths worms contend with heavens great king?
Shall flitting Jesuits, and Seminaries with their perfidious adherents.
vagrants break a settled peace?
Who for themselves a weak defense do bring;
Who see their Patrons power still to decrease.
Shall Rome declining to that height aspire*
To set a world within it self on fire?
Who cannot quench a flame so In Venice
near begun;
But yield to time, and temporize for fear.
Shall others to her Having lost the far greatest part of Germany, all the
Northeast countries, of De^marke* and Swethland. great part of Poland, and
Hungary: the Low countries and France.
wayning power be won?
And on their necks this helpless idol bear?
Like to the Rocks whereon the waves do beat:
So are all those whom Roman curse does threat.
The birds of the air, and those caelestiall Angels.
legions,
Which over virtuous Kings do always houer,
These hear the speeches of the lower regions;
And to the highest will these wrongs discover.
"All Prou. 8.15.16.
power's from heaven and heaven will it defend,
"And ill shall be to those that ill intend.
CHAP. 2. Inducement to unity.
WHen Arist meteor. lib. 2. cap 8
vapors moist, and exhalations hot,
Into the airs mid regiment are hailed,
The fiery fume, cloud smoothered, scorns his lot,
And breaks the prison where it was inthral'd,
Then ayery Cannons in such sort do thunder,
As if the firmament would cleave a sunder.
So different humors on this earthly stage,
Send from their fantasies such store of vollies,
As if the world in his old wayward age,
Should make a rendz-vous of all his follies:
Yet their assaults the truth can no way scarre,
Nor fruitless passions reasons strenght can mar.
For Unity from heaven her self deriues,
And there her truest image does remain,
Who seeks her breach against himself does strive,
And on his head his shafts return again;
Yet self-conceit strange paradoxes houlds,
As wandering Goats delight in change of foulds.
The first reason from the Trinity.
THe only One Trinus in numero, vnus in numine.
distinct in persons three,
In glorious essence never is divided,
Three Tapers light in one do all agree,
And by this light the elect to bliss are guided,
"For man's dull thoughts heavens mysteries cannot see,
"Except faiths windows thence tralucent be.
Where quintessence of all perfections dwells,
How can there any difference arise?
Man blind and frail, with sullen envy swells;
His mind does vary as his bodies guise.
Which is the cause that underneath the sun,
There Is nothing soundly, or in order done.
The general Councels of the worlds great Clearkes,
Where public good so fairly is pretended,
They are but pageants of some private querkes,
Where vice is masked, and no fault amended:
"The world grows weak, and art must now sustain,
What natures strength, and vigor did maintain.
When motions are on foot though neu'r so good;
And though propounders often merit praise,
Yet still by factions they are so with-stood,
That truth, and right themselves can hardly raise.
Some wits consent though somewhat they will add,
Some wits triumph to make good causes bad.
But with Jehovah, the true square of right,
The August. epist. 11^.
eye of truth, the arm of strength and force:
Which sees all falsehood in the darkest night;
And does uprightly judge without remorce:
How can their odds by any weakness be,
As man with man in strife too often we see?
The second reason from the Heavens.
HEre is the perfect view of Unity,
To which the worthiest creatures do aspire;
The Heavens, and Elements do move hereby,
Else to their Chaos they would soon retire:
If these should not their place and order keep,
Men should not here on earth so soundly sleep.
The Psalm. 19.6.
circled motion of the spangled wheels,
Which primum mobile about does carry,
Proou's heavens great concord, for there is none that reeles
Out of his place, or that maine course does vary:
The changing Moon, which earthly things presents,
Her course with other stars no whit preuents.
As maskers when they hear sweet Musick's sound,
They tread their Measures by so perfect Art,
As if their bodies were by trauise bound,
Or that they were all guided by one heart:
So heavens great Orbs together run their rings,
As they are charged by the King of Kings.
From the Empyreall heaven, which does embrace,
The other heavens, and all the elements,
All keep true Psalm. 48.6.
quarter, teaching Adams race,
That they so le^rne to order their intents,
That lawful concord they do never cross,
Least civil discord bring a fatal loss,
The third reason from the Elements.
IF fire and water should their armies bring,
Into earths valleys they would all devour;
If air should from his triple station fling,
No creature could retain his vital power:
The earth would then her deluge plaints renew,
As once the borders, Britains strife did row.
The happiest government they do observe,
Which is the preservation of the whole;
From this decree they never yet did swerue,
Since glistering stars carreer'd about the pole:
Twixt fire and water, which are deadly foes,
The onely-wise, the air did interpose.
The earth and air true correspondence keep;
The sun is Arist. meteor lib. 2. cap. 4.
arbitrator twixt them both,
Sometimes he lets the spongie clouds to weep,
On earths dry face, and then as being loathe
To offer wrong, from floods and briny seas,
He paies that moisture which the air does please.
The fourth reason from Man.
But if Man list not pierce into the skies,
To search the formal motion of the sphaeres,
Let Man but set himself before his eyes,
And he shall see what government he bears:
For great Jehovah gave him comely feature,
And made him lord of every living creature.
And as a King, to counterpoise his cares,
Has often recourse from profit to delight,
So with this Monarch of the earth it fares,
Some creatures serve his taste, and some his sight:
Some carry him into what coast he please,
And some are Physic for his bodies ease.
This is the Micr^cos^os.
model of the greater All,
Which like the eye it self cannot behold:
And though he tread upon this earthly ball,
Yet is he graced with Solomon's song, cap. 4.
beauties manifold:
For of a soul, and body he is framed,
So that he is the Kingly creature named.
The soul of man, a Plena deo, similisque ^reanto. Prudentius.
glimpse of heavenly light,
Conueys it self to all the bodi's members;
Yet it affoords a view, and perfect sight,
Whereby man understands; fo^esees, remembers:
Whose swift discourse and motions are so strange,
That through the world this little world does range.
And as a Captain of besieged howlds
Suruayes the Ports, and weakness of the walls,
Then his advice to others he vnfoulds,
And to the watch the Corpse du guard he calls:
So does the soul prevent the bodies danger,
Least it should be surprised by a stranger.
Hereby he is Gods Genesis 1.28 Psalm. 4.
Viceroy here below,
Over whom heavens Psalm. 104.2.19.22.23.24.
starry canopie is spread:
On whom by day the sun does light bestow;
Whom in the night the other stars have lead:
Who holds all of the great Lord Paramont*
That he his praises daily may recoun^.
None can recount his boundless regiment,
To whom no part of earth has been forbidden,
Whose body does unite each element,
And in the same a soul divine is hidden:
Which so conioynes with th'elementall frame,
That Man th'vnited mirror we may name.
If we shall view right reason at the length,
Which is a choice perfection of the soul;
Oculus hominis anima, animae ratio; rationis relligio.
Christianity will show her powerful strength,
And will obtain praecedence in this roll.
"For with faiths hand we hold our mediator,
"And as a toy neglect the worlds Theater.
So that the world is for his creatures made,
The creatures for man's body daily serve,
The body is unto the soul a shade,
The soul likewise true reason to preserve;
Right reason does contain religious bounds,
Whose Anchor's cast far from these earthly mounds.
This is the chain which heaven to earth does link,
The golden bracelet of man's greatest bliss,
Yet must not man of his weak merits think,
But of his grace which 2. Cor. ca. 12.9.
all sufficient is.
For Man is not thus happy by his Ex pacto, non ex facto Bernard.
fact,
But by Iehouah's only free compact.
Thus is the earthly Church, heavens dearest spouse,
Not by emissiue, but attractiue beams;
This bounty great should our dull spirits rowse,
To make his praises be our only theames:
Whose charge maintains us on this earthly globe,
And couers us with his all-righteous robe.
O happy creature of so kind a founder!
Whose power creat's, whose providence maintains:
Of thy great glory who shall be the sounder?
Poor man is weak to chaunt such lofty strains:
Let Angel's, trumpets of thy glory ring;
Let heavenly saints thine Aleluias sing.
Let earths low valleys her faint echoes lend;
And to this heavenly quier make some report,
The harshest voice heavens artick will attend,
And with his grace man's weakness will support.
Nay he accepts the 2. Corint. 8.12.
meaning for the deed,
And with supplies our drouping faith does feed.
The disuniting practice of Satan.
But as the highest does the elect vphould
From sad despair, by th'vnion of his son,
So Lucifer makes other rebels bold,
To run that course that Adam had begun:
For still he compasses both seas, and lands,
To join one soldier to his traiterous bands.
As Pride was first the pro-scaene of his fall,
And of that crew which with him did conspire;
So now he vents his malice, and his gall,
Against man, which has a spark of heavenly fire:
For since he cannot wrong the strong of strongs,
He s^ares no servant which to him belongs.
Yet does he not profess hostility,
But on each folly s^ts a Cyprian. epist. 40.
varnisht gloss;
By which poor man with all agilitie,
Does eagerly pursue his greatest loss:
He takes advantage of men's several age,
That into dangers he may them engage.
In prime of youth, when heat of lust abounds,
He blows the coals of selfe-consuming pleasures;
And afterward with avarice he drownes,
The vital spirits with carke of worldly treasures,
Then late repentance, time, and death consent
To end that life, which was in folly spent.
Yet he suggest's lust but a youthful trick,
And couetosnesse an honest thrifty care;
The Maecchiauillians to be pollitick,
And those most valiant which no sex do spare:
That to be cleanliness, when in great pride,
Men rob all creatures, their true shapes to hide.
He Is first a slave, and prentise for some years,
A perfect humorist for all assayes,
At last he tyrant turns, and ouer-peeres,
All human comfort, and himself displayes:
As Usurers first get the bonds of heirs,
And then their lands, and tenements are theirs.
But as the Salamander which does live,
In suites of law, and quarrels with his betters,
Is soon discerned, and the Judge does give
No place to him but with the fond barretters:
So is man's foe by the highest judge disclaimed,
And he is hurt which would have others maimed.
Thus man's arch-enemy pursues with hate
The breach of union with his Mediator:
Thus has he ever strived to make debate
Twixt th'earthly Monarch, and his great Creator:
And always where a virtuous concord fails,
This busy makebate by his slights preuailes.
The body of Man.
But now to leave Man's soul with his first maker,
Which by faiths conduct climes heavens battlements,
Where once inrowl'd it is with him partaker,
Far from the danger of all sad events:
Let Man but think of his weak bodies mass,
And he shall see true Unions lively glass.
For though it be a prison to the soul,
A rotten bark such treasure to (...)
Yet this poor frame the best state does control,
In prudent care each member to maintain:
The toe scarce feels the gowte, or any grief,
But every part does feel, and seek relief.
The senses window's see, and shun the ill,
Which may ensue, and aim at all things good:
The heart from beating never stands still,
It sends the spirits, where dead palsy stood:
The baser parts food to the maw do bring,
Whence unto them it flows as from a spring.
The stomach, like a Cook, each mess does boil,
And from the Port-vaine sends it to the liver,
Then turned to blood, it feeds the bodies soil,
As Aegipts fields are cheered by Nilus river:
For from the hollow vein, small veins are fed,
As from a spring are many Conduicts led.
The fifth reason from the experience of Nations.
Sly Berosus.
Nymrod first did follow Natures law,
And did comprise a body politic;
Who straggling families to his charge did draw,
Which long had been of civil discord sick:
Then soon they joined in love, and left their bowres,
To build, for Nimrod, Babilons high towers.
But proud Ambition like a dropsy fares,
The more it drinks, the more it does desire;
As Nimrod by that ayerie tower declares,
For which he had confusion for his hyre:
This heap of Ants was by division broken,
Which of each state the ruin does betoken.
He thought all future deluge to prevent,
And on this tower amongst the clouds to walk:
He scorned in earths low cellars to be pent,
And of the highest did profanely talk:
But where he thought his honor to advance,
There was the tragedy of his mischance.
When public shows at private ends do aim,
Those proiects fail, and have the like event;
But who with care preuents each public maime,
The publike-weale shall crown his calm intent:
Thus holy writ: thus former times have taught,
Though now the world be with new figme^ts fraught.
Some factions are in love with novelties,
And different minds their different fancies follow;
They shun the mean, and seek extremities,
They strain at Gnats, and Elephants do swallow:
In some mistaking of conceited ill,
The Quintus Curtius, lib. 5.
Gordion knot of concord they would spill.
But as thy Clergy ( James) thou did relieve,
Esteeming all their wrongs as done to thee;
Whom storms aloft, and rocks below did grieve,
From shipwracks danger thy great care set free:
That seas wax calm, and rocks are now discried,
Which show of zeal so long did closely hide:
So shall the rest of Britain be united
By the rights champion which undaunted art,
Which smil'st to hear what passions have indicted,
Against reasons force which humors would pervert.
"A comprimise each party must offend,
"Which to the center of the right does tend.
When Plutarch in ^he life of Theseus*
Theseus founded the Athenian state,
Which long for Arts, and Valor won the price,
He first asswag'd the Atticans debate,
And for their concord gave so sound advice
That if the Greeks had so united been,
They had not yet their head long downfall seen.
When Liui lib. 1 dec. 1. Plutarch in the life of Romulus.
Romulus had built his seau'n-hild Rome,
Which afterward all countries did subdue,
The Sabines first he brought unto his home,
Which did with arms their women's loss pursue:
But so the Roman policy prevailed,
That they conioyn'd, and Roman sons assailed.
Then Numa, Publicola, and the rest,
Which in the Roman government succeeded,
By all fair means their borderers did inuest,
Within their state, and in all love proceeded:
For still they gave them equal privilege,
Which was of faithful love, the truest pledge.
This was their course the Italians to bring under,
Of weal, and woe, they were partakers still;
So that no force this frame could break a sunder,
Till they of conquests did the stories fill.
But when from Tacitus lib 2 hist. cap. 15.
foreign wars their arms did rest,
Ambitious Hydra raised her various Crest.
The Greeks likewise, when strangers did invade,
They flourished most by force of Unity;
For then they were one corporation made,
And bent their valor against their enemy.
If they had yearly ^ear'd the Persian war,
To civil slaughters it had been a bar.
None but great Plutarch. the life of ^lexander ^odor. Sic. ^. 16.
Philip and his warlike son,
Could curb the Greeks from shedding Greekish blood;
And then by them great Alexander wone,
The worlds great globe, no strength his power withstood:
As Britains twins conioyn'd on Belgias plain,
Their fronting foes to flight they still constrain.
The Arabian Agarims of Ismaels race,
Which Sarazins by Mahomet were named,
They were a people abject, mean, and base,
Till Mahomet to union had them framed:
Which done in wars and peace they so agreed,
That soon themselves from Knowlles ^n the gene^all hist. of ^he Turks.
Romain thral they freed.
Then Africa, Egypt, Syria they subdued,
And so conioyn'd disioynted lands did seize,
That daily they their strength, and power renewed,
And vanquished their borderers at ease:
So far they raung'd that lands far of did fear,
And gave them fees that arms they would forbear.
The Thea^. winc. orbis, de Tur^. ^mperio.
Turks likewise which with them did remain,
Which did increase when Sarazins were employed,
By their great unity such power did gain,
That Europe, Afric, and Asia they cloyed:
For in the flower of these three they are placed,
And have the glory of them all defaced.
From Buda to the great Constantinople.
Constantines seat,
And from the Euxine sea to Savus banks,
The Christians may their loss with grief repeat,
For Turks thus far have led their Moonye rancks:
Bulgaria, Seruia, Greece, and Hungary,
And other lands within this tract do lie.
In Asia and in Afric they do hold,
The land from Velez to Alexanders town; Alexandria.

From Bugia to Guergula they are bold,
T'aduance the ensigns of their great renown:
Their wars are but their Ianisaries breathing,
And Christian gifts their swords keep from unsheathing.
But they for Unity do take such care,
And are so wary discord to prevent,
That they their Emperors Knowl^ in the lif^ of Amur* the first.
brethren will not spare,
Nor cease from blood, till all that line be spent:
One warlike sproute they do maintain alive,
And by that means their hearts in one contriue.
Mean while they break both heavens and natures laws,
Their Empires power, and greatness to maintain:
But nice conceits demurre, and long do pawse
The heavens, and natures gift to intertaine:
"Such is the frailty of all human wit,
"That restless folly best the turn does fit.
O giddie thoughts, and groundless fears of men,
Which do prevent all rest unto the mind!
Ill guided passion is much like a wenne,
Which to the body we disgraceful find.
Nubi men's es^ vinctaque fraenis, vbi reg^ Boethi consola philosop lib. 1. m^
Fear, hope, love, hate, contempt, desire, grief, joy,
Do cloud the mind, and thrall it with annoy.
And as their civil discord overthrow,
All sound content in any private bower:
So in a state, much more, where humors flow,
Each blast does raise huge billows every hour:
Such storms of discord kingdoms ouer-whelme,
That warily their Kings must hold the helm.
My great Grand-sonne does hold no other course,
Then that which virtuous Kings did still intend:
They always held that Concord was the source
Of endless peace, for this all strife does end:
Though many years this land all means did try,
Yet heavens till now this proffer did deny.
Eight hundred years ^he duke ^mmer^etter to ^oun^^^ of (...)
two heirs did not afford,
Of Britains kingdoms, which might match together,
Yet in Prince Edwards time no sound accord,
Could be obtained, that Mary might come hither:
And when all human plots, and proiects failed.
By JAMES, Iehouahs firm decree prevailed.
Nine hundred years likewise the truth was sealed.
And barred from sight of this, and other lands;
Unto some few heavens mysteries were revealed,
Which did discard themselves from Romish bands:
For which they many tortures did endure,
To prove the truth, and their election sure.
Of this same truth my James is now ordained
A matchless champion in this monarchy,
Who with firm constancy and zeal v^fain'd,
Does labor to confirm an Unity:
As of this I Will he is now the only King,
So to one Truth he would each subject bring.
And though some few may Barricadoes make,
To stop the course of his devout intent,
Yet from the highest courage he shall take,
And Hell it self shall not his aim prevent:
The least design shall some incounters have,
The worthiest act some factions will deprave.
No earthly good is clear from all offense,
None merits sweet, which will not taste the sour;
None can with great Iehouahs laws dispense,
For earth would then man's love, and hope devour.
Man then would make the earth his biding place,
Which is ordained but for a breathing race.
Things truly good have always hard ascents,
And resolution must undaunted be;
If any one do sooth his fond intents
With idle hopes, his error he shall see:
No Church, no^ State, from envy can be free,
He Is worse then blind, which naught but ill does see.
Disloyal thoughts their authors chiefly wrong,
He has his loss in chase which hurts his friends:
With unity a land is chiefly strong;
If concord fail all power to ruin tends.
But Praesenti^bus semper insestal^u^ tas. Sen. de Tranq. ca.
Lightness does distaste the present still,
And things far off surprise the wish and will.
The Indies gold earths yellow excrement,
How dangerously and deadly is it bought?
How long are men in floting prisons pent,
Before they can obtain what they have sought?
Yet gold from men, or men from gold must part,
When death assaults with his not-missing dart.
But Unity, which makes thousands blessed,
Without the danger or the loss of one:
Where none shall be by Neptun's waves distressed:
Where none shall hear the sire, or widows moan:
Why should it be without great cause neglected?
Why should the publike-good be so rejected?
Cred^litie does often dangers breed,
And slow belief does often foreslow the occasion:
Once to Columbus we gave little beede,
When he made proffer to the English nation
That if we did but furnish him with ships,
All Europes glory we might soon eclipse.
He said he knew there was another world,
And to the same he would the Hakluit Eng. vo^ vol 3. page
Pilot be:
If skill did fail over board he would be hurled;
So sure he was that the Indies he should see,
Where was of silver and of gold such store,
As in the old world was not seen before.
But we esteemed his speech an idle dream,
And after long delay his suite denied:
We wey'd his words at our own fancies beam:
And thus repulsed, he only thus replied:
That he would all the Christian Princes try,
And would not rest till all did him deny.
When after tedious suites to Europes kings,
He found his motions every where neglected;
At length to Arragon his suite he brings,
Where (...) Mar de nouo (...), page 1.
Castiles queen what he desired effected.
Then was that done which he had long informed,
And what he promised duly he performed.
What since insu'd all lands have felt and seen,
For to a concord Spain was soon reduced;
And to all lands she has a terror been;
Since from her league she has not been seduced:
Her Indies gold, and Concord so prevailed,
That England, France, and Italy sh'assail'd.
In Eighty eight her hopes devoured this I Will;
And France since that with wars she has infested:
Great Charles the fifth made Italy stoop awhile,
And Belgia always is by her molested;
Which if she get a floting bridge she will make,
By which she will hope all Europes lands to take.
No other means the Spaniards did advance,
But those which wayward Folly here refuses;
Men at this niceness oftentimes do glance,
And wonder how such motions it abuses:
For all the world conceiues, and well does know,
That Concord does an endless peace bestow.
It is a truth which never yet did fail,
That homebred Unity makes sure defense;
And if men lift far countries to assail,
It always makes a firm and strong offense.
As many streams which in one channel mee^e,
Pass vncontroul'd till Neptune they do greet.
This practice made Plutarch his life.
Themistocles renowned,
When by a message to the Persian king
He kept the Greeks from being quite confounded,
And to his country Victory did bring:
For all the Grecian navy would have parted,
If he their purpose had not soon diuerted.
For when they were at Salamin assembled,
And that the Persian fleet did lie in sight,
As out of love to Zerxes he dissembled,
And wished him quickly to begin the fight,
For if the Greeks he took not in that bay,
They soon would be dispers't some other way.
The king next morn gave order for the charge,
And in a streit the Greeks made their defense:
But their united force did them enlarge,
Some ships they took, and drove the rest from thence:
And so their victory they did pursue,
That Persians never durst those wars renew.
Yet cunningly they civil wars maintained
Betwixt the Athenians and the Spartans bold;
They knew if Greece true Unity attained,
Great Persia could not long her Empire hold:
As Romists now of Britanie do think,
That now she is joined, their hopes must quickly sink.
CHAP. 3. The policy, deceit, and spite of the underminers of Britains Unity.
AL Romes Usurpers by division strive,
To break the forces of each potent king,
When others jar, they keep the stakes and thrive:
Thus into bondage they the world did bring:
And though they seem t'vphold a public peace,
Their traitrous engines daily do increase.
Thus in My reign the Laity was abused,
When Ignorance could not Romes follies check,
When by no sex their pleasure were refused,
Wealth, Honor, Beauty, served the Clergies beck:
Yet of their lives to have a jealousy,
It Was sacrilegious, and maine Heresy.
This heavy mischief every subject bare,
The more he had the greater was his pain,
And kings themselves might not with them compare,
Though wrongs were rife they must complaints refrain,
Else were their subjects for the Church in arms;
So were men subject to those hellish charms.
We wondered then how kings their freedom lost,
How spotted Leopards had the Lions mated,
Kings budding power they nipt as with a frost,
Nor was there hope to have their pride abated:
But when of freedom kings did most despair,
The King of kings their freedom did repair.
The truth likewise by means most strange appeared,
And at the appointed time none could keep back
That power divine which true professers cheered,
And did the world of endless folly check:
That we may yield all honor to his name,
Who by weak means such worthy acts does frame.
For now each man may see the truth refined,
Through many christian Principalities:
Now many see which heretofore were blind,
That Rome consists of mere Formalities:
Like apples fair in show near Sodoms lake,
Which being touched to dust do quickly shake.
For Rome does now that Purity abjure,
Which to her glory many years she held,
To fancies now she does her self inure:
The Oracles divine are now expeld:
Else does she conster them to her own pleasure,
To raise her pride, or to increase her treasure.
As water powered into the choicest wine,
For many hours when both of them run over,
Does leave no color, nor a taste behind,
Whereby his liquour B^cchus may discover:
So Romes inventions have the Truth out-borne,
That ancient truth is now exposed to scorn.
Her outward reverence is the only glass,
To dazzle millions of th'vnlearned train,
When silly larkes by these fair shows do pass,
They Are caught, and never may return again:
For unto Saints they do their prayers make,
And do the God of power and love forsake.
Unto the blessed Virgin they do build
More stately temples, and more altars fair,
Then unto Christ whose churches are not filled
With equal presents; few to him repair:
So are they from their high Creator led,
And to his creatures they themselves do wed.
Pompilius the Romans second king,
Forbad all Plutarch in his life.
images of powers divine:
He said their worth surpast each earthly thing,
And that they far above our skill did shine:
That colors lost their color once compared
With that high court where hosts of Angels ward.
The Jewish Church could not, nor can endure
To Adore the image of their famous Moses.
guide:
His interview with God could not procure,
That they for him a statue should provide:
And he which of his praise is jealous still,
Did Deuteronomy. 34.6.
hide his corpse such fond intents to spill.
Though by Iehouahs high command they cast
A Number. 21.8.9.
brazen serpent curing serpents sting,
Yet when the bounds of due regard they past,
And adoration unto it did bring:
It Was by Gods herald into pieces 2. King. 18 4.
broken,
Though it were of Ioh. 3.14.
Christ a certain sign and token.
How fearful then and charie should men be
To frame on earth corriuals of his glory?
How from idolatry should men be free,
Since worthiest things are pages of his story?
To greatest Saints which on the earth did breath,
He from his store their measure did bequeath.
Shall then these drops of good which from him flow,
Hold counterpoise with their eternal spring?
Shall man on man that sacred praise bestow,
Which does belong unto the worlds great King?
Such praise undue the Saints above disclaim,
Which at their great Creators praise do aim.
But Rome herein does represent the Dove,
Which being siel'd does strive aloft to fly.
So is she soothed by flattery and self love,
That she no way her weakness can descrie:
In her great shows of Zeal true zeal does swerve,
As Tantalus amidst his food did starve.
As for Romes Lyturgies not understood,
Or Sermons where the Legends are so rife,
Unto the soul thei'r bare and windy food,
Whereby Rome does confound Devotions life:
Thus man with God, and God with man conferres,
Thus both the zeal and understanding erres.
Who knows not, cannot fear the highest Judge,
Nor can he feel the riches of his love,
Who scorned on earth like to the vilest drudge,
For his elect a sacrifice did prove:
Who now Mat. 11.28.
inuites them to his sacred throne,
To ease their grief and to relieve their moan.
Conf^ssors now usurp that function high,
To hear and pardon every heinous sin:
Adultery, murder, poison, blasphemy,
Have easy penance, and a fresh begin:
Where pardon may so quickly be obtained,
Why should prophanest actions be refrained?
If villainies may not thus be secured,
Their actors will unto some Altars fly,
Which from the Pope indulgence have procured,
To salve for many worlds each malady:
Here are all winow'd by the Popish fan,
None is excluded but the Lutheran.
If any one by drowsy Negligence
Unpurged die, and fall to Purgatory,
The Altars Pro defunctis rid him thence,
By mumbling Mass hel^ charming Oratorie:
A golden world it is when earth can vaunt
Of newfound engines hel^ish power to daunt.
What is more royal then to pardon those,
Whose often crimes their Sovereign have provoked?
Herein the Highest does his grace expose,
Which Rome seems now in such sort to have broched*
That every Priest by Popes can grace derive,
A world of worlds from ruin to repriue.
Whereas the best should their salvation work,
With awful trembling, and an holy fear,
All Romists in security may lurk,
They need not any enterprise forbear:
For Pardons plenarie from the holy sea,
Will be for all a warrantable plea.
Besides, the blessed Virgin will command
Her Christ, that he the Romists may not charge:
And all the Saints will make a joint demand,
That from their sins he may them all enlarge:
Then every Saint will his devoto free,
And then a present pardon there shall be.
For all those numbers of the blinded crew,
Shall boldly stand before the judgment seat:
They Will plead, they held the Roman faith most true,
And from the same they never did retreat.
As Rome bele'ft, so did they still believe,
And now her Saints and she must them relieve.
These are the vaunts of all the limbs of Rome,
Which far beyond their bounds has them transported,
For which she must expect a fearful doom,
Since she the holy Writ has thus retorted:
Not many years proud Babylon shall stand,
Which against the truth so long her self did band.
As they which are the Pastors of men's souls,
Which many stragglers to their Pastor bring;
Which do conduct them to th'eternals Dan. 12.3
foulds,
Over whom he did vouchsafe to stretch his wing:
As these shall shine like heavenly lamps most clear,
Whose lives and doctrine did so bright appear;
So Rome which by inticements has allured
So many from Iehouahs reverence,
Which has of bliss her champions assured,
By giving false and subtle evidence:
To darkest Labyrinth she shall be thrown,
Which to confound the light has errors sown.
The ancient Rome was happy in her wars,
When her spread Eagle did the earth ore-spread,
But now the gates of heaven and hell she bars,
Some she sets up, on others she does tread:
Her favorites, her Popes do Tortura Torti, page 361.
Vice-gods style,
Man's blessed or cursed as they do frown or smile.
Is now the worlds Commander more remiss,
Then he has been to punish heinous sin?
Or has Rome only that indulgent bliss,
Whereby she does such reputation win?
No Church or State had such a Monopoly,
To barter sins, and make prophaners holy.
The Israelites which were to God most dear,
Which for his Church he made peculiar choice;
These were to him above all other near;
Yet when they did neglect his sacred voice,
Their sins eclipst his favorable eye,
That he would not relieve their misery.
He punished them for their idolatry,
And other sins, in Rome scarce sins esteemed:
Twixt God and Sin there is an Antipathie,
And disobedience is as witchcraft deemed:
When wretched miscreants call the infernal power,
To wrong Gods glory, and themselves devour.
The holy writ, truths surest Testament,
Which in Cimerian darkness, light does give;
With precept, and example it is sent,
To curb man's sin, and teach him how to live,
When man is with sins heavy burden grieved,
By God and Man his sorrows are relieved.
From him alone does all perfection flow,
By him we are with righteousness invested,
From none besides does certain comfort grow,
Man's great unworthiness must be detested:
Man's pardons are but letters formed in sand,
Which not a moment in effect do stand.
When man in viewing his deformities,
Prostrates himself before the worlds dread King,
Intending to reform enormities,
So far as human frailty strength may bring:
When in these thoughts a lively faith arises,
Which to Gods mercy constant trust advises;
When these concur within a mortal breast,
Conducted by th'elects most sacred guide,
The Pastor may pronounce that party blessed,
His pardon's granted, and he may not slide:
There is no law, nor danger unto those
Which are in Christ, and thus their thoughts dispose.
But unto those that welter in their sins,
Whose lives are fraught with all impiety,
Which for the innocent do lay their ginnes,
Which scorn reproof, and all sincerity:
Heaven scorns such guests, and their all-pard'ning priests
As vile blasphemers, and mere Atheists.
Then let not Rome of charter warrant boast,
To sport her self at pleasure with each sin;
The Majesty divine does raise an host,
Whereby he will his ancient glory win:
Then shall the Romists perish like to them
Which were confounded in Jerusalem.
Mean while let the heart of all true Christians bleed,
Let wandering thoughts retire themselves with shame:
Let these abuses detestation breed,
To see this age so haughty, yet so lame:
When holiest things are set to open sale,
Why should it not each worthy mind appale?
Bright Phoebus thou, which Mat. 27.45
hidst thy face from view,
When Christ for man by man death's pains endured:
Oh hide thy face again since now in liew,
Of humble thanks the world's to pride inured.
Such pride as strives to overthrow Christ's throne,
And in that place to re-aduance her own.
For if Rome were content with wronging those;
Which in the circle of her charms do live,
If she sought not all kingdoms to enclose
Within her power, and laws to Princes give:
Some hope there were that truth might have some rest.
Where now all countries are by her oppressed.
As Beelzebub th'aires Prince, and King of Flies,
Imploys for man's overthrow his damned swarms:
So Papal furies daily play their prize,
Against the truth to put their troops in arms:
From these no state, or kingdom may be free,
Except by heavens they shall protected be.
To th'heauens it is clear, that this is one maine let,
That Unity due passage cannot have,
For at this Churches concord they do fret,
And seem as if at the Albans they did rave,
But Englands peace, and weal they would prevent,
What ere they feign, this is their sly intent.
The great Lipsius de Romanorum machinis.
Testudo fitly they resemble,
Which in their batteries the Romans vsd:
For under them th'assaylers did assemble,
That from the walls they were not hurt nor brus'd:
So Romists under Unions hate do lurk,
And shade themselves their hellish mines to work.
By arms long time ill fortune they have tried,
Now policy must be their chief defense:
When they into the Court, and Church have pried,
To sooth all grieuance they make fair pretense:
Of jealousy they cherish many sprouts,
And from vain fears they raise a thousand doubts.
Against the Watson.
Puritans one while they stormed,
And termed them the cankers of good order:
Now do they Tortus.
sooth them against the church conformed
And call subscription tyranous disorder:
For where all factions they on foot maintain,
They hope the sooner their deseigns to gain.
This proou's the world in his decrepit age,
When slights must be the st^lts to stay his fall:
Rome vaunts her self a scourge for heavens great rage,
Yet is she sauadge as the Canniball:
None did stern Tamberlain so Knowlles, in the life of Bajazet the first.
cruel see;
In shedding blood he would more charie be.
The Romans did hostility proclaim,
And Florence did her Machiauel Floren. hist. lib. 2.
Martinella ring;
They thought that enterprise was honors maine,
When Cic. offic. lib. 1.
vndenounced war their force did bring:
Much more they scorned traitors to maintain,
Or give rewards to those which Kings had slain.
Fabritius did not thus with Plutarch in the life of Pyrrhus and Camillus.
Pyrrhus deal,
Camillus did not thus Faleria win:
For to their foes they traitors did reveal,
But Romists now extol this deadly sin:
No marvel then if Concord they would spill,
Which all the world with mutinies do fill.
As Froggs of Egypt and those heaps of Lice,
Which plag'd the Aegipt^an for his stubbornness:
So are the R^maine Clericks which entice
Each Princes subjects to unfaithfulness.
These like Camelions wander every where,
Instructing treacheries, and to forswear,
As when the body is with humors full,
A little bruise these humors does attract;
So in a state their Priests do draw each gull,
Whose wealths impaired, or reputation cract.
Such swelling ulcers Jesuits do make,
Till launcing justice due revenge do take.
Once famous Rome for justice in thy wars,
Once famous for the Christian truths defense;
Now treacherous cowardice thy glory marres,
Thy truth is now become but truths pretense:
Thy Ignis fatuus does to ruin lead,
Those, which for thy supremacy do plead.
What will they not by thee led on aduenter?
Hoodwinked by thee what mischief will they shun?
Steep rocks they will clime, and diue to earths low center,
To perjury, murder, treason they will run,
As if they should perform some worthy act,
Or follow their great Mediators tract.
When famous Paulus Venetus.
Godfrey with the Christian powers,
Expelled the Sarazins from the holy land,
When Cities, Castles, and the strongest Towers,
This valiant general could not long withstand:
The Assassins for their bloud-thirstie King,
Did to the Christians often danger bring.
This peoples country did on Persia bound,
And at the foot of Libanus was seated;
Dame nature did with Mountains guard it round,
That all assaults thereof were soon defeated:
For through one entry they did only pass,
Which by the fort Tigado guarded was.
This plain, great store, and surplussage affoorded,
Of useful things, which to man's life pertained;
As if the earth her treasures there had hoorded,
And that elsewhere her favor she refrained:
Or that the Amalthean horn did there abide,
And did it self from other countries hide.
Th'inamel'd meadows were with rivers lac't,
And fringed about with many sorts of bowers,
Where busy Art her diverse skill had placed,
To help the pleasure of retiring hours:
Though Nature ground, and Art bestowed advice,
Yet was this land the instrument of vice.
For Aladine which termed himself Divine,
Which both a King and God would needs be styled,
His best inventions daily did refine,
That men in pleasures trance might be beguiled:
For houses of delight he there did build,
Which with the fairest curtizans he filled.
This done, he sent his factors every where,
To bring to him some youngsters for his turn;
For these are void of wariness and fear,
Besides these most with Paphian flames do burn,
These with expense will often their pleasures buie,
And soon embrace fit opportunity.
When any one was to Tigado brought,
There did he rest till some Sun-shinie day:
Then should he take a Dose which charmed his thought,
And did his senses bind without delay:
Then in a swound they richly him arrayed,
And to the pleasant gardens him conuay'd.
There in short space his senses he enjoyed,
And all those objects which his senses pleased:
His sight and touch by coyness not annoyed,
The fairest and the loueliest damzels seized:
One day he did possess his pleasures fill,
And all disports did sooth thi^ strangers will.
But when the Sun drew to his western goal,
And made long shadows as even low things do;
In banqueting his wits and robes they stole,
Then Aladins castle he was brought unto;
Where being wakened he began to think,
How he from heaven was brought to Stigian brinke.
Then Aladine began with him to commune,
And told him that in Paradise he had been,
Where he all joys for his true friends did summon,
That yet he had not half those pleasures seen:
Which if he would by faithful service gain,
This life expired he always should obtain.
This promise did so raise this captives heart,
And others which thus fondly were abused,
That all did strive which first should act his part,
No dangerous action was by them refused:
If Aladin would kings or captains kill,
They strived who first his pleasure should fulfill.
Thus was the County of Mountferrat slain,
So was the valiant Duke of Tripoly,
These Richard Cordelions tent did stain
With blood, whom Aladine had marked to die:
For so vain hope of happiness prevailed,
That Kings in their pauilions they assailed.
At length this crew of murderers were Knowls (...). hist. of (...) Turks,
(...). 113.
beset
By Scythians, which Hayton had procured;
Which after many years their fort did get,
And since the world has not such wrongs endured:
Till Rome to blood her champions did entice,
With full assurance of like paradise.
For Rome can subjects from ^ellar. de ^m. Pont. ^. 5. cap. 6.
allegiance free,
And bind them to their kings when she shall please,
All must of heaven or hell partakers be
Of endless pains, or of eternal ease:
As to the sea of Rome they stand affected,
And as Romes favors are on them reflected.
To baulk the Laicke Papists still deluded,
With the opinion of antiquity;
Which do account the Protestants secluded
From the true Church by their fond sophistry:
Since Jesuits by name and power are great,
It Is fittest of their virtues to entreat.
These are the Mercuries which are employed,
In all commissions for the Romish state;
Their carriage of all offense is void,
These cherish love, renouncing all debate:
These plead for kings, or else they should so do,
For both their names and office tend thereto.
But from this scantling how their courses stray,
The heavens do see, and earth too often does feel,
If Monarchies the highest did not sway,
The greatest kingdoms with their storms would reele*
These raise the tempests of all discontent:
Which virtuous kings by favor would prevent.
The Seductor, Sweco, Ga^lo ficaerius, etc. Carolus Molinaeu^
Swecians king by slights they have seduced,
Unto the French they stabbers vile do prove;
The English they to treason have induced,
And serve as spies the Emperor to move:
Their craft fits Spain; their fair speech Italy,
And Jesuits only can that part supply.
Thus do the Sec'lar Priests of them report,
And those Italians which to them are near:
Which plainly see their iuggling in such sort,
That travelers of them this verdict hear,
That of the Romans, Clergymen are worst,
And of the Clergy, Jesuits most accursed.
Yet both their Popes and they, far off are feared,
And foreign nouices do them adore,
Whose consciences are with hot irons seared,
Whose festred souls do still retain the core:
Which as a plague will suddenly infect
All those which trade with this enchanting sect.
Alexander the third that haughty Pope,
Whom Romans scorned and often did expel:
How did he Englands second Henry mope,
With thundering curse, that he to penance fell?
Since when against Popes few kings durst once to strive
Lest they their bane and mischief should contriue.
For by Tradition, or fresh policy,
Where Popish practice has a lawless range,
Such savage massakers are raised hereby,
That Turks and Pagans think the same most strange:
As Christ by miracle has marriage graced,
So Rome by murders has the same defaced.
An hundred thousand Protestants were slain,
When Bourbon and Valois were matched together;
A cloud brake then into that bloody rain,
When they were most assured of fairest weather:
No aged sires, nor infants at the breast,
Could be repriu'd from sudden deaths arrest.
If bloody stratagemes should be rehearsed,
Which Rome has plotted in each Christian land;
A Christian heart would with remorce be pierced,
And with the thought thereof amazed would stand:
That Popes which do themselves Christ's Vicars call,
Should Christian lands with Jewish rage inthrall.
But if the Powder Plot shall be remembered,
By any one but of that damned crew,
How King, Prince, Nobles should have bin dismembered,
With many friends which there the Miners knew,
When Englands gentry, and her choicest flower,
One hellish vault of sulphur should devour.
When Englands Church, most near the Primitive,
Should there have lost their reverent Lords of note;
When skillful Judges justice to derive,
Should die by those, which do on errors dote:
When many Cur^ii must have served that lake,
Of which the child unborn complaints should make,
If any one should reckon half those woes,
Which did attend on that dark dismal act,
A world of miseries he should disclose,
More fit for Furies, then for humane fact:
As feends with men join hands to work man's ill,
So Rome with hell conspires to have her will.
When those, which wield the sword of justice, fail,
A Chaos of confusion soon will follow;
When fear of punishment does not prevail,
The greatest part will in profaneness wallow.
"Such is the base ingratitude of man,
"That rodds work more then any favor can.
There might a man have seen the goodliest show,
That worth, or order could on earth present,
All turned to horror, and the saddest view,
That ever eye could see, or tongue could vent:
All had alike been into pieces torn,
Their battered lims had diverse ways been borne.
Where then my James, where had thine ayerie been,
Ordained to be the scourge of haughty Rome?
The royal tree, and all the branches green,
That tempest had o'reblowne in chiefest bloome:
No family could so the truth defend,
Against which so many sects their force did bend.
Of many families of high descent,
Whose Prince to Rome should have been sacrificed:
The Protestants their guide would most lament,
In preparation of their aid surprised:
"In mighty armies which with fury close,
"The General lost, makes passage for his foes.
How many thousands would have mourned then,
Both for their King and for their chiefest friends:
Whilst Hell and Rome would send fourth graceless men,
Which for this fact would make this ill amends:
They would have said (their plot not then detected)
That heaven had Englands heresies corrected.
Who ever saw a town well manned assaulted,
When murdering shot was on the breaches bent,
When martial men on every side exalted
Their blood, and lives for honors ^uerdon spent:
When walls and trenches were with men bestrewd,
Which with each others blood themselves imbrew'd.
Who after this has heard their friends bewayling:
Some their own brethren, some their fathers dear,
Some shedding tears for sons no whit prevailing,
Which were to them in blood and love most near:
Who has this seen but one poor scaene has seen
Of Tragedies, which had in England been.
For siege of towns makes peace within their walls,
And cooles the heat of all intestine broils;
All foreign war unto agreement calls
That homebred discord, which all cities spoils:
And though some worthy men do loose their lives
In honors field, their glory daily thriues.
But if the Miners had their wish obtained,
And had the pillars of this state oreturn'd,
Great Britanie had of endless strife complained,
And had within it self like Aetna burned:
The best deseruer had been as a groom,
Debarred the honor of his ancients tomb.
Then might each wayward thought with ease perceive,
The happiness of awful government,
And that they do themselves of good bereave,
Which lend their ears to causlesse discontent:
"For busy heads like shaking palsies are,
"Which always moon, yet all good motions mar.
When rich America the Spaniards got,
And of the Indians millions they had slain;
It Was held to be the chief Iberian blot,
Which all her other actions there did stain:
For which they pleaded, that they Pagans were,
And that their numbers justly they did fear.
But why against Christians, Christians should thus rave,
Not differing much in faiths foundations?
Why Romists should themselves like wolves behave,
Like devils to blow up this famous nation?
The world can guess no other cause but pride,
Which Popes by other colors seek to hide.
Is this the Church whose Prelate Christ resembles,
Which was the mirror of humility?
Yet at our Saviors voice each creature trembles,
But Popes though weak mar all tranquillity:
Whose artificial wings heavens heat will melt,
Then shall they feel what others often have felt.
What can blood-thirstie Rome plead for defense?
What brazen mask such horride facts can hide?
What mint of treason may with this dispense,
This new-coin'd treason which lies open wide?
What wretch for this dares frame Apologies,
Which being vie'wd yields such deformities?
Yet Romists do among themselves auow,
This ougly plot their Aladin to advance:
For which they are as Saints exalted now,
Which cast those rebels into such a trance:
The Indians which devils reverence,
Of deu'lish minds give not like evidence.
But Bellarmine does flat denial make,
(For Tortus now is tortured out of joint)
That Jesuits of this plot did notice take,
That they were strangers in this treasons point:
That Garnet, Ouldcorn, Tesmund much did loath,
An act so vile, which no pretext could cloth.
He writes, that Garnet made a long oration,
Disclaiming the act at's execution:
VV'had Englands heresies in detestation;
Extolling Rome with constant resolution:
In whose approved faith he bravely died,
And so himself a worthy Saint he tried.
Such maine untruths are fit for maine supporters,
Some Cardinal must countenance such lies:
Such will bear down a thousand true reporters,
Transforming falsehoods into verities,
These are Romes champions to maintain a breach.
Which do maintain that they may ouer-reach.
Their several letters to their inward friends,
And to their loves without equivocation,
Their own confession testimony lends,
Their hands approve their just examination:
And their consulting what was to be done,
When they had finished what they had begun.
All these proceedings does the Cardinal know,
For many Romists did to Rome resort,
To shun just rigor for that aimed blow,
And to the Pope to make a true report:
Yet for injustice he would England blame,
And seeks to hide Romes neuer-dying shame.
And as for Garnet, when his death drew near,
He was perplexed with an inward care:
His words were few, and by them did appear,
An heavy burden, which his conscience bare:
Thrice he craved pardon for his guiltiness,
Which he before a thousand did confess.
If Bellarmine, Romes master of defense,
Can find no better ward for Romes disgrace,
Then to disprooue so great an audience;
And that all evidence he will outface,
What shall men think of Romes inferior rabble,
Which of untruths so confidently babble?
When aged Beza dangerously was sick,
The Jesuits feigned he made a recantation;
But when his health, and pen bewrayed this trick,
A shameless slight must salve their reputation:
They said that Beza forged of them this lie,
To wrong them with reproach, and infamy.
When Henry Bourbon Paris did besiege,
And that the Citizens could not long hold out,
Rome to encourage them against their liege,
This strange miraculous accident gave out,
That all his army papal curse had blasted,
All had black faces, and their power was wasted.
When first My James in England did arrive,
It Was noised by Jesuits that he did them love:
He knew their worth, and would their weal contriue:
And unto Rome he would a fautor prove:
There soon should be at least a toleration,
So soon as he did reign over the English nation.
And now of late a rumor they have spread,
That Antichrist in Babylon is borne:
With this report the credulous are fed,
To put away all Antichristian scorn:
And though such sleights may serve their turns awhile,
The wiser sort at such poor shifts do smile.
Romes absent favorites in hand are borne,
That only Popes give Antidotes against sin,
That she is like th'all-purging Unicorn;
That she alone does heavens conniuence win:
That she has works of Supererrogation,
As in a treasure for each Christian nation.
That Rome is like Noah's ark where all is well:
Without the same sins deluge will destroy:
That Rome has charms for all the strength of hell;
Her Clerks are fiend-proofe scorning all annoy.
That Masses sung, and Crucifixes worn,
The greatest rage of Lucifer do scorn.
Her exorcismes made in our Ladies name,
Do serve to prove these maine conclusions,
But now the world perceiues this cunning frame,
And how poor souls are wronged by strange delusions,
Her fained miracles are now detected,
Her Alcumie is every where suspected.
Her beaded prayers which the priests repeat,
A sacrifice of fools where faith is wanting,
Her outward shows without religious heat,
Can hardly keep th'vnpartiall from recanting.
Shrift, penance, whippings, but for maskes do serve,
To hide Licentiousness, whilst Zeal does sterue.
And a^ for Purgatory it is a grinne,
To fright the ignorant, and make them fly
Unto the Priests, to have a salve for sin,
And that on Roman help they may rely:
For they which have a liberal resolution,
From any fault shall have an absolution.
Such queint devices helped Romes clergy well,
When her base Caterpillars were neglected;
Then they invented many a subtle spell,
Whereby they might the better be respected.
As lately Mylains priests deuis^d for gain,
Our Ladies eyes with bloody tears to stain.
It Is strange to think what idle fopperies,
Do pass for current where Rome domineeres:
Th'vnlearnedst laick may the same descrie,
And see new fictions in these latter years:
Though rust, and rest her former worth confirm,
Yet she to scorn all others dares presume.
With Protestants the Romists may not pray,
Although they pray as Christ himself has taught:
Defiance they against heretics must display,
Else with some heresy they shall be caught:
All other Scismaticks are miserable,
But Protestants are held most detestable.
None therefore must with Protestants confer,
No books of controversies they must see,
Rome fears the sight of these will make them err,
And that a great departure there will be.
Of Jews, and Greeks, Rome has no iealousies,
But Protestants she marks with Argus eyes.
Rome dreads the Protestants great constancy:
Their complete armor to make strong defense:
With lance, or Pen, the Romists they will try;
Their cause flies not the light, nor seeks pretense:
They fear no force, nor their intestine foes,
Since Truths Protector does their plots disclose.
But for base fugitives which Rome maintains,
Which like the Turkish Azamoglens are,
For whom they will not their countries wrack refrain,
For whom against their parents they will war:
But for her pardons which she does ingrosse,
She had ere this been purged from her dross.
Rome does on these Arch-policies rely;
She knows that lewdness daily will abound;
That varlets will unto her Altars fly,
Where certain expiation still is found:
And as for those which will dislike bewray,
Some renegadoes will their wrack assay.
The Clergy is an huge part of each land*
By several stairs unto one end aspiring:
And like eau'sdroppers in each place they stand,
A dissolution of each state desiring:
In troubled waters they desire to fish,
That they may serve themselves with every dish.
These by confession do each humor know,
And curb al thoughts which against themselves they find,
The discontent of Nobles they ore-grow,
Else by some favor haughty spirits they bind:
None dare once stir, what ere they have conceived,
Least of their pleasures they be soon bereaved.
Kings marriages are made legitimate,
With nearest kin against the holy Writ.
The laws of Nature Rome does violate,
And proudly shows a selfe-aduancing wit:
Rome by her greatness does her actions square,
And for Gods worship she takes little care.
The Catholic Kings fear least their titles fail;
Their marriages the Pope can disanull:
The nobles and the gentry they do quail,
With sundry threats of which their writs are full:
The Friars undertake the vulgar sort,
And unto them strange stories do report.
These much prevail with persons credulous,
And often manage secret business:
In great attempts they are not timorous,
And for employment still in readiness:
In word they do austeritie maintain,
Yet of their looseness does each state complain.
So Roman Vestals Venus disallow,
And with Diana seem to have abiding:
They seem most constant in their solemn vow,
Yet are they famous for their often backsliding,
And by their weakness more they do allure,
Then by their constancy they could procure.
What ever serves to minister delight,
What ever may this humorous age content,
What object may give pleasure to the sight,
Or to rebellious passions give a vent:
All to the Romist shall auspicious be,
If in the Church no blemish he will see.
As for those Kings which stand aloof from Rome,
And will not stoop unto the Papal lure;
They Are often blasted in their chiefest bloome;
Some bloody Assassins Rome will procure:
Which will attempt some desperate enterprise,
Since for such acts Rome will them canonize.
So long she will with Princes scepters play,
So long she will both earth and heaven provoke;
That brooded Papists will her slights bewray,
Then shall she fail and vanish into smoke:
For kings which thought by mildness to appease,
Must then by rigor strive the heavens to please.
The bloody Inquisition must awake
The Protestants to some more strict account;
From sufferance since Romists courage take,
This folly they with woe should soon recount:
"The stroke far fetched does make the deeper wound,
"For which no cure or salve can ere be found.
And Britain, thou thy self must first acquit,
From those dark clouds which would obscure thy glory:
Constantine, Henry, and my James inuit,
To dedicate to thee a living story.
For all these champions on thy soil were borne,
Which every where with fame will thee adorn.
The first was the first Emperor for Christ,
Which valiantly the Christians did defend;
The second was first King against Antichrist,
Which unto Truth his helping hand did lend.
The last, not least, this Church, and I Will Unites,
And to the Truth al Christian lands incites.
Great Constantine the world from idols freed,
Yet could he not the Christian iarres appease:
And Popish pride mine Henry hence did weed,
But scandalous rumors did his honor seize:
Yet unto these the world must fame afford,
Whilst heavens with stars, or earth with men is stored.
But James whose skill, whose will, and zeal agree,
To win the world unto one Verity:
In whom his foes no stain of honor see,
To wrong himself or his posterity:
He stops the mouths of all the Stoike train,
That they of naught but trifles can complain.
In every kind of knowledge he excels,
In Christian virtues every Christian king,
His wary foresight wisedome's strength foretells,
Which tel-truth Time one day to light will bring: Veritas poris fi^^

His wisdom shall appear by his great deeds,
Whereof as yet he has but sown the seeds.
He first must string and tune his Britanie,
Before he can his pleasing music make,
He Will mend each craze, the strings and stops he will try,
Before he will performance undertake:
Each practiser in this eare-pleasing Art,
Will first thus do before he will play his part.
The Clergy he already well has tuned,
And with great care the false strings has removed;
Which would have made the consort seem untuned,
And to the skillful ear would harsh have proved:
This makes his wisdom and his zeal appear,
To stop extremities in their carreer.
Both Romists and the Scismatickes are bold
To countermaund the actions of their kings:
All Princes power by these are still controlled,
Yet must they raise themselves with Princes wings:
One on the Popes supremacy does stand,
The other like Diogenes command.
Twixt Sylla and Charibdis, James has passed,
The King of kings his skill and helm has guided;
Unto the golden Mean he is linked fast;
His Church and He shall never be divided:
From these the cool Etesiae shall blow,
To swage the fumes which shall from malice grow.
For though this little world have many foes
In foreign parts, and in this center here;
Yet with the proudest, constant Truth shall ^loze,
And keep the list when they dare not appear:
My James and His have happily begun,
And shall in time Romes champions ouerrunne.
Let Spain her proud imperious Church maintain,
And with that plea excuse inflicted wrongs;
Let Belgia, France, and Germany refrain
That Unity which unto peace belongs:
Let these their many-headed Sects commend,
Let Britain still for Unity contend.
Let every voice, which mooues this western air,
Extroll his virtue which thus far has gone:
The Church of due regard shall not despair,
Whilst He or His this throne shall sit upon;
Then for my James shall wary wisdom plead,
Beyond those kings which the infant Church did lead.
Now for his justice showed in former rimes,
Amongst a people which were Eagle eyed,
Which soon could see and judge vnballanc't crimes,
If weight or measure ever were denied:
These free as air as yet could never say,
That spite or favor did his judgment sway.
His magnanimity is daily seen,
In slight Qua eximia plaerisque and prclara videtur, pa^ua ducere, for animi
mnique ducdum est, Cie. Of^ic lib. 1.
contempt of what the world admires;
Which proves a mind which has not tainted been,
By vain ambition which high fortunes fires:
"Yet honor and all majesty attends
"That mind which least these earthly toys intends,
Who does both fortunes Boethius de cons. Pl. los. met. 4.
equally esteem,
Not raised by one nor ought depressed by the other;
In him the affections conquered we may deem,
Which reasons strength with their great weight would smother
No Cic Or^ pro Mare
victory with this may make compare,
This fight is single, none with him may share.
Those which by bloody fights advance their names,
With many wrongs their victories they stain;
If any act or conquest purchase fame,
A part thereof each soldier will retain:
For these are instruments to bring to pass,
What by their General enterprised was.
But he which does all Prou. 1 32.
mutinies keep under,
Which both himself and others would betray;
Who at the worlds great treasures does not wonder,
Whose wronglesse conquest virtue does display;
He is true champion in this Christian weal,
And he alone true valor does reveal.
In peace this virtue most triumphant is,
Her victories no drop of blood do spill:
Here rest the Trophies of another bliss,
Which with a lasting good the world does fill:
This virtue cures the wounds which others make,
Yet keeps the field which others do forsake.
Too much the Christian world has been imbrued,
With Christian blood, which James does strive to stint,
Their malice they like Tigers have pursu'de,
And Rome has been of many broils the mint,
acquid aut repl^tun. Acl^ui, at, Epi.
Whilst kings contend, their subjects feel the smart,
For every one of loss does feel his part.
Some States, though weak, revenge will undertake,
O^t wronging many for the fault of few,
Often to their foes themselves a prey they make,
And great expense no way they can eschew:
But James, whose power might offer Europe wrong,
Forbeares all those which unto Christ belong.
So Temperance in such a boundless power,
Which is so rare on Honors highest stage,
And Liberality which shines each hour,
Which many wrong in this base-crauing age:
All these, and other virtues most complete,
In Britains King have their abiding seat.
Since then the Truth such champions does enjoy,
As know their strength and Romans force do scorn;
Since Romes delusions all estates do cloy,
And of all hopes she will quickly be forlorn:
Let Britain be from her in one united,
By heaven, air, earth, and sea thereto invited.
CHAP. 4. The danger of Division.
But now to leave this Isles renowned heir,
Whose blood is graced with high descent of kings,
Whose ancestors have kept the kingly chair
Well-neare two thousand years: whose marriage brings
A fresh alliance from that ^nmark.
Nor-east coast,
Whose Kings did once of Englands scepter boast.
A brief recapitulation of the former Chapter.
TO leave his virtues matching herauldrie,
And all those titles which that skill affoords;
To pass from that high reaching policy,
Which with the heavens, and elements accords,
To pass the ima^e of the worlds creator,
United with so great a mediator.
To leave that Union where Iehouahs spirit,
Vouchsafes residence in an earthly mass,
Which motion, sense, and reason does inherit,
With zeal, and faith which does man's reason pass:
To pass th'arch-enemie of human bliss,
Which to good concord still repugnant is.
To leave the Romist his confederate,
Which thinks by Britains idle iarres to thrive;
Whose malice against al. peace inueterate,
Does dangerous plots against this state contriue:
These things are plain, and how great states did rise,
Now will we set their falls before our eyes.
For heavens great glory, and the earths true light,
Whose words more sure then Oracles do prove,
Whose wisdom always clearly sees the right,
To Unity his dear elect does move;
And this auerrs that kingdoms needs must Mark. 3.24.
fail,
Where Ruins nurce Division does prevail.
Who ever did converse with times record:
Who sacred stories, or profane has seen,
His observation will here-with accord,
That Union strong, Division weak has been:
"By concord smallest things have great increase,
"By discord greatest things do wane, and cease.
For as a ship, which does on billows ride,
Though Eolus and Neptune both agree,
To do their worst, yet safe it does abide,
Whilst of great leakes, and ruptures it is free;
But when the plankes do once begin to spring,
Just fear, and certain danger it does bring.
So kingdoms whole, and in themselves entire,
May well hold out against strength of foreign force;
When they in settled Unity conspire,
A late repentance will not breed remorce:
When postern-gates, and back-doores all are fast,
Assaults are with the first incounters passed.
The ouer-throw of the Jews.
THe twelve Tribes of that once most happy race,
Which were the darlings of the heavens great king,
How were they feared whilst love they did embrace,
How did they to their neighbors terror bring?
But when dissension did their kingdom sever,
How were they subject to all bondage ever?
The Assyrians sometimes have them captive lead,
Sometimes the Greeks have spoiled their City fair,
And lastly Romans with their fruits were fed,
So that they did of all relief despair:
Till hope of their Messiah did prevail,
Which made them Roman garrisons assail.
A while they freed themselves from Roman power,
And put those enemies oftentimes to flight,
But homebred iarres their strength did so devour,
That final misery on them did light:
For frantic Judah, Iuda's blood did spill,
Their slaughters did their streets and temples fill.
For when the Josephus de hello Iudaico. lib. 6. cap. 1.
Roman Prince, Vespatians son,
Jerusalem with thousands had besieged,
Three factions soon their bloody broiles begun,
Which with one truth, and promise were obliged:
They only joined when foes assaults were given,
And then the Romans back with loss were driven.
But when the Roman battery did cease,
When by delays they thought the Jews to starve,
Mean while the Jews would not themselves release,
But with their swords the Romans turn did serve,
For on themselves they did inflict more harms,
Then could have chanced by all the Roman arms.
The Proverb. 18.19.
hate of brethren does all hate exceed,
Which ever did the breast of man infect,
For many iealosies this spite do feed,
Divine nor human laws can this correct:
Yet must they know that for their foes they fight,
When on themselves they spend their force and might.
As in a sluice, where dammes the waters curb,
Till they unto the top of banks do swell;
No little let their current does disturb,
When their great noise their open pass does tell:
So friends, and countrymens great hate delayed,
Works strong effects, if once it be displayed.
Where greatest love is any where expected,
If thence proceed no show of kind intent,
They, which do fail herein, are soon suspected,
And fear seems wise suggesting some contempt:
Then strangeness grows from the one unto the other,
And both will shortly secret envy smoother.
For as the glass, through which the eye does peer,
Makes all things seem of color with the same;
So do all actions good or ill appear,
As good or ill conceit the mind does frame:
And this is commonly the usual course,
"That ill does wax, and grow from bad to worse.
Sometimes a fa^se report is blown abroad,
Of wrong, which does incense the hearts of men;
And then revenge is like the hellish goade,
Which makes the wronged rouse him from his den:
That mischief oftentimes he brings to pass,
To quitte a wrong, which never offered was,
Then wrong with wrong, and blood with blood repai'd,
Makes every place the stage of butcherie;
Whole families thus often are decai'd,
Often kingdoms are thus wasted utterly:
For where one law of concord does not bind,
Bellona still will vent for malice find,
As winds of heat or coolness do partake,
With sands, or waters where they lately pass^d,
As breath a savor good or ill does make,
As from the teeths Percullis it is cast:
So are our thoughts as our presumptions seem,
O^ as our iealousies do them esteem.
When after ^
seauenty years in bondage pass^d,
The Jews had leave their Cities to repair;
Some ma^e-contents ^broad false rumors cast,
And forged strange tales to make them all despair,
But all devices could not hinder them,
From building of the fair Jerusalem.
So England seeing many lets to muster,
(If those be lets which every fancy venteth)
And seeing from these lets new lets do cluster,
Wher^by the world at Englands good relenteth:
The more should all to Unity incline,
In spite of those which at our weal repine.
The different judgments of the Union,
And other discontentmens have so wrought,
That Romists are imbould'ned here-vpon,
Of Britains discord to retain a thought,
And to divulgate on a public stage,
The brainsick vapors of the Roman rage.
So wise a king such Councellers of state,
As at this day few kingdoms do maintain,
The Romists prize them at so mean a rate,
That personal Quaeres they will not refrain:
Who with their Popes and Cardinals would be bold,
Unto the world strange stories might unfold,
But for the scandal of the Christian weal,
Which labors now of her unworthy guide,
Some Christian Satyr would such acts reveal,
As modesty has heretofore denide:
Yet if the Romists daily shall provoke,
They must expect a wel-deserued stroke.
Thy wrongs my dear Eliza shall inflame,
Those hidden sparks which seem extinguished;
Since by thy grace the Muses honor came,
They cannot hear thy honor blemished:
Even they which of these times do most complain,
In thy defense may sing a pleasing strain
Thy due no honest Papist shall offend,
Some of their Sixtus Quintus.
Popes have rightly thee esteemed;
All they which do impartial censure spend,
Of thy most princely virtues well have deemed:
Though Parsons, clamorous and fugitives,
Would stain such princes, and deprave their lives.
As for my James, which sees his foes despite,
And tries the valor of approved friends,
If with respect their service he requite,
They for their silence will make such amends,
That in her strength Rome shall assaulted be,
And at her doors al'armaes she shall see.
So cast a cause, such bombast furniture,
Such proud brauadoes from Romes painted flourish,
These justly may all Christians hate procure,
D^^esting falsehood which blind zeal did nourish:
"Who only at his own defense does lie,
"Such ward his own defense shall not supply.
When Hanibal near Rome his army brought,
He put the Romans unto more distress,
Then at the siege of Carthage, where he fought,
With all his power her thraldom to redress.
So when the Popes V^aligon does burn,
He well may fear it will shortly be his turn.
So many towering wits encouraged,
So many soldiers ready for the charge,
Might soon throughout all Christendom be spread,
And might some Roman prisoners enlarge:
Since Rome by pamphlets all the world does threaten,
With true reports she is worthy to be beaten.
The Romists and the Schismatickes agree,
To rail at those, whose cause they cannot wrong:
The worthiest Prince from these cannot be free,
In subjects love they will not have them strong:
On the one side Parsons, Martins on the other,
All awful love of governors would smother.
And whilst thrice-famous England does prepare,
To countermine the Roman policy,
Whilst the English in the front their strength declare,
Upon their flank the Schismatickes will fly:
So that they will give assistance unto Rome,
Which once victorious would work their doom.
Then let conceits, and idle groundless fears,
Be held as mutinies in armies raised;
Or like to harvest showers procuring tears
Of those, which would their timely help have praised:
By others harms let Britains sects be warned,
Which till their ruin Concord have not learned.
Though Britain like to famous Tire do stand,
All moted by a neuer-failing river,
Though wooden walls her bays and coasts command,
Though Truth fear neither Rome nor Satan's quiver,
Yet if some pore-blind factions be not true,
Their fond division all the rest may rue.
What was the cause, The ruin of Greece after Alexander.
that Greece so soon had lost,
That great command; which Alexander gained?
What great misfortune could so soon have crossed
That power, which through the world was not restrained:
How did her glory suddenly decline,
Which in the view of all the world did shine?
Her riches and her prowess did exceed
All kingdoms of the world, which then were known,
Her name did every where great terror breed,
And who withstood her headlong down were thrown
Yet want of Concord did her frame dissolve,
And she again to weakness did reuolue.
Her captains did themselves with broils consume,
Which had conioyn'd themselves in foreign fight;
To The Empire every one would needs presume,
And every one made equal claim of right:
As ships in whirlewinds quickly strike the sail,
So Greece did stoop when hers did her assail.
And as the Julius C^sar in the conspirac^ of Brutus and Cassi. Plutarch the
life of Julius Cae^
first great Emperor of Rome,
In greatest conflicts never was dismayed;
But when he saw that in his chiefest bloome,
By his disloyal friends he was betrayed:
He hid his eyes, and would not make defense,
But left the scourge to heaven for this offense.
So Greece when she perceived her homebred iarres,
To waste her cities, and her wealthy store:
She then foresawe, that shortly foreign wars,
Should make her captive which was queen before:
Then widow-like whose Lord and sons were slain,
Of Concords breach she only did complain.
Division both a breach and passage made,
First for the Roman, after for the Turk;
Now Ottoman all Greece does ouershade,
Where he the Christians overthrow does work:
Whose policy all Europe might advise,
That public peace does private weal comprise.
The Grecians often the Romans did procure
To land their forces on the Grecian plain:
This made the Roman victories most sure,
When Greeks did help their conquests to obtain.
The Eastern Emperor did this fault commit,
When against his nobles Turks his turn^ did fit.
For thus the Turks came armed into Greece
At his request, which should have kept them out:
Then did they win from him this golden fleece,
Which only Discord had thus brought about:
Thus (...) in life of man.
Isabel the queen of Hungary,
With late repentance Iurkish aid did try.
The decay of the Roman Empire.
AS The Empire of the East was quickly lost
By strife to Turks, which now do all devour,
So was the western Empire always crossed
By (...) hist.
Popes, wc did through broils increase their power:
For like the Tribunes they did animate
Each rebel, which the Emperor did hate.
The Lumbards, Vandals, Sweuians, and the Goths,
This ancient Empire often did annoy:
For to the same they were like fretting mothes,
But Papal practice did it quite destroy:
By them the Empire lost all Italy,
Which since has been confined in Germany.
As Romans thriu'd by linking petty States,
Till Italy was to their power united;
Then shunning civil quarrels and debates,
To foreign conquests they were soon incited;
Till they unto such force and strength were grown,
That all the world by them was overthrown.
So in the end their greatness did decline,
And all their sodered kingdoms fall asunder,
For civil discord made them soon resign,
And at their vanishing the world did wonder:
For now in Italy such sharers are,
As all her hope of future greatness mar.
The Sarazins were to the world awhile Sarazins.

Like swelling tides which all did ouerflow:
They did themselves the Lords of Africa style,
And said, the earth did homage to them owe:
But when division did their forces sunder,
The Turks conioyn'd did quickly bring them under.
Thus was the Eg^p^ian Souldan overthrown,
Against whom his General Caythbie was in field, Mamel

Which jar was to the bloody ^elim known,
And on that discord he his hopes did build:
For Mameluckes divided are defeated,
And in great Caire were Ianisaries seated.
What will become of wasted Barbary, Barbary

Whose miseries Division only wrought?
Those only may by circumstance deserie,
Which have the Muleis woeful story sought:
Mars so has balanced their powers ^s yet,
That it is doubtful who the crown should get.
What in Moscouy Jesuits will effect, Russia.

What they in Europe closely will attempt,
If heaven do not their purposes detect,
And bring their names and practice to contempt:
Time will hereafter such events declare,
That Britain of Division shall beware.
Mean while (My James) thy blood and vital spirits,
Have joined in one the kingdoms of this I Will,
Succeeding ages shall extol thy merits,
No muddie censure may this act defile;
Who storm hereat show but an idle froth,
Who are lukewarm show but a careless sloth.
True concord in a state should always be,
Like to the compass in a ship at sea:
Without the same a state cannot be free
From danger, this is held a certain plea:
The Mariners by that their course do learn.
By this a state her ill, or good does learn.
Divided Germany to many sects,
Yet does it join against the Turkish power:
Their foreign fear their civil broils corrects,
Else would division all that land devour:
So Britain should to Unity consent,
All foreign foes the better to prevent.
When Mariners are in a tempest tossed,
They soon forget all quarrels that have passed,
They know discention then their lives will cost,
And every one about his task does have:
So in this age when Jesuits storms do raise,
All must conioyne in these disioynted days.
The Turk abroad, the Jesuit at home,
By which the Christian weal is still disturbed,
One like an Hawk, the other like a Mome,
By concord only may be safely curbed.
For none of these dare ever give assault,
Where factions weakness have not made default.
Both these are like the spleen with humors full,
Which always make the body lean and bare:
From their adherents they all wealth do pull,
The Turks are Lions, Jesuits Foxes are:
The one by force, the other by sly shifts,
Square all their plots by selfe-aduancing drifts.
Now if the Persians, Turks do undertake,
If wronged Papists, Jesuits do casseere;
The Turks shall not such sudden conquests make,
Nor shall the Spanish faction domineere.
Then Christian lands may happily be quiet,
Which have been fed with self devouring diet.
Then treacheries, which Pagans did detest,
And breach of oaths which Christians once did hate,
These wanting patrons shall with Pluto rest,
All such delusions shall be out of date.
Then subjects shall to Caesar pay their due,
And Christians name shall Christian love renew.
That Hel-borne policy shall then surcease,
To foster every countries malcontent;
That viperous brood should not so much increase,
Which do their native soil for strangers rent.
All should their fury spend in Turkish wars,
And only triumph of thence gotten scarres.
The gold, which the Indies yearly do afford,
Should not to rebels yearly pensions give,
Which in the end does fade like Jonas gourde,
And fails them most, when most it should relieve:
These have their pensions at the dearest rate.
Which for the same their lives must ante-date.
If policy, and treasures were employed,
To drive the Turks out of the Christian land,
If in each kingdom, Kings were not annoyed:
If Christians would against Mahomet join their bands,
As by their strife he got his lawless power,
So now their concord should his strength devour.
But as the Roman Imperator seruiebat orbis, imperator militibu^. Erasmi
praefat in Sueton.
Emperor was obay'd
Of all the world; yet soldiers were his masters:
So Christian lands are by their Princes swaid,
Yet Jesuits in their games will be the casters:
For these proud vpstarts daily tyrannize,
And for their ends do shape each enterprise.
This watchful land has these imposters known,
They have not much as yet deceau'd her sight:
Unto their pits themselves they first have thrown,
Before they could prevail against the right.
In many countries they have gamesters been,
But their base cheating England best has seen.
So Britain knows the scourge of civil war,
By Brutus fault which did divide the same:
This act did roll the stone which ran so far,
That it did break this strong-compacted frame:
Thus Romans, Saxons, Danes, and French did spoil,
This most unhappy dis-united soil.
For Brutus to his sons this I Will had shared,
To Locrin England, and to Camber Wales:
To Albanack he Scotland did award,
Which is so strong by mountains, hills, and dales:
That Valor joined with her situation,
Has kept her people in their native station.
To pass the broils twixt Locrin and his Queen,
In which the wronged Guend'lin got the field;
To pass the middle iarres which often were seen*
When The English did to Cunidagis yield:
Ferrex and Porrex were from Brute the l^st,
Which did themselves with civil discord wast.
When Brutus line six hundred years had reigned,
Till long Division had his line consumed,
Mu mutius the Sovereignty obtained,
Which first to wear a crown of gold presumed:
Whose laws did bind this long-distracted I Will,
That savage customs should not it defile.
His sons were Bellin, and the warlike Brenne,
Which had divided Britanie in twain;
But strife began, and they concluded then,
That one alone must in this country reign:
One Sun for one Horrizon did suffice,
So should one I Will one Monarchy comprise.
Then Brennus left this I Will, and of the Galls
Was chosen captain, Romans to subdue,
He conquered Greece; but under Delphos walls
His fortune failed him, and himself he slew:
Mean while great Bellin Denmark did bring under,
Whilst Britains subjects did not war asunder.
If all in one they firmly had agreed,
When Caesar first this I Will did undertake,
They had themselves from Roman conquest freed,
As their own stories Taci^ vita (...) col^^.
true report do make,
In single fight* or skirmish when they met,
The Britains still the victory did get.
But when they were in one Battalia raung'd,
Their faint encounter showed their factions power;
Division had so much their minds estranged,
That easily their foes might them devour:
Thus did the Turks the Christians ouer-throw,
Because due rescue they did still foreslow.
As workmen in a frame when they do vary,
When in the plot their minds cannot agree,
There Is nothing done, or else all does miscarrie;
So both in peace and wars we daily see.
Each enterprise is like the Babel-mount,
Where several men do several things recoun^.
Cassibilan, which Caesar did withstand,
Was with the Londoners in some disgrace,
If they had lived within his due command,
They might have followed Romans in that chase,
When many Captains in the front were slain,
When Romans could not Britains charge sustain.
But as the Britains lost their liberty,
For want of Union against a foreign foe;
So Romans lost their hold in Britanie,
And by their discord did this land forgo.
For Romes great Empire lost by strife and iarres,
Those foreign lands, which were subdued by wars.
The Romans wealth, and soldiers hence did take,
Whereby their power, and pomp they might maintain*
On the other side the P^cts did daily rake,
What they by force, and violence could gain,
Then to the Saxons, Britons sent for aid,
By whose arrival they were most betrayed.
They first by policy and subtle slights,
The Britains (...).
king unto their side had won:
The rest they vanquished in sundry fights,
Then with themselves division they begone:
Seau'n kingdoms they within themselves had made,
And every one each other did invade.
As is the restless motion of the seas,
Which to the south and north does ebb and flow,
Which every gust and gale does still disease,
As they which pass those watrie rhegions know:
So Britain to and fro by strife did range,
And foreign power her state did often change.
Three hundred years the Saxons were in arms,
Before they could to Wales the Brittons drive,
Then against themselves they fought in several swarms
Two hundred years they did selfe-hurt contriue:
Mean while the Danes this fruitful i will had tasted,
Whose strength had been by her own people wasted
The Danes long time had foraged this I Will,
And weakened Saxons could not them repel:
For ^.
Edmund did Canutus long withstand,
But they at length to this agreement fell:
That they betwixt them should this land divide,
And so they should all present iarres decide.
Not long they were ioynt-tenants of this I Will,
For Ederick had poisoned Edmund soon,
Canutus then sole king himself did style,
By the suruiver this he said he won:
Then Edmunds sons to Sweathlands king he sent,
Where they should spend their lives in banishment.
Hardy Canutus was his only son,
Which had no issue which might him succeed;
And after him the Saxons soon begun
To claim their due, since heaven had so decreed:
Then Edward the Confessor rightly reigned,
Whose government and zeal no spot had stained.
Of law and love he did an Union make,
Which by all means My James would now effect,
The Churches good his care did vndertak^,
This Englands king did first of all respect:
Both right to Levites kindly did perform,
And to the truth they did themselves conform.
King Edward did the Saxons blood restore,
In James the Britons, Saxons, Normans live,
All claims in them did rest which were before,
Their right to all did satisfaction give:
Both loved peace, and gave their subjects rest,
Whom stern Bellona did so long molest.
Their virtues equally are matched together,
Their studious thoughts for Christian welfare spent,
Their constancy in fair and foulest weather,
Their zeal alike to great Jehovah bent.
One issulesse was Saxons Sun declining,
The other Britains new Aurora shining.
Edgar, grandchild to Edmund Ironside,
By right, and Edwards will, should next have raig'nd,
But Harold sworn thereto did from it slide,
He only should have regencie obtained:
But for himself he only seized the crown,
Until the Normands threw him headlong down.
As Harold wronged Englands rightful heir,
So did he William Duke of Normandy:
He promised marriage of his daughter fair,
But he the due performance did deny.
Then did appear a bloody blazing star,
Which did fore-shew th'vnsatiat sword of war.
First the English were within themselves distracted,
For Tostus, Harolds brother was in arms,
A power from Norway he had then contracted,
Which was the cause of Englands fatal harms,
Duke William aimed on the English coast to land,
When these two brothers did in battle stand.
Thus did the Normans get the victory,
When Harold was with home incounters tir'de;
Thus the English were inthralld to misery;
When they so often against themselves conspired:
For what before the Conquest often befell,
The like in Normands reign the stories tell,
As fevers, which disturb the bodies frame,
With thirst, ach, casting, shiuering cold, and heat,
They first the blood do waste, and spirits tame,
Then for the dropsy often they leave a seat.
Sometimes the Phtisick, and consumption,
Disse^se the soul from her late mansion.
So does Division, iealousies maintain,
Sometimes a coldness to a fo^reine foe,
Sometimes an heat of civil strife, whose pain
Does present rest; and future weal undo:
For wasted fields a famine still does follow,
Dearth does with death conspire, and thousands swallow,
The Conquerors reign was full of civil broils,
With Edgar the English, Scots, and Welsh agreed,
Which if they first had done, they would mist those toils,
From which since that themselves they never freed:
If Malcome Edgars sister had not married,
The English royal blood had quite miscarried.
By Margaret this Scotlands King had Maude,
Which mathc'd to ^^nry. ^.
Henry Beuclarke, had a daughter,
By whom all other claims were ouer-aw'd,
Which did prevent much strife, and bloody slaughter:
Mauds daughter Maud, to ^^ffrey ^^^agenet
the Aniou Duke did bear
The second Henry which the crown did wear.
Yet since this Union of the rightful blood,
Much strife, and much Division there has been,
For the English have the English often with-stood,
That right with wrong contends it is often seen:
The house of Lancaster against York held out,
Till either house preserved but one poor sprout.
Rest, rest in happiness most happy souls,
Which did ingraft my York and Me in one:
Earth counts them fathers, heaven as heirs inroules,
Those which prevent so many thousands moan:
Let others vaunt of victories in France,
True wisdom will this sacred knot advance.
This marriage unto England did procure
Long peace, good government, riches, and renown;
Wars, laws neglect, and loss it did endure,
These were the weights which kept pore England down:
For all these mischiefs will that land disturb,
Which peaceful laws of concord do not courbe.
Too long I should Iehouah's presence loose,
Which in it self all happiness contains,
If long discourse of Discord I should choose,
Or speak of half her selfe-inflicted pains:
Almost three thousand years this ^e did wail,
Whilst Britains Peers did Britains Peers assail.
Both Wales and Scotland stood as lookers on,
Whilst bloody Tragedies were on this stage,
Sometimes they took advantage hereupon,
To show the fury of a brothers rage:
But now their Union former hate must banish,
And all remembrance of old grudge must vanish.
My self have Wales, my James has Scotland brought,
To join with England in an endless love:
The great Jehovah this for Britains wrought,
That to themselves they should most faithful prove:
And that they should forbear the least contempt,
Least from this league the heavens should them exe^pt.
This is the act of Providence divine,
Which has decreed that this should be effected,
The world unto such weakness does decline,
That all had failed if this had been neglected.
Such pride, disdain, and envy rules the heart,
That now the world must be maintained by Art.
Art, Nature, Heavens, the elements and man,
Both home and foreign cares for Concord plead,
These all conclude, do Romists what they can,
That slights no longer the English shall mislead:
As iuggling tricks are naught when they are known
So cunning slights when they abroad are blown.
Let Henry Bourbon, heir of Honors wreath,
Who foreign and domesticke iarres suppressed,
Let him, and the other Henry's death bequeath,
A wary caution to each loyal breast:
Oh let their blood a detestation breed,
Of Canibals, which do on Princes feed!
Beware (My James) since thy great friend is slain,
Who warned thee often of dangers eminent,
Beware of Rome, and others which would train
Thy royal thoughts unto their private bent:
The Iui^ does that tree of sap bereave,
To which by close embracements it does cleave.
But now me thinks I hear high trumpets sound,
For some great good which to England shall betide,
Her plaints in heavenly parliament are found,
And right in earthly Sessions shall be tried:
This said, he vanished promising supply,
When malcontents against this truth reply.
FINIS.
Errata.
page 12. in the Margent for creanto, read creanti. page 13. l. 27. for Artick,
read Artist. page 15. l. 17. for maintain, read contain.

