A SERMON PREACHED at Paul's Cross the 9. of June. 1605.

Upon the 20. of the Revelation the 12. verse. treating of these several heads.

1. Of the Resurrection of the Flesh. 2. Of the Judgment of the quick and
dead. 3. Of the Communion of Saints. 4. Of Everlasting life.
By Samuel Gardnier, Doct. of Divinity.

LONDON Printed for Edward White, and are to be sold at the little
North-doore of Saint Paul's Church, at the Sign of the Gun. 1605.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable and virtuous Lady, Jane Lady Barkley, wife to Henry
Lord Barkley.
IN the full affiance I have in the Lords mercy, which made this poor
Sermon, welcome to so many ears, being preached: that he will direct it to
the common comfort, being now presented to their eyes printed: the importunity
of many of my good friends had success with me.

I consecrate it, most Honorable Lady, unto you, in token of duty toward
you: for your great Love, by which I am enabled to labor in this sort, and
indeed to live. Gods blessing be upon it, and upon you.

Your Honors Chaplain, SAMVEL GARDNIER.

Reuelat. 20. Verse. 12 And J saw the dead both great and small stand before
God, and the Books were opened, and an other Book was opened, which is the
Book of Life, and the dead were judged of those things, which were written in
the Books according to their works.
Here is cluster, and multiplicitie of Christian Catechism, as including and
concluding these four Articles of the catholic faith. 1. The resurrection of
the flesh, touched in the standing of the dead before God. 2. The judgment of
the quick and the dead, noted in the opening of the Books, out of which they
have the sentence of judgment read them. 3. The Communion of Saints. 4.
Everlasting life, not obscurely insinuated by the other book, entitled: The
Book of life, here spoken of.

This sentence is an absolute description of the judgment, wherein we have
these circumstances. 1. The persons standing in the judgment to be tried.
All. 1 Great, 2. Small, of what note and mark soever they be 2. The manner of
trial and proceeding with them, by the bills of enditement found out against
the^ in the opening the books. 3. The doom definitive of double nature. 1.
Absolution. 2. Condemnation according to the property and condition of their
works.

The precedencie is an introduction to this, which tells us the person of the
judge in the immediate verse before, which is Christ the Son of God, the
Son of man, John. 5.22.
to whom all the judgment is committed by the father, being the predestinate
man, by whom he will judge the world in righteousness, Act. 17.31.
whose majesty is there depicted unto us, in his orient colors, answerable in
effect to that which Augustine says: videbitur terribilis, qui visus est
contemptibilis, demonstrabit potentiam, qui demonstrauit patientiam. He shall
be seen terrible, that has been seen contemptible, and he shall manifest his
power, as he has showed his patience. And thus I pretermit the purport of the
premises with this sentence of monition given you out of Augustine: August. in
Psalm. 66.
Deuteronomy se corrigendos, dent se dirigendos, ei qui videt iudicandos. Let them
yield to be corrected, let them yield to be directed, to him that one day shall
see them all detected.

That which is first in nature, is here handled first in order: the learning
of the resurrection, the fore runner of the judgment and the consequents
thereof: taught in the very entry in these words. I saw the dead both great
and small stand before God. The resurrection is the hand that holds up
religion by the head: the life and soul of it, the first stone that we are to
lay in our spiritual building, or rather the foundation that bears up the
building, the anchor of our hope, the certainty of our salvation, called by
Tertullian, Ianua regni caelestis. The door whereat we enter into the
Kingdom of heaven, the Godly thereby going to the joys, the wicked to the
torments prepared for them: the refere^ce of our faith by the same Godly
Father, Fiducia Christianorum est resurrectio mortuorum: Our Christian
expectation is the corporal resurrection, which is grounded on the Doctrine of
Saint Paul, who brings in bundles of reasons for it by order of just
consequence thus: If there were no resurrection. 1. Then were our preaching
vain. 1. Cor. 1^ 1.
2. Your faith of none effect. 3. We should be found false witnesses. 4. The
dead were quite undone. 5. We were yet in our sins. 6. Of all men,
Christians were most miserable. As if he should have said, take away the
resurrection, and take away altogether, our preaching, your believing, burn
the Bible, throw down pulpits, lay our churches even with their foundations,
play the Epicures and belli-gods, and live as ye list. For the Books are found
liars, the Prophets and Apostles have fed us with fables, and they are as
Fountains dried up. But our foundations are in the holy hills, and not in the
valleies of humane reasons, we know what we believe, and we lay steadfast
hold of the resurrection and of faith toward Christ. Psalm. 3.21.
Who shall change our vile body that it may be fashioned like his glorious
body, according to the working, whereby he is able even to subdue all things
unto himself. But yet there is more oppugnation, and insurrection, against
this sweet Article of the resurrection, then against any parcel of Divinity
beside: the devil and his black guard, bending and banding themselves against
this, withal the might and malice that they can. 1. By Gentiles. 2. By Jews,
without and within the Liberties of the Church. Without, by the Peripatecians,
and almost all the brood of Brainsicke Philosophers and school of Epicures,
among whom, here what Seneca, Seneca ad Martiam.
one of the best of that bunch, says: Mors omnium solutio est et finis, extra
quam mala nostra non exeant. Death is the Period and determination of al
things, beyond which they cannot go. And he stands to reason it, and
maintain it in this wise: Quo modo potest miser esse qui nullus est? How can
he be a wretched man that is no man? But there are in the Church that speak
proudlye and peruersly against this excellent Divinity, either marring it
altogether, or (which is little better) making it in their own moulds, casting
clouds and fume upon the clear light of the Scriptures, making a spiritual
resurrection consisting in our renua^ce and regeneration. Such were the
Sadduces among the Jews, put to a non plus, Mat. 22.33
and silence by our Savior: Such were Hymeneus and Philetus, while the
Apostles lived and taught among them, taxed by saint Paul in his letter to
Timothee. 2. Tim. 2.1^
Such were the Athenians very troublesome to the same Apostle, no sooner he
touched this text of the resurrection, how be it they heard him willingly the
forepart of the Sermon: Act. 17.32
and suth are the mockers and scoffers of whom saint Peter speaks that this
last age should bring forth, 2. Pet. 3.4
who shall have in derision whatsoever Preachers out of Scriptures shall tell
them of the resurrection, the judgment and the worlds destruction, Such was
Simon Magus, from whom came the sect of the Simonians. Such were the
Valentinians, Carpocratians, Cardonians, Archotici, Seuerians, Basilidians,
Hierarchites, with rablements of such Locusts and Caterpillars, of whom
Augustine has entreated. Such were the Manichees that were mainely bent
against this Article, against whom saint Augustine worthyly disputes: such a
one was Martion, who was no faithful friend to the resurrection, as Tertullian
in his fifth Book witnesses. But that every mouth may be stopped, God
gloryfied, our faith strengthened, we shall. 1. by authorities of Scriptures. 2.
Sacred examples. 3. Reasons irrefragable. 4. The whole course of nature make
good this proposition, and wind it up with the use, and applycation that it
gives, and pass on to the rest.

1. In both the instruments the old and the new, we are compassed with
clouds of witnesses in the cause. Isaiah. 26.19
The Prophet Isaiah thus speaks in it. Thy dead men shall live: even with my
body shall they rise. Awake and sing ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as
the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. Lively illustration
heerof is in the dead bones, Ezech. 37.10
which by Ezechiel his prophesying upon them, recovered their joints, Dan. 12.2
sinnewes, flesh, skin, life. Daniel makes this as clear as the Sun, when
as he says: Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake,
some to everlasting life, and some to shame and perpetual contempt. Psalm. 17.16
David is as plain and open in the point. As for me, I will behold thy
presence in righteousness: and when I wake up after thy likeness, I shall be
satisfied with it. Job. 19.25
But Job strikes the nail to the head, who amidst all his perturbations and
passions, makes this profession. I am sure that my redeemer lives, and he
shall stand the last on the earth. And though after my skin worms destroy
this body, yet shall I see God in my flesh, whom I my self shall see, and
mine eyes shall behold, and noue other for me, though my reins are consumed
within me. There be more places in the old Testament besides these: but these
are bones enough to choke them that are so impudent as to say, that the old
Charter performs no testimony to this present article: or if there be any
one to be found, that it was unknown to the Fathers of those times. I am
driven to deal with the proofs of the new Testament, as Solomon did with the
brass in the Temple: it was so much he would not weigh it: they are so many,
we cannot stand upon them.

2. Examples of such as have been raised from the dead, do nourish and
fortify our faith in the resurrection, 1. Ki. 17.22 2. Kin. 4.35 Math. 9.25
Luke. 7.15 Ioh. 11.44 Act. 9.40 Act. 20.10
as of the widows Son of Zarephath raised by Elijah: of the Shunamites
Son restored by Elisha, of Iairus his Daughter, the widows Son of the
City of Naijm, Lazarus that had lain in his grave four days, brought from
death to life again by Christ, Tabytha by Peter: Eutichus by Paul.

3. There are fundamental reasons on the side of the resurrection that ought
to sway with us. 1. We draw the first from the Justice of God, which would that
the body which has partaked with the mind, in the good or badde inclinations
thereof, should be rewarded accordinglye: which not being so performed in
this life, it could never be served in number, measure, proportion, without the
resurrection. 2. We also dispute from his infinite goodness, which plenteously
rewards the well dooer: and his anger implacable, (worser, as Chrysostom
faith, then a thousand helles) which must make an end, or rather no end with
the workers of wickedness: both which were quite voided, were there a nullity of
the resurrection. 3. We further argue from the immutabilitie of his verity,
his promises being signed by the finger of his spirit, and sealed with the
blood of the Lamb, of honor, glory, peace, a crown of immortality, the
fruition of the tree of life, the sight of the glorious face of God, the
society with his Angels and Saints, the congregation of first borne, new
names, white garments, pleasures at the right hand of God, abundance of joys
for evermore: all which must take place by the resurrection. 4. Finally, our
dignity and excellency above all other creatures, (wherein we go as much
beyond them, as the Moon does the smaller Stars in glory) challenges the
same: which without the condition of the life to come, should be many ways
inferior unto them. For as the earth with the other elements are of longer
standing then man: so there be among Birds, Beasts, Fishes, that are of
greater strength and longer life then he. And whereas almost all creatures
immediately after they be producted can shift for themselves, and have either
no, or little need others: mankind only must have need of great atte^dance,
and assistance, his time is shorter then of many of the^, and his miseries more
then any of the^. Therefore there must be an other life to recompense it.

4. But because it pleases the Philosophers to arraigne the Scriptures of
folly, and measure Divinity by the line of humane wisdom, and cannot
maintain this maxim of their school a priuatione ad habitum impossibilis
regressus, from the privation to the habit, the return is impossible, unless
they flatly disclaim the resurrection: and the Atheist rubbeth his filthiness
against Gods holiness, and scorneth whatsoever is spoken out of scriptures,
(whereby our forecited testimonies, examples, reasons, grounded upon them,
concern not their profession) we will deal with them, by their own learning,
the order of nature, which is every ones Schoolemaister, and that shall stint
the strife that is between us, and make the question questionles.

There be many good resemblances in the works of nature, of the resurection in
creatures of al kinds. 1. Vegetative. 2. Sensitive. 3. Rational, which albeit
they be not proofs so pregnant: yet give they good enforcement to the present
argument.

1. Out of things vegetative, that have but a growing life: grows very good
probability of this sacred mystery. 1. Cor. 15, ^6
As of Corn, (which is Paul's comparison, and brought in by him to prove the
resurrection) which first rotteth, and dies in the ground, and again in the
spring, the renewing time of the season, reuiueth and flourishes, yea the
earth with all her stirpes, herbs, plants, yield to the wrath and wrack of
the winter, and decay, and die away: and draw their breath again at the
return of the times, and put on their new habit and attire with which they
stately mantle and adorn the surface of the earth, and plentifully serve for
the use of man.

2. To come to things sensitive: there be among them sensible and significant
signs of the resurrection, Historians of very good worth make report, that
there be certain Bears and Mice, who sleep whole winters without repast,
and that in such sort, as by no agitation, and compunction that is used, they
can be perceived to stir, until the spring of the year, when they awake
again, and show themselves abroad out of their Caves and Dens. The Indian
Bird the Phoenix (as witnesses Lactantius) is burnt to ashes by the power of
the Sun, and out of the same ashes another is quickened, whereby that kind is
preserved. The Lion missing of her pray, is longer from her whelps, who
returning finding them dead, roareth so outragiously as she recouereth them.

3. But in the reasonable and royal creature, which is man, this matter is
manifested, he is conceived an infant in his mothers womb, where of liquid
seed things of sundry natures are producted, as flesh, bones, sinews,
veins, hair: in the womb he is qualified with vital Spirits, where he
lives, moves, feeds, at the last out of the womb, as out of a winding
sheet, he comes into the world. Who is so stockish as cannot here
perceive, special good token, and tipe of the resurrection? To press this
point further, that man may be instance of man's resurrection, does not every
man every day as it were dye by his sleep, which is the ligature of his
senses and reason, there being such cognation between death and sleep, as
sleep is termed by Philosophers, Imago mortis, the Image of death, and by
Homer, Frater mortis, the Brother of death.

For what office does he perform of a living man, while he lies like a
timber logge in his dead sleep. But his sleep being dispelled, he is a new
man, and returns a fresh to his wonted labors, Do we not also see how many
are cast into sownes and traunces, which for a time seem to deprive them of
breath and life: and yet do recover themselves again. These be to me very
good memorialls of my good resurrection, and they preach the like to you.
Finally, the very distinction of the times, reads this Divinity lecture unto
us, while the day is buried in the darkness of the night, as it were in a
Sepulcher, and so rowleth a stone over it, as it cannot, until the dawning,
break out again. The like we say of the night which dies by the day. The
seasons die and depart from us, and live and return again: all things by
deformity are reformed. These be Tertullians arguments in Apologetico to
prove the resurrection against the Ge^tils. But to the adversaries of this
Doctrine, it seems against reason, and to be impossible, that of nothing any
thing should be made, and so that a body, by death as they say, resolved into
nothing, should become a body again, we answer them herein, that it is
suprarationem, non contra rationem: above reason, but not against reason it
should be so. And Potentia facientis est ratio facti. Aug. Epist. 3. ad volus.
Considera authorem, toll dubitationem, it is Augustines saying: The power of
the doer is the reason of the deed. Consider the Author and do away all
doubt, the reason of the resurrection of the creature, is the power of the
creator, there being nothing of impossible condition with God, that implies
not a contradictio^, as the schoole-me^ do distinguish. And it is false they
say: that the body by death is dissolved to nothing, for it is but turned into
his element, the earth, the Rock from which it was first hewed, the pit from
whence it was first dug and to take up the form of the speech of the
Philosopher, in materiam priman, into his first matter, of which it was first
made, into which it shall be marred, and out of which it shall be made again.
Why should it seem to you harder for God, to restore that which once was, then
to create at the first of nothing that which never was? Are Artificers and
workmen in Metalles able to dissolve such vessels as they list, and to make
them new again? Can Glasiers do the like in that brittle ware? to let pass
Potters, and Plodders in clay, who can mar and make any vtensill of that
fragile nature, as many times as they please. And shall not the great master
workman of the whole world be able to do the like? Spend and disperse my
body, so far as force of imagination will suffer you, suppose a Beast eats
it, an other beast prays upon him, and that beast again is devoured by
birds, those Birds are incorporated by men, and so my substance is after many
concoctions and degrees, transfused into many men's substance: the Lord shall
sunder and divide them again, as well as the Craftes-me^ can part sundry metals
that are moulten together.

But we are not to conceive, that every thing that gives increase to the
bodies substance, is to rise again in the resurrection: but that every one
shall have such sufficiency of dimensions, as shall serve for a perfect and
absolute body. But be it that the body is to take up that stature in the
resurrection, which is laid down by dissolution (as some stiflie defend it,
whom we will not offend in it, with the restrictions and cautions that
Augustine speaks of, that we free it of deformity, De Ciuit. lei lib, 22,
cap, 20.
infirmity, tarditie, impuritie) and be it never so piece-meale divided
according to the former supposition, the like whereof Augustine makes in the
same place, every part must again be restored to the right owner, as being
but borrowed for the time, as the same father says.

But we conclude this, with these grave and reverend words of this man: Absit
vt sinus vllus, secretumque naturae, ibidem.
ita recipiat aliquid subtractum sensibus nostris, vt omnium creatoris aut
lateat cognitionem, aut effugiat potestatem. Be it far from us to think
that any secret place, or conueyance of nature, should so hide any thing
removed from our senses, as it may be kept from the knowledge of the Creator,
or escape his power.

It remains that we reap the Harvest of this Doctrine, and the Vintage this
Divinity gives us: much being to be gathered and gleaned from hence.

1. The resurrection is a comfort to the Godly, and a corsiue to the wicked.
So our Savior Christ says of it: Ioh. 5.29.
They shall come forth that have done good to the resurrection of life: but
they that have done evil to the resurrection of condemnation.

Hear the Godly sow in tears, they shall then reap in joy: here they
labor and are heavy laden, there they shall rest from their labors, and take
out their general quietus est. And that is the rekoning David makes of it
saying: Psalm. 16.9.
Mine heart is glad, my tongue rejoices, and my flesh also does rest in hope,
the effect of the resurrection as the addition shows: For thou shall not
leave my soul in grave, neither will thou suffer thine holy one to see
corruption. Wherefore the resurrection is styled by Peter, Act. 3.19 Ma. 5.4.6
Reu. 17.1 Revel. 21
the time of refreshing: for the hungry shall be satisfied, which is their
refreshing: the mourners comforted, which is their refreshing: all tears wiped
away from our eyes, which is our refreshing: death shall be no more, nor
sorrow, nor crying, nor any more pain, which is our gracious general
refreshing.

The resurrection as Augustine says: August Psalm. 10.
Est formidenda malis propter paenam: amanda bonis propter coronam. It is
fearful to the wicked for the stroke of Justice: it is welcome to the Godly
for the crown of righteousness. As two that are cast into the Jail, the one
for a Capital, the other for a common offense, entertain the time of the
assizes and coming of the Judge, with contrary affection, as being this man's
absolution, and the other man's condemnation, and therefore the one is
encouraged, and the other is cast down, when this time comes: so the good in
the resurection hold up their heads, for their jail delivery and redemption
is at hand, the bad hang down their heads, and are out of soul, for their
swift damnation comes. This calls upon us for our speedy repentance, least
that day as a snare unawares come upon us: For such as this time leave us, such
shall that time find us: Qualis quisque in isto die moritur, Iug. hesych pist,
8
talis in die illo iudicabitur: as a man dies in this day, so shall he be
judged in that day.

2. The certain expectation of the resurrection, and the due and duetiful
meditation of it, serves to rouse us up from our beds of security, to take
us by the elbowes and set us on our feet, and much fruit grows upon the
stalk. It powers water upon the Furnace of our furious affections and cools
them, it is the watch and the dyall by which we are directed to spend our time,
and it is the fan that fifteth and winnoweth the pelf from the corn, the
staff of our journey toward heaven more fortunate then Jacobs was, with which
he passed over Jordan, the star that leads the Godly wise to the heavenly
Bethlehem, where Christ is, as the Commet led the wisemen of the east to
Bethlehem where Christ was.

He that has a yearly great inheritance may spend somewhat liberally, but he
that owes more then he is worth must not spend an idle penny, as being to
stand to the courtesy of his creditor that will call him to a reckoning. It so
fares with us, we are already much cast behind hand, as having spent too much
time already upon our pleasures and our sins: it remains now that we apply
our selves to the Appostles counsel, to redeem the time, because the days
are evil, and to join in petition to God with David; O let me live and
recover my self, before I go hence, and be no more seen. The serious thought
of this drove Ierom to his dumpes, and pricked him in the quickest vain,
whatsoever he went about, hearing the voice of the judgment sounding in his
ears, of which he says thus: sieve vigilo sieve dormio, sieve aliquidaliud ago,
videor mihi audire vocem hanc in aure mea, surgite mortui, venite ad iudicium:
whether I awake or sleep, or whatsoever else I do, I seem to hear this
voice, ringing in mine ears. Awake ye dead and come to judgment. The sound of
this trumpet awaketh us all, and it is a Spur to the Godly to prick them unto
virtue, and a bridle to the wicked to hold them in from vice. While the
Apostle fed upon this, as upon a restoratiue. That the resurrection of the dead
should be of the just and unjust, how it wrought, he tells us. In this
respect I endeavor my self to have always a clear conscience toward God
and man. Act. 24.15.16.


3. The faith in the resurrection serves to scatter our inordinate passions,
which naturally strangle us for our deceased friends and to keep them within
the limits and bounds of orderly moderation.

While we consider how death that slays us all, is slain in the elect by
the general resurrection, that non obijt, sed abijt: non amisimus sed premisin
us. He is not lost, Genesis 15.15 Number. 27.13
but left for a while, he is but gone with Abraham to his fathers, as here
living, but among strangers: he is but gathered to his people with Moses, as
being here but scattered: his flesh sleeping and resting in hope with David's,
Psalm. 16.9.
easing himself after such wearysome labors of this life, which being
finished he arises there fully to his endless felicitye, his soul all the
while being in Gods custodye, and his spirit in the hands of the Lord of the
spirits of all flesh, as David teaches us in his last will and testament,
leaving his kingdom to his Son, his carkas to the soil, and to God his soul,
Psalm. 31.5.
saying: Into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord
thou God of truth, which the second David of the seed of David sampleth,
committing his soul to no other keeper, then to the Creator as being there
most sure, as the Apostle says: Luk 23, 46
I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded, 2. Tim. 1, 12
that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against that day.

4. While we assertaine our selves of the resurrection, and rest our selves in
that as Doves in the cleftes of the rocks, we are armed and prepared against
the terror of death, for we consider how God has turned it into our benefit,
and made it our entrance into a better life, our passage from a prison to a
palace, from a tabernacle to an abiding City: from a region of death, to the
land of the living: from the life of men, to the life of Angels: from a body
of humillitie, to a body of glory: from the vale of tears, to that mount of
Sion, where the Lamb is gathering the Saints about him, to the copartnershippe
of those joys, which he himself enjoys according to that which the Apostle
says: 2, Cor, 5, 1
We know that when our earthly house of this tabernacle shall be
dissolved: we have a building given of God, which is an house not made with
hands, but eternal in the heavens.

What man has been thrown into a deep dungion without light of Sun or
Mooneful of Serpents, and all vile creatures, would not be glad to be set at
liberty? our death and resurrection is this great mutation, the body being
the prison of the soul, and the grave the prison of the body: the body being
as full of sins as any prison is of Serpents in this life, and heaven being
the palace of our endless pleasures. What man makes not have for his life
out of an old house ready to fall? our bodies are no better then old clay:
cottages ready to drop down: our spirit is but vapor and fume, our garments
are corruption, the worm and cancker, our portion, the earth, the womb that
did conceive us, and the earth, the womb that must receive us. If a skillful
Pilote shall foresee and foretell a storm, shall not the Mariners have all
that they may toward the Haven? Christ our great Ship-maister has forespoken
many storms in the sea of this world: hie we therefore to heaven, which is our
haven, to the key-side of the kingdom of God, and to the land of the living,
the landing place of us all. In the joined Battle with the worldly enemy, when
our soldiers are strooken with gun shot on al sides, and our fellows fall
before us, and behind us, on the right hand, and the left, what a happy turn
is it for the enemy to turn his back to us, and betake him to his heels,
and how would this quicken and hearten our Spirits? but by the resurrection,
all the ranckes and Classeis of our enemies, the devil, death, condemnation,
turn us their back parts and fly away from us. The day labourer is glad
when the day is at an end, for the^ his rest and his reward begins: the end
of this life is the end of our labor, and then our rest and reward without end
begins.

Every man is glad at the departure of Winter, and at the approach of Summer:
this life of ours is but a troublesome Winter, the life that is to come is the
joyful Summer season.

He is a brainelesse beggar indeed, that would not put off his rotten rags,
to be clad with royal robes: our hides that cover us are paltrie leather
coats, and as filthy as any Beggars weeds: but in the other life we shall
be clothed with the white garment of Christ's innocence, who shall change the
vile raiment of our bodies, and shall deck them with all glory and Majesty
suitable to his body. The traveler that has been long in far parts, is a
glad man when his business are at an end, that he may return to his wife,
children, and friends: our life is but a weariesome pilgrimage, of few and
evil days: by death and the resurrection we have a merry meeting withal our
kindred, and dear friends departed in the Lords fear. He that is outlawed
and banished for debt, is made a merry man by his calling home again, and the
cancelling that debt: we live here debtors and banished men, the Lord calls
us home by the way of our death, and throws all our tickets of accounts into
the sea. Why therefore should not our hearts skip like Rams within our bellyes
for joy? If David, Paul, Peter, John, or any of these great men and dear
Saints of God, the fingers of Gods hand, and sacred actuaries and penmen of
his Counsels, might be sent down from heaven unto us, we would be glad to
take the widest perambulation that is, to look any of them on the face: but
in the resurrection, we shall see all the glorious company of the prophets,
the fellowship of the Apostles, the noble army of Martirs, and his holy
Angels, yea Christ himself face to face, wherefore we have cause to wish and
welcome this our resurrection.

5. I note also this advantage in the resurrection that the faithful have: it
is their Bul-warke and wall of brass against all temptations, the City of
refuge amidst their persecutions in this world, the soul of the inward man,
and blessed be God which has showed us this kindness in a strong City.
This was armor of proof to Job against all the fiery Darts of the devil
thrown against his patience, Job, 19.25,
whereby he was more then Conqueror, whilst his heart like Mount Sion, which
could not be removed, was fixed and fastened upon the resurrection.

And this was as it were the latter gracious rain in the heat and drought of
summer, which refreshed the inheritance of God, even the souls of his Saints,
and as the sweet wood thrown into the waters of Marah that took away the
bitterness of it, when in the days of Antiochus they were under the Cross,
and endured strange torments: for they looked as the Spirit of God says: for a
better resurrection. Heb. 11.3^
David by this Target that covered his heart could fight like a man, and break
every Spear that was lift up against him, and was in a readiness for every
enemy when he came in the gate, of which he doubted not to make this godly
boast saying. Though I walk through the midst of the shadow of death, Psalm.
23.4
I will fear none evil: for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff comfort
me. Phil. 1.21
This made Paul to say that it was life for him to die, because it was lucre
and gain to him. And the same Apostle being the mouth of the rest says:
Therefore we faint not, 2. Cor. 4.2
because we know though the outward man perish, the inward man shall be renewed
daily, while we look not on the things that are seen, but on the things that
are not seen. For that which the left hand of nature pulls down, the right
hand of the creator shall build up again. The destruction of our earthly
mansion is the construction of our heavenly habitation, it is the same Apostles
profession: 2. Cor. 5
We know that when the earthly house of this tahernacle be destroved: we shall
have a house not made with hands, Judge. 5.23.
but eternal in the heavens. For this cause curse ye Atheists as the Angel did
Meroz because they go not out with us to fight in the Lords cause in the
resurrection. Sa. 1.21
As David pronounced a curse on the mountains of Gilboa that the clouds might
never drop upon those clods, because there the shieldes of the mighty were
cast down: so a cursle of all cursses and the full vial of the Lords
malidiction be powered upon the bodies and souls of all unrepentant
Atheistes, whose hearts are so hooped and bound about with infidelity, as
they have thrown down this shield and buckler of all their expectation, which
is the resurrection:

But the blessing of the Lord be on the mountains of Armenia which gave rest
unto the Arc: and blessed be all those Christian bodies and souls that rest
upon this, and let this rest with them, the Arc and the Cofer of his most
gracious promises. And oh that David's fools that say there is no God, and so
no resurrection, who I fear are too rife in this Royal City, had the marks
of knowledge set upon them, as the Leprous person had, whose garments were
split, whose head and lips were covered, who was enjoined to proclaim, as he
passed by, I am unclean, I am unclean: that all that see them might point at
them, and say, There, there: Behold an Atheist, behold an Atheist, who are dead
while they live (by the sentence of Socrates) because all the cares of their
life are but to live: Non viuit cui nihil est in mente nisi vt viuat. He lives
not, that minds nothing but to live, or as the Roman Emperor said: cui
nihill in vita dulcius est vita: to whom nothing in this life is sweeter the^
life: whose estate therein is no better then a stone, viuit et lapis says St.
Augustine: a stone it self lives. But they are dead and dead again, as St.
Jude says: and to be plucked up by the roots, Mar. 11.13
as the Fig Tree blasted by Christ his lips: dead by natural vegetation, dead
by spiritual execration. From the subject of the resurrection, we are led by
the hand of the Text, to the tractat of the judgment. And first to the
circumstance of the persons in the judgment to be tried, Al great and small,
without any difference of sex, or sort. So says Esaias in the person of God:
Isai. 45.23.
Every knee shall bow unto (...), etc St. Paul confirms it, saying: We
shall all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, To. 14.10.
not one shall escape: so he concludes it in the same place, five or one of us
(...) give accounts of himself to God. To. 14.12. John. 5.
This proposition is always indefinitely delivered. All that are in the graves
shall hear the voice of Christ, and come forth to judgment. All nations shall
be gathered before him. Mat. 13.15.
He shall give to every one according to his works. Wherefore the Lords
judgment is compared to a Barbers Raser, which shall have the hair of the
head and the feet, even the highest and the lowest, the Pesant and the Prince.
Isai. 7.20. Isai. 8.8.
It is compared to a violent rage of waters, which shall not only fill the
channells, and the valleys below, but shall cover the tops of the prowdest
mountains. Men lay their nets for the smaller fish, but the Lord tra^meleth
for the great Leuiathan, Job. 40.20.
and casts a line unto his tongue, and peirceth his nostrilles with a hook,
Isai. 27.1.
he has Tewe for the great Dragon, and the crocodile in the waters, as the
prophet Esaias says. There is no running behind a tree with Adam, behind a
Tent with Sara, or covering our selves with a veil with Thamar. There is no
running into the hoales of Rocks, or into the Caves of the earth from the
glory of his Majesty. The Mountains cannot cover us, the hills cannot hide
us, from the anger of him that sits upon the Throne, and of the Lamb. Isai.
22. Psalm. 62. Joel. 2.9
Though we make our nest in a Rock, yet shall we be as a tottering wall, and
as a broken hedge. Gods judgment shall run upon the wall, climb up upon the
houses, and enter in at the windows like a Thief. No secret or sacred place
shall then shrowde us: ^ephan, 1
but Jerusalem shall be searched with lanterns: whereby make conjecture what
shall be become of Babylon. When the judgment of waters came upon the first
world, there was an Arc and a Bark to rescue Noah and his famely. When the
judgment of fire, licked up Sodom and Comorra like dry stubble, yet Lot was
exempted, and the little City Zoar appointed him to run unto. But the
universal judgment spares none, there is no covenant to be made with it. Isa.
30.33. Wisd. 6.
Tophet is prepared for the King and the mighty shall be mightily tormented.
The Lord puts this text into his servant Ieremies mouth: Say unto the King and
the Queen. Humble your selves, Iere. 13.18
sit down, for the Crown of your glory shall come down. The great
mountain before Zorobabell shall be made plain: it is the prophecy and
aphorism of the Prophet. Corrupt Judges shall then stand at the Bar before
their judge, and be condemned, as Shebna was. Isai. 22.8.
The jdle, jdoll Bishopes and Ministers shall then be cut of in that day, as he
once cut of three of the^ in a month. Zach. 11.8.
Blasphemers who now throw out oaths as mad men throw stones, shall be
sentenced to death, Leui. 24.10
as that Son of the Egiptian was, that was overwhelmed with stones and died:
False witnesses, Zach. 11.5
under the burden of whom the earth now groaneth, shall then be served with a
witness, and shall reap the fruit, their wickedness have plowed, as the
accusers of Daniel were handled. Dan. 6.24
All thieves and especially the Clerophagi of our time, that ingrosse the
patrimony of the Church, and say among themselves: Come let us take to our
selves the house of God in possession, who have already broken down the
carved works thereof with axes, and hammers shall be condemned in the judgment
with Achan, who stole a wedge of gold and a Babilonish garment, Josue. 7.
and be led to execution. All Politicians and counterfeit Christians, that
look under the brow, and run with the stream and tide of the times, to
engrosse the prosperity and plenteousnes thereof, shall in the judgment be
stricken out of life, Acts. 5.
as Ananias, and Saphira were. Our Popish heretics, and all maintainers of
Heretical Prauitie and Purloyners and Barterers of Gods holy mysteries, rather
then they shall want executioners, their own parents shall be glad of the
office, Zach. 13.3.
and shall thrust the^ through.

Finally let all the sort of Schismatiques that fight under the standard of
their grand Captains Korah and his accomplices, Numb. 16.
and would vnioynt government, tremble at their judgment, the earth opening
and swallowing up Dathan, and covering the congregation of Abiram. Of which
says saint Augustine: Quis dubitauerit hoc esse sceleratius co^missum quod est
grauius vindicatum? Who does doubt that this is heynously committed, which is
of the Lord so highlye punished? When a Noble man in case of treason is brought
to Westminster Hal to be arraigned, the people in admiration thereof, run in
flocks and heaps thither: But what a sight will there be that judgment Hall,
where the Lord will hold his Assizes, so many Princes and Pote^tates, shall stand
without guard or retenue, naked, and trembling, yearning, and eating their
tongues through grief, and shall receive sentence not only capital, but
eternal. If all the bodies that ever were borne, might be now seen in one
heap, what a fearful spectackle would it make? but there shall be this
object in the general judgment, to strike us all with amazement.

2. The next circumsta^ce is the manner of the trial, and judicial proceeding
with the persons co^uented in the judgment, and that is, by the books and
evidences that are put in against the^: wherein what is meant by these books,
and how many books there are, it is to be considered. By the books I
understand the certain and infallible knowledge of God, his remembrance and
care of al things, especially of such as concern his chose^ ones: so as their
number and names are before his eyes, as if he had amanuenses, registers and
Scriueners to make enrolme^t of the^. For as he numbreth the stars and calls
the^ al by their names: as he keeps tale of the hairs of our head, so as not
one of the^ fall away from us without his foreknowledge: as his providence
stretches it self to the ha^dful of meal of the woman of zarepthah, and to
the pitcher of oil of the preachers widow: to the fall of a sparrow from the
house top to the clothing of the lilleis, and grass of the field: to the
prouission of the young Ravens that call upon him: so much more keeps he a
Calendar of our doings, and sets our secret sins in the sight of his
countenance. Thus Metaphoricallie in this sense are Books given to God, the
spirit here alluding to the custom of the wise, to Princes, Universities,
Merchants, Masters of families and such like. Princes use to have a bill of
the names of such as appertain unto them, that they may know what number they
have, and how to provide for them in time. So the Lord has his court in
heaven, to which he has not chosen al, but some before the foundations of the
world were laid. Now the number and names of such, he keeps in as sure and
sweet remembrance, as if he had put them into writing Tables for the purpose.
As God said to Moses, I know thee by thy name: Exo. 35.12
as Christ says of himself to the Church. John 10.3.
He calls his own sheep by name, and else where: Luke 10.20
willing them to rejoice, because their names were written in heaven.
Universities do the like: when they admit any into their corporation, they
cataloguize their names: Merchants and Houshoulders serve their memories in
matters of moment, by notes that they keep of them. So this is the reason and
cause of the Metaphor, and the signification of the Books, so often remembered
in divine learning. Gods mind therefore is his book: the Tables of our hearts
are the writing Tables, as well as parchme^t skrolles, wherein are things
engrossed. The omniscience of God is the writing it self. Things are said to
be written in a book, that is in the sacred secrets of his breast, as he
knows them altogether.

We find three books given to God in the Scriptures. 1. One is of his
Providence, and foreknowledge of all things before ever they were. 2. Another
is of the judgment. 3. The other is of life. The sweet singer of Israel
says. Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being imperfect, Psalm. 139.16.
and in thy book were all my members written, which day by day were facioned,
when as yet there was none of them. There is the first book of his providence,
and foreknowledge. 2. The second which is the book of judgment has two Tomes
or volumes. 1. The first is his understanding of all our works and words,
according to which he will award Judgment in the day of judgment: so as this
is instead of a roll in Gods hand, wherein the names of all delinquents are
set down, and the quality of their doings. 2. The other Tome is the book of
every ones conscience, which shall perform testimony to things done and
undone, which may also be entitled the book of life, that is of this life:
which divine operation in the conscience accusing or excusing, scientia
conscientiam the knowledge, the conscience, has the name of a book, because
in that in a manner is read, whatsoever by the agent has been hid. 3. The
third book is inscribed the book of life, that is of Gods predestination to
eternal life: which is begun in this life by our steadfast faith in Christ,
according to the words of Christ, He that believes in me has eternal life,
that is the inchoation and first fruits thereof, after death it must have
consummation and perfection. So the book of life is a register or role in the
Lords right hand of the names of such as are preordinated to everlasting life,
whom God will always acknowledge to be his, John. 13.8. 2. Tim. 1.19
as our Savior says: I know whom I have chosen, as St. Paul says: The Lord
knows who are his. This book is often spoken of in the scriptures, as by
Moses: Exo. 32.32.
when he says: Raze me out of thy book which thou have written. Psalm. 69.29
By David, Let the^ be put out of the book of life, and not be written among
the righteous. By Isaiah he shall be called holy, Isai. 4.3.
that shall be written among the living in Jerusalem. Ezech. 13.9
By Ezechiel, They shall not be written in the writings of the house of Israel.
By Daniel: Dan. 12.1.
Every one shall be delivered, that shall be found written in the book. The new
Testament does often entreat of it: Luke 10.20
Christ touches it saying: Rejoice because your name is written in heaven,
that is, in the book of life: Phil. 4.3.
so does Paul when he says, I believe thee faithful yoake-fellow help those
women which labored with me in the Gospel, with Clement also, and with other
my fellow laborers, whose names are in the book of life: so does the spirit
elsewhere in the Revelation. There shall enter in it no unclean thing, Reuela.
21.27
neither whatsoever works abhominatio^ (...)

Now these books shall be opened, that is the Lord whose fiery eyes of his
omniscie^ce peirceth al things, that holds the ball of the world in his
hands, and keeps a perfect reckoning of our doings, shall set every ones
several sin in his sight. And this divine power shall smite open the doors of
our consciences, which shall call to remembrance our forepassed misdeeds and
convict and condemn them. For there is a book that is written in our hearts,
which is of the works of the law, the Lord having imprinted in the^ the
notio^s of the^: as naturally enduing the very heathens with judgment to
divide good from evil, and to discern between things honest and dishonest,
that no man might hold up for his defense, the target of ignorance. This we
shall soon perceive by our cursory conference of the ten commandments, with
their politic sanctions. 1. Of the first which teaches that there is a God
whom we al stand bound to worship, the Orator Cicero says: Cicero Legibus.
Nulla gens tam sera nulla tam barbara natio, in quibus non misideat deorum
opinio. There is no nation so wild and barbarous, that is not persuaded that
there is a God. The Athenians did set up an Alter, Ignoto Deo, the unknown
God. Protagoras, Act. 17.
Abderites that said: Whether there be Gods or no, I have nothing to say, was
by the Athenians banished for it.

2. To the second, which is an inhibition of Idolatry the Persians gave
consent, who as Strabo writes (...) abomination, burned and destroyed their
Temples and their Images. Cornelius Tacitus storyeth it of the ancient
Germans, that they held it very unbeseeming the heavenly Majesty, to mure
him up within private walls, and according to humane shape to shadow him. And
Numa the second King of the Romans (as Plutarch relates) held it very
heinous, that any should comprehend the invisible God, under the similitude of
a visible creature.

3. The third precept against blasphemy, and profane use of this great name,
was as duly practiced among them. Theophrastus notes Pericles with his
inckhorne for an absurd fellow, as showing to a friend of his in his sickness,
certain charms, which old Beldams had tied about his neck, under which the
name of God was inuocated and profaned. Tullus Hostilius was stricken out of
life, by a thunder bolte, and was deprived of solemnity of funeralles, because
it was in his mind to have called out Jupiter, and so to have cast abuse upon
his name.

4. The fourth of the Sabbath, was by them solemly observed: which their Laws
in that behalf provided, abundantly do testify, but herein we are to give
them the blame, that they pestred and cloyed the Religion of the Sabbath with
such a crew of jdle and nastie ceremonies.

Now this common sentence of theirs, then in every ones mouth, That which thou
would not have done to thee, do not to another, is the sum and Epitomie
of the cannons of the second Table: but yet let us in a word particularize upon
them.

5. How they esteemed of Parents, and of the aged, and gray headed, that go
also in Divinity, under the name of parents, be their own Authors judges. It
is Menanders saying: (...),
The great Gods are to wisemen their Parents.
The same Poet also says: (...).
I will that thou have thy Parents in all honor.


Valerius gives us a memorable example of a Daughter, who being charged upon
pain of death, not to bring any succor to her Mother, being adjudged to die
by famishment in prison, having access to her, relieved her nothwithstanding
with the milk of her breasts, which was so admired as it effected the woman's
pardon. But how could this have been says Valerius, had not the very instinct
of nature, weitten this law of love within her heart? hence it is that Solon,
thought it superfluous to give a decree against Parricides, as not imagining
that any could so put off nature, as to bereave them of their life, of whom
they had their life. And how they rogarded those that were in years, Parents
for their age, this custom of theirs shows Credebant hoc grande nefas, et
morte piandum:
Si Iuuenis vetulo non assurrexerit.


They did account it a prodigious impiety and capital, for the young men not to
rise up, and to do reverence to the aged.

6. Murder was of that execrable nature unto them, as Romulus confounds
these two words together, homicidium and parricidium: adiudging homicide and
Paricide al one: yea the punishment thereof was so exquisite, as there was not a
man slain by private hand within the walls of Rome, for the space of six
hundred and twenty years after that City was founded, as Dion Halicarnasseus
does report.

7. How by nature the heathens abhorred whoredom, and were therein a law unto
themselves, before the law of God was given: the examples of Pharao, and
Abimilech shows, who assaulted Sara in ignorance that she was another wife.

8. Theft, by the Athenian Lawgiver, Draco was punished by death: and by Solon
by double damage: and by the Romans, according to the proportion of the
felony, yea Usury which is thefts Daughter, is consorted by Cato the elder to
murder.

9. They made such provision against false testimony as it was enacted among
the^, that none should be a witness in his own cause though the matter were never
so mean as Cicero says. Cic. 2. Osi.
And their saw also excepted against such, who were known to be enemies to
that person, against whom they should give witness, as the same Orator tells
us, giving us this reason for it: Ementiuntur enim sape in eos quos oderunt:
Men will easily lie against such whom they hate: among the Indians every liar
was very sharply censured.

10. The last was very requisite to curb our affections: Sophocles calls
this affection of coveting that is an others, a furious commander. It was the
answer of Leonides to Xerxes, egging him to defection, and promising him the
Grecian monarchy, upon that condition: If thou knew what things were
honest in this life, thou would forbear to covet that which is another: as
for me I had rather die then do it.

But here the natural man's conscience is as a book clasped, and shut up, every
man being willingly ignorant of that, which the Lord with an iron pen has thus
written in his heart, either not acknowledging his misdoings with Giezi, who
could say to his Master, 2. King. 5.
Thy servant was no where, or else pleading a good intention in defense of a
bad actio^, 1. Sam. 15.
as Saul did to Samuel that under color of sacrifice would protect (...)
disobedience. If there be but a bush in the thicket of Paradise, Genesis 3.
thither will Adam convey himself to shrowde his nakedness: and if there be
any shift in the world though it be never, so balde and miserable, the Sons
of Adam will be boulde with it. David would never have known the man that was
Nathans declamation, and the principal of the Parable: if the Preacher had not
plucked him by the sleeue, and roundlye made him the applycation of it, saying:
Thou art the man. The accusers of the woman taken in adultery, drew a formal
Bil of indictment against her, 2. Sam. 12. John. 8.
and followed it to the full: But when Christ wylled them to lay their hands
upon their own hearts, they put up their papers and shrunk away suddenly.

If an oath would have gone for payment, Peter had a lusty one at commaundent
in the denial of his Master, to put of a danger, I know not the man. So long
as there were eleven else, upon whom Christ's prediction of a traitor to come
out of the company of the twelve, Math. 26.
might be cast, Judas would make a question of it, though he knew it to be
questionles, Master is it I? But in the judgment Adam shall be put besides his
apron of fig leaves, Sara besides her Tent, Thamer besides her mask, and
every man's conscience shall say unto him, as Achab to Elias: Have thou found
me, O my enemy? Quando Deus iudex erit, alius testis quam conscientia tua, non
erit. (...) iudicem ius^um, et conscientiam tuam, August. (...) Psalm. 36
noli^^mere nisi causam tuam. Si causam malam non habueris nullum accusatorem
pertimnesces: nullam falsum testem refelles, nullum veru^ requires. When God
(says Augustine) shall be thy judge, there shall be no other witness then thy
conscience Between this just judge and thy conscience doubt nothing but thy
cause: if thy cause be not bad thou shall fear no promooter, thou shall not
challendge any false witness, nor call for any that is true. Again says the
same father: Interrogat te non alium de te: interrogat te, non vt discat a te,
sed vt coufu^dat te. He asks thee, not any other of thee: he asks thee,
not to learn of thee, but to confound thee. Augustine gives us a coppie of the
indictment by the judge, which shall be put to the conscience to reply unto,
formed in this wise: Suscepi dolores tuos vt tibi gloriam darem: suscept mortem
tuam vt in eternum viueres, conditus iacui in sepulchro vt tu regnares in
caelo. Cur quod pro te pertuli perdidisti? Read mihi vitam tuam, pro qua meam
dedi. Tu despexisti in ^omine deum, in infitmo salutem, in via reditun, in
Iudice venia^, in crace vitani, in supplicijs medicinam. I undertook thy
sorrows to bring thee to glory, I suffered this death to give thee eternal
life: I lay buried in earth, that thou might reign in heaven: why have thou
lost that which I have bought? Give me this life, for which I gave thee mine.
Thou have despised in man, this God: in infirmity, this strength: in the way,
thy return: in the judge, thy pardon: in the torments, thy medicines. To all
this shall the conscience, which is instead of a thousand witnesses give
testimony and consent, which shall be as Barnard says: Testis, Iudex, Tortor,
witness, Judge, Executioner: Ipsa accusat, Ipsa iudicat, ipsa punit, Ipsa
damnat. That inditeth, that judges, that punishes, that damneth. The shield
of ignorance which we shall then hold up, shall be turned into a spiders web. The
conviction of the conscience is an argument irresistable. The truth whereof by
sencible experience is known to every one, that has but a dram of ordinary
understanding. For howsoever we may bleare the eyes of men, yet we cannot
pluck out the eyes of our mind and knowledge. We may beguile a Judge by
subtlety, and terrify an informer by our insolency, but we cannot escape
the arraignment and judgment of conscience, which maugre our hearts, shall
sift our misdeedes to the coursest branne, bring them to the light, proclaim
them on the house top, and shall set down torments before us, for time and
times, and when there shall be no more time, and set nothing but terrors about
us, which the Poets understand, fuciarum taedis ardentibus, by the burning
tapers of furious and hellish hagges. To conclude, our selves being judges, we
cannot be acquainted. And there cannot be a greater punishment in humane
invention, then thus to carry our accuser in our bosom, and this is the
Opening of the books, here spoken of Gods omniscience calling into our
knowledge all our misdeedes and our vnrestie conscience in the guiltines
thereof, openly acknowledging them.

We have many duties red us in this lecture of the opening of the books. 1.
As first of humiliation and repentance. This was that the Apostle would infer
out of the Sermon that he made to the Athenians of the judgment, the Text
whereof was: Act. 17.32
The Lord has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in righteousness.
For all our new Doctrine, we keep still the old conversation. But for Gods
sake let us think of the count day, and prevent the judgment to come with
newnes of life, as Jacob by rewards sent before him, aswadged the fury of his
Brother Esau. Let us meet the Lord in the way, Amos. 4.12. 1. Sam. 25.
it is the counsel of the Prophet Amos: As Abigail met David in the way to her
great good. For by this she stayed the sword of his vengeance: and by this we
shall stay a more devouring sword, drawn long ago out of the scabbard of his
patience. To this end says the Apostle: If we would judge our selves, 1. Cor.
11.31
we should not be judged. A former judgment taken out of our selves, shall be a
Supersedeas to the second judgment that must else come out against us. To the
due performance whereof these four things are required. 1. A due examination of
our selves, 2. Kings. 5
because the flesh is as Giezie that lies to his Master, that is to his
soul, and will not acknowledge what it has done. Wherefore as Elisha examined
him: so must the soul examine the body. Judge. 16.6.
And as Dalilah examined Sampson in what part his strength was, so is every
one to examine himself in what part his weakness is. As Iehu did examine
Iehonadab, 1. King. 10.15
whether his heart stood right toward him, so we are to examine our selves
whether our heart stand right toward God. Paul wills us to try althings:
wherefore it follows by needful consequence, 1. These. 5.
that we should try our selves.

Isaac tried his Children before he blessed them. Solomon tried who was the
right mother: The Ephramites were tried before they could pass Iorda^:
Grasiers try their Oxen, Merchans their gold, wisemen their servants. Therefore
we are much more to try our selves. 2. Having found out our sins in the next
room, we must confess them unto the Lord. In this duty lies a great part
of Gods glory, as Joshua says to Achan: My Son give glory to God and confess
what thou have done: Iosue 7 Cypian.
It is Ciprians grave saying, Somnium narrare vigilantis est, et vitia
confiteri sanitatis indicium est. To deliver our dream, it is a token of
wakefulnesse, and to acknowledge our misdeedes, it is a sign of
healthfulnesse: which Seneca shows by similitude when he says: Vulnera
clausa plus cruciant. Seneca.
Wounds that are stopped, are more paineful to us: which has just application
unto the stoppage of our spiritual wounds. And how they will torment us
Gregory delivers: Si non confessus lates, inconfessus damnaberis. it
vnco^fessed thou have hid, Greg.
unconfessed thou shall be damned. 3. Upon this our confession we must
proceed unto a judgment and comdemnation of our selves, to stop the greater
judgment and comdemnation. Wherefore August. says: Aug.
Peccatum puniendum est aut ate, aut a deo: si punitur a te, tune punitur sine
te: si vero a te non punitur, tecum punietur. Sin must either be punished by
thee or by God, If it be punished by thee, it shall be punished without thee.
If it be not punished by thee, it shall be punished with thee. Wherefore Bernard
takes bond by decree of himself to perform this part of duty. Bernard in
Canti. sermon. 24.
He says he will present himself to his judge, Iudicatus non iudicandus,
already judged, and not be judged. 4. Lastly to save our selves from
destruction, let us call for the Psalm of mercy for our neck-verse, which is
so infinite, as no affection of nature, or proportion of creature is able to
express. The height of the heaven above the earth, the wideness from the east
to the west, the tender love of Parents to their Children, of Eagles to their
young ones, are but light shadows and resemblances thereof, they are not
equal rules and measures of it. The mercy of God is the mother that
conceiueth us, the nurse that feeds us, and that which shall keep us for
ever and ever says Cassiodorus.

2. It is also caution and provision against rash judgment, it is the use and
applycation, the Apostle makes of it in two places: 1. Cor. 4.3.
as when he says, Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who
lighten things that are hid in darkness, and make the counsels of the heart
manifest. To. 14.10.
Again, Why do thou judge thy Brother, for we must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ. To God only appertains the judgment, and the
judicial seat he keeps only to himself, wherefore Christ says: Judgment
is mine. Wherefore what a presumption is this for the prisoner that must stand
at the Bar to be judged, to take the room on the bench that belongs unto
the Judge? the Lord will be sure to recompense this saucines with retaliation of
judgment, as he insinuates in this his cautio^, Judge not and ye shall not be
judged. But this is the common disease of our nature and as kind unto us, as
the skin that we carry about us, we will give judgment of a man's inclination
if we but see his outward behauionr and action. As if he looks downward we
will note him for an Hypocrite: If upward, we conclude him to be proud: If
sile^t too severe, if somewhat pleasant and talkatiue to be too remiss. If
somewhat frugal too covetous, if somewhat liberal too careless, if somewhat
costly in apparel too lascivious, if somewhat familiar a flatterer, if
somewhat grave, stoical. There was a fellow shot his fools bolte at Pompey,
and argued him of effeminate nature, for he scratched his head forsooth with
one of his fingers, and that was the luxate logique to conclude it. This Hydra
does more hurt then any one can divine, yea even in the church among us: while
he that is formal takes the other side to be too peevish, and those that
would reform take us to be too Popish. For my part I shall judge of them in
love, and if they shall judge of us according to their lusts, I shall leave
them to their lusts: to contend with them, we have no such custom nor the
church of God: we will not take up the Lords peculiar Chair, which he has
in the hearts and the reins of men. In many things we sin all, the Lord be
merciful unto us all.

3. It traineth us to the timely reverence and fear of the name of the Lord,
and to give him his glory: the spiritual learning deducted from the judgment
which the Angel gives us. Fear God and give glory to him, for the hour of
his judgment is come. For be our sinews never so hooped about with iron, and
our hearts harder then the neither most millstone, the hammer of Gods judgment
will break and mollify them, or else there is no Iron instrument in the world
can do it. The Cananites were as contumacious a people as any under the Sun:
yet the coming of Moses, Joshua and the people of Israel in military manner, so
perplexed and apalled the^, as their hearts melted in their bellies as wax
before the Sun. And shall not the coming of the great Jehovah, riding upon the
heavens as upon an horse, and flying with the wings of the wind, like a man of
war, putting on the habergeon, and sword of justice, which shall the^ be
dronken with blood in heaven, more strike us out of heart, and take our spirits
from us? Elias his coming to the Priests of Baal, was their stupefaction and
destruction: wherefore Christ his coming in wrath and indignation, his face
burning, and his lips full of indignation, must needs have a more terrible
operation in us. Psalm. 18
If the earth trembles and quaketh, and the mighty foundations of the hills
shake, and be removed because he is wrath: how shall he not rend asunder the
foundations of our hearts, and make them to stacker like a drunken man, when
he shall come to execute the furiousness of his wrath? Math. 2.
If Herod and Jerusalem were so trobled at the birth of Christ: what an
intricate maze of miseries and troubles shall encircle the wicked in that great
day, when he shall come to judgment? Exodus 17.
If the thunder clappes and fire flashes on Mount Sinai, when the Law was
published, so quelled all the people, as they crouched unto Moses, and besought
him, that he might speak unto them, and not God: when the whole world shall
be set on fire, Et incandescet eundo, and it shall flame as it goes, and
shall climb up to the midst of heaven, and the highest shall sound his shrill
trumpet, to the doleful and bloody battle, what shall become of us? Hest. 14.
If Queen Hester was thrown into a trance, at the sight of the Majesty of
King Assuerus: at the sight of the ineffable glory of the King of glory, how
shall not all palpitation and extremity of passion possess us? If the sight
of one Angel put Daniel to an ecstasy, Dan. 9.
what effect shall the fight of so many myriads of Angels have with us? which
must accompany the judgment? Math. 28.
The warders of the Sepulcher were dead men at Christ's resurrection, wherefore
dead and dead again shall the wicked be in the general judgment.

If the armed Soldiers sent to attache Christ in the garden, John. 18.
were so thrown backward at these mild words of Christ, I am the man: when
every word shall be a deadly wound to the wicked in the judgment, how shall
they be able to abide it? whose breasts and sides, shall then be able to
receive the quiver of his arrows, which must lick up all their blood and
devour their flesh.

This Doctrine therefore of the opening of the books, opens all our hearts:
wherefore go we not about to pluck out the eyes of al knowledge of God, with
David's vain man that says: Tush God does not see it, the God of Iaacob does
not regard it, who is there noted for a noddy for his labor: O thou fool,
shall not he that made the eye see? The Lord is not liable to the scorn that
was thrown upon Baal, Cry louder, for Baal may be otherwise employed, or
coasting about the Country, or happily has betaken himself to his pillow and
is at rest. His seven eyes says Zachary run through the world: the circles
thereof are broader then the Moon: And as he is Totus oculus, as Augustine
says: so he is totus manus, he is all hand to strike: and let this serve for
the Doctrine of this place.

But there is an other wrighting book besides these, that is to be opened,
bearing here the Title of the book of life, namely of our eternal life,
begun in this life, and finished by our death. But we must likewise
distinguish of this, as it is of two sorts.

1. The first is a wrighting in opinion and not indeed, the judgment of the
faithful which is led by charity, being led blind-folde by the Hypocrisy of
many, who make shows of Godlynes, and use strange fallacies between the
Temple and the Alter, to the enchauntment of their souls, as staring up with
their eyes, eleuating their hands, smiting of their breasts, hanging down their
heads, wagging their lips, sighing, weeping, and looking demurely, with many
such mockeries, which easily coozen credulous charitable Christians. But
howsoever these have a name that they live, the courtesy of Christians making
the best construction of their painted profession, and wrighting them in the
Church book: they are not indeed in the wrightings of the house of Israel, or
in the legend of the living. For the Lord will strippe them of these vain
shows, and bewray their hollow hearts and discover all their knauerie.

2. The second sort, is uncreated prescience, and eternal foreknowledge, by
which he acknowledges, and has acknowledged those whom he has preordinated
to be his. Of this says Augustine, Liber iste apertus non admonet deum qui
sunt sernandi, sed predestinationem eorum significat, quibus aeterna dabitur
vita. Neque enim nescit eos Deus, aut in hoc libro legit vt sciat: sed potius
ipsa eius praescientia de illis quae falli non potest, liber est vite in quo
sit scripti id est praecognitj. This book that is opened, does not learn God
who are to be saved: but it signifies the predestination of such, to whom
eternal life shall be given. Neither are they unknown to God, neither reads
he in this book to know them: but rather his very foreknowledge it self of
the^, which cannot be deceived, is the book of life, in which they are
written, that is to say, foreknowne.

Now here we are to open the vain of the liuelyest and sweetest question in
the Bible. Whether he whose name is once entered into the book of life, may
ever be blotted out, that is, whether an elect child of God, ca^ ever be a
reprobate? Our answer is negative that he cannot: and the affirmative part is
most detestable, and devilish. True faith does not know what this means, to
houer between hope and fear, as the Raven over the Arc between heaven and
earth. Our faith lays hold upon the omnipotency of God, as being in
security of his will, it being ours by promises before the best witnesses in
heaven and earth, under the wrighting of his hand, and the seal of the blood
of the Lamb: whatsoever he would have us believe, he has liberally
promised of his own accord, which he would never have done, had he not
minded to stand to his bargain, and to be as good as his word.

But let us carry away the cause from every gainesayer by the power, and
strong hand of argument.

Of the just says the Psalmist. 1. Argument salme. 1.
His leaf shall not fade, as a tree planted by the right hand of God, and
ingrafted into the stock Christ Jesus; he so ordering their goings, as they
shall not turn aside to ungodly counsels, to the ways of the wicked, or
take up the seat and chair of the scorneful.

The Prophet Isaiah speaking of the kingdom of Christ, which is the church,
says: 2. Argument Isai. 9.7.
He shall sit upon his kingdom to order it, and to stablish it with judgment
and Justice from hence forth, even for ever. But this justice is established
by faith in the regenerate, by which we stand. 1. Cor. 1. yea by which we live,
Aba. 2 If this be, out of cry true, of the whole church, it cannot but be
verified of every singular member thereof.

Jeremy pleasureth us with as plain a place as can be, saying: I will put my
fear in their hearts, 3. Argum^^ Ier. 32.40
that they Shall not depart from me. This so satisfied Augustine, as he often to
this purpose produces it.

Hosea sings the self same song, taking his text from the Lords own mouth.
4. Argum^^ Hose. 2.19
I will marry thee unto me for ever in righteousness. I will marry thee unto me
in faithfulness. This Sermon is made to all the elect. And the reason stands
thus: Christ knitteth the indissoluble marriage knot with the Church, faith
being the marriage ring that joins the^. Therefore those whom he has thus
conjoined to himself, who shall put a sunder?

The Lord by the mouth of the Prophet Amos says: 5. Argum^^ Amos. 9.1^
I will plant thee upon their land, and they shall be no more pulled up again
out of their land. The pla^ts are the elect: the plot wherein they are planted
is the church, as ingrafted into Christ: they are planted therein by a true and
lively faith. Now to these is this promise made, they shall be no more pulled
up.

The Church is founded upon a Rock, 6. Argument Math. 7.
which all the driuings of tempests cannot stir: that is the machinations of
the devil and all his darlings.

Hell gates shall not prevail against this Rock. 7. Argume. Math. 16. 8.
Argum. John. 6.37.


It is Christ's saying, All that the Father gives me shall come to me, and him
that comes to me, I cast not away. For this is the will of my Father that
sent me, that of all which he has given me, I should lack nothing, but
should raise it up again at the last day. Here is the whole form and
structure of our salvation, and the compass and dimensions of it. For whereas
the father has given us all to Christ, 1. Here is our election: So that we
hold of Christ as in Capite, our mediator in whom we were chosen before the
groundwork of the world was laid. And whereas those that are thus given
cannot be kept from him, but must come unto him: 2. There is our effectual
and lively vocation, our coming to Christ being by the feet of our faith:
now in that it is added, that such as come unto him, he will not cast away. 3.
There is our justification, and the gift of perseverance in Christ. The
conclusion, I will raise him up again at the last day. 4. Is the hand that
points at our glorification. Upon the former words of Christ, 9. Argume^s
Romans 8.29.
the Apostle Paul paraphraceth in this wise: Those whom he knew before, he
also predestinate, and whom he predestinate, them also he called, and whom he
called them also he justified: and whom he justified, them also he glorified,
which are the four ringes and linckes of one chain that are impartible, let
down from heaven, to draw us up thither. 1. The first is our predestination to
life in Christ. 2. The second is our effectual calling to Christ. 3. The third
is our Justification by Christ. 4. The fourth is our glorification with Christ.
The last cannot be broken from the first, nor the first from the last,
wherefore it is impossible the predestinate should perish. The reason hereof
lays in the nature of God, his will and counsel answering his nature, his
nature being without variableness or shadow of change: as he tells us
saying: Mal. 3.6.
I am Jehovah and I change not, it is no way subject to repentance, to which
Balam perfourmeth testimony: Nu. 23.19
God is not as man that he should lie, neither as the Son of man that he
should repent: has he said and shall he not do it? and has he spoken, and
shall he not accomplish it? It is Augustines apt inference, Shall man say That
I have written, I have written? (which was Pilats speech of the title and
inscription that was set upon Christ's Cross) and shall God go from his hand
wrighting, or alter? Let God be true and every man else a liar, that he may be
justified in his sayings, and clear when he is judged.

It is Christ's asseueration. 10. Argum. John. 10.
No man can tyke my sheep from my hands. Hereupon it is concluded that the
elect being delivered by the father into the hands of his Son, and joined
unto him by a lively faith, cannot be snatched from him.

It is Christ his gracious promise, 11. Argu. John. 14.
I will ask my father and he shall give thee another comforter, and he shall
abide with you for ever, wherefore the holy Ghost dwells with them for ever,
with whom he has once been.

If any thing could blotte or tear out our names out of the Book of life, 12.
Argum.
it is sin. For that is only to be feared, Exo. 32.33
because God has said whosoever has sinned against me, I will put him out of
my Book. But this shall not scare us, as being to be understood of preapared,
and presumptuous sin, which goes down to the grave with us, which a final
impenitencie does accompany. For as God could not be stopped by the foreseen
sins of his Saints, from making entry of their names into the Lambs book
of life, so when sin has done the extent of his spite, it shall never
separate his love toward us, wherein it thus pleased him at the first to enrole
us. We are worthy whose names should be raced and defaced: as having showed
our sins as Sodom, cast down our selves upon the bed of sin, as Iezabel
upon a bed of fornication, drinking iniquity as an Ass drinks water, as
Job says, and drawing iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were
with cart-ropes, as Isaiah says: and the Lord punishes our iniquities by the
rod, and our sins by scourges: but his mercy will he never take from us,
it being tied to us by an everlasting covenant. Yea because we are written
unto life by God, we shall not sin contumaciouslie and stubbornely, or
continue in it as the wicked do. Our Faith may be much perplexed with doubts,
ouershaddowed with clouds, shaken with te^pests, winnowed by Satan, and the
shield and breast plate thereof may be tried to the vttermoste by all the
fierye darts of the devil: our faith may be challenged the field, and endure
a fierce fight, and be in an agonye, and blodye sweat as Christ was in the
garden: it may be as the last spark of a fire ready to go out, as the last
gasp that a man's dying spirit gives: yet shall it kindle and recover again,
and in all these things be conqueror.

Be the Sun never so much under a cloud, it will break out again, and
appear unto us in his perfect beauty. Though fire be covered under ashes, it
will execute his nature. Though the Philistimes take the Ark of the Lord, they
shall restore it to the Isralites again. These are aplycations to faith, which
howsoever assaulted with temptations, and borne down a while, shall rise up
again and have the upper hand of them, the Lord being faithful and just, and
not suffering us to be tried above that which we are able to bear. There is an
Apoplexy of sin in man, which seems to stop his life altogether, but he
shall recover again. Thus there was in David an Apoplexy of adultery, which
he overcame: thus there was an Apoplexy of idolatry in Solomon, which we
doubt not he subdued: thus there was an apoplexy of cruelty in Paul, while
he was a Saul, which the Lord did drive from him: thus there was an apoplexy
of perjury in Peter, which his repentance shook off. It is with a Christian,
as it was with Eutichus, that fell from the third lofte, and was taken up dead,
of whom Paul said: Trouble not your selves, for his life is in him. Act. 20.
Be not over troubled dear friends in the Lord, the life of the inward man is
in us all, howsoever Satan would stifle and strangle it.

OUr election is in God, 3. Argum.
and not in man, for election was before ever there was man. For we were
elected as Paul says, Ephesians. 1.4.
before the foundations of the world were laid, at what time there was nothing
but God, wherefore our salvation is cock-sure as being wholye in God. For what
is the reason that the heavens keep their certain motions? the Sun, Moon,
Stars, their certain courses? the day and night their successiue returns?
It is because the rule and government of them is absolutely in God, and not in
any other creature, whether Angel or man.

All things in God are stable and unchangeable: 14. Argum.
wherefore his decree of our election is immovable.

Gods election is eternal: 15. Argu.
that which is eternal is inuariable, as admitting no beginning, ending or
changeing.

He that changes his purpose, 16, Argum.
does it in the sight he has of a better way, or else because he cannot
compass it. Hence it is, that being not able to do as we would, we do as we
can. But be it far from us to think any of these in God. For as his wisdom
is uncreated, nothing can be better then that he has purposed: and as his
power is illimmited, and absolutely omnipotent, it cannot as the arms of
Sampson be manacled.

The reasons producted against this infallible divinity, are simple God wot,
and will hold no tacke with us, we will single out the best, and scatter them
like foame.

They oppose this Text out of the Revelation, 1. Objection Revel. 3. 1^
Hold that which thou bast, that no man take away thy crown, that is to say,
they of beauenly glory, to which the Apostles sentence has reference. 1. Cor.
10
Let him that thinks be stands, take heed least be fall. We answer that
the Crown there spoken of, is the Crown of the ministry, the spirit there
directing admonition to the Bishop of Philadelphia to perseverance in his
function: least being remisle and defective therein, he be deposed, and
another consecrated. But let it carry the construction, they give it: they
shall gain nothing by it. For the loosing of the Crown of glory is of double
meaning.

1. In respect of our selves. 2. In respect of God. In the first respect which
is of our selves, there is nothing more certain then that we may loose it
being so sinful as we are, and death and not glory being the stipend of
iniquitye. But second, in respect of God that has chosen us: of Christ in whom
we are chosen, this crown can never be taken from our heads, being set on by
him that can never repent himself of any thing that he does.

Whereas they object to us the churches of the Ephesians, Thessalonians, 2.
Object. Ephesians. 1.4. 1. These. 14 1. Pet 1.1.
and scattered Jews, who were called Elect by the Apostles, and yet many of
them afterward were relapsed: we answer that there are two sorts of
judgments.

1. There is a judgment of certainty, 2. There is a judgment of charity. 1.
That which is of certaintye is in God only: it is in men but in part, so far
forth as they have certificat from God of any man's estate. 2. But that which
is of charity is belonging to us all: it being our part to leave the Lords
sacred secrets to himself, and to judge the best of every one, that gives
his name to Christ, makes a good profession, and shows the fruits thereof
in outward conversation, God having revealed to us nothing to the contrary. 2.
Also the elect are so called of the chief part, as an heap of corn is called
corn though it stands most upon chafe.

But they think they hold up Alax his shield unto us, when they tell us of
that which Moses says, 3. Objection Exodus 32.
Blot me out of the Book of life. 1. I will not answer them that that is meant
of the Book of the Law which he had penned, as some men do: because it is a
base exposition, and unworthy a man of such a spirit, as if he had thrown
out these words in his hastiness, and heat of his blood. 2. Neither will I
understand them of the Book of this present life, as if he chose rather to
be strangled then to live in his bones, albeit many Captains are content to
dye for the common good, and therefore some would charge us with this sense.
But because it seems as gold that is too light, we will not receive it. 3
Neither shall I give them reference to the book of the covenant, to the
Catalogue of communion of Saints, and of the church: as if Moses would be out
of the Rubric in the Calendar of the church: because we take it, that Moses
had a further prospect and a higher reach then this.

4. Wherefore we will willingly receive the meaning they do like of, that is:
of deprivation of eternal life, as if he should have said, put me out of thy
predestination book, implying this condition, if it be possible. But he knew
it to be impossible. If any shall think it an absurditye in him to come in
with an impossible condition, I choke them with the like of our Savior
Christ, who not being ignorant that he could not possible avoid the deadly
cup of the red wine of Gods wrath, that was given him to drink, yet put up
this form of petition to his father, Father if it be possible let this Cup
pass from me.

The like prayer has David against his enemies, 4. Object. Psalm. 69.29.
Let them be blotted out of the book of life, we reply thus to that, that
their names were never in the book of life, but in the charitable opinion of
men, whom their hypocrisy beguiled.

This Doctrine is much useful, but the chiefest grace it has, is the comfort
it gives us in the greatest te^ptatio^s that besiedge us: while we have in
lively and louelye remembrance, the love of God toward us, whereby we are
graven with an iron pen, in lead or stone for ever, in the Book of Gods
mind, and so can never be expugned or forsaken. Why then should we be
afraid in the days of evil, when the iniquities compass us to the beeles?
It is David's sweet aphorism with the double spirit of Elias to have a plause,
and aclamation given unto it. I know nothing more detestable to God, and
dangerous to our selves, then to despair of Gods mercy: which is to turn his
truth into a lie, and set Satan's suggestions before his gracious promises.
Wherefore we are of Hieroms mind, that Judas his treason was not so great as
Judas his desperation. The reason whereof is given by Isidore, because his
transgression was but the death of the soul: but his desperation the
introduction into the very hell of damnation. Wherefore put but off the helmet
of this hope, which covers the brain pan, and the Target of faith, which
hides the heart, and we perish unquestionably. Wherefore be we not worser then
Lions to rise up against our selves, but behold the Lamb of God, whose blood
let it be sprinkled on the door posts of your hearts. One deep swalloweth up
another: the depth of his mercies, the depth of our sins. Desperation is a
disease incurable. For the Phiscitian would put to his helping hand, and
recover us: and we with our nails undo all again. Nil miserius misero non
miserante seip sum. Nothing is more miserable then a miserable man, that
commiserateth not himself. Though it was the saying of an heathen, a Christian
well may use it. Qui nihil potest sperare, desperit nihil. He that can hope for
nothing let him despair of nothing. Christ has sowed in tears, that we
might reap in joy: He has trodden the wine press of Gods wrath, that we
might drink the wine of his love, and be drunken with it. He has borne the
heat and burden of the day, that the wages might be ours: He has given us a
cup of salvation, that we drincking it down, might drive away all dread and
desperation: wherefore we hold up our heads and stand fast against all the
assaults of our enemies in this life, after which we shall enjoy the place to
which we have of old by the Father been written and prepared, and which by
Christ of late has been purchased, and to which by the spirit unto the day of
redemption we are sealed. Now to these three persons, one eternal and
everliving God, be all honor, praise, power, thanksgiving, ascribed in the
congreation of Christ Jesus, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

