THE DISCOVERIES of the World from their first original unto the year of our
Lord 1555. Briefly written in the Portugal tongue by ANTONIE GALVANO,
Governor of Ternate, the chief Island of the Malucos: Corrected, quoted, and
now published in English by Richard Hakluyt, sometimes student of Christchurch
in Oxford.

LONDINI, Impensis G. Bishop. 1601.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR Robert Cecill Knight, principal Secretary to her
Majesty, Master of the Court of Wards and Liueries, the worthy Chancellor
of the University of Cambridge, and one of her Majesty's most honorable privy
Counsel.
RIght Honorable, while I went about to publish our English Voyages and
Discoueries, I was advised by master WALTER COPE, a gentleman of rare and
excellent parts, to draw them into a short sum, adding that in his opinion that
course would prove most acceptable to the world, especially to men of great
action and employment. Although in that work then under the press I could not
conveniently alter my course, yet holding his advise, as in many things else,
so in this for sound and very good, I here present unto your Honor a brief
Treaty most agreeable to the same. The author whereof was one Antonie
Galuano, a Portugal gentleman: of whose piety toward God, equity toward
men, fidelity to his Prince, love to his country, skill in sea causes,
experience in Histories, liberality toward his nation, vigilance, valor,
wisdom and diligence in restoring and settling the decayed state of The Isles
of Maluco, (where he remained six or seven years governor,) if it please
your Honor to read Fernando Lopez de Castagneda, or Ioannes Maffeius in their
Histories of The East Indies, you shall find more written in his singular
commendation, then a large Epistle can well comprehend.

The work though s^all in bulk contains so much rare and profitable matter,
as I know not where to seek the like, within so narrow and streite a compass.
For herein is orderly declared, who were The first Discouerours of the world
since the time of the flood: by what ways from age to age the spicerie, drugs,
and riches of the East were conveyed into The West: what were the causes of the
alterations of those courses, as namely the changes of Empires and governments:
The ceasing of all traffic for many years by The Goths invasion of the
Roman Empire: The rising up of The Mahumetane sect; with their ouerrunning of
Afrike and Spain: The renewing again, after many years disturbance, of the
traffic and intercourse of The East Indies; first by the Califas of the
aforesaid sect: and eftsoons by The Venetians, Ienowais and Florentines. Then
follows the taking of Ceuta in Barbary by John the first king of Portugal
of that name in the year of our Lord 1415. whose third son Don Henry (which
he had by the virtuous Lady Philippa, daughter of John of Gante, and sister to
Henry the fourth, king of England) was the first beginner of all the Portugal
discoueries, and continued the same for the space of forty and three years
even to his dying day. By whose encouragement the kings of Portugal found out
with much patience and constancy the last way of the bringing the Spicerie
into Europe by The Cape of Buona Speranca; and for these hundred years past
have become the chief Lords of the riches of the Orient By emulation of which
their good endeavors, The Antiles and The west Indies began to be discovered by
The kings of Spain. The infancies of both which most important enterprises,
The progress of the same from time to time, the discoueries of Islands,
rivers, baies and harbors, of many rich provinces, kingdoms, and countries;
The erecting of castles in sundry convenient Islands and places, with the
drawing of traffic unto the same, where, when, by whom, and by whose
authority is here succinctly and faithfully recorded. So that if it please
your Honor at your convenient leisure to take a sea card or a map of the
world, and carry your eye upon the coast of Africa from Cape de Non, lying on
the main in 29. degrees of northerly latitude, and follow the shore about the
Cape of Buona Speranca till you come to the mouth of The Red Sea, and passing
thence along by the country of Arabia cross over to India, and doubling Cape
Comory compass the gulf of Bengala, and shooting by the city of Malacca
through The streite of Cincapura, coast all the south of Asia to the northeast
part of China, and comprehend in this view all the Islands from The Acores and
Madera in the West, to The Malucoes, The Philippinas, and Iapan in the East:
you shall here find by order, who were the first discouerours, conquerours
and planters in every place: as also the natures and commodities of the soyles,
together with the forces, qualities, and conditions of the inhabitants. And
that which I mention of the Orient, is likewise to be understood of The
Occident.

Now touching the translation, it may please you sir, to be advertised that it
was first done into our language by some honest and well affected merchant of
our nation, whose name by no means I could attain unto, and that as it
seems many years ago. For it has lien by me above these twelve years. In
all which space though I have made much inquiry, and sent to Lisbon, where it
seems it was printed, yet to this day I could never obtain the original
copy; whereby I might reform the manifold errors of the translator. For
whereas a good translator ought to be well acquainted with the propriety of
the tongue out of which, and of that into which he translateth, and thirdly
with the subject or matter it self: I found this translator very defective in
all three; especially in the last. For the supplying of whose defects I had
none other remedy, but to have recourse unto the original histories, (which
as it appears are very many, and many of them exceeding rare and hard to come
by) out of which the author himself drew the greatest part of this discourse.
And in very deed it cost me more travail to search out the grounds thereof,
and to annexe the marginall quotations unto the work, then the translation of
many such books would have put me unto. Of which quotations there is yet a
farther use; to wit, that such as have leisure sufficient, and are desirous to
read these things more at large, (for brevity oftentimes breeds obscurity)
may fully satisfy their desires by having recourse by the help thereof to the
pure fountains, out of which those waters which are drawn are for the most
part most sweet and wholesome. Now if any man shall marvel, that in these
Discoueries of The World for the ^pace almost of four thousand years here set
down, our nation is scarce four times mentioned: He is to understand, that
when this author ended this discourse, (which was about the year of Grace
1555.) there was little extant of our men's travails. And for ought I can see,
there had no great matter yet come to light, if my self had not undertaken
that heavy burden, being never therein entertained to any purpose, until I
had recourse unto your self, by whose special favor and bountiful patronage
I have been often much encouraged, and as it were revived. Which travails of
our men, because as yet they be not come to ripenes, and have been made for the
most part to places first discovered by others; when they shall come to more
perfection, and become more profitable to the adventurers, will then be more
fit to be reduced into brief epitomes, by my self or some other endued with
an honest zeal of the honor of our country. In the mean season nothing
doubting of your favorable acceptance of this my labor, I humbly beseech the
author of all goodness to replenish and enrich you with his best blessings,
long to protect and preserve your Honor to the profitable service of her
Majesty, and to the common benefit and good of the Realm. From London this
29. of October 1061.

Your Honors Chaplein, in all duty most ready to be commanded, RICHARD
HAKLVYT.

Francis de Sousa Tauares unto the high and mighty Prince Don JOHN Duke of
Aueiro.
ANtonie Galuano upon his death bed left unto me in his testament among his
papers this book. And because I am certain he ordained it to be presented
unto your Grace, I have thought good herein to fulfill his will and testament,
though in other things I have done nothing, the fault remaining not in me. And
by all reason this treaty ought to be set forth by a Portugal, seeing it
entreats of the variable ways from whence the pepper and spices came in
times past into our parts, and also of all the nauigations and discoueries in
the old time: In both of which things the Portugals have most travailed. In
this treaty and in nine or ten books of things touching Maluco and India
(which the Cardinal willed me to give to Damian de Goes, saying that he should
content me, for otherwise I could not deliver them) this true Portugal
occupied himself against the unfortunate and sorrow^ull times which he had
been in (which were all ended before all our days and times:) Antonie Galuano
Captain of Maluco.
for when he received the captainship and fortresses of Maluco, all the kings
and governors of all the Islands about being agreed to make war against the
Portugals, until such time as they might drive them all out of the country,
he fought against them all* with only 130. Portugals, when they were all
together, and strong in Tidore; and he gave them the overthrow and killed their
king, and one ^ernate, the principal author of that war, and he took from them
their fortress: so upon this victory they submitted themselves, and came
under the obeisance and service of our king of Portugal. Herein two things
happened of great admiration* The first, that all the kings and governors of
Maluco agreed together against us, a thing that never fell out, nor yet
credible to be like to happen: for they are ever at variance among themselves:
Variance usually amon^ the kings of Maluco.
The second, that the captain of Maluco with only his ordinary soldiers
should have the victory against so many being all together. For sometimes it
happens that some of the captains of Maluco with many extraordinary
soldiers besides their ordinary, yea and with the aid of all the Kings and
Lords of Maluco in their favor and aid went against one King only of them,
and came back again with loss. So there may be reckoned three notable things
done in India, I say of quality: (but of more quantity Emmanuel Falcon, and
the winning Peter Mascarenas, and this, whereof we presently treat. For all
these three deeds seemed to be impossible to be achieved, considering the
small quantity of soldiers which the captains had in giving the enterprise
against so many; with the order and manner by them ordained how and which ways
to obtain their purpose as well by their enemies as by themselves. And they
could not be achieved otherwise but by using a mean and order not thought of
at the first by the Portugals, nor yet ever suspected by their enemies. And,
besides this, his father and four of his brethren were all slain in the kings
service: And he now being the last of his lineage, carried with him into Maluco
worth ten thousand crusadoes, which he spent not in idleness, nor yet in play,
but only in bringing of many kings and innumerable towns unto our holy faith,
and in the preserving of Maluco, employing all his power and strength that all
the cloves might come unto the hands of the kings highness: which with Maluco
yielded unto him every year five hundred thousand crusadoes; being all to his
great prejudice, let, and hinderance. For if he had gathered cloves for
himself, as the captains of Maluco have done and do, then he had come home
very rich. But when he came home into Portugal in great hope (such is the
simplicity of the best natures) to be rewarded for his good service, Good
service full ill rewarded.
and to be more favored and honored, then if he had brought home with him an
hundred thousand crusadoes, he was greatly deceived. For he found neither
favor, nor yet honor, but only among the poor and miserable, to wit, in an
hospital: where he was kept seventeen years until the hour of his death;
and there he had allowed unto him his winding sheet to bury him in: and the
brotherhood of the Covent prepared for his burial as for a poor courtier cast
off by all men, leaving himself indebted in two thousand crusadoes, whereof
part came out of India, and part thereof many of his friends had lent him to
maintain him in the hospital: for in all these seventeen years he had not
of his highness for to help himself with so much as one riall of plate, nor
yet I of the books which I delivered received any thing to discharge his will
with. Yet for all this, even as upon the prosperity of his victories he never
made any boast, so likewise in his adversities his great stomach did nothing
abate his heart. As there are good proofs that with so many and so continual
disgraces as he suffered, he never unto the hour of his death left off to
raise and to augment the yearly rent unto a Counto: A Counto is 50000.
crusadoes.
which some made strange and would not give ear unto: So that even as he was
extreme painful in the performance of his service, so he was the like in the
things sounding unto the perfecting of the same, which was the cause that he
was brought unto the state that he died in. For he could not see the quality
of the time, but only those of his great service, by reason of the great
charges that it stood him in. And his saying was, That he was borne, not for to
say that his constellation was in the wars victorious, but in the ouercomming
of kings by the art of warfare, readiness in resolving, prudence in conseruing,
and great loialtie and patience with many services unto his king and master. In
which of all these he had most contentation it cannot easily be determined.
Wherefore your noble Grace may see, that this treaty and the others were made
with sighs and afflictions which his inferior will might have raised up in
him against his superior reason. Neither was he willing to take for his
remedy that which that great Turk Zelim son to the great Mahumet did, (for
he took Constantinople and died in Rome) who used to make himself drunk,
because he would not remember the great estate which he lost: nor yet would he
give ear unto those things which many of his friends would tell him, wishing
he would settle his mind out of the kingdom: (for otherwise he should never be
able to live:) whereunto he answered, that in this point he would rather be
compared unto the great Timocles the Athenian, Or rather Themistocles.
then to be like the excellent Roman Coriolanus. Which is a goodly example of
a true and faithful Portugal. (Though it were not so as I do say, yet I do
hear, that the hospitals be full of the most faithful subjects to their
prince and country.) Wherefore by all reason this treaty ought to be of your
Grace favored, setting apart all ouersights, if there be any, in this work,
of the author: I being not able to attain unto the understanding of the
contrary. God prosper your Grace with long life and increase of honor.

An excellent Treatise of ANTONIE GALVANO Portugal, containing the most
ancient and modern discoueries of the world especially by navigations,
according to the course of times from the flood until the year of grace 1555.
WHile I had a desire to gather together some old and some new discoueries,
which have been made by sea and by land, with their just times and situations;
they seemed to be two things of so great difficulty, that being co^fused in
the authors of them, I determined once to desist from any such purpose. For
touching the course of time the Herbre^es declare, that from the beginning of
the world to the flood were 1656. years. The Seventy Interpreters make
mention of 2242. Augustine de C^^^t. Dei, lib. 15. cap. ^0.
And S. Augustine reckons 2262. In the situations likewise there be many
differences. For there never sailed together in one fleet at sea from ten
pilots to the number of 100. but that some of them found themselves by
reckoning in one longitude and other some in another. But considering better
with my self, that the difficulties are open^o, and the differences amended by
others of more exact judgment and understanding therein, I purposed
notwithstanding to proceed in this work of Discoueries.

Some there be that say, that the world has fully been discovered: and they
allege this reason, that as it has b^ene peopled and inhabited, so it might
be frequented, and nauigable, and the rather for that the men in that age were
of a longer life, and of laws and languages almost one.

There be others of a contrary opinion to this, Contrary opinions touching
the discovery of the world.
holding that all the earth could not be known, nor the people conversant one
with another. For though it had been so once, yet the same would have been
lost again by the malice of men, and the want of justice among the inhabitants
of the earth. But because the best and most famous discoueries were made by
sea, Who were the first discouerers since the flood.
and that principally in our times, I desire to know, who were the first
Discouerers since the time of the flood.

Some affirm that they were the Greeks, others say, the Phoenicians, others
also the Egyptians. The people of India agree not hereunto; affirming that they
were the first that sailed by sea: namely the The people of China say they were
the first sailers by sea.
Tabencos, which now we call the Chinois. And they allege for the proof of
this, that they be ye Lords of the Indiaes even unto the Cape of Bona Speranca,
and the island of S. Laurence, which is inhabited by them* and al along the
sea; as also the Iauaes, Timores, Celebes, Maca^ares, Malucos, Borneos,
Mindanaos, Lucones, Lequeos, Iapones, and other Islands being many in number,
and the firm lands of Cauchin-China, Laos, Bramas, Pegu, Arracones, till you
come unto Bengala: The inhabitants of the West Indies descended from China.
And besides this, New Spain, Peru, Brasill, the Antiles, with the rest
adioining unto them, as appears by the fashions and manners of the men and
women, and by their proportions, having small eyes, flat noses, with other
proportions to be seen. And to this day many of these Islands and countreies
are called by the names of B^tochina, Bocho-China, which is as much to say, as
the countreies of China. Further it appears by histories, that the ark of Noah rested upon the north parts of the mountains of Armenia, which stands in
40. degrees and upwards: and that immediately thereupon Scythia was first
peopled, for that it is an high land, and appeered first after the flood. And
seeing the province and country of the Taben^os is one of the chiefest of all
Tartarie, as they report, it is to be thought that they were of the most
ancient inhabitants, The seas between the Tropicks very calm.
and men of the most ancient nauigations, the seas being as calm as the rivers
be in those parts lying between the Tropicks, where the days and nights do
not much differ, as well in the hours, as in ye temperature: where there blow
no outrageous winds, to cause the waters to rise or to be troubled. And by
late experience it is sound, An high bough in steed of mast and sail.
that the small barks wherein they sail have only a great high bough in the
midst of the bark, standing in steed both of mast and sail, and the master
holds only an ^are in his hand to stir withal: and so they sail swiftly
along the coast; and the rest of the passengers sit only upon certain poles,
which are fastened in the bark, which they call Catamarones, and so they pass
without rowing.

It is further said, that the people of China were sometimes Lords of the most
part of Scythia, and sailed ordinarily along that coast, which seems to reach
unto 70. degrees toward the north. Pomponius Mela lib. 3.
Cornelius Nepos is the author of this; who particularly affirms, Plinius
lib. 2. cap 67.
that in the time that Metellus the fellow Consul of Afranius, was Proconsul
in France, the king of Sue^ia sent unto him certain Indians, which came
thither in a ship from this country, coming by the north and by the flats of
Germany. And it is probable that they were people of China, for that they from
20. 30. and 40. degrees upwards have strong ships and clynchers, that can well
brook the seas, and endure the cold and intemperature of such northerly
regions. As for Cambaia there is shipping also in it, and the people by report
have used the seas many years: but it seems not that they were any of them
which came into France: for that they traffic only to Cairo, and are men in
deed of little traffic and less clothing.

As for those which escaped the destruction of the flood, Joseph. Antiouit.
Iudai^ lib. 1. ca. 5.
they were therewith so amazed, that they durst not descend into the plains
and low countreies, but kept the hills. And we read of Nimrode, who 130.
years after the flood built the Tower of Babell, intending thereby to save
himself, if there should come any more such floods.

Therefore it seems, that they which first came to be sailers were those
which dwell in the east in the province of China: although others contrariwise
hold them which dwell in the west as in Syria, to have used the trade of the
sea soonest after the flood. But this contention about the antiquity of
navigations I leave to the Scythians and Egyptians, Justinius lib. 1.
who were at great variance and difference in this matter; for each of them
challenged unto themselves the honor of the first sea travail. But omitting
all iars and differences thereabouts, I will apply my self to my purposed
discourse, and speak of that which histories have left in record.

THere be some well seen in Antiquities, Bero^us.
which say that in the 143. year after the flood, The first navigations after
the flood 143.
Tubal came by sea into Spain, whereby it seems that in those times
nauigations were used into our parts out of Ethiopia.

And they also say farther, that not long after this, the Queen Semyramis went
against the Indians in that river whereof they took their name, Diodorus
Siculus lib. 2. cap. 5.
and therein gave battle unto the king Stabrobates, wherein he lost a thousand
ships. Which being credible by the ancient history, proves manifestly that
in those parts, in those times were many ships, and the seas frequented in good
numbers.

In the 650. year after the flood there was a king in Spain named Hesperus,
Berosus.
who in his time as it is reported went and discovered as far as Cape Verde,
and the Island of S. Thomas, whereof he was prince: Gonsaluo Fernandes de
Ouiedo lib. 2. cap 3. Generalis H^st.
And Gonsaluo Fernandes of Ouiedo the Chronicler of Antiquities affirms, that
in his time the Islands of the West Indies were discovered, and called somewhat
after his name He^perides: and he alleges many reasons to prove it, Plinius
lib. 6. cap. 3^.
reporting particularly that in 40. days they sailed from Cape Verde unto
those Islands.

There are others that say that the like was done from this Cape unto the
Islands of S. Thomas, and the Isle De Principe, and that they be the
Hesperides, and not the An^iles: And they do not differ far from reason: The
ancient navigations was along the coast, and not far into the maine Ocean.
seeing in those times and many years after they did use to sail only along
the coast, not passing through the maine Ocean sea: for they had neither
altitude nor compass then in use, nor any mariners so expert.

It cannot be denied, but that there were many countries, Islands, Capes
Is^hmos and points which now are grown out of knowledge; Length of time (...)
of waters have much altered the situation of (...) places.
because the names of them are found in histories. But the age of the world and
force of waters have w^sted and consumed them, and separated one country from
another, both in Europe, Asia, Af^ica, New Spain, Peru, and other places.

Plato says in his dialogue of Timaeus, Plato in Timaeo.
that there were in ancient times in the Ocean sea Atlanticke certain great
Islands and countries named Atlantides greater then Afrike and Europe: and that
the kings of those parts were Lords of a great part of this our country: but
with certain great tempests the sea did ouerflow it, and it remained as mud
and shingle; so that in a long time after no ships could pass that way.

It is also recorded in histories, Plinius lib. 4. cap. 22.
that fast by the Island of Cadiz toward the Straights of Gibraltar there was
a certain Island which was called Aphrodisias, well inhabited and planted with
many gardens and orchards, and yet at this day we have no knowledge of this
Aphrodisias, but only a bare mention of it in ancient authors. The said Island
of Cadiz is further said to have been so large and big, that it did join with
the firm land of Spain.

The Islands of the Acores were sometimes a point of the mountains of
Estrella, The Islands of the Acores sometimes joined to the firm land.
which join unto the sea over the town of Syntra: And also from Sierra Verde
or the green mountain, which adioineth unto the water, hard by the city of
Sasin in the land of Cucu (which is the self same Island of Mouchin, where
Algarbe is) come the Islands of Porto Santo and Madera.

For it is held as a true and undoubted verity, All Islands have their roots
running from the maine land.
that all Islands have their roots running from the firm land, though they be
never so far from the continent: for otherwise they could not stand firm.

There are other histories which say, Eratosthenes apud Strabonem lib. 1. page
26.
that from Spain unto Ceuta in Barbary men sometimes travailed on foot upon
dry land, and that the Islands of Sardinia and Corsica did join the one with
the other, as also did Sicilia with Italy, and Negroponto with Graecia.

We read also that there were found hulles of ships, Huls of ships and ankers
^ound on mountains f^rre within land.
ankers of iron, and other memorials of shipping upon the mountains of Sussa
far within the land: where as it seems now no salt water or sea ever came.

In India also, and in the land of Malabar, although now there be great store
of people, yet many writers affirm that it was once a maine sea unto the foot
of the mountains; and that the Cape of Comarim, and the Island of Zeilan were
all one thing: As also that the Island of Samatra did join with the land of
Malacca by the flats of Caypasia; and not far from thence there stands now a
little Island, which few years past was part of the firm land that is over
against it.

Furthermore it is to be seen, how Ptolemey in his tables dot^ set the land of
Malacca to the south of the line in three or four degrees of latitude, whereas
now it is at the point thereof, being called ^entana, in one degree on the
north side, as appears in the Straight of Cincapura, where daily they do
pass through unto the coast of Sian and China, where the Island of Aynan
stands, which also they say did join hard to the land of China: and Ptolemey
places it on the north side far from the line, standing now above 20. degrees
from it toward the north, as Asia and Europe now stand.

Well it may be that in time past the land of Malacca and China did end beyond
the line on the south side, as Ptolemey does set them forth: because it might
join with the point of the land called ^entana, with the Islands of Bi^tan,
Banca, and Salitres being many that ways, and the land might be all slime and
oaze; And so ye point of China, might join with the Islands of the Lucones,
Borneos, Lequeos, Mindanaos, and others which stand in this parallele: they
also as yet having in opinion that the Island of Samatra did join with Iaua by
the channel of Sunda, At this Isle of Bali the Holla^ders were 1596. and have
largely described it.
and the Islands of Bali, Aujaue, cambaua, Solor, Hogaleao, Maulua, Vintara,
Rosalaguin, and others that be in this parallele and altitude did all join
with Iaua; and so they seem outwardly to those that descrie them. For at this
day the Islands stand so near the one to the other, that they seem all but
one firm land; and whosoever passes between some of them, may touch with
their hand the boughs of the trees on the one and on the other side also. And
to come nearer to the matter, it is not long since, that in the east the
Islands of Banda were diverse of them overflowed and drowned by the sea: And so
likewise in China about nine score miles of firm ground is now become a lake,
Nine score miles of firm ground lately drowned in China.
as it is reported. Which is not to be thought marvelous; considering that
which Ptolemey* and others have written in such cases; which here I omit, to
return to my purpose.

After the flood 800. years we read that the city of Troy was builded by the
Dardans; and that before that time they brought out of the Indies into Europe
by the Red sea, 800. years after the flood was trade of spices by the Red sea.
spices, drugs, and many other kinds of marchandises, which were there more
abundant, then now they be. Whereunto if credit may be given, we may conceive
that the sea was of old haunted and frequented, seeing that then they of the
East had so much and so great traffic with them of the West, that they
brought their merchandise unto an haven which was named Arsinoe, Arsinoe, now
called Suez.
being that which at this day is called Suez, standing in 30. degrees on the
north part of the Arabian Gulf. It is also by authors farther written, that
from this haven of Arsinoe or Suez, Plinius lib. 6. cap. 29.
these marchandises were carried by Carauans or great companies of carriers
upon camels, asses, and mules, unto the Leuant sea unto a city called Cassou,
standing on the coast in 32. degrees of latitude, yielding unto every degree
17. leagues and an half, as the manner is. And there are by account from the
one sea to the other 35. leagues, or 105. miles. Strabo lib. 17. page 560.
These carriers, by reason of the heat of the country, travailed in the night
only, directing themselves by stars and by marks of posts and canes, which
they used to stick in the ground as they went. But after that, because this
course and journey had many inconveniences, they changed and altered the same
twice, to find out the most commodious way.

900. years or there about after the flood, 900. years after the flood.
and before the destruction of Troy, Strabo lib. 17.
there was a king in Egypt called Sesostris, who perceiving that the former
courses and passages for the carrying of marchandises by men and beasts, were
chargeable to the one and most painful to the other, provided to have a way or
stream cut out of the land from the Red sea unto an arm of the river Nilus
which runs unto the City Heroum; that by the means thereof ships might
pass and repasse with their marchandises from India into Europe, Plinius lib.
6. cap. 29.
and not be discharged till they came into Italy. So that this Sesostris was
the first king, which built great caracks to travail this way. But this
enterprise for all that took little effect. For if it had, Africa had then
been made as an Island all compassed with water, being no more ground between
sea and sea, then the space of 20. leagues or 60. miles.

About this time the Graecians gathered together an army or fleet, Diodorus
Siculus lib. 4. cap. 4.
which now is called Argonautica, whereof Jason and Alceus were captains
general. Some say they went from the Isle of Creta, others from Graecia. But
whence soever they departed, they sailed through the Proponticke sea, and Saint
Georges Sleeue unto the Euxine sea, where some perished, and Jason thereupon
returned back into Greece. Alceus reported that he was driven with a tempest
to the lake Maeotis, The lake Maeotis.
where he was forsaken of al his company, and they which escaped with great
travail, passed through by land unto the Ocean sea of Almaine, Shipping of
great antiquity in the German sea.
where they took shipping, passing the coasts of Saxony, Frisland, Holland,
Flanders, France, Spain, Italy, and so returned unto Peloponesus and Greece,
discovering the most part of the coast of Europe.

Strabo, Strabo lib. 1. page 26.
alleging Aristonicus the Grammarian, shows that after the destruction of
Troy Menelaus the king came out of the straights of the Leuant seas into the
sea Atlanticke and coasted Africa and Guinea, and doubled the Cape of Bona
Speranca, and so in time arrived in India. Of which voyage of his there may be
many more particulars gathered out of the histories. This Mediterrane sea was
also sometimes called The Adriaticke, The Aegaean, and the Herculean sea, with
other names, according to the lands, coasts and Islands which it passes by,
running into the great sea Atlanticke, along the coast of Africa.

In the year 1300. after the flood Solomon caused a navy to be prepared on
the Red sea, 1. of Kings. 9.
at an haven called Ezeon Geber, 2. Chron. 8.
to sail to the East India, where by opinion stand the Islands called Tharsis
and Ophir. This navy was three years on this voyage, and then returned, and
brought with them gold, silver, cypres, etc. Whereby it seems that those
places, and Islands were those, which now be called the Lucones, Lequeos, and
Chinaes. For we know few other parts from whence some of those things are
brought, or wherein navigations was so long since used.

It is left us also in histories, Herodotus lib. 4.
that a king of Egypt called Neco, desiring greatly to join the Red sea with
the river Nilus, commanded the Phoenicians to sail from the straight of Mecca
to the farther end of the Mediterrane sea, to see if it did make any turn
back again unto Egypt. Which commandment they obeyed, sailing toward the
south all along the coast and country of Melinde, Quiloa, Sofala, till they
came to the Cape of Bona Esperanca, finding the sea continually on the left
hand: But when they had doubled the Cape, and found the coast continually on
the right hand, they maruailed much at it. Notwithstanding they continued their
course forward toward the north al along the coast of Guiney and the
Mediterrane sea, till they came back again into Egypt, whence they first went
out. In which discovery they remained two years. And these are thought to be
the first, that compassed by sea all the coast of Afrike, and sailed round
about it.

In the year 590. before the incarnation of Christ there went out of Spain a
fleet of Carthaginian merchants upon their own proper costs and charges,
Aristoteles lib. de mirandis in natura auditis.
which sailed toward the west through the high seas to see if they could find
any land: and they sailed so far, that they found at last the Islands,
Gonzalo Fernandes de Quiedo lib. 2 cap. 3. of his general history.
which we now call the Antiles and Noua Spagna: which Gonzalo Fernandes de
Quiedo says were then discovered, although Christopher Columbus afterward by
his travail got more exact knowledge of them, and has left us an evident
notice where they be. But all these historians, which wrote of these Antiles
before, as of doubtful and uncertain things, and of places undiscovered, do
now plainly confess the same to be the country of Noua Spagna.

In the year 520. before the incarnation, Diodorus Siculus lib. 1. cap. 3.
and after the setting out of the aforesaid army, Cambyses king of Persia took
Egypt, after whom succeeded Darius the son of Histaspis, and he determined to
make an end of the enterprise which king Sesostris had begun, if they had not
told him that the Red sea was higher then the land of Egypt, and that by means
of the salt sea coming into the river Nilus, all the province would have been
lost and undone for hunger and thirst. For the fresh water of the river Nilus
does ouerflowe the whole country, and the inhabitants have no other water then
that for their drink: whereupon he left his first purpose of prosecuting that
enterprise.

Now by the way I shall not swerve much from my matter, A digression.
if I speak a word or two of some things incident to this discourse. Plinius
lib. 9. cap. 58. de mu^ibus Nili.
The Egyptians say that they had in their country certain vermin like unto
rats, whereof many be half like earth and the other half like a vermin. One
kind of them keep the water, and another kind the land. For my part I think
that these be they, which break the serpents eggs, whereof there are many in
the river Nilus, which also be called Crocodiles: which in times past by report
were so enchanted, that thereby they could not hurt any person. But when they
were delivered from their enchantment made by the Egyptians art, Ioannes Leo
Africanus lib. 9. cap. de Nilo.
and letters, then they endeavored to kill people, wild beasts and cattle,
doing very much harm, specially those which live in the water, which
oftentimes come to the land, and living altogether on land become very strong
poison. The people beyond the city of Cairo use to fish for them and eat
them, and they take their heads, and set them upon the walls of their city.

Of these Crocodiles it is written, Plinius lib. 8. cap. 25.
that they lay themselves along by the river with their mouths open, and that
there come unto them certain white birds, Ioannes Leo Africanus lib. 9.
little bigger then thrusshes, which fly into the mouth of the Crocodile, and
pick out the filthiness which is between his teeth, and in his jaws,
wherewith he is greatly pleased; but for all that the Crocodile would close his
mouth and devour the bird, if nature had not provided the bird a sharp prick
as it were, growing out of his head, wherewith he pricketh the Crocodile in the
mouth; which causes him to gape wide, and so the bird flies away without
harm; yet there come by and by other of those birds, which make an end of
cleansing his mouth.

In the same river there are also many beasts like unto horses; Hippopotami.
and upon the land certain fowls like unto cranes, which war continually
with serpents, Ibis.
that come thither from Arabia, and kill many of them. Which birds as also the
vermin, which eat the eggs of the Crocodiles, are greatly esteemed of the
Egyptians.

But now to return to my matter, and to proceed in the discoueries; In the
year 485. before the incarnation of Christ Xerxes the king of Persia commanded
Sataspis his nephew to go and search, and discover India: who according to the
precept undertook the voyage, and went through the straight of Gibraltar, and
passed the promontorie of Africa, which now we call the Cape of Bona Speranca,
standing southward betwixt 34. and 35. degrees in latitude, and being weary of
so great a navigations turned from thence back again, as Bartholomew Diaz did
in our days.

Before the coming of Christ 443. years Himilco and Hanno his brother
Carthaginian captains governing that part of Spain, Plinius lib. 2. cap. 67.
which is now called Andaluzia, departed from thence each one with his navy.
Himilco sailing toward the north discovered the coasts of Spain, France,
England, Flanders and Germany. And some write farther, that he sailed unto
Gotland, and came to the Island of Thule, or Island, standing under the circle
Arcticke in 24. degrees from the north pole, and continued in his navigations
two years, til he came unto this Island, where the day has in June 22.
hours, and in December the night also has 22. hours, whereby it is there
woonderfully cold.

Now the other brother Hanno took his course toward Africa and Guiney, and he
discovered the Fortunate Islands, which we call the Canaries, and besides these
he discovered others, Plinius lib. 6. cap. 31.
as the Dorcades, Hesperides, and the Gorgades, which now be called the Isles
of Cape Verde. There he with his company went along the coast till they doubled
the Cape of Bona Speranca, and taking their course toward the land, they went
along by it unto another Cape named Aromaticum, which is now called Guardafu,
standing southeast from Cape Verde in 14. degrees toward the north; and he came
to the coast of Arabia standing in 16. and 17. degrees; and was five years in
this voyage, before he returned back into Spain. The navigations of Hanno in
Greek hereunto agrees.
There be others that say, that he passed not beyond Sierra Leona, but peopled
it, and afterward discovered as far as the line. But it seems he made a full
navigations, because he spent so much time in his travail. It is reported that
the inhabitants of the Cape of Bona Speranca are great witches, and inchanters
of certain snakes, which they bring to such service, Enchanted snakes.
and commandment, that they keep their Churches and Churchyards, gardens,
orchards, barnes, and cattle as well from wild beasts, as from thieves. For if
they see any to do or to intend hurt, the snake winds her self to him or
them, holding them as prisoners, and commanding her young ones to call their
masters until they be taken. If the thieves be many, or the wild beasts of
so much strength, that they dare not meddle with them, then they go unto the
house of him with whom they do live: and if it be in the night time, they give
so many strokes, that at the last they do awake them, to cause them to provide
for their defense.

A certain Italian called Aloisius Cadamusta writes, that he being in the
discovery of Guiney in the kingdom of Budimol lay in the house of Bisborol
his sons son; and lying in his bed he heard a great noise and many blows
given about the house; whereupon Bisborol rose, and went out: and when he came
again, Cadamusta demanded of him, where he had been; and he answered that he
had been with his Cobras or snakes which called him. In the Indias there be
many of these kind of snakes, and some full of poison, which notwithstanding
the Indian people use to carry about their necks, and put them into their
bosoms and under their arms: which at some soundes that the people make will
dance, and do diverse things at commandment.

There was a Portugal that sometime told me, that beyond the Cape of Bona
Speranca toward Sofala, Quiloa, and Melinde, where he had been, there were
certain birds, which would come to the Black Moors at their call, Odericus
writes the like of one that brought multitudes of patridges to Trapezunda.
and according as the Moors did remove, so the birds would do, from one tree
to another: and they used to follow them till they did light upon some tree,
from whence they could not remove. And as the Negros went up the tree they
should find wax and honey thereupon, not knowing whether it grew there
naturally or not. In the same country also under ground in Ant-holes they did
find much honey and wax, which the Antes did make, being somewhat bitter.
Upon the sea coast also they found certain fishes, which commonly went upright
in the water, Mermaides.
having the faces and natures of women, which the fishermen of those places
were acquainted with.

In the year 355. before Christ it is said that the Spaniards sailed through
the maine sea till they came unto the flats of India, Aristotel. de mirand^^ in
natura auditis.
Arabia, Strabo lib. 2. page 68. de Gad^tanorum longi^^^a nauiga^^^^ ingentibus
na^^bus.
and those coasts adjoining, whereunto they carried diverse marchandises, which
trade they used in great ships. And sailing to the northwest they came unto
certain flats, which with the flowing of the sea were covered, and with the
ebb were discovered, finding there many Tunnies of great bigness, where they
commonly used to fish them to their great profit, because they were the first
until that time that they had seen, and were greatly esteemed.

The time of Alexander Magnus, as appiereth by the ages of the world, was
before the coming of Christ 324. years: we all know that he was borne in
Europe: but he travailed into Asia and Africa, and passed through Armenia,
Assyria, Persia, and Bactria, standing northerly in 44. degrees of latitude,
which is the farthest country in longitude wherein he was in all his
iourneyes. From thence he descended into India by the mountains of Imaus, and
the valleys of Paropanisus, and prepared a navy in the river Indus, and
therewith passed into the Ocean sea, where he turned by the lands of Gedrosia,
Caramania, and Persia, unto the great city of Babylon, leaving Onesicritus and
Nearcus captains of his fleet, which afterward came unto him by the straight
of the Persian sea, and up the river of Euphrates, leaving that country and
coast discovered.

After this, Ptolemey reigned king of Egypt, who by some is reputed to have
been bastard son unto Philip father of the foresaid Alexander the great.
Plinius lib. 6. cap. 29.
This Ptolemey imitating the forenamed kings Sesostris and Darius, made a
trench or ditch of an hundred foot broad and of thirty foot deep, and ten or
twelve leagues in length till he came to The bitter Wells, pretending to have
his work run into the sea from a mouth of the river Nilus, called Pelusium,
passing now by the city Damiata. But this thing took none effect: for that
the Red sea was thought to be higher by three cubits then the land of Egypt,
which would have ouerflowed all the country, to the ruin and loss thereof.

In the year 277. Strabo lib 17. page 560 and 561.
before the incarnation succeeded in the government of the kingdom one
Philadelphus, who brought to pass that the marchandises should come out of
Europe to the city of Alexandria upwards by the river Nilus unto a city named
Coptus, Coptus. Myos-Hormos now (...) on the Red sea.
and from thence to be conveyed by land to a haven standing upon the Red sea
called Myos-Hormos; which way was travailed in the night, the pilots directing
themselves by the stars, which were expert in that practice. And because water
was scant that way, they used to carry it with them for all the company, till
at the last to avoid that trouble they dug very deep wels, and made large
cisterns for the receipt of rain water, by which the way furnished with that
commodity, which at the first it wanted grew in continuance of time to be the
more frequented.

But whereas the straight way was dangerons by reason of flats and islands, the
aforesaid king Philadelphus with his armies went on the side of Troglodytica,
and in an haven called Berenice caused the ships to arrive which came out of
India, being a place of more surety and less peril; from whence they might
easily carry the wares to the city of Coptus, The cause of the greatness of
Alexandria.
and so to Alexandria. And by this mean Alexandria grew so famous and rich,
that in those days there was no city of the world comparable to it. And to
speak briefly and particularly of the abundance of traffic there used, it is
left written for an assured truth, Strabo lib. 17. page 549.
that in the time of king Ptolemey Auletes father unto Cleopatra, it yielded in
customs unto him yearly seven millions and an half of gold, although the
traffic was not then scant twenty years old, by way of that city.

But after that this province and country became subject to the Emperors of
Rome, Strabo lib. 17. page 549.
as they were greater in power, and nearer in covetousness, so they enhansed the
customs: so that within a little time the city yielded double the foresaid
sum. For the traffike grew so exceeding great, that they sent every year
into India 120. ships laden with wares, which began to set sail from
Myos-Hormos about the middle of July, Plinius lib 6. cap. 23.
and returned back again within one year.

The merchandise which they did carry amounted unto one million two hundred
thousand crowns, and there was made in return of every crown an hundred. In
so much that by reason of this increase of wealth the matrones or noble women
of that time and place, Plinius lib. 12. cap. 18.
spent infinitely in decking themselves with precious stones, purple, pearls
musk, amber, and the like: whereof the writers and historians of that age
speak very greatly.

Cornelius Nepos, Plinius lib. 2. cap. 67.
alleged by Pliny, makes report of a king of Egypt, that reigned in his time
called Ptolemaeus Lathyrus, from whom one Eudoxus fled upon occasion, and the
better to avoid and escape his hands he passed through the Arabicke gulf, and
the sea, all along the coast of Africa and the Cape of Bona Speranca till he
came unto the Island of Cadiz: and this navigations by that course was in those
days as often used as now it is, if we may give credit to the histories. Which
appiereth the more manifest by this, that Caius Caesar the son of Augustus
going into Arabia did find in the Red sea certain pieces of those ships,
which came thither out of Spain. It was a use also long after those days to
pass to India by land. For so did the kings of the Soldans, and the princes of
Bactria, and other famous captains, who travailing thither and into Scythia by
land, had the view of those provinces and countries, so far till they came
that way unto the * West, and to the seas thereof on the north part, whereunto
many merchants then did travail. Marcus Paulus Venetus writes much hereof.
Paulus Venetus commended.
And although at the first his book was taken for a fabulous thing, yet now
there is better credit given unto it, for that by the late experiences of the
trauailers and merchants of these days into those parts, the names of the
countries, cities and towns, with their situations, latitudes and commodities
are now found true, as he and other historiographers of that time have reported.

In the 200. year before the incarnation it is written, that the Romans sent
an army by sea into India against the great Can of Cathaia, which passing
through the straight of Gibraltar, and running to the northwest, found right
over against the Cape Finisterre ten Islands, wherein was much tin: And they
may be those which were called the Cassiterides, Cassiterides.
and being come to 50. degrees of latitude they found a The northwest passage,
though the latitude be somewhat mistaken.
Straight; and passing through it toward the west, they arrived in the Empire
of India, and fought with the king of Cathay, and so came back again unto the
city of Rome. Which thing howsoever it may seem either possible or not
possible, true or not true, What histories may these be?
yet so I find it left to us recorded in the * histories of that time.

In the 100. year after the incarnation of Christ the Emperor Traiane
prepared an army by sea upon the rivers Euphrates and Tigris, Xiphil^nus in
vita Traiani.
and departed from them, and sailed to the Islands of Zyzara, and passing the
straight of Persia entered into the Ocean sea and sailed toward India all along
the coast till he came to that place where Alexander had been, and there he
took certain ships which came from Bengala, of whom he learned the state of
that country. But because he was then in years and weary with his travail,
but especially because he found there small relief for his army, he returned
back.

After that the Romans had gotten the most part of the world, there were in
that age made many, and notable discoueries. But then came the Goths, Moors,
and other barbarous nations, and destroyed all. For in the year 412. after the
incarnation of Christ, Rome taken by the Goths 412.
they took the city of Rome: And the Vandales came out of Spain and
conquered Africa.

And in the year 450. the king called Atila destroyed many cities in Italy:
The original of Venice 450.
at which time the city of Venice began. And in this age the Frankes and
Vandals entered into France.

In the year 474. the Empire of Rome was lost, and fell from the Romans to
the Goths.

And after this came the Lombards into Italy, namely in the year 560.

Also about this time the sect of the Arrians prevailed greatly: and at this
time one Merline of England was famous for his prophecies.

To be short, The sect of Mahumet began anno 611.
in the year 611. sproong up the Mahumetane sect and Morisco regiment, which
by force invaded both Africa and Spain.

By all this it may appear, that in that age all the world was in an hurly
burly, and all places very tumultuous. In so much that traffic and
merchandise ceased: Traffic and navigations cease.
for no nation durst trade one with another neither by sea nor land: nothing as
then remained steadfast neither in monarchies nor kingdoms, Ramusius 1. vol.
fol 372. page 2.
signiories, religions, laws, arts, sciences, nor nauigations. Nor so much as
the records and writings of such things did remain, but were all burnt and
consumed by the barbarous cruelty and unbridled power of the Goths: who
became so covetous and ambitious, that they purposed of themselves to begin a
new world, and to root out the memory, and blot out the knowledge of all
other nations besides.

But they that succeeded after these times in the government of things,
perceiving the great and huge loss, that the Christian world had by the want
of traffic and ceasing of navigations, whereby those commodities and
marchandises could not be spent, which before went ordinarily from one nation
to another by the use of trade: to the end that this decay and loss might be
repaired, and the treasures of the East might be imparted with the West, as it
was wont in the times of quietness and peaceable living, they began to devise a
way to pass to India, which was not as the former way was by the Red sea and
the river Nilus, but a way of farther sailing and farther length and cost also.
For they brought their ware up the river Indus, Ramusius 1. vol. fol. 373.
and there vnladed it, carrying it by land through the country of Paropanisus
by Carauans unto the province of Bactria, and then shipped it in barks on the
river Oxus, A way by the river Oxus, the Caspian sea, Volga, and over land to
Caffa.
which falls into the Caspian sea, and so sailed over that sea unto an haven
of the river Rha named Citracan or Astracan, and so upwards in the said river
which now is called Volga; and as it appears they carried it to the city of
Nouogrode in the province of Resan, which now belongs to the great Duke of
Moscouia, standing toward the north in 54. degrees of latitude: and therehence
they travailed over land unto the province of Sarmatia unto the river Tanais,
which is the division of Europe from Asia; where they again laded it in barks,
and carried it down the river, into the lake Maeotis, and to the city of
Caffa, which in ancient time was called Theodosia, which then belonged to the
Genowais, who came thither for those wares in their galliasses or great ships.

It is also left written, that the trade this way endured until the reign of
Commodita Emperor of Armenia, who provided for a better course, and commanded
this traffic of the spices to be conveyed by the Caspian sea, Strabo lib. 11.
and so through the kingdom of Hiberia, which now is called Georgiana, and
from thence they entered by the river Phasis, now Phasso, into Pontus Euxinus,
The mart of spices at Trapezunda. Ramusius ibidem.
and so unto the city of Trapezunda standing in 40. and odd degrees of
northerly latitude. And to that place came shipping for the marchandises out of
Europe and Africa.

It is further left recorded concerning this way of traffic, Strabo lib. 11.
Plinius lib. 6. cap. 11.
that Nicanor determined or had already begun to open above 120. miles of land,
which lies between the Caspian sea and Pontus Euxinus, that they might come
and go by water with their spices, drugs, and other commodities, there used.
But in the mean time this mischief happened, that Ptolemey Ceraunos killed
him, and by his death this worthy and famous enterprise ceased without effect.

But the other way being also at last lost by reason of the wars of the Turks,
Another way to Boghar, and so by carauans into Persia by the river Ganges.
it pleased God to open another way to these marchandises from the Isle of
Samatra, the city of Malacca, and the Island of Iaua unto Bengala, and so
carrying them up the river Ganges unto the city of Agra; from whence they
travailed over land unto another city standing near the river Indus named
Boghar, where they discharged, because the city of Or Laor.
Cabor stands too far within the land, being the principal city of the
Mogores. From thence they went forward to the great city of Samarcand standing
in the country of Bactria: Samarcande.
and there the merchants of India, Persia, and Turkey met, bringing thither
their several commodities, Woollen cloth good merchandise for Cathay.
as cloth of gold, veluets, chamolets, scarlet, and woollen clothes, which were
carried to Cathay and the great kingdom of China: wherehence they brought
again gold, silver, precious stones, pearls, silk, musk, and many other
things of great value, and much rubarbe. After this these merchandise, The way
by Ormus and Balsara and so to Aleppo and Barutti.
drugs, and spiceries were carried in ships upon the Indian sea unto the
straight of Ormus, and to the rivers Euphrates and Tigris; and were unladen in
the city of Balsara standing in 31. degrees toward the north, and from thence
they were carried over land unto the cities of Aleppo, Damascus, and Barutti
standing on the same side in 35. degrees: And there the Venetian galleys or
galliasses, which transported pilgrims into the holy land, came and received of
those goods.

In the year 1153. in the time of Frederick Barbarossa it is written that
there came to Lubec a city of Germany one Canoa with certain Indians, like
unto a long barge: which seemed to have come from the coast of Baccalaos, which
stands in the same latitude that Germany does: The Germans greatly
woondered to see such a barge, and such people, not knowing from whence they
came, nor understanding their speech, especially because there was then no
knowledge of that country, as now there is: it may be credible that though the
boat was small in respect of those huge seas, yet the wind and water might
bring them thither: as we see in these our days, that the Almadie which is but
a small boat comes notwithstanding from Quiloa, Mosambique, and Sofala to
the Island of S. Helena, being a small spot of land standing in the maine Ocean
off the coast of Bona Speranca so far separated.

In the year 1300. after the coming of Christ the great Sultan of Cayro
commanded that the spiceries and drugs, Ioannes Leo Africanus.
and marchandises of India should be carried through the Red sea, Ramusius 1.
vol. fol. 373.
as it was used before: at which time they vnladed on the Arabian side, at the
haven of Judah, and carried them unto the house at Mecca, and the carriers of it
were the pilgrims. So that each Prince used a custom to augment the honor,
and increase the profit of his country. And these Soldans had special
regard to Cayro, from whence the wares were carried unto the countries of
Egypt, Lybia, Africa, the kingdoms of Tunez, Tremessen, Fez, Marocco, Suz: and
some of it was carried beyond the mountains of Atlas unto the city of
Tombuto, Tombuto.
and the kingdom of the Ialophos; until afterward that the Portugals did
bring it about the Cape of Bona Speranca unto the city of Lisbone, as in place
convenient we purpose to show more at large.

In the year 1344. king Peter the fourth of that name reigning in Arragon, the
Chronicles of his time report, that one Don Luis of Cerda, son unto the son
of Don John of Cerda, craved aid of him to go and to conquers the Isles of
the Canaries, The Canarie Islands.
standing in 28. degrees of latitude to the north, because they were given unto
him by Pope Clement the sixth, which was a French man. Whereby in those days
there grew a knowledge of those Islands in all Europe, and specially in Spain:
for such great Princes would not begin nor enterprise things of such moment
without great certainty.

About this time also the Island of Madera was discovered by an English man
called Macham: The Island of Madera discovered by Macham an English man.
who sailing out of England into Spain, with a woman of his, was driven out of
his direct course by a tempest, and arrived in that Island, and cast his anchor
in that haven, which now is called Machico after the name of Macham. And
because his lover was then sea-sicke, he there went on land with some of his
company, and in the mean time his ship weyed and put to sea, leaving him
there: whereupon his lover for thought died. Macham, which greatly loved her,
built in the Island a chapel or hermitage to bury her in, calling it by the
name of Jesus Chapel: and wrote or graued upon the stone of her tomb his
name and hers, and the occasion whereupon they arrived there. After this he
made himself a boat all of a tree, the trees being there of a great compass
about, and went to sea in it with those men of his company that were left with
him, and fell with the coast of Afric without sail or oar, and the Moors
among whom he came took it for a miracle, and presented him unto the king of
that country: and that king also admiring the accident, sent him and his
company unto the king of Castile.

In the year 1395. king Henry the third of that name reigning in Castile, the
information which Macham gave of this Island, and also the ship wherein he went
thither, moved many of France and of Castile to go and discover it, and the
great Canarie: And they which went were principally the Andaluzes, the
Biscaines, and the Guepus^oes, carrying with them many people and horses. But I
know not whether the charge of that voyage was theirs or the kings. But by whom
soever it was set out, The first discovery of the Canaries by the Christians
1405.
they seem to be the first that discovered the Canaries and landed in them:
where also they took 150 of the Islanders prisoners. Concerning the time of
this discovery, there is some difference among the writers: for some affirm
this to be done in the year 1405.

The first beginning of the Portugal Discoueries.
THe Chronicles of Portugal have this record, That after the incarnation of
Christ 1415. king John the first of that name king of Portugal, departed from
the city of Lisbon with the Prince Don Duarte or Edward, The first conquest of
the Portugals in Barbary 1415.
and Don Peter, and Don Henry his sons, with other Lords, and nobles of his
realm, and sailed into Africa, where he took the great city of Ceuta, This
victory was gotten by the help of the English as Walsingham writes.
standing on the north side thereof between 35. and 36. degrees in latitude:
which was one of the principal causes of the enlarging of the dominions of
Portugal.

When they were come from thence, Henry the kings third son, desirous to
enlarge the kingdom and to discover strange and unknown countries, being
then in Algarbe, gave direction for the discovery of the coast of Mauritania.
John de Barros Asiae decad. 1. lib 1. cap. 2.
For in those days none of the Portugals had ever passed the Cape de Non,
standing in 29. degrees of latitude. Cape de Non.
And for the better accomplishing of this discovery, the aforesaid Don Henry
prepared a fleet, and gave commandment to the chief captains to proceed in
discovery from the aforesaid Cape forward: Which they did. But when they came
to another Cape named Bojador, Cape Bojador.
there was not one of them, that durst go farther or beyond it: at which
fearful and cowardly faintnes of theirs the Prince was exceedingly displeased.

In the year 1417. king John the second reigning in Castile, and his mother
Lady Katharine then using the government, one Monsieur Ruben of Bracamonte
which was then Admiral of France craved the conquest of the Islands of the
Canaries, with the title to be king of them, for a kinsman of his called
Monsieur John Betancourt: which being granted him by the Queen, and farther
also partly furnished out, he departed from Civil with a good army: But the
chief or principal cause that moved him to enter into this action, was to
discover and perfectly to take a view of the Island of Madera, whereof Macham
before had given so much information. But for all that he went unto the
Canaries, and carried with him a Friar called Mendo to be as Bishop thereof,
admitted by Pope Martine the fifth. When they were landed they won Lancerota,
The Canarie Islands conquered.
Forteuentura, Gomera, and Ferro: from whence they sent into Spain many
slaves, honey, wax, Camfora, or Camfire, hides, Orchall, figs, Sanguis
Draconis, and other marchandises, whereof they made good profit: And this army
also as they report, Porto Santo.
discovered Porto Santo. The Island that they inhabited was Lancerota, where
they built in it a castle of stone for their better defense and security.

In the year 1418. one John Gonzales Zarco, John de Barros decad. 1. lib. 1.
cap. 2.
and Tristam Vaz Teixera, household gentlemen unto Don Henry the kings third
son, perceiving the desire that their master had to discover new countries,
and willing in that course to do him some service, craved of him a bark, and
license to undertake the action: which they obtained, and sailed to the coast
of Africa: where they were overtaken with a terrible tempest; but they were
succored by falling with the land, and entering into an haven called Santo,
where they landed, and remained two years.

In the year 1420. they discovered the Island of Madera, where they found the
chapel and the stone and tomb, Ba^^os decad. 1. lib. 1. cap. 3.
whereupon the foresaid Macham had graven his name. The chapel built by
Macham found in Madera.
There are others that write that a certain Castillian perceiving the desire
and favor to navigations which Don Henry had, told him that they had found the
Island of Porto Santo; which being but a small thing they made no reckoning of
it. Don Henry sent Bartholomew Perestrello, John Conzales Zarco, Tristam Vaz
Teixera, and by the signs and likelyhoods that they had received, Porto Santo.
they went to Porto Santo, and there remained two years: and after that,
namely in the year 1420. they sailed also to the Island of Madera, where they
found the memorial and monument of the aforesaid Macham the English man.

As for Monsieur Betancourt, who entered into the conquest of the Canaries as is
above mentioned, he was slain in the midst of the action, and left behind
him for his heir a kinseman of his called Monsieur Menante, The Canarie
Islands sold over to a Spanyard.
who after that sold the said Islands of the Canaries unto one Peter Barba of
Civil. There are other which speak otherwise, and say that Monsieur John
Betancourt went into France to prepare a new army about this conquest, and
left there a nephew of his; who because he heard no more of his uncle, and saw
that he could not maintain the wars any longer, he sold the Canaries to Don
Henry the king of Portugals third son, for a certain thing that he gave him
in the Island of Madera.

In the year 1424. they write that the said Don Henry prepared a navy and
army to conquer these Islands, Barros decad. 1. lib. 1. cap. 12.
wherein there went as captain general, one Don Fernando de Castro; and by
reason of the valiantnes and warlike behavior of the people they had the
repulse: whereupon Don Ferdinando, considering the great charge, and little or
no good success, he gave over the action, and returned back again. After
this Don Henry resigned over these Islandes to the crown of Castile, in
consideration of the aides which Betancou^t had received. But the Castillians
agree not unto this report. For they say, that neither the kings of Portugal,
nor Don Henry would render the Islands, till they came in question before Pope
Eugenius the fourth; The Canaries came to the crown of Spain in the year 1431
who fully understanding the matter, gave the conquest of the Islands by order
of judgment unto the king of Castile in the year 1431. whereupon this
contention ceased touching the title of the Canaries between^ the kings of
Portugal and of Castile.

These Islands being in number seven, were called by the name of Fortunatae,
standing in 28. degrees to the north: where the longest day is but 13. hours,
and the longest night as much, lying distant from Spain 200. leagues, and from
the coast of Africa 18. leagues. The ancient manners of the Canarians.
The people were idolaters, and did eat their flesh raw for want of fire: they
had no iron, and sowed without any tool: they tilled and raised the ground
with ox horns, and goats horns. Every Island did speak a several language.
They took many wives, and knew them not carnally until they had delivered
them to the superiors. They had diverse other Paganish customs: but now the
Christian faith is planted among them.

The commodities of these Islands are wheat, The commodities of the Canaries.
barley, sugar, wine, and certain birds, called Canarie birds, much esteemed
in Spain and other places.

In the Island of Ferro they have none other water, but that which proceeds
in the night from a tree, A tree yielding abundance of water in Ferro.
compassed with a cloud, whence water issues, serving the whole Island both
men and cattle, a thing notorious and known to very many.

In the year 1428. it is written that Don Peter the king of Portugals eldest
son was a great traveler. He went into England, France, Almaine, and from
thence into the Holy land, and to other places; and came home by Italy, taking
Rome and Venice in his way: from whence he brought a map of the world, A most
rare and excellent map of the world.
which had all the parts of the world and earth described. The straight of
Magelan was called in it The Dragons tail: The Cape of Bona Speranca, The
forefront of Afrike, A great help to Don Henry in his discoueries.
and so forth of other places: by which map Don Henry the kings third son
was much helped and furthered in his discoueries.

It was told me by Francis de Sosa Tauares, that in the year 1528. Don
Fernando the kings son and heir did show him a map, which was found in the
study of Alcobaza, which had been made 120. years before, which map did set
forth all the navigations of the East Indies, As much discovered in ancient
time as now is.
with the Cape of Bona Speranca, according as our later maps have described it.
Whereby it appears, that in ancient time there was as much or more
discovered, Barros decad. 1. lib. 1. cap. 4.
then now there is. Notwithstanding all the travail, pains and expenses in
this action of Don Henry, yet he was never weary of his purposed discoueries.
At length there was a servant of his called Gilianes that first passed the Cape
Bojador, Cape Bojador first passed. Anno 1132.
a place before terrible to all men: and he brought word that it was not so
dangerous, as it was reported: for on the other side of it he went on land, and
in manner of taking possession, set in the ground a cross of wood, to be as a
mark and token afterward of his discovery so far.

In the year 1433. in the month of August Don John died, The death of Don
John the first of Portugal.
and his son Don Duarte or Edward succeeded him in the kingdom.

In the year 1434. Don Henry set out one Alfonso Gonsales Baldaia, Barros
decad. 1. lib. 1. cap. 5.
and Gilianes aforesaid, and they went to another Cape, which was beyond the
former, and going on land perceived the country to be inhabited: and because
they were desirous to satisfy Don Henry with as much relation and knowledge as
they could get, they continued their voyage, and went forward, till they came
to a certain point of land, from whence they turned back again.

In the year 1438. king Edward, The death of Don Duarte king of Portugal.
whom the Portugals call Don Duarte died, and Don Alphonso the prince being
young, Don Peter his uncle governed the kingdom.

In the year 1441. Don Henry sent out two ships, Barros decad. 1. lib. 1. cap.
6.
and the captains were in the one Tristan, and Antonie Gonsales in the other
Being put to sea they took a prise upon the coast, and sailed on to Cape
Blanco, Cape Blanco.
that is the White Cape, standing in 20. degrees, and informed Don Henry of the
state of that country by the Moors which they brought from thence. Whereupon
he sent one Fernan Lopez de Sauado to give knowledge thereof to Pope Martine,
trusting to make these things commodious to Holy Church. Upon which knowledge
the Pope granted indulgences and everlasting pardon, I^dulgences ^^anted to
encourage to this enterprise.
and all other things demanded of him, unto those which should die in this
enterprise.

After this, Barros decad. 1. lib. 1. cap. 7.
in the year 1443. Don Henry commanded Antonie Gonsales to carry back the
slaves which he had brought, and to ransom them in their country: Which he
did, and the Moors gave them in trucke for them again black Moors with
curled hair, and some gold; so that now that place is called Rio de Oro, Rio
de Oro, why so called.
that is, the Golden River; whereby the desire of the discovery might be the
more increased.

Not long after he sent out another named Nunnez Tristan, who came unto the
Islands of Arguin, The Islands of Arguin.
where he took more slaves, and brought them to Portugal in the year 1444.

Hereupon also one Lansarote, a groom of Don Gilians chamber, with others
associated with him, armed out certain ships, The Islands of Garze.
which went coasting til they came to the Islands of Garze, where they took
two hundred slaves: which were the first that were brought from thence to
Portugal.

In the year 1445. there went as captain of a bark one Gonsalo de Syntra,
Barros decad. 1. lib. 1. cap. 9.
an esquire belonging to Don Henry into those parts; and he went on land, where
he was taken with six or seven more of his company, which place was therefore
called after his name, Angra de Gonsaluo de Syntra.
Angra de Gonsaluo de Syntra. This was the first loss, which the Portugals
received in their discoueries.

In the year following Don Henry sent out three carauels, wherein went as
captains Antonie Gonsales, Diego Aloizio, and Gomes Perez, who had their
direction, not to enter into Rio de Oro, nor to bear themselves disorderly,
but to travail in peace, and to convert as many infidels as they could to
Christianity. But none of these things were performed by them; for they
returned without doing any memorable act.

In the same year 1446. another esquire belonging to the king of Portugal
called Denis Fernandes of the city of Lisbon, Barros decad. 1. lib. 1. cap. 9.
and cap. 13.
entered into these discoueries, more to win fame then to reap commodity by
them. And he being in his voyage came to the river of Sanaga, The river of
Sanaga.
standing between 15. and 16. degrees of latitude toward the north, where he
took certain Negroes; and not contented therewith, he went forward and
discovered Cape Verde, Cape Verde.
standing in 14. degrees on the same side; and there he set up upon the land a
cross of wood, and then returned with great contentation.

In the year 1447. one Nunnez Tristan went forth to discover in a carauell,
Barros decad. 1. lib. 1. cap. 14.
and he passed the aforesaid Cape Verde, and Rio Grande, Rio Grande.
and went past it unto another standing beyond it in 12. degrees, where he was
also taken with 18. Portugals more: but the ship came home again in safety,
conducted by four or five which escaped the hands of the Negroes.

In this year also 1447. it happened that there came a Portugal ship through
the straight of Gibraltar; and being taken with a great tempest, was forced to
run westwards more then willingly the men would, and at last they fell upon
an Island which had seven cities, The Island of seven cities.
and the people spoke the Portugal tongue, and they demanded if the Moors did
yet trouble Spain, whence they had fled for the loss which they received by
the death of the king of Spain, Don Roderigo.

The boateswaine of the ship brought home a little of the sand, and sold it
unto a goldsmith of Lisbon, out of the which he had a good quantity of gold.

Don Pedro understanding this, being then governor of the realm, caused all
the things thus brought home, and made known, to be recorded in the house of
Justice.

There be some that think, that those Islands whereunto the Portugals were
thus driven, were the Antiles, or New Spain, alleging good reasons for their
opinion, which here I omit, because they serve not to my purpose. But all their
reasons seem to agree, that they should be that country, which is called Noua
Spagna.

In the year 1449. the king Don Alfonso gave license unto his uncle Don Henry
to inhabit the Islands of the Acores, Don Alfonso king of Portugal come to age.
which were long before discovered. Barros decad. 1. lib. 2. cap 1.


And in the year 1458. this king went into Africa, The Acores first inhabited.
and there he took the town called Alcacer.

And in the year 1461. he commanded Signior Mendez a gentleman of his house to
build the castle of Arguin, Alcacer taken.
whereof he gave unto him the government, The castle of Arguin builded.
as to his lieutenant. Ibidem.


In the year 1462. there came into the realm of Portugal three Genowais of
good parentage, Barros decad. 1. lib. 2. cap. 1.
the chief of whom was called Antonie de Noli, and of the other two, the one
was his brother, the other was his nep^ew, and each of these had his several
ship, craving liberty of Don Henry to discover the Islands of Cape Verde,
which was granted them. Others say, The Isles of Cape Verde disc^uered by three
Genowais.
that the places which they discovered, were those which Antiquity called the
Gorgades, Hesperides, and Dorcades: but they named them Mayo, Saint Iago, and
Saint Philip, because they discovered them on those Saints days: but they are
also called by some the Islands of Antonio.

In the year following 1463. this good noble man Don Henry died, The death of
Don Henry 1463.
leaning from Cape De Non discovered unto the mountain called Sierra Leona,
Sierra Leona.
standing on this side the line in 8. degrees of latitude, where no man had
been before that time.

In the year 1469. the king of Portugal did let out for yearly rent the
trade of Guiney unto one called Fernan Gomez, Barros decad. 1. lib. 2 cap. 2.
which country afterward was called The Mine. The country of Guiney let out
to farm.
He let it out for five years, for two hundred thousand Reyes by the year
(which is of our English money 138. l. 17. ^. 9. d. ob.) and added unto his
lease this condition, that every year he should discover an hundred leagues.

In the year following, Ibidem.
which was 1470. this king went into Africa with his son Prince John, where
they took the town of Arzila, Arzila taken.
and the people of the city of Tanger fled out for fear, Tanger taken.
and that he took also. It seems that good fortune follows a courageous
attempt.

In the year 1471. Fernan Gomes gave commandment that the coast should be
discovered as it lay. Ibidem.
Which was undertaken by John de S. Aren, and John de Scouar; La Mina.
and they went and found the Mine in 5. degrees of latitude.

And the next year, Ibidem.
which was 1472. one Fernando da Poo discovered the Island now called after his
name. The Isle de Fernan de Poo.
Also about this time the Islands of Saint Thomas, Saint Thome. Rha del
Principe.
and Del Principe were discovered, standing under the line, with the firm land
also, Benin.
wherein is the kingdom of Benin, Cape de Santa Catarina.
reaching to the Cape de Santa Catarina, standing on the south side of the line
in 3. degrees. The man that made this discovery was a servant of the kings,
and his name was Sequeira.

Many suppose, that than also there were those places, countries and Islands
discovered, which before were never known to us since the flood.

In the year 1480. the valiant king Don Alphonso died, Don John the second.
and left many things worthy of memory behind him; Barros decad. 1. lib. 3
cap. 2.
and his son Don John the second succeeded him. Castle de Mina. built.
Who in the year 1481. gave direction for the building of the castle De Mina
to one Diego d'Azambuxa; who did so, and was made captain of it.

In the year 1484. the foresaid king John sent out one Diego Caon a knight of
his Court to discover: Barros decad. 1. lib. 3. cap. 3.
and he went to the River of Congo, Rio de Congo.
standing on the south side in 7. or 8. degrees of latitude; where he erected a
pillar of stone with the royal arms and letters of Portugal, wherein he
wrote the commandment that he had received from the king, with the time and
day of his being there. From thence he went unto a river near the Tropicke of
Capricorn, Discovery near unto the Tropic of Capricorn.
setting still up pillars of stone where he thought it convenient, and so came
back again unto Congo, An ambassador from the king of Congo.
and to the king of that country: who thereupon sent an ambassador and men of
credit into Portugal.

In the next year or the second following, one John Alonso d'Aueiro came from
the kingdom of Benin, and brought home pepper with a tail: Pepper of Benin.
which was the first of that kind seen in Portugal.

In the year 1487. king John sent to discover India over land. Barros decad.
1. lib. 3. cap. 5. Pedro de Couillan and Alfonso de Pavua sent to discover
India.
In which journey went one Pedro de Couillan a servant of the kings, and
Alfonso de Payua, because they could speak the Arabian tongue. They went out in
the month of May, and the same year they took shipping at Naples, and
arrived in the Isle of Rhodes, and lodged in the house that was provided for
the Portugal knights of that order: from thence they went to Alexandria,
Alexandria.
and so to Cayro, and thence to the haven of Toro in the company of the
Carauans or carriers which were Moors. Cairo.
There they took shipping, Toro.
and being on the Red sea they arrived at the city of Aden, Aden.
and there they separated themselves: for Alfonso de Payua went toward
Aethiopia, and Pedro de Couillan into India. Who came unto the cities of
Cananor and Calicut, Cananor.
and came back unto Goa: Calicut.
where he took shipping unto Sofala, Goa.
being on the coast of Africa in the southern latitude of 20. degrees, Sofala.
to see the mines that were of so great name. Mosambique.
From Sofala he turned back to Mosambique, Quiloa.
and unto the cities of Quiloa, Mombaza, Mombaza.
and Melinde, Melinde.
till he came back again unto the city of Aden: where he and Alfonso de
Payua divided themselves: and thence he sailed again through the Red sea unto
the city of Cayro, where he thought to have met with his companion: but there
he heard that he was dead by the letters that he received from king John his
master; in which letters he was farther commanded to travail into the country
and dominions of Presbyter John.

Upon this commandment he provided for his farther journey, The voyage of
Pedro de Couillan unto the country of Prete Ianni.
and from Cairo went back again to the haven of Toro, and from thence to
Aden, where he had been twice before: and there hearing of the fame of the
city of Ormuz, he determined to go thither; and therefore went along the
coast of Arabia unto the Cape Razalgate standing under the Tropicke of Cancer,
Cape Razalgate.
and from thence he went to Ormuz, Ormuz.
standing in 27. degrees on that side. There he learned and understood of the
streigth of Persia, and of that country: and entered there into the Red sea,
and passed over to the realm of the Abassini, Abassini.
which commonly is called Presbyter John's country or Aethiopia: Pedro de
Couillan the first Portugal that came into the East India and Aethiopia by the
Red sea.
and there he was detained till the year 1520. when there came thither the
ambassador Don Roderigo de Lima: This Pedro de Couillan was the first
Portugal that ever knew and saw the Indias and those seas, and other places
adjoining thereunto.

In the year 1490. the king sent unto Congo one Gonzalo de Sosa a gentleman
with three ships, Barros decad. 1. lib. 3. cap 9.
and in them sent home the ambassador of Congo, which was sent into Portugal,
whom Diego Caon had brought from thence: who at his being in Portugal was
baptized both himself and others of his company.

The aforesaid Gonzalo de Sosa died in that journey by the way, and in his
room they chose his nephew Ruy de Sosa for their captain; and so being come
unto Congo, the king was very glad of their coming, and yielded himself, and
the greater part of his realm to be baptized: A great part of the kingdom of
Congo baptized.
whereof the Portugals had good cause to rejoice, seeing by them so many
Infidels were converted from gentilitie and paganism to Christianity.

The first beginning of the Discoueries of the Spaniards, with the continuation
of the Discoueries of the Portugals.
IN the year 1492. in the time of Don Ferdinando king of Castile, he being at
the siege of Granada, dispatched one Christopher Columbus a Genoway with three
ships to go and discover Noua Spagna: who first had offered his service for a
western discovery unto king John of Portugal; but he would not entertain
him.

He being sufficiently furnished for this enterprise departed from the town of
Palos the third day of August, having with him as captains and pilots Martin
Alfonso Pinzon, Francis Martinez Pinzon, Vincent Yannes Pinzon, and Bartholomew
Columbus his brother, with 120. persons more in his company: The first that in
sailing are thought to have observed latitud^s.
and some affirm that they were the first that sailed by latitudes. They took
the Canaries in their way, and there refreshed themselves; taking their course
thence toward Cipango: but finding the sea by the way full of weeds they were
amazed, and with great fear arrived at the Antiles the tenth day of October,
and the first Island that they descried was called Guanahany: The Isle of
Guanahany first discovered.
where they went on land, and took possession of it, and named it San
Saluador. This Island stands in 25. degrees of northerly latitude. And after
that they found many Islands, which they called the Princes because they were
the first that they had discovered.

The Savages of those parts call these Islands by the name of Lucaios, Lucaios
Islands.
having in deed several names for them. And they do stand on the north side
almost under the Tropicke of Cancer. As for the Island of S. James or Iamaica,
it stands between 16. and 17. degrees.

Thence they went to the Island which the naturals of the country call Cuba,
Cuba.
and the Spaniards call it Ferdinandina, because their kings name was
Ferdinando, standing in 22. degrees: from whence the Indians conducted them
unto another Island, which they call Hayti, and the Spaniards called it
Isabella, in the memory of the Queen of Castile, which was so called,
Hispaniola.
and they named it also Hispaniola. In that Island the Admiral ship of
Columbus was cast away: of the timber and planks whereof they made a forte,
wherein they left 38 men, and a captain called Roderigo de Arana, to learn
the language and customs of the country. They brought from thence musters and
shows of gold, pearls, and other things, which that country yielded; and ten
Indians also, whereof six died, the rest were brought home and baptized.

Hereupon there grew such a common desire of travail among the Spaniards,
that they were ready to leap into the sea to swim, if it had been possible,
into those new found parts. The aforesaid company of Columbus at their coming
home took in their way the Isles of the Acores, and the 4. day of March in the
year 1493. they entered into the bar of Lisbon: Contention between the kings
of Spain and Portugal.
which discovery pleased not the king of Portugal. Whereupon rose a
contention between those two kings.

Christopher Columbus being arrived went presently into Castile with the news
of all things, and acquainted the king Fernando, with the discontentednes of
the king of Portugal: whereupon he and the Queen Isabella his wife sent
straight word thereof unto Pope Alexander the 6. whereat he and the Italians
were in great admiration, The bull of donation.
maruailing that there was any more land besides that which was under the
Romans. But the end of this matter was this: Alexander the Pope gave these
countreies by his judgment unto the kingdoms of Leon and Castile; with this
condition, That they should labor to extirpate idolatry, and plant the Holy
faith in those countries.

Fernando the king having received this answer, was glad of it, and sent
Christopher Columbus again on the former voyage, Gomara historiae general.
lib. 1. cap. 17.
having made him Admiral, and given him other honors, with particular arms,
and a posie written about his arms to this effect.

For Castile and for Leon
A new world found out Colon.
In the year 1493. the 25. of the month of October Christopher Columbus went
back unto the Antiles, Columbus second voyage.
and from Cadiz he took his course, having in his company 17. ships, and
1500. men in them, with his brethren Bartholomew Columbus, and Diego Columbus,
with other knights, gentlemen, men of law, and religious men, with chalices,
crosses, rich ornaments, and with great power and dignity from Pope Alexander;
and the 10. day after their setting forth, they arrived at the Canaries; and
from thence in 25. or 30. days they sailed unto the Antiles; and the first
Island that they saw stands in 14. degrees toward the north, due west from
Cape Verde on the coast of Africa. They say that the distance from thence to
the Canaries is 800. leagues. Deseada discovered.
The name they gave it was Deseada, that is the Desired or wished Island, for
the great desire which the company had to come to sight of land. After that
they discovered many more which they named the Virgins, Caribas.
which the naturals of the country call the Caribas, for that the men of that
country are good warriers, and shoot well in bows. They poison their arrows
with an herb, whereof he that is hurt dies, biting himself like as a mad dog
does.

From these Islands and others they went unto the principal Island there,
which they of the country do call Boriquen, Boriquen of S. John de porto
riceo.
and the Spaniards call it S. John, and thence to Hispaniola or Isabella, where
they found all the men dead which there they had left. Here the Admiral left
the most part of the people to plant it, and appointed his brethren to be
governors there: and so took two ships, and went to discover the other side
of the Island of Cuba, Iamaica.
and from thence to Iamaica. All these Islands stand from 16. unto 20. degrees
of northerly latitude. In the mean time that the Admiral^ sailed about, his
brethren and they that were left with them were much troubled, because the
Savages did rise against them. So that Christopher Colon went back again into
Spain, to tell the king and Queen of his adventures.

In the year 1494. and in the month of January there was an agreement made
of the differences which were between the two kings of Spain and Portugal.
For the which agreement there were sent out of Portugal Ruy de So^a, and Don
John his son, and the Doctor Airs de Almada: and for the king of Spain
there were Don Henry Henriques, Don John de Cardenas, and the Doctor Maldonado.
All these met in the town of Tordesillas, and they divided the world from the
north to the south by a meridian which stands west from the Islands of Cape
Verde 300. leagues: The first line of partition.
so that the one half which lay unto the east should belong unto Portugal,
and that which lay to the west to the king of Spain, whereby notwithstanding
liberty to travel was left equal unto both.

In the year following 1495. John king of Portugal died, The death of Don
John the second.
and Emmanuel his cosen began to reign.

In the year 1496. there was a Venetian in England called John Cabota, The
great discovery of John Cabota and the English.
who having knowledge of such a new discovery as this was, and perceiving by
the globe, that the Islands before spoken of stood almost in the same latitude
with his country, and much nearer to England then to Portugal, or to Castile,
he acquainted king Henry the seventh then king of England with the same,
wherewith the said king was greatly pleased, and furnished him out with two
ships and three hundred men: which departed and set sail in the spring of the
year, and they sailed westward til they came in sight of land in 45. degrees
of latitude toward the north, and then went straight northwards till they came
into 60. degrees of latitude, where the day is 18. hours long, and the night
is very clear and bright. There they found the air cold, and great Islands of
ice, but no ground in an hundred fathoms sounding: and so from thence finding
the land to turn eastwards they trended along by it discovering all the Bay
and river named Deseado, to see if it passed on the other side: Then they
sailed back again till they came to 38. degrees toward the Equinoctial
line, This is to the south of the Chese^ian Bay.
and from thence returned into England. There he others which say, that he went
as far as the Cape of Florida, which stands in 25. degrees.

In the year 1497. The king of Spain Don Fernando sent out Christopher
Columbus with six ships, Columbus third voyage.
and he himself provided two ships at his own cost, Gomara historiae general.
lib. 2. cap. 21.
and sending his brother before, he made sail from the Bay of Cadiz, carrying
with him his son Don Diego Colon* It was then reported that he went to take
the Island of Madera, because he mistrusted the French men, and therefore sent
thither three ships: others say it was to the Canaries. But howsoever it was,
this is true, that he and three more went unto the Islands of Cape Verde, and
ran along by the line finding great calmes and rain, and the first land which
they came unto of the Antiles was an Island standing in 9. degrees of latitude
toward the north ioining fast unto the maine land, which they called La
Trinidada; Trinidada.
and so he entered into the Gulf of Paria, and came out of the mouth which they
name Bocca de Dragone, or the Dragons mouth: and they took their course hard
by the coast, where they found three small Islands, which they named Los
Testigos, Testigos.
that is to say, Cubagua.
The Witnesses, beyond which stands the Island of Cubagua, where is great
fishing of muscle pearls: where also, as they say, there springs a Well of
aile: and beyond that Island they came to the Isles of Frailes, Roques,
Frailes, Roques, Aruba, Caracao, etc.
Aruba, and Curacao, with other small ones all along the Bay: and they came to
the point of Cabo de Vela, and discovered along the coast almost 200. leagues,
Cabo de Vela.
from whence they crossed over to Hispaniola, having had also sight of the
Island called Beata. Beata.


In this same year 1497. on the 20. day of the month of June one Vasques de
Gama sailed from Lisbon by the king Emmanuels commandment to India with 3.
ships, Barros decad. 1. lib 4 cap. 2. and to the end of the 11. chapter.
wherein there went for captains Vasques de Gama, Paulus de Gama his brother,
and Nicolas Coello with 120. men; with whom also there went one ship laden only
with vittailes, and in 14. days they came unto Cape Verde, unto the Island of
Saint Iago, where they refreshed themselves, and from thence they went along
the coast beyond the Cape of Bona Speranca, The Cape of Bona Speranca.
whereupon they erected certain pillars of stone, and so came unto Mosambique
standing in 15. degrees to the south of the line, Mosambique.
where they stayed not long, but went from thence to Mombaza, Mombaza. Melinde.
and unto Melinde: where the king of that place gave them pilots, which
conducted them into India, in which discovery they found out Los Baxos do
Padua, Los Baxos de Padua.
that is to say, the flats of Padua.

In the year 1498. in the month of May they came to an anchor before the city
of Calicut, Calicut.
and Panana, where they remained all the winter: and the first day of September
they set sail toward the north discovering the coast all along till they came
to the Island of Angediua, which stands on that side in 15. degrees of
latitude, where they came to an anchor in the beginning of October, and so they
departed from Angediua in February in the year 1499. and came in sight of the
coast of Africa about Melinde toward the north 3. or 4. degrees, and from
thence they sailed unto the said city, and so unto Mosambique again, and to
the Cape of Bona Speranca, sailing along by the coast, and then they came to
the Islands of Cape Verde, and last of al to the city of Lisbon in the month
of September, Gomara historiae general lib.
having been in the voyage 26. months.

In the year 1499 on the 13. day of the month of November there departed from
Palos one Vincent Yannez Pinson and his nephew Aries Pinson with four ships
well appointed at their own coast and charges, to discover the new world under
the license of the king of Castile, and with commandment not to touch there,
where the Admiral Columbus had been. And so they went to the Islands of Cape
Verde, and passed the line to the southward, The Cape of S. Augustine.
and discovered the Cape of Saint Augustine standing on that side in 8. degrees
of latitude, and there they wrote on the rindes of pine trees the names of the
king and of the Queen, also the year and day when they arrived there. They
fought with the people of Brasil, but got nothing, Rio de Maria Tambal.
they took their course all along the coast toward the west unto the river
Maria Tambal, and at that time they had taken thirty and odd prisoners. Angla
de San Lucas.
The chief places where they touched were the Cape of S. Augustine, and the
angle or point of S. Luke, The rivers of Marannon, Amazones and Rio Dolce.
and Tierra de los Humos, the Rivers of Marannon, and of the Amazones, and Rio
dolce, or the Sweet river, and other places along the coast: and they came to
ten degrees of latitude on the north side, where they lost two ships and their
company, and remained in that voyage of discovery ten months, and 15. days.

In the year 1500. and in the month of March one Pedro Aluarez Cabral sailed
out of Lisbon with 13. ships, Barros decad. 1. lib. 5 cap. 2.
with commandment not to come near the coast of Africa to shorten his way;
and he losing the sight of one of his ships, went to seek her, and in seeking
of her lost his course, and sailed till he came within sight of the land. The
General was so long in seeking his ship, that the company were weary of it,
and entreated him to leave his enterprise. The next day they fell in sight of
the coast of Brasil: whereupon the General commanded a bark to go to land
and seek an haven: which they did, Puerto Seguro in Brasil.
and found a good and safe haven, and they named it Puerto Seguro, that is to
say, The Safe haven, standing on the south side in 17. degrees of latitude.
From thence they sailed toward the Cape of Bona Speranca, and Melinde, and
crossed over to the river of Cochin, which before was not known, where they
laded themselves with pepper, and at their return Sancho de Thouar discovered
the city of Sofala upon the coast of Africa. Sofala.


In this same year 1500. it is reported that Gaspar Cortereal craved a
general license of the king Emmanuel to discover the New found land. He went
from the Island Tercera with two ships well appointed at his own cost, and he
sailed unto that climate which stands under the north in 50. degrees of
latitude, which is a land now called after his name; Terra Corterealis.
and he came home in safety unto the city of Lisbon: And making another time
this voyage, the ship was lost wherein he went, and the other came back into
Portugal. Wherefore his brother Michael Cortereal went to seek him with three
ships well appointed at his own cost; and when they came unto that coast, and
found so many entrances of rivers, Many entrances of rivers in the northwest.
and havens, every ship went into her several river, with this rule and order,
that they all three should meet again the 20. day of August. The two other
ships did so, and they seeing that Michael Cortereal was not come at the day
appointed, nor yet afterward in a certain time, returned back into the
realm of Portugal, and never heard any more news of him, nor yet any other
memory. But that country is called The land of Cortereall unto this day.

In the year 1501. in the month of March John de Noua departed from the city
of Lisbon with four ships, Barros decad. 1. lib. 5. cap. 10.
and passed the line on the south side into 8. degrees of latitude, and he
discovered an Island, I^^ha de Ascension.
which he called the Isle de Ascension: And he went unto Mosambique, and to
Melinde, and from thence he crossed over unto the other side, where they took
lading, and so came back and doubled the Cape, and found an Island called Santa
Helena, The Isle of Santa Helena.
being but a small thing, but yet of great importance in respect of the
situation thereof.

In this same year 1501. and in the month of May there departed out of Lisbon
three ships upon the commandment of Emmanuel the king to discover the coast of
Brasil: and they sailed in the sight of the Canaries, and from thence to Cape
Verde, Bezequiche.
where they refreshed themselves in the town of Bezequiche, and passed from
thence beyond the line southward and fell with the land of Brasill in five
degrees of latitude, Brasil discovered to 32. degrees.
and so went forward till they came in 32. degrees little more or less,
according as they accounted it, and from thence they came back in the month
of April, because it was there at that time cold and tempestuous. They were in
that voyage fifteen months, and came to Lisbon again in the beginning of
September 1502.

In the y^ere 1502. one Alfonso Hoieda went to discover Terra firma, Gomara
historiae general. lib. 2.
and followed his course till he came to his province of Vraba. Vraba.


The next year following also one Roderigo Bastidas of Civil went out with
two carauels at his own cost, and the first land of the Antiles that he saw
was an Island which he named Isla Verde, that is, the Green Island, standing
fast by the Island of Guadalupe, toward the land: and from thence they took
their course toward the west to Santa Martha, and Cape De la Vela, and to Rio
Grande, or the Great river, and they discovered the haven of Zamba, the
Coradas, Carthagena, and the Islands of S. Barnard, of Baru, and Islas de
Arenas, and went forward unto Isla fuerte, and to the point of Caribana
standing at the end of the Gulf of Vraba, where they had sight of the
Farrallones standing on the other side hard by the river of Darien, and from
Cape De la Vela unto this place are two hundred leagues: and it stands in 9.
degrees and two parts of latitude. From thence they crossed over unto the
Island of Iamaica, where they refreshed themselves. In Hispaniola they graued
their ships because of the holes which certain worms of the water had eaten
in the planks. In that country they got four hundred marks of gold,
although the people there be more warlike then in Noua Spania: for they poison
their arrows which they shoot.

In this same year 1502. Christopher Columbus entered the fourth time into his
discovery with four ships at the commandment of Don Fernando to seek the
Straight, The fourth voyage of Columbus.
which as they said did divide the land from the other side, Gomara historiae
general. l^b. 1. cap. 24.
and he carried with him Ferdinando his son. They went first to the Island of
Hispaniola, to Iamaica, to the river Azua, to the Cape of Higueras, Cabo de
Higueras.
and unto the Islands Gamares, and to the Cape of Hunduras, Cabo de Hunduras.
that is to say, the Cape of the Depthes: from thence they sailed toward the
east unto the Cape Gracias a Dios, Cabo Gracias a Dios.
and discovered the province and river of Veragua, and Rio Grande, Veragua.
and others, which the Indians call Hienra. And from thence he went to the
river of Crocodiles, which now is called Rio de Chagres, Rio de Chagres.
which has his springs near the South Sea, within four leagues of Panama,
and runs into the North Sea: and so he went unto the Island which he called
Isla de Bastimentos, Isla de Bastimentos.
that is the Isle of Victuailes, Puerto Bello.
and then to Puerto Bello, that is the Fair haven, and so unto Nombre de Dios,
Nombre de Dios.
and to Rio Francisco, and so to the haven of Retrete, and then to the Gulf of
Cabesa Cattiua, and to the Islands of Caperosa, The Cape of marble.
and lastly to the Cape of Marble, which is two hundred leagues upon the coast:
from whence they began to turn again unto the Island of Cuba, and from thence
to Iamaica, where he grounded his ships being much spoiled and eaten with
worms.

In this year also 1502 Don Vasques de Gama being now Admiral went again
into India with 19. or 20. Carauels. Barros decad. 1. lib. 6. cap. 2.
He departed from Lisbon the tenth day of February, and by the last day of
that month he came to an anchor at Cape Verde, The Island of Mosambique.
and from thence he went unto Mosambique, and was the first that crossed from
that Island into India: and he discovered another in 4. degrees of latitude,
which he called the Island of the Admiral, and there he took his lading of
pepper and drugs, and left there one Vincent Sodre to keep the coast of India
with five ships.

These were the first Portugals, that with an army did run along the coast of
Arabia Foelix. It is there so barren, that their cattle and camels are only
maintained with dry fish brought from the sea; Cattle and camels led with
dried fish.
whereof there is such plenty and abundance, that the cats of the country do
use to take them.

In the year following, as it is reported, one Antonie de Saldanta discovered
the Island which in old time was called Coradis, Socotora.
and now Socotora, and the Cape of Guardafu, which adioineth unto that
country. Cape de Guardafu.


In the year 1504. Roderigo de Bastidas obtained license of king Ferdinando,
and by the means of John de Lodesma and others of Civil armed and furnished
out two ships, having for his pilot one John de Cosa of Saint Marie Port, and
he went to discover that part of Tierra firma where now stands Carthagena,
Carthagena.
being in ten degrees and a half of northerly latitude. And it is said that
they found the captain Luis de la Guerra; Codego.
and they together took land in the Isle of Codego, where they took six
hundred persons of the Savages: And going farther along the coast they entered
into the Gulf of Vraba, where they found sand mingled with gold, being the
first that was brought to the king Don Ferdinando: from thence they returned to
the city of Santo Domingo laden with slaves without victuailes, because they
of the country would not bargain with them, which grew to their great trouble
and grief.

In the later end of this year died Lady Isabella Queen of Castile: The
death of Queen Isabella 150^.
Which Queen while she lived would not suffer any man of Arragon, Catalunia,
Valencia, nor any borne in the country of Don Fernando her husband to enter
into these discoueries, save those which were their servants, or by special
commandment, but only the Castillians, Biscaines, and those which were of her
own Signiories, by whom all the lands aforesaid were discovered.

In the year 1505. upon our Lady day in March Francisco de Almeida Viceroy of
India took his course with 22. sails toward India as now is accustomed.
Barros decad. 1. lib. 8. cap. 3.
He came unto the city of Quiloa, A fort built in Quiloa.
where he built a fort, appointing one Peter Fereira to be captain thereof:
and beyond Melinde he trauersed to the Island of Angediua, Angediua possessed.
where he placed as captain one Emmanuell Passauia. Forts builded in Cananor
and in Cochin.
In Cananor also he built another fort, giving the captainship of it to
Laurence de Brito. In Cochin he did the like, where Don Alfonso de Noronia was
made captain. A fort builded in Sofala.
This year one Peter de Anhaya did build the fortress of Sofala, whereof also
himself was made captain.

In the later end of this year the Viceroy commanded his son, whose name was
Don Laurenco to make some entry upon the Islands of Maldiua, and with
contrary weather he arrived at the Islands, which of ancient time were called
Traganae, but the Moors called them Ytterubenero, and we call them Ceilan:
Ceilan.
where he went on land, and made peace with the people there, and afterward
came back unto Cochin, sailing along the coast and fully discovering it. In
the midst of this Island there stands a rock of stone very high having the
sign of the foot of a man upon the top of it, which they say to be the
footestep of Adam, when he went up into the heavens, and the Indians have it in
great reverence.

In the year 1506. after the death of the Queen of Spain, king Philip and
Queen Joan his wife came into Spain to take possession thereof, and king Don
Fernando went into Arragon being his own patrimony. The death of Philip the
first king of Spain 1506.
In this same year the said king Philip died, and then Fernando came again to
govern Spain, and he gave license unto all Spaniards to go unto the New
land, and to the A^tiles, but not to the Portugals. The death of Christopher
Columbus.
In this year and in the month of May Christopher Columbus died, and his
son Don Diego Columbus succeeded in his room.

In the year 1506. and entering into the month of March Tristan de Acunna and
Alfonso de Albuquerque went into India with 14. ships in their company, Barros
decad. 2. lib. 1. cap. 1.
and sailed till they came to an anchor at the town of Bezequiche, Bezequiche
is by Cape Verde.
where they refreshed themselves: and before they came to the Cape of Bona
Speranca in 37. degrees they found certain Islands, which now are named the
Isles of Tristan de Acunna, The Isles of Tristan de Acunna in 37. degrees.
where they had such a tempest that therewithal the fleet was dispersed.
Tristan de Acun^a and Alfonso de Albuquerque went unto Mosambique, and Aluaro
Telez ran so far that he came to the Island of Samatra, Samatra discovered.
and so back again unto the Cape of Guardatu; having discovered many Islands,
sea, and land never seen before that time of any Portugal. Emmanuel Telez de
Meneses was also driven without the great Island of S. Laurence, and he ran
along the coast thereof, and arrived at last at Mosambique, and there met with
Tristan de Acun^a, who was the first captain that wintred there; and by them
it was told, that in this Island was much Ginger, Cloves, and silver: The
Inland of S. Laurence discovered.
whereupon he went and discovered much of it within the land; but finding
nothing he came back again unto Mosambique; from whence he sailed unto
Melinde, and ran along that coast and entered into Braua, Braua.
and from thence they crossed over to the Island of Socotora, A fortress builded
in Soc^tora.
where they built a fortress, Barros decad. 2. lib. 2. cap. 1.
and made one Don Antonio de Noronia captain thereof.

In the year 1507. in the month of August Tristan de Acun^a took shipping
for India, and Alfonso de Albuquerque remained there with five or six ships to
keep the coast and entry of the Straight; but being not therewith satisfied
he took his course over unto Arabia, and running along that coast he doubled
the Cape of Rosalgate standing under the Tropicke of Cancer. The Cape of
Rosalgate.


In the year 1509. one Diego Lopez de Sequeira went out of Lisbon with four
sails unto the Island of Saint Laurence, Barros decad. 2. lib. 1. cap. 3.
and continued in his voyage almost a year, The Isle of S. Laurence.
and in the month of May the same year he arrived in Cochin, where the
Viceroy gave him one ship more: and in the beginning of the month of September
he took his course unto Malacca passing between the Islands of Nicubar, The
Islands of Nicubar.
and many others: He went also to the land of Samatra to the cities of Pedir
and Pacem, Samatra.
and all along by all that coast unto the Island of A Poluoreira, The Isle of A
Poluoreira.
and the flats of Capacia: and from thence he went over unto Malacca standing
in 2. degrees of latitude toward the north: The flats of Capacia.
but in that city the people killed and took as prisoners some of his men:
Malacca.
and thereupon he turned back again into India, having discovered in this
voyage five hundred leagues. Rarities in Samatra.
This Island of Samatra is the first land wherein we knew man's flesh to be
eaten by certain people which live in the mountains called Bacas, who use to
gilde their teeth. They hold opinion that the flesh of the black people is
sweeter then the flesh of the white. In Samatra buffes, kine, and hens have
flesh as black as ink.
The buffes, kine, and hens which are in that country are in their flesh as
black as any ink. They say that there are certain people there called
Daraqui Dara, People having tails like sheep.
which have tails like unto sheep; and some of their wells yield oil.

The king of Pedir is reported to have a river in his land running with oil:
which is a thing not to be marvelled at, seeing it is found written, that in
Bactria there is also a well of oil: it is farther said that there grows
here a tree, the juice whereof is strong poison, and if it touch the blood of a
man, he dies immediately: but if a man do drink of it, it is a sovereign
remedy against poison, so serving both for life and death. Gold coined in
Samatra.
Here also they do coin pieces of gold, which they call Drachmas, brought
into the land as they say by the Romans: which seems to have some
resemblance of truth: because that from that place forward there is no coined
gold: but that which is thus coined does run current in the buying of
merchandise and other things.

In the year 1508. one Alfonso de Hoieda with the favor of Don Fernando
purposed to go unto Tierra firma to conquer the province of Darien. Gomara
historiae general. lib. 3. cap. 7.
He went forth at his own charges, and discovered The Firm land, where it is
called Vraba, which he named Castilia del Oro, Castilia del oro.
that is Golden Castilia, because of the gold which they found among the sand
along the coast: And they were the first Spaniards that did this. Alfonso de
Hoieda went first from the Island of Hispaniola and the city of San Domingo
with four ships and three hundred soldiers, The book of the Bachiler Anciso
of these discoueries.
leaving behind him the bachiler Anciso, who afterward compiled a book of
these discoueries. And after him there went also one ship with victuals,
munition, and 150. Spaniards. He went on land at Carthagena: but there the
people of the country took, slew and eat 70. of his soldiers, whereupon he
grew very weak.

In this year 1508. one Drego de Niquesa prepared seven ships in the port of
Beata to go unto Veragua, Beata is a province in the west part of H^^paniola.
and carried in them almost 800. men. When he came to Carthagena he found there
Alfonso de Hoieda sore spoiled with his former loss: but then they both joined
together, and went on land and avenged themselves of the people. And in this
voyage Diego de Niquesa went and discovered the coast called Nombre de Dios,
and went unto the sound of Darien, and called it Puerto de Misas, Gomara genesis
hist. lib. 3. cap. 6.
which is upon the river of Pito. When they were come unto Veragua, he went on
shore with his army, his soldiers being out of hope to return to Hispaniola.
Alfonso de Hoieda began a fortress in Caribana against the Caribes; which was
the first town that the Spaniards builded in the Firm land: Nuestra Sennora
de la antigua builded.
and in Nombre de Dios they built another, and called it Nuestra Sennora de la
Antigua. They builded also the town of Vraba. And there they left for their
captain and lieutenant one Francis Pisarro, who was there much troubled. They
builded other towns also, whose names I here omit. But these captains had not
that good success which they hoped for.

In the year 1509. the second Admiral Don Diego Columbus went into the Island
of Hispaniola with his wife and household: Many gentlewomen went to dwell in
Hispaniola.
And she being a gentlewoman carried with her many other women of good
families, which were there married, and so the Spaniards and Castillians began
to people the country: for Don Fernando the king had given them license to
discover and people the towns of Hispaniola; so that the same place grew to be
famous and much frequented. The foresaid. Admiral also gave order to people
the Island of Cuba, Cuba peopled.
which is very great and large, and placed there as his lieutenant one Diego
Velasques, who went with his father in the second voyage.

In the year 1511. in the month of April Alfonso de Albuquerque went from
the city of Cochin unto Malaeca. Barros decad. 2. lib. 5 cap 10. and lib. 6.
cap. 2.
In which year and month the Chineans went from Malaeca into their own
country, Barros decad. 2. lib. 6. cap. 5.
and Alfonso sent with them for master a Portugal called Duarte Fernandes,
with letters also and order unto the king of the Mantias, which now is called
Sian standing in the South. The Straight of Cincapura.
They passed through the straight of Cincapura, and sailed toward the north,
went along the coast of Patane unto the city of Cuy, Odia the chief city of
Sian.
and from thence to Odia which is the chief city of the kingdom, standing in
14. degrees of northerly latitude. The king greatly honored and welcomed
Duarte Fernandes, being the first Portugal that he had seen, and with him he
sent back ambassadors to Albuquerque. They passed over land toward the west
unto the city of Tanacerim standing upon the sea on the other side in 12.
degrees, Tanacerim.
where they embarked themselves in two ships, and sailed along the coast unto
the city of Malacca, leaving it all discovered.

The people of this country of Sian are people that eat of all kind of
beasts, M. Ralph Fitch which had been in this country brought diverse of
these bells into England.
or vermin. They have a delight to carry round bells within the skin of their
privy members: which is forbidden to the king and the religious people. It is
said that of all other people of those parts they be most virtuous and honest.
They commend themselves much for their chastity and poverty. They bring no
heunes nor doves up in their houses. This kingdom has in length 250. leagues,
and in breadth 80. Of this only kingdom the king may bring forth into the
field thirty thousand elephants, when he goes to war, besides those which
remain in the cities for the guard of them. The king much esteems a white
elephant, and a red one also, that has eyes like unto flaming fire.

There is in this country a certain small vermin, which uses to cleave fast
to the trunk of the elephant, and draws the blood of the elephant, and so he
dies thereof. The skull of this vermin is so hard, that the shot of an
handgun cannot enter it: they have in their livers the figures of men and
women, which they call Toke^a, and are much like unto a mandrake. The liver of
a little beast good against any wo^d of iron.
And they affirm that he which has one of them about him cannot die with the
stroke of any iron. They have also wild kine in this country, in the heads of
whom they find stones, which are of virtue to bring good hap and fortune to
merchants.

After that Duarte Fernandes had been with the Mantales or people of Sian,
Alfonso de Albuquerque sent thither a knight called Ruy Nunnez de Acunna with
letters and embassage unto the king of the Seguies, Pegu.
which we call Pegu. He went in a Iunco of the country in sight of the Cape
Rachado, and from thence went unto the city of Pera which stands fast by the
river Salano, Pera.
and many other villages standing all along this river, where Duarte Fernandes
had been before, unto the cities of Tanacerim and of Martauan, standing in 15.
degrees toward the north, and the city of Pegu stands in 17. This was the
first Portugal, which travailed in that kingdom: Master Ralph Fitch saw this
in Pegu also.
and he gave good information of that country, and of the people, which use to
were bells in their priuities even as the Mantales do.

In the end of this year 1511. Barros decad 2. lib 6. cap. 7.
Alfonso de Albuquerque sent three ships to the Islands of Banda, The Isles of
Banda and Maluco.
and Maluco. And there went as General of them one Antonio de Breu, and with
him also went one Francis Serrano: and in these ships there were 120. persons.
They passed through the Straight of Saban, and along the Island of Samatra, and
others, leaving them on the left hand, toward the east: and they called them
the Salites. The Salites.
They went also to the Islands of Palinibam and La Suparam; from whence they
sailed by the noble Island of Iaua, Iaua.
and they ran their course east, sailing between it and the Island of Madura.
Madura.
The people of this Island are very warlike and strong, and do little regard
their lives. The women also are there hired for the wars: and they fall out
often together, and kill one another, as the Mocos do, delighting only in
shedding of blood.

Beyond the Island of Iaua they sailed along by another called Bali: Bali.
and then came also unto others called Aujaue, cambaba, Solor, Or Guliam.
Galao, Mallua, Vitara, Rosalangum, and Or Aru.
Arus, from whence are brought delicate birds, which are of great estimation
because of their feathers: they came also to other Islands lying in the same
parallele on the south side in 7. or 8. degrees of latitude. And they be so
nere the one to the other, that they seem at the first to be one entire and
maine land. The course by these Islands is above five hundred leagues. The
ancient Cosmographers call all these Islands by the name Iauos: but late
experience has found their names to be very diverse, as you see. Beyond these
there are other Islands toward the north, which are inhabited with whiter
people going arraied in shirts, The people of the Isles of Maluco wear such
apparel.
doublets and slops like unto the Portugals, having also money of silver. The
governors among them do carry in their hands red staves, Governors carrying
red staves like those of China.
whereby they seem to have some affinity with the people of China. There are
other Islands and people about this place, which are read; and it is reported
that they are of the people of China.

Antonie de Breu and those that went with him took their course toward the
north, where is a small Island called Gumnape or Ternate, Ternate.
from the highest place whereof there fall continually into the sea flakes or
streams like unto fire; which is a wonderful thing to behold. Burro.
From thence they went to the Islands of Burro and Amboino, Amboino.
and came to an anchor in an haven of it called Guliguli, Guliguli.
where they went on land and took a village standing by the river, where they
found dead men hanging in the houses; for the people there are eaters of man's
flesh. Here the Portugals burnt the ship wherein Francis Serrano was, for she
was old and rotten. They went to a place on the other side standing in 8.
degrees toward the south, Cloves, nutmegs, and mace in 8. degrees toward the
south.
where they laded cloves, nutmegs, and mace in a Iunco or bark which Francis
Serrano bought here.

They say that not far from the Islands of Banda there is an Island, where
there breeds nothing else but snakes, and the most are in one cave in the
midst of the land. This is a thing not much to be woondred at; for as much as
in the Leuant sea hard by the Isles of Maiorca and Minorca there is another
Island of old named Ophi^sa, and now Formentera, wherein there is great
abundance of these vermin: and in the rest of the Islands lying by it there
are none.

In the year 1512. they departed from Banda toward Malacea, and on the baxos
or flats of Lucapinho Francis Serrano perished in his Iunke or bark, from
whence escaped unto the Isle of Mindanao nine or ten Portugals which were with
him, Mindanao.
and the kings of Maluco sent for them. Maluco.
These were the first Portugals that came to the Islands of Cloves, which stand
from the Equinoctial line toward the north in one degree, where they lived
seven or eight years.

The Island of Gumnape now called Ternate is much to be admired, for that it
casts out fire. There were some princes of the Moors and courageous
Portugals which determined to go near to the fiery place to see what it was;
but they could never come near it. But Antonie Galuano hearing of it,
undertook to go up to it, and did so, and found a river so extreme cold, that
he could not suffer his hand in it, nor yet put any of the water in his mouth:
And yet this place stands under the line, where the sun continually
burns. In these Islands of Maluco there is a kind of men that have spurs
on their ankles like unto cocks. Monstrous men.
And it was told me by the king of Tydore, Batochina.
that in the Islands of Batochina there were people that had tails, and had a
thing like unto a dug between their cods, out of the which there came milk.
There are small hens also which lay their eggs under the ground above a
fathom and an half, and the eggs are bigger then ducks eggs, and many of
these hens are black in their flesh. There are hogs also with horns, and
parats which prattle much, which they call Noris. There is also a river of
water so hot, that whatsoever living creature comes into it, their skins will
come off, and yet fish breed in it. There are crabs which be very sweet, and
so strong in their claws, that they will break the iron of a pik^axe. There
be others also in the sea little and hairie, but whosoever eats of them dies
immediately. There be likewise certain oisters, which they do call Bras, the
shells whereof have so large a compass, that they do Christen in them. In the
sea also there are lively stones, which do grow and increase like unto fish,
whereof very good lime is made: and if they let it lie when it is taken out of
the water, it loses the strength, and it never burns after. The flowers of
Xistus and Arbor (...) are such.
There is also a certain tree, which bears flowers at the sun set, which
fall down as soon as they be grown. There is a fruit also, as they say,
whereof if a woman that is conceived of child eats, the child by and by
moves. There is further a kind of herb there growing, which follows the
sun, and remooueth after it, which is a very strange and maruailous thing.

In the year 1512. in the month of January Alfonsus de Albuquerque went
back from Malaca unto Goa, Barros decad 2. lib. 7. cap. 1.
and the ship wherein he went was lost, and the rest went from his company.
The Isles of Maldiua.
Simon de Andrada, and a few Portugals were driven unto the Islands of Maldiua
being many and full of palm trees: and they stand low by the water: which
stayed there till they knew what was become of their governor. These were the
first Portugals that had seen those Islands, wherein there grow Cocos, which
are very good against all kind of poison.

In this year 1512. there went out of Castile one John de Solis borne in
Lisbon, John de Solis.
and chief pilot unto Don Fernando. And he having license went to discover the
coast of Brasill. He took the like course that the Pinsons had done: he went
also to the Cape of S. Augustine, and went forwards to the south, coasting the
shore and land, and he came unto The Port De Lagoa: and in 35. degrees of
southerly latitude he found a river which they of Brasill call Parana-guacu,
that is, The great Water. He saw there signs of silver, and therefore called
it Rio de Plata, Rio de Plata.
that is, The River of silver. And it is said that at that time he went farther
because he liked the country well: but he returned back again into Spain,
and made account of all things to Don Fernando, demanding of the king the
government thereof, which the king granted him. Pet. Martyr. decad. 3 cap. 10.
Whereupon he provided three ships and with them in the year 1515. he went
again into that kingdom; but he was there slain. These Solisses were great
discouerers in those parts, and spent therein their lives and goods.

In the same year 1512. John Ponce of Leon, which had been goueruour of the
Isle of S. John armed two ships and went to seek the Isle of Boyuca, where the
naturals of the country reported to be a Well, Pet. Martyr. decad. 2 cap 10.
which makes old men young. Whereupon he labored to find it out, Gomara
historiae general. lib. 2. cap. 10.
and was in searching of it the space of six months, but could find no such
thing. He entered into the Isle of Bimini; Bimini Islands.
and discovered a point of the firm land standing in 25. degrees toward the
north upon Easter day, Florida.
and therefore he named it Florida. And because the land seemed to yield gold
and silver and great riches, Martyr. decad. 3. cap. 10.
he begged it of the king Don Fernando, but he died in the discovery of it, as
many more have done.

In the year 1513. Vasco Nuns de Valboa hearing speech and news of The
south sea, Pet Mart^r. de^ad. 3. cap. 1.
determined to go thither, although his company dissuaded him from that
action. But being a man of good valor with those soldiers that he had, being
290. he resolved to put himself into that ieoperdie. He went therefore from
Dariene the first day of September, carrying some Indians of the country with
him to be his guides, and he marched overthwart the land sometimes quietly,
sometimes in war: and in a certain place called Careca he found Negroes
captives with curled hair. The South sea dis^o^ered.
This Valboa came to the sight of the South Sea on the 25. day of the said
month, and on Saint Michaels day came unto it: where he embarked himself
against the will of Chiapes, who was the Lord of that coast, who wished him not
to do so, because it was very dangerous for him. But he desirous to have it
known, that he had been upon those seas, went forwards, and came back again
to land in safety, and with great contentment, bringing with him good store of
gold, silver, and pearls, which there they took. For which good service of
his Don Ferdinando the king greatly favored and honored him.

This year 1513. in the month of February Alfonsus de Albuquerque went from
the city of Goa toward the straight of Mecha with twenty ships. Barro^ decad.
2. lib. 7 cap. 7.
They arrived at the city of Aden and battered it, The straight of Mecha or of
the Red sea discovered.
and passed forward and entered into the Straight. They say that they saw a
cross in the element and worshipped it. The Isle of Camaran.
They wintered in the Island of Camaran* This was the first Portugal captain
that gave information of those seas, and of that of Persia, being things in the
world of great account.

In the year 1514. and in the month of May there went out of Saint Lu^ar one
Pedro Arias de Auila at the commandment of Don Ferdinando. Pet. Martyr. decad.
3. cap. 5.
He was the fourth governor of Castillia del Oro or Golden Castile: for so
they named the countries of Dariene, Carthagena, and Vraba, and that country
which was newly conquered. He carried with him his wife the Lady Elizabeth and
1500. men in seven ships; and the king appointed Vasco Nunnez de Valboa
governor of the South Sea and of that coast.

In the beginning of the year 1515. the governor Pedro Arias de Auila sent
one Gaspar Morales with 150. men unto the Gulf of S. Michael to discover the
Islands of Tararequi, Chiapes, and Tumaccus. There was a Casique Valboas friend
which gave him many Canoas or boats made of one tree to row in, The Island of
Tararequi or of pearls in the South sea.
wherein they passed unto The Island of pearls: the Lord whereof resisted them
at their coming on land. But Chiapes and Tumaccus did pacify him in such
order, that the captain of the Isle had them home unto his house, Martyr.
decad. 3. cap. 10.
and made much of them, Gomara historia^ general. lib. ^. cap. 2.
and received baptism at their hands, naming him Pedro Arias after the
governors name, and he gave unto them for this a basket full of pearls waying
110. pounds, whereof some were as big as hasell nuts of 20. 25. 26. or 31.
carats: and every carat is four grains. There was given for one of them 1200.
ducats. This Island of Tararequi stands in 5. degrees of latitude toward the
north.

In this year 1515. in the month of March the governor sent one Gonsaluo de
Badaios with 80. soldiers to discover new lands, and they went from Dariene to
Nombre de Dios, where came unto them one Lewis de Mercado with fifty men more,
which the governor sent to aid him. They determined to discover toward the
South, Pet. Martyr. decad. 3. cap. 1^.
saying that that country was the richest. They took with them Indians to be
their guides, and going along the coast they found slaves marked with irons as
the Portugals do use; and having marched a good way through the countries
with great travail they gathered together much gold and forty slaves to do
them service: but one Casique named Pariza did set upon them and slew and took
the most part of them.

The governor hearing of these news, the same year 1515. sent forth his
son John Arias de Auila to be revenged and to discover also by sea and by
land: They went westward to Cape De Guerra standing in little more then six
degrees toward the north, Cape de Guerra.
and from thence unto Punta de Borica, Punta de Borica.
and to Cape Blanco or the White Cape standing in 8. degrees and an half: Cape
Blanco.
they discovered 250. leagues as they affirm, Panama peopled.
and peopled the city of Panama.

In this very year 1515. in the month of May Alfonsus de Albuquerque
governor of India sent from the city of Ormuz one Fernando Gomes de Lemos as
ambassador unto Xec or Shaugh Ismael king of Persia: Barros decad. 2. lib. 10.
cap. 5.
and it is declared that they travailed in it 300. leagues, Osorius lib. 10.
page 277.
and that it is a pleasant country like unto France. An embassage to^ Ismael
king of Persia.
This Xe^ or Shaugh Ismael went on hunting and fishing for troutes, whereof
there are many. And there be the fairest women in all the world. And so
Alexander the great affirmed, when he called them The women with golden eyes.
And this year this worthy Viceroy Alfonsus de Albuquerque died.

In the year 1416. and one hundred years after the taking of Ceuta in
Barba^ie, Lopez Suares being governor of India, there was a dispatch made by
the commandment of the kings highness unto one Fernando Perez de Andrada to
pass to the great country and kingdom of China. He went from the city of
Cochin in the month of April. They received pepper, Pepper a principal
ma^chandise in China.
being the principal merchandise to be sold in all China of any value: And he
was farther commanded by the king Don Emmanuel to go also to Bengala with his
letter and dispatch to a knight called John Coelo. This was the first Portugal
as far as I know, which drunk of the water of the river Ganges.

This year 1516. died Don Fernando king of Spain. The death of Fernando king
of Spain.


In the year 1517. this Fernando Perez went unto the city of Malacha, Osorius
lib. 11. fol. 312.
and in the month of June he departed from thence toward China with eight
sails four Portugals and the others Malayans. China discovered.
He arrived in China: And because he could not come on land without an
embassage, there was one Thomas Perez which had order for it: and he went from
the city of Canton, Canton.
where they came to an anchor: They went by land four hundred leagues, and came
unto the city of Or Pakin.
Pekin, where the king was for this province and country is the biggest that
is in the world. It begins at Sailana in twenty degrees of latitude
toward the north, and it ends almost in 50. degrees. Which must be 500.
leagues in length: and they say that it contains 300. leagues in breadth.
Fernando Perez was 14. months in the Isle Da Veniaga, (...) da Veniaga or Tama
according to Osorius.
learning as much as he could of the country, according as the king his master
had commanded him. And although one Raphael Perestrello had been there in a
Iunke or bark of certain merchants of Malaca, yet unto Fernando Perez there
ought to be given the praise of this discovery: as well for that he had
commandment from the king, as in discovering so much with Thomas Perez by
land, and George Mascarenhas by sea, Foquiem.
and for coasting unto the city of Foquiem standing in 24. degrees of latitude.

In this same year 1517. Charles, which afterward was Emperor, The coming of
Charles the fifth into Spain.
came into Spain, and took possession thereof. And in the same year Francis
Fernandes de Cordoua, Christopher Morantes, Gomar. hist. genesis lib. 3. cap. 2.
and Lopez Ochoa armed three ships at their own proper charges from the Island
of Cuba. They had also with them a bark of Diego Velasques, who then was
governor: Iucatan.
They came on land in Iucatan standing in 20. degrees of latitude at a point
which they called Punta de las Duennas, that is to say, The point of Ladies,
which was the first place wherein they had seen Temples and buildings of lime
and stone. The people here go better apparelled then in any other place. They
have crosses which they worship, setting them upon their tombs when they be
buried. Whereby it seems that in times past they had in that place the faith
of Christ among them. And some say that thereabouts were The seven Cities. The
Seven cities.
They went round about it toward the north which is on the right hand: from
whence they turned back unto the Island of Cuba with some examples of gold,
and men which they had taken. And this was the first beginning of the
discovery of New Spain.

In the year 1518. Lopez Suares commanded Don John de Silueira to go to the
Islands of Maldiua: Castagneda lib. 4. cap. 36. and 37.
and he made peace with them: Osorius lib. 11. fol. 315. page 2.
and from thence he went to the city of Chatigam situated on the mouth of the
river Ganges under the Tropicke of Cancer. Chatigam in Bengala.
For this river, and the river Indus, which stands an hundred leagues beyond
the city of Diu, and that of Canton in China do all fall int the sea under
one parallele or latitude. And although before that time Fernan Perez had been
commanded to go to Bengala, yet notwithstanding John de Silueira ought to
bear away the commendation of this discovery: because he went as captain
general, and remained there longest, learning the commodities of the country,
and manners of the people.

In the said year 1518. the first day of May Diego Velasques governor of the
Island of Cuba sent his nephew John de Grisalua with four ships and two
hundred soldiers to discover the land of Iucatan. Pet. Martyr. decad. 4. cap.
3.Gomar. hist. genesis lib. 2* cap. 14. and cap. 17.
And they found in their way the Island of Or Acuzamil.
Cosumel standing toward the north in 19. degrees, and named it Santa Cruz,
because they came to it the third of May. The Isle of Ascension.
They coasted the land lying upon the left hand of the Gulf, and came to an
Island called Ascension, because they came unto it upon Ascension day* The Bay
of Hunduras.
They went unto the end of it standing in 16. degrees of latitude: from whence
they came back because they could find no place to go out at: and from hence
they went round about it to another river, which they called The river of
Grisalua standing in 17. degrees of latitude: ^io de Grisalua.
the people thereabout troubled them sore, yet notwithstanding they brought
from thence some gold, silver, and feathers, being there in great estimation,
and so they turned back again to the Island of Cuba.

In the same year 1518. one Francis Garay armed three ships in the Isle of
Iamaica at his own charges, Gomar. hist. genesis lib. 2. cap. 12. and 61
and went toward the point of Florida standing in 25. degrees toward the
north, seeming to them to be an Island most pleasant, thinking it better to
people Islands then the firm land, because they could best conquer them and
keep them. They went there on land, but the people of Florida killed many of
them, so that they durst not inhabit it. So they sailed along the coast,
Panuco.
and came unto the river of Panuco, standing 500. leagues from the point of
Florida in sailing along the coast; but the people resisted them in every
place. Many of them also were killed in Chila, whom the Savages flaied and
eat, hanging up their skins in their Temples in memorial of their
valiantnes. Notwithstanding all thi^ Francis de Garay went thither the next
year and begged the government of that country of the Emperor, because he
saw in it some show of gold and silver.

In the year 1519. in the month of February Fernando Cortes went from the
Island of Cuba to the land which is called Noua Spania with 11. ships and 550.
Spaniards in them. Pet. Martyr. decad. 4. cap. 6.
The first place where he went on land was the Island of Cosumel; where they
immediately destroyed all the Idols, and set crosses on the altars and the
images of the virgin Marie. Gomar. hist. gen lib. 2. cap. 18. etc.
From this Island they went and arrived on the firm land of Iucatan, at the
point De las Duen^as, or the point of Ladies, Tauasco.
and went thence to the river of Tauasco, and set upon a city fast by called
Potoncian environed with wood, Potoncian now called Victoria.
and the houses were built with lime and stone, and covered with tile: they
fought there egarly; and there appeered unto them S. James on horseback, which
increased their courage. They called that city Victoria: and they were the
first people which were subdued to the Spaniards obedience in all New Spain.
From hence they went discovering the coast till they came unto a place named S.
John de Vllhua, S. John de Vllhua
distant as they said from Mexico where the king Mutecuma was, 60. or 70.
leagues: and there was a servant of his that governed that province, named
Tendilli, which gave them good entertainment, although they understood not one
another. But Cortes had 20. women, whereof one was called Marine borne in tha^
country: They were the first that were baptized in New Spain. And from that
time forward Marine and Aguilar served as interpreters. Tendilli presently gave
knowledge of this unto Mutecuma, that a kind of bearded people were arrived in
his country: for so they called the Castillians. But he was troubled upon that
news: for his Gods, (which are to be thought to be devils) had told him, that
such people as the Spaniards were should destroy his law and country, and be
Lords thereof. And therefore he sent gifts unto Cortes, in value 20. thousand
ducats, but would not come to him.

Because S. John de Vllhua was then no place for a navy to ride in, Cortes
sent Francis de Mont^io, and the pilot Antonie Alaminos in two brigandines to
discover that coast; who came to a place where they might ride without danger.
They came to Panuco standing in 23. degrees northward: Gomara historiae
general. lib. 2. cap. 21. 22. 23* 24.
from whence they came back upon an agreement to go unto Culuacan being an
haven of more safety. They set sail, but Cortes went by land westward with
the most part of his men on horseback, Zempoallan.
and they came unto a city called Zempoallan; where they were well received.
And from thence he went to another town called Chiauitztlan: Chiauitztlan.
with the Lord of which town as with all the country besides he made league
to be against Mutecuma. And when he knew that his ships were come, he went unto
them, and there builded a town, Villa rica de la vera Cruz.
and called it Villa rica de la vera cruz. From whence he sent unto Charles the
Emperor a present, and made report of all that he had done, and how he
determined to go to Mexico, and to visit Mutecuma: and besought the Emperor
to give him the government of that country. And because his people should not
rise in mutiny, as they began, he destroyed all his ships.

Cortes presently went from Villa rica de la vera Cruz, leaving there 150.
Spanish horsemen, and many Indians to serve them; and the villages round about
became his friends. He went unto the city of Zempoallan: Gomara historiae
general. lib. 2. cap. 61.
there he heard news that Francis Garay was on the coast with four ships to
come on land: And by subtlety he got nine of his men; of whom he understood,
that Garay had been in Florida, and came unto the river Panuco, where he got
some gold, determining to stay there in a town which is now called Almeria.

Cortos overthrew the idols in Zempoallan, Gomar. hist. genesis lib. 2. cap. 25.
and the tombs of their kings, whom they worshipped as Gods, and told them
that they were to worship the true God. From thence he went toward Mexico the
16. day of August 1519. and travailed three days journey, Zalapan.
and came to the city of Zalapan, and to another beyond it named Sicuchimatl,
Sicuchimatl.
where they were well received, and offered to be conducted to Mexico, because
Mutecuma had given such commandment. Beyond this place he passed with his
company a certain hill of three leagues high, wherein there were vines. In
another place they found above a thousand loades of wood ready cut; and beyond
they met with a plain country, and in going through the same, he named it
Nombre de Dios. At the bottom of the mountain he rested in a town called
Te^hixuacan, and from thence they went through a desolate country, and so came
to another mountain that was very cold and full of snow, Zaclotan.
and they lay in a town named Zaclotan: And so from town to town they were
well received and feasted till they came into another realm named Tlaxcallan,
Tlaxcallan.
which waged war against Mutecuma, and being valiant they skirmished with
Cortes; but in the end they agreed and entered into league with him against the
Mexicans; and so they went from country to country till they came within
fight of Mexico. The king Mutecuma fearing them, gave them good entertainment
with lodging and all things necessary: and they were with this for a time
contented: but mistrusting that he and his should be slain, Mutecuma prisoner.
he took Mutecuma prisoner and brought him to his lodging with good guard.
Cortes demanded how far his realm did extend, and sought to know the mines
of gold and silver that were in it, and how many kings neighbors to Mutecuma
dwelled therein, requiring certain Indians to be informed thereof, whereof he
had eight provided: and he joined to them eight Spaniards, and sent them two
and two into four countries, Zucolla.
namely into Zucolla, Malinaltepec.
Malinaltepec, Zenich.
Tenich, Tututepec.
and Tututepec. They which went unto Zucolla went 80. leagues: for so much it
was from Mexico thither: They which went to Mahnaltepec, went 70. leagues,
seeing goodly countries, and brought examples of gold, which the naturals of
the country took out of great rivers: and all this province belonged unto
Mutecuma.

The country of Tenich and up the river were not subject to Mutecuma, but had
war with him, and would not suffe^ the Mexicans to enter into their
territory. They sent ambassadors unto Cortes with presents, offering him their
estate, and amity; whereof Mutecuma was nothing glad. They which went to
Tututepec standing near the South sea did also bring with them examples of
gold, and praised the pleasantnes of the country, and the multitude of good
harbors upon that coast, showing to Cortes a cloth of cotton wool all wouen
with goodly works, wherein all the coast with the havens and creekes were set
forth. Gomara hist. genesis lib. 2. cap. 48.
But this thing then could not be prosecuted by reason of the coming of
Pamphilus de Naruaez into the country, Pamphilus de Narua^z.
who set all the kingdom of Mexico in an uproar.

In this year 1519. the tenth day of August one Fernande de Magallanes
departed from Civil with five ships toward the Islands of Maluco: Gomara hist.
genesis lib. ^* cap. 2.
he went along the coast of Brasill till he came unto the river of Plate, which
the Castillians had before discovered. The discovery of Magallanes from the
river of Plate forward.
From thence therefore he began his discovery, and came unto an haven which he
called The Port of Saint Julian standing in 49. degrees, and there he entered
and wintred: they endured much cold by reason of snow and ice: the people of
that country they found to be of great stature, and of great strength, taking
men by the legs and renting them in the midst as easily as one of us will
rent an hen: they live by fruits and hunting. Patagones.
They called them Patagones, but the Brasilians do call them Morcas.

In the year 1520. in the beginning of the month of September growing then
somewhat temperate they went out of the port and river of Saint Julian, having
lost in it one of their ships, and with the other f^wer he came unto the
Streights named after the name of Mag^llanes standing in 52. degrees and a
half. From thence one of the ships returned back unto Castile, whereof was
captain and pilot one Stephen de Porto a Portugal, and the other three went
forward, entering into a mighty sea called Pacificum, without seeing any
inhabited land till they came in 13. degrees toward the north of the
Equinoctial: in which latitude they came unto Islands which they called Los
Iardines; Los Iardines.
and from thence they sailed to the Archipelagus of S. Lazarus, and in one of
the Islands called Matan Magallanes was slain, Gomara hist genesis lib. 4 cap. 3.
and his ship was burnt, and the other two went unto Borneo, and so from place
to place they went back until they came to the Islands of Mal^cos, Pet.
Martyr. decad 5. cap. 7.
leaving many others discovered, which I rehearse not, because I find not this
voyage exactly written.

About this time Pope Leo the tenth sent one Paulus Centurio as ambassador to
the greot Duke of Moscouie to wish him to send into India an army along the
coast of Tartarie. Gomar. lib. 4. cap. 17.
And by the reasons of this ambassador the said Duke was almost persuaded unto
that action, Ramusius 1. vol. fol. 374.
if other inconveniences had not let him.

In this same year 1520. in February Diego Lopes de Sequeira governor of
India went toward the Straight of Mecha and carried with him the ambassador
of Presbyter John, and Roderigo de Lima who also went as ambassador to him.
Macua.
They came unto the Island of Macua standing in the Red sea on the side of
Africa in 17. degrees toward the north: where he set the ambassadors on land,
with the Portugals that should go with them. Peter de Couillan had been there
before, Ramusius 1. vol. fol. 190.
being sent thither by king John the second of Portugal: but yet Francis
Aluarez gave principal light and knowledge of that country.

In the year 1520. the licenciate Lucas Vasques de Aillon and other
inhabitants of S. Domingo furnished two ships, Gomara hist genesis lib 2. cap. 7.
and sent them to the Isles of Lucayos to get slaves, and finding none they
passed along by the firm land beyond Florida unto certain countries called
Chicora and Gualdape, Chicora.
unto the river Jordan and the Cape of Saint Helena standing in 32. degrees
toward the north. Gualdape.
They of the country came down to the sea side to see the ships, as having
never before seen the like: The Spaniards went on land where they received
good entertainment, and had given unto them such things as they lacked. But
they brought many of them into their ships and then set sail and brought them
away for slaves: but in the way one of their ships sunk, and the other was
also in great hazard. By this news the Licentiate Aillon knowing the wealth of
the country, begged the government thereof of the Emperor, and it was given
him: whither he went to get money to pay his debt.

About this time Diego Velasques governor of Cuba hearing the good success of
Cortes, Gomara hist. genesis lib. 2. cap. 48.
and that he had begged the government of New Spain, which he held to be his,
he furnished out thither against Cortes 18. ships with 1000. men and 80.
horses, whereof he sent as General one Pamphilus de Naruaez. He came unto the
town called Villa rica de la vera Cruz, where he took land, and commanded
those of the country to receive him as governor thereof: But they took his
messenger prisoner, and sent him to Mexico where Cortes was. Which thing being
known of Cortes, he wrote letters unto Naruaez not to raise any uproar in the
country which he had discovered, offering him obedience if he had any
commission from the Emperor; but he corrupted the people of the country with
money: Whereupon Cortes went from Mexico and took Naruaez prisoner in the
town of Zampoallan, and put out one of his eyes.

Naruaez being thus taken prisoner, his army submitted themselves to Cortes,
and obeyed him. Whereupon presently he dispatched 200. soldiers unto the river
of Garay, and he sent John Vasquez de Leon with other two hundred unto
Cosaalco, and withal sent a Spanyard with the news of his victory unto
Mexico. The revolt of the Mexicans in absence of Cortes.
But the Indians being in the mean time risen, hurt the messenger. Which being
known to Cortes, he mustered his men, and found a thousand footmen and two
hundred horsemen, with the which he went toward Mexico, where he found Peter
de Aluarado, and the rest which he had left there alive and in safety,
wherewith he was greatly pleased, and Mutecuma made much of him. But yet the
Mexicans ceased not but made war against him: and the war grew so hot that
they killed their king Mutecuma with a stone, Mutecuma slain.
and then there rose up another king such an one as pleased them, till such
time as they might put the Spaniards out of the city, being no more then 504.
footmen, and forty horsemen. Gomar. hist. genesis lib. 2. cap. 50.
The Spaniards with great loss being driven out of Mexico, retired themselves
with much ado to Tlaxcallan, where they were well received: and so they
gathered together 900. Spaniards, 80. horsemen, and two hundred thousand
Indians, their friends* and allies: and so they went back again to take
Mexico in the month of August in the year 1521.

Cortes obtaining still more and more victories defermined to see further
within the country: Gomar. hist. genesis lib. 2. cap 60.
and for this purpose in the year 1521. and in October he sent out one Gonsalo
de Sandoual with 200. footmen and 35* horsemen, and cortaine Indians his
friends unto Tochtepec and Coazacoalco, Tochtepec.
which had rebelled, Coazacoalco.
but at length yielded. And they discovered the country, and built a town
120. leagues from Mexico, and named it Medelin, and another town they made
naming it Santo Spirito fewer leagues from the sea upon a river; and these two
towns kept the whole country in obedience.

This year 1521. in December Emmanuell king of Portugal died, Emmanuels death.
and after him his son king John the 3. reigned. Osorius lib. 12. fol. 366.


In the year 1521. there went from Maluco one of Magellans ships laden with
cl^ues: Gomara historiae general. lib. 4. cap. 8.
they victualed themselves in the Island of Burro, and from thence went to
Timor which stands in 11. degrees of southerly latitude. Burro.
Beyond this Island one hundred leagues they discovered certain Islands and
one named Eude, Timor.
finding the places from thence forward peopled. Eude.
Afterward passing without Samatra they met with no land till they fell with
the Cape of Bona Speranca, where they took in fresh water and wood: So they
came by the Islands of Cape Verde, and from thence to Civil, where they were
notably received, as well for the cloves that they brought, as that they had
compassed about the world.

In the year 1522. in January one Gilgonzales armed four ships in the Island
of Tararequi standing in the South sea with intent to discover the coast of
Nicarag^a, Gomara hist. genesis lib. 6. cap. 4.
and especially a straight or passage from the South sea into the North sea.
And sailing along the coast he came unto an haven called S. Vincent, and there
landed with 100. Spaniards and certain horsemen, and went within the land 200.
leagues* and he brought with him 200. pesoes of gold, and so came back again
to S. Vincent: where he found his pilot Andrew Nigno, who was as far as
Tecoantepec in 16. degrees to the north, Tecoantepec.
and had sailed three hundred leagues: Gomara histori^ general. lib. 6. cap. 12.
from whence they returned to Panama, and so over land to Hispaniola.

In the same year 1522. in the month of April the other ship of Magallanes
called The Trinity went from the Island of Tidore, Castagneda Historia delle
Indie Orientali lib. 6. cap. 41.
wherein was captain Gonzalo Gomez de Espinosa, Gomar. hist. genesis lib. 4. cap.
8. and 12.
shaping their course toward Noua Spania: and because wind was scant they
stirred toward the northeast into 16. degrees, Two Islands in 16. degrees of
northerly latitude.
where they found two Islands, and named them the Isles of Saint John, and in
that course they came to another Island in 20. degrees, which they named La
Griega, where the simple people came into their ships, of whom they kept some
to show them in Noua Spania: They were in this course four months, 42.
degrees of northerly latitude.
until they came into 42. degrees of northerly latitude, where they did see
sea fishes called Seals and Tunies. And the climate seemed unto them coming
newly out of the heat, to be so cold and intemperate, that they could not well
abide it, and therefore they turned back again to Tidore, being thereunto
enforced also by contrary winds. These were the first Spaniards which had
been in so high a latitude toward the north. And there they found one Antonie
de Bri^to building a fortress, which took from them their goods, and sent 48.
of them prisoners to Malaca.

In this year 1522. Gomar. hist. genesis lib. 6. cap. 12.
Cortes desirous to have some havens on the South sea, and to discover the
coast of ^oua Spania on that side, whereof he had knowledge in Mutecuma his
time, (because he thought by that way to bring the drugs from Maluco and Banda,
and the spiceris from Iaua, with less travail and danger) he sent fewer
Spaniards with their guides to Tecoantepec, Qua^utemallan, and other havens:
where they were well received, and brought some of the people with them to
Mexico: The South sea first searched by Cortes ^is pilots.
And Cortes made much of them; and afterward sent ten pilots thither to search
the seas there about. They went 70. leagues in the sea but found no haven. One
Casique or Lord called Cuchataquir used them well, and sent with them to Cortes
200. of his men with a present of gold and silver, and other things of the
country: Tecoentepec.
and they of Tecoantepec did the like: and not long after, this Casique sent
for aid to Cortes against his neighbors which did war against him.

In the year 1523. Cortes sent unto him for his aid Peter de Aluarado, Gomara
hist genesis lib. 6. cap. 12.
with two hundred soldiers footmen, and forty horsemen, and the Caciques of
Tecoantepec* and Quahutemallan asked them for the monsters of the sea which
came thither the year past, meaning the ships of Gil Gonsales de Auila, being
greatly amazed at the sight of them, and woondring much more when they heard,
that Cortes had bigger then those: A witty stratageme.
and they painted unto them a mighty Carake with six masts, and sails and
shroudes, and men armed on horseback. This Aluarado went through the country
and builded there the city of Sant Iago or Saint James, Sant Iago built.
and a town which he called Segura leaving certain of his people in it.
Castagneda hist. delle Indie Orientali lib. 6. c 42.


In the same year 1523. in the month of May Antonie de Britto being captain
of the Isles of Maluco sent his cosen Simon de Breu to learn the way by the
Isle of Borneo to Malaca: Manada.
They came in sight of the Islands of Manada and Panguensara: Panguensara.
They went through the straight of Treminao and Taguy: The Islands of S.
Michael.
and to the Islands of Saint Michael standing in 7. degrees, Borneo.
and from thence discovered the Islands of Borneo, and had sight of Pedra
branca or the White stone, Pedra branca.
and passed through the straight of Cincapura, and so to the city of Malaca.

In this same year 1523. Cortes went with 300. footmen and 150. horsemen and
40000. Mexicans to Panuco both to discover it better, Gomara hist. genesis lib. 2.
cap. 61.
and also to inhabit it, and withal to be revenged upon them which had killed
and eaten the soldiers of Francis Garay. They of Panuco resisted him, but
Cortes in the end overthrew them, and conquered the country: And hard by Chila
upon the river he built a town and named it Santo Stephano del puerto, Santo
Stephano del puerto.
leaving in it 100. footmen, and thirty horsemen and one Peter de Vall^io for
lieutenant. This journey cost him 76. thousand Castillians, besides the
Spaniards, horses, and Maxicans which died there.

In this year 1523. Francis de Garay made nine ships and two brigandines to
go to Panuco and to Rio de las Palmas to be there as governor: Gomara hist.
genesis lib. 2. cap. 61. and en la Conquista de Mexico.
for that the Emperor had granted unto him from the coast of Florida unto
Panuco, in regard of the charges, which he had been at in that discovery. He
carried with him 850. soldiers, and 140. horses, and some men out of the Island
of Iamaica, where he furnished his fleet with munition for the war: and he
went unto Xagua an haven in the Island of Cuba, where he understood that Cortes
had peopled the coast of Panuco: and that it might not happen unto him as it
did to Pamphilus de Naruaez, he determined to take another companion with him,
and desired the Doctor Zuazo to go to Mexico and procure some agreement
between Cortes and him. And they departed from Xagua each one about his
business. Zuazo came in great ieoperdie, and Garay went not clear without. Rio
de las Palmas.
Garay arrived in Rio de las Palmas on S. James his day, and then he sent up
the river one Gonsaluo de Ocampo, who at his return declared that it was an
evil and desert country: but notwithstanding Garay went there on land with
400. footmen and some horsemen; and he commanded one John de Grijalua to
search the coast, and he himself marched by land toward Panuco, and passed a
river which he named Rio montalco; Rio Montalco.
he entered into a great town where they found many hens, wherewith they
refreshed themselves, and he took some of the people of Chila which he used
for messengers to certain places: Chila.
And after great travail coming to Panuco they found no victuailes there by
reason of the wars of Cortes and the spoil of the soldiers. Garay then sent
one Goncalo de Ocampo to Sant Isteuan del puerto to know whether they would
receive him or no. They had a good answer. But Cortes his men privily by an
ambushment took 40. of Garayes horsemen, alleging that they came to usurp
the government of another: and besides this misfortune he lost four of his
ships: whereupon he left off to proceed any farther.

While Cortes was preparing to set forward to Panuco* Francis de las Casas, and
Roderigo de la Paz arrived at Mexico with letters patents, Gomar. en la
Conquesta de Mexico fol. 226.
wherein the Emperor gave the government of Nueua Spagna and all the country
which Cortes had conquered to Cortes, and namely Panuco. Whereupon he stayed
his journey. But he sent Diego de Ocampo with the said letters patents, and
Pedro de Aluarado with store of footmen and horsemen. Garay knowing this
thought it best to yield himself unto Cortes his hands, and to go to Mexico;
which thing he did having discovered a great tract of land.

In this year 1523. Gil Goncales de Auila made a discovery, Gomara en la
Conquista de Mex^co fol 242.
and peopled a town called San Gil de buena vista standing in 14. degrees
toward the north, San Gil de buena Vista in the Bay of Honduras.
and almost in the bottom of the Bay called the Ascension or the Honduras. He
began to conquer it because he best knew the secrets thereof, and that it was
a very rich country.

In this year 1523. the sixth day of December Peter de Aluarado went from the
city of Mexico by Cortes his commandment to discover and conquer
Quahutemallan, Gomara en la Conquista de Mexico fol. 229. and in sequentibus.
Vtlatlan, Chiapa, Xochnuxco, and other towns toward the South sea. He had
with him three hundred soldiers, 170. horsemen, four field pieces, and some
noble men of Mexico, with people of the country to aid him as well in the
war, as by the way being long. He went by Tecoantepec to Xochnuxco, and other
places above said with great travail and loss of his men: but he discovered
and subdued all the country. There are in those parts certain hills that have
Alume in them, Oil distilling out of hills.
and out of which distilleth a certain liquor like unto oil, and sulphur or
brimstone, whereof the Spaniards made excellent gunpowder. Ibidem fol. 230.
He travailed 400. leagues in this voyage, and passed certain rivers which
were so hot, that they could not well endure to wade through them. He builded a
city calling it Sant Iago de Quahutemallan. Sant Iago de Quahutemallan.
Peter de Aluarado begged the government of this country, and the report is
that it was given him.

In the year 1523. the 8. day of December Cortes sent Diego de Godoy with 100.
footmen and 30. horsemen, Gomara en la Conquista de Mexico fol. 233.
two field pieces, and many of his friends Indians unto the town Del Espiritu
santo: Villa del Espiritu santo.
He joined himself with the captain of that town, Chamolla.
and they went to Chamolla the head city of that province, and that being
taken all the country grew quiet.

In the year 1524. in February Cortes sent one Roderigo Rangel with 150.
Spaniards and many of the Tlaxcallans and Mexicans against the Zapoteeas and
Nixticas and unto other provinces and countries not so well discovered: Gomara
en la Conquista de Mexico fol. 234.
they were resisted at the first, but quickly put the people to the woorst, and
kept them for ever after in subjection.

In this same year 1524. one Roderigo de Bastidas was sent to discover, Gomar.
hist. genesis lib. 3. cap. 21.
people, and govern the country of Santa Martha: where he lost his life
because he would not suffer the soldiers to take the spoil of a certain
town. They joined with Peter Villa-forte, and he being sometimes his entire
friend did help to kill him with daggers lying in his bed. Afterward Don Pedro
de Lugo, and Don Alfonso his son were governors of that place, which used
themselves like covetous tyrants; whereof grew much trouble.

In this same year also 1524. after that the Licenciate Lucas Vasques de
Aillon had obtained of the Emperor the government of Chicora, Gomara hist.
genesis lib. 2. cap. 7.
he armed for that purpose certain ships from the city of Santo Domingo and
went to discover the country, and to inhabit it: but he was lost with all his
company, leaving nothing done worthy of memory. And I cannot tell how it
comes to pass, except it be by the just judgment of God, that of so much
gold and precious stones as have been gotten in the Antiles by so many
Spaniards, little or none remains, but the most part is spent and consumed,
and no good thing done.

In this year 1524. Cortes sent one Christopher de Olid with a fleet to the
Island of Cuba to receive the vitailes and munition which Alonso de Contreras
had prepared and to discover and people the country about Cape De Higueras and
the Honduras; Gomar. hist. genesis lib. 2. cap. 65. and en la Conquista de Mexico
fol. 243.
and to send Diego Hurtado de Mendoca by sea, to search the coast from thence
even to Darien to find out the Straight which was thought to run into the
South sea, as the Emperor had commanded. He sent also two ships from Panuco to
search along the coast unto Florida. He commanded also certain brigandines to
search the coast from Zacatullan unto Panama. This Christopher de Olid came to
the Island of Cuba, and made a league with Diego Velasquez against Cortes, and
so set sail and went on land hard by Puerto de Cauallos standing in 10.
degrees to the north, and built a town which he called Triumpho de la Cruz. He
took Gil Gonzales de Auila prisoner, and killed his nephew and the Spaniards
that were with him all saving one child, and showed himself an enemy to
Cortes, who had spent in that expedition thirty thousand Castellans of gold to
do him pleasure withal.

Cortes understanding hereof the same year 1524. and in the month of October
he went out of the city of Mexico to seek Christopher de Olid to be revenged
of him, Gomar. hist. genesis lib. 2. cap. 66. and en la Conqu^sta de Mexico fol.
246. and 251.
and also to discover, carrying with him three hundred Spanish footmen and
horsemen, and Quahutimoc king of Mexico, and other great Lords of the same
city. And coming to the town called La villa del Espiritu santo, he required
guides of the Lords of Tauasco and Xicalanco: and they sent him ten of their
principal men for guides: who gave him also a map of cotton wool, An
excellent large map of cotton wool.
wherein was painted the situation of the whole country from Xicalanco unto
Naco, and Nito, and even as far as Nicaragua, with their mountains, hills,
fields, meadows, valleys, rivers, cities and towns. And Cortes in the mean
time sent for three ships which were at the haven of Medellin to follow him
along the coast.

In this year 1524. they came to the city of Izancanac, Gomara hist. genesis
lib. 2. cap. 67. and 68 and en la Conquista^ie Mexico fol. 257.
where he understood that the king Quahutimoc and the Mexicans that were in his
company were conspired against him and the Spaniards: for the which he hanged
the king and two others of the chief: Mazatlan.
and so came to the city of Mazaclan, Tiaca.
and after that to Tiaca the head city of a province so called standing in the
midst of a lake: and here about they began to find the train of the
Spaniards, which they went to seek, Zuzullin.
and so they went to Zuzullin, and at length came to the town of Nito: from
Nito Cortes with his own company and all the Spaniards that he found there
departed to the shore or strand called La Ba^a de Sant Andres, Gomar. in the
Conquest of Mexico fol. 268.
and finding there a good haven he builded a town in that place and called it
Natividad de nuestra Sen^ora. Natiuidad de Nuestra Sennora.


From hence Cortes went to the town of Truxillo standing in the haven of the
Honduras, Truxillo.
where the Spaniards dwelling there did entertain him well: Honduras.
and while he was there, there arrived a ship which brought news of the stir
in Mexico in Cortes his absence: whereupon he sent word to Gonsalo de Sandoual
to march with his company from Naco to Mexico by land toward the South sea
unto Quahutemallan, Gomara in the Conquest of Mexico fol. 170. and 273.
because that is the usual plain and safest way, and he left as captain in
Truxillo Fernando de Saavedra his cosen: and he himself went by sea along the
coast of Iucatan to Chalchicoeca now called Sant Iuan de Vllhua, and so to
Medellin, and from thence to Mexico, where he was well received, having been
from thence 18. months, and had gone five hundred leagues travailing often
out of his way, and enduring much hardness.

In the year 1525. Francis Pizarro and Diego de Almagro went from Panama to
discover Peru standing beyond the line toward the South, Gomara hist. genesis
lib. 5. cap. 1. and 2.
which they called Nueua Castillia. Peru.
The governor Pedro Arias would not entermeddle with this expedition, because
of the evil news which his captain Francis Vezerra had brought.

Francis Pizarro went first in a ship having with him 124. soldiers, and
Almagro went after him in another ship with 70. men. He came to Rio de San Iuan
standing in three degrees where he got two thousand pesoes of gold; and not
finding Pizarro, he went to seek him, repenting his doings by reason of a
mishap that he had. But he went first to an Island called Isla del Gorgona,
Isla del Gorgona.
and afterward to another called Isla del Gallo, Isla del Gallo.
and to the river called Rio del Peru standing in two degrees northward, Rio
del Peru.
whereof so many famous countries take their name. From thence they went to
Rio de San Francisco, Cabo de Passaos.
and to Cabo de Passaos, where they passed the Equinoctial line, Puerto vejo.
and came to Puerto Vejo standing in one degree to the south of the line: from
whence they sailed to the rivers of Chinapanpa, Tumbez.
Tumbez, Payta.
and Payta standing in 4. or. 5. degrees, where they had knowledge of king
Atabalipa and of the exceeding wealth and riches of his palace. Which news
moved Pizarro speedily to return home again to Panama, and so into Spain,
and to request the government of that country of the Emperor: which he also
obtained. He had spent above three years before in this discovery not without
enduring great travail and perils.

In the same year 1525. there was sent out of Spain a fleet of seven ships,
Pet. Martyr. decad. 8. cap. 9.
whereof was captain general Don Garsia de Loaisa to the Islands of Maluco.
Gomar. hist. genesis lib. 4. cap. ^2.
They went from the city of the Groine and passed by the Islands of the
Canaries, and went to Brasill, where they found an Island in two degrees, The
Isle of S. Matthew.
and named it. S. Matthew: and it seemed to be inhabited, because they found in
it orange trees, hogs, and hens in caves, and upon the rindes of most of the
trees there were graven Portugal letters, showing that the Portugals had been
there 17. years before that time. Gomara in the Conquest of Mexico page 28^.
A patache or pinnesse of theirs passed the straight of Magellane having in her
one John de Resaga, and ran all along the coast of Peru and Noua Spagna: They
declared all their success unto Cortes, and told him, that friar Garsia de
Loaisa was passed to the islands of cloves. But of this fleet the Admiral
only came thither, wherein was captain one Martine Mingues de Car^houa: for
Loaisa and the other captains died by the way. All the Moors of Maluco were
found well affectioned to the Spaniards.

In the same year 1525. the pilot Stephen Gomes went from the port of the
Groine toward the north to discover the straight unto the Malucos by the north,
Pet. Martyr. decad 8 page 601.
to whom they would give no charge in the fleet of friar Garsia de Loaisa.
Gomara historiae general. lib. 1. cap. 5.
But yet the Earl Don Fernando de Andrada, and the Doctor Beltram, and the
merchant Christopher de Sarro furnished a gallion for him, and he went from the
Groine in Galicia to the Island of Cuba, and to the point of Florida, sailing
by day because he knew not the land. He passed the bay Angra, and the river
Enseada, and so went over to the other side. It is also reported that he came
to Cape Razo in 46. degrees to the north: from whence he came back again to
the Groine laden with slaves. The news hereof ran by and by through Spain,
that he was come home laden with cloves as mistaking the word: and it was
carried to the Court of Spain: but when the truth was known it turned to a
pleasant jest. In this voyage Gomes was ten months.

In this year 1525. Don George de Meneses captain of Maluco, and with him Don
Garcia Henriques sent a foyst to discover land toward the north, wherein went
as captain one Diego de Rocha, and Gomes de Sequeira for pilot. In 9. or 10.
degrees they found certain Islands standing close together, The Isle of
Batochina by Gilolo.
and they called them the Islands of Gomes de Sequeira, he being the first
pilot that discovered them. And they came back again by the Island of
Batochina.

In the year 1526. there went out of Civil one Sebastian Cabota a Venetian by
his father, Gomara historiae general. lib. 3. cap. 39.
but borne at Bristol in England, being chief pilote to the Emperor, with
four ships toward Maluco. They came to Pernambuco, and stayed there three
months for a wind to double the Cape of Saint Augustine. In the Bay of Patos
or of ducks the Admiral ship perished; and being without hope to get to the
Isles of Maluco they there made a pinnesse to enter up the river of Plate, and
to search it. They ran 60. leagues up before they came to the bar: where they
left their great ships, and with their small pinnesses passed up the river
Parana, (...) Parana.
which the inhabitants count to be the principal river. Having rowed up 120.
leagues, they made a fortress and stayed there above a year: and then rowed
further till they came to the mouth of another river called Paragioa, Rio
Paragioa.
and perceiving that the country yielded gold and silver they kept on their
course, and sent a brigandine before; but those of the country took it: and
Cabote understanding of it thought it best to turn back unto their forte, and
there took in his men which he had left there, and so went down the river
where his ships did ride, and from thence he sailed home to Civil in the year
1530. leaving discovered about two hundred leagues within this river, The
fountain of the River of Plata.
reporting it to be very nauigable, and that it springs out of a lake named
Bombo. It stands in the firm land of the kingdom of Peru, running through
the valleys of Xauxa, and meets with the rivers Parso, Bulcasban, Cay,
Parima, Hiucax, with others which make it very broad and great. It is said
also, that out of this lake runs the river called Rio de San Francesco; and
by this mean the rivers come to be so great. The biggest rivers proceed from
lakes.
For the rivers that come out of lakes are bigger then those which proceed
from a spring.

In the year 1517. one Pamphilus de Naruaez went out of S. Lucar de Barameda
to be general of the coast and land of Florida as far as Rio de las Palmas,
Ramusius 3. vol. fol. 310.
and had with him five ships, 600. soldiers, 100. horses, besides a great sum
and quantity of victuailes, armor, clothing and other things. He could not
go on land where his desire was, but went on land somewhat near to Florida
with three hundred of his company, some horses, and some victuailes,
commanding the ships to go to Rio de las Palmas; in which voyage they were
almost all lost: The Isle of Xamo or Malhada.
and those which escaped passed great dangers, hunger and thirst in an Island
called Xamo and by the Spaniards Malhada being very dry and barren, where the
Spaniards killed one another, and the people also of the country did the like.
Naruaez and those which went with him saw some gold with certain Indians,
and he demanded of them where they gathered it: and they answered that they had
it at Apalachen. Apalachen.
They therefore searched this gold, and in searching came to the said town,
where they found no gold nor silver: they saw many Bay trees, and almost all
other kind of trees with beasts, birds, and such like. The men and women of
this place are high and strong, very light and so swift runners, that they will
take dear at their pleasure, and will not grow weary though they run a whole
day. From Apalachen they went to a town called Aute; Aute.
and from thence to Xamo a poor country with small sustinance. Xamo.
These people bring up their children very tenderly, and make great lamentation
when any of them dies; they neither weep nor lament at the death of any old
body. Here the people desired the Spaniards to cure their sick folks, for
they had many diseased: and certain of the Spaniards being in extreme poverty
assaied it, and used prayer, and it pleased God that they did indeed recover
as well those that were hurt, as those which were otherwise diseased; in so
much, that one which was thought verily to be dead, was by them restored to
life, as they themselves report. They affirm that they passed through many
countreies and many strange people differing in language, apparel, and
customs. And because they played the physicians, they were as they passed
greatly esteemed and held for Gods, and the people did no hurt unto them, but
would give them part of such things as they had. Therefore they passed quietly,
and travailed so far till they came to a people, that use continually to live
in herds with their cattle as the Arabians do. They be poor, and eat
snakes, lisards, spiders, ants, and al kind of vermin, and herewith they live
so well contented that commonly they sing and dance. They buie the women of
their enemies, and kill their daughters, because they would not have them
marry with them, whereby they might increase. They travailed through certain
places, where the women gave suck unto their children til they were ten or
twelve years of age; and where certain men being Hermaphrodites do marry
one another. These Spaniards travailed above 800. leagues; and there escaped
alive in this journey not above seven or eight of them. They came upon the
coast of the South sea unto a city called Saint Michael of Culuacan standing
in 23. degrees and upward toward the north.

This year 1527. when Cortes understood by the pinnesse aforesaid that Don
Garcia de Loaisa was passed by the Straight of Magelan toward the Islands of
cloves, Gomar. hist. genesis lib. 2. cap. 72. and in the Conquest of Mexico fol.
28^.
he provided three ships to go seek him, and to discover by that way of New
Spain as far as the Isles of Maluco. There went as governor in those ships
one Aluaro de Saavedra Ceron, cosen unto Cortes, a man fit for that purpose. He
made sail from Ciuatlanejo, now named S. Christopher standing in 20. degrees
toward the north on All Saints day. They arrived at the Islands which Magelan
named The Pleasures; and from thence sailed to the Islands, which Gomes de
Sequeira had discovered, Islas de los Reyes.
and not knowing thereof, they named the^ Islas de los Reyes, that is to say,
The Isles of the kings, because they came unto them on Twelfe day. In the way
Saavedra lost two ships of his company, of which they never after heard news.
But from Island to Island he still sailed and came to the Island of Candiga,
Candiga.
where he bought two Spaniards for 70. ducats, which had been of the company
of Friar Loaisa, who was lost thereabout.

In the year 1528. in March Saavedra arrived at the Islands of Maluco, and
came to an anchor before the Isle of Gilolo: he found the sea calm and wind at
will, without any tempests: and he took the distance from thence to Noua
Spagna to be 2050. leagues. At this time Martin Yn^iguez de Carquicano died,
and Fernando de la Torre was chosen their General, who then was in the city
of Tidore, who had there erected a gallows and had fierce war with Don George
de Meneses captain of the Portugals: and in a fight which they had the fourth
day of May Saavedra took from him a galiotte and slew the captain thereof
called Fernando de Baldaya, and in June he returned toward New Spain, having
with him one Simon de Brito Patalin and other Portugals, and having been
certain months at sea, he was forced back unto Tidore, where Patalin was
beheaded and quartered, and his companions hanged.

In this year 1528. Cortes sent two hundred footmen and 60. horsemen, Gomara
hist. genesis lib. 2. cap. 73.
and many Mexicans to discover and plant the country of the Chichimecas, for
that it was reported to be rich of gold. This being done he shipped himself,
and came into Castile with great pomp, and brought with him 250000. marks of
gold and silver: and being come to Toledo where the Emperor then lay, he was
entertained according to his deserts, and the Emperor made him Marquis Del
Valle, and married him to the Lady Jane de Zuniga daughter unto the Earl de
Aguilar, and then the Emperor sent him back again to be General of New
Spain.

In the year 1529. in May Saavedra returned back again toward New Spain,
Gomara hist. genesis lib. 2. cap. 72.
and he had sight of a land toward the South in two degrees, and he ran East
along by it above five hundred leagues till the end of August. The coast was
clean and of good ankerage, Noua Guinea.
but the people black and of curled hair; from the girdle downward they did
wear a certain thing plaited to cover their lower parts. The people of Maluco
call them Papuas, Os Papuas are black people with frisled hair.
because they be black and friseled in their hair: and so also do the
Portugals call them.

Saavedra having sailed 4. or 5. degrees to the South of the line, returned
unto it, and passed the Equinoctial toward the north, and discovered an
Island which he called Isla de los Pintados, Isla de los Pintados.
that is to say, The Isle of painted people: for the people thereof be white,
and all of them marked with an iron: and by the signs which they gave he
conceived that they were of China. There came unto them from the shore a kind
of boat full of these men, making tokens of threatenings to the Spaniards; who
seeing that the Spaniards would not obey them, they began to skirmish with
slinging of stones, but Saavedra would suffer no shot to be shot at them,
because their stones were of no strength, and did no harm.

A little beyond this Island in 10. or 12. degrees they found many small low
Islands full of palm trees and grass, which they called Los Iardines, Los
Iardines.
and they came to an anchor in the midst of them, where they tarried certain
days. The people seemed to descend from them of China, but by reason of their
long continuance there they are become so brutish, that they have neither law,
nor yet give themselves to any honest labor. They were white clothing which
they make of grass. They stand in maruailous fear of fire, because they never
saw any. They eat Cocos in steed of bread, breaking them before they be ripe,
and putting them under the sand, and then after certain days they take them
out and lay them in the sun, and then they will open. They eat fish which
they take in a kind of boat called a Parao, which they make of pine wood,
(...) wood.
which is driven thither at certain times of the year, they know not how, nor
from whence, and the tools wherewith they make their boats are of shells.

Saavedra perceiving that the time and weather was then somewhat better for his
purpose, made sail toward the firm land and city of Panama, where he might
unlade the cloves and merchandise which he had, that so in carts it might be
carried four leagues to the river of Chagre, which they say is nauigable
running out into the North sea not far from Nombre de Dios, where the ships
ride, which come out of Spain: by which way all kind of goods might be
brought unto them in shorter time, and with less danger, then to sail about
the Cape of Bona Speranca. For from Maluco unto Panama they sail continually
between the Tropickes and the line: but they never found wind to serve that
course, and therefore they came back again to Maluco very sad, because
Saavedra died by the way: who if he had lived meant to have opened the land of
Gastillia del Oro and New Spain from sea to sea. Four narrow passages from
sea to sea in the West Indies.
Which might have been done in four places: namely from the Gulf of S.
Michael to Vraba, which is 25. leagues, Gomara hist. genesis lib. 4. cap. 14.
or from Panama to Nombre de Dios being 17. leagues distance: or through
Xaquator a river of Nicaragua, which springs out of a lake three or four
leagues from the South sea, and falls into the North sea; whereupon do sail
great barks and crayers. The other place is from Tecoantepee through a river to
Verdadera Cruz in the Bay of the Honduras, which also might be opened in a
straight. Which if it were done, then they might sail from the Canaries unto
the Malucos under the climate of the Zodiake in less time and with much less
danger, then to sail about the Cape de Bona Speranca, or by the straight of
Magelan, or by the Northwest. The northwest passage very beneficial.
And yet if there might be found a straight there to sail into the sea of
China, as it has been sought, it would do much good.

In this year 1529, one Damian de Goes a Portugal being in Flanders, after
that he had travailed over all Spain, was yet desirous to see more countries,
and fashions, and diversities of people; and therefore went over into England
and Scotland, and was in the courts of the kings of those parts: and after that
came again into Flanders, and then travailed through Zealand, Holland,
Brabant, Luxenburge, Suitzerland, and so through the cities of Colen, Spyres,
Argentine, Basil, and other parts of Alemaine, and then came back again into
Flanders: and from thence he went into France through Picardie, Normandy,
Champaine, Burgundy, the dukedom of Borbon, Gascoigne, Languedoc, Daulphinie,
the dukedom of Sauoy, and passed into Italy into the dukedom of Millaine,
Ferrara, Lombardie, and so to Venice, and turned back again to the territory
of Genoa, and the dukedom of Florence through all Tuscane: and he was in the
city of Rome, and in the kingdom of Naples from the one side to the other.

From thence he went into Germany to Vlmes, and other places of the Empire, to
the dukedom of Sueuia and of Bauier, and the Archdukedome of Austrich, the
kingdom of Boeme, the dukedom of Morania, and the kingdom of Hungary, and
so to the confines of Graecia. From thence he went to the kingdom of Poland,
Prussia, and the dukedom of Liuonia, and so came into the great dukedom of
Moscouia. From whence he came back into High Alemayne, and through the
countries of the Lantzgraue, the dukedom of Saxony, the countries of
Denmark, Gotland, and Norway, travailing so far, that he found himself in
70. degrees of latitude toward the North. He did see, speak and was
conversant with all the kings, princes, nobles and chief cities of all
Christendom in the space of 22. years: So that by reason of the greatness of
his travel, I thought him a man worthy to be here remembered.

In the year 1529. or 1530. one Melchior de Sofa Tauarez went from the city
of Ormuz unto Balfera and the Islands of Gissara with certain ships of war,
and passed up as far as the place, where the rivers Tygris and Euphrates
meet one with the other. And although other Portugals had discovered and
sailed through that straight, yet never any of them sailed so far upon the
fresh water till that time, when he discovered that river from the one side to
the other, wherein he saw many things which the Portugals knew not.

Not long after this one Ferdinando Coutinho a Portugal came unto Ormuz, and
being desirous to see the world, he determined to go into Portugal from
thence over land to see Asia and Europe; And to do this the better he went
into Arabia, Persia, and upwards the river Euphrates the space of a month; and
saw many kingdoms and countreies, which in our time had not been seen by the
Portugals: He was taken prisoner in Damasco, and afterward crossed over the
province of Syria, and came unto the city of Alepo. He had been at the holy
Sepulcher in Jerusalem, and in the city of Cayro, and at Constantinople with
the Great Turk; and having seen his court he passed over unto Venice, and
from thence into Italy, France, Spain, and so came again to Lisbon. So that
he and Damian de Goes were in our time the most noble Portugals, that had
discovered and seen most countries and realms of their own affections.

In the same year 1530. little more or less, Gomara hist. genesis lib. 5. cap. 3.
one Francis Pisarro, which had been in Spain to obtain the government of
Peru, turned back again to the city of Panama with all things that he
desired: he brought with him four brethren, Ferdinand, John, Gonzaluo, and
Francis Martines de Alcantara: They were not well received by Diego de Almagro,
and his friends; for that Pisarro had not so much commended him to the Emperor
as he looked for, but omitted the discovery, wherein he had lost one of his
eyes, and spent much: yet in the end they agreed, and Diegro de Almagro gave
unto Pisarro 700. pezoes of gold, victuailes and munition, wherewith he
prepared himself the better for his journey.

Not long after this agreement Francis Pisarro and his brethren went in two
ships with the most of their soldiers and horses; but he could not arrive at
Tumbez as he was minded, and so they went on land in the river of Peru; and
went along the coast with great pains, because there were many b^gs and rivers
in their way, wherein some of his men were drowned: They came to the town of
Coache, where they rested, Much gold and emeraulds.
where they found much gold and emeraulds, of which they brake some to see if
they were perfect. From thence Pisarro sent to Diego de Almagro twenty
thousand pezoes of gold to send him men, horses, munition, and victuailes; and
so he went on his journey to the haven named Porto Viejo: and thither came unto
him one Sebastian de Benalcazar, with all such things as had sent for, which
pleased and pleasured him very much.

In the year 1531. he having this aid, Gomara hist. genesis lib. 5. cap. 4.
passed over into a rich Island called Puna, The Isle of Puna.
where he was well received of the governor: yet at last he conspired to kill
him and all his men: but Pisarro prevented him, and took many of the Indians,
and bound them with chains of gold and silver. The governor caused those that
kept his wines to have their noses, arms, and privy members to be cut off, so
jealous was he. Here Pisarro found above six hundred men prisoners belonging
to the king Attabalipa, Gomara hist. genesis lib. 5. cap. 5.
who waged war against his eldest brother Guascar to win reputation. These
he set at liberty and sent them to the city of Tombez, who promised to be a
mean that he should be well received in those parts. But when they saw
themselves out of bondage, they forgot their promise, and incited the people
against the Spaniards. Then Pisarro sent three Spaniards to Tombez to treat
for peace, whom they took and slew and sacrificed, and their priests wept
not for pity but of custom. Pisarro hearing of this cruel fact, passed over
to the maine, and set upon the city one night suddenly and killed many of
them, so that they presented him with gifts of gold and silver and other
riches, and so became friends. This done, he builded a town upon the river of
Cira, S. Michael of Tangarara.
and called it Saint Michael of Tangarara, which was the first town inhabited
by Christians in those parts; whereof Sebastian de Benalcazar was appointed
captain. Payta an excellent harbor in 5. degrees to the South of the line.
Then he searched out a good and sure haven for his ships, and found that of
Payta to be an excellent harbor.

In this same year 1531. there went one Diego de Ordas to be governor in the
river of Maragnon, Gomara historiae general. lib. 3. cap. 17.
with three ships, six hundred soldiers, and 35. horses. He died by the way,
so that the intention came to none effect. After that in the year 1534. there
was sent thither one Hierome Artal with 130. soldiers, The famous river
Maragnon.
yet he came not to the river, but peopled Saint Michael de Neueri, and other
places in Paria. Also there went unto this river Maragnon a Portugal gentleman
named Aries Dacugna, and he had with him ten ships, nine hundred Portugals, and
130. horses. He spent much, but he that lost most was one John de Barros. John
de Barros factor of the house of India.
This river stands in three degrees toward the South, having at the entrance
of it 15. leagues of breadth and many Islands inhabited, wherein grow trees
that bear incence of a greater bigness then in Arabia, gold, rich stones, and
one emeraud was found there as big as the palm of a man's hand. The people of
the country make their drink of a kind of dates, which are as big as quinces.

In the year 1531. one Nunnez de Gusman went from the city of Mexico toward
the northwest to discover and conquer the countreies of Xalisco, Gomara hist.
genesis lib. 6. cap. 16.
Ceintiliquipac, Ciametlan, Toualla, Cnixco, Ciamolla, Culhuacan, and other
places. And to do this he carried with him 250. horses, and five hundred
soldiers. He went through the country of Mechuacan, where he had much gold,
ten thousand marks of silver, and 6000. Indians to carry burdens. Nueua
Galicia.
He conquered many countries, called that of Xalisco Nueua Galicia, because it
is a ragged country, and the people strong. He builded a city which he called
Compostella, Compostella.
and another named Guadalajara, because he was borne in the city of
Guadalajara in Spain. Guadalaira.
He likewise builded the towns de Santo Espirito, Santo Espirito.
de la Conception, De la conception.
and de San Miguel standing in 24. degrees of northerly latitude. San Miguel.


In the year 1532. Ferdinando Cortes sent one Diego Hurtado de Mendoca unto
Acapulco 70. leagues from Mexico, Gomara hist. genesis lib. 2. cap. 74.
where he had prepared a small fleet to discover the coast of the South sea as
he had promised the Emperor. And finding two ships ready, he went into them,
and sailed to the haven of Xalisco, where he would have taken in water and
wood: but Nunnez de Gusman caused him to be resisted, and so he went forward:
but some of his men mutined against him, and he put them all into one of the
ships, and sent them back into New Spain. They wanted water, and going to
take some in the bay of the Vanderas, the Indians killed them. But Diego
Hurtado sailed 200. leagues along the coast, yet did nothing worth the writing.

In the year 1533. Francis Pisarro went from the city of Tumbes to Caxamalca,
Gomara hist. genesis lib. 5. cap. 6. 7. 8. 9.
where he took the king Attabalipa, who promised for his ransom much gold and
silver: and to accomplish it there went to the city of Cusco standing in 17.
degrees on the South side Peter de Varco, and Ferdinando de Sotto, who
discovered that journey being 200. leagues all causies of stone, and bridges
was made of it, and from one journey to another, lodgings made for the Yngas:
for so they call their kings. Their armies are very great and monstrous. For
they bring above an hundred thousand fighting men to the field. They lodge upon
these causies; and have there provision sufficient and necessary, after the
use and custom of Chi^^^, as it is said. Ferdinando Pisarro with some horsemen
went unto Paciacama 100. leagues from Caxamalca, and discovered that province:
And coming back he understood how Guascar brother to Attabalipa was by his
commandment killed, Guascar slain.
and how that his captain Ruminaguy rose up in arms with the city of Quito.
Gomar. hist. genesis lib 5 cap. 11.
After this Attabalipa was by the commandment of Pisarro strangled. Attabalipa
strangied.


In the year 1534. Francis Pisarro seeing that the two kings were goue, began
to enlarge himself in his signiories, and to build cities, forts, and towns
to have them more in subjection. Gomara historiae general. lib. 5. cap. ^8.
Likewise he sent Sebastian de Banalcazar the captain of S. Michael of
Tangarara against Ruminaguy unto Quito. He had with him two hundred footmen
and 80. horsemen: He went discovering and conquering 120. leagues from the one
city to the other east not far from the Equinoctial line: Cruel snow
under the line.
where Peter Aluarado found mountains full of snow, Gomara historiae general.
lib. 5. cap. 19.
and so cold, that 70. of his men were frosen to death. When he came unto
Quito, he began to inhabit it, and named it S. Francis. In this country there
is plenty of wheat, barlie, cattle and plants of Spain, Gomara hist. genesis
lib. 5. cap. 16.
which is very strange. Pisarro went straight to the city of Cusco, and found
by the way the captain Quisquiz risen in arms, whom shortly he defeated.
About this time there came unto him a brother of Attabalipa named Mango, whom
he made Ynga or king of the country. Thus marching forward on his journey
after certain skirmishes he took that exceeding rich and wealthy city of
Culco. Casco taken.


In this same year 1534. a Briton called Jacques Cartier with three ships went
to the land of Corterealis, and the Bay of Saint Laurence, The Bay of S.
Laurence discovered.
otherwise called Golfo Quadrato, and fell in 48. degrees and an half toward
the north; and so he sailed till he came unto 51. degrees hoping to have passed
that way to China, and to bring thence drugs and other merchandise into France.
The next year after he made another voyage into those parts, and found the
country abounding with victuailes, houses and good habitations, with many and
great rivers. He sailed in one river toward the southwest 300. leagues, and
named the country thereabout Noua Francia: at length finding the water fresh
he perceived he could not pass through to the South sea, and having wintered
in those parts, the next year following he returned into France.

In the year 1535. or in the beginning of the year 1536. Gomar. hist. genesis
lib. 2. cap. 74. and lib. 2. cap. 98.
Don Antonie de Mendoca came unto the city of Mexico as Viceroy of New Spain.
In the mean while Cortes was gone for more men to continue his discovery,
which immediately he set in hand sending forth two ships from Tecoantepec
which he had made ready. There went as captains in them Fernando de Grijalua,
and Diego Bezerra de Mendoca, and for pilots there went a Portugal named
Acosta, and the other Fortunio Ximenez a Biscaine. The first night they divided
themselves. Fortunio Ximenez killed his captain Bezerra and hurt many of his
confederacy: and then he went on land to take water and wood in the Bay of
Santa Cruz, Plaia de Santa Cruz.
but the Indians there slew him, and above 20. of his company. Two mariners
which were in the boat escaped, and went unto Xalisco, and told Nuns de
Gusman that they had found tokens of pearls: he went into the ship, and so
went to seek the pearls, he discovered along the coast above 150. leagues.
They said that Ferdinando de Grijalua sailed three hundred leagues from
Tecoantepec without seeing any land, The Isle of S. Thomas.
but only one Island which he named The Isle of Saint Thomas, because he came
unto it on that Saints day: it stands in 20. degrees of latitude.

In this year 1535. Pisarro builded the city de los Reyes upon the river of
Lima. Lima builded.
The inhabitants of Xauxa went to dwell there, Gomar. hist. genesis lib. 4. cap.
23.
because it was a better country, standing in 12. degrees of southerly
latitude. In this same year of 1535. he caused the city of Truxillo to be
builded on a rivers side upon a fruitful soil, Lib. 5. cap. 22. Truxillo.
standing in 8. degrees on that side. He built also the city of Saint Iago in
Porto Viejo: S. Iago de Porto v^ejo.
besides many others along the sea coast and within the land: where there
breed many horses, asses, mules, kine, hogs, goats, sheep, and other beasts;
also trees and plants, but principally rosemary, oranges, limons, citrons, and
other sower fruits, vines, wheat, barlie, and other grains, radishes and
other kind of herbage and fruits brought out of Spain thither to be sown and
planted.

In the same year 1535. one Diego de Almagro went from the city of Culco to
the provinces of Arequipa and Chili, Go^ara hist. genesis lib. 5. cap. 24. Chili.
reaching beyond Cusco toward the South unto 30. degrees. This voyage was
long, and he discovered much land, suffering great hunger, cold, and other
extremities, by reason of the abundance of ice, which stops the running of
the rivers; so that men and horses die in those parts of the cold. About this
time Ferdinando Pilarro came out of Spain to the city de los Reyes, and
brought with him the title of Marquisate of Atanillos for his brother Francis
Pisarro, and unto Diego de Almagro he brought the government of 100. leagues
over and besides that which was discovered, Lib. 5. cap. 25.
and named it The New kingdom of Toledo. Ferdinando Pilarro went straight to
the city of Cusco: and one John de Rada went to Almagro into Chili with the
Emperors patents.

Diego de Almagro having received the letters patents which the Emperor had
sent him, Lib. 5. cap. 27.
went straight from Chili unto Cusco, to have it, seeing it did appertain unto
him. Which was the cause of a civil war. They were mightily oppressed with
want of victuailes and other things in this their return, and were enforced to
eat the horses, which had died four months and a half before, when they
passed that way.

In this same year 1535. Nunnez Dacun^a being governor of India, The
fortress of Diu.
while he was making a fortress at the city of Diu, he sent a fleet to the
river of Indus, being from thence 90. or 100. leagues toward ye north under
the Tropicke of Cancer. The captains name was Vasques Perez de San Paio: also
he sent another army against Badu the king of Cambaia, Badu king of Cambaia.
the captain whereof was Cosesofar a renegado. They came to the bar of that
mighty river in the month of December, of the water whereof they found such
trial as Quintus Curtius writes of it, when Alexander came thither.

In this year 1535. one Simon de Alcazaua went from Civil with two ships and
240. Gomara hist. genesis lib. 4. cap. 13.
Spaniards in them. Some say they went to New Spain, others that they went to
Maluco, but others also say to China; where they had been with Ferdinando
Perez de Andrada. Howsoever it was, they went first unto the Canaries, and from
thence to the straight of Magelan, without touching at the land of Brasill or
any part at all of that coast. They entered into the straight in the month of
December with contrary winds and cold weather. The soldiers would ha^^ had
him turn back again, but he would not. He went into an haven on the South
side in 53. degrees: There the captain Simon of Alcazaua commanded Roderigo de
Isla with 60. Spaniards to go and discover land: but they rose up against him
and killed him, and appointed such captains and officers as pleased them, and
returned. Coming thwart of Brasil they lost one of their ships upon the coast,
and the Spaniards that escaped drowning were eaten by the Savages. The other
ship went to Saint Iago in Hispaniola, and from thence to Civil in Spain.

In this same year 1535. Gomara historiae general. lib. 3. cap. 39.
Don Pedro de Mendoca went from Cadiz toward the river of Plate with twelve
ships, and had with him two thousand men: which was the greatest number of
ships and men, that ever any captain carried into the Indies. He died by the
way returning homewards. The most part of his men remained in that river, and
builded a great town containing now two thousand houses, wherein great store
of Indians dwell with the Spaniards. They discovered and conquered the country
till they came to the mines of Potossi and to the town La Plata, The river of
Plata runs up to Potossi.
which is 500. leagues distant from them.

In the year 1536. Cortes understanding that his ship wherein Fortunio Ximenez
was pilote was seized on by Nunnez de Guzman, Gomara hist genesis lib. 2. cap 74
and 98
he sent forth three ships to the place where Guzman was, and he himself went
by land well accompanied, and found the ship which he sought all spoiled and
rifled. When his three other ships were come about, he went aboard himself
with the most part of his men and horses, leaving for captain of those which
remained on land one Andrew de Tapia. Saint Iago Isle.
So he set sail, and coming to a point the first day of May he called it
Saint Philip, and an Island that lies fast by it he called Sant Iago. Within
three days after he came into the bay where the pilot Fortunio Ximenez was
killed, La plaia de Santa Cruz.
which he called La plaia de Santa Cruz, where he went on land, and commanded
Andrew de Tapia to discover, Cortes took shipping again and came to the river
now called Rio de San Pedro y San Paulo, Rio de S. Pedro y San Paulo.
where by a tempest the ships were separated, one was driven to the bay de
Santa Cruz, Guajaual Rio.
another to the river of Guajaual, and the third was driven on shore hard by
Xalisco, and the men thereof went by land to Mexico.

Cortes long expected his two ships that he wanted: but they not coming he
hoised sail and entered into the Gulf now called Mar de Cortes, Mar Vermejo or
the Gulf of California.
Mar Vermejo, or the Gulf of California, and shot himself 50. leagues within
it: where he espied a ship at anchor and sailing toward her he had been lost,
if that ship had not succored him. Gomara in the conquest of Mexico folio 290.
291. 292.
But having graued his ship, he departed with both the ships from thence. He
bought victuals at a dear rate at Saint Michael of Culhuacan; and from thence
he went to the haven of Santa Cruz, where he heard that Don Antonio de Mendoca
was come out of Spain to be Viceroy. He therefore left to be captain of his
men one Francis de Vlloa, to send him certain ships to discover that coast.
While he was at Acapulco messengers came unto him from Don Antonio de Mendoca
the Viceroy, to certify him of his arrival: and also he sent him the coppie
of a letter, wherein Francis Pisarro wrote, that Mango Ynga was risen against
him, and was come to the city of Cusco with an hundred thousand fighting men,
and that they had killed his brother John Pisarro, and above 400. Spaniards and
200. horses, and he himself was in danger, so that he demanded succor and
aid. Cortes being informed of the state of Pisarro, and of the arrival of Don
Antonio de Mendoca, because he would not as yet be at obedience; First he
determined to send to Maluco to discover that way a long under the Equinoctial
line, because The Islands of Cloves stand under that paralele: And for that
purpose he prepared 2. ships with provision, victuals and men, besides all
other things necessary. He gave the charge of one of these ships to Ferdinando
de Grijalua, and of the other unto one Aluarado a Gentleman. They went first to
Saint Michael de Tangarara in Peru to succor Francis Pisarro, and from thence
to Maluco all along near the line as they were commanded. And it is declared
that they sailed above a thousand leagues without fight of land, on she one
side nor yet on the other of the Equinoctial. And in two degrees toward the
north they discovered one Island named Asea, Asea Island.
which seems to be one of the Islands of Cloves: 500. leagues little more or
less as they sailed, Isla de los Pescadores.
they came to the sight of another which they named Isla de los Pescadores.
Going still in this course they saw another Island called Hayme toward the
south, Hayme Island.
and another named Apia: Apia Island.
and then they came to the fight of Seri: Seri.
turning toward the north one degree, they came to anchor at another Island
named Coroa, Coroa.
and from thence they came to another under the live (...) and from thence unto
Bufu standing in the same course. (...) Bufu.


The people of all these Islands are black, and have their hair frisled, Os
papuas.
whom the people of Maluco do call Papuas. The most of them eat man's flesh,
and are witches, so given to diuilishnes, that the devils walk among them as
companions. If these wicked spirits do find one alone, they kill him with
cruel blows or smoother him. Therefore they use not to go, but when two or
three may be in a company. These seem to be like Ostriches.
There is here a bird as big as a Crane: he flies not, nor has any wings
wherewith to flee, he runs on the ground like a Dear: of their small
feathers they do make hair for their idols. There is also an herb, which
being washed in warm water, if the leaf thereof be laid on any member and
licked with the tongue, it will draw out all the blood of a man's body: and with
this leaf they use to let themselves blood.

From these Islands they came unto others named the Guelles standing one degree
toward the north, Guelles Islands.
east, and west from the Isle Terenate, Terenate.
wherein the Portugals have a fortress: these men are haired like the people
of the Malucoes. These Islands stand 124. leagues from the Island named Moro;
Moro.
and from Terenate between 40. and 50. From whence they went to the Isle of
Moro, Moluccae.
and the Isla^ds of Cloves, going from the one unto the other. But the people
of the country would not suffer them to come on land, saying unto them:
Antonie Galuano, the author of this book.
Go unto the fortress where the captain Antonie Galuano is, and we will
receive you with a good will: for they would not suffer them to come on land
without his license: for he was factor of the country, as they named him. A
thing worthy to be noted, that those of the country were so affectioned to
the Portugals, The case now is much altered.
that they would venture for them their lives, wives, children and goods.

In the year 1537. the licenciate John de Vadillo governor of Cartagena,
Pedro de Cieca part primera de la Cl^^onica del Peru cap 9. and cap. 107.
went out with a good army from a port of Vraba called Saint Sebastian de
buena Vista, being in the gulf of Vraba, and from thence to Rio verde, and
from thence by land without knowing any way, nor yet having any carriages, they
went to the end of the country of Peru, and to the town La plata, La Pla^a.
by the space of 1200. leagues: a thing worthy of memory. For from this
river to the mountains of Abibe the country is full of hills, The mountains
of Abibe
thick forests of trees, and many rivers: and for lack of a beaten way, they
had pierced sides. The mountains of Abibe as it is recorded have 20. leagues
in breadth. They must be passed over in January, February, March, and April.
And from that time forward it raineth much, and the rivers will be so greatly
increased, that you cannot pass for them. There are in those mountains many
herds of swine, many dantes, lions, tigers, bears, ounses, and great cats,
and monkeis, and mighty snakes and other such vermin. Also there be in these
mountains abundance of partridges, quails, turtle doves, pigeons, and other
birds and fowls of sundry sorts. Likewise in the rivers is such plenty of
fish, that they did kill of them with their staves: and carrying canes and nets
they affirm that a great army might be sustained that way without being
distressed for want of victuals. Moreover they declared the diversities of the
people, toongs, and apparel that they observed in the countries, kingdoms,
and provinces which they went through, and the great travels and dangers that
they were in till they came to the town called Villa de la Plata, Villa de la
Plata.
and unto the sea there unto adjoining. This was the greatest discovery that
has been heard of by land, and in so short a time. And if it had not been
done in our days, the credit thereof would have been doubtful.

In the year 1538. there went out of Mexico certain friars of the order of
Saint Francis toward the north to preach to the Indians the Catholic faith.
Ramusius 3. vol. fol. 356.
He that went farthest was one friar Mark de Nizza, Friar Mark de Nizza.
who passed through Cul^acan, Sibola.
and came to the province of Sibola, where he found seven cities: and the
farther he went, the richer he found the country of gold, silver, precious
stones, and sheep bearing very fine wool. Upon the fame of this wealth the
viceroy don Antonio de Mendoca, and Cortes, determined to send a power thither.
But when they could not agree thereupon Cortes went over into Spain in the
year 1540. where afterward he died.

In this year 1538. began the civil war between Pisarro and Alonagro,
wherein at the last Alinagro was taken and beheaded.

In the same year 1538. Antonie Galuano being chief captain in the isles of
Maluco sent a ship toward the north, Gomara hist. genesis lib. 5. cap. 34.
whereof one Francis de Castro was captain, Antonie Galuano chief captain of
Maluco author of this work.
having commandment to convert as many as he could to the faith. He himself
christened many, as the lords of the Celebes, Macasares, Amboynos, Moros,
Moratax, and diverse other places, When Francis de Gastro arrived at the Island
of Mindanao, six kings received the water of Baptism, with their wives,
children and subjects: and the most of them Antonie Galuano gave commandment
to be called by the name of John, in remembrance that king John the third
reigned then in Portugal.

The Portugals and Spaniards which have been in these Islands affirm, that
there be certain hogs in them, which besides the teeth which they have in
their mouths, have other two growing out of their snouts, and as many behind
their ears of a large span and an half in length. Likewise they say there is
a tree, the one half whereof, which stands toward the east is a good
medicine against all poison, and the other side of the tree which stands
toward the west is very poison; and the fruit on that side is like a big
pease; and there is made of it the strongest poison that is in all the world.
Also they report that there is there another tree, the fruit whereof whosoever
does eat, shall be twelve hours besides himself, and when he comes again
unto himself he shall not remember what he did in the time of his madness.
Moreover there are certain crabs of the land, whereof whosoever does eat
shall be a certain space out of his wits. Likewise the country people declare
that there is a stone in these Islands whereon whosoever sits shall be
broken in his body. It is farther to be noted, that the people of these
Islands do gild their teeth.

In the year 1539. Cortes sent three ships with Francis Vlloa to discover the
coast of Coludean northward. Gomara hist genesis lib. 2. cap. 74. and. Ramusius 3.
vol. fol. 339.
They vient from Acapulco, The bottom of the gulf of California discovered.
and touched at S. Iago de buqna speranca, and entered into the gulf that
Cortes had discovered, and sailed till they came in 32. degrees, which is
almost the farthest end of that gulf, which place they named Ancon de Sane
Andres, because they came thither on that saints day: Then they came out a
long the coast on the other side, California doubled.
and doubled the point of California and entered in between certain Islands
and the point, and so sailed along by it, till they came to 32. degrees, Cabo
del Enganno.
from whence they returned to new Spain, enforced thereunto by contrary
winds and want of victuals; having been out about a year. Cortes according
to his account, spent 200000. ducates in these discoueries.

From Cabo del Enganno to another cape called Cabo de Liampo in China there are
1000. or 1200. leagues sailing. The distance between America and China in 32.
degrees is 1000 leagues Gomar. hist. genesis lib. 6. cap. 17.
Cortes and his captains discovered new Spain, from 12. degrees to 32. from
south to the north, being 700. leagues, finding it more warm then cold,
although snow do lie upon certain mountains most part of the year. In new
Spain there be many trees, flowers and fruits of diverse sorts and profitable
for many things. The principal tree is named Metl. Metl an excellent tree.
It grows not very high nor thick. They plant and dress it as we do our
vines. They say it has forty kind of leaves like wouen clothes, which serve
for many uses. When they be tender they make conserues of them, paper, and a
thing like unto flax: they make of it mantles, mats, shoes, girdles, and
cordage. These trees have certain prickles so strong and sharp, that they
sewe with them. The roots make fire and ashes, which ashes make excellent good
lie. They open the earth from the root and scrape it, and the juice which
comes out is like a sirrupe. If you do feeth it, it will become honey; if you
purify it it will be sugar. Also you may make wine and vinegar thereof. It
bears the Coco. The rind roasted and crushed upon sores and hurts heals and
cures. The juice of the tops and roots mingled with incense are good against
poison, and the biting of a viper. For these manifold benefits it is the most
profitable tree known to grow in those parts.

Also there be there certain small birds named Vicmalim. Their bill is small
and long. They live of the dew, and the juice of flowers and roses. Their
feathers be very small and of diverse colors. They be greatly esteemed to
work gold with. They die or sleep every year in the month of October
fitting upon a little bough in a warm and close place: they revive or wake
again in the month of April after that the flowers be sprung, The revived
birds.
and therefore they call them the revived birds.

Likewise there be snakes in these parts, which sound as though they had bells
when they creep. There be other which engender at the mouth, even as they
report of the viper. There be hogs which have a navel on the ridge of their
backs, which as soon as they be killed and cut out, will by and by corrupt and
stink.

Besides these there be certain fishes which make a noise like unto hogs,
Snorting fishes.
and will snort, for which cause they be named snorters.

In the year 1538. and 1539. after that Diego de Almagro was beheaded, Gomara
hist. genesis lib. 5. cap. 35.
the Marquis Francis Pisarro was not idle. For he sent straight one Peter de
Baldiuia with a good company of men to discover and conquer the country of
Chili. Chili.
He was well received of those of the country, but afterward they rose against
him and would have killed him by treason. Yet for all the war that he had
with them, he discovered much land, and the coast of the sea toward the
southeast, till he came into 40. degrees and more in latitude. While he was in
these discoueries he heard news of a king called Leucengolma, This might be
the temple in the lake of Titicaca.
which commonly brought to the field two hundred thousand fighting men against
another king his neighbor, and that this Leucengolma had an Island, and a
temple therein with two thousand priests: Cieca cap. 103.
and that beyond them were the Amazones, whose Queen was called Guanomilla,
that is to say, The goldeu heaven. But as yet there are none of these things
discovered. About this time Gomez de Aluarado went to conquer the province of
Guanuco: and Francis de Chauez went to subdue the Conchincos, which troubled
the town of Truxillo, and the countries adjoining. Peter de Vergara went to
the Bracamores, a people dwelling toward the north from Quito. John Perez de
Vergara went against the Ciaciapoians: Alfonsus de Mercadiglio went unto
Mulubamba. Ferdinando and Gonzaluo Pisarros went to subdue Collao, a country
very rich in gold. Peter de Candia went to the lower part of Collao. Peranzures
also went to conquer the said country. And thus the Spaniards dispersed
themselves, and conquered above seven hundred leagues of country in a very
short space, though not without great travails and loss of men.

The countries of Brasill and Peru stand east and west almost 800. leagues
distant. The nearest is from the Cape of Saint Augustine unto the haven of
Truxillo: for they stand both almost in one parallele and latitude. And the
farthest is 950. leagues, reckoning from the river of Peru to the streits of
Magellan, which places lie directly north and south, through which country
pass certain mountains named the Andes, The mountains of Andes.
which divide Brasill from the empire of the Ingas. After this manner the
mountains of Taurus and Imaus divide Asia into two parts: which mountains
begin in 36. and 37. degrees of northerly latitude at the end of the Mediterran
sea over against the Isles of Rhodes and Cyprus, running still toward the East
unto the sea of China. And so likewise the mountains of Atlas in Africa divide
the tawnie Moors from the black Moors which have frisled hair, beginning at
mount Me^es about the desert of Barca, and running along under the Tropicke of
Cancer unto the Atlanticke Ocean.

The mountains of the Andes be high, ragged, and in some places barren without
trees or grass, whereon it raineth and snoweth most commonly. Upon them are
winds and sudden blastes; there is likewise such scarcity of wood, that they
make fire of turffes, Earth of diverse colors good to die withal.
as they do in Flanders. In some places of these mountains and countries the
earth is of diverse colors, as black, white, red, green, blew, yellow, and
violet, wherewith they die colors without any other mixture. From the bottomes
of these mountains spring many small and great rivers, principally from the
east side, as appears by the rivers of the Amazones, of S. Francis, of Plata,
and many others which run through the country of Brasil, being larger then
those of Peru, or those of Castilia del oro. There grow on these mountains
many turnips, rapes, and other such like roots and herbs. One there is like
unto Aipo or Rue which bears a yellow flower, and heals all kind of rotten
sores, and if you apply it unto whole and clean flesh it will eat it unto the
bone: so that it is good for the unsound and naught for the whole.

They say there be in these mountains tigers, lions, bears, woolues, wild
cats, foxes, Dantes, Ounces, hogs and dear: birds as well ravenous as others,
and the most part of them are black, as under the North both beasts and birds
be white. Also there be great and terrible snakes which destroyed a whole army
of the Ingas passing that way, yet they say that an old woman did inchant them
in such sort that they became so gentle, that a man might sit upon one of them.
The country of Peru adioining unto the mountains of Andes westward toward the
sea, and containing 15. or 20. leagues in breadth is all of very hot sand, yet
fresh, bringing forth many good trees and fruits because it is well watered:
where there grow abundance of flags, rushes, herbs, and trees so slender and
loose, that laying your hands upon them the leaves will fall off. And among
these herbs and fresh flowers the men and women live and abide without any
houses or bedding, even as the cattle do in the fields: and some of them have
tails. They be gross, and wear long hair. They have no beards, yet have
they diverse languages.

Those which live on the tops of these mountains of Andes between the cold and
the heat for the most part be blind of one eye, and some altogether blind,
and scarce you shall find two men of them together, but one of them is half
blind. Also there grows in these fields, notwithstanding the great heat of
the sand good Maiz, and Potatos, and an herb which they name Coca, which they
carry continually in their mouths (as in the East India they use another
herb named Betele) which also (they say) satisfies both hunger and thirst. An
herb named Coca which satisfies hunger and thirst.
Also there are other kinds of grains and roots whereon they feed. Moreover
there is plenty of wheat, barley, millet, vines, and fruitful trees, which are
brought out of Spain and planted there. For all these things prove well in
this country, because it is so commodiously watered.

Also they sow much cotton wool, which of nature is white, red, black,
green, yellow, orange tawnie, and of diverse other colors.

Likewise they affirm, that from Tumbez southward it does neither rain,
thunder, nor lighten, for the space of five hundred leagues of land: but at
some times there falls some little shower. Also it is reported, that from
Tumbez to Chili there breed no peacocks, hens, cocks, nor eagles, falcons,
hawks, kites, nor any other kind of ravening fowls, and yet there are of
them in all other regions and countreies: but there are many duckes; geese,
herous, pigeons, partriges, quails, and many other kinds of birds. There are
also a certain kind of foul like unto a ducke which has no wings to fly
withal, but it has fine thin feathers which all the body. Likewise there
are bitters that make war with the seal or sea wolf: for finding them out of
the water they will labor to pick out their eyes, that they may not see to
get to the water again, and then they do kill them. They say it is a pleasant
sight to behold the fight between the said bitters and seals. With the beards
of these seals men make clean their teeth, because they be wholesome for the
toothach. There are certain beasts which those of the country call Xacos,
Xacos a kind of great sheep that men ride upon.
and the Spaniards sheep because they bear wool like unto a sheep, but are
made much like unto a dear, having a a saddle back like unto a camel. They
will carry the burteen of 100. weight. The Spaniards ride upon them, and when
they be weary they will turn their heads backward, and void out of their
mouths a woonderful stinking water.

From the river of Plata and Lima southward there breed no crocodiles nor
lizards, no snakes, nor any kind of vene mous vermin, but great store of good
fishes breed in those rivers. On the coast of Saint Michael in The South sea
there are many rocks of salt covered with eggs. On the point of Saint Helena
are certain Well springs which cast forth a liquor, that serves in stead of
pitch and tar. They say that in Chili there is a fountain, the water whereof
will convert wood into stone. In the haven of Truxillo there is a lake of fresh
water, and the bottom thereof is of good hard salt. In the Andes beyond Xauxa
there is a river of fresh water, in the bottom whereof there lies white salt.
Also they affirm by the report of those of the country, that there have dwelt
giants in Peru, of whose statures they found in Porto viejo, and in the haven
of Truxillo, bones and jaws with teeth, which were three and four fingers
long.

In the year 1540. the captain Ferdinando Alorchon went by the commandment
of the Viceroy Don Antonio de Mendoca with two ships to discover the bottom of
the gulf of California, Ramusius 3 vol. fol. 303.
and diverse other countries.

In this year 1540. Gonsaluo Pisarro went out of the city of Quito to
discover the country of Canell or Cinamome, a thing of great fame in that
country. He had with him two hundred Spaniards horsemen and footmen, and
three hundred Indians to carry burdens. Gomara hist. genesis lib. 5. cap. (...).
He went forward til he came to Guixos, which is the farthest place governed by
the Ingas: where there happened a great earthquake with rain and lightning,
which sunk 70. houses. They passed over cold and snowie hills, where they found
many Indians frozen to death, maruelling much of the great snow that they
found under the Equinoctial line. From hence they went to a province called
Cumaco, Cumaco.
where they tarried two months because it rained continually. And beyond they
saw the Cinamome-trees, Cinamom trees
which be very great, the leaves thereof resembling bay leeues, both leaves,
branches, roots, and all tasting of Cinamome. The roots have the whole taste
of Cinamome. But the best are certain knops like unto Alcornoques or acornes,
which are good merchandise. Wild. Cinamom in the Islands of Iaua.
It appears to be wild Cinamome, and there is much of it in the East Indies,
and in the Islands of Iaoa or Iaua.

From hence they went to the province and city of Coca, Coca.
where they rested fifty days. From that place forwards they travailed along
by a rivers side being 60. leagues long, without finding of any bridge, nor yet
any foorde to pass over to the other side. They found one place of this river,
where it had a fall of 200. fathoms deep, El pongo. a mighty fall of a river.
where the water made such a noise, that it would make a man almost deaf to
stand by it. And not far beneath this fall, they say they found a channel of
stone very smooth, of two hundred foot broad, and the river runs by: and
there they made a bridge to pass over on the other side, Guema.
where they went to a country called Guema, which was so poor, that they
could get nothing to eat but only fruits and herbs. From that place forward
they found a people of some reason, wearing certain clothing made of cotton
wool, where they made a brigandine, and there they found also certain Canoas,
wherein they put their sick men, and their treasure and best apparel, giving
the charge of them to one Francis de Orellana: and Gonsaluo Pizarro went by
land with the rest of the company along by the rivers side, and at night went
into the boats, and they travailed in this order two hundred leagues as it
appears. When Pizarro came to the place where he thought to find the
brigandine and Canoas, and could have no sight of them nor yet hear of them,
he thought himself out of all hope, because he was in a strange country
without victuales, clothing, or any thing else: wherefore they were feign to
eat their horses, yea and dogs also, because the country was poor and
barren, and the journey long, to go to Quito. Yet notwithstanding taking a
good heart to themselves they went on forwards in their journey, travailing
continually 18. months and it is reported, that they went almost 5. hundred
leagues, wherein they did neither see sun nor any thing else whereby they
might be comforted, wherefore of two hundred men which went forth at the
first, there returned not back past ten unto Quito, and these so weak,
ragged, and disfigured that they knew them not. Orellana went five hundred or
six hundred leagues down the river, seeing diverse countries and people on
both sides thereof, among whom he affirmed some to be Amazones. He came into
Castile, excusing himself, that the water and streams drove him down
perforce. This river is named The river of Orellana, Rio de Orellana.
and other name it the river of the Amazones, because there be women there
which live like unto them.

In the year 1540. Cortes went with his wife into Spain where he died of a
disease seven years after.

In the year 1541. it is recorded that Don Stephan de Gama governor of India
sailed toward the streit of Mecca. He came with all his fleet unto an anchor in
the Island of Macua, Macua.
and from thence upwards in small shipping he went along the coast of the
Abassins and Ethiopia, till he came to the Island of Suachen, Suachen.
standing in 20. degrees toward the north, Cossir.
and from thence to the haven of Cos^ir, standing in 27. degrees, Toro.
and so he crossed over to the city of Toro standing on the shore of Arabia,
Suez.
and along by it he went unto Suez, which is the farthest end of the streit,
and so he turned back the same way, leaving that country and coast discovered
so far as never any other Portugal captain had done, although Lopez Suarez
governor of India went to the haven of Judah, and the haven of Mecca standing
on the coast of Arabia in 23. degrees of latitude, and 150. leagues from the
mouth of the streit. Don Stephan de Gama crossing over from Cos^ir to the city
of Toro, An Island of brimstone in the Red sea.
as it is reported found an Island of Brimstone, which was dispeopled by the
hand of Mahumet, wherein many crabs do breed, which increase nature:
wherefore they be greatly esteemed of such as are unchaste. Also they say that
there are in this streit many roses which open when women are in their labor.

John Leo writes in the very end of his Geographie which he made of Africa,
that there is in the mountains of Atlas a root called Surnag, over which if a
maid chance to make water she shall leese her virginity.

In the same year 1541. Don Diego de Almagro killed the Marquis Francis
Pizarro, and his brother Francis Martinez of Alcantara in the city de los
Reyes, otherwise called Lima, and made himself governor of that country.

In the year 1540. the Viceroy Don Antony de Mendoza sent one Francis Vasquez
de Coronado by land unto the province of Sibola with an army of Spaniards and
Indians. Gomara hist. genesis lib. 6. cap. 17.
They went out of Mexico, Sibola.
and came to Culuacan, and from thence to Sibola, which stands in 30. degrees
of latitude. They required peace with the people and some victuals, being
thereof destitute. But they answered that they used not to give any thing to
those that came unto them in warlike manner. So the Spaniards assalted the
town and took it, and called it Nueua Granada, because the general himself
was borne in Granada. The soldiers found themselves deceived by the words of
the Friars, which had been in those parts before; and because they would not
return back to Mexico again with empty hands, they went to the town of
Acuco, Acuco.
where they had knowledge of Axa and Quiuira, where there was a king very rich,
that did worship a cross of gold, and the picture of the queen of Heaven.
They endured many extremities in this journey, and the Indians fled away from
them, and in one morning they found thirty of their horses dead. Circuie.
From Cicuie they went to Quiuira, which was two hundred leagues off, Quiuira.
according to their account, passing all through a plain country, and making
by the way certain hillocks of cow dung, because thereby they might not loose
their way in their return. They had there haile-stones as big as Oranges.
Now when they were come to Quiuira, they found the king called Tatarrax, which
they sought for, with a jewel of copper hanging about his neck, which was all
his riches. They saw neither any cross, nor any image of the queen of Heaven,
nor any other token of Christian religion. Gomara hist. genesis lib. 6. cap. 18.
and 19.
It is written of this country that it is but smally inhabited, principally in
the plain and champion places, because the men and women go in herds with
their cattle, whereof they have great plenty, even as the Arabians do in
Barbary, and they remove from place to place, even as the season serves,
Sheep as big as horses.
and the pastures to feed their cattle. In these parts are certain beasts
almost as big as horses, they have very great horns, and they bear wool
like unto sheep, and so the Spaniards call them. They have abundance of oxen
very monstrous, being camel-backed, and having long beards, and on their neck
long manes like unto horses. They live with eating of these oxen and drinking
of their blood, and apparel themselves with the skins of the same. The most
part of the flesh that they do eat is raw, or evil roasted, for they lack
pots to sees it in. They cut their meat with certain knives made of flint
stone. Their fruit are damsons, hasel-nuts, walnuts, melons, grapes, pines,
and mulberies. Dogs carrying 50. pound weight on their backs.
There be dogs so big, that one of them alone will hold a bull, though he
be never so wild. When they remove, these dogs do carry their children,
wives, and stuff upon their backs, and they are able to carry fifty pound
weight. I pass over many things, because the order which I follow will not
permit me to be long.

In the year of our Lord 1542. one Diego de Freitas being in the realm of
Siam, and in city of Dodra as captain of a ship, there fled from him three
Portugals in a Iunco (which is a kind of ship) toward China. Their names were
Antony de Mota, Francis Zeimoro, and Antony Pexoto, directing their course to
the city of Liampo, standing in 30. and odd degrees of latitude. There fell
upon their stern such a storm, that it set them off the land, and in few
days they saw an Island toward the east standing in 32. degrees, which they
do name Iapan, Iapan discovered by chance.
which seems to be the Isle of Zipangri, whereof Paulus Venetus makes
mention, and of the riches thereof. And this Island of Iapan has gold, silver,
and other riches.

In this year 1542. Don Antonio de Mendoca Viceroy of Nueua Spagna, sent his
captains and pilots to discover the coast of Cape del Enganno, where a fleet
of Cortez had been before. They sailed till they came to a place called Sierras
Neuadas, or The snowie mountains, standing in 40. degrees toward the north,
where they saw ships with merchandises, which carried on (...) the images of
certain birds called Alcatra^zi, and had the yards of their sails gilded,
and their prowess laid over with silver. Gomara hist. genesis lib. 6. cap. 18.
They seemed to be of the Isles of Iapan, or of China; for they said that it
was not above thirty days sailing unto their country.

In the same year 1542. Don Antony de Mendoca sent unto the Islands of
Mindanao a fleet of six ships with four hundred soldiers, Gomara hist. genesis
lib. 4. cap. 13.
and as many Indians of the country, the general whereof was one Rui Lopez de
villa Lobos, Ramusius 1. vol. fol. 375. page 1.
being his brother in law and a man in great estimation. They set sail from
the haven of Natiuidad standing in 20. degrees toward the north, upon All
Saints eeue, and shaped their course toward the west. Saint Thomas.
They had sight of the Island of S. Thomas, which Hernando de Grijalua had
discovered, and beyond in 17. degrees they had sight of another Island which
they named La Nublada, La Nublada.
that is, The cloudie Island. From thence they went to another Island named
Roca partida, Roca Partida.
that is, The cloven Rock. The 3. of December they found certain Baxos or
states of six or seven fathoms deep. Baxo^.
The 15. of the same month they had sight of the Islands, which Diego de Roca,
and Gomez de Sequeira, and Aluaro de Saauedra had discovered, Los Reyes.
and named them Los Reyes, because they came unto them on Twelfe day. And
beyond them they found other Islands in 10. degrees all standing round, and in
the midst of them they came to an anchor, where they took fresh water and wood.

In the same year 1542. Don Diego de Almagro was slain in Peru by the hands
of one Don Vaca de Castro.

In the year 1543. in January they departed from the foresaid Islands with
all the fleet, and had sight of certain Islands, out of which there came unto
them men in a certain kind of boats, and they brought in their hands crosses,
and saluted the Spaniards in the Spanish tongue saying, Buenas dias, Matelotes,
that is to say, Good morrow, companions; whereat the Spaniards much marueiled,
being then so far out of Spain, to see the men of that country with
crosses, and to be saluted by them in the Spanish tongue, and they seemed in
their behavior to incline somewhat to our Catholic faith. The Spaniards not
knowing, that many thereabout had been Christened by Francis de Castro, at the
commandment of Antony Galuano, some of them named these Islands, ^he Isles of
Matelates.
Islas de las cruzes, and others named them Islas de los Matelotes.

In the same year 1543. the first of February Rui Lopez had sight of that
noble Island Mindanao standing in 9. degrees: Mindanao.
they could not double it nor yet come to an ancre as they would, because the
christened kings and people resisted them, having given their obedience to
Antonie Galuano, whom they had in great estimation, and there were five or six
kings that had received baptism, who by no means would incur his
displeasure. Rui Lopez perceiving this, and having a contrary wind, sailed
along the coast to find some aid; Sarangam.
and in 4. or 5. degrees he found a small Island which they of the country
call Sarangam, which they took perforce, and in memory of the vizeroy who had
sent them thither they named it Antonia, where they remained a whole year, in
which time there fell out things worthy to be written; but because there are
more histories that entreat of the same I leave them, meaning to meddle with the
discoueries only.

In the same year 1543. and in the month of August the general Rui Lopez
sent ane Bartholmew de la torre in a small ship into new Spain, to acquaint the
vizeroy don Antonio de Mendoca with all things. The relation of John Ga^etan in
the first vol. of Ramusu^^ fol. 376.
They went to the Islands of Siria, Gaonata, Bisaia, and many others, standing
in 11. and 12. degrees toward the north, where Magellan had been, and Francis
de Castro also, who there baptized many, and the spaniards called the^ the
Philippinas in memory of the prince of Spain. The Philippinas.
Here they took victuals and wood, and hoised sails, they sailed for certain
days with a fore-winde, till it came upon the skanting, and came right under
the tropique of Cancer. The 25. of september they had sight of certain
Islands, Malabrigos.
which they named Malabrigos, that is to say, The evil roads. Las dos Hermanas.
Beyond them they discovered Las dos Hermanas, that is The two sisters. And
beyond them also they saw 4. islands more, Los Volcanes.
which they called los Volcanes. The second of October they had sight of
Farsana, La Farsana.
beyond which there stands an high pointed rock, which casts out fire at 5.
places. So sailing in 16. degrees of northerly latitude, from whence they had
come, as it seems wanting wind, they arrived again at the Islands of the
Philippinas. Six or (...) Islands more.
They had sight of 6. or 7. Islands more, but they ankered not at them. An
Archipelagus of Islands.
They found also an Archipelagus of Islands well inhabited with people, lying
in 15. or 16. degrees: the people be white, and the weomen well proportioned,
and more beautiful and better arraied then in any other place of those parts,
having many jewels of gold, which was a token, that there was some of that
metal in the same country. Here were also barks of 43. cubits in length, and
2. fathomes and a half in breadth, and the plankes 5. inches thick, which
barks were rowed with ^ares. They told the Spaniards, that they used to sail
in them to China, Pilots for China.
and that if they would go thither they should have pilots to conduct them, the
country not being above 5. or 6. days sailing from thence. There came unto
them also certain barks or boats handsomely decked, wherein the Master and
principal men sat on high, and underneath were very black moors with
frizled hair: and being demanded where they had these black moors, they
answered, that they had them from certain Islands standing fast by Sebut,
where there were many of them, a thing that the Spaniards much maruailed at,
because from thence it was above 300. leagues to the places where the black
people were. Therefore it seemed, that they were not naturally borne in that
climate, but that they be in certain places scattered over the whole circuit
of the world. For even so they be in the Islands of Nicobar and Andeman, which
stand in the gulf of Bengala, and from thence by the space of 500. leagues we
do not know of any black people. Also Vasco Nunez de Valboa declares that as
he went to discover The South sea, in a certain land named Quareca he found
black people with frizled hair, whereas there were never any other found
either in Noua Spagna, or in Castilia del Oro, or in Peru.

In the year 1544. Don Gutierre de Vargas bishop of Placenza sent a fleet from
the city of Siuil unto the streits of Magellan: Gomara hist. genesis lib. 4. cap.
14.
which is reported to have been done by the counsel of the vizeroy Don Antonie
de Mendoca his cousin. Some suspe^ed that they went to Maluco, others to China,
others, that they went only to discover the land betwixt the streite and the
land of Peru on the other side of Chili, because it was reported to be very
rich in gold and silver. But this fleet by reason of contrary winds could not
passeth^ streit, yet one small bark passed the same, and sailed along the
coast, and discovered all the land, till he came unto Chirimai, and Arequipa,
which was above 500. leagues, for the rest was already discovered by Diego de
Almagro, and Francis Pizarro, and their captains and people at diverse times.
By this it appears, that from The streit to the Equinoctial line on both
sides is wholly discovered.

In the year 1545. and in the month of January Rui Lopez de villa Lobos, and
Giraldo with the Castilians came to the Island of Moro, The Isle of Moro.
and the city of Camafo, where they were well received of the kings of Gilolo
and Tidore, and of the people of the country (because Antony Galuano was gone)
and put the captain Don George de Castro to great trouble, Antonie Galua^o gone
out of ^he Malucas.
as appeered by those things which passed between him and the Portugals, and
the great expenses whereunto he put the fortress.

In the same year 1545. Rui Lopez de villa Lobos sent from the Island of
Tidore another ship toward New Spain by the south side of the line, wherein
was captain one Inigo Ortez de Rotha, and for pilot one Iaspar Rico. They
sailed to the coast of Os Papuas, Os Papuas.
and ranged all along the same, and because they knew not that Saauedra had
been there before, they challenged the honor and same of that discovery. And
because the people there were black and had frisled hair, Nueua Guinea.
they named it Nueua Guinea. For the memory of Saauedra as then was almost
lost, as all things else do fall into oblivion, which are not recorded, and
illustrated by writing.

In this year 1545. and in the month of June, there went a Iunk from the
city of Borneo, wherein went a Portugal called Peter Fidalgo, and by contrary
winds he was driven toward the north; where he found an Island standing in
9. or 10. degrees, that stretched it self to 22. degrees of latitude, The Isle
of Lu^ones.
which is called The Isle of the Lucones, because the inhabitants thereof were
so named. It may have some other name and harborowes, which as yet we know not:
it runs from the north unto the southwest, and stands between Mindanao
and China. They say they sailed along by it 250. leagues, where the land was
fruitful and well covered, and they affirm, that there they will give two
Pezos of gold for one of silver: (...) gold.
and yet it stands not far from the country of China.

In the year 1553. there went out of England certain shipping, and as it
appeered they sailed northward along the coast of Norway and Finmark, Moscouie
discovered by sea, by the English.
and from thence east, till they came between 70. and 80. degrees unto
Moscouie, for so far one of the ships went: but I know not what became of the
rest: and this was the last discovery made until this time. From this land of
Moscouie eastward you fail unto Tartary, and at the farther end of it stands
the country and province of China. It is said that between China and Tartary
there is a wall above 200. leagues in length, standing near unto 50. degrees
of latitude.

Now I gather by all the precedent discoueries, that the whole earth is in
circuit 360. degrees according to the Geometry thereof: and to every degree
the ancient writers allow 17. leagues and a half, which amount unto 6300.
leagues yet I take it that every degree is just 17. leagues. Howsoever it be,
all is discovered and sailed from the east unto the west almost even as the
sun compasses it: but from the south to the north there is great difference;
for toward the north pole there is found discovered no more then 77. or 78.
degrees, which come to 1326. leagues: and toward the south pole there is
discovered from the Equinoctial to 52. or 53. degrees, that is, to the streit
which Magellan passed through, which amounts to about 900. leagues; and
putting both these said maine sums together, they amount to 2226. leagues. Now
take so many out of 6300. leagues, there remains as yet undiscovered north
and south above the space of 4000. leagues.

FINIS.

