A GARDEN OF GRAVE AND GODLY FLOVVRES: SONETS, ELEGIES, AND EPITAPHS. Planted,
polished, and perfected By Mr. ALEXANDER GARDYNE.

Et sacer and magnus Vatum labor. EDINBVRGH Printed by THOMAS FINLASON. 1609.
With License.

TO THE MOST NOBLE LORDS OF HIS MOST EXCELLENT Majesty his most honorable
Privy Council, and College of Justice.
MOst powerful Peers, cheef Pillars of the Empire,
Strong Pedestals, whereon the State does stay,
Ministering Mercur's, to the Sacrat Sire,
Our Joue Great JAMES and our Agustus ay:
Those lurid, sad, and those Thanatik Theams,
I consecrat to your most Noble Nam's.
Your Lo. Most humble Orator M. Alex. Gardyne.

TO THE TRVELIE RELIGIOUS, RIGHT HONORABLE, AND VERY LEARNED ALEXANDER GORDON
of Clunie. S.
Look for no lively lyn's that may allure,
Or verse of worth, that will provok to view,
They want all power Poetic to procure,
And frame a lovely liking unto You,
My minor Muse, no neu'r a draught she drew,
From Helicon, or Aganippe well,
Bot ever still a lower flight she flew,
Nor Pindus hight, where Delius does dwell:
No such a friendly fortune Her befell,
For to be plunged in Parnassus springs,
Or see the Sisters in their Sacrat Cell,
Whence Poets all, their brave inventions brings:
Bot she her grouth got in Garden whair,
Nor Pallas, nor Apollo does Repair.
2.
THat gallant Greek, cognominate the Grand,
Who sometime All the Mundane Monarchy,
By Martial might did conquesse and command,
Voutchafed with a lovely looking eye:
Als well to view, and with desire did see,
An halting Vulcan, as an Venus fair,
His Royal Father Philip likewise He
To take (tho a Potentat) did not spair,
(A Grace J grant in such a Roy bot rair,
And from a Pesant, in a publict place)
A Globe of Graips, and what I mark was mair,
He took them friendly but a frowning face:
Swa if this small (Sir) you shall accept also,
You shall make up a ternarie of two.
3.
THe Perseans keept a custom with their King,
To give him gifts, mean, or magnificent;
Amongs those One, did for Oblation bring,
A water Coup, and did his Prince present:
He gracious Lord, as it had excellent,
And Royal been, respected the Propine,
As if there had been from some Sengeour sent,
A Jemme or Jewel, of the Isles of Inde,
Remarking much the meaning, and the mind
Affected well, he in that fellow fand,
More nor the worth, the quality and kind,
Of that he held into his Hienes hand:
Then Gracious more, prove nor the Persian Kings,
That made so much of light and little things.
4
Bot Sir, if to, my will, or to your Worth,
My worthles verse they war equivalent;
J should not fear, to send them freely forth,
To bid the Braish, of each Arbitriment,
Yet if my travels taine can but content,
And move thy mind, my labors to Allow,
My pains Jmploid, are profitably spent,
Jf that they bot, do help to honor you,
Bot had I borne, the Bays above my Brow,
Or been circunded with the Laurel green,
I should more largely notefie it now
How much t'augment thy Greatness, J am ge'ine,
And make the world and this Se-circled I Will,
Amazd t'admire, Thee in moir stately style,
Aberden the 25. of August. 1609. Your Hon. bounden and devoted, Mr. Alex.
Gardyne,

TO THE DISCRET READER.
I Publish naught, nor put I to the Press,
Their Poesies, to purchase me an praise,
Nor, is my drift, nor my devise to dress,
Elabrat lines, upon Respects to raise,
And mount my Muse, upon the front of Fame,
To get me Gain, or t'eternize my Name.
Nor do I on, self-confidence or skill,
For price, or place, presumptuously aspyre,
My meaning much, you do mistake: my will,
Is to get done, my Distitch lasts desire,
Slip all the Smooth, sleik what you see unfound,
Help whair they halt, Abreage when they abound.
Thine if you merit, Alex. Gardyne.

CERTAIN ENCOMIASTICK POEsies to the Author.
I Seem like Cynthia while thou shines I swear,
I am mistun'd whairas Thou sweetly sings,
And barren too, whair Thou begins to bear,
Whose Rustic Muse bot Bastard brats forth brings:
Yet what I can, I Will do it in thy sight,
Wart but to len, a luster to thy light.
I will not prease, to pratle of thy praise,
Thy work bears witness of thy wondrous worth,
Bot while I live and when I end my days
J must entreat thy favor this far forth:
About thy Garden place me near hand by,
That J may smell thy flowers whair eu'r J lie.
So shall I rest contented Jn thy favor,
Graced, while J grow, In such a glorious Ground,
Whair Virtue, Wit, and worth so sweetly favor,
Whair Eloquence and Art so much Abound:
Whair I shall prove part of thy sweet Reposes,
Surpassing sugared Myrrh and musced Roses.
Anonimos.

AS Beauty still desires to be in sight,
Of saddest Sable and misshapen Statures,
The more to grace their admirable light,
By the default of such deformed Creatures:
As Cynthya be day can give no glance
While bright Apolo shows his Radiance.
So gracious Gardyne wonder of thy Age,
Thou gains a world of praise for every verse,
Thy Countries honor thus thou does agraige,
All Nations thy, Jnuentions sall rehearse:
Poor petty Poems now your heads go hide,
While greater light here stains your glistring pride.
Ane light that shows be shining every whair,
What Lamps are lost in British learned brains,
For lack of Patrons to maintain the rair,
And royal spirits that the Earth retains:
Live Gardine then, and love thy Patron best.
I Will praise you both, and pray for all the rest.
P. G.

With Pyrameids, of Poliz'd Pophir proud,
Great Princes Toumbs, are beautified we see,
And with the gold of Ophyr fortunes Good,
Their palaces stand poynting at the sky:
Thus while they live their glory they maintain,
Thus while they die, they make it live again.
Yet all that life, is bot a living Death,
And all this death, a dying life, and All,
Their Trains, and honors, that attend their breath,
Are but Rich marks, ye more to frame their fall,
And after life, that painted honors stone,
With flying Time, consumed is and done.
Live than, that life, come not unto decay,
And if it come, yet that it shall naught die,
Into this Garden gather up thou may
How still thy Name, may still eternal be:
For be those fruits of Alexanders lore,
Thou dies in Virtue for to live in Gloir.
Mr. W. Bar.

SONET.
TWo sorts of men be bound to love thy lyns,
Two sorts therefore aught to proclaim thy Praise,
Their several sorts, them selves shows and defines.
The Dead, and als the Living in their days,
The Dead they should ascent to thy Assayes
Since by thy Lines, Resussitat and sure,
Their Fame revived, and immortal stays,
And by thy Deed, eternal shall endure.
The Living too, unless they thee injure,
Into whose praise, thy Poesies thou pend,
Should in Thy Cause, at Critics hands procure,
And spair no pains, thy Fame for to defend:
Wherefore I judge, (and justly) all ingins,
Alive and Dead, be bouud to love thy lines.
Green Garden great, and gallant is thy glore,
And happy thou, that such a troup contains,
A comely Court, a rich and stable store,
Hemmed here within thy heavenly hedge remains:
Great Delius, dishanting Parnass uses,
And with him all, these Maids admired the Muses.
That tripill Tryn have here transferd their seat,
And here Apollo hes his Palion pitched,
Whereby no Wene, Invention nor conceat,
Is not thy Muse attempted not, nor touched:
Wherefore J think condinglie thou may clame
One leaf out of the Laurel Diadem.
Since in thy Breast boyls those inspiring springs,
From whence does flow that lively liquor sweet:
Wherein Thou baths thy Virgin Muses wings,
And at thy pleasure in those fonts does fleet:
From whence thy Muse exceeding store extracts,
That through the Mundan Map thee famous maks.
W. T.

IN Good or Bad, the work bewrays the Man,
And by the fruit we clearlie know the Tree,
How cunning and, how great a Gardner than
Declares thy gallant Garden thee to be?
For therein thou maks blind and sensles see,
Thy worthy work, unto my self a sight,
That stupefacts my sense, delud's my eye,
And yet it lens unto my life a light:
For while with Reason I do reckon Right,
And see such store do from one stock Proceed,
Fruits fresh and fair, diverslie dressed and dight,
Yet discrepant in sapor, shape and seed:
I must say then, thou by a thousand ways,
Thy practice and Poetic power displayes.
Mr. I. Lesl.

WHose pleasure is into his Paradise,
And Adam like his Eden has advisd,
Relent thy course by Gardens grave advise,
Whose Muse divine this sweetest Subject chusd,
Inspired hereby, he hes profoundly infufd,
Rare Recipies thy Soul for to renew,
Read with remorse, and rightly if thou use,
Thou shall rejoce, that in our Ground there grew
A Garden whence springs Cedars to subdew:
Soule-killing soars resulting from thy sin,
Then wandering worldling, hold this in thy view,
Lest if thou stray, thou enter not therein
This Gardens-flowrs: had Alexander seen,
His heart had not half so ambitious been.
Alex. Ste.



UPON HIS MAJESTY'S Arms quartered.
LORD be thy boundles bounty from above,
The British Great, long tripartited Throne,
United now, in pleasure, peace and love,
To thee and thine (Great James) shall Al-be-on
Distractions, greefs, and grudges all are gone,
Competitors, that preast thy Crowns to clame,
Hes ceased their suits, and leau's to thee Alone,
The Irish, French, and the English Diadem,
Out of all doubt impertinent to them;
And be all Laws belonging unto thee,
As lo my sacred Sovereign supreme,
Behold here with thy Royal eyes, and see
The Leopards, and Flowers of France they bring
The Harp, to sport their Lord, thee Lion King.
TO HISSACRED MAJESTY PROCLAIMED KING OF Great Britane.
MOst magnanime, and high imperial Prince,
Whom IOVA just, undoubtedly ordains,
In peace be A, fore-pointed providence,
Of Al-be-on all, to rule the royal rains,
The bloody broyls, where but th'vngodlie gains,
Great Jove, sweet Time, and sacred Soverain you,
Have brought to end, and every strength constrains,
Before your feet, debased like to bow,
The threatening storms of bold Bellonas brow,
To pleasant peace long intertain'd shall turn,
As may be noted evidentlie now,
Whill all your bounds, with blasing bon-fires burn:
Amidst this mirth, and those triumphiug things,
Give GOD the glore, the Creator of Kings.
CONGRATVLATION FOR HIS MAJESTY'S DELIVERIE FROM THE SVLPHVRIOVS Treason in the
Parliament house.
Sonet. 1.
LIft up your hearts and hands unto the Lord,
Applaud, give praise, and with the Psalmist sing,
Unto his Majesty Misericord,
For saif conserving of thee Sovereign King:
Give glore to God, and thank him for this thing,
Laud we the Lord, with heavenly hyms on hie,
That by that bloody boutchrie did him bring:
Devisd for him with secret subtlety.
Extend the Truth, tell this eternally,
With mirrie minds conjunctlie all rejoes,
IEHOVA just, Almighty, magnify,
That fred him from the fury of his foes.
Triumph and sing for this deliverance sweet,
Praise to the Father, Son, and holy Sprit.
Sonet 2.
IT is not flamm's of artificial fir's,
That thou the Lord craves for a recompense:
Nor is it pomp ostentiue thou requjr's,
For wondrous preservation of the Prince,
It is not Mundane vane magnificence,
Nor sliding show's, that momentarie be,
Bot it is zeal, thanks, and obedience,
With gladness of the mind to glorify,
Thee thee the Lord, that hes so lovinglie,
Even from a fore-decrited death, out-drawen:
Thy servant that, sinceirlie serves Thee,
To cause on him, thy love, and care, be knawne.
A paill of prayer, not artificial fir's,
The Lord for this, deliverance desir's.
TO THE CITY OF ABERDEN at the death of that excellent D. DAVID Bishop of
Aberd.
THe Prince of preaching Pastors in their parts,
Thy Archidoctor dearest and divine;
The light of learning in the liberal Arts,
Thy senior sage, in every Science sine,
Thy faithful Father, and informer fine:
Thy dearest David in the Lord is lost,
Thy Cypr'an Ambrose, and thy Augustine,
The Earth for Heaven thy Cunninghame hes cost:
Whill as Religion with her loud laments,
For his departure powers out her plaints.
To Church and King, what detriment and skaith,
The breaths-abridging Burrio does bring:
Here in this death, is eminent to both,
For lo the Church, a Column; and the King
A Consul grave, inlaiks in every thing
The people a Platter of their publict pace,
Ane Symboll sure, and an assured sign,
Of some approaching perrell to the place:
Where he was wont divinlie to indite
The mysteries of holy sacred write.
THE OPINION OF THE worldly estate of the honorable and learned Mr Walter
Steward Principal of the Kings College of Aberdon at his death.
LIfe, Lordships, friends, all ease and earthly glore,
Pomp, Pleasure, Pride, Renown and worldly wealth,
Sprit, manhood, strength, estate, and treasures store,
Blood, beutie, clan, and honor here but health,
Like dying lamps into the longest night,
Are false deluding dainties but delight.
Pre-eminence, soveranitie, and place,
Great dignities, and transitorious joys:
Promotions high, discents from royal race,
Time turns to naught, Death alters and destroys:
As water-bell's with little blasts are blown,
So with less breaths they are again ou'r-throwen.
Wit, learning, skill, sweet Eloquence and vene,
Jn faculties, intelligence profound:
Soliditie, and quicknes of the brain,
And in all Earthly blessings to abound:
Are always vain, and foolishnes in fine,
Without that Wisdom heavenly and divine.
Men are not made for ever permanent,
In Mein, nor Monarchs is no steadfast strength,
Men are no more, here bot a trau'ling tent,
And they shall leave this lingering life at length:
Remove and wend out of this vaill their ways,
For they the part of posting Pilgrims plays.
What they in their Inventiue brain have bred,
Be means of their imagination vain:
And with expense perfectly have exped,
By ill governing is disgraced again:
And that which Fame and Fortune hiest bure,
Often lies full low, inglorious and obscure.
Why do we then in fragill flesh confide,
And boldly buildes our aspirance and trust;
Since nothing breaths that here is borne to bide.
Of Nothing all, all unto Nothing must:
Revert and turn, Death will in end devore,
And flesh transchange to filth, as a before.
Disdain those base and lowest earthly things,
Fly through the skies unto his burning throne;
Whose blessed sight to the beholders brings,
(Be mere affection, and his love alone:)
Those sacred, holy, benefits and blessed,
Peace, wealth and ease, content and quiet rest.
Abandon then those all alluring baits,
Which to the Soul frams ruin and decay;
Be not infected with those frivole fraits,
That are in heavenly happiness a stay:
So in the earth your Names shall be renownd,
And in the heavens with Christ coheird and crowned.
Non est mortale quod opto.
NOt mortal, no, nor earthly is my aim,
Nor point's it to, great Powers or empir's
To Favors fraill, nor to officious Fame,
Nor is it sworn, to sensual desires:
Nor would I wish what worldlings covet most,
Glore got with ease, and with less labor lost.
No tracking trash, nor transitorious things,
Not Mammons muck, that Mundans most on muse;
Impeds my Sprit, which still aspiring springs,
That only and Eternal good, to choose:
Which Spirits bad, nor Angels blessed above,
Not in a point can alter, change, or move.
No, bot it is that pure impassiue Spirit,
That ere all time was, shall, and only is:
Good, just and wise, immortal, infinite,
God all in all, all only is my wish:
For in the same excessiuelie I shall,
Have infinite, and what I would have, all.
UPON THE HONORABLE the Lord of Tolquhon.
ATtend, come view, behold here shall you see
Into this grave, as in a stealed glass,
The sudden change of men that mortal be,
Now men, now metamorphos'd in a mass,
Now paill and wan, that even now vital was,
Now brave, now blyth, now body but a breath,
Now flesh and blood, now are we dust and ass,
Now like to live, now subject unto death,
Now fiery is, now frosen hard our faith,
Now faithful friends, now false and fained foes,
Now patient, now angry full of wraith,
Now filthy weid, now fragrant like the rose:
Now pampred up like painted pots are we,
And dross again, in twinkling of an eye.
2.
REligion laiks out of this land a lamp,
Thou Publict-well weep for thy member may,
Thou Virtue wants the Captain of thy camp,
Thou Country him that did thee honor ay:
You Poor have lost, that seldom said you nay,
You Friends your best, and only permanent:
Unto you sex, the damnage done this day,
What pithie pen in paper can imprent,
Truth, Virtue, Friends, Well, Country, Poor, lament,
His death to you that deutie did discharge,
And wroght with wit and wisdom to invent,
But others loss, your limits to enlarge:
Then sex in one, come honor now his death,
A live who to dishonor you was leath.
To the Country where he lies.
OF Buchan ground thou hes in grave thy glore,
And of thy Lairds the light within thee lies:
Thou keeps his corpse that best could thee decore,
And was be vote (amongs the wisest) wise,
Thou does depresse that causd thee to arise,
And made thy Fame in every Firth to flee,
His Trophee then Eternal maks thee twice,
First that thou bred one worthy such as he,
Next that his bones should in thee buried be;
And though thou Earth, his earthly joints enjoy,
Devised, made, and destinate to die,
Yet doubtless death dow never his deeds destroy:
For thought ye both do your devour in this,
Fame and Remembrance shall amend your mis.
Prosop. to his living friends.
CEase mortal men, for me mourn ye no more,
You griue your God, and craibs him but a cause,
Ye follow fast, though that I go before,
Death for thee last, be course each of you knows,
The daily dead you sure example shows,
You weep in vain, your mourning Me dismaies,
Ye get no wrong, God sheares bot where he sow's:
Your childish plaints, your weakness lo bewrais,
Think after Death what state still for you stays,
Pray with S. Paul for dissolution syne,
Think not by Death the better part decaies,
Bot think that death men worldly maks divine:
The Scripture says, we shall dissolve, not die,
Then wait the hour, and mourn no more for me.
Upon his dear friend Mr. A. M.
GIflosse of friends, if damnage great, or skaith,
May move to mourn, to waill, or to lament:
The first I think the greatest of them both,
Yneugh for me, and a fit argument,
Too much for those not touched with such intent,
For friends or Fortune, once to moan or move,
To all I say, this is sufficient,
Agreing to all harmed Men's behoue,
Prick with the spur, and force of onfold love,
To such a one as by a just desert,
Sold longer lived, bot (weerds) I you reprove,
And cursed be thou death with thy dreadful dart:
That in the spring and prime time of his year,
Has from his being brought him to his Beer.
Upon the verteous and worthy Virgin Helen Chein.
INjurious Death, thy rage is but regard,
No reason reuls where once thou gets a rest:
With reprobats the right reap's like reward,
The godles, good, the mein, and mightiest,
Thy dart to dust, does reddie bring the best,
And ay thou wretch, the worthiest invyes,
As on this Maid thou hes made manifest,
That here interd into this Temple lies,
The wisest wight that Nature could devise,
Whose Fame thy force and fury shall confound,
When from each pen her praise proceid thou spies,
Then Death all shall, to thy disgrace redound:
And where she rests shall be inrold thy rage,
For marring her in morning of her age.
Upon the honorable the Lord of Corss.
THe glorious Gods, o seldom wonder strange,
Dressed in their dule, convoied all with cair,
Wrath for thy wrack, all willing to revenge,
Thy wrong, down from the watrie voulted Air,
Hes left the Heavens, their habitations their,
Thy dolent death to quite it, if they can:
The thundering Jove to magnify thee mair,
Hes vou'd to venge upon the Sprit's that span
Thy threid so thin; the mighty Mars, says than
The spoils of death shall grace the grave above,
In spite of death, in witness that thou wan
Of all the Gods, the favor, grace, and love.
Apollo last, laments thee with the laue,
And vow's t'ingraph thy glore above thy grave,
Upon the honorable I. Irv. of Pet.
LIke as the Date, or silver plumed Palm,
That planted is upon an open plain,
But help of hedge, to keep it close and calm,
From v'olent winds, and from the rapping rain,
Does upright rise, and level like a rash,
And blooming bears her fruit, and floorish fresh.
So he that back, as to his mothers womb,
This quiet Caverne, and this silent Cell,
Returned is, into this terrene tomb,
Against those foes, the World, the Devil, and Hell:
He stoutly strove through force of faith and strength,
And Iacob-like, here Victor-lyes at lenth.
DIALOG UPON THE DEATH OF P. F. Baillie of Aberden.
CIVES. STay stranger thou, that so preceislie spies
With earnest eyes, and on those Graves does gaze,
Look here below, where thou shall see there lies
Matter to make thee both to mourn and maze:
For years a youth, dead in his tender days,
Enriched with graces reasonable, and rare,
As thou shall see all those lamenting lays,
And dulefull ditons cunningly declare:
Then thou hes to dilat an other day,
Of such a man thou red into thy way.

PEREG. The mourning of so many modest men,
The Deads deserts, does evidently show,
And causes all inquisitiue to ken
What was his worth, that here is laid so low,
Through dint of death, and destanies ov'rthrowe,
And what his parts were, by their plaints appears,
Which surely seru's him for to sound to blow,
And put his praise in all the honests ears:
And for my self, J would enlarge the same,
And forther eik a fether to his fame.
Brethring in brugh, and ye his brether borne,
And all that hes of his acquentance been:
Do what ye can, his death for to adorn,
And mourn no more, it will not mend to mein,
Set forth the Fame of the defunct your friend:
Ye Poets kyth, your cunnings, craft, and can,
To cause his fame, still floorish, fresh, and green,
And be our Muse, immortal make the man:
So ow's be Partner of the praise, and be,
Remembered both, and honored as He.
Give it no partial nor a sparing praise,
Pen only that, that reason we will, may crave,
It buits naught much, above all bounds to blaze,
Superfluous praises, graces not the Grave,
Rander the right, and let alone the leave,
Extend the Truth, and surely so you shall,
Alot him all the honor he would have,
Both in his life, and his last funeral:
Wouchaif to write, and lend him lin's thairfoir,
That be our means, he may live euermoir.

Remors and sorrow for sin.
LOrd lend me light, for to lament my life,
And sharp my fight, to sorrow for my sin;
Restrain the fury, and the mortal strife,
Of spreit, and flesh, that I am entered in:
Permit me not, without recourse to rin,
Nor walk the ways, of the vnchastiz'd child,
Bot give me grace, and grant me to begin,
For to refuse, the folies that defyld,
My sinful soul, and all my senses syld,
With shows of wordly vanities, and wealth,
And those inglorious glosis that begyld,
And did with hold, me from my heavenly health:
Lord be thy spreit, make me perceive and spy-them,
And then renounce, and utterly deny-them.
2
God grant me grace, for to digest my grief,
And for the spreit, of patience I pray:
Lord send my Soul, that long desired releif,
And now convert, my Carioune to clay;
Contract the Time, Lord thraw the threid in two,
And let me murne my miseries no moir,
Dislodge this life, and do not long delay,
To enter me, in Thy eternal gloir,
Whair J may live Thy loving face befoir,
Their with thy Saints, incessantly to sing,
Thy perfect praise, and but all end adoir,
Thy holy name, high Prophet, Priest, and King:
Untie my tongue, that I may sing, and say,
O holy God, all holy, holy, ay.
Invocation for seasonable weather.
O Puissant Prince, and King Cunctipotent,
Whose body rent, was on the rack, or Rude,
For man's great good, O Lord thy self was shent,
Of that intent, the Devil to denude;
Us to seclude, from that feirce fiery flood,
Whilk reddie stood, to drink vpi and demain,
That thou had then, boght with thy blissed blood,
The heavenly food, that fed thy Israel feign,
Lord send again, to Nurish us thy own,
Since floods of Rain, downfalls out from the Aer,
That we despair, to reap the fruits, and grain,
Whairwith the plain, is now ore'spread alwhair,
My suit then Lord, with spreit deprest receive,
Grant J may have, that heir I humbly crave.
A PRAYER FOR THE ESTATE of the Church.
O Lord that art the strength and steadfast rock,
Let thy out-streatched arm fry and defend,
That now in danger be, thy faithful flock,
Which was, which is, and shall be to the end:
Cause now thy care upon the Church be kend,
When Reprobats vprises to rebel,
And with their tricks and treasons does intend,
To wrest thy Word, thou dictat hes thy sell,
Thought of the truth, no thing them selves can tell,
Bot boasts us with the strength of strangers sword,
Apostat Papists, from all parts expel,
Or turn them truly to avow thy word.
Imped their Platt's, their mintings make amiss,
That ought bot well to thy Evangell wisse.
Comfort for my innocent afflicted friend.
LEt not blasphemous barking beasts bereave,
Nor causles thy accustomed courage quaill,
For giltles states the keenest courage crave,
And most does in adversity availl:
Though raging Rog's, without all reason raill,
And wicked wretches at thy worth envy,
Yet all their falset in the sin shall faill,
When every one thine innocence shall try:
To their eternal infamy and shame,
And to the lawd and honor of thy Name.
None bot the worthy are envyed worst,
And few traduced bot of the best estate,
The finest often we find unfriendly forced,
And with the beastly borne at greatest hate;
Fools only at their Betters fortune frait,
And swells to see their credit to encresse,
Their malice yet should not thy mind amait,
Nor make thy private pleasures prove the Less:
Bot rather move thee mirthfull more to be,
And flout thy foolish foes that frouns on thee.
A Passion.
WHat grief, what anguish great,
What black and bitter baill,
So hurts and harms my heavy heart,
And never makes to haill?
What hudge misfortunes me,
Confounds, defaits, and foiles,
What daft desire, like flamm's of fire,
Within my bowels boyls?
What subtle slight desaits,
What trains my soul to trap?
What wicked wiles my will invents,
Me Wretch in woe to wrap?
What lubrick pleasant shows,
With false impoysoned baits,
My fond fantastic fancy finds,
To sensual consaits?
What wild corrupted thoughts,
As from their rute and stock, ()

Out of my heart, like armies hudge,
About my brain do flock?
What hundredth thousand ill's,
From that first sinful seeds,
Into my mind immured alace,
All bad abuses breeds?
What willingness to vice?
What forwardness to fall?
What prompnes to trespass is nurced in my natural?
What readiness to stray,
What rage from right to rin,
A beastly bygate to embrace,
The sink of shame and sin?
What inward foolish force,
What inclinations ill,
Into my endless errors ay
Makes me continue still? ()

Or what a madness is it,
That but remorse or fear,
I with my God almost, his Word
And will reveild I weir.
Who in his Wisdom hes
All Natures made of naught,
And ilk a Creature and kind,
Their several courses taught.
The Bodies all above,
The spheir and cirled Heaven,
He maks rin restless round about,
As violently drawn.
The sure and solid Ground,
Just placed lik a prick,
In mids alike immovable,
Does still and stable stick.
With both the sorts of Seas,
Embrodered about,
That still does brash and beat their banks,
With many roar and rout.
He all above the Earth,
The Region of the Air,
Right properly appointed for
His Palace did prepare.
Although the Heaven of Heavens,
Most polished perfect,
His Grace and Godhood not contains,
Full glorious, and grite.
For in the Earth and Deeps,
And Firmament most fair,
His blessed Sprit and Essence is,
Over all and everie-where.
He all and every thing,
H'apointed hes and placed;
And what his Providence performed,
Is nothing void nor waist.
The third and highest Heaven,
Great GOD he did ordain,
For Angels, and the blessed Band,
A mansion to remain.
The subtle Air below,
And Firmament for Fowls,
The deadly Deep, and black Abyss,
For damned sprits and souls.
For fleeting finned Fish,
Fresh Waters, Floods and Seas:
For savage, wild, and bloody Beasts,
He planted Parks and Trees.
Yet of those all the use,
As Nature taught, weken.
He hes appointed for supply,
And nurishment to men,
And sapentlie hes set
In season ilk a sort,
And all things as he thinks it good,
Provids for their support.
All forms of Fish the Floods,
Her eating Flesh the Field,
All healthsome Fowls for food, the Air,
He hes ordained to yield.
The Glob aetheriall,
And closse compacted spheir,
He peopled hes with lightsome lamps,
The streaming starr's, and cleir.
Some of those litler Lights,
But steiring steadfast stay,
And some their circled courses change,
And alter erring ay.
And such like He hes set
These ornaments amang,
That through the voults of Cristall skies,
Full gleglie glansing gang.
Twa-glimsing golden Globes,
With bodies broad and bright,
The Greater for to guide the day,
The Less to rule the night.
The silver Cynthia,
Does both incresse and waine
Into a Month: and Phoebus course
A year concludes again.
The twice two Elements,
And every other thing;
Abers not by their limit bounds,
Be the All-creating King.
Bot onl' unthankful man
Tho to his use alone,
Great good and gracious God did all,
Befoir expressed, compone:
it all the Creatures,
That He hes made amang,
Man only know's the right and it,
Does walk awry, and wrang,
Fortis est falsam infamiam contemnere.
ALL they that love, and lives be the law,
And they that stur, her statutes to trangres,
All they of God, that his commands do know,
Than lewd Reports, they nothing count of less,
All they in life, who purity profess,
Than sland'ring tongues, they nothing more detest,
Wha seiks to smoir, while they the more increase,
The giltles Fame, the pure, and perfect best,
The Scripture shows, the wiser sort, expreems,
Detracting tongues, a vice unworthiest,
Which God most vile, and odious esteems,
Of falls infamous lies, than think no mair,
Bot as words lost, and Echoes in the air.
Ane prayer for the faithful.
O Lord whose force, and righteonsnes do reach,
From Monarchies, unto the meinest Mote,
O Lord whose Regal staitlines does streach,
Over all not passing once the smallest iott,
O Lord that saved, vnlost thy servant Lot,
And for distrust, struck up his wife in stone,
O Christ that cured, by touching of thy cott,
The blind, the lame, and all, with greifs, begone,
Look Lord, I pray, down from thy thundering throne,
And view us wratches with thy eyes divine,
Guide us with grace from danger every one,
Whom thou elects, and chooses to be thine,
Bliss us on Earth, and give us perfect pace,
And in the Heavens fruition of thy face.
UPON THE REVEREND AND GODly M. N. H. Commissar of Aber.
HEre lies inclosde, within this Cave of clay,
His bloodles bones that boldly did embrace,
In Christ, the Truth, unto his dying day,
Whose like now few, are liueand left, alace,
Pereit to Poize, with piety, the place,
That upright He, did but a spot preserve,
By guide governing, godliness, and grace,
Which now to sound, (that surely cannot swerue)
Thy publict praise, O happy Soul shall serve,
Though thou be dead, and death thy dross, deuoir,
Thy laud shall not, inlaik, that does deserve,
For to remain, immortal euermoir,
Thy Name, by Fame, into this land shall live,
Though seasons slide, it permanent shall prive.
DIALOGVE UPON THE VIRTUOUS and Right honorable Sir Thomas Gordon of Clunie
Knight.
Interlo. Resp. Fame.
Pub. Weal. WHair flies thou Fame, so frantick-like, and fast?
What chance, or change? what may thy murning move?
What grieus thee thus, how goes thou so aghast,
What news in Earth, what in the Heavens above?
Thou Tongue of Time, thou wingd-foote Herold stay,
T'impart th'imployments unto us we pray.

Fame. The force of my, Affairs and woes scarce can,
Permit a pause much-lesse to bide, and breath,
Bot wit Thou we will, the World it wants a Man,
By the vntimous, Tyranie of death.
Whose worthiness, to sound out J am send,
Unto the Heaven and to the Worlds end.

Pub. Whom have J lost? Fa. A manfull member you,
That loved the Lord, and held Religion dear,
Alas removed, and transported now,
From you, the faithsull, that are fechtand here.
Unto his Home, the high and stately Heaven,
That God unto, the glorified hes given.
And hes thee left, as Orphane to bewaill,
And weept his want, with tears and tragic toone.
That from this woeful and this wratched vail,
His shyning virtues Sun hes set so soon,
By whose eclipsed and declined light,
This day is dark, like the Cymmeriane night.
His sanctified Soul celestial,
From whence it came, to God again is gone,
Up to the highest heaven imperial,
The Appointed Palace of the Lord, where None,
Bot Souls of Saints, and blessed Angels be,
Elect to life, from all Eternity.
His Name, Remembrance, and his Memory,
The Earth up to, the firmament, shall fill,
The mouth's of men, shall minister with me,
To cause them vncorrupt continue still,
And grasse-like grow, great, glorious, and green,
As if they were, substantially seen.
How greatly than, thou graced are, O grave,
(A seven foot Cell,) made of the marble mold,
His knighted Corpse, with honor thou shall have,
Whose Fame, skarse can, the universal hold,
Whairbe the age, succeeding, this, shall see,
How rair a Man, heir buried lies, in Thee.

To his loving friends.
Prosop.
YOu Honorable, Dear, and loving, Friends,
To whom God gives, his graces great, and guide,
Mark this Mort-head, and your ensewing ends,
See how it stands, think some-time how it stood,
Now bot bare bones, and hes beines, but their blood,
No worldly wit to Kingdoms, Crowns, nor kin,
Brings with them blessings or Beatitude,
Nor will they Heaven unto the wicked win,
All Earthly pomp, if not divod of sin,
Shall turn to this wherein my bones are borne,
A trimmed Tomb, with rotten waires within,
Brought forth to day, and buried on the morn:
Live therefore godly, verteous, well and wise,
Such happiest, and only blessed dies.
2.
GOD gave to me of friends sufficient,
Of worldly wit, a reasonable store;
Of Thesaure too, until I was content,
And honor here, yea, whill I craved no more:
Yet all is naught, and bot a gloss of glore,
Like the Sol-sequium, a fading flower,
That with the Sun does all the day decore
The Gardens green; sine sets in an hour.
Bot Christ my King, and Souls-sweet Savior,
My comfort is, my honor, health, and all,
Everlasting life, and never tracking treasure,
That permanent shall be perpetual:
Leave then dear Friends, wealth vanishing and vain,
Make Christ with me your God, your goods, your gain.
A strong Opiniator.
FOr Fortunes favor or her fead,
I nether eik nor pairs my trynde;
Though misreport of me be made,
I nether vex nor move my mind:
For who to misreport pretend,
Dismakes their malice in the end.
I pance not on no present things,
Nor covets those that are to come:
I sturt not for Cupido's stings,
Nor am I driven to do as some.
For private pleasure to prescriue,
The day of death, or term of live.
I fash me not with Court effairs,
I suit not for a seat supreme:
I am not cloyed with Country cares,
Nor hunt I for renoune of Name:
For I find sooth that wise men says,
Fame conquest soon, als soon decays.
To gather gear is good I grant,
Bot godly naught therein to glore:
Then some-time have, and some-time want,
I for my self, I would no more:
It surfets often, and seems sore,
To want, or to be still in store.
With faithful Friends I do not fash,
No ended bargane back I bring:
I waist me not in vain to wash
The woeb J wait that will not wring:
For folly is to enterprise
That not into my power lies.
J do not hate no others hap.
And am content here with my own:
I strive not to mount up a stap,
To be two grees again down-throwne.
Bot I employ me in that place,
Where glore I gain not, nor disgrace.
Th'vnpleasant Proud I plain despise,
From Fools J flee as from my foes,
I love and honor ay the wise,
And still I do mislike of those,
As Sancts that bears a Sanct-like shoe,
And yet in deed are no ways so.
For doubtsome changes that may chance,
I nether glade, nor yet I grieve:
For hope of things that may advance,
I nether like to die nor live:
For worldly thing is not can
One live, once make an happy man.
For swelling rage of sorrows showr's,
As unassaulted sure I sit:
And for unconstant stormy showr's,
As fixed fast, I'fotch no futt:
So as a Bulwark on the strand,
Rebeatting Fortunes bloes I stand.
For cumming storm's, I do forecast,
Of greatest ill's J choose the best:
J set no saill, I hew no mast,
No vehement I know can lest.
And as no Pilat inexpert,
I view the Compass and the Cart.
For instant grief, for gladness gone,
Believe J nether heat nor cool,
At all events I still am one,
For ought J nether joy nor doole:
So both in peace and in debate,
J still remain in one estate.
Upon the death of the honorable Lady D. H. B. L. Essel.
The defunct La. to her living friends.
YOu yet that brukes this breath,
By birth who ever you be;
Descend duwn deeply in your self,
Consider, search, and see
From whence thou came, when, how,
And whither thou must go,
What strength thou hes, what stuf thou art,
Learn careless man and kno.
Thou art but momentare,
And not immortal made,
Your flesh though fair,, it fragill is,
And like a flower shall fade.
What is thy Idol wealth?
What is estate or strength?
And what be these thy pleasures all.
which thou shall leave at length:
They are like shooting stars,
That make a shining shoe,
Or like to these straight running streams,
That but regresse do go.
All flesh is grass, and grass,
Be course it does decay,
So shall the glory of the flesh,
Evainish (...) once away.
Th'vnhappie Heir of Sin,
The Son of ire forlorn
And guilty banished from thy bliss,
By Nature thou art borne, ()

O then whence springs thy Pride,
Conceau'd in Sin since e,
Be borne in bail, in labor lives,
And out of doubt must die.
Vane is the trust in men,
Thar glory vain, and than.
Amongs all vanities, most vain,
The vainest Vain, is Man.
When passing pleasures off,
This posting life most please,
it they, they pass, and fade, they fly,
And perish does all these.
To vermin e convert,
From worms to dust e do.
Dissolve and all your pomp departs,
To Earth, and ashes too.
Bot O vain glorious worm,
In pleasure, pride, and pomp,
That lives thy life look here below
To me a liueles lompe.
Wha while I played my part,
On the unstable stage,
And in this woeful wordly veil,
Past over my pilgrimage,
My Nature framed me fair, ()

My Fortune gave me wealth,
And many days my gracious God,
With honor gave me health,
Preferment, Pleasure, wit,
Contentment, and delight,
Thou wretched world saw me possess,
With solace in thy sight:
Yet honor, beauty, birth,
Riches, renown, and rent,
Nor kingdoms can releive the life,
When here her space is spent.
For Prince nor Peasant poor,
The Libertine, and slave
The Monarch and the Miser meine,
Shall all go to the Grave.
Wit wordly, nor vain wealth,
Nobility, nor blood,
T'exeme the one day, from thy death,
Shall doubtless do no good,
The Ambitious hautie head?
What helps his honor him,
When dreidful death, that ghostly Groom
Lean, Meagre, Pale, and grimme,
Feirce, and inflexible,
To pierce him shall appear?
Shall lordships then prolong his life,
Or honor hold him heir?
No not one hour, although,
He did possess all that,
Great Caesar, Cyrus, Solomon,
With all their glory gat.
I nane, and futill was,
And like a flower, fast fled,
The pleasures all, that they possessed,
And honors which they had;
A Sar'cine Salaedine,
Once Emperor of the East,
When death did him attach, and with,
That rigrous rod arrest,
Through Askalon sometime,
In Palestine a Town,
That proud and pagane Potentat,
Cause carry up and down,
Upon his lance, his linning shirt,
And thus causd cry: no moir,
Hes now deid Saladine of all,
His treasures, wealth, and stoir.
All pleasure so shall pass,
Gold treasure is but trash,
And as the Sun dissolues the snow,
So wealth away does wash.
And what while we are here,
Seems to the sense* most sweet,
Or best does please, it is naught but,
Vexation of the spreit,
This world then it is naught,
That only worthy wairs?
That should the Christian Conscience cloy,
Nor too much clag, with cares?
No no that is it naught,
Since every thing, and all,
That earthly is, shall have an end,
And is but temporal,
Weell since this world within,
We no thing firm can find,
And what this life, most large does len,
Shall all be left behind,
Goods, children, kin, and friends,
And which more dear, we love,
Our life we leave, theirs no remeid,
But from this Monde remove.
Here honor keeps no hold,
Nor does delights endure,
one heaven, this Earth, the Aer, that Sea,
From shifting are not sure:
Nor no thing on the Earth,
(That helps to humane use,)
From alteration quite exempe,
Did the All-Diuine produce.
For man, beast, fish, and foul,
Plant, metal, stones, and Trees,
Once widders, wracks, once rots, or rusts,
Decays, departs, or dies.
Than thou art mad O man,
Into those toys to trust,
That temp'rall are, ea transitore:
And naught but dross and dust.
Herefore what is but dust,
And what thou deems most dear.
This grassie glore forget, and think
On Heaven whill thou art here.
There lay thy count a Crown
To conquesse, and atchyue:
Here thoroughly think that there the life,
Ay lasting thou must live.
Here guide thee so, atlest
To grow in grace, begin
From hollow of thy heart, to hate
Iniquity and sin.
Prepare provision here,
And make thee in some measure,
There only there for to extruct,
A never tracking treasure.
And there to dwell here must
Th'endevours be addressed;
Where ever, and perpetually
Is pleasure, peace and rest,
And where in full of joy's
The just and blessed byd's,
But change beyond all date of day's,
All terms, all times, and tyd's. ()

Where Mourning shall in Mirth,
Loss be exchanged in Gain;
And where Mortality refind,
Immortal shall remain.
EIDEM.
SInce Death, distress, wrack, wretchedness, and woe,
Since mourning, and since misery to Man,
Peculiar are, and thy adherents, O!
Why should thou start, and strange esteem them than,
Since Policy nor power carnal can,
Divert, remove, nor in a point preveine,
Thy danger, or Misfortune fatal, when,
To sease on thee, too sharply they are seen:
No Kingdoms, Crowns, no Kin, nor Consobrein,
Nor nothing here that being hes nor Breath,
Not Tyrants with their Terrors can retein,
The vildest worm, from dying once the Death:
Since naught can Death, nor sorrows saif from thee
Lamenting live, and living learn to die.
In what a Labarinthian sink of sin?
In what a Maze, in what a misery?
Into what greef, and with what grons begin?
The Dulfull dait of Man's Nativitie,
Woe, weeping, Care, and cries continually,
Are at his Birth, and at his Burial both,
In sickness sore, or sorrows suredlie,
The Time twixt Life and Death, he groaning goth,
So silly Man, does bot lament and mourn,
Whill to the ground, his Grandame he return.
He weeps when from the belly he is borne,
And enters first (the stage) distilling tears,
So to the world, he mourning giu's gud-morne,
And as he liu's, so to lament he lears,
His lewd-led-life, occasion giu's of fears,
Fear breeds complaints, perplexities, and pain,
So thus his life, it vanishes, and wears,
He comes in greef, and groaning goes again,
Lamenting first, he looks upon the light,
Lamenting last, he gives again goodnight.
To the same honorable Lady.
MElpomine al Murners Tragic Muse,
Some unknown kind of sadest sable choose,
T'invest thy self therewith whereby, thou may,
Expreslie more, divulgat, and bewray,
Thy care and cause, all Creaturs to ken,
Thy grieu's more great, nor's ordinar to men,
Convene thy wits, use all thy Airt and skill,
For words thou wont to write, now Tears distill,
And unto Tritone that the Trident bears,
Pay triple tribute, of salt brimmish tears.
Desire thy sweet and sacred Sisters fine,
To trim their Harps, to tragic toons like thine,
And pray your Prince, Apollo for to borrow
Some of Neptunus tears, to show your sorrow.
Th'Arrabick gulphe, the East nor Ocean seas,
Shall b'insufficient to suffice your eyes.
Although ye should, yea recolect the rain,
And gathred all in drops disgorg't again,
Yet all this should not plenty, prove, nor store,
Thy departure, dear Lady, to deplore,
No thought they all, that live of humane line,
Celestial signs, and Dieties divine*
And all that care can kno, or sorrow see,
Should too tear-wash, this terren Tomb with me,
Though the Echoing Air it murmour should and moan
Tho light-foot winds should whissel their grifs and groan,
And though the fire ascend be Nature light,
As sorrowful to see so sad a sight,
And the Earth aggrieud her Entrels hudge should tear
Most discontent thy burdenn dead to bear,
Although the shyning Sun himself should shroud,
Most careful for thy cause within a cloud.
And though the Clouds lamenting look and lowre,
And tears for rain upon the planes should power.
Though brutish Beasts should brey, burst, rage and rore,
And schools of Fish seem t'ambiset the shore:
All mourning in their manner to the end,
Their heavines to have us apprehend.
Though Creeping things, and flights of Fowls al-whair,
Deiue with their din, the deiphs, the earth, the Air,
And though that Monster many mouthed Fame,
Thy only praise should publish and proclaim;
Still elevat above the Rounds, and rear-it,
And blaz't abroad als far as Fame can bear-it.
And it in Diamonds indent and mass,
It into Marble, and in books of Brass.
And last, though Men in numbers infinite,
Should in complaints, consume, and spend their sprit:
And be so sad as never seen was such,
Murne what they may, they can not murne too much.
Although their backs the black doole bages bear's,
Though mournful minds too testifies their tears.
And though with lines lugubrious and sad,
Thy Coffin they have covered and spread.
Yea though they should conglomerat and join
All the earthl'- ingens, with those the best abone.
And then draw from the Thesaurie of Arts,
On perfectly perfect in whole and parts.
Yet should he not ineugh deplore and praise
Thy Death and thy Deserving in thy days.
Upon he honest and virtuous, Ag. Chal.
THese be the treasours that this Tomb contains,
Earth, dust, and ash, much pampred in our pride,
Now but a band, of bosse, and bloodles bains,
That but short time, here in their beauties bide,
Flesh is most frail, and suddantly does slide,
No durance is nor certentie of days,
No mortal men, hes wherein to confide,
But in the Lord, through Christ, the Scripture says,
So while each one, their part like Stagers plays,
Upon this worlds, vain Theater I would,
They learnd to die, unto the Lord always,
So for to rest, inregistred, and rold,
Amongs the happy, company of those,
To life elect, be mercy, love, and choice.
Upon the Right honorable A. I. of Drum.
Fame.
COme me (the Herold of the heavens) behold,
Remembrance mouth, and never dying Fame,
Tongue unto Time, and Trenchman uncontrolled,
Reporter chief, and Publisher supreme,
In Joyful Thesis, or in tragic Theme,
What be above, or in the Earth, belaw,
By Providence, preordain'd to proclaim,
Jn swiftest sort, to signify and shaw,
The will, decrees, Occurrents, now, and then,
Of Gods eternal, and of mortal Men.
Truth, Virtue, Love, Faith, Piety and Peace,
Pressed with complaints, importuned, and oprest;
Their Synod set, this Sepulture the place,
This Death, their Dolor, to dilate a dressed,
In mourning manner for to manifest,
What all the living, and this Land has lost,
A Baron bold, of blood, an of the best,
A mundane Mirror but a Match almost,
A perfect Pattern plenished withal,
The excellent, and virtues Cardinal.
Each one of these, are damnified by daith,
Each one of these, are wounded with this wrack,
Each one of these, are justly wronged and wraith,
To each of these, an Lover is in lackt,
Each one of these, with Death their band, shall break,
To honor him, and in Remembrance have,
And each of these, hes sworn this for his sake,
For to ingrosse, his graces on his grave,
And hing on high, above, his honors Hearse,
His worthiness, and virtues into verse.
Receive then Earth, and in thy bosom lay,
This fragill frame, in substance like thy sell,
A Man of mold, converted into clay,
Whose Truth and whose, jntegritie to tell,
Leave unto Me, the restles ringing Bell,
Time Death, nor Age, shall in Oblivion bring,
Nor from my Troumpe, his passing praise, expel,
Although that death, or'threw the earthly Thing,
The heavenly half is hence to heaven again,
Which both by me, remembered shall remain.
UPON THAT HONORABLE AND worthy Gent. M. Patrik Cheyn of Rainstone.
WHat both thy worth, and what thou was to wriet,
What hapines, and honor here thou had:
What providence, and prudencie of spreit,
And what a life, beloved thou hes led;
Needs not be pens, of Poets be expressed,
That of it self, is so made manifest.
Thy love to friends, and to thy country weel,
Who could not know, thy constancy, and Cair,
Unto this City, syne and Common-weell,
Of all an most, affected euermair,
Deserving weell, of both, thou was I wait:
Since for thy grave, their grief is now so great,
An Ieme, an Jewel, and a chosen Cheyne,
A Cheane, both be, thy Nature, and thy Name:
Unto this Burgh, thou euermair hes been,
But death, alace, soon sundered the same;
And from all common cummers hes conuoi'd,
Thee thee to heaven in whom we justly ioi'd
THE CONTENTS AND SVMME of the Authors his Christian Knight
Translated.
PErmit, and let, thy loving looks alight,
And with wel-willing eyes vouchsafe to view;
The young unwise, and wilful wandering Knight,
Dressed in apparel and an habit new;
Which in a ground, and barren Garden grew,
Almost unworthy, to be worn, and it:
The Portrat right, the Type, the Figure true,
And very viue Anatomy of wit:
To monstrate these, the Misses we commit.
And make them all, be sensible, and seen,
Yea the image and, the Idea is it,
That represents, most Efauld to the eyne:
The natural man, imprudent and profane,
Be grace of God, regenerate again.
2
OF Satan's snares, that souls incites to sin,
Here is detected the undoubted Truth,
And all that may, inveit to vice, whairin,
Often falls th'vndanted and rebellious youth,
Here are the sins, deciphered of sloth.
Of Misbeleefe, of Malice, and Envy,
And heir of sin, also to drench the drouth,
The Well divine, and spring of verrue spy,
Heir is the Touch where thou may truly try,
If thou hes fully faithful been, befoir,
And here are perfect plasteres to apply,
To salve the soul, and to heal sound her soar:
And here as in, a mirror markthou may,
To life or death, the right or radie way.
At the death of the right honorable Sir J. Wisehart of Pettarro Kn.
THe world it is, a Theater and Men,
The Actors are, upon this stately stage;
Whereof some young, some midlings, now, and then,
Some in the very Evening of their age,
Presents themselfs, preparde to play their page;
Yet in a moment, suddenly, and soon,
As poasting Palmers, poast a Pilgrimage,
They dryving o'r, we dow, decerne, have done.
And glyds into the Grave, the Den of Death,
That each one for his place retering has.
Yet Death, nor this the Grave unto the good,
Nor should affright, no nor dismay them must,
Albeit the boulke, the marrow, bons, and blood,
They reconvert in Ashes, Earth and Dust.
For Jesus Christ, th'Omnipotent and just,
From both he struke the sting, and stayed that strife,
To all that in his mercies truly trust,
And plainly made them Ledders unto life:
Whereby to Heaven, that glorious Scene t'ascend,
Triumphand Actors ever more but end.
Men should not then, too much bot measure mourn,
Nor for their Friends, impatiently deplore;
Who as they take, long ere their Time return,
And go to grave, their hours prefixed before,
Wherein they do their Maker move the more,
Whill thus at his appointments they repine,
And with their groaning derogats his glore,
Which in his great Synedrione divine,
H'apoints that all, that ever breathd, and be,
Should ere they live, taste the first death, and dee.
Death is the Port of Peace, Restrent from strife,
Place of Repose, Conclaue of all Content:
The gate to Glore, the Line that leeds to Life,
The way of flesh, that worldlings ever went,
It was the battering Bombard Jesus bent,
To break and brvse the Serpent and our Sin.
It was the Ram, that Heauens-strong Ramperds rent
To make Men mount, and easily enter in:
In Sion sure, saif sanctified for Them,
The heavenly, holy, new Jerusalem.
To his very loving friend Mr. T. M.
A Mortal man, Immortalized now, ()

This earthly Vrne, this compond caskat keeps
Called from the Cairs that cross and cumber you,
Content in Christ here sound and softly sleeps,
Flesh, blood and bones (the slouchs and truly typ's
Of the restrained and imprisond sperit,
Wherein oprest, as from a Pit it peeps.)
Jmmast, are now, in mold, a Mantion meet,
Preordaind for the very best, albeit,
They by their birth, be of Basilik blood,
For Death, that all devours, thus does decreit,
All flesh shall to, the creeping fry be food:
And men howsoev'r in pleasurs Seas they suom,
Once shall confind be in a terrene Tomb.
TO A COVRAGIOVS YOUNG MAN William Keith, who for his Countries honor slew an
Englishman and suffered for the same.
Would not the Ghost of that great Greek be glade,
That paind so much to pen a Pagans praise,
Jf he the happiness, or honor had
To be a live, now dead into their days,
To make his tongue a trump t'impen and blase
Through all the Anguls of the Universe,
Into most lofty, and most learned lays,
And in more then his wonted wondrous verse,
To cause courageous Keyth thy praise to perse,
Als well the Spheirs, as that low place of pain,
And in thy honor here upon thy Hearse,
To leave their lyn's for ever to remain:
Here lies a youth, who for his Countries cause
A Saxon slew, sine suffered be the Laws.
2.
TO silence time, thy praise shall never put,
Nor once Envy thy ventrous worth shall wrong,
No though the grave upon thy gore do glut
Whill man is man, thy laud shall live so long,
Thy fact to Fame sure shall become a song,
And valiant Will'am thou shall ever more,
Be memoriz'd, and mentioned among,
Those Gallants that have gaind and gotten glore,
Thy famous friends for fensing a-before,
Their Native Soil, from ferce and faithles foes,
As Cronicles, their kind, for to decore,
And Kamus Cross, their vpset Trophies choes:
So with thy Friends, thy Fame shall flee stout Keith,
Although thou boght it dearly with thy deith.
3.
WHat was his kindness and his courage keen,
Belgic thy broyls, a Record best can bair,
Where he brought up near from his Birth hes been,
Naught bot to make his martial mind grow mair,
Wherefore thou justly should erect, and rear
To Mars his Man, a martial Monument,
Since that he as a sojour serving their,
Into thy querrell willing, and content,
His Blood oft-tims in thy employments spent.
And this more too, to grace and do thee good,
Upon thy foes, thy praises he did prent.
In Crimson Red, and Characters of blood.
To honor him, then thou hes matter much,
And of our Soil full many thousands such.
To the City Aberden at the death of Jho. Fo. Ba.
FAir Virgin Mother, Widow-like lament,
Thy Martial Son, and Lamb-like lover lost,
Peirs every ear, and place, with thy complent,
Whill they admire, that are remotest most,
Apend thy plaints, to every Pole and post,
Chalcographiz'd, with Charecters of woe,
And let thy grief's upon thy Goun b'ingrost,
That every eye may see thy sorrow so:
O silent sad, and greiued, may thou go,
Since to thy wracks, this wrack is joined the worst,
For dreadful Death hes by one bitter blo,
One of thy firmest, forts vnfreindly forced,
And maind the of, an of thy members strong;
That boore thy burden lovingly, and long.
To the defunct his spouse.
Dear fruitful vine, alone to languish left,
Let not thy clusters, through thy care decay,
Though raging Death hes by all reason reft,
And out of time, hes hint thy heid away,
Take thou on Thee, to be the staff and stay,
And bear their birth, and all, the load alone,
That both alive, in love togidder ay,
You to this hour, have gladly undergone,
Through mourning much; and out of measure move,
No not thy self, nor put in peril those,
To whom thou must, be All, and the only one.
(Except the Lord,) to place in the repose,
Wherefore praise God, and take in patience this,
Thy husbands death, from bail brought to his blis.
To his courteous friend, T. B.
Give quick engines, that trusting to attain,
The height of Honor and a living Fame,
With penning of, their Poesies profane,
Should purchase praise, and win a noble Name,
What then brave Buck, should be thy part, herein,
That shawes the sortow of the Soul for sin.
For while as forth, some busied be to bring,
The bad inventions, of their boiling Brain,
Thou happy Thou, harps on an higher string;
And shows a Man, regenerat again,
Wherefore we should, Thee thanks most grateful give,
Because a woeb, much worthier Thou wiue.
While wordly Writers witles and unwise,
Be full of folies, and of friuole fraits,
Thy pen and pains, to profit moir tho'applies,
And both divine, and worthily thou wraites,
Than since thou such, a sacred subject sings,
Fly with the pens, of praise and honors wings.
UPON THe DEATH OF THE Worshipful M. Alex. Cheyn Commisser of Aber.
NOw now, at last, and naught, while now have I,
Put a Catastroph, to this course of cair,
World, Flesh, and Feind, your forces J defy,
Your works are wrought, your mights may now no mair,
Now I am quit, and from your cummers clair,
Grave, Hell, and Sin, your powers J despise,
Death is the door, through Faith ye step, and stair,
That makes my soul, mount, sore, and skall the skies,
Albeit the bones, left here consuming lies,
Yet certainly, J am assured they shall,
To rest and ring, in their Redeemer rise,
Since Satan, Sin, the grave, death, hell and all,
That Lion strong, and yet a loving Lamb,
Tryumphantly, upon the cross o'rcame.
An description of the World.
WHat is this World, a Theater of woe?
A golfe of grief, that still the greater grows,
A Fair where fools, are flitting to and fro,
A Sea of sorrow, that still ebs and flows,
A Forge where Belial the bellows blows,
A Ship of sensual Souls, neir sunk for sin
Whair ramping Rage, is Ruther-man and rows,
A wratched Vail, full of all Vice within,
A Booth of business where restles rin,
To wrack himself, the wicked worldly worm,
A deadly Den, of dolor, and of din,
An onstai'd stage, of state, a strife, a storm,
Th'vnquiet Court, of discontent and Cair,
The Place of Pride, and wellspring of Despair.
A desire of an Repentant spirit.
WOuld God my Soul, for sin such sorrow felt,
As could cause Me spend al my time in Tears,
Would God my Heart, would every moment melt,
And for my faults, be fraughted full of fears,
Would God my flesh, that fights, and battle bears,
Against the powers, of the spreit, would spair,
And rest from wrestling and their jnward wears,
That does augment, and bot increase my cair,
Would God my Plaints, could penetrat the Air,
To purchase Peace, to my perplexed Spreit,
And never cease t'assend, nor rest; but whair,
They face for face, might with The Almighty meit,
To pray him for, a pardon, and a place,
Unto Repentance, godliness, and grace.
An admonition to the Soul to watch.
Poor silly Soul, thou sees not how are set,
Thy fatal foes, about the in a Ball,
The Feind, and Flesh, Thee in the gyues to get,
Of loathsome Lust, and pleasures sensual,
They will object, All what, may frame thy fall,
And cast before, the Beauty for a bait,
Opinions strange, falls, and heretical,
Promotion, Riches, Honor, and Estate,
All what they can, find out for to defait,
And with thy God, to get the in disgrace,
They will essay, each secular conceit,
To hold the from, thy heavenly Fathers face,
Heirfore on him, prepare the to depend,
He only may, the from thy foes defend.
Invocation to the Lord Jesus to save the wounded soul.
O Son of God, Silo sweet savior,
Thou that my shield, and my assistance art,
The precious ointments of thy pity pour,
Into my Soul, and woeful wounded heart,
J'le prostrat, Me in publict, and in part,
My former foul offenses to confess,
My secret sins sore makes my Soul to smart,
And I am woeful for my wickedness,
With hiest up hands, and hartly humblenes,
I pray the pardon my impiety,
Thy word divine, my God grants me regres,
And bids me seek the sweet society:
For thou art ay, says the Apostle Paull,
At hand to help, the woeful wounded Saull.
A Prayer for apaising of the Plague.
Our wicked liu's hes wakned Lord, thy wrath,
In kindling it for our iniquity,
It maks thee blow, this thy devouring breath,
To punish us, for our impiety.
Our falls and faults, hes forced thee to let flee,
At the Noone day, thy Arrows Pestilent,
Yet in thy mercies Lord, remember: We
Are thy own Sons, on whom the same is sent,
Albeit thy Bow, against our breasts be bent,
And thou the Rod, does hold into thy hand,
We hope thou will inspire us to repent,
And from the Infection last releif the Land,
That in the greatness of her greef does groan,
Looking, O Lord, for thy releif alone.
Upon the Death of a verteous young man. Wm. Ke.
Withold thy haist, spair Passinger thy pace,
And mark amongs, those Marble Monuments,
This Grave, yet grene, and little ludge alace,
And thereon spend, some part of thy complents,
Mourn. mourn with Me, a Miriad of laments,
And on the Interred streams of thy tears distill,
Whoes want the Wise, both pitties. and repents,
And whill They live, the Verteous all, they will
Their plaints power out, disperse, effund and fill.
The Continent her Caverns with their cries,
For never shall their Sorrows cease; not whill
They deaue the Dead, into those lairs that lies:
For trust thou me, this terren Tomb contains,
A Relict rare, a godly Young-mans Bains.
PROSOP OF THE DEFVNCT TO his lamenting friends.
2.
A Paise your plaints, since Fortune, Fate, nor Chance,
Was not the cause, nor framers of my fall,
Bot be a pre-apointed Ordinance,
The Lord hes thus concluded me to call:
For Men are naught one way Attached all,
Nor by one kind of Death ordaind to die,
No, no, but this Privation temporal,
Hes different, and diverse sorts we see:
From Prison some depart, and some flit free,
And some be force, be butcherie or blood,
Yea, some be every Element there be,
That does, we know, this corrupt course conclude,
Yet dies thou this, I that, he so and so,
Die we in Christ, the manner matters no.
3.
DIe ye in Christ, ye die well dying so,
For Fire nor Sword, the Water, Earth nor Air,
They have no power, nor the Puissance, no,
But special permission to impair,
Nor for to harm into thy head an hair,
Unless the Lord, pass, suffer, or permit,
For he hes ay, a kind, and constant Cair,
And over his chosen still continues it,
His favors are not fragill, fraill, nor flit
This way or that, like worldlings now and than,
No, no, bot with his kindness kind is knit,
Protection too, each constant Christian:
Then die, depart, or howsoever ye go,
Die ye in Christ, ye die well dying so.
DIALOGVE. A new years gift.
Interl. Charites, and the Author.
Author. THis Mornings as I from my rest araize,
And went to walk into the open Air,
I peradventure met whereon I gaize,
Thrie minard Maids, all wonderfully fair:
Their Robs a like, replendant rich and rair,
Whereat I was more moved to admire,
Who they should be, whence from they came, and whair
They at that time, intended to retire:
Whill thus on them, like one but life I look,
One forward came, and be the sleif Me shook.

Gra. Where by thy mind, when thou art musing thus?
Why stonish'd stands thou? we entreat thee tell?
Quod one, what wonders hes thou seen on us,
That maks thee so, for to forget thy sell,
Art thou enchanted be some Magic spell?
Or thinks thou us of that accursed crew?
With Lucifer, that from the Heaven down fell,
And now art come to vex and weary you:
Or why is it, so stupefact thou stands,
Without so much as moving head or hands.

Auth. I mis-regarde, not such thrie fair, so far
Nor do I think, the form of those and thine:
For to be such, as you have said, that are,
Appeirandlie, Immortal and Divine,
Swa that sweet Saints, this musing is of mine,
A moldie grosnes, in my mortal eyes,
Which can not see, nor suffer for to shine,
Your glory great, for their infirmities:
And with my self, I am debaitting who
Thy self should be, and thy Companions two.

Gra. Recall thy sprits, thy musing then remove,
Debar all doubts, and wit thou this that we
Are called Faith, strong Hope, and constant Love,
Of IOVA just, th'vndoubted Daughters three,
Come of Intention for to talk with thee,
And give thee some directions thou must do,
For thou of us, art the appointed he
To bear Imbassage, or our blessing too,
A much respected honorable Pair,
Thus it in few, deliver and declair.
I Love, the first, and greatest of the Graces,
Saluts them say, conjunct and several,
And promies them with all my friendl' embraces',
Prosperity and Peace perpetual,
And I, quod Faith, adds to the former All,
A working quick, and justifeing Faith.
And I quod Hope, my Anchor sends, which shall
Sustain them surely, in the Seas of Death:
For be it, and, with what, their two have given,
Their Ancring shall, be happy into heuin.
Now Friend we deem, dissolved is thy doubt,
Since thou of us, hes got a knowledge cleir,
And we (because, th Anuall course is out,
And this day enters the succeeding eir,
Have purposed unto Thee to appeir,)
And chusd The to, make manifest our mind,
Unto that two, that we do hold so deir,
And hes their Hearts, into one breast combind,
Who mutually, shall linked live, and die,
Full of our Hope, our Faith, and Charity,

An Confession of sins and Incalling of the Lord.
O God which art, great, good, and gracious,
Most holy powerful, and glorious,
We that are ashes of the Earth, and dust,
When we fall down before the feet, (we must,)
Of thy high Majesty confess, that we,
Are Sinners vile, borne, and conceived be,
In sin, and that, by Nature we, no less,
Are nor a lump of Vice and wickedness,
Whose Natural and property, appears,
To grow in sin, as we increase in years,
And in the works of wickedness, and wrong,
Waxes and grows, ay more, and more, more strong,
As does the body, and the mind, their strength,
And force receive, through tract of time and length.
Their is in us, no good affection found,
No knowledge cleir, wholesome, sincere nor sound,
Nor manner how thy bidding to obey,
Nor how aplease thy majesty we may,
Last Lord their byds, into our flesh, and blood,
Nothing that is, or can be called good,
And thought our state, accursed does herein,
Yea wratched most, apeare: yet is, our sin,
More sinful much, and out of measure maid,
By the exceeding grace, thou Lord hes laid,
And offered us, in the Evangell cleir,
Of thy undoubted divine Son most deir.
Wharby from profiting, so much, we are,
That of our self, we should wax, war and war.
For moir the light, of knowledge is made plain,
We would alace, the blinder more remain,
The more to obey, thee we are taught, we would,
Be froward moir, moir stubberner, and bold,
Give that by mighty power of thy spriet,
It were not fruitful made and mollifeit,
And thought that this, corruption Natural,
We have togidder, and in common All,
With Adams putrified, and rotten race,
That fell from God, through misbeleif alace,
Yet we confess, in us, it buds much moir,
Nor into vthers, it hes done befoir,
And so much moir, set forth, increst, and grew,
Though we mo ways, the same had to subdue.
And we we had, yea much more means to kill,
Than others had, this wickedness and ill.
Whair first of all, the offer gracious,
Of that great treasure of thy word to us,
Does make us faulty, into many parts,
Of th'Adamantine, hardness of our hearts,
For passing other Nations thou hes lent,
And trusted us, that Jewel excellent.
And yet it hes, (with no small number bot,
A slender and, a small intreatment got,
And felt as great, resistance obstinate,
As at those gates it never knocked at.
For in this land, a Portion is (O Lord,)
That partly neu'r, would yield unto thy word,
And partly when, they had confes'd the same
Defection made, and Apostates became,
So proudly as, it wear, stands at defense.
(Jn their conceits,) Lord with thine excele^ce
The rest which makes, thereof profession,
And seems t'assent and gives thereto submission,
They do it not, accordingly, bot skant,
Of zeal they are, in their profession fant,
For first their, many of our people be,
Which through affection fond, to Papistrie,
So blinded are, miscarried and led,
That straying still, in ignorance they tred,
Yea of the Truth, it self thought faithfully,
The word is preached in aboundancie,
Yet in thy Service true, and knowledge they,
Are now more raw, and inexpert always,
Nor they before, have been, be many fold,
When blindly they, idolatriz'd of old.
And whair a kind, of knowledge is, the which,
To any of sufficiency is such,
Yea requisite, as is and should euin,
Sufficient for th'Inheritors of heauin,
It is yet seen, for the most part, to be,
Conioynd in league, with such hypocrasie,
As makes Thee that, does searse, the secret raen,
Detest, abhor, more hate, them and disdain,
Then if they had, in all their Errors ill,
And in dark ignorance continued still,
Now for that few, of us and remanant,
Which truly still, (of grace participant,)
And faithfully in thee believed haith,
It is with such, infirmity of faith,
And with so small correction of our
Forepast trespasses and behavior,
That our profession, that notorious,
Should be of thy great Gospel glorious
Supported is, and borne, with so few stuites,
And so small shaw, of good, and godly fruits,
Whose dignit' and excellency alon,
Requires more than we can mind upon.
So that this makes, our Enemies, and Foes,
Condemn us, and some also are of those,
That are our own, which doubtingly suspect,
Give we, or no, be thine, and thy elect,
The cause of this, our state, we grant whairin,
We stand it is, the hudgenes of our sin.
That being put, in trust, for to possess,
This treasure of, infinite worthiness.
Thy Gospel great, and be preferred thus,
Before our neighbors Christians with us,
And yet in grait Obedience, to Thee,
Behind them all, (we will confess) are we
In knowledge first, bot we are last in zeal,
In Doctrine far before them, bot we faill
To practice what, is preached, and ay we find
In Discipline, we ever are behind,
The bands aod holy ock Lord of thy Law,
Full heavilie we suffer, thoill, and draw:
Whereby our lives too vicious and vain,
We should amend, correct, reform, and strain
Our fond affections all, and every thing,
In us enorme, we should in bondage bring.
The Gospel that unto us did aduce,
Of honors and, of pleasures friar use?
It welcome was, and we did it embrace
Bot that same Gospel that our wickedness
Reproved, and did threatten punishment,
We was therewith, no thing so well content.
It that did our Ambition rebuke,
We skarcelie heard, or lent thereto a look:
And that thereof, that does most neerlie touch,
Salvation of, the Soul, we make of much.
Bot that again, that does directly more,
Seem to respect, O Lord, thy heavenly glore;
And to the profit of our Neighbors all,
We make no count, nor care for it, bot small.
And though the treasure of thy Word hes been
A precious gift, as like was never seen.
Th'assured sign of our Salvation,
Which to us bairlie came not, nor alone,
Bot with abundance, plentiful, and peace,
And permanent, so long, and large a space.
As surely never this (little thankful Land)
Before in many passed ages fand:
Which benefits our neighbor Nations long,
Have looked for, and wished (their) them among.
This makes us Lord, herefore accursedlie,
A great deall more, in fault and guilty be;
Because we have still proven our selfs so plain,
Ungrateful for those thy great gifts again.
There is likewise, an other Ledder heir,
Whereon our sins they seem, and they appeir
To mount and clim more high, in that, that We
Surmount into, this lifs commodity.
Our old Ancestors, that professed with us,
Even this thy holy Gospel glorious:
And yet we are, yea every day be day,
A great deal worse, and wickeder nor they.
In blessings out-ward we be far above,
Our Nightbours yet, far les to Thee in love,
And grants we falt, even in the gross offense,
Of the outward tokens of Obedience.
SCOTLAND HER GRIEF AT HIS Majesty's going into England,
O England now exult,
And sing a cheerful sang,
Now may thou joy, since such a Roy,
Neu'r over thy Regions rang.
Our Sovereign sweet, our Jemme,
Josias and our James,
The only Starr that guids thy state,
And brights thee with his beams.
Thou now posseids with peace,
And hes with Love at length*
That never could be win with war,
Nor yet constraind be strength.
Faits, Time and Right hes made
Thee, to triumph into,
That not thy Martial minded Men,
Nor active deeds could do.
The only Ornament,
And Sunshine of the Earth,
By destinies ordainde, to bruke
All Britain, or his Berth.
Thou hes, and now enjoi's
Our very Soul and Sark,
A Dy'mond in thy Dyall set,
The hight of Honors wark,
These Royal virtues haill,
That thou to fore hes found
In thy preceding Princes all,
Even from his birth abound:
And gloriously into
His Princely person shine,
O England to thy comfort now,
And Scotland unto thine.
In deed Thou should rejoice,
And be appleased since,
But grudge thou saw with glore the great
Preferment of thy Prince.
For now thou may behold
His Hienes Head to hemme,
(Beside the old vnconquest Crown)
A Triple Diadem.
All men may clearlie know
What God his wisdom wroght,
And by thy Prince, his patience,
Beyond belief is brought
Unto an happy end,
For in the British Throne,
Religion raign's, Peace there is placed
And Justice joind in one.
There Majesty does move,
There Fortitude is fixed,
And there with Rigor or Revenge,
Is mavelous Mercy mixed.
There may thou view from East,
And from the setting Sun,
Elected Legates send, and from
Remottest Regions run,
T'applaud thy Prince his praise,
Their Precious presents brings
From Europe, Afric, Asia,
And from Amerik Kings.
Not that thy Lord inlaiks,
For his great state, such store,
No, no, his Highness hes his own,
In infinite before.
Bot yet because they see
Him blessed from above,
Thus they resort, to signify
Unto thy Lord, their love.
So Inely thou may joi's,
To hear his Name renound,
Since from his boundant benefits,
Some back to thee rebound.
And yet I grant thy grief,
Is greater then thy gain,
For but thy Head unhappy thou,
Dismembered moan remain.
And now shall hear his will, ()

Bot be commission that,
He from his mouth mellifluous
Wont to communicate,
Most patiently and as,
Thy Parent and thy Prince,
Divulgating his Laws with love
And divine Eloquence.
Thou must solicit be,
And careful now t'inquire,
What credit bears the spurring Posts,
To the Synedrion heir.
Poor Orphane widow like,
Be thou in sable seen,
While as thy sister England goes,
Now gallantly in green.
And like pale Lnna loure,
When her Apollos light,
Is in eclipse, or with a cloud,
Secluded from her sight. ()

For lo thy golden Sun,
Into the South he shines,
While thou Solsequium-like, for thy,
Abstracted Titan tynes,
A body hudge thou ar,
Exhibit but a Heart.
Upon the worlds inconsta^t stage,
To play the Monsters part.
Poor Lady now, thy Life,
Thy Lord, and thy Beloved,
And next that mighty Mobile,
Thy Mouer, is removed,
Yet for thy great King James,
His Iubile reioyes,
Since he above the British blood,
Thy old, now freinded foes,
Thou to his honor high,
Dilucidlie decerns,
With measure how, he moderates,
And like a God gouerns,
For whose long happy life,
Prosperity, and Peace,
His royal Reign, his gracious, Queen,
And for their hopeful Race,
Jncall, protest, and pray,
(From whose blis'd spreit all springs,)
Jehovah, Eli, Elohim, The Almighty King of Kings.
An humble confession of Sin.
IN Reverence, on bare, and bended kneis,
Debast I bow, (if I dare be so bold,)
My soul most sad, with weeping watrie eyes,
Before thy feet, upon my face I fold,
My eyes, my heart, my hands, Iehoue I hold,
To heauin, to Thee, and prostrat will display,
My Misles made, but measure manyfold,
And all the words, I wairt in vain, bewray,
None will I hide, but open Lord, shall lay,
My Sin both seen, and secret to my shame,
And my delicts, done all unto this day,
I in thy publict Presence shall proclaim,
And to my Turpitud sound out, I shall,
My Sins committed, and omitted all.
Upon his loving, dear and Courteous friend, Pa. Q.
WHo do of chance, or vtherwise that, has,
An deep desire, and earnest care to kno,
This Trophe sad, of still triumphing death,
Whair liueles lies, an earrhly lump bot lo,
How rair a live to signify and sho,
Nor Maroes Muse, would an more cunning crave,
To wreit his want, what works it, of woe,
T'ingraph each, grief by gazing on his Grave,
To not the noy when men look on the leave
His Commorads, and Consorts Christian
To count the care, his kin for him conceive
To dyte the duile, of wife and Orphans whane,
Their father they, and sho does miss her Mane.
An man, whose make, here hardly may be haid?
What can? what shall? what is? or rests thane,
To say bot this, that safely may be said,
Lo where a youth, on Beirtrees brought to bed,
Ay faithful fast, traist, virtuous, and wise,
Deir to his friends, and of his foes ay dred,
Here underneath, to be lamented lies
And shall, ay while, the latter day constrain,
The Earth to raise, and render him again.
Sighs of an sorrowful soul.
Sigh, sadly sigh, sob for thy Sins and sound,
Weep wail, and woe, mourn mirthles Man, and moan,
Redouble thy dolor, til each Den redound;
With noisome notes, thy accents every one,
Cry careful cry, while every sensles stone,
Peirst with thy plaints, for pity plead, and pleane,
With tragic tears, toone out thy griefs, and groan
While marble mazed at thy mones remain,
Thou writes thy woes, thou weeps, thou vows in vain
Give not anon, from straying thus, thou stay,
Thou's drive thy days, in dateles deep disdain,
Then sadly sigh poor Soul, and sighing say,
Sad be each sigh, moir noisome every note,
That treads the tracture of my troubled throat.
A description of the fragilitie of man.
WHat be we wratches but,
AMasse of putrid mold,
Which ugly worms and wild deuoures,
When we are dead, and cold,
Borne in this woeful vail,
Jn moments, ar naught Men,
And in a period, departs?
What are we nothing then,
Learn then to die, and let,
Not hope of youth, nor years,
Delude the least, the Fates, ay ferce,
That Man nor Beast forbeares,
Come on thee sudden shall,
And warn thee vn-a-ware,
For mortal none, tho near so wise,
From those excemed are.
Times flees, your gilt does grow,
Death at your doors does call,
Then take your time, and learn in time
To live Perpetual.
For you are naught, bot like
Dust driven with wind away,
And like unto a brittle glass,
Or shaddows fleing ay.
Or Roses redolent,
That in the morning shines,
And when the night draws near anon,
Their pleasant tincture tines.
Now liuely-like anon, ()

Feasts for the creeping fry,
Now strong and fair, and now anon
A lump but life we ly.
T'accumulat great goods,
or what does profit us
Jemm's, Jewels, Silver, Gold
And all apparel precious?
What Scepters, Crowns, Estat's,
Or Kingdoms great to guide?
And what in Princely Palaces
Shall buit us to abide?
And others in our pride, ()

What helps it to despise?
Or to account our selfs like to,
The Lord alone most wise.
If dreadful Death shall come,
Most horrible and haw,
And with her Sith, (that here you see)
All which GOD made shall maw.
Or if like earthly dust,
Or slyding shaddows, we
O wretched misers miserable,
Shall fall away and flee.
And all the pride of flesh,
And this small glance of glore,
Shall in the day of Death depart,
Without returning more.
Idem.
MArk mortal Man, and surely thou shall see,
What in short space it shall become of thee:
And then thou shall desist, for to desire
The worldly Pleasures, that so soon expire:
By no device, ingine, nor craft can Thou,
Fearful to flesh, Death certain, once eshew.
Thou should not then s'exult nor joifull be,
Because per-haps to morrow thou shall dee:
And in a little ludge, a cave or cott,
Thy flesh and bones shall soon consume and rott.
THE AVTHOR HIS REPENTANCE fro writing Poesies profane.
COuld I or this my scattered skrols recall,
Or my dispersed Poesies repeit,
Most willingly I would revock them all,
And sound from singing of such Toys retreit,
I would envy against wanton verse and writ,
Invectiuelie of all inventions vain:
For it infects the well desposed Sprit,
For to peruse such Poesies profane:
They breed abuse, and brings into the brain
Fantastic folies, and phanatik freats,
Which are in deed not bot presumptions plain,
Or at the most (but profit) poor conceats:
Wherefore, were those else published to pen,
I should assume some sadder subject then.
A PROFITABLE ADMONITION, if wisely followed.
LOse not the Garlant of eternal Glore,
For things that here, bot for a time shall tarry:
Officious Fame, goods, or unstable store,
That facil Fortune both does bring and carry:
Endanger not, nor do in perrell put
The Immortal mark, whereat the Soul does shut.
Tho precious pearls thou purches, what suppose?
And gain more gold nor Craesus got, what than?
If thou the Heaven, and heavenly Soul shall lose,
For all thy wealth, thou's miserable Man.
And truly loses in a moment more,
Ten thousand fold, nor thou could find before.
I give and grant, that thou enlarge thy roumes,
For to cotaine thy infinite incresse:
And that secure in Honors Seas thou soums,
Yet thou in fine, must needs of force confess.
If that thy soul shall suddenly be taine,
What thou possessed, was wealth, for naught in vain.
Though thou be made, and creat were a King,
And supreme Emperor inaugurate:
Or at thy wish had every earthly thing,
Of Monument most, with Mundans estimate:
If that the Soul her heavenly life you loss,
Cursed is with those, corruptible thy cosse.
Although thou have both health and honor here,
And pleasure past the compass of compare:
And that thou previlegiat appeir,
Above the world, and worldlings everywhere
Want thou a sanctified Soul, what shall
Availl thy Pleasures and Promotions all?
OF THE ESSENCE, WISDOM, and Power of God.
GOD only great, he guides and governs,
The restles Rounds, that rules above, and all
Th'invirond Earth, with Seas that each decerns,
Just circular, and perfect Sphericall,
His blessed Being built the double Ball,
And did appoint fit places for the Sphaeres,
From th'Earthlie Orbs destinct, and several.
Which we gross Mortals marvels and admirs,
His Providence and Power plain appears,
In th'artificiall forming of this Frame,
Whose various works, dilucidats and cleirs,
Into the sure concerving of the same:
His wondrous wit, exceeding all ingins,
Of Seculars, and of the best Divins.
Upon the certainty of death and the uncertainty of the hour.
NOthing then death more certain is we see,
Yet nor the hour, incertaine nothing more:
Than if as thou, were every day to die,
Govern thy self, and learn to live therefore,
So shall thou not, need for to count, nor cair,
Whence death shall come, how when, nor whair.
It is this life, here well, or lewdly led,
That this first Death, makes dreidfull, now or no,
Jf in misdeeds, thy days thou drive, then dred,
And full of dolor is, this Death, and O;
Perplexed so, and so annoyed that None,
Can weel the passions of the spreit expone.
For all that thou, hes done unto that day,
Thy secret sins, thy seen, and publict shall,
Dismasked all, arryue into array.
T'accuse the in, thy Conscience, and call;
The to account, so spacious and large,
That Livers lewd, can scarsely scarce discharge.
Man his Immoderate care for transitorious things.
Our labors, studies, exercise, and Pain,
And for this corpse, is our continual cair,
For why t'acquire, thairto some gloir, or gain,
No perrill nor impiety, we spair.
VVeneuer leave, bot labors late air,
And for t'attract, vile trash, we never tire,
Like frantic fools, and furious we fair,
While we possess, that whereunto w'aspire,
Through per'lous paths, salt seas, and flashing fire,
But Providence, we pass, we post, we Ply,
For to enjoy, the depth of our desire,
No naught the night, in quiet can we lie,
Bot puts unto, all hazards but a Host,
The Soul to Christ, that did so dearly cost.
Means how to bridle the carnal desires of men.
NOthing so fit, to danton the desires,
And appetites, of fragill fleshly Men;
That so much reigns, and over them empires,
Nor with considred, Conscience to ken:
And wisely wey, what is this Body that,
They fearce so full, and dress, so delicat.
Would they consider, and bot sight the same,
And but self love, these circumstances see?
What is their kind? whairof compound they came?
And then how short, here their abydings be:
Or at the least? how much incertaine since,
One hour they are, and or an other hence.
Or would men mortal meditate, and mark,
Of Nothing how, the great Creator choosd,
To frame so fair, the worlds most wondrous wark,
And from no monstrous mass, but form confusde;
As Fablers fain, into their wanton verse,
Created He the boundles Universe.
And how of the Earth, the grossest Element,
He all the kinds, of Creatures compones,
And how the Artificer most Excellent,
Their fragill flesh, their Bodies, blood, and bones:
Did make, of matter most despisd, and basse,
The Earth her dust, her excrements, and ash,
Thus that they are, (would they bot well advise)
Dung, dust, and ash, which so alive, they love,
And look again, when dead, but life, one lies,
How putrid and, unpleasant soon they prove,
These would they wey, view, warlie, and adart,
They should not then, so primp the Earthly part.
Comparison hetwixt the bed and the Grave.
THe bed, which most, for our repofe we have,
Whairin the natural night we softly, sleep,
May fitly be, compared to the grave,
That these our corpse, when they are cold, does keep,
And not unto, that Den, or Dreadful deep,
Whairin the damned shall dying never dye,
Bot their, in ever skalding lead, shall sleep,
And euermoir, eternal Torments try,
Jnto our Couch, we sensles seem, and lie,
As if no braith, were in our breasts, nor brain,
Bot once our sleeping terms expired we spy,
And cleirly knows, we lively grow again,
So in the grave (that of the dust is dressed,
A little time, and then to rise) we rest.
Of the brevity and miseries of man his life.
THis transitorious time,
And present passing life,
The Scripture calls, an Pilgrimage,
A travel, way, a strtfe,
Because continually,
It but all resting rins,
And plies unto an end fra once,
It enters and begins,
For like as they, whom ships,
Or wheeled coatches carry,
Although they either sit, or sleep,
They tine no time, nor tarry,
Bot as with wings, and wind,
Supported they proceed,
(Though they their passage cannot spy,)
And spurring, posts with speed.
So every one, of us,
Albeit we busied be,
With worldly works, and plainly so,
Cannot perceive, nor see,
Our life of little length,
Like waxen tapers spend,
Yet but dignoscing, drives our days,
And we draw to our end.
The Posts and passengers,
As many gaits they go,
So much they see, and having seen,
They seek no more, and so,
What in their way they view,
Before them what they find,
They gaze upon, then goes and leaves
What they beheld behind.
As forward then they fair,
Before them set, they see
Most wondrous worthy works t'invit,
the most envyous eye:
Which for a while th'admire,
As glorious, rich, and rare,
Yet they return to travel on,
And may not tarry there.
Thereafter Middows, Fields,
And Pastures plain they spy;
Whereat they wonder and they gaze,
And gazing they go by.
Then in their progress they
They obviat, and meet
Sometime with silver Sanded Streams
Some sour, some sharp, some sweet
Sometimes with Fountains fresh,
And Conduits cristalene,
And often with Orchards full of fruit,
And Forests grassie grene.
Which for a time content,
They visie and rejoes,
Bot shortly satiat with the sight,
They take their gaits and goes.
Where they before them find,
A wild unpleasant way,
Of thistles, thorns, and brears, where they
Constrained are to stay:
Yet with great greef and pain,
Woe and vexation sore:
These perlous paths, they over pass,
Then minds on them no more.
Suchlike some one will be
Incarcerat, and cast
Jn firmance, or in prison put,
And therein fettered fast.
Vexed, and afflicted too,
Or to the torment taine: ()

Yet all these greefs, he will forget,
If he b'inlargd again.
Even so with us it is,
One moment we do meet,
With many most delightful things,
All pleasant to the Sperit.
An other while we find,
Displeasant Greefs, most gross,
And Sorrows, that excedinglie,
Our cheef Contents, does cross,
Yet all our greefs and game,
Jnto an hour, O nay,
Jnto a moment, they shall melt
And vanish will away.
In publict paths we see
A new imprinted pass, ()

Anon an other with his foot,
That foor-step does deface.
An other comes, and with
His dust-depressing dint,
Incontinent he does cancel,
His Predicessours print.
And thus our natural life.
Whereof we make so much,
And mainlie muses to mentaine,
Js it not see you such?
Says Basile, ask and speir
At these thy grow's and grange,
Unto thy days how many Names,
They use to chop and change.
Some-time they did belong
To such a one, and sine
An other did possess the same,
And lastly they are thine.
Perhaps some other yet
Shall in thy place succead,
And occupy the place, when thou
Art dispossesd, or dead.
Or lastly those now thy
Possessions present shall
Be called, perteining to such one,
Whose scarcely none can tell.
And why? because this life
Is like a walking way;
Wherein one passinger expels,
By course an other way.
Bot lo, a little look,
More hie, to hier things,
And mark the mutabilities
Of Monarchies and Kings.
How many every age
We see aims, points, aspires,
And covets Crowns, Swords, Scepturs, Thrones,
Great Kingdoms and Empyres,
And when oft-times they have
With troubles, travels, toil;
De-population of the land,
Impiety, and spoil:
And oft-times too with death,
Of innocents obtaind,
All their ambitious bold desires
The'are forced and constraind:
And to give place compeld,
Not obstant their Estates,
To their Successors, or them selfs,
Be satled in their seats.
This day one rules or reigns,
To morrow he is dead,
Yet others shortly shall ascend,
And in his seat succeid.
Departed, buried, dead,
And to the grave once gone,
Fairwel, they are well away, soon shall
Be re-possest their throne.
Like Maskars on a stage,
They pass their time, and play,
Some sittes, salutes, ascends, descends
They come and go away.
Consider this we should,
That man his life is bot
A journey, ()
or seducing way,
And time that taries not.
Bot specially to those
Most doubtless dangerous,
That they be here but Passingers,
Which be oblivious.
And who too much does stand
Upon occurrent things,
The which occasion, represents,
And often for object brings,
For know the night will come,
And quickly it will come,
When many shall be fast asleep,
Whairof, there shall be some,
Whose negligence, ()
and sloth,
Shall Be a bar to them,
To bear them back, from the most holy hie Jerusalem,
Whairby they shall become,
(A fearful sorry sight,)
An pray unto the infernal Wolfes,
That wander be the night.
To his Majesty's great Commissioner G. E. Marshall Lo. K. and Altrie.
GReat Fabius, far famous for his facts,
Be long delays, he did restore the state,
Naught greatest have, the gravest Actions acts,
Nor are they lost, although a-doing late;
So generous, and Thou most worthy Than,
Walk with that wise and Inclite Fabian.
Alex. Rupeo. Suo, S.
KJnd, Cunning, Crag, I can naught bot commend,
Thy wondrous wit, thy Judgment, thy Ingyne,
For thy attempts, brought to so brave an end,
Bewrayes thee for, none wordly, bot divine,
And if thou list, from Men to lead thy Line,
Or brwik, that they, thy first for-Beares ware
Then'cording too, this Judgment mean of mine,
Thee to no Craig, nor Petra, I compare,
Bot I avow, proclaim, and does declare,
Thee, (the only he, that sol'deserues the same,)
That learned old, the great Petrarchas hear,
He was the Craig, of whom, thou (sandy) came.
For with thy works, that worthy thou reuiu's,
And by thy lines, his Lady Laura lives.
Upon thee honorable gentleman John Da. and John Sibalds of Kair.
Look here below, into this Judge, whair lies,
Dead in the Lord, the father, son, and Oyo,
By name, and Nature, SIB-BALD both and wise.
Honest, discret, and sotiall also,
Whose spreits above, in mouths of men Remains,
Their fame, their flesh, this Terren Tomb contains.
To the Ghost of the most noble Lady, Lad e Elizabeth Gordon Countess of
Dunbar.
IF Virtue, wit, and if discretion do,
With piety expostulat a praise,
If the outward shape, may be collauded to,
Than thou adorned with those into thy days,
Must nocht (Madam) expect nor look for less,
Nor all that Art or Poesy can express.
Thought all that Art, or Poesy can express,
About thy pale imprinted war, and pend:
Yet should thy praise (great Lady) I confess
Permit no point, no period, nor end:
Bot be a solemn subject to be sung,
In th'after age, with each Poetic Tongue.
Of changing Fortune and her effects into This age.
HE first that did a Fortune feign to be,
And but her eyes upon a Rolling Round,
Shuip her to sit, in my opinion, He,
May pass for an, both famous, and Profound,
For lo as she, vnsatled seems to sit,
So flowing ay, all her affairs does flitt.
Behold each day, and see a sundry change,
The Proud deprest, and simple Spreits ptomou'd
The skillful scornd, and what is yet more strange,
The Fool preferred, and loiterers beloved:
And all things known, come of contrarious kind,
Turned topsie turvie be this fortune blind.
TO THE MOST ACCO-MPLISHED and most noble Earl George Earl of Anzie. L. G.
etc.
GReat gallant Youth, thy Bogie-valley, wailes,
And lovingly, laments thy absence long,
Thy Bogie bursts, and as inragd she railes,
And waries all the world for this wrong:
Mourning she moves the Montanes all among,
And as she slides, she soughs, she shoutes and sings,
With weeping voice, a sad and sorry song,
VVailing thy want, her watrie eyes she wrings,
While spaits of Tears, that from those fontains springs
The Valies low, like furious floods over flows
And all her banks, in their disdain down dings
And with a thought, like thunder all ore throws:
Yet noble Lord, haist home and you shall see,
Both Bog and Bogie-waill be blyth of Thee.
EPITAPH UPON THE HONORABLE young Gentleman of singular expectation prevented
by death Walter Vrquart apeir. of Cragstoun.
COnvert our eyes unto this Voult and view
This Sepulture, or this spelunck epsy:
Whair (woe is me,) Wit, worth, and valor true,
Apollos friend, and Pallas love does lie,
Of such deserts, while both those Gods disdain,
That such a man, among mortals should remain.
TO THE MOST HONORED Lady, The Lady Clunie.
WHen I revolue, or reckens, or recounts
All favors fond, from my affected friends.
Above those all so high Thy merits mounts,
That my conceit, them scarsely comprehends.
So boundles be, thy benefits but ends,
While J ashame, for surely I must say
If naught my Muse, were mindful of a mends,
For very woe, I vanish would away:
Bot since jn part, She preeses to repay,
And gladly yields, her endeavors as yours,
Then I protest, I repotest, and pray,
That these the labors of her idle hours:
In part for payment of my depts, receive,
And hope at least (good Lady) for the leave.
Deus vnita protegat Sceptra Mag. Brit.
THose Crowns conjoind and now united, Lord,
Into thy mercy with thy power protege:
And keep thou them, at quiet, and accord,
Each with their old, and princely privilege:
And let no Wrong: nor no attempt betide,
Those royal Realms united to divide.
What greater joy, nor see two Kingdoms knit
Togither-chain'd, and locked into Love,
And for two Kings, to see on Caesar sit,
And both with Majesty and Mercy move:
Two royal Scepters with one happy hand,
And over two Countries quietly command.
No greater Grace nor richer blessing be,
Imparted to, no Prince his Subjects then.
Thou loving Lord (of thy benignity,)
Bestows on Britans, Scots and Englishmen,
For O we have: from heaven a happy Head,
And from the same, a Son for to succead.
FJNIS.
To such as shall peruse this Book.
POETRY is so every way made the Harauld of wantonness, as there is not now
any thing too unclean for lascivious rhyme; which among some (in whose hearts
God has wrought better things) has bin the cause, why so general an
imputation is laid upon this ancient and industrious Art. And I, to clear (as
I might) verse, from the soil of this unworthiness, have herein (at least)
proved that it may deliver good matter, with fit harmony of words, though I
have erred in the latter. The way to Do well, is not so doubtful, as not to
be sought; neither so dark, but it may be found. I confess, I have, touching
my particular, been long carried with the doubts of folly, youth, and opinion,
and as long miscarried in the darkness of unhappiness, both in mention and
action. This was not the path that led to a contented rest, or a respected
name. In regard whereof, I have here set forth the witness that may testify
what I desire to be. Not that many should know it, but that many should take
comfort by it. And (kind Reader) this is my request, that faults in Printing
may be charitably corrected; that the sense of the matter may be wisely (and
herein truly) construed, and so shall ye both approve your own Judgments,
and right the Author in his hopes.

Farewell.



