DOOMES-Day Book: OR, An Alarm for Atheistes, A Watchword for VVorldlinges, A
Caveat for Christians.

By Samuel Gardnier Doctor of Divinity.

Heb. 9. verse 27. It is appointed to men that they shall once dye, and after
that comes the Judgment. The Contents the following page shows.



LONDON Printed by E. A. for Nicholas Ling and are to be sold at his shop in
Saint Dunstans Churchyard in Fleete-streete. 1606.

The Contents of the Chapters of this Book.
Chap. 1 OF the unquestionable certainty of the worlds end page 1 Chap. 2. Of
the manner how the world shall be destroyed. page. 10 Chap. 3. Of the
uncertain, and unknown time of the worlds end. page 15 Chap. 4 Of the signs
of the worlds end. page. 24 Chap. 5. Of the certainty of our Resurrection.
page. 45 Chap. 6. Of the certainty of the judgment, or the day of Deome. pa.
56 Chap. 7. That Christ shall be the judge of the world. page. 63 Chap 8. How
joyful it is to the Godly, and doleful to the wicked, that Christ shall be
their judge page. 67 Chap. 9. The majesty of Christ in his coming to
judgment. page. 7^ Chap. 10. The Persons that are to be judged. page. 76 Chap.
11. The cases that are to be judged. page, 79 Chap. 12. Of the Terror and
horror of judgment. page. 84 Chap. 13. The form of the sentence of
judgment. page. ^8 Chap. 14 Of the blessed estate of the Godly in the life to
come. pa. 102
To the Right Honorable Jane, Lady Barkley, wife to the Lord Barkley, his
ve^^ good Lady.
THe directi^^ given to Salomons young man, (...) as an Orient star to guide
you to Heaven, as the Commet in the East was to the wise men, as it were a
hand to lead them to Bechlehem, Matthew. 2. 9.
the place where Christ was. I wish (if it ^e the will of God) that you live
yet many years, to the glory of God, and the comfort of your godly friends:
and that you may long go with a staff for very age: yet it will not be
amiss in the mean time, to give you summons of death. For this cause I tender
you this Doomes-day discourse, wishing you to feed upon it in your soul, as
upon a Restoratiue, and to eat it up, as the Prophet did the Roll that God
gave him, You shall not die the sooner: but happily to the world the sooner.
Though I doubt not but you have hitherto so lived, as you may bol^ly say upon
your dying bed, I am not ashamed to live, and I am not ^oath to die. The grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you, Amen.

Your Honors Chaplain, SAMVEL GARDNI^R.

To the Reader.
SImple Christian with Natlara^l, John 1.
or semi Christian with (...) or no Christian with Daui^s nodd^: Act 26.
The enrolment of this Argument is more the^ need^^l As a comfort to the first,
Psalm. 14. 1.
a cons^^matio^ to the second* a call or corosiue to the la^ter sort. ^ The
former rank hear Doomes-day discourse as w^llingly as that man that intending
to traua^le to in^ta, delightfully listneth to an other that delateth of the
riches and plenty of that place. His joy is then fulfilled in the sight of his
Savior the substance thereof: as Solomon was upon view of the visible Arc of
the Covenant, which was but the shadow. 1 King. 18.
He takes out his Qu^etus est, with that luckie Evangelical Merchant, Matthew.
13.
who having found the Pearl of mestimable value, Matthew. 9.
and the golden mine, casts up all his worldly commodities, as Matthew did
his Customers off^ce: Act. 9.
Paul his high Commission given him by the Bishops: Luke 19.
(...) his usury, Peter his Nets, when they were called to a better place:
Matthew. 4.
And as Elias did cast aside his Cloak when he was catched up to heaven. 2.
King. 4.
He is then in his Harvest, reaping with joy that he sowed in tears, and
^^nging home his sheaues with him: He is led to the Kings r^yall banquet* and
to the Supper of the Lamb, which how ^^gh honor it is, H^ster 5.
Hama^ tells you in the boast of that favor to his wife and friends
affoorded unto him, when he was called t^ dine with King Assuerus. His
sorrows are no sorrows unto him in respect of the joys that are set before
him: the light afflictions of this world casting upon him a greater weight of
glory. 1. Cor. 7
Those that weep, are as those that wept not because the shadow of this world
passes away. 2 The second sort of men (I mean the midling) that serves God
and Baal, God and M^mmon: By this learning of the end of the world is easily
led to the contempt of the world. Hier^m^
Om^^a ^ac^e co^tem^t qui credit se cito moriturum: He soon contemns all
things that thinks he shall die soon, says Jerome. It was wisely laid
together of Esau, Lo I die, and what shall then the prerogative of my birth do
me? and as a stone cast into the river, raises a bubble, and that bubble
stir^eth up another: ^o this contempt of the world, raised by this learning,
raises an other contempt with it, even of our selves. Of which Bernard takes
consideration, saying: Vide vnde veneris and erubesce: vbi es and ingemesce:
and quo vadis and contremis^e: See from whence thou came and blush: where
thou art and sigh at it: and whither thou art going, and quake at it. It will
make thee crest^alne, the consideration of thy constitution, what thou art by
creation, and that thou shall be the same by dissolution, and thou art subject
to this check, Why art thou proud, thou dust and ashes? Finally, it will
confirm thee in thy dutiful doings, and strengthen thy feeble loins. It is
the Schoolmaister, the Prophet desires to be given him of God to teach him
wisdom, the certificat of the dimensions of this life. Quis^qu^^^die
recordatur esse mori^urum, Hieron: ad Cyprian.
contem^^t praes^nt^a and adfutura ^^sti^at He that daily remembers his death,
will hate things present, and haste to things to come. 3 Finally, it
con^e^teth or confounds the Atheist. Nabal and Epicure, that with the
Prodigal son, in his conceits is gone into a far Country from his fathers
house, the Church of the everliving God, standing upon his own proper wisdom,
which he takes to be better then the wisdom of the spirit. So that he
swalloweth home in his s^^ine security such damnable, sathannicall suggestions
as these. Ede, b^be, lude, post mortem nulla (...). 1. Cor. 15.
Let us eat and drink, to morrow we shall die. But such ^erm^ning as this, if
there be any hope in them, shall (...) by the ears, and the sound of this
trumpet, (...) from the dead sleep of their sin, and set them upon their
feet, and cast them into a new ^ould. For matter of this nature, naturally
scatters an host of sins: For as fellons ^eare the coming of the Judge,
and the time of the A^^^ses: (...) that shall not stand in the judgment,
tremble at this time, and will be fearful of such sins as they know will
arr^^^ne them, and condemn them. If I shall benefit these or any of these,
which is the period of my labors and desires: the Lords name be blessed for it.

Doomes day Book.
The first Chapter.
Of the unquestionable certainty of the worlds end.
THe s^curitie, Math. 24. ^2. 38. 44 4^. 48.
and iniquity of these ^^mes, Luke. 17. 1^. 27. 2^.
have thrust this argument upon me. For having been four and forty years
su^ feted with peace and plenty, we have not only forgotten but as it were
set our faces against ple^ie. So that spa^^^^ the judgments of God, not by his
word but by the state of the times* 2. Pet. 3. 4. 8 1^.
we make a moc^^^^ them: and whatsoever Preachers tell us of the dissolution
of the world* (...) 18.
of (...) of all flesh, Mat^. ^. 13, 34
of the general county day* we (...) and (...). T^ cut the ve^^ ^ase (...)
of truth, do we not find that the world sedde upon (...) (...)
and ^ucke up these su^^^^ damnable ep^nons to the sub^^^sion of their souls?
(...)
(...) that (...) no (...) at all or judgment to ^^me, sensual (...) 2. (...)
Or that God ^ath adiourned the ^^me of his c^mm^ng and that it will belong ^ce
he come* of the generation of those (...) all the ^est of them, that Saint Peter
takes to ^^ske. (...)
It is therefore high time to put the world in mind of their lying vani^ies
which so (...) their souls and so call them from dead wo^k, (...)
(...) so be it may (...) se^ue the living God, (...)
by placing before (...) ^yes the day of doom, which must certainly come, and
shortly come, which shall give to every one according to their works. That
is, to them which by continuance in well doing, seek glory and honor, Romans ^.
6. 7 8. 9 etc.
and immortality, eternal life: Apoca. 22. 12
but unto them that are contentious and disobey the truth, and obey
unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath. Now if this shrill trumpet
and passing Bell will not wake us out of our lithargie of carnal security,
there is no recovery of us: For this is the only cooler I can consider of, to
quench or qualify our hot sinful lusts: If we look up to this clock or
dyall, we shall be wary how we spend our time. Dan. 14. 15. 19. ^0. 21.
Daniel by strewing ashes upon the floor found out the fallacy of the
Priests of Baal: Genesis 18. 27.
by the mature meditation of our frail condition that we are but dust and
ashes, and that we are sure of a resurrection and retribution according to the
nature of our actions we shall des^tie and dispeli the subtilties of the
devil. For all his devises by the memory hereof shall be subdued unto us: as
the devil himself was driven away by Christ, (...). 14 13
by telling him of Scriptures. The remembrance of this will be a staff and
crotch as luckie unto us in this our wearisome perambulation of the few and
evil d^^e^ of our life as that of Jacobs was unto him, Genesis 32. 10.
wherewith he passed over Jordan. Mat. 2. 10. 11
If we look to the end (as the wisemen to the star) it will lead us as it did
them the right way to Christ. For why are older men better keepers of their
Church then young men: but because they consider they are nearer their end:
young men by their sins with the younger Son, Luke. 15. 13.
who went far from his father, are farther off from God, the farther they
think in regard of their youth, they are from their end. They are as proud of
the healthful estate of their bodies, as Nabuchadonozar was of the
statelynesse of his Palace: saying to themselves, I^ not this a strong body?
as Nabuchadonozer said to himself. Dan. 4 27. 28
Is not this great Babell? The cause of the sins of the people that were
endless, Lau^en. 1. 9.
was their carelessness of the end, as Jeremy flatly tells Jerusalem, Her
filthiness is in her skirts: she remembers not her last end. While Moses
considered that he had but a time in the world* ^ee forsook the world
betime, and chose rather to suffer adversity with the people of God, Heb^ 11.
25.
the^ to enjoy the pleasures of sins for a season.

Tell me worldly man, Matt. 17. 4.
that say with Peter: It is good to behere, Mark. 9. 5.
whether if thou had hired a house whose foundation reeleth, and rocketh, and
threatens a downfall, thou would not make have out of that house? Genesis 19.
2^.
It is certain thou would: Have thee, save thee, escape for thy life: I
counsel thee as the Angel counseled Lot: Escape into the Mountain and
holy hill of the Lord, as Lot was advised when Sodom was destroyed: for the
Lord will fire the house of this world, and the heavens the beautiful roof
of the house, Apoc. 21. 1.
according as he has immutably decreed, saying: Heaven and earth shall pass.
Matthew. 24. 35.
And as in this chapter it shall be fully proved unto thee* Psalm. 102. 2^.
He that made the heaven can fold it up like a book again and can roll it
together like a skin of Parchment. Heb. 1. 10. 11. 12.
He that made the sea and set the waves thereof in a rage, and caused it to
boil like a pot of ointment, can say to the ^^oods, Be ye dried up: He that
made the dry land can rock it to and fro upon her foundations, as a drunken
man reeleth from place to place: He can cleath the Sun, and the Moon in
sackcloth and command the stars to fall down to the earth, and the
mountains of the land to remove into the sea. Mat. 24. 29. and 21. 2^.
It is the greatest folly in the world to dream here of a dwelling place.
Heb. 13. 14.
We have here no continuing City, but we seek one to come. John 14. 2. 3
Of his fathers house Christ hathsaid, That there are many mansio^s, but he
never said so much of Horeb or Thabor, or of the wilderness of this world.
Heb. 9. 27.
But the word is already gone out of Gods mouth. It is appointed unto all men
once to die: nay twice to die, Gen* 2. 17. Heb. M^riend^ mo^^ent.
as God threatened Adam: Thou shall die the death: wherefore the Apostle makes
up the former sentence with this addition: After that comes the judgment.
Believe this (as the Samaritans did) not because of my word, John* 4. 30. 4^
42.
but because the Lord himself has spoken it by the mouth of his Prophets
ever since (...) world began. Genesis ^. 1. 20.
The Deluge or flood, which Moses diligently has described unto us. Luke 17.
26.
^s a lively representation of the worlds dis^^tion. Saint Peter ^^^^teth so
much from thence against the mockers of his time, 1. Pet. 3. 20.
thus: Wherefore the world that then wa^ perished, ouerflowed with the water:
2. Pet. 3. 6. 7.
but the heavens and earth which (...) now, are kept by the same werde in
store, (...) 11. 12. 13
(...) ^lerued unto fire unto the day of judgment. This his (...) is taken
from the example* and it is fashioned thus: If God could in times past mar
the face of the whole world, he is able to do the like again: 1. Pet. 3. 20.
But the former he has done already, ouerwhelming the whole earth (a handful
of seed as it were only rese^^ed to renew the same again,) with rivers of
waters. Genesis 6. 14. 17.
And the latter is to be looked for that he waste the world again with rivers
of fire and brimstone. Luke 17. 26.
2. Pet. 3. 6. 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Christ in many places is plain in this point. Heaven and earth shall pass
away, Matt. 5. 18. and chapter 34. 35.
but my words shall not pass away. In the reedition of a Parable the effect
thereof elsewhere is thus delivered. The Harvest is the end of the world:
Matthew. 13. 39. verse 49.
So shall it be in the end of this world. And in the 49, verse of that
Chapter, the same words are repeated. The 25. Chapter of Matthews Gospel
handles no other Argument, but it is Doomes days discourse altogether. Matthew.
25.
It is the gracious promise Christ has given to his Church: Matt. 28. 20.
I am with you always to the end of the world. John 14. 16.
The Apostle taking this Text from Christ's mouth, do est-soones put their
people in remembrance hereof. It is Paul's saying to the Romans. The creature
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption. Romans 8. 21.
In his first Letter to the Corinthians he is large in this point. 1. Cor. 15.
12. 15.
Then shall be the end when he has delivered up the kingdom to God: etc. 1.
These. 5. 2, 3.
To the Thessalonians he says: When they shall say peace, 1. Pet. 4. 7.
and safety, then shall come upon them sudden destruction, 2. Pet. 3. 10.
etc. The e^de of all things is at hand, says Saint Peter. Revel. 3. 3.
What better witnesses would a man wish to have for the eu^^ence of the case?
We hear God himself speak, and therefore let every adversaries mouth be
stopped, and in the certainty of the worlds end let us be fully grounded.
Acts 17. 28.
With these authenticke and pregnant proofs we may hear what the Heathens say
(not that the sacred mysteries of our faith have need of any grace from the
lips of Poets and Philosophers,) Tit. 1. 12. 13.
but that Heathens may be vanquished with their own weapons, as the head of
Goliath was cut off by his own a^ming sword, 1. Sam. 17. 51.
and the Baalites were lanched with their own shredding knives: 1. King. 18. 28
and that such as bear the name of Christians might be ashamed, who deny
that in their hearts, Ephesians. 2. 12.
which the heathens who were without God in the world, confessed with their
tongues. Ovid describing God, Romans 2. 14. 15
deliberating with himself about the Deluge, among other things he relates
this of him.

Esse quoquem ^ati^^ reminiscitur affore tempus, Ovid lib. 1. (...) Genesis 6. 3.
18. First by a ^^tood afterward (...) a doct^^ne agreeing with the (...).

Quo (...), quo tellus, corrept ^qu^ r^g^^^^li,
(...) l^mol^s operola laboret.
The D^^^mes decree a dismal day to come,
Wherein the Sea the soyle^ and frame coelest^ll,
And (...) worldly mass and spacious rome,
(...) utter wrack and ruin fall.
Plato whose eyes were broader then the world, and saw so much into this
Diumitie, as his wisdom was but a little wide of (...), Judge. 14. 1^.
h^n^leth the worlds creation in such sort, as Euse^^^s auerreth, that ^e
plowed with Moses Heiser, Genesis 1. 1. 3. 8. 9. etc.
and was helped by his Books, which is not much unlikely. Plato having bin in
Egypt, as the story of his life shows, and the Egyptians being so careful
keepers of the rolls and registers of Moses, the Jews bringing them into
Egypt, G^^ 37. 28. 29.
there being such free passage one to another between the Jews and the
Egyptians. His Dialogue super^cribed, Timaeus gives clusters of conclusions
in the case. So that give we that the world was created as Plato contendeth,
this consequence will necessarily follow thereupon, that it shall likewise be
dissolved. 2. Pet. 3. 36.
For the composition thereof plainly proouing the beginning thereof, as well in
regard of the material, as the effecient cause every thing compounded, having
a compounder: and the compound matter of things contrary req^ring the aid of
things simple, from whence they may have their original composition) the
duration or dissolution thereof must stand to the ^^rtesi^ and will of the
compo^nder, whose will is free, and will not be enforced, as things natural
are in their ^c^io^s: or admit that ne^essarie co^erence of causes, which the
(...) cast in their con^^ts. Id^iue this long dilated Argument into a narrow
room and (...) it up thus: The world (...), Acts 17. 28.
moved, prese^ued by a first cause: but that first go^^^ing and preset^^ng
cause is at absolute liberty to dee as it p^^s^th, wherefore when that arch
fli^ht from it, the whole (...) and (...) there of immediately falls. The Sect
of Phelos^phers called Sto^cks, not only pronounce the dissolution et the
world, 2. P^^. ^. 7.
but they go further, and determine (as Cicero records) the manner of it, that
it shall be brought to a general combustien. Heraclitus as Themistius an
Expositor upon Aristotle has it, (...) in natura lib. quest, lib. 1
and Seneca, (surnamed by some a Christian Gentile, or a Gentile Christian) are
of the mind that it shall perish by water. But the scheole of Philosophers
goes most with the first opinion of the two, whose steps the Mathematicians
tread in, who make the stars the Incendiaries of the world, running into a
c^urse and concourse ^^ereunto. Berosus is very busy there about, who (as
Seneca says) is so nice as to calculate the very nicke and exegent of time,
when it shall be reduced to his final conslo^ration. The time appointed is (as
he fan^seth) when as all the Eelestiall signs, who now have their several
^erambulatie^e and ^ettings, shall meet together in Cancer. Of this kind we
have vntnesses enough, for having a sufficient company to make a grand Jury,
what advantage should we have i^ we should ransacke the whole world, from the
Center to the Circum^erence for every such authority? Let the Perepatecians
prate as they please to the contrary, who peremptorily avouch the worlds
eternity. Among whom their great master Aristotle is the chiefest: and Galen
the Physicians God is not behind, who measures the nature of the world by
experience, saying, as we see by daily sight, that the world has always
stood, so it shall still stand. Of which vain is Manlius coming in very
good^ily with such a spoke, saying; Our fathers have not seen, neither shall
their childrens children see any other world then this. Upon which string
harpeth the blind Harpers and ianglers at this doctrine, whom Peter statly
overcame in disputation, who considering how the world keeps at a stay, do
promise the perpetuity of the same unto themselves in a restie security. Thus
shooting their fools bolte: 2. Tim. 3. 1.
Where is the promise of his coming? For since the fathers died, 2. Pet. 3. 4.
all things have continued alike since the beginning of the creation. Jude 18.
Let these (I say and such like) blurt out their vain tattle as they please,
1. Tim. 4. 1.
we have adversaries of their own mark and calling, that shall reply against
them and repel them. Against those forenamed grand-captaines of the
controversy, we culle out Philosophers as themselves are: Pithagoras, the
Sloicks, and the brood of Epicures, if they will admit of them, as for Plato
their Deisted Philosopher, they dare not deny him, but they will give him the
first place in the schools. Against the Latins, Pliny and his ^^^plices,
(...) Sen^^a who is worth them all and will forte them at the (...).

L^stly I desire no other Judge in the cause, Psalm. 19. 1. etc. (...). 1. 20.
etc.
then our common (...) which considers of the nature of the whole b^ the
con^equence of the several pa^ts which do ordeyne and (...) the whole. But
every particular part of the world that pe^^^ whe^^ore common sense it self
sets down that the whole world shall perish. Take we a short and cur^ory
suruay of the esp^ciall parts, (...) 1. 1.
to put the matter out of doubt: which for (...) we reduce to two che^fe, (for
so the scripture truneth them all up as it were in two bundles) The heaven and
the earth. But the definitive doom of Christ concerning them, Math. 5. ^8.
is, that they shall be destroyed: Heaven and earth shall pas^e. The heaven is
the roof, Genesis 1. 8. 9, 10.
and the earth the foundation of Gods house. The heaven contains the air and
whatsoever lives in the same. The earth contains the sea in it* which are
the pauement of Gods beautiful palace, the sea also being the girdle of the
dryland: now there is nothing more firm and stable then the earth, which how
best it be ^ounded upon the floodes ( as David says) yet is it such a solid
and compact body and of such waightines, Psalm. 136. 6.
as by no means of man it may be rocked out of his place: and an earthquake
which assaniteth it most is numbered amongst the strangest thunderboltes of
Gods judgments which he lets she as arrows at a mark. The heaven as it is
so mortaised and hangde as it cannot be drawn from his hindges and hooks:
Psalm. 102. 26.
so his orbs have their certain and orderly courses, but they shall be
thredbare, H^br. 1. 10. 11. 12.
and wax old as a garment. 1. Pet. 3. 10 11. 12. etc.
The heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the elements shall melte with
heat etc. Do we not see how the earth droopeth like an old man that has
lost his strength, having lost the fatness and marrow that was wont to be in
the heart and bones of it, James. 5. 17.
whilst it is sometimes choked with water, and at other times parched with
heat, 1. King. 17.
and whilst in some places it mouldreth away? 1. Luke. 4. 25.
It is recorded of Aetna that mighty mountain that it is not such a mark to
Sailers as it was wont. Ecle. 48. 3.
In many places the sea retire and give back, as is written of Egypt: Amos.
4. 7. etc.
in other places it gets ground horribly, ouerwhelming whole towns and
provinces. In some places mountains are maimed by earthquakes, rocks (the
boniest places of the earth) splitted asunder, great deepes dried up, and are
like a dry floor, neither cloddes, nor clouds give the^r wonted inst^^^s al
which do argue that they have no long cont^un^^e. Moreover if we may believe
Astrononiers, the (...) of the celestia^^^^s is weakened, the Sun is not so many
(...) from us as it was wont to be, for they avouch that ^t is nearer to us by
the fourth part then it was in P^olome ^s time: that is to say nine thousand
nine hundred seventy fire miles as the Germans reckon miles. If there be
such a decl^^ation in the uppermost part, what shall we say of this low ^^ost
rome, but that it is in a very weak taking? 1. Cor. 2. 29. 32. 31.
Old age has come upon the back of the world, and every part thereof
groaueth under the burden thereof. Romans 8. 19. 20. 21. etc.
In p^antes their is lesser virtue* in bea^ts and men lesser strength, Isaith.
24. 1. 3 4. 5. 6. 7. etc.
in all of us fewer years. (...) 26. 14.
I look therefore for noe less then a sudden and short consummation of all.
Deuteronomy. 28. 16.
From this doctrine grows very special use, if we have grace ^o apprehend
it. 1. For the consideration of the tra^sttory nature of the things of this
world, lifts up our minds beyond all earthly things, and gains them to
God. For it is but lost labor to plough upon rocks, to lean upon a broaken
reed, to look for comfort of a river that is dried up, to build upon
uncertainties, and to rely upon mere vanities. But Solomon smites the world
of both cheeres, twice calling it vanity, Eccle. 1. 2.
vanity of vanities and troubling the note, that we might know it is his
verdict without repeal. All is vanity. Joan. 2. 8.
Jonas gives the he to them, naming them lying vanities: as promising one
thing and giving us another: promising li^e, and every minute bringing us to
death: promising felicity, and ouerwhelming us with misery: promising
eternity, whereas it is transt^orie: Genesis ^9. 13.
dealing dissemblingly and falsely with us as Laban did with Jacob, who promised
him Rachell, but gave him Lea^^ in her stead: And as the false prophets did by
Achab, promising him victory, 1 King. 22. 34.
when behold he was slain by the enemy: and as the deceitful teachers did
the people, of whom God thus speaks by Isaiah: My people, they that call you
blessed deceive you. It is the ghostly council the Apostle gives us from this
observation. Charge them that are rich in this world, 1. Tim. 6. 17.
that they be not high minded, and that they trust not in uncertain riches,
Muk^. 4. 15. ^8.
but in the living God etc. Luke. 12. 15. 16.
The like lecture Christ read us before him: Math. 6. 19.
Lay not up treasures for your selves upon the earth* which the moth and canker
corrupt, 1 (...) 19.
and where thieves dig tho^ough and steal: For if we dee, (...). 12. 33.
the very corruption thereof shall co^^^^me our corruption, as the Apostle
learneth us. Your riches (...) corrupt: (...)
and your garments are motheaten. Your gold and silver is cankered and the
rust of them shall be a witness aga^^st you, and shall eat your (...) as it
were fire. (...)
Ye have li^^^^^ pleasure on the earth and in wantonness. Ye have nourished your
hearts, as (...) day of slaughter. He says of them as Duke Ioab said to Abner
in effect: (...) 26.
Know thou not that it (...) bitterness in the latter end? If we could spare
a time from due sins for such a thought, we should soon feel in our selves
more compunction, and deuo^ion.

2. This document also as needful as the former is from hence deducted, that
we who dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is the dust, who are nothing
else but a sincke of sin* and Chaos of corruption, shall much more perish,
seeing all the parts of the world, the excellent creatures and wormanship of
God shall have their desolution. We ^iue not here in a castle and place of
abode: John. 18. 36.
but as it were in an June as passengers to tarry but for a night: as Christ
said. My kingdom is not of this world: so our kingdom and continuance is not
in this world. As God said to Abraham* Genesis 12. 1.
get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy fathers house:
so God will say to every one of us, Acts. ^. 3.
get thee out of thy life. Exodus 33. 1. 7
As the tabernacles of the Jews were made to be removed, so are we. Wherefore,
stand not so much upon y^ prerogati^e of thy birth right and terms of gentry,
seeing they are all so momentarie. Ge. 2. ^. and 5. 2
It is well known from what house the best borne among us, 1. Cor. 15. 45
the son of man only excepted) originally have descended, namely from the
earth and gleabe, Gen 3. 19.
Job teaching us to call corruption our father, and the worm our mother. Job.
1^. 14.
Now what profit is there (as David says) in our blood, I^al. 6. 5.
when we go down to the pit? As (...) said, Lo, I am almost dead, what is
then this birthright t^^ee? Genesis 25. 32.
Wherefore by the diligent consideration of thy end with the world and thou
shall be taught and brought to make an end of sin and so begin a new life.
Hebr. 12. 16.
And therewith? (...) Christ the sole object of the eye of the (...), thou
shall (...) death bed be willing to die, and (...) (which saying Possid^nius
in the story of his life (...)) I am not ashamed to live and I do not fear
to die, A^^^stine (...).
because I have a good master whom I serve* what extremity of sollie is it to
be thinking of this transitory world so much, and of the eternal world to
come so little? wherein we are like the ^unnell that tunneth in licor into a
vessel, that delivers it self of the purer matter, but suffers the
concreat and gresser substance to cleave to the sides of it. The judgment that
should purify us is out of our sight: and the carnal cares of the world, like
lumpes of mire and clay stick to our souls.

The second Chapter.
Of the manner how the world shall be destroyed.
IT being concluded in the former chapter that the world shall be destroyed,
order would we should set down how it is to be destroyed: which shall be the
subject and argument of this chapter; which we will spend upon these two
parts. 1. The first shall determine in what sort it shall perish.

2. The second shall give decision to this question, whether the same in
substance or form shall so perish. About the first there is great dispute and
difference among Doctors, while they denide them selves into contrary min^es:
some holding that it shall be destroyed by water, Seneca in naturalib^ quest.
lib. ^.
othersome by fire. Of the first rank are Seneca and his scholars. In
historia Phile.
Of the second which are the sounder sort, are the Stoics, of whom Cicero and
Galen makes mention, Heraclitus, the greater part of Philosophers, the
Mathematicians, and Divines running with the stream of sacred authorities, as
the other part with the current of their private fan^ics. For they take their
text from Peter who says. 1. Pet 3. 7. 10. 11. 12. 13.
But the heavens, and earth which are now, are kept by the same word in store,
(...) 1. 65. 17. and 66. 22.
and res^rued unto fire against the day of judgment, (...) ^. 21. 1
and o^ the dest^^^ of ungodly men. But yet there is no small (...) of the Moon
to scour and purify the other three elements: others producing it out of the
Sun beams. Peter Lombard says, that th^e fire shall go before the face of
the Lord, and shall reduce the whole fashion of the heavens and earth to a
consumption: and he is so curious and fine as to measure out unto us the height
of the fire, su^ing it to the depth of y^ waters of Noah which drowned the
earth. Such things delivers Austine in his twentieth book of the City of
God in the 18. chapter. Yet in the 16. chapter of that book he seems to deny
that a man may have any certain knowledge therein but by the especial
certificate of the spirit. Wherein he is in the right and of the surer side,
for it is safer for us to hold this modesty then to be over busy with the
secrets of Gods sanctuary. 1. Peter. 3. 7. etc.
It is enough that we simply believe (as Peter teaches) that the world shall
be fixed. 1. To ventilate and examine, of what kind of nature this fire should
be. 2. From whence it should be brought 3. How the saints shall be preserved in
that flame, and live as the Salamander in the fire. 4. How high this fire shall
mount we leave to the will and providence of God, being contented to be wise
with sobriety and not affecting to know more then God would have us, or to
compel the scriptures that are willing to go part of y^ way with us* to go
after the vagaries of our idle lusts. It serves to the confirmation of the
present cause, namly to the illustratio^ of the manner of the worlds
dissolution, that which Math: has in these words: Math 25 6.
At midnight there was a cry made, Behold the bridgrome comes. The voice of
the angel and the trumpet of God is part of that cry. The scripture calls it
else where (...) which signifies the hoarse vociferation of Mariners when they
call one upon another to go to their tackling: for it must needs be a cry out
of cry that must waken the dead, and raise them from their graves. But another
part of the cry is the stridor and noise that Peter mentions which this fire
that shall consume the world shall make, 1. Pet. 3. 10.
saying: The heavens shall pass away with a noise and the elements shall melt
with heat, and the earth with the works therein, s^al be burnt up. We hear a
terrible noise at the downfall of two or three houses at once: therefore that
must be a noise with a (...) esse which one fire shall make which
shalouerchro^^ ^he heauers, the earth, the sea, all cities* towns, houses,
beasts, living creatures, and the whole mass of the world ^ltogither. David by
an apt similitude, teaching the ^^ate and condition of the wicked, alludeth
hereunto As the fire among the thorns, etc. Fire among thorns, makes a great
noise. Wherefore hear we now the cry of his word at midday, least we hea^e
this fearful cry at midnight hitherto spoken of: and in time let the sweet
cry of his mercy charm us, least the direful and irefull out cry of his
judgments do condemn us.

We come to the second part of this Chapter, which answers the question,
whether the substance or form of the world shall perish. For hereof are two
opinions scattered. 1 Some are of that mind, that in very substance it shall
be turned vpside down, fastening upon these Scriptures, as of that in the
Psalm: Isal, 102. 25.
Thou have aforetime laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the
works of thine hands. Heb. 1. 10, 11 12.
They shall perish, but thou shall endure, etc. As of that saying of the
Prophet Isaiah, Isai. 65. 17. and 66. 22.
For lo I will create new heavens, and a new earth, Revel. ^1. 1.
and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind: 1. Pet 3. 13.
as of that which Saint John in his Revelation says: And I saw a new heaven,
and a new earth; for the first heaven, and the first earth were passed away,
and there was no more sea. Finally, in that the Angel swears by him that
lives for ever, that Time shall be no more. Now if time be taken away, all
motion must be taken away. If all motion be taken away, there is nothing in the
world that can continue. 2 But othersome hold, that only but some parts of the
world shall be ouerturned at the second coming of Christ, not altogether
raised from their foundation^: but so as they shall suffer a singular
alteration. Ambrose takes part with this side and sets his hand to this
opinion, 1. Cor. 7. 31.
urging that which the Apostle Paul says: The fashion of this world goes
away: prossing the word which he calls the fashion, shadow, or form, and not
the mass, matter, substance. That authority of Peter also favors that
part, in these words. Wherefore the world that then was, 2. Pet. 3. 6.
perished, ouerflowed with the water: when as but the lower parts thereof were
corrupted by the waters. Apoc. 21. 1.
That of the Revelation preiudiceth not the point: For there seems rather a
new heaven, and new earth to be destroyed, then a dissolution of the other to
be insinuated. Also in Isaiah it is said That the Moon shall have the light of
the Sun, Isai. 3^. ^6
and that the Sun shall yield seven fold more light then it does now. The
Schoolmen apply all inferences in this case to the qualities, and not to the
substance of the world: for the nature of the world shall not so be turmosted,
Romans 8. 20. 21, etc.
as it shall be brought to nothing: but it shall be rescued and redeemed from
the hands of var^tie, unto which it was subject. For the world being sentensed
to this judgment for the sin of man, not of it self sinning against God:
after that sin is out of place, the world must recover his former dignity,
when the time appointed is accomplished, especially the lower bodies which are
in the subl^^arie world: for those be most object and subject to corruption.
Lib. 4. did. 4^ Lib. 20. cap. 1^ de (...) Dei.
The master of the Sentences in effect delivers thus much: But he borrows
that which he has herein from Austine, who says, That by a worldly
combustion the qualities of the corruptible elements which had some cognation
and correspondencie with our corruptible bodies shall utterly burn and perish,
and that the substance shall put on those qualities by a miraculous exchange,
which shall be agreeable with the condition of immortal bodies, that the world
being altered to the better, may be fitting to the persons also in their bodies
altered to the better. In the 14. Chapter of the forenamed book, this is his
verdit. This world shall pass away by a mutation, not final subversion. And
he alleges for himself the forecited saying of Paul, 1. Cor. 7. 31 Lib. de
dogma. (...).
The fashion of this world passes away: The figure (says he) not the nature
is spoken of by the Apostle else where, he likewise says: we are not to
believe, that the Elements, that is to say, that heaven and earth are to be
produced to ashes, but that their property shall be bettered. The scriptures
no where show the dissolution of the worlds substance. Also the bodies of the
Saints must be in a place: but what place shall they have, if they have not a
place in the world? Moreover, man for whose sin all woe came upon the world,
shall not utterly be destroyed, but shall be renewed in body, and invested with
immortality, either to his endless felicity, or misery: wherefore the
worlds composition that was not in the transgression shall much less comein
substance to this utter confusion. But this being a point more doubtful then
profitable, we leave it arbitrable: what shall be the end of the world, we
shall best know in the end of the world.

Thus having insisted as much as need requires in the two propounded points
of this Chapter, we will give the use, the life of the whole, and so conclude
the same.

Whereas the fire is to consume this world as stubble as the former world was
licked up by water: 2. Pet. 3. 7. 11. 12.
we see how every thing, howsoever simply of it own nature, Genesis 7. 20.
appertains most to the necessary use of man, has a most hurtful effect
against man, when God will take it up as a rod in his hand, either for the
correction, or destruction of man. The fire, the water, the soil, the air,
are the Elements that are aliments unto us in their property, and kind
whereby we live, move, and have our being: but when God otherwise disposes of
them, and purposes the diuersion of their nature, they are posting Purseuants
of the wrath of God to execute his judgments, Genesis 19 24. Gen 7. 20. Number. 16.
31. 32. 33. 34. Number. 11. 16. 33.
to the overthrow of our lives. Wherefore the fire went out from Gods presence
to burn up Sodom and her Cities. The water, the Beesom of his fierce anger,
drowned (reserving only eight persons) y^ whole world of the ungodly. The
earth whereupon every one treads, opened and distended her mouth like hell,
and swallowed up Dathan, and coneted the congregation of Abiram. Manna the
dainty restoration of the Israelites, burst out of their noses, and sauoured
abhominably, as a most just judgment against their palpable and damnable
ungratefulness. The sons of the Prophets, by a sower herb in their
pottage, (...) 1. 4.
had almost perlshed. The wind, a Meteor by which we live, being the spirit of
life and as it were a fan in the hand of God, for the clarifying the air
that it should not putrify (an the Lungs in stead of Bellows are given to the
heart, to qualify the excessive hear of the heart) driued Jonas into the
depth of the sea.

Again, whereas the world is to be wasted with fire, and every man's work is
to be revealed by sire: 1. Cor. 3. 12, 13, 14, 15.
let us labor to plant gold, silver, precious stones, which the fire will
make brighter: and root up and remove, woodde, ^ay, stubble, which cannot
continue against the force of the fire: 2. These. 1. 7, 8. 1. These. 4. 16. 1.
Cor. 15. 52. Matt. 24. 31.
When the Lord Jesus shall show himself from Heaven with his mighty Angels in
flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them that do not know God, etc.

Lastly, this argues the worlds folly, that labors to labor, and carketh
to care, never taking out his Quietus est, for those things that are reserved
unto fi^e: which draws many, through their wicked practices thereabout, into
the horrible fire that we shall ^ntreate of afterward.

The third Chapter.
Of the uncertain and unknown time of the worlds end.
Having fore showed the manner of the worlds dissolution, which we rather call
an immutation then corruption, and a translation from a w^rser to a better
condition: like as when we of children become men: of men, old men, we are not
destroyed but changed in nature: the fire not consuming the world, but
restoring it: as the fire consumes not the gold, but refineth it: by the
method of the place, it would be considered concerning the time of the
duration thereof, what is to be determined, wherein we will desire to know
no more then the Scriptures have revealed: From whence we have no certainty,
but rather the uncertainty is every where spoken of. As where Christ says:
Matthew. 24. 36.
Of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels of heaven, but my
father only. In Mark he excepteth against himself to leave the high knowledge
thereof only to his father: Mar. 13. 32.
Neither the son himself, save the father. Which is to be understood of his
humanity: which naturally and ordinarily knows nothing ^erein: but as it is
taught by a better schoolmaster namely his Divinity. When the Apostles put
forth the question to Christ: (...) 1. 6.
Lord will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel? Their answer was,
that the knowledge thereof was to deep mystery for them. It is not for you to
know the times or the seasons, which the father has put in h^s own power. It
is Christ's watchword to the world. Matthew. 24. 41. Matt 2^. 13. Mark 13. 33.
Ye know not what hour your mu^^er will come. Ye know not the day nor the
hour, when the son of man will come. Ye know not when the time is But (...)
it is not far of we are sure. So Paul teaches: 1. Cor. 13. 11.
To admonis^, us, upon whom the ends of the world are come: Apo^. 16. 15. 1.
John. 1. 18. (...) Genesis cont. M^nic^. cap. 2^.
Saint John is as plain. It is the last time. Augustine says unto Hesychius,
who was curiously inquisitiue of the worlds end, That he dare not give the
adventure to measure the length and the scope theref, seeing the Angels and
Son of man himself are ignorant hereof. But in his first ^ocke upon Genesis
against the Manichies, he gives six ages to the life of the world, as the
life of man is disposed, and divided into several sundry ages, through which
as his life pass, so the life of the world goes away. By casting the world
into sire, ages, he follows the set number of days which were sire, wherein
the whole form and frame of heaven and earth were made and finished. The first
age is the time from Adam to Noah, or to the stood, which he compares to our
infancy. The second is, all the time from the flood to Abraham's days, which
he likeneth to our childehoode. The third is, all the time from Abraham to
David, which he suteth to our youthful age. The fourth is, all the time from
David to the transportation of the people into Babylon, which is answerable to
our man's estate. The fifth is, all the time from the captivity to the
Incarnation of Christ, which has reference is our old age. The sixth is, all
the time from Christ, to the very end it self, John. 2. 18.
which is our decrepit estate and condition, which is called by Saint John, The
last hour. After which follows the seventh day, even the Sabbath of our
endless rest.

But in regard of the notable chaunges thereof, the world may be drawn to a
narrower room, and more simply be distributed into four ages only. The
first is the time from the Creation to the Flood, which we may rightly term
the infancy and Child-hoode of the world, Genesis 4. 21. 22. etc. Genesis 4. 26.
Gene. 3. 15. Exo. 12 and 13. and 16. and 20. etc. Exodus 28. 21. 2^. Exo. 18. 5.
18.
for that theu Arts were first found out, and that with the first principles
and promises of salvation the godly were satisfied, and they worshipped God
after a simple and plain manner. The second, from the Flood extends it self
to the promulgation and publication of the Law, which for very good causes
we may woorthily call the youthful age of it. For then were men, far and
wide divided throughout all parts of the earth: Commonwealths were first
founded, and the beginning of the first Monarchy instituted, and the covenant
of salvation by God with Abraham our father indented, the lineage and descent of
the Messiah designed, Exo. 13. 3. 1^
and our universal redemption in the deliverance of the Israelites from the
Egyptian thraldom, typicallie represented. The third age comprehends the
whole time that was spent under the time of the Law, unto the coming of our
Savior in the flesh, as we find it divided by our Savior Christ himself,
Mat. 11. 1^
saying: The Law and the Prophets are unto John, etc. That was the ripe age
and manhoods of the World, it being then come to his perfect growth, for then
came in Magna Charta, the plenarie enrolment of the will of God, making the
consignement of the promises of God, by sundry Ceremonies, and opening them at
large by the Commentaries of the Prophets. Now as sorrows increase with
years, and the full age has fullness of troubles accompanying it: so many
perturbations did fall upon these times, and the whole world was, as it were
set upon Wheels, and up and down rolled with tragical comm^tions. The
fourth age ran upon the neck of this, wherein the Senne of God, in flesh
was manifested, which to the consummation of the world shall be continued.
This (as we noted before out of John) is called The last hour, 1. John 2. 18.
Gal. 4. 4.
otherwise called by the Apostle Paul to the same effect: The fullness of time:
so termed, because all the promises of God (excepting the general
resurrection, and judgment) are absolutely fulfilled, and shall make a full
end of the World. Now it agrees ful^ie with the nature of old age. For as
old men can not live long, (though young men may die soon) and they spend
their remainder of time, with cares infirmityes, and diseases enough: so we
can not promise to the world being in his old age any long continuance, or
that it shall be better then it is, but rather that the age of it shall be
more burdensome unto it, and make it to be worsser. This knowledge howsoever
sufficient for us, satisfies not others folishly curious, aiming at the very
exact time of his dissolution, by these ^riuolous conjectures.

These have found out a simple shift for themselves to answer Christ's words,
The day and hour knows no man, instnuating that we may have a guess at the
time though we know not the nicke and exact part of the time. But their
sophistry will not serve the^ For Christ's ^^plie to the ^psie qu^stion of the
Apostles in these words. It is not for you to know the times, cutleth off their
cauilling ^^stinction of time it being in the Greek (...) Times and seasons,
Act 1. 7.
wherefore their cunning comes out of time. Neither will that out of Matthew
do them good whereby they would take a measure of the time, when (...) world
should have (...), Math. 24. 14.
in these words: And this Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached thorough
the whole world, for a witness to all nati^ns, and then shall the end come.

Augustine answers them thus, the Lords coming shall not be until the
Gospel be dispersed throughout the world: But how soon he shall come after
this is thus published, it is not from hence gathered. The Gospel was generally
notified to the world in the Apostles time, who by their continual tedious
perambulations had sent the sound thereof into all lands, Romans 10. 18. Psalm.
19. 4 Col. 1. 6.
as Paul in his letter to the Colossians writes thus. Which is come unto you
even as it is unto all the world, and is fruitful, as it is also among you: and
yet ever since the world has continued. But there are many rely upon idle
dreams as upon familiar deuiles. The Mathematicians do look for a great
year, as Cicero shows, after which all the stars shall return to their
beginnings, and then the end of the world shall be. Baldus in Cicero, puts in
this spoake, This conversion how long it will be is a great question: but it
is necessarily certain and definite. Macrobius out of the opinion of natural
philosophers does set down a great year, which he calls the worlds year.
Making it to confist of fifteen thousand years, as the Sun measures them.
Augustine acquainteth us with the fancies of some in his time, who assigned
four hundred years after the assention of Christ unto heaven: of others who
^^cr^ed five hundred: of others who spoke of a thousand: after the expiration
whereof the world should have an absolute vastation. But their uttermost
prefixed time having long been out of date, their vain assertions are
sufficiently reproved. Others there are that are carried away with oracle
derived from the traditions of the Hebrews, which they would bear us in hand
they had learned of Elias and out of his school house, and restrain the
worlds duration to (...) thousand of years which they to part equally into
these (...). 1. Two thousand spent be o^e the time of the law. 2. Two thousand
under the law (...) 3. The last two thousand to the kingdom of Christ, dep^ted
so as (...) ^eeing the year of grace revealed 1603. (as it pleases learned
men so supp^te,) this is the five thousand five hundredth (...) eight year of
the worlds age: So that of this account there (...) ye four hundred ^eeres
to be consummased. This reckoning has ^^nne the more currantly, in that they
apply these six thousand years to the six dates, wherein God created y^ world^
inasmuch as the Prophet says. A thousand years in thy sight are as yesterday:
P^^l. 9^ 4^ 2. Pet 3. 8.
and it ^^in Peter: One day is with the Lord as a thous^^d years, and a
thous^nd years as one day. Heere^pon they make this interence: as in h^da^es
the world was (...), and in the seventh was the s^bbath of the Lord, wherein
he tested. So after six thousand years accomplished the world shall be
^est^o^ed, and in the seventh shall our eternal fabb^th he fulfilled, and in
the eight the purity of our circumcision re^o^ed. We read also of another
fraternity and brotherhoode, who ^^liuer that the ^^sticali body the church,
shall abide three and thirty years here in ca^th, as Christ himself (...) so
long in the bod^e which he took from the Virgin. But they make every of those
^eeces of a wonderful widenes, putting fifty years to every one, to make
every year a year of Iubilee. But this and such like are ver^e fr^^uolous
fictions. It is naturally engrafted in the mind of man to desire novelties, and
to affect strange courses, and so see is after a knowledge beyond al sob^tet^^:
to be curiously ^^quisttiue after ^^ages to come, and carelessly respective of
such things as are present. This is the cause why some give themselves unto
^^lawfull arts. and (...) themselves to be mocked and misled b^^ste Devil. 1
(...) 18 8. 9 etc. I^^ah. 8 19.
So did Saul who perceiving God to be angry with him* and the hand of the
Philisti^^s to be sore upon him* never sought unto God for his Quietus est to
have cou^sa^le or comfort from (...): But dec^^ous to know the censequent of
the case, he deliberated with (...) women who drove him headlong to
de^petation and destruction. Such madness now blinds, and be^^te^eth too
many, who by staring upon the startes will prognositcat the event and success
of every year, and so determine of the estate of it, as if they had the
heavens water in an brinall: with an impudent rashness denouncing wars,
fore-promising peace, prophisying of maladies in men and beasts, giving us many
good words of a good year, telling us a fair tale of the free passage of
religion, and comprehending in their speculation the perturbations and
mutations of all kingdoms. In the mean while they let slip greater matters
that are certain, revealed by the scriptures, touching faith, hope, charity,
and other godly duties requisite for a christian man weil to know, and to be
familiarly conversant in, which have no perpleritie or obscurity in them. But
in this Article especially, which is of the end of the world, men at all times
have been singularly busy and bold: Whereas the prophecies thereof (as
Augustine well says) are sooner perfected then perceived. This is one of the
Devils notable stratagems and devises, to set our brains a work with
circuler questions, endless and fruitles: thereby to withdraw our minds from
points of greatest needfulnes. The Apostle touches such, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 1. ^.
and wills the Thessalonians not to heed them that drop into their ears the
present coming of Jesus Christ in glory. Our age have brought forth men of no
base learning, Ephe. 56. Luke. 21. 8. Mar. 13. 5. Mat. 24. 4.
who in their books and sermons, have been over saucy and malipert in this
matter, as if they had been furnished with heavenly revelations, and as if God
had familliarly talked with them, as the father death with the child^. Math. 24
36. Mark. 12. 32
Now what heinous and detestable boldness is this to affect such a
metaphisicall, and supereminent knowledge, which goes beyond the wisdom of
angels and the wisdom of the son of man, as he is barely the son of man:
So we be wise unto salvation, we must content our selves with that which the
word delivers us, and seek no other scholma^ster, no though it were an
angel. Isaiah 8 20. Gal. 1. 8 9.
I care not what any Angel says, if he take not his text from the written
word of God, which we have with us. That which we say of an Angel, is to be
understood likewise of the spirits of those that are departed, as the history
of the rich man and Lazarus shows, who putting up his bil of request unto
Abraham, Luke. 16. 29
that some doctor out of another world from the company of the dead, might be
sent to preach unto his brethren, he was denied his suit, and told that Moses
and the Prophets were sufficient, and that if they could not reclaim them,
their case was incurable: this his new found affected monster could do no good
upon them. What need have we to seen beyond the scriptures for any thing
belonging to the work of our salvation, when (as Paul says) an Angel is not
to be cred^ted, but so far as he comes with scripture? The object and
subject of the word being Christ. Gal. ^. 8.
how should it not be stored with all kind of wisdom? Who of God is made unto
us, wisdom, and righteousness, and santification, and redemption: The written
word of God endited by the spirit, is in all numbers absolute as Paul teaches.
I. Cor. I. ^0. Iere. 13. 5. ^. 2 Timothy 13. 16. 2. Pet. 1. 10.
The whole scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to
teach, to improve, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of
God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works.

It was requisite that this time should be concealed and not discovered to us.
That we might arise the better from that bed of security, into which we were
cast as Iezabell was cast upon abedde of fornication. Christ takes up this
argument, as an instigation to us to more forwardnes and faithfullnes in our
duty: Watch therefore, for ye know not when the master of the house will
come, Mark 13. 35. 36. 37.
at even or at midnight, at the cock crowing or in the dawning. It is our
manner to serve God as law^ers do their cliants, with delays, and to put off
duties of religion and devotion to after times, promising our selves that we
shall live long and see many good days. But while we are in the fashion of the
world in Zachary ^in time, Zach. 1. ^1.
of which it is said, All the world sits still, and is at rest, the Echo
and answering voice from heaven will be this. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. Apoca. 3. 3. and
16. 15.
When they shall say peace and safety, then shall come upon them sudden
destruction, as travel upon a woman with child, 2. Pet. 3. 10. Math. 14. 44.
and they shall not escape. Wherefore the uncertain suddaines of the worlds
end is effectual to dispell desidiousnes, and to stir us up to watchfulnes,
to live as if the present day were the last, Apoca. 20. 1^
and to make our books even, as if out of hand God would keep his Audit among
us and take a straight account of us.

Omnem creed diem tib^ diluxisse su^remum.
Think every day the last: that here abode thou have.

A Poet spoke it and every Christian may well repeat it. It thou were called to
a table furnished with fifty or three score platters of good meat, s^uing
only that de^dly poison is in one of those chargers, and thou art to^oe so
^^uch before but art ^ot certified in which of them it is: Doubtless in the
tender regard which thou have of the li^^. thou would mistrust every di^h,
and forbear all together, least in that which thou tastest thou should be
taken: It is thus with thee, thou have here fifty or three sco^e years to
live, and in one of those, death shall certainly seize on thee, and thou
know not in which of them he will attach thee: wherefore doubt every one I
advise thee, and look circumspectly abo^t thee Seeing our pater patria, and
(...) are in heaven, we are Pilgrims and Trauailers upon earth, as al our
Fathers were and we have a ^ourney to go namely to Jerusalem, a City, whose
builder and workman is God, and a swift Horse we have to carry us thither,
let us gird up our reins, put our Sandols about our feet and prepare for the
voyage. What man knowing that he is to live in England will purchase and build
in Spain? But such fools are we, looking to live in heaven, we consume our
selves with care how to live here in earth. I do not impartinently degresse
from the matter, in putting two ends together of the world, and man's life. For
the same consideration is to be had of them both; there being such a kind
Simpathye and aff^nite between them. For death in Scripture is called the way
of all flesh, ^osua. 23. 14.
and the common inevitable condition of death is imposed upon all. But there is
nothing more certain then the uncertainty thereof as daily proof teaches.
Job his Sons and Daughters, Job 1. 19.
when they were feasting^ in their elder Brothers house, little thought that
death was so nie them in a whirlwind, which threw the four corners of the
house over them. 1 King. 16. 10
When Elah was drinking in his Stewards house in his capable Goblets eue^ unto
drunkenness, he did not imagine there to be done to death by Zimri. Did Babylon,
was bare the title of the Lady of the kingdoms, and was called Tender and
Delicate, Isai. 47. ^. 5. 7. 8.
who presumed of herself that she was like Mount Syon, not to be removed,
and therefore said, I shall be a Lady for ever: I am, and none else: I shall
not sit as a Widow, neither shall know the loss of Children: Did she (I say)
that thus swelled with pride, dream that this sentence should so soon have
been read over he^ Thine end is come? Ierem. 51. 13.
wherefore to such as say^^ Isa^ah: Isai. 56. 12.
Come I will bring wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink and to
morrow shall be as this day, and much more, which (...) but the merry
madness of one hour. I^^nes remooueth th^^ (...) from their eyes that
blinds them, and lo^teth them see the nice and ^ickle est ate wherein they
stand thus censuring their folly. Iam. 4. 13. 14. 15.
Go to now ye that say, To day, or tomorrow we will go into such a City, and
continue there a year and buy and sell and get gain, 1. Cor. 4. 19. Act. 18.
21.
and yet cannot tell what shall be tomorrow. For what is your life? It is even
a vapor that appears for a little time, and afterward vanishes away. No
glass or pitche^ of earth is more brickle then the body o^ man, as being
nothing else but a house of clay, whose foundation is the dust. For a noisome
savor, an infected air, a day little more then ordinarily hotter, some what a
larger supper, excessive either sorrow or pleasure, is as it were a blow of a
hammer that knocks the sides of t^is frail vessel together. A little labor
cracketh some, a little love othersome, unkindness is some man's coro^iue, 2.
King. 4. 8. Macc 5. 9. etc. 1. Kin. 15. 23. 2. Chr. 16. 12. Lam. 2. 11. 12
Ezec. 16. 49.
and his pleasant wine is his ^o. This man complains of headache with the
Sunamites son: that man has con^ulsion in his bowels with Antiochus. A third
man cries out of the gout in his legs with Asa. Some perish through
pe^utie, as the sonne^ of Jerusalem: and other some are slain, surfetted
through satietie, as the Sodom^tes: many are dispatched by violent death many
kind^ of ways; Math. 2. 16.
some in their cradle, as the Babes of Bethlehem: some in their Parlar as
Eglon. some in the field as Saul: Judge. 3. 12. 1. Sam. 3 1. 4. 2. Sam. 4. 5. 6.
1. King. 2. 29. etc.
some in their bed, as Isbosheth: some between the Porch and the Altar, as
Zenacharib: some at the very horns of the Altar, as Duke Ioab: some by water,
as Pharaoh and his Princes of Egypt: some by fire from heaven, as the Co^onels
with their fifties: Exodus 14. 27. 2. King. 1. 10. 2 Kin. 16. 18. Number. 16. 31.
32.
some by fi^e from the earth, as Z^mri: some by y^ rupture and opening of the
earth, as Datha^ and his accomplices: some by wind, as lobs sons and
daughters: some by dogs as Iesabel: some by worms, as Herod: some by Lions
as the disobedient man of God: Job 1. 19. 2. King. 9. 33. Acts. 12. 23. 1. Kin.
13. 24. 2 King. 2. 24. Ester. 7. 6.
some by Bears as the graceless children that mocked the Prophet: some by the
Gallows as Haman: some by a G^at, as Pope Adrian the fourth: some by a hair
in their (...) as a certain Ro^ an Fabius the Senator: some by the stone of a
R^^s^n as Anacreon: we come into the world one way: but we go out of it by a
thousand. We marvel not that a clock is soon out of ^elter, because it
consists of so many slender pieces: our bodies standing of so many weak
iunctures, why should we admire the soon decay of it? Death knocks us on the
head like a hammer: goes through the loins of us like a sword: entangleth
every one of us like a snare, as a prison keeps us forth-comming: as a sea,
ingendreth us all: and it is the tribute money that we must all disburse to
nature. Wherefore as watchmen are set to those places where they fear the
enemy will come, though his coming be uncertain: so because our enemy death
will beset our bodies and souls, and his coming is daily to be feared and
looked for, let us set good ward and watch about them both, that we may be
appointed for him when he comes, that we may not be affraide when we meet
him in the gat^.

The fourth Chapter.
Showing the signs of the worlds end.
THe saying of the Prophet Amos, is very memorable in these words: Amos 3. 7.
Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secrets unto his
servants the Prophets. He brought the Flood upon the first world, Gene. 6.
3. 18. and cha. 7. 1. 20 Genesis 19. 7. 9. 2. Pet. 2. 7. 8. 9 Exodus 5. 1. and 6.
10 and 7. 10. and 8. 6. 13. 17. 21. and 9. 3. 10. 23. and 10. ^. 13. 22.
but they were told of it a hundred years before by Noah. Sodom and
Gomorrha, and the neighbor Cities were burnt to Ashes, but this judgment was
formerly denounced by Loath. He brought his vengeance and fierce wrath upon
Pharaoh. but he had fair warning thereof by Moses aforehand. Thus God
threatens the worlds end, but he gives us signs, which are the Preachers and
forerunners of the end. That God does this, invincible argument that he loves
us, and that he is loath to undo us. For wished he our destruction, he would
not prevent it with so wholesome admonition. For the Huntsman that seeks the
death of the Hare, threatens not the Hare, but warily watches him, the better
to set upon him: but God threatening us before, it is a sign he would have us
take heed of that which follows. The Genttle had an eye to this, who took
coniectutes of consequent calamities, by some pre^^^ accidents, according to
that which the Poet says: S^pe malum hoc nobis, si men's non laeua fuisset,
De Coel^ tactas memini praedicere quercus.
This evil to us if that our minds had not been fondly bent,
Thunder from heaven upon our Oaks did threaten such eue^t.


That we should be grounded in the certainty of the worlds end, though we
know not the certainty of the time, these signs and marks are given us. The
signs prefired, partly are such as are known unto us, and familiar to our
senses: and partly they are such as exceed natures course, and are very
strange and fearful to ronfider of. But they all serve to set forth the
corruption and consumption of the worlds body, as Ulcers, diseases, distort,
and luxate members forespeake the dissolution of the natural body. This is no
strange and uncouth case (as we have said before) but it is Gods wont so to
do. Genesis 9. 14. Eccl. 43. 11. 12.
He made peace with Noah, but the Raine-bowe which he placed in the Heaven,
was the consignement of this Charter and indentment. Ezechias rece^ueth promise
of ensuing health, 2. King. 20. ^. 11. Isai. 38. 5. 8. 2. Chr. 32. 24.
and of longer life: And the recesse of the Sun and shadow, certain degrees
binds and confirms it. In this sort by signs are we assured that the
world shall be dissolved.

The signs expressly nominated in the holy Scriptures, Matthew. 24. 29. Mark.
13. 10. Luke 21. 8. 9. 27.
are by Matthew, Mark, Luke, diligently set forth, and put together thus: 1
The first is corruption of doctrine, and seduction by impostors and deceyuable
teachers, noted by the penmen of the Gospels in these words: Matthew. 24. 5.
Colos. 2. 18. Matthew. 24. 6.
Many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many. 2
The second is wars, and rumors of wars, in these words: Ye shall hear of
wars, and rumors of wars. 3 Motions, commotions, and subuersions of Empires,
Matthew. 24. 7.
and dominations thus, delivered: Nation tha^ rise against nation, and realm
against realm. 4 Pestilence, (...) Famine, 6 Earthquake, in the end of the
seventh verse, of the 24. Chapter of Saint Mathews Gospel, hudled together.

7 The persecution of the Church by the false Brether^^, the brethe^^ of (...)
chur^^ in these wo^ds (...). (...) 14. 9. Io^n. 15. 20. and 16. 2. Math. 10. 17.
The^ shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you, and ye
shall be hated of all nations for my names sake. 8. Defections in the church
and int^stine perturbations and diuisione between k^dred and al^e^ in these
words opened: Math. 24. 10.
And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate
one another. And that an insolent nei^hbour-hood, and Ero^^erhood shall do
this, Mark. 13. 12.
Mark forete^^eth. The Brother shall deliue^ the Brother to death, and the
father the Son, and the Children shall rise against their Parents, and shall
cause them to die. 9. Generally, of iniqui^ie and detection of charity, are
tokens of a cousumption in the worlds body, in the same Cat log of ^ehearsed
malignities put down. Math. 24. 12.
And because iniquity shall be increased, the love of many shall be cold. 10.
The coll^men of the church throughout the Gentiles and al^^ations and the
dispersion of the Gospel among all lano^s, to the ends of the world, is
another presagement of the worlds and And this Gospel of the kingdom shall be
preached throughout the whole world, Math. 24. 14.
for a witness to all nations, and then shall the end come. 11. The
abomination of desolution, setting up a Monarchy in the holy place, with the
rest witnesses the worlds desolution. When ye shall see the abhom nation of
desolation, Math. 24. 15. Mark. 13. 14. Dan. 9. 27.
spoke of by Daniel the Prophet standing in the holy place. etc. 12. The
coming in of dececiuable and damnable spirit, false Christ's and false Prophets
is an other essential mark of this matter: Math. 14. 24. Luke 17. 23. 2.
These. 2. 3
For there shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets, and shall show great
signs and wonders, so that if it were possible, they should deceive the very
elect. 13. Prodigious, Aspeas in the heaven, strange Ecclipses of Sun and
Moon, palpable and more then Aegiptian darkness, afearefull fall of the
Startes, a shaking in all the powers of head^^ do prophecy this point: Mat.
24. 29. Dan. 7. 13. Apocal 1 7. Joel. 2. 31.
The Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, and the
Stars shall fall from Heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken.
Descend from the air to the earth, which gives us no less fearful tokens
hereof, as troubles and perplerities among the nations, roarings in the sea and
al^^ps, palpitatious torobbings, and thrauings in all hearts, in expecttion of
so terrible destruction. Luk 21. ^5.
Upon the earth trouble among the nations with perplex^tie: the Sea, and the
waters shall roar. And men's hearts shall fail them for fear, and for looking
after those things which shall come on the world. 14 The sign of the son of
man in the el^udes shall be set up as a banner of the approach and end without
end. Luke 21. 25.
Then shall they see the son of man come in a cloud, with power and great
glory. 15 Lastly to trusse up the bundle hereof, a supine security in the
hearts of men, eating, ^rinking, huing in daliance (as they did in Noah's time,
whom the stood found so occupied and destroyed) shall possessie the world, and
shall betoken the end of the world. As it was in the days of Noah, L^k. ^^ 26.
Genesis 7. 5. Matt. 24. 38. 1. Pet. 3. ^0.
so shall it be in the days of the son of man: they eat, they drank, they
married wines, and gave in ma^iage unto the day that Noe went into the arc,
and the flood came and destroyed them all. 16 To the former, put var^etie or
nu^^itie of says. But when the son of man comes, shall he find faith on
the earth? Luke 18. 8.
These signs are of two kinds, 1 Some go before the Judgment. 2 Some go
hand in hand with it. Ma. 24 24. ^1 Matt. 24. 6. 7.
Of the first rank are these. 1 Adulteration of pure doctrine by false and
(...) doctors. 2 Wars and proclamations of wars. 7.
3. Plagur. 4 Famine. 5 Earthquake. 6 Catholic and general corruption to
manners. 12.
7 Decay of charity. 8 The progress and free passage of the Gospel. 14. 9. 10.
Martyrdom of good men. 10 Public scandale. 11 Settled and stiff-necked
secaritie. 21. etc.
12 Terror and horror among men. 13 Vocifiration and ex^ndation of waters.
Scco^dly, The signs that keep company with the Iudg^nt, are 1. The
obscuca^lon of the sun. 2 The E^l^pse and defect of the Moon. Matt. 24. 20.
3 The downfall of stars. 4. The lu^a^e and palse^ shaking disposition of
heavenly powers. 30. 30. etc.
5 The sign of the son of man. 6 The direful eiulation and lamentation of
the wicked. If we shall cursor^^e run over the (...) clasley, we shall find al
of them alread^^^ esse, really accoup^^e^. Man. 13. 21. Antiq. lib. 20. cap.
11. 12. 14
1 The first, adulteration of doctrine, has been long too (...) Josephus
speaks of ^able^^^s of such. who led the people into the wilderness and mount
of Olmes: and bare them in (...) that they were their Saviors: among others he
names the Egyptian named by Luke in the Acts of the Apostled. Act. 21. 38. 8
Chap. 5. 36.
This mischief like a Gangrene has far disperied it self: For all the
East-churches God after Mahomet, and the Pope has established the kingdom of
Antichrist very strongly in the Western parts. M^^h. ^4. 6. 7
2 Wars and rumors of wars have already been many and great. In lurie
there were successiue seditions, which partly were raised by their false
teachers, and partly by tyranous presidents were kindled. Wars after y^ death
of Neroe waxed very hot, the Romans being at civil wars among themselves,
every one catching his fellow by the head, and thrusting his sword in his
fellows side while there was claim made to the crown by Galba, Otto,
Vitellius, and Vespasia^, in whose second year Titus took the city which
together with the temple he quite consumed with fire. Matthew. 24. 7.
3 Plague. 4 Famine, are indiuided companions of wars, or servants that wait
at the heels of the Plagues, were long before threatened them for sin: as
where Moses says: Leuit. 26. 16. Lamen. 2. 17. Mal. 2. 2. Deuteronomy. 18. 21.
I will appoint over you a consumption and the bnrning ague to consume the eyes
and to make the heart heavy. The Lord shall make the pestilence to cleave unto
thee, until he has consumed thee from the land. The heavy stroke of Gods
hand herein have diverse parts of this our land of late years grievously felt.
Concerning samme, it was so fierce and fearful in Heirusalem as many died of
it, of which Josephus writes. Of a famine that came upon them the scripture
speaks. Matthew. 24. 7. L^b. 20. Antiq. Cap. 2. Act. 11. 28.
And there stood up one of them named Agabus, and signified by the spirit, that
there should be a great famine throughout all the world, which also came to
pass under Claudius Caesar. 5 It is enough that Earthquakes are foretold though
there be no further inrolement either of the place or of the time: Matthew. 24. 7.
yet Josephus makes relation of some things agreeing with this prediction. For
a year before the siege, Lib. 7. de bell^. (...). Cap. 12.
there was a star over the City seen like unto a sword: at nine in the
night, a light greater the^ the daylight shined in the Temple, which continued
half an hour. In the air were seen armed soldiors skirmishing together, and
a voice in the Temple was heard. Let us depart hence: But we need not wander
so far for proof of such prodigies. The Earthquake that happened in the year
1580. on the sixth of April, that shaked not only the scenicall Theater, but the
great stage and Theater of the whole land verifieth Christ's prediction. 6 A
Catholic corruption in manners and conversation, being another mark of
knowledge of the worlds consumption, has been long and is still really, and
substancially in action. And because iniquity shall be increased, the love of
many shall be cold. This prophecy took place in Christ's time, when he came
among his own, John. 1. 11. Mark. 14. 43. Luke 22. 47.
but his own knew him not. When Judas betrayed him, Peter forsware him, and
al his other followers persidiously did forsake him. And is the condition of
these times better^no truly, but far worser, and are come to all extremity,
John. 18. 1^.
iniquity having set up a Monarchy among us, and driven out all piety. The
word of God foundeth in our ears summoning us to repentance, that we may be
reborne, Luke 22 55 58 Mat. 25. 69. 71
and be made new creatures. But the more serious the holy ghost is with us, the
more slack we are to heed his suggestions, and more forward to apprehend all
unlawful motions, confronting the very heavens, and offering the combat unto
God himself. So it is therefore, that being wholly dedicated and given up to
our for^ide gain, we neglect al those things that make against it: we feed
upon hatred and malice without cause: we conceive filthy lusts and anger
implacable, and those that seem to be of the best sect, are set upon:
drunkenness, glottonie, carnality: which dulleth the mind, enfeeble the body,
disable the whole man, and turns him into an other nature of a man, making
him a beast. Due obedience to parents is not given, faithfulness between man
and wife is not kept, the rec^procall duty that is between the Master and the
Servant is neglected, and the love of both sides that is to pass currantly
between the magistrates and their underlings languisheth. 7 Put the seventh
sign of this sick and dying world to the former, Math. 24. ^2.
that is to say, defection of charity. The love of many shall wax cold, and
there is nothing wanting that may help to fulfill the measure of iniquity,
we swerve not from the right, if we proportion out the corruption of these
present times with the corruption of the times in the time of the flood: as the
Poet Graphically, and all the full has set them forth.

Viuitur exr^pto, Ovid Metamorph. Lab. 1. Fab. 4.
nec hospes ab hospite t^tus,
Neusocer a genero, fratrum quoque gratiarara est.
Imm net ex^tio vir coniugis, illa mariti,
Lurida terribiles nuscent aconi^a nouercae,
Filuis ante diem patrios inqui^ it in annos.
Victaiacet pietas, and virgo caede madentes,
Vl^^ma caelestum terras Astrea reliqui^*
Men live by spoil the host is not of guest from danger free,
The father in law from son in law, brothers seldom agree:
The wife is often the husbands bane, the husband of the wife:
The son does look before the time, the term of fathers life.
The stepmother likewise strong poison does prepare,
All piety is up to heaven in earth it is but rare.
Suitable to this saying of the Poet is this of the Apostle. Toward the latter
days shall come perilous times, 2. Tim 3. 1. 1. Tim. 4. 1. Jude 18. 2. Pet 3.
3.
wherein men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed
speakers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, and without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, intemperate, fierce, dispisers of
them which are good, traitors, headie, high minded, lovers of pleasures more
then lovers of God etc. All which large discourse and particular reckning, may
be concluded in this total and general sum in the sentence of our Savior,
Luk 18. 8.
When he comes he shall scarce find faith upon the earth. If this be not as
clear as the Sun, let any man go with cresset and torch light from the
center to the circumferice, and find me out a man, in whom some of these
properties is not proper, that walks eeuenly both with God and man without
any imputatio^ of reproof, to disprove and check this assertion. 8 The eight
token of the end of the world which is the preaching of the Gospel through the
whole world, according to that which Christ says: This Gospel of the Kingdom
must be preached through the whole world for a witness to all nations, Matt.
24. 14. Mark. 13. 10.
and then shall the end come. These words of our Savior being rightly
understood, has had his virtue and effect. For when persecution began to be
in Jerusalem, and the D^sciples were driven from thence, Act 8. 2. 3. 4. 9. 19.
they went preaching throughout all Judea, and went from thence into Samaria,
and illuminated that place with the light of the Gospel, where Philip
converted Queen Candaces Chamberlain the Ethiopian, by whose means, no
doubt, the knowledge of the truth was scattered among the Aethiopians. Also
while the Disciples were at a stand, amazed within themselves, doubtful what to
do, whether they might bear the word unto the Gentiles: Acts. 10. 1. 7. 11.
17. 44. Acts. 12. 24. Act. ^3. 1. 13. 14. 42.
this their st^die was broken up, Peter being advised by heavenly Oracle, to
join himself to the Centuri^^ Cornelius a G^n^tle the rest of the Apostles
coasting to Phaenicia, and Cyprus, and so spreading the Gospel over sea and
land. But Paul did sweat most of all other at this work, Act. 11. 4. 21. 2^.
who filled all the parts from ^ierusalem, with the Countries round about unto
Illyricum with the preaching of the word. Act. 14. 6. 13. 26.
And being in fetters, be wrote Eua^g^^cal ^etters from ye Iaile to the
Colossians, Act. 15. 35. 39 Act. 28. 30. 6. 31. Col. 1. Romans 1. 7. 11.
con^ratulating with the^ the large progress of the Gospel through the world.
The Gospel is come unto you, even as it is unto all the world, and is
fruitful, a^ it is also among you Now these words of our Savior: The Gospel
must be preached unto all Nations, are to be understood of the greatest part
of the Nations. The greaterpart have already had the preaching thereof, of
which Paul says: 1. T^m. 3. 16.
God is manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world. Now whereas some give a
check to this doctrine, inasmuch as the Antipodes, and such as are cast into
the cut-shifts of the world, have never hea^d so much as an inck^^ag of the
word, that is a stale jest, and it is a knot as easy as mar be to be undone.
For the words of Christ mean not every Cauton, tract, and stroke of the
world, neither have they an are to any set time when the Gospel shall be thus
strewed about: but the meaning is this, The Gospel which in respect of raging
persecutions, they thought should have been banished out of Judea, the
natural home thereof, shall disperse it self to the utmost ^artes of the
world before this general desolution, according to the saying (...) the
Psalmograph: Psalm. 19. 4. Rom 10. 18.
His found is gone into all ^andes, and ^^is words unto the end of the
world. Which words are also taken up for ^ext by Saint Paul. Therefore that
he speaks of all the world, is to be appli^d to the Jews and Gentiles, to
whom the Gospel is to be published: For into these two sorts of people the
whole world is dia^ded. Ioh. 15. 20. and 16. 2. Luke. 21. 12.
9 The ninth evidence of the worlds end, which is the massacre and martyrdom
of the saints, is as evidently as any come to pass. For have not Princes ^
words from age to age been ouer-drunken with the blood of the godly? Isa^ was
killed with a Saw: Ie^emie with stones; Dan, 6. 16.
Amos with a clubbe; Daniel was exposed (...); Paul was beheaved; Peter
crucified: In the ten p^s^co^ions which were three hundred years after Christ,
what erquis^^e (...) were devised, against good professors? rocks, rackes,
flees, and what not? In Europe how has the church been chaced like a Do,
tossed like a Ball, removed like a Tree by the bloody Beast of Rome now these
hundred years bypast? We cannot find a time, if we make a scrutinie of times,
either when the church was in her infancy, or when it was grown up to more
years, or in her latter days wherein the better sort hau^ not been put to the
worst and have been heavily handled. For Christ the object of their profession
is as Simeon prophesied, a a sign of contradiction, Lukk. ^. 34.
which the Apostles for Christ's sake as soon as they began to preach the word,
had lamentable experience off. 1. Pet 28. Act. 2. 11. 13
For when as those that heard them were astonished at them, speaking in
several languages the wonderful works of God: some immediately shot the^
through with the arrows of their bitter words, Act 3. 7. Act. 4. 1. 2. 3. 5.
7. 18. 21. Act 5. 17. 29. ^0.
saying They are all full of new wine. By and by after when Peter and John in
the name of Christ made the Creeple a sound Creature, the multitude grew mad at
this new miracle, and committed the Preachers to prison, and afterward drew a
grievous enditement against them, and not without great threats discharged
them which should come upon them, when they should adventure to preach again
among them. Not long after, the number of the faithful increafing, the high
Bishop with his swarm of Saduces, who then domin^red and ruled the roste at
Jerusalem, got the Apostles into their clutches, and laid them by the heels.
Acts. 5. 18. 19 29. 40.
And albrit God sent an Angel to bate them, yet the second time they had them
by the backs, and made no bones to have a set Sessions against them, wherein
they gave them the whip, and suspended them of their ministry. But they for all
that fors^^ke not their profession, but stood to their tackling, they caught
Stephen, Acts 6 8. Acts 7. 57. 58 Act. 26.
and call a counsel against him, and suborne false witnesses, and do him to
death. After which act followed an universal persecution. wherein Saul
bestirred his stumps in persecuting the second David. as if he had been
begotten of that Sa^^ that persecuted the first David.

At the last came in Herod Agrippa to play his parte^ who acted it to the
purpose, Act. 12. 1. 2 4.
falling upon the Church and making heueck of it, killing John the Brother of
James with the sword, Act. 14 6. 19. Acts. 16. 19. 22. 23. 24. 33. 25.
without order of law, his cause being never heard to currie favor with the
Jews: and for his cause shut up Peter in prison, and sent out his writ for
his execution. Finall^e the more the Church increased, persecutions increased:
for three hundred years after the Apostles times exceeding the persecuting
times of the Apostles. Whereof there were ten which the Roman Emperors s^ured
up. The (...).
Nero was the Author of the first, who for his fact of setting Rome on fi^e
having set the hearts of his Subjects on fire against him to quench the^e
coals, and to wind into their good wills again, Cornel. T^^it.
as Tacitus does report, who otherwise was a monstrous enemy to Christ, under
which persecution died Paul and Peter valiantly and carried away the crown.
The second Domitian in the year of Grace 86. Tertull de prascri^^ (...).
in the which the Apostle John was put into a Tun or Vessel of hot boiling
oil, which could not harm him, and so was afterward confined, and banished
into Pathmos. The third persecution is given Trac^an, in which Ignatius
suffered in the year of Christ, one hundredth and ten, being worried and
devoured of wild beasts. Antonius the Philosopher, in which were martired
Policarpus, Justinius, and many more in the year of Salvation, 170. The fi^^
most merciless nusereant against the Seuerus, who among others did to death
Leonides Origin in the year after Christ 204. Maximus Dreius under whom Saint
Lawrence was tortured, being roasted upon a Gridiron in the year 252. The eight
was stirred by Lyanus, who with the blood Cornelius and Simon, seeded and
watered the Church of God. Aurchan was chief actor in the ninth. In Dioclesian
and Maximianus had three hands full: Nicomedia confuted together for the utter
r^^^ing out the name of Christians. Whereupon by power of their ^^oclamations
sent out into all quarters of their domination* there was such a mighty
massacre made every where, as it is in register, that in one month,
seauenteene thousand of them were put to the sword. Acts and Monuments of the
Church by Master Fox.
This tempest continued for thirteen years. Neither have the times been
milder under Antichrist, as examples enough show, which master Fox in his
book of monuments store you with to which I do send you, having been prolixe
enough in this point, but I hope not unprofitable.

The tenth sign of this downefalling world, is public offense, and scandale
that shall arise. (...) 10.
And then shall many be offended. Ofthie scandale and offense there are two
sorts. 1. For first such as starte aside from the Gospel, take a scandale and
offense at the corruption of men's manners. 2. Secondly by their Apostasy and
defection they harde^ the obstinate, overthrow the weak, weaken the the
strong, moving great offension in their minds. The latter is the worst, and
badde is the best of them. This prediction could not otherwise be but
fulfilled. For many do nothing else but seek their private gain under
pretext and show of Godliness, and this is such a natural and common disease,
Math. 18. 1.
as the Apostles themselves were not clear of it, as their ambitions,
contentions about the Primacie, and the right hand and left hand in the
kingdom do witness. Math. 20. 20 Mark. 10. 35. Luc. 22. 24. 25. 26.
How should it then be shifted, but that gr^dge and offense must grow in the
minds of men when they see those great Candles whom Christ called the light
of the world ware dim and loose their light, Math. 5. 13. 14 15.
when they had a taste how the salt of the earth had lost his savor, when they
perceived how his hea^enly herauldes, Mark. 9. 50. Luke. 14. 34.
the preachers of his word, were poor, despised, afflicted, determined to
death, and made the spectacle in the Theater of this world, for men and Angels
to w^nder at?

At this day many are ^ffended when they see and hear, 1. Cor. 4. 8. 9. 3. 10.
13.
how men of good note, and chief place, sometimes wedded to their
superstitious vanities, have turned their copies, and have subscribed to the
veri^ie and are disgraced, and displaced for it. Yea whom should not such
things offend that are Christians, Luc. 2. Isa. 8. 14. Romans 9. 32 1. Pet. 2.
8. 1. Cor. 1. 23.
when as Christ was fore told by Simon that he should be a stone of offense:
for many to stumble at, which Paul witnesses saying: But we pre^ch Christ
crucified: unto the Jews even a st^^bling block, and unto the Graecians
foolishness. And it is well known what Christ humelie says to the point:
Math. 11. 6.
Blessed is he that shall not be offended in me. Paul gives iustance of such
of the Church as took offense ^so departed from the Church, as of Hymeneus and
Alexander, 1 Timothy 18. ^ 19. 20.
who made sh^pwracke of ^aith and conscience altogether. E^e-where he theweth
how riches have been a stumbling stone to ma^y, which has ^is^ed them from a
former good profession, and entangled them with many molestations. 11 The
eleventh sign of the end of the world, is a seated and resolved security,
which neither judgments from heaven, nor preaching in earth can dis^el out of
the hearts of men. Of which Christ says: Luke. 17. 26 27. 28. 29. 30. Genesis 7.
5. 1. Pet. 3. 20.
As it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be in the days of the son of
man, They eat, they drank, they married wives, and gave in marriage, unto the
day that Noah went into the Arc, and the blood came and destroyed the^ all,
etc. This sign these times, as those times have seen. Gods word is freely
preached, and never any age had so many learned preachers, and it is wonderful
how many convicted in their consciences, do^ confess that that which they
preach is the truth: yet we may send them to the judgment with this
superscription on their foreheads. Matthew. 11. 16. 17. 20. 21. 23. Luke 7 31. 32
Isai 62. 6. and 65. 2. Iere. 7. 21. 22. 23.
Noluerunt incantari, They would not be charmed: We have piped unto them, and
they have not daunced: we have mourned unto them, and they have not lamented:
we have stretched out our hands all the day long unto a wicked and gainsaying
people. Men walk after the flesh, and fleshly desires: and too many there be,
who make the Gospel, and the profession of holiness, the shrewde and mantle to
cover their licentiousness. Epicureous gormandizing is rife every where:
Ezec. 16. 49. 40. etc.
dr^nkennesse is without example, we are cast into as found a sleep of sin,
Genesis 2. 21. 22. Judge. 4. 17. 21. 2. Sam. 4. 6. Act 20. 9.
as Adam was when he lost a rib: as Sisera was when he was slain in his tent:
and as Isbosheth was when he was slain in his bed: and as Eutichus was when he
fell from the third loft. It is with the state of sin, as it was with
Dyonisius, who though he had bodkins thrust into his belly, so as the fat a
grease issued out, yet he had no feeling of it: so pierce we and wou^d sin as
much as we will, and it will not yield an inch for it. Been pungeris si
compungens, says Bernard. It were good thou had that punction, that would
bring thee to compunction. 12 The twelf forerunner of the worlds confusion, is
the terror and desperation that shall (...) by Luke in these words: Men's
hearts shall (...) fear, Luk 21. 2^. Mark 13 10. (...). 13. 24.
and for looking after those things which ha^^ (...) on the world: which
hitherto has been (...) home, and wars abrod, (...) all of a great death,
(...) pleagues new diseases never (...) before, have stricken us like the (...)
that flies by noneday (...) And as these outw^^d (...) come upon us, (...)
vering the inward conscience (...) such hold of some, as they could never be
(...): (...) 24. 11. 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2. 3. 2. Pet. 3. 3.
(...) and provi^^^ opinions in matters of faith, heritical (...) of
unspeakable Schisms and (...), not only (...) with vn^essie cogitations, but
plunging it into the bottomless pit of desperation. But this is but a light
(...) and conculsion in respect of that lamentable and unspeakable con^^s^on
and (...) of soul and body, Matthew. 25. 32. 33.
which shall be the scorpion to whippe them at the nick(...) of the direful
day of doom. Luke 13. 24. 27.
The woman that is with child has often many aylements and complaininges: as
of (...), and sickness of stomach, but all these are little and light, (...)
as it were, if we compare them to the sorrows which she (...) at the time of
her travail. when she (...) the clouds with her cries, and she ^hrobbinges
and throwinges of her soul do ascend up unto heaven: So the troubles of
these times are but tristes, to close that shall befall us in the extremity of
that time. 13 The thirteenth Preludium, and forewarning of the worlds end, is
the raging and roaring of mighty waters: Luke 21.25 Isa 13. 10. Math 24. 29.
The Sea and the Waters shall roar, which also has had his inchoation, though
not his perfection, as many unseasonable by past years do witness, which
have brought forth many untimely terrible tempests and mighty inundations. To
these forespoken signs we must needs adioyne these other two, so pregnant and
notable. 1 The vocation of the Jews. 2 The Revelation of Antichrist. The first
is thus pointed at by the Apostle in these words, (...) 11. 25. (...) 28. 31.
(...) 59. 20. (...) 27. 9.
I would not that ye should be ignorant of this secret, that partly obstinacy
is come to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in. The sense
whereof is this, That the Jews shall not always abide in blind^es* but that
after the number of the Gentiles be collected, which is a great and full
number, signified by these his words: The fullness of the Gentiles: they shall
come in heaps, and (...) their names to Christ, and be (...) into the church,
and submit themselves to the obedience of (...), by which they shall (...). Of
these specialties, (...) this calling shall be, (...) Of the manner how it
shall be (...) Or of the numb^r of them that shall (...) this grace, we can say
nothing, because the (...), (...) (...)
(...). (...)
Of (...) sealed twelve thousand: of the (...) were sealed twelve thousand.
(...)
(...) (...) shall give up the kingdom to (...) and how he must reign until
such time as he (...) and put them under his (...) by these (...) The like he
deliu^^ (...) Genuadies amongst others, (...) them all to favor again. Such as
(...) to expect such (...) But I (...).

For (...) of the Church, and always withal the (...) they could, (...)
did kick against Christ: so among the Jews there shall be some such humorous
fellows, as shall express the peruers^^sse of their ancestors Also al Israel
is to be taken but for a part of Israel, according to the usual phraise of the
scripture. For universal propositions in the scriptures, are often contracted,
and implie an universality that is definite, as in these places: All flesh
shall see the salvation of God. 1. Tim. 2. 4.
Again, They shall be all taught of God. Also God will that all men shall be
saved, which is to be understood (as August says) of all that are saved: for
they are saved by the will of God But the greatest matter that they have to
oppose against this point, is the saying of our Savior: Luke. 18.
Do ye think that when then son of man shall come, he shall find faith in
earth? But, say they, If there shall be such a popular conversion unto Christ,
there remains much faith upon earth, which Christ shall find at his coming.
We thus easily dissolve this doubt, and reconcile these repugnant places in
appearance. 2. These. 2. 3. 1. Sam. 19. 13. Of the principles of their faith,
swaruing from the truth. See D. Reinolds 5. conclusion, enlarged. An 1602.
For Antichrist has turned al religion vp-side down, insomuch as the
principles of their faith no more fit the right faith, then the counterfeite
that Michell placed upon the pillow, was like unto David: so that if it were
possible, the elect should be seduced, but being smit through by the sword of
the Spirit of Christ: The Jews may well return and acknowledge their Messiah,
and confirm and establish the seduced Gentiles: we also answer thus, that
after this universal conueonrst of the world anew, Apostacy and security may
follow, which may quench the fire of the spirit, and so they may be relapsed a
fresh into their former filthiness, which shall be the cause that God shall
abridge, and shorten the worlds age for his elects happiness.

There is no absurdity or inconvenience in any of these two answers. Romes 7.
hills described by Virgil. Georg. 2 in fine, by Proper^^us Elog (...) lib. 3 by
Varro. lib. 5. 2. These. 2. 3. Apoc. 18. 6. Apo. 17. 2. 13
I charge not the Reader with one more then the other, but leave each of them
to his choice, it being nothing material unto our salvation, busily to bolt
out which is the best of them: 2 The second of the last two signs of the
worlds end, is the manifestation of Antichrist, of which Paul speaks,
saying: This day of Christ shall not come before there be a departure first,
and that man of sin be disclosed, even the son of perdition, which is
Antichrist. This sign is already given, for the Pope is this huge and
absolute Antichrist, in the judgment of Pope. For Gregory the eight of that
name Pope of Rome in the year of our Lord 602. willed us to take this for an
infallable mark of Antichrist, the name of universal Bishop, and whosoever
shall arrogate that title to himself, he concludes him to be Antichrist. But
five years after, Boniface succeeding him, was by Phocas the Emperor called
Universal Bishop. And ever since every following Pope continues the title.
By consequence then it is manifest that at Rome is the Antichrist: who so
lists further to be satisfied in this point, let him read the learned book
of Doctor Whittakers against Sanders sortie demonstrations in this case: and a
set homely of Gualters to this purpose: and a late book of Doctor Downams, D.
Downam his treatise of Antichrist, published An. 1603.
and many others that have labored in this business to assoile at questions,
and to clear it of all further contradiction.

By this which hitherto has been declared, we may evidently perceive if we
will not be blind with Balaam with our eyes open, and groape with the Sodomites
for a wall at noone day: that the worlds best days are spente, and that the
destruction thereof is at hand. Number. 21. 22. and 23 etc. Genesis 19 11.
There is no greater sign of a dying man then when thou feast him snatch the
sheets and blankets of the bed, and forciblie draw them to himself: but
this we see every where in the course of the world, wherein every one catches
what he can, drawing other^ goods into their hands with cartropes of
covetousness, wherein they have their sicophantes at hand to sooth them in their
sin, and their oppressing iniquity. Pharaoh had servants at hand to magnify
Sarahs beauty, Gen 12. 15.
thereby to sit themselves to the kings fancy. Another certain sign of a
perishing body is the coldness of the body. Therefore it is said of David
when he was toward death, that ^e was so cold as no clothes could heat him:
1. King. 1. 1,
and so for want of heat died. Wherefore when every one begins to die, his
feet, hands, nose, and other parts ware cold, upon sight whereof his
Physicians pronounces him to be a dead man. This is the state of the present
world, wherein charity is at the coldest, and at the last gasp, having taken
farewell of the world: virtue, verity pity, piet^e, are so (...) practiced
as they are not spoken of, nay scarce thought of. Sermons are seldom heard of
us, and less regarded, and the shortest are the sweetest unto us: for out
feet are as it were in the stocks till they be ended: we may take up the
Prophets moan. There is no truth or mercy, (...)
or knowledge of God in the land. By swearing, and lying, and killing and
stealing, and whoring, they break out, and blood touches blood. These
carbuncles and putrefying sores we plainly see to abound in the worlds body,
whereby we do determine the s^eedy death of that botle. But all these signs
hitherto specified do come before the judgment. (...) 24. 29. 3^ (...) 13. 24.
Luke 21. 25. Isa. ^3. ^^ Ezekiel. 32. 7.
I^remaineth now that we entreat of those that a^to^pany the (...) A^ 1. the
^bscuration and obfuscation of the (...) 2. The (...) darkness of the moon. 3.
The fall of heavenly stars. 4. The co^^^ction of ecl^stial powers. 5. The sign
of the Son of man: 6. Of the coming of the son of man in the clouds, we shall
entreat more specially in his proper place. I may not curiously (...) into
(...) points, and portray out unto you the (...) co^ntenance and (...) aspect
of ye world which it will then (...). Mark. ^3. 33. 34. 35. Math. 14. 42.
These rather serve as prepara^^es to incite us to watchfulnes become that we
may stand at that day: and that we might consider how dreadful a thing sin
is, Ro^. 8. 19. 20 21. 22. 23.
which is the procurer of these dreadful (...). For (...) it not for our
sins these creatures should not travel in th^^^ ^^rowes. For what have they
be served that they should be so punished? But because they look not Gods
part and rose up against (...) when we rose against God, this cu^se shall
light upon them, (...) ^5. 23. 14 25.
and we say the sentence of the Angel in the (...) of Deborah upon them, read
over others in the like case, Curse ye Meroz, Curse the inhabitants thereof,
because they came (...) help the Lord, to help the Lord against the mighty.
Because the (...) ga^e thee light when thou (...) in the works of darkness.
(...) shall ^e (...) day. Because the (...) did warmeth^^, and did (...)
wickedlie, it shall be (...). God shall fight against (...) they would (...)
against thee when thou (...) fight against God. (...) they are rightly served.
For it is (...) to take (...) of sin, Deutr. 20 20.
as of sin if (...) by God, that when the Israelites should besiedge (...)
their enemies, they should lay their woo^es and (...). And it was a statute in
Israel that he that sinned (...) Exodus 22.
should die with the beast. Now the beast that was to die or the (...) were net
in the sin, but because (...) was no (...) to be showed (...) commanded to
(...) the cattle of (...), no more then the stone walls of (...) which Joshua
tumbled down. (...)
So God brought (...) upon the Serpent, commanding him always to go upon
his (...) not that the Serpent sinned but (...) to speak out of him (...) was
(...) since.

(...), serve onley for the extent (...). For when the godly see these (...) up
their (...), because their Salvation is at hand. (...) wicked that would not
stand (...) confounded at the signs of a God of judgment. 2. Sam. 14 3^
When A^solon cou^de not draw Ioab (...) use: by (...) grounds he made him
take his part. God has two stri^ges to his bow: if one will not serve,
another shall: I^ the (...) will not convert us, (...) of Damascus and there
le^^ (...) power, (...) all their come s^^des, (...) came upon (...) when (...)
(...) (...)
(...) say, when he shall see these (...) If men (...) darkness of (...),
(...)
(...) see another or remoou^ out of his place: If they quake at every
earthquake, If a ra^ling wind goes to the heart of them* If the roaring of the
Sea, any noice at midnight dismaieth them, If the skritchings of Serpents and
Dragons cut them to the quick, what heaps of perturbations shall run upon
the damned sort, when these things here spoken of shall play their last act
upon the fiery stage of this world? Math. 27. 45. 51. 52. 53. Mark. 15. 33.
38. Math. 27. 54. Mark. 15. 39.
In the day of Christ's passion for man's salvation, the Sun laid down his
light, and darkness ouer-clouded all the face of the earth: much more when the
righteousness of the son of God shall execute judgment, shall the sun
forbear to show himself, or to run his course, but shall hide himself in
his chamber, that the sinner may tremble at the judgment of Christ, as the
Centurion, was astonished at these tokens at the suffering of Christ. Math. 24.
29. 30. Mark. 13. 24.
But as all the elements, and heast of heaven and frame of the world shall
serve as soldiers to fight under his banner for the discomfiture and confusion
of his adversaries when he shall come to destroy the world: So have they from
the beginning of the same, Genesis 1. 26. 29 30. Psalm. 19. 1. 2. Exodus 7. 19. 20
21. Exodus 8. 6. 16 24. and. 9. 1. 10 23. and 10 13. 22. and 12. 29. and 14 27.
Number. 10. 1. 2 Number. 16. 28. 29. 32. 33. 34. Psalm 105. 16. 27. 28. 29. 30 31. 32.
34. 35. Exodus 7 20. Exodus 8. 6. Exodus 29. Psalm 104. 1 2. 3. 4 29. 32 etc. Ids.
10 10. 11 12 13 14. Ios. 6. 3, 4, 20
fought his battles against sinners. For as the whole world was made for the
use of man, and there is no part thereof but is a liuelye image of his
goodness to those that serve God: so when man sets his face against God,
and despise his commandments, God who is a man of war, whose name is Iehoua,
calls out these soldiers into the field against him, and they are fierce
excutioners of his judgments. Examples every where are obuious unto us: and
the examples of the Egyptians and Chananites are especially memorable, against
whom all the elements conspired, and put them selves in battle array against
them, while the heavens smote their grounds with hot thunderbolts, and
discharged haileshotte of hailestones to the fearful slaughter both of man
and beast: while the air mustred swarms of locustes and caterpillars
iunumerable, which did eat up all the grass in their land, and devoured the
fruit of their ground: whilst their rivers yielded frogs, which were brought
up to the kings bed chamber. The Sun and Moon took part with Joshua at the
appointment of God standing still in Gibea, and in the vallie of Aialon, and
refusing to stir an y^ch, till Joshua had his just revenge of his enemies. I
would that our minds were given more to the serious remembrance of these
forepassed judgments, then they are, that we might apply them to the pre^^
vn^aturall years that we have had of late, which have show (...) us many unkind
parts, by very hurtful tempests, rage and i^^undation of sea and rivers,
earthquakes, provigious birthes, ^^luck^e blasing stars, whereof I would fame
know what age has seen to many as ours within these last threescore years? In
which not only Comets have been common, Math. 24. ^^ 29. Mark. 13. 24. Luke 21
25. Isa. 13. 1^
but in many places crosses, swords, bloody spears, armed soldiers, lions,
and other such strange sightes full of terror, have very perspicuously
appeared in the air. Now that God scareth us not with fraybugges, his
following judgments by wars, commoti^ns, alterations of kingdoms, famine,
plagues, mortality, strange maladies, whereby he heaueth us by the shoulders,
and sets us on our feet, do witness well enough. But yet these are but
petty punishments, forerunners and breeders of a greater mischief, which when
the day comes must certainly come upon us. Math. 25. 2^^ 8. 11. 12. ^^ 33.
Among these latter signs given us by Christ of the worlds end, the sign of
the Son of man is nominated, Mark. 13. 34.
which some say is the body of Christ, bearing the signs of his sufferings,
as the wounds of his hands, feet, side: and other some say is the sign of the
cross. But the certainest sense is, to take the sign for the signification,
for those prodigious aspects lately named, and for the worlds combus^^n, which
is the sign of the son of man's apparition by S. Peter directly named.

We will give the use of this large discourse, 2. Pet. 3 7. 10. 11. 12. 13 14.
Math. 24. 29. 30.
and so we will conclude it. 1. First these signs serve as wholesome
admoni^on to dr^we v^ to a godly and holy conversation. It is the Apostle
Peter's application in the case, Ioe. 2. 31. etc.
who after mention made of these ^^full manner of the worlds destruction
comes in with this addition. Seeing all things must be desolued, what manner
of men ought we to be in holy conversation and godliness? The consequence is
good, for if all earthly creatures must be refined and ren^e^ by the fire: Much
more should the fire of Gods spirit burn in us which may consume the dross
of our dead works like s^uble, and perfect us that we may be wrought as it
were in a new ^oulde after the Image of God in righteousness and holiness. 1 Thessalonians 5. 2. R^u^. 16 15.
2. Secondly we are taught to gather from hence how grievous sin is which
is in the creatures of the world thus greiuously punished. Deutr 24. 8. Leuit.
13. and 14.
The leprosy of the Jews was to all that knew it wonderful: because it not
only did infect the whole man, but did clea^e to his garments, and to the
walls of the house. Luke 17. 12.
But the leprosy of sin is more to be wondered at, that not only polluteth
the body and soul of man, but ble^isheth and staineth the worlds glorious
eye even the glorious Sun in the firmament, and subiecteth the Moon and
stars unto vanity. Wretched therefore are we the whom the dregs of sin
are so frozen and conicalled, as we are become senceles in sin: not only
going up to the anckles, but diuing over head and ears in the gulf of sin.
We endure not to look upon the blaines and running sore^ of spitlemen, but
did we behold the sores of our sinful souls as they are in their natural
cor^uption, which rancle the very heavens many thousand miles of from them,
we would have, in all loathsome detestation, their most ugly and fipthie
abomination. 3. The third and last consideration we take from hence, is the
loving kindness of God and his unwillingness in punishing a sinner, according to
that which Isai says. God works a strange work, to bring his own work to
pass. Dij immortales nec volunt nec possunt obesse. The immortal Gods are
neither willing norable to hurt, says Seneca. It is his property always to
have mercy, as it is in the Antheme of the Church. And judgment is a strange
work unto him contrary to his nature: which he executes to make us owners of
his mercy, which is his own proper action. If God took any pleasure in
undoing the world, and worldly men: he would not come in this moving manner to
us, causing all the creatures of heaven to put on black garments. But even as
when the master of the house dies (says Chrysostom) all the household is
cladde in mourning weeds: so mankind, for which all the parts of the world
were made to be servants to them, being to be done away, all creatures follow
their funeralles with lamentations in their kinds, the orient Sun, Moon,
stairs do change color, and are in black array. Math. 24. 29. Mark. 13. 24.
A Painter is very loath to mar the whole proportion of the picture, for some
defection and imperfection that is in it: so God is very loath, to undo al his
workmanship in us, for some sins and transgressions that are in us. Many
Judges of Assise are so pitiful, as albeit they are to venounce the doom of
death against prisoners at the bar, as they weep when they deliver it: so
God does with us being sentenced for our unrepentant sins unto death. So he
wept when he ^rowned the first world: Genesis 7. Luke 19. 21. 41. 42. Math. 24.
29.
so he wept for the destruction of Jerusalem, and this affection he shows
in this habit of heavenly creatures, which they do on at the worlds
dissolution. There is many a hangman, who though he be never so butcherly bent
will bemoane the estate of his friend, especialli^ his kinsman, whose hand or
ear he is to cut off: Therefore God that loves us more then the father can
the child, or the husband the wife, cannot but be resolved into passions for
our condemnation. This doctrine you have often heard, but ye do but little
heed it, happily because ye do not believe it is so at hand. But these
signs hitherto spoken of makes it out of doubt. The king does purpose to
remove from one Court to another: and when report goes of it, many doubt of
it, because the prince many times does delay the time, but when the furniture
of the Court is taken down, then every one knows that he remoueth out of
hand: 1. Pet. 4. ^.
so it has been often preached in your ears, that the end of the world is at
hand, that Christ is coming to judge it, and ye arraigne God of slacknes;
Mark. 13. 24, 25.
but the remoual of this the worlds furniture this bu^^e doing which is not
in hand, flatly shows that these things are at hand.

The fifth Chapter.
Of the certainty of our resurrection.
THe resurrection of all flesh immediately with the worlds consummation comes
in place. Ioh. 6. 40.
So says Christ, I will raise him up at the last day. The like says Martha
(no doubt immitated in the school of Christ) touching her brother Lazarus: I
know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day: Ioh. 21. 24.
25.
Wherefore we are to deal with this article in this place.

There is a double resurrection. 1. Cor. 15. 34.
1. The one of our bodies. 2 The other of our souls. Of our souls when we
rise from sin: Of our bodies we rise from our sepulchers. That of our souls
is called the first resurrection. Reu. 11. 18. and 14. 1. 2. and 20. 12. 13.
The other of our bodies is called the second. A double death answers this
double resurrection. 1. The first death, which is of the unrepentant soul. 2.
The second which is everlasting death, the condition of the damned. We learn
of the Scriptures thus to distinguish of the resurrection. For the first and
second resurrection, The first and second death are mentioned in holy
scriptures. (...). 20. 6.
As by John in the Reuellation: Blessed, and holy is he, that has part in the
first resurrection: For on such the second death has no power: But they shall
be the Priests of God and of Christ. and shall reign with him a thousand
years. Where John by the first resurrection understands the resurrection of
the mind from sin to repentance. In the Gospel of John both these
resurrections are spoken of together: Ioh. 5. 25. 28, 2^.
The hour shall come and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the
son of God, These words belong to the first resurrection, and that does the
course of them declare, in that he says: The hour shall come and now is.
For no man will say that the hour of the latter resurrection was then. By the
dead therefore that should have lived, if they had had faith in Christ and
believed: he means such who by means of their sins, are without spiritual
life: of whom Christ in an other place, Math. 8. 22. Ephesians. 2. 1. 2 3
says Let the dead bury the dead. The like death is named by Saint Paul: You
has he quickened, that were dead in trespasses and sins. In his letter to
Timothy, he speaks of a living dead widow in the former sense: She that
lives in pleasure is dead while she lives. 1. Tim. 5. 6. Col. 2. 13.
We were all of us in this state of death before our justification by faith:
First by our original sin, and then by our actual sins, which we have
committed since of our own free will: wherefore it is more then needful for
us thus to rise from the dead. The blessed only share in this resurrection. In
the latter resurrection the commons common with us, as Christ shows in his
words of the latter resurrection: ^eue. 21. 3. 24 27.
Marvel not at this: for the hour shall come in the which all that are in
the graves, shall hear his voice. And they shall come forth that have done
good unto the resurrection of life, but they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of condemnation. But this first resurrection as not falling into
my purpose I mind not to meddle with.

In the handling of the resurrection, 1. Cor. 15. 12 13 21 29 30, 32 34 35, 36
38, 43.
we have in hand, we will first conclude the certainty thereof against all
gaine-saying adversaries. For the point is much pushed at with the point of
Sophistical allegations, which without difficulty we will do away well
enough. This Article has been exagitated by many, and many ways oppugned.
The Philosophers as absurd do renounce it: And there have been found too
many in the Church who have denied it. The Peripaticians as almost all the
sects of P^ilosophers have behaved themselves most rudely in this business.
The divinity that the school of Epicures professes in this point, is this.
There is nothing that remains after death. Seneca, though he be a friend to
the principle of the immortality of the soul, yet he is so gross, as to
avouch that all things are determined and ended by death. For writing unto
Martia, he s^ith: Mors omnium est solutio and finis, vltra quam mala nostra
non exeunt. Death is the resolution and period of all things, which bounds our
evils cannot exceed. Again, this is another of his proper Aphorisms. Non
potest e^^e miser qui nullus est. He cannot be a wretched man that is no man.
In these darkness lay almost all the rabblement of the Orators, Philosophers,
and Poets of the Gentiles. And if we shall ransacke the militant Church, we
shall find many monstrous minded men in this matter. Among the Jews, the
Sadduces disclaimed the resurrection, whom Christ took to task in the Gospel,
and daunted those triumphing Hannibals most notably.

The Apostles times brought forth Hymenaes, Mat. 22. 23. 2. Tim. 2. 16. 17 18
and Philetus, such companions of the same association. Of this school was
Simon Magus of whom the Heretics Simoniani were named, with whom combined in
this nastie opinion, the eluish route of Valentinians, Carpocratians,
Cardonians, Arcontici, Seueria^s, Basilidans, Hierarchites, etc. The Manichees
likewise come stuffling in among them, absolutely gainsaying the resurrection
of the body, but maintaining the resurrection of the soul, by the preaching
of the truth, against whom Augustine disputes. The Heresy of these men we
will remove and do away by Scriptures, before which all such lewd assertions
must fall, as Dagon before the Arc. The whole consent of the old Testament
conf^^teth them, and the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles confounds them,
and natural reason agrees thereunto, and is earnest against them. This
orderly and cursortly we will consider of. We prove the resurrection, and
restitution of the same indiuided body in the same substance, all infirmity
and deformity taken away, the mighty spirit of God to be repaired at the
latter day, and made like the glorious body of his Majesty. Job has a
peculier proof hereof in this his simple and open formal profession: Job 14.
12. Job. 19. 35. etc
I am sure that my Redeemer lives, and he shall stand the last on the earth.
And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God in my
flesh, who^ I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for
me, though my reins are consumed within me. The same is not obscurely shadowed
unto us in the dry bones which at the prophecy of Ezechiel at the
commandment of God upon them received breath of life, Ezech. 37. 8.
had their sinews iunctures, and perfect composition. Daniel avouches as much
saying: Dan. 12. 2.
Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and perpetual contempt. The prophet Isai
goes hand in hand with the rest, Isai. 26. 19.
saying: Thy dead men shall live, even with my body shall they rise. David
witnesses so much in this wise: Psalm. 17. 15.
But I will behold thy face in righteousness and when I awake, I shall be
satissied with thine image. The practice and probate hereof in the widows son
of Sarepta raised by Elias, and in the Sunamites son restored to life by
Elisha, 1. Kin. 17. 22. 2 King. 4. 34 John 5. 25. Matthew. 9. 25. Act. 4. 2 Matt.
22. 23. Mat. 5. 45. 4^. Acts 23. 8. John 14. 19.
are also proofs pregnant enough of the general resurrection to come. Christ
in many places of the new instrument concludes as much, as when he says: The
hour comes, and is how, when the dead shall hear the voice of the son of
God: as when against the Saduces he is peremptory in this point, thus arguing
against the^: God is not the God of the dead but of the living: but God is the
God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob who are dead: from hence is this necessary
deduction, they must rise again: as when he said to his disciples, I live and
ye shall live. Also to the further illustration of this doctrine, do these
places appertain: It shall be easier for them of the land of Sodom and Gomorrah
in the day of judgment then for that City: which inference is repeated in y^
next chap. The son of man shall come in the glory of his father with his Angels,
Matt. 10 15. Matthew. 1^. 24. Mat. 6. 27.
and then shall he give to every man according to his deeds: he wills us to
feast y^ poor. and yields this reason: Luk 14. 14.
Thou shall be reco^penced at the resurrection of the just. The Apostles with
one mouth preach the same doctrine. Paul brings in clusters of arguments in
the case. 1 He reasons from the confession of the Corinth. 1. Cor. 15. 11.
14, 15, 17. 18 20. 23, 29, 36 37 etc.
thus: So we preach and so have ye believed: Therefore there is a resurrection.
For otherwise ye had never believed it: but as evident reason did euict it This
reason likes August. well enough, Lib. 22. de Ci^^t. Dei. ca. 25
and therefore he uses it: concluding, that because God has foretold the
resurrection, and the world does credit it, which seemed impossible to be
effected, that the resurrection is most sure. 1. Cor. 15. 1^, 13 14. etc.
2 He disputes in the next place thus: Christ is risen from the dead,
therefore we shall rise from the dead. The coherence is good: for the head and
the members go together, and it were abs^rd to part the one from the other. But
Christ is the head and we are the members conglutinated and coa^nuuated to that
head: The antecedeut and forepart of the argument is accompanied by sundry
consequences in the following verses. 1. Cor. 15. 14. 15, 19, 17. 1^. 19 22, 23.
That if Christ our head be not risen, 1 Our preaching is vain 2 your faith is
vain: 3 we are false witnesses who have testified so much: 4 ye are yet in
your sins: 5. They which are asleep in Christ are perished. The analogy of
head and members makes good the consequent. That therefore we shall li^e, as
Christ has risen: wherefore the fathers call the resurrection of Christ the
mystery of our resurrection, 1. Cor ^5. 20. 21.
and the Apostle terms it, The first fruits of them that slept. 3 Thirdly
from the purifit of the contraries, he forms his matter thus: It by one man
came death, by one man must also come the resurrection from the de^de. 1. Cor.
25. 22 23.
But the first is true: therefore the second. The argument holds the
contraries, so answering one another. Adam, and Christ: Death and the
Resurrection. But we all die in body through Adam: therefore we must live in
body again by Christ. 4 The form that the Apostle so accurately descri^eth
of the resurrection thus: We shall not all sleep, but we shall be all changed
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last Trumpet: for the trumpet
shall blow, and the dead shall be raised up incorruptible, 1. These. 4. 16, 17,
18.
and we shall be changed. And thus For the Lord himself shall descend from
heaven with a shout and with the voice of the archa^gel, and with the trumpet
of God: and the dead in christ shall rise first: the^ shall we which live and
remain be caught up with them also in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the
air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord.

This Graphicall and ord^r^ie description of the resurrection euicteth the
necessary also intall^^le certainty of the resurrection. For if it were not a
matter undoubted, to what purpose is it that it is thus described? These are
the chief arguments wherewith the Apostle urges the resurrection in that
famous fifteenth charter of his first Letter to the Corinthians. Upon which
subject he disputed often: as at Athens, where he preached unto the people of
Jesus, Act. 17. 18. Act. 24. 15 M^tt. 22. 31. (...) 20. 37.
and the resurrection: as in the Consistory before Faelix, where he makes
this constant profession: I have hope toward God, that the resurrection of the
dead which they themselves look for also, shall be both of just and unjust.
Of the resurrection of the dead am I accused of you this day. Peter in sundry
places witnesses the resurrection, as when he says: Which shall give accounte
to him that is ready to judge quick and dead, 1. Pet. 4. 5. 1. Pet. 3.
and thus: when the chief shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive an
incorruptible Crown of glory Also his last Chapter of his last Epistle, is
nothing else but illustration of this Article. S. John delivers like
divinity thus: We know that when he shall appear, 1. John 3. 2.
we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. In the Revelation y^ spirit
speaks evidently thus: And I saw the dead both great and small stand before
God: Reu^^. 20. 12. John 5. 28. and ^1. 24.
and the books were opened, and another book was opened, which was the book
of life, and the dead were judged of those things which were written in the
books, according to their works. And the Sea gave up her dead which were in
her, and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them, and they were
judged every man according to their works. In the next Chapter we have this
discourse, R^ue 21. 4. James 5. 7. 8.
which opens the resurrection unto us: God shall wipe away all tears from
their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying,
neither shall there be any more pain. Saint James avouches as much saying: Be
patient unto the coming of the Lord. Be patient and settle your heart, for the
coming of the Lord draws near. the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews
has much good matter in the behalf of the resurrection. In the tenth Chapter,
after much discourse appertaining thereunto, he summeth it up thus: Knowing in
your selves how that ye have in heaven a better and enduring substance. Heb.
10. 34. Heb. 11. 35.
etc. In the next chapter he says: Others also were racked and would not be
delivered, that they might receive a better resurrection.

Thus have we the old and new Testament on the side of this doctrine, which is
sufficient: but because Atheists (who pester this land, as the Frogs and
Caterpillars did Pharaos Court) do arraigne the integrity of the Scriptures,
1. Cor. 15. 3^ 36. 37. 38.
and judge of this matter by natural reason: it is not amiss t^ stop their
mouths by confuting and confounding them this way. Wherefore we set upon them
thus. 1 The soul did not sin without the body: therefore the body must be
punished with it. Therefore the body must rise again. The Philosophers do
deny the sequence, and say that it is enough that the mind be rewarded
according to the actions thereof, and that it is not needful that the body
which was not principal but accessarie in the sin, and only but the
instrument to serve sins turn, should partake with the mind. And they show
comparisons for the same of Artificers and craftsmen, who for making a house,
or any other piece of work, have their hire and covenants, when as the
instruments wherewith they wrought are not rewarded, neither are they damnified
though the work by them be not accordingly performed. Of a poisoned pot, which
is not therefore dissolved and broken in pieces, especially if it be of any
price, though many have drunk their destruction out of it. Of a sword, which a
man will not break or cast from him, because a man has been slain with it.
But yet by their leave (who take these similitudes for such sure studdes) there
be many in their unstaid affections, that will dash in pieces such intoxicated
cups, and break that weapon against a wall, that has been the occasion of a
mischief. But we turn away all the force of such reaso^ing by distinction of
instruments, as they are of coniunct, and divided nature. The body (the souls
instrument) is of the first difference, and is conjoined and coupled with the
mind: wherefore it du^ly takes such part as the mind does. The mind draws on
the body to commit uncleanness: the body therefore falls thereupon justly
into diverse maladies. The mind is disposed to fell onie, for which the hands and
the feet are manacled, and the neck is hazarded, and the whole body
undergoes the penalty. This argument deducted from the rule of Gods justice,
pleases Paul so well as he makes use of it, having pro^ed the resurrection.
Therefore my beloved brethren be ye steadfast, 1. Cor. 15. 58.
immovable, abundant always in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know
that your labor is not in vain in the Lord But this labor comes both from
mind and body: therefore the recompense of the reward shall be given unto them
both. 2 Our second Apodicticall conclusion is this That which is imperfect,
has not capacity of absolute felicity: but the soul sundred from the body
is imperfect, therefore it must needs be coupled to the body, to the
attainment of this plenarie felicity. 3 We reason also thus. The fullness of
Gods goodness toward those that are his, could not be showed: nor the fulness of
his furiousness upon the wicked could not be powered, if the resurrection were
not. 4. It stands God in hand as much as his truth is worth, to make good the
resurrection because we have promise and charter of him for it: Christ having
said it, God shall reward you in the resurrection of the just. 5 That we should
not doubt of his truth in some examples, Luke 14.
at all t^mes he has made proof hereof, exempting them from death, that the
world may know that death is in his hands, standing before him to execute his
will like a Purseuant, to spare and to spoil: as in the time of nature, Genesis
5. 20. 2. Reg. 2. 8. 11. Matt. 28. 6. Mark 16. 1. 8, 5, etc. Ioh 20. 11, etc
2. Reg. 4. 34. 2 Kin. 13. 21. Exodus 4. 3. 6. Genesis 7. Heb. 11. 11. Genesis 21. 7.
when he took up Enoch: in the time of the law when he took up Elias: in the
time of grace, when he raised up Christ from death to life. We enforce the
matter fuller, and argue from the lesser to the greater thus. Elizeus raised
the Sunamites son, therefore much more can Christ raise us up. Elizeus his
bones gave life to a dead body: therefore much more shall the omnipotent word
of God which is Christ, give li^e to our dead bodies. Aarons rod did blossom
and bear Almonds. Moses dry waster became a creeping Serpent. Sarah her dead
wembe was delivered of a son: what are these but lively images of the
resurrection? 7 From the order of nature, though we have no strong proof, yet
much probable matter we have of the undoubted resurrection. The day that now
passes, to morrow does return. Trees and herbs are stricken dead by the
violence of the winter, and revive with the spring (the renewing time of the
year) and are clothed with leaves and fruits. But thou will say to this, that
life was not utterly out of them by the winters wrack: we say also, that by
death man is not utterly deprived of life, for it is their souls that die not.
Such Logicks does Paul use in the corn that is sown, whose corruption is the
generation of it. 1. Cor. 15. 3^. John 13. 14.
O fool that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die. This is that
which Christ says, except the wheat-corne fall into the ground and d^e, it
bideth alone: but if it die, it brings forth much fruit. If such contemptible
creatures have renewance, and from death are restored to life: shall not this
handle work of God be much more seen in man, the noblest plant that his right
hand has planted, and the finest seed that ever the furrows of the earth were
strowed with the most excellent and worthiest: creature of all? For what is the
hay or grieve herb in comparison of man? That Indian bird the Phaenix (as
philosophers do report) and good divines do ratify (especially Lactantius
among others) dies and is wasted to ashes by the heat of the Sun, and of those
her ashes is a young one ingundred, and thus is that kind continued. This
similitude is taken up by divines to illustrate our certain resurrection. For
more company sake we name the swallows, worms, flies, which lie dead all the
winter, and by y^ increasing heat of the sun are enliued again in the spring
and summer time. If we run through all the ranks and classes of nature, we
shall find every where probabilities in the point. Fire that lies dead in a
flint stone, by a little force that is put unto it, puts life into it. The
Sun that goes down does rise again: the Moon decreaseth and increases
again: Our nails are paired, and grow again: our hears are cut off, and
come up again. Sleep (called by Homer the brother of death, and by others the
image of death, because it is the tying of the senses, as binding them in that
wise as they cannot execute their functions) seazeth upon us, and as it were
burieth us for a time. But the body dispelleth it again: after which it is
fresh and pliable to to any office. The misbeleefe of such, who cannot be
brought to think that out of the putred and consumed stuff, life should be
expressed, are by sundry works of nature notably convicted. For of such
confection (or infection rather) are mise, mouls, frogs, worms, engendered. Out
of ^ooks, cranies, odd corners of the earth, often very radiant and splendent
precious stones are gathered. The seed of living creatures, which is nothing
else but a drop of misshapen humor, what substance does it beget in progress
of time? What parts does it produce, as hands, feet, ears, eyes, head and
such like in their kind? These things do we behold in the Glass of
nature; which so often as we remember, we do well if we remember the
resurrection. 8 By the Prophets, by Christ, by the Apostles some have been
raised from death in life, to ground us in the faith of the resurrection. 1.
Kin. 17. 20.
The widows son of Sarepta was raised by Elias: 2. King. 4. 33.
the Sunamites son by Elisha: a dead man by the touch of the bones of Elisha:
2. Kin. 13. 21.
the rulers daughter by Christ, Matthew. 9. 25.
who was newly deceased: the widows son of Nain that was in his locker, Luke
7. 14. 15
John 11. 43.
and led out to the grave by him likewise: Lazarus that had lien in the ground
four days: Acts 9. 40.
Tabitha by Peter: Acts 20. 10.
Eutychus by Paul, 9 A man would think if were a work of more difficulty to
form the woman of man's rib, to create the man of the gleab of the earth, to
make the whole frame of heaven and earth of nothing; then to raise up man from
the dust to life. If wine be mixed with water, there are those that can part
the wine from the water. Goldsmiths, and such as work in metals, Genesis 1. 1. 3
26
can dissolve confected substances, concreate of gold, silver, brass, Genesis 2.
22.
steel. And such are to be found, who can express Oil and liquide matter out
of any dry body: Wherefore the illimited power of God, which made all things
of nothing, shall reduce our bodies to their forms again, howsoever formerly
reduced to nothing. Lengthen out the matter so far as conceit and imagination
will let you, and put the case thus: That a man is eaten by a wolf; that wolf
is eaten by a lion; that lion is devoured by the fouls of the air; the fowls
of the are air eaten by men; one of those men eat up another as Canibals do:
yet shall his own body be given him again: every man shall have so much
matter of his own, as will serve to make him a perfect body. They shall have
the same bodies in substance, Job 19. 27.
as Job says, but altered in quality, being freed from corruption, and
fulfilled with glory. Homil. 2. Corinthians.
Their mouths shall be opened to speak better things, their eyes shall have
better object before them, their feet shall be exalted above the clouds, and
the whole body shall be mantled with immortality, as says Chrysostom. If
to infringe this which has been delivered, any shall object this saying of
the Apostle: 1. Cor. 15. 50.
Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God: and so infer hereupon,
that the bodies of men shall not rise again: we answer them thus, that by
fleth and blood is not meant the bodies of men simply, but as they are now in
the state of corruption, that which the Apostle calls animale corpus The
fleshly man or the earthly man, and what soever is of nature without the
spirit: which being depraved and corrupted, must needs be renewed. Ioh. ^. 3.
5. 6. 7 8. 1^. 15. 16. 18.
Wherefore Christ said to Nicodemus unless a man be regenerate, and borne a new,
he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. The unregenerate man is called Flesh:
therefore Christ immediately after the former words said. That which is borne of
the flesh is flesh, wherefore of force we must be regenerated, neither only
the flesh, the body, or a part of the mind is to be renewed, which couetteth
and is angry: but especially the reason, the mind, the will. And Christ else
where teaches that the whole man as he is in the state of nature is called
flesh and blood. For thus Christ answers Peter: Blessed art thou Simon Bar
Iona for flesh and blood has not revealed these things, Math. 16. 16. 17.
E^h. 1. 19. and 2 10. 1. Pet. 1. 3.
but the spirit of my father. In which words Christ comprehends the better
parts of the mind. For they be those by which we understood, and the truth is
revealed unto us. Therefore these must be turned and transposed and created a
new, that we may be (as Christ says) like the Angels in resurrection. For the
infirmity of this mortal body is such, as it cannot take the least taste or
smack of heavenly glory, as we perceive in the Prophets and Apostles, who were
men without souls, when at any time God did appear unto them. And not
without cause said God to Moses, Thou can not see my face: neither shall man
see me and live. Wherefore the German and right sense of the words of the
Apostle is this: as we are nothing else but flesh and blood, weak, mortal,
sinful. Curuae in terris animae coel est ium in mes, we cannot inherit the
kingdom of God. Lastly if that of Solomon shall be laid against us: Eccles. 3.
19.
The condition of the children of men, and the condition of beasts are even as
one condition, and so argue that a man shall rise no more from the dead then a
beast: we will answer them by Solomon who explaineth himself in the words
following: they are like in dying, As the one dies so dies the other: but in
their estate after death they differ, of which Solomon speaks not.

The sixth Chapter.
Of the certainty of the judgment or the day of doom.
THe general judgment being the consecution of the resurrection, 1. These. 4.
^6.
and the end thereof, y^ last blast of that shril trumpet giving this Echo
surgite mortui, venite ad Iudiciu^. Arise ye dead and come to judgment: We are
to enter into the tractation hereof in this place. This subject matter though
it be of unquestionable assurance: Yet because ye school of Cyclopical
Atheists, Epicures, carnal minded men, is so great (who as se^pents grouel
wholly in the dust, and only give themselves to earthly things, licking up this
Aphorism of Socrates the Philosopher, Quae supra nos nihil ad nos. Those
things that are above us appertain not unto us) we list to light a candle
before the Sun, and as well by scriptures, as irrefragable reasons, determine the
absolute certainty of this matter.

1. The scriptures are plain and plentiful in the point. Hanna the mother of
Samuel thus prophecieth hereof saying, 1. Sam. 2. 10.
The Lords adversaries shall be destroyed, and out of heaven shall he thunder
upon them: the Lord shall judge the ends of the world, and shall give power
unto his king, and exalt the horn of his anointed, which is Christ. Isaiah
sermoneth it thus, Isa. 2. 19.
Then shall they go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the
earth, from before the fear of the Lord, and from the glory of his majesty,
when he shall arise to judge the earth. That the prophet by these words aims
at doomes day appears by the Angels exposition of the same. Reu. 6. 15. 1.
Reu. 1. 7. and 6. ^5.
And the kings of the earth and the great men* and the rich men, and the chief
captains, and the mighty men, and every bondsman, and every free man, hid
themselves in dens, and among the rocks of the mountains, And said to the
mountains and rocks fall on us and hide us from the presence of him that
sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. For the great day of
his wrath is come, and who can stand? In another place he preaches thus
Behold the day of the Lord comes, Isa. 13. 9.
cruel, with wrath and fierce anger* etc. But in another place ^e is most
pathetical in the point. Isa^. 66. 15. (...) 1. 7. 8
The lord will come with fire, and his charets like a wirlewind, that he may
recompense his (...) with wrath, and his indignation with the flame of fire.
For the Lord will judge with fire, Da^. 12. 1. 2. 3.
and with his sword all flesh. Daniel delivers the like doom, saying: And at
that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince, which stands for the
children of the people, and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was
since there began to be a nation unto that same time, and at that time thy
people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the book.
And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and perpetual contempt. And they that be
wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament: and they that turn many to
righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever and ever. Iod. 2. 30.
Joel writes thus of it: I will show wonders in the heavens and in the earth:
blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke. The Sun shall be turned into darkness,
and the moon into blood, before the great and terrible day of the Lord come.
Zophan. 1. 1^
Zephaniah sings the same song with the rest. The great day of the Lord is
near, it is near and hastes greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord:
the strong man shall cry there bitterly. That day is a day of wrath, a day of
trouble and heaumes, a day of destruction and des^lation, a day of obscurity
and darkness, a day of clouds and blacknes, a day of the trumpet, Mala^^. 4. 1.
and a ^arume against the strong cities etc. Malachie has also good matter to
this purpose. The day comes that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud,
yea and all that do wickedly shall be stuble, and the day that comes shall
burn them up, says the Lord of hosts, and shall leave them neither root nor
branch. In the new testament we have very pregnant proofs. Math. 16. 27.
The Eua^gelists are flat for it, Christ says in Math. The Son of man shall
come in the glory of his father with his Angels, and then shall he give to every
man according to his deeds. Again by the same Evangelist he says thus. Math.
24. 30.
They shall see the son of man come in the clouds of heaven with power and
great glory etc. Math. 25. 31.
Also by the same penman thus: when the Son of man comes in his glory, and
all the holly Angels with him, Luke 21. 27.
then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory. Luke records the like words
of our Savior. Then shall they see the Son of man come in a cloud, with
power and great glory. (...) beheaded? and Peter to be crucified? the Saints
of God from time to time by all exquisite torments to be tortured? if there
were not a reuersion of times wherein they might be glorified? Wherefore it was
necessary that a general assise should be holden for Gaile delivery, and
the consummation of their endless felicity.

3. When should this fore denuntiation of Christ sake effect? Nothing is secret
that shall not be evident: Luke 8. 17.
neither any thing hid that shall not be known, and come to light. As also
these like pred^ctions of holy Scripture: Rom 2 16.
God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ. Every man's work shall
be made manifest, if our expectation of the judgment has not due effect? For
seeing here many things are smothered which never are detected, Be we
assured that God keeps a Calendar of our doings, and notes every thing
exactly in his Register, and that the books shall be opened and set before us,
the eternal counsel of God revealing to every one his sins in particular.

4 Albeit the two edged sword of Gods justice rests and rusteth in the
Scabbard of his patience, because he would have no man to perish, 2. Pet. 3. 9.
Genesis 3. 17. and 6 35. 18. and 7. 1. 10. Luke 17. 26. 27. Matt. 24. 38. 1. Pet.
3. 20.
but would all men to come to repentance: yet that this conniuencie might not
cast us upon a bed of security, he has made some examples to us in this life,
to set us upon our feet, and to make us vigilant, that we fall not into the
judgment. As those whom the Deluge did absorpe and sweep away, wherein all the
Inhabitants of the world ( Noah his famille dedicted the remnant of the old,
and the seed of the new World) being destroyed.

Under this judgment the future final judgment (wherein only a remnant
shall be saved, even the little Arc and Bark of Christ's Church,) is
luculently portended. As also the fearful conflagration of Sodom gives
fair admonition of a judging God, Genesis 19. 24. 25.
the breath of Gods anger having blown the fire, that will lick up all the
ungodly like stubble, Iab. 22. cap. 41 con. Faust. Ma^ichaum. Genesis 19. 3. 7.
^7. 21. 22.
and consume them like dross. Hereupon Augustine thus sweetly speaks. Lot
a just man, and a good housekeeper in Sodom, pure and undefiled from the
filthiness of the Sodomites, was saved from the fire, which was the image of
hell fire, being the type of the body of Christ, which in all the Saints, and
now among the wicked wayleth, by whose badde conversation it is not corrupted,
and from whose consociation it shall be delivered in the end of the world,
those being adindged to Hell fire. etc. Finally, the repudiation of the Jews,
Luke 13. 34. Romans 11. 8. 18. Ezech. 2. 3.
the inheritance, royal Nation, and peculiar people of God, is a memorable and
dreadful example of Gods judgment: who for their disobedience to the Lords
Prophets were the declamation, and a Proverb unto all the world, and were
pitifully entreated of the Assyrians and Babylonians, and lastly by the Romans
so spoiled, as they were no more a people.

5 Our consciences witness the certainty of the judgment, which tremble and
quake all the remembrance thereof, Acts 14. 26.
as Faelix d^d at the Sermon o^ Paul dilating upon these points,
righteousness, temperance, judgment to come.

But for as much as we are called to reckoning immediately after the
Dissolution of our bodies, and with our death come in the Tic^ets and Bell of
account of the bypast actions of the whole life: the universal general Audit
day, seems needless, but in a double respect it is more then necessary.
First of God: second of our selves. Psalm. 51.
1 Of God, that he might be justified in his sayings, and clear when he is
judged. Matt. 25. 31. 32 33 34. 37. 41. 4^.
God is so good, as being infinite, and omnipotent, and we being little more
then nothing, he yields to a judicial hearing, that no man may complain
that justice is not given him. Therefore that thou may not charge him with
wrong intended of his side toward thee, thou shall have thy open (very
honorable) tryull. 2 In regard of our selves it is also requisite, that our
shameless sins might come to more confusion, and our good be^des might the
more be dignifyed. Wherefore our prouin^^ll Laws punish thieves and
malefactors openly, to add more shame unto them. If a Magistrate shall in
pity to cover his shame, execute a felon closely in the Gaile, he should
not do justice, because he does not the plenarie punishment the Law awarded
him For the disgrace, ignominy, and reproach that follows such a judgment,
is the greatest part of the judgment. Hence it is that man tendering his
credit, had rather die then be o^^g^aced. Secular Judges, and Ecclesiastical
Officers, bring forth their delinquents to do their peuance, in the Market
days and Sabbath, that the great appearance of people which such times do give,
might enlarge their shame. So God reserueth an impenitent sinner to that
general day to add more affliction to his heaviness, being made as a
spectacl^ set upon a stage for all the World to wonder at. This is that he
threatens him by his Prophet Nahum. Nahum. 3. 5.
Behold I will discover thy ski^s upon thy face and will show the nations thy
filthiness, and the Kingdoms thy shame And I will cast filth upon thee, and
make thee vile, and will set thee as a gasing stock.

Now what an exquisite judgment is this, consider by this which has some
similitude hereunto. Put the case that an honest and shamefast Matrone should
be stripped of her raiment, and showed naked to all that would behold her,
would not this be as a knife set at the heart or her, and would she not die
through the anguish of soul, for this unspeakable shame brought upon her? No
question she would. But in what case is a sinner in resp^ct of her, who shall
have all his abominations set before the view of the world, the filthy
works, words, thoughts o^ his ^^^de, read in the audience of all? A thousand
to one that ^ehe^^e her nakedness shall see his filthiness: by infinite
degrees ^^ere^ore the vexation of the one shall exceed the veration of the
other. For he shall call out heaven and earth to record against them, Deuteronomy. 31.
28.
as Moses against the people: Angels and Diue^s shall go against them, and
condemn them: and what, (...) o^ the sins of the Saints be spoken of? Yes
doub^^s. But rather to dignifie then damnifie them. For they shall be unto
them as rents of Garments, which are ^ouered over with a Vewe^ Welt, or Fringe,
or Lace of Gold, which gives a great d^ale more grace unto the Garment. The
rentes of their sins being ouerlayde with repentance, appear no more, but
rather are more orient and beautiful. Psalm. 1. 5.
But the wicked shall not stand in the judgment, neither the sinners in the
Congregation of the righteous. Thus as the general judgment serves for the
greater confusion of vilde persons: so it makes to the greater glory of the
Saints, and the grace of their good works. It was the order among the Romans
that such ch^iftains and v^liants that had performed honorable seru^c^ in the
wars, should be brought into the city of Rome with great ^om^e, with their
captives taken in the field following them, and the displaid (...) and other
ensigne^ of their va^o^c carried before them: (...) the godly when they go^ out
of this use, shall be brought with all unspeakable solemn^ (...) the heavenly
city of Hier^salem, among the company of inu^merable ^ngels, Mat. 25. 33.
35. ^6. Isa. 58. 7. 8. Ezekiel. 18. 7, Matt. 25. 41. 42. 43.
with all the fuduments and ornaments of their vertu^s about them as all (...)
works of pity and pi^^e, their co^tumelies, callamities (...) suff^^^d for
conscience sake, their humility charity, modes^e, (...): finally every good
action, though it be quid^^ rather then quantum a quidditie rather then a
quantity, as a cup of cold water given for Gods sake, which we give our
beasts, s^^ll come before God and have reward in heaven, the quality rather
then quantity being regarded by the almighty. As for the (...) which shall
be brought after them as the Emperoures among the Romans did bring their
prisoners with them, they are the D^^ell, the world, the ^lesh, and all the
black guard that hang ^^ereupon, as fornication, vnclea^^es, immodestie,
anger, contention, and such like over which they have victoriou^ly triumphed.

The seventh Chapter.
That Christ shall be the judge of the world.
THe certainty of the judgment being showed: in the next room it is meet
it be declared who shall be the judge. The judge shall be Christ the second
person in Trinity. Ioh. 5. 22. and 1. 27. 1. Cor 1. 7 8. and 11. 26. Phil. 2.
10. and 3. 20. Matt. 26. 27. Col. 34. 1. These. 1. ^0* and 2. 9.
The whole Trinity have a stroke in the action: but the execution thereof is
committed by them to the second person, So the scriptures show. It is Christ's
saying The father judges woman, but has committed all judgment to the (...).
And h^th given him power to execute judgment, in that he is the son of man.
Matthew, Mark, Luke, witness so much. In Matthew it is said The son of man
shall come in the glory of his father with his Angels, and then shall he give
to every man according to his deeds: Again by him thus: They shall see the Son
of man come in the clouds of heaven etc. Math 24. 30. Math. 25. 31.
And thus: And when the son of man comes in his glory etc. In Mark it is
said. When they shall see the son of man coming in the clouds etc. Luke 21.
27. and 22. 69. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16 and 5. 23.
The like says Luke: They shall see the son of man come in a cloud etc The
Apostle by their subscription establish this proposition: Paul gives his
unfeigned consent thereunto thus: At the day when God shall judge the secrets of
men by Jesus Christ: Romans 2. 16. 2. Cor. 5 10. Romans 14. 10
And in another place* thus: We must all apeare before the judgment seat of
Christ etc. The third time he puteth his hand to this doctrine using the self
same words before mentioned. This was a piece of his preaching at Athens:
Because he has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness by that man whom he has appointed, Act. 17, 31. Hebr. 9 28 and
10. 25. 37. Jacob 5 7. 8. 9 Apoc. 22. 7. 12 ^0. 2 Timothy 4. 1. Phil 3 ^0. 21 1.
Pet. 1. 7. and 4. 5. 7. and 5. 4. 2. Pet 3. 4. 10. 12. Tit. 2. 13. 1. John. 2.
28. and 3. 2. Iud. 24. Apoc. 1. 7. 25. 2 Thessalonians 1. 7. 8 10.
whereof he has given an assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from
the dead. By this he adiureth Timothy to be ^aithfull in his ministry: I
charge thee before the Lord Jesus Christ which shall judge the quick and dead
at his appearing, and in his kingdom. etc. By this he persuades to follow
wholesome admoni^ion. Our conversation is in heaven from whence also we look
for the Sauio^ eue^ the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile b^d^e, that
it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body according to the working,
whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself. He puts Titus in
mind hereof saying: Looking for the blessed hope and apearing of the glory of
the mighty God, and of our savior lesus Christ. So much he intimates in
effect to the Thessalonians: When the Lord Jesus shall show himself from
heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, rendering vengance unto them
that do not know God. etc There is no wr^ghting of the Apostle free from this
doctrine, but it is eft-soones by him upon al ^ccurring necessities repea^ed.
This text was given to Peter to preach upon, to the Centurio^ Cornelius; as he
himself confesses in this wise. Act. 10. 42.
He commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify, that it is he
that is ordained of God a judge of quick, and dead Augustine re^dreth this
reason of his coming to judgment in this wise: vt ea natura Iudicem agat qu^
sub Iudice stetit: that he may act the off^ce of a judge in that nature, in
which he stood before a judge. He shall come visible and manifest to judge the
world, as he came visible and manifest to redeem the world. But this office
seems too base for his heavenly majesty, to fit judging and determining
the ^ffaires of men: And one would think it might become a meaner person
better. For if a King should sit counting with hie Cater about his expenses,
or should once enter into the kitchen or larder house, he should be less
esteem^d over after for it. But he that will parley the point with the Ante,
why he conueyeth away kernelles of corn, and hoordeth them up in the holes of
the earth, he should be accounted a very foolish man. Psalm. 62. 9. Psalm. 39
^. 9. Psalm. 8. 5 Psalm. 29. 5. Job. 1. 21. and 8 9. and 25. 6. Psalm. 82. 7. and
94. 20. and 103 14. and 104. 4. 6. and 146. 3. Eccle. 4. 3. Hebr. 2. 6. 1. Pet.
1 24. Isai. 40. 7. Isai 31. 3 and 5^ 8. ^2. Psalm. ^02.
Now this action of Christ seems in outwar^ consideration me^^er then any of
these supposed cases, inasmuch as Christ and we cannot admit comparisons,
we being not so much as a mote to himward. My substance is nothing in respect
of thee, every man in his best state is altogether vanity, so sings the
melodious and mellictuous musi^ian of Israel. Isaj resembles us to ^ay and to
grass which the wind wracketh, the Sun s^ngeth, the beast deuoureth, and
every passenger trampleth under feet, which is to day, and to morrow is cast
into the ^uen: and he takes the theme from Gods mouth saying: All flesh is
grass and all the glory thereof is as the flower of the field. David has no
better thing to liken us to then a worm and cast garment: we shall all wax
old as does a garment: and as a vesture shall thou change us and we shall be
changed. Therefore if being said to Christ we are less then the Cater is to
the King, the moth to a man: It seem der^gatorie from his supreme dignity to
undergo such an office of humility. But the necessity thereof has been
for-shewed: and his manner of coming in glory, which we shall afterward speak
of, does assoile this question, and infinuation. But yet is this conc^usion
somewhat choked by that which Isaiah says: Isai. 3. 14.
The Lord shall enter into judgment with the ancients of his people and the
princes thereof, meaning the elect and faithful children o^ God: Math. 39. 2^
and by that promise of Christ to his Apostles: Ye which followed me in the
regeneration, shall sit also upon twelve thrones, and judge the twelve tribes
of Israel. And by that which Paul says: 1. Cor. 6. ^^
Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world? By these it should
seem that Christ have copartners in this commission, and that the whole
authority is not in him alone. We answer that he is the chief justice, and
he and none but he pronounces the sentence: the Apostles, and good
professers of his name shall sit on the bench by him, as all that are justices
among us do sit by their principal Judge at both hands, and give evidence and
allowance to the sentence. This is a royal prerogative that the saints have,
that they are Christ's assistants and consortes, and their enemies judges:
wherefore take the watchword of the Apostle with you. Brethren consider your
calling, and disgrace we it at no hand by our misdoings. A noble man's son is
not suffered to converse with any inordinate or base companion: We are of noble
degree as ye see being to sit with our Christ in his throne of majesty. Oh
remember we this, and by conuersing with wicked men let us not bring upon so
high a calling such contempt and dislike. Aulus Fuluius would have ^laine his
son because he consorted himself with Catiline the enemy of the country,
whereas he had begat him for the good of the country. God indureth not that
such as are separated and put apart to be consorts to our savior, should be
copsmats with sinners. When as Philip the King was playing with his prisoners
taken in the wars, and was casting up unto them in declamatorie wise their
captive condition. Demades the philosopher endured him not, but thus wisely
censured him: since fortune and good luck have made thee a great man, and laid
upon thee the person of Agamemnon, art thou not ashamed to play the Thersites?
that is of a victorious prince will thou prove a paltrie companion? This is our
estate, but not fortune, but Gods favor has made us kings for ever: wherefore
be we not conditioned as catifes. But as christians as it becomes us. And
this grace the Lord give us.

The eight Chapter.
How joyful it is to the godly, and doleful to the wicked, that Christ shall
be their Judge.
AS Kings have their habits according to the times, either of war, mirth, or
mourning: So Christ suteth himself to the nature and property of his
business: and coming to judge the world, he cloatheth himself with the
clouds, as with a garment, and is decked with majesty and honor. He will
come flying like a Be^ among us. bringing honey to the godly, and fastening his
sting in those that are his enemies. In his first coming he came for thee:
but his second journey, if thou take not heed, will be taken against thee. To
the Saint he will show himself a Lamb: to the sinner he will show himself a
^ion. His first coming was the kingdom of grace: his second shall be his
kingdom of glory and justice. That, showed mercy upon souls: this shall sit
in judgment upon souls. Then he came with the Trumpet of men's tongues: but
he is to come next with the Trumpet of an Archangell^. Then he came down with
a very merry noise, with this comfortable Antheme and song of deliverance,
Glory be to God in the heavens, and peace in the earth: but he is to come
hereafter with a doleful dumpish note: Woe, woe, be to the inhabitants of the
earth. Then he came to gather the lost sheep into his fold: but his next
coming is to separate the sheep from the Goats. Acts. 8 32.
Then he came to entertain both Jew and the Gentile: but when he comes
again he will divide the servant from the servant standing at the
Mill-quearnes, the husband from the wife couching together in one bed: Matt.
16. 27. and 25. 31. 6. and 24 30. Psalm. 58. 10.
Jacob from Esan w^ll^wing in one womb. But then begins the merry world with
the godly which never shall have end. The righteous shall rejoice when he sees
the vengeance: he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked* The Saints
shall be joyful with g^^rie, Psa. 149. 5.
they shall rejoice in their beds. The praises of God shall be in their
^^o^thes, and a two edged sword in their hands. etc. As the judge (...)* be
dreadful to the wicked, because they shall be (...) it shall be as
delightful to the godly, because they (...) according to that which Paul
says: ^. Tim. 4. 7.
I have fought a good fight, and have finished my course: I have kept the
faith. For henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which
the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day: and not to me only,
but unto all them also that love his appearance.

By the names he gives us, he opens his love toward us, that we might lift
up our heads when be comes again to us. Iud. 8. 21. Romans 6. 16. 18. 22.
John 15. 14. Mark. 3. 33. Luk^ 24. Mark 1. Cant. 5. 1.
He calls the godly, Mother, Sisters, Brethren. He calls them his
Servants. He calls them his Friends. He calls them his kinsmen. He calls
them his Brethren. He calls them his Sons. He calls them his Spouse. All
these being terms of love, and requi^i^g duties of love. By calling us by
all these, what else does he thereby signify, but that he has all love
toward us. Wherefore bear we him our hearts, as Marie bare him in her arms,
if we be his Mother. Let us prefer him before all brethren, as Joseph
preferred Benjamin before all his brethren if he be our brother. Let us embrace
him as Rebecca did Isaac, A^^. in. lib. de Jacob. and vita beata. lib. c. 6.
if we be his Spouse. Art thou afraid (says Ambrose) that thy Judge will be
unmerciful? consider what Judge thou have? The Father has committed all the
judgment to Christ: can he condemn us to death, who has redeemed us from
death ^ having given himself for us, whose life he acknowledges to be the
recompense of his death? Shall he not say, what pro^^^e is there in my blood,
if I damn him whom I have delivered? Again, do thou consider the Judge, and
do not consider the Advocate? Can his sentence be sharp, who cease not to
make continual intercession for us, that we may gain his fathers grace
againe^ This is the sage and sweet saying of this worthy father. T^ which
this short sugared speech of learned Gregory is suitable. Est nobis spes magna
poenitentibus: G^^g. ^om^ 3. (...) Euan.
quia Aduocatus noster factus est Iudex noster. There is great hope for us that
are penitent, because he that is our Advocate is made our Judge. Iustit lib. 2.
(...) ^6. sect, 11
Thrice ren^ wne^ Master Calvin, to this purpose speaks most comfortablie to
the Christian soul thus: It is no small security, that we are not called
before any judgment seat, but of our redeemers, of whom salvation is to be
looked for: so far is he from going up to the bench to condemn us. To this
end the Father has honored his Son, and has resigned up to him all the
judgment, for the pacificition (...) the consciences of his servant and
aff^ighted with the regard of the terror of his judgment.

Thus (good Christian) is thy lot fal^e into a fair ground, and thou have a
good inheritance. For tell me if thou had a cause ha^ing in the law, and thy
Counselor who always has encouraged thee in it, should be made thy Judge,
would thou not be a glad man upon it, and ascertaine thy self of thy good
success? The Christians case is the like, and our fee-simple, and freehold of
our salvation is to undergo decision and determination of law. Christ that
always has been our Counselor and warranted us the day is created by the
father our Judge, the inheritance therefore cocke-sure of our side, and that
our souls know right well. Respect not therefore what judgment the world
gives of thee, seeing thou have the supreme Judge of the highest Court, that
gives sentence on thy side, which Omni appellatione remota, without further
appeal must stand inviolable. For if thou be here wronged in a lower Court
by some unskillful or corrupt Judge, thou know how to remedy the matter out
of hand, n^mely, by appealing to a higher Bench, where this iniuris is
rectified. Art thou thus wise for thy worldly wealth, and will thou not have as
good understanding for thy saving health? The Prophet Jeremy took this
course, who being unjustly judged by men, turns himself to God, and puts
up his ^ill of complaint thus unto him: Iere. 11. 20.
O Lord of hosts that iudgest righteously, and triest the reins and heart,
let me see thy vengeance on them, for unto thee have I opened my cause.

But this is not so much comfort to the godly, Mark 14. 62* Luke 9. 26. 2.
These. ^. 1. 7. 8. 2. Pet 3. 4. 10 Apoc. 1. 7 1* Genesis 37. 7^ 8, 9. 11. 1. Sam.
19. 2. Lam 1. 2. 3. 5. 7. 10. Psalm. 3. 18*
as a corosiue to the wicked. For it will be a death unto them, to see him whom
they so hated, so exalted, that their highest enemy shall be in highest majesty.
It was the greatest e^e-sore, and heart-sore that might be to the brethren of
Joseph, that Joseph was more set by of their father Jacob then they, because
they never could abide him. Saul was made a mad mela^cholick man, because the
people so much applauded David who^ he persecuted. It was not such veration to
Jeremy to see Jerusalem destroyed, and to sit as a widow forsaken: but this
wrought al his woe, that his enemies had dominion over him* That the wicked are
Christ's enemies and no better it is certain. So Paul calls the^. They are
the enemies of the cross of Christ, whose (...) damnation.

In regard of his enmity between Christ and them, they had rather go down
presently into hell, then see him in such Majesty, whom they loaded with such
misery. 2 Also their conditions are so contrary, as they could not possible
have a worse match, then that he should be Judge over them. For what comfort
can a covetous man have, when he stands before him to be judged who ever, so
abhorred covetousness, and despised riches, as when he was borne he would
have never a Cradle, but suffered himself to be laid in a Cratch: who all his
life time would not have a house of his own wherein to hide his head, when as
the foxes were better provided for by their hole^, and the bird of the air by
their nests: who at his death had never a Graue-stone to cover him, but was
intombed in Joseph's Sepulcher? What ^ey can the proud have when they appear
before this Judge, whose humility was such, as he stooped and yielded his
shoulders to the cross, which he carried till his back was ready to break?
what heart can the haughty and ambicious have, who only stand upon terms of
gentry, and hunt after honor, saying with Saul: Honor me before my people
and taking that to be their Quietus est, the chiefest felicity, knowing that
this Judge can abide nothing worse: in which respect, when they would have
honored him, he hid himself from them: and when they would have crowned him a
king, Josh. 6. 15.
he would not come at them? And what shall the trencher-men of our times,
(whose God is their belly, whose larder is their love, whose bowls are their
bliss, and their food their felicity) say when they shall hold up their
hands at his bar, and look him on the face, whose (...) was so sour, and
diet so much against appetite, Matt. 27. 48. John 19. 29.
gall steeped in Vinegar, being given him for restoration? Now shall not all
the lovers of the world be confounded before him, who so loathed and rejected
all the pleasures of this world? It dismaieth the rich man to have a poor man
his Judge: the proud man endures not the humble should judge him: the unchaste
dreadeth the arbitriment of the continent: the mighty had rather be tried by
any then by the mean man. In all these respects, the unrighteous wish to be
tried by any then by Christ Jesus. And they have reason for it: For admit
thou were to go to Westminster Hall to convent thy neighbor before one of the
Judges, and thou should meet one of thy acquaintance coming from thence,
to whom thou ope^est thy purpose in this bus^^esse, and he should answer thee
that the law would go against thee, because others in the like case have been
condemned before thee: would not thy discretion deal with thee to go back as
then came, and give over this inte^dement? truly if thou have any wit in
thy head thou would. It so fares with every wicked man and so stands the
case with him. Cou^tous man I ask thee whether thou go? thou answerest me
to a judge of Assise, and thou answerest right, for to him thou must go
whether thou will or no. But tell me what thou would have there? Thou
say by that means thou would ^ll in thy moneys by obligatorie
wrightinges (though by vncenscionable practice ^^tors^^) due unto thee. I tell
thee my friend, return back by repentance, and be thine own friend, for
upon my certain knowledge I have seen the case condemned in others wholly
wrightings, and I have diverse times read them. The Lord the judge of glory
sitting upon that cause, by couching in (...) ^rath, and not having in all
(...) life time a cabin to cover him: in this ^ts own example has condemned
this course. I say the (...) to you resolute and desolate men, that pick
quarrelles for s^all causes and often for no cause: and think manslaughter
g^od manhood, and think it a dispa^^^^ent to bigest a discontent^ment: you
will be condemned for this ^^ate at the judgment: for the Judge by doing the
con^rarie, has condemned it: b^e a ^^u^led* reu^led not again: did not ban^^e
back blows for blows: but even as sheep before his sheerer was d^mmie, so
opened he not his mo^th. Math. 5 39. Luke 6. 29. Math 11. 29. Col. 3. 1^. Acts.
7. 60*
Also he has left us c^ntrarie commandment, namely, if we be bu^^^ted on the
one cheek, to hold out the other: the meaning whereof is, that we rather
suffer two i^iuries then revenge one. To the Ep^cures* ambitious, luxurio^s,
and to all e^orbitant persons of what name and title soever they be, be the
same spoaken: they have their i^dgement in the law, and they shall have it in
the lake, if they look not well unto it. Therefore for God^ sake be ye warned
that ye may be armed that ye may not be harmed. Thou angry man, it will not
se^ue thy turn at that time toplead the heat of thy nature, the impotencie of
thy affections, whereby thou can not moderat thy ^cessiue perturbations: For
when many dogs came about Christ, and many fat Bulls of Basan incircled
him, and be set him round about: he was so far from troublesome passions, as
he was resolved into charitable affections toward them, and put up his
praieres to his father for them. (...). 23. 34.
Thou greedy gutt^ that give up thy self to gurmandizing, it is but absurd
to plead disuse of abstinence or temperaunco, for Christ that great faster,
shall condemn thee thou great feaster. From these instances all degrees of
sinners may take inferences that belong unto them, and be in time converted,
least at that time they be for ever confounded. Thus Christ as he was the ruin
and resurrection of many, (...). 2. 34.
according to the prophecy at his first coming: so shall his second coming
have the same effects. The dolor of the wicked and the pleasure of the godly
shall be such at that time, as a learned man in meditation hereof wondereth, that
every stone should not be a thorn to the godly in this life to enlarg his
misery* that in the life to come he might have laid upon his shoulders a
great-weight of glory: and that every stone is not a rose to the wicked (...)
might have his fill of pleasure in this life, because then it is out^^ date and
there is none to be looked for of him in the (...) to come.

The ninth Chapter.
The Majesty of Christ in his coming to Judgment.
CHrist shall come very gloriously to judgment with a white cloud round about
him, Math. 26. 27. 24. 30. and 25. 31. and 26. 64
the whole quire of Angels and the whole host of heaven attending upon him,
with an incredible shrill and hoarse noise of trumpets. His number without
number is thus indefinitly spoken of by the Apostle in these words. Dan. 7.
10. 2. Cor. 5 10. Luke 1. 28. and 2. 9. 1. These. 4. 16. 2. These. 1. 7. 8. ^0
He shall come with thousands of his saints: which has consent with former
prophecies: for Daniel being in this argument says: A fiery stream issued,
and came forth from before him: thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten
thousand thousands, stood before him: the judgment was set, and the books
opened. This took place at his first coming when the minister and host of
heavenly soldiers waited on him: and shall take place again at his second
coming, when all the ministering spirits and creatures of heaven. Saints,
Angels, Tit. 2. 13. Hebr. 9. 28. 1. Pet. 1. 7. 2. Pet. 3. 4. 10. 12. Math. 16
27. Iud. 24 Apoc. 1. 7. Math. 24. 30. Math. 25. 31. Math. 26. 64. Mark. 13. 26.
servants, shall be pannelled personally to assist him. To this end says the
Evangelist. The son of man shall come in the glory of his father with his
Angels. They shall, see the some of man come in the clouds of heaven, with
power and great glory. When the son of man comes in his glory, and all the
holy Angels with him: Ye shall see the Son of man sitting at the right hand
of the power of God, and come in the clouds of the heaven. They shall see the
Son of man coming in the clouds with great power and glory The like words
are in Luke, with these has the saying of Jude sweet harmony. Behold the
Lord comes with thousands of his saints. Now the power of Angels in the
execution of Gods judgments is inuinc^ble, for one Angel slew all the first
borne of Egypt in on night. Luke. 21. 27. Iud. 14. Exodus 12. 29. 2. Kin, 19. 35.
Isai. 37. 3^.
By the hand of one Angel there was such hauock made of the armies of the
Assirians, as a hundredth fouer-score and five thousand of them were put to the
sword, and laid on the ground as corn by a sicle. Therefore what a huge
destruction shall there be of the wicked, when he comes with such a royal
army of Angels with him? There are many that are innocent that are terrified
when they see a King come by with an armed power, the sight of glistring swords
dismaieth them, and the clattering of armor and weapons affrighteth them:
therefore what terror and horror shall come upon the wicked, when Christ a man
of war shall buckle his harness to him, and he shall put on justice as a
habergeon, and shall come with his Miriades of heavenly Angels, and betake
himself to his throane, out of which he shall thunder the great cur^^e against
all flesh, which must be ratified forever. Where shall those that have
persecuted him in his members then appear? If they could not endure the
majesty of him when he came, but to deliver the law in Mount Synaj, but the
blacknes, darkness, tempest, burning fi^e was to terrible for them, Exodus 19,
16. Hebr. 12. 2^. Exodus 20. 19.
insomuch as Moses said: I fear and quake, and the people fled and stood a far
off, and said unto Moses: Talk thou with us and we will hear, but let not God
talk with us least we die: Hag, 2, 7* Hebr. 12, 26.
Now shall they endure his second coming in the ^^tiousnes of his wrath, when
his voice shall shake y^ heavens, the earth, the sea, the dry land, and his
coming is to take vengeance of the breakers of this law?

If men ware amazed at any strange eclips of Sun and Moon, if any
extraordinary darkness danteth them (as the Egiptians: were out of heart when
such a foggie darkness came upon them, Exodus 10. 22. 23.
as for two or three days together one could not see another, Wis. 17. 2. and
18. 1.
or move out of his place) if earthquakes make them quake, and their hearts
fail them upon the occurrence of impetuous winds, vociferations of many
waters, noice in the night, scritchings of Serpents and Dragons and such like:
When greater signs then these by infinite degrees be showed in the glorious
coming of Christ to judge the world: how should not the hearts of the wicked
malt like wax and fall away like water? As in the day whereon our redeemer was
crucified the natural son of God for the sins of the world, the Sun was
smoothered, and there was dacknes over all the land: so when the justice of the
adopted Son of God shall be showed, Math 27 51. 52 53 54. and 24 29. 43.
there shall be terrible fearful signs, Genesis 15. 5. and* 50. 16. 17.
to strike sinners into passions, Mark. 13. 24.
as the Centurion and many others were at those signs showed at his passion.
Luke 21. 25.
If the brethren of Joseph could not tell what to say, when as Joseph in
kindness did but say unto him I am Joseph, in remembrance but of one forpassed
trespass: What shall stubborn sinners say at this, the glorious coming of
Jesus Christ, when he shall come riding upon the heavens as upon an horse,
Revel. 1. 7.
and come flying with the wings of the wind, 2 Pet. 3. 7. 10. 11. 12. 14.
who have so often sold their Jesus by their sinful doings, and never with
the brethren of Joseph have yet tasted of any sorrow for it? Genesis 32. 7.
When he shall be in his domination, not one: one kingdom of Egypt as Joseph,
Exodus 14 10. and 19 16.
but over all the kingdoms of the world? Deuteronomy. 5 5.
If Esther was cast into a trance, 1. Sam. 7 7.
and life for a time went out of the gates of her body at the fight of king
Assuerus in his royalty: Hest. 4.
If Daniel having but seen an Angel, 1 Samuel 17. 11 and 28 5.
was a man for a time out of soul: Dan. 9.
what terror and trepidation shall possess us at the appearance of Christ in
his majesty, Math. 28. 2. 34
at the sight of his retinue of inumerable Angels? Ioh. 18. 6.
If the Warders of the Sepulcher of Christ at the day of his resurrection, were
so dismayed as they seemed like dead men: If the Jews strong by an arm of
flesh, by seculer Mace and authority coming with forcible provision to
attache Christ in the Garden, hearing him but speak and say I am her fell upon
their backs, and their legs could not longer bold up their bodies: Infinite
terrors shall beset the sinful soul at the ^ight of the coming of Christ in
the clouds. If y^ Jews could not ^u^u^e the Majesty of the Almighty, Exodus
19. 16 and 20 18.
when he descended upon Mount Sinai but to deliver the Law: Deuteronomy. 5 24. and
18. 6.
how shall they be able to sustain his fury when he comes to take
vengeance of the breakers of the Law? Heb. 12. 8.
What breast can bear the arrows of ^s indignation, which he has steeped in
(...) for the reta^^a^^on of incorrigible transgressions? of which he himself
says: I will make mine arrows drunken in blood, Soph 1. 10.
and my sword shall eat up their flesh. Apoc 18. 1, 2. 3.
If the holy City of Jerusalem shall be scorched with lights and bu^^ing
^orches: how shall Babylon the place of confusion be searched? This dreadful
manner of Christ's coming to (...), is so* the greater dismayment of the
wicked: when the King of Kings came to be married to his Church* and came (as
it were) to seas^ with us, he came in apparel suting that purpose, and looked
lovingly, and sp^ke peaceably to the world: but when he shall came in b^ght
armor with Sword and Arrows in his hand, he shows by this beha^iour that
he comes in anger, and that there is no talking with him.

At his nat^^i^e, when he came to be merry at a marriage, he^ thus sweete^^
saluted them by his heavenly faintlie: Luke 2. 10. 14. 30. 38.
Glory be to God on high, in earth peace, and good will toward men. But his
second coming as Esaih shows, is otherwise: Isai 42. 13.
The Lord shall go forth as a Grant: he shall stir up his courage like a
man of war. The Majesty of worldly Princes co^isteth in their glorious
retinue of all deg^^es: of Dukes, Earls, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and
others of (...) state: M^th. 24. 30* Apo^ 17.
the glory of our blessed Savior shall be showed in the Clouds by his royal
army of Saints and Angels. Dan. 7. 13.


The Clowd (...) the Session house of the Lord of hosts: 1. These. 4. 16.
that place was for good (...): as being the room^aiest and capable of all
(...) of Angels, Apostles, Mart^^ ^^^arkes, and (...) idea (...) Saints as
also of all the confused cursed (...) But he ^en is the only brave place for
(...) God (...) of that, because (...) heaven, and it is parcel (...)
punishment interminatea against the devil and his angels, to be cast out of
heaven Herein also God keeps custom, meaning to ceasu^e the delinquent where
he s^^ned. The Jews mete out the valley or Iehosaphat for Gods judgment hall
laying the foundation of this their assertion from Ioels prediction: Iod. 32.
I will also gather all nations and will bring them down into the valley of
Iehosaphat and will plead with them there for my people and for mine heritage
Israel and from other such words in the middle part of that chapter: Verse 12.
Let the heathen be weakened, and come up to the valley of Iehosaphat, for there
will I sit to judge all the heathen round about. The Jews with all pertinacie
do apply this prophecy to temporal things, and dote hereupon, that the
Messiah shall prevail ever the Gentiles in this valley, and condemn them; and
that afterward in the resurrection of the righteous he shall sit in the same
place upon their final sentence, and that there he shall keep a solemn feast
with the godly. They give out also in their headstrong imaginations, that an
Ox is staked up for the purpose, created and fatted by God to that use: and
that the Leuiathan has been slain long since, and laid in the powdring tub,
and that they shall drink wine freely out of Paradise. The valley of
Iehosaphat is called the valley of judgment, and it may be true that at
Jerusalem there was a place of this name, situated at the East door of the
Temple: but that is but the type and shadow of the judgment place of the Lord,
Matt. 25. 32.
to which shall resort a greater assembly then that valley can receive. But we
desire to know no more then is meet for us, which God has revealed to us: We
list not to look beyond the Moon for mysteries: As the time of judgment is
only known to God, so God knows best what place is fittest, and what place
he will have to hold his Assizes in.

The tenth Chapter.
The persons that are to be judged.
CHrist his second coming apperteyning wholly to judgment, where the persons
are that are to be judged, is to be considered. All persons are to be judged
without exception, which the Scriptures call and the Article of our Creed
calls the quick and the dead. Some by the quick understand the righteous: and
by the dead do understand the wicked. Li^. ^ de Dog. Ecclesia.
So did Diodonis of whom Augustine wrighteth, whose e^position he there
reprooueth. But in the Creed and scripture the quick are said to be those
whom Christ finds alive in body at his second coming: and the dead, whose
souls have left their bodies, or are giving up the ghost at his second
coming. For the Apostle when he says: 1. Cor. 15. 3^ 52.
We shall not al sleep, but we shall a^l be changed, speaks of the death of ye
body, not of the unjust only but the just likewise dead in body. The
trumpet shall blow and the dead shall rise incorruptible: He sets against
these all that live in general both good and bad, we shall be changed, that is
to say: all whom Christ shall find living. In his letter to the Thessalonians
by those that sleep he simply under stands the dead in body, 1. These. 4.
13 14. 15. 16. 17.
and by the living, only those that are in bodily life when he shall come.
That all shall be cited to this Court, as well good as badde, sundry
comparisons do show: as of the wise and foolish virgins: of the wheat and of
the tares: of the good and badde fish: and of the Sheep and Goats. Likewise
many Scripture places do conclude the same. Math. 25. 32. 33. 34. 41 4^.
Before him shall be gathered all Nations* Hitherto belongs this saying of
our Savior indefinitely: Math. 10.
Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my
Father which is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I
also deny before my Father which is in heaven. The Apostle has set it down
for an irrefrugable conclusion, we shall all appear before the judgment ^eate
of Christ. Romans 14. 10.
Answerable to this is this his other Aphort^me: 2 Cor. 5. 10.
we must al appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things which are done in his body* etc. But the Godly shall make a
very easy reckoning. For Christ is their comfort^^, their conscience there
cleerg^, as witness of their (...), and heavenly possession, But the wicked,
because their conscience shall condemn the^, and the devil shall accuse th^^
Christ shall be against the^ shall have a world of wo^^n answer to make answers.
They shall say to the mountain, Revel. 6 12. 13. 14 15 16. 17.
hide us, and to the hills co^er us. But from hence grows a question how the
Godly can be judged, Luke. 23 3^
seeing they shall sit Assistants with Christ in the judgment, Isai. 3. 14.
as Esai says. The Lord shall enter into judgment with the ancients of his
people, and the Princes thereof* that is to say, with the elect company, as
Christ says to his Apostles: Ye shall sit upon twelve Thrones, Matt 19 18.
Luke. 22. 30. 1. Cor. 6. 3.
and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, as Paul says: Know ye not that we
shall judge the Angels? We answer, that judgment is of double nature: there is
a judgment of Absolution: there is another judgment which is of Condemnation.
In the judgment of Condemnation are the wicked only wrapped, adulterers,
adultresses, fornicators unclean persons, Apoc. 22. 11. 15.
usurers, oppressors slanderers, blasph^mers, hers, deceivers, ep^cures,
Machi^ilians, Atheists. The godly have only but judgment of Absolution that
is to say: they are judged to be quit and delivered, and blessed. They shall be
absolved of all the slanderous imputatio^s of the world, and wicked men against
them. Besides men, the evil spirit also shall be judged. Christ denounces
infernal fire to the devil and his angels: Mat. 25. 41. 42.
Go ye cursed into Hell fire prepared for the devil and his angels. Of this
their condemnation speaks: Peter thus. 2. Pet. 4.
God spared not the Angels that had sinned, but cast them down into hell, and
delivered them into chains of darkness to be kept unto condemnation Of this
Paul speaks when he says. 1 Cor. 6. 3. Verse. 6.
Rnow ye not that we shall judge the Angels? Jude consents with the rest,
expressly saying: The Angels also which kept not their s^st estate but le^t
their own habitation, he has referred in everlasting chains under darkness,
unto the judgment of the great day. These are to be judged as ringleaders of
all (...) of all the band of sinners, Math. 26 48. ^9.
as Judas did the band of soldiers against Christ. Also this judgment shall
extend it self unto the senseless and unreasonable creature, the heaven, the
earth, and whatsoever is contained in them. Isai. 66. 22.
Esai speaks of new heaven and a new earth, 2 Pet. 3. 1^.
that are promised. Isa 65. 17.
The new heavens, Apoc. 21. 1.
and the new earth which I will make, Rom 8. 19. 20 21. 22.
shall remain before me. Paul shows so much, saying: The fervent desire of
the creature waits when the sons of God shall be revealed, because the
creature is subject to vanity, not of its own will, but by reason of him which
has subdued it under hope: because the creaturs also shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. Lastly
antichrist is rankt in the rank of those that shall have condemnatorie
judgment His dam^ation decreed against him is thus spoaken of: Whom the Lord
shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, 2. These. 2. 8.
and shall abolish with the brightness ^f his coming. Thus have we the several
persons that shall be judged severally, the sen^les creature shall be purged, the
godly shall be absolved, the wicked shall be condemned, Satan the muster master
of malignant men, shall be thrown down into hell, and Antichrist as the
son of perdition, the opposite a^uersarie to our Savior Christ shall be
destro^ed by the wrath^^l^ indignation of Christ.

The eleventh Chapter.
The things that are to be judged.
AS all persons are to be judged, so they shall be ^asted to their co^rsest
branne: Their thoughts, words, works, shall be as thoroughly ransacked as ever
Laban did ra^sacke Rachels st^ff^. Genesis 31. 32. 33. 37.
That all things shall be scanned. Saint John has declared. I saw the dead b^th
great and small ^^and before God, Revel. 20. ^2.
and the books were opened: and another book was open^d, which is the book
of life, and the dead were judged of these things, which were written in the
books a^cording to their works. God is said i^ have counting books by him,
because all things are as certain to him, as if he had Ac^^^ries and Clerks
in heaven to make enrolement thereof and to keep the records of them. (...)
has three several (...) or Books. 1. The book of providence. 2. Of
Judgment. 3. Of life. The book of his providence is the absolute knowledge of
a particularities p^st, present, to come. This Book is me^^oned by David in
these words: (...) 12. and 11^ 14.
Thine eyes did see my substance yet being imperfect: and in thy books were al
my members written, which day by day were ^ashioned, when as yet there were
none of them: As in another place thus: Thou tellest my ^^ttings, put my
tears into thy bottel, are not these things noted in thy books? The book of
Judgment is that whereb^ he gives judgment, which is of two sections. The
first is his ^ore knowle^ge in which all the affairs of men, their designme^ts
and (...) as plainly set down to him, as if they were p^nned We may ^et them
slip in a careles^e ^orge fullness, but God has ^ckets of our doings by
him, and keeps them in per^ect remembrance. Of which the Prophet David says
thus: Psalm. 90. 9.
Thou have set my misdeedes before thee, and my secret sins in the sight of
thy countenance. So that be they never so old, they are as new to him as if
they had been done but yesterday. ^. Sam. 15 3.
For he rippeth up the s^ane of Amalek, done more then three hundredth years
before, and commands Saul to confer it. He y^ numbreth the stars, and
calls them all by their names, has numbered our sins, and will name them unto
us: as periuries, blasphemies, adulteries, lies, vsuries and such like. The
second leaf or tome of this second Book is every man's particular conscience,
which makes conuulsions and things in us, and is instead of a thousand
witnesses, setting before us the things that we have done. The book of life
is the decree of Gods election, in which God has set down who are sealed up
unto eternal life. The opening of these books is Gods revealing unto every
man his own proper sins, in thought word, and deed, committed against heaven
and against him, and then also by his omnipotent power, he that can of stones
by Iordans brook side raise up Children to Abraham, shall break a sunder our
stony consciences, so that we shall have compunction and remembrance of all
sorepassed actions. Now the conscience of the wicked is feared with a hot iron,
and is past feeling, but then, it shall be so sensible and seeling as it shall
accuse and condemn it self.

Being thus revealed and spread abroad, there shall be dis^inction made of them
according to the nature of them either good or evil. That shall be thus done.
They that never had knowledge of the law of God, and had no other schoolmaster
but nature, shall be tried and judged by the law of nature. As for those that
live in the church, and have li^ed under the law and under grace: shall have
their trial by the law and the Gospel. Romans 2. 1^. 16.
So says Paul, As many as have lived by the law shall be judged by the law. At
the day of judgment ^od ^hal judge the secrets of our hearts according to his
Gospel. To ^xpresse the exact account that shall be taken of al things in the
judgment, Job says of God, Thou have sealed up our sins in a bag* it is more
to (...) then to keep, for sealing signifies a very special keeping,
Therefore the bag and bundle of our misdeeds being sealed up: not the least
sin of al can possible drop out. S^^ 1. 1^.
To the further insinuation hereof says the Lord by Zephaniah: I will search
Jerusalem with Lanterns* Such things as we desire very much, we seek for
very much, but when we seek with candle and Cresset light, we show thereby
that we will seek to purpose and will find if it be possible. But when the
Almighty seeks with his Candle in his hand, how is it possible but that he
should find what he seeks for? This is a judgment by it self of which all
ye judgments of men are wide. Before the Tribunals and judgment seats of men
the truth is often obscured, and the offenses of men are either smothered,
dissembled, or diminished: when as either the Judge is deceived, or the
witnesses is corrupted, or the guilty man beguileth both: but there is none of
all these in this Judgment. The consistoriall places of men, respect
consanguinitie, affinitye Nobility: but these have no privilege in that
impartial place: For thus the Psalmist says: Psalm 49. 16.
Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, and when the glory of his house
is increased. For he shall take nothing away when he dies, neither shall his
pomp descend after. The hope of the wicked shall fail him, his trust says
Job shall be as the house of a Spider. Job 8. 14. Psalm.
If righteousness and judgment shall be the preperation of his seat, what
is the pre-eminence of Gentry before others, before that heavenly seat? of
this wrighting and storing up of the worlds faulles against ye day of
reckoning. Isai 65. 6.
Isaiah speaks thus: Behold it is written before me: I will not keep silence,
but will render it and recompense it into their bosoms. In the mean while y^
art merry like a fond fellonious fellow, who being indicted of scheme, is
swallowed up with a sottish security, in yt mean while the inditeme^t passing on
and the Clark of the Assise pe^^ing every point thereunto appertaning. That
there shall be this busy inquiry, and that this singular scrutiny shall be made
of thoughts, words, works, the Scriptures have told us. That our thoughts
shall be discovered, Solomon makes manifest sayings: (...). ^^. 14.
God will bring to judgment every secret thing whether it be good or evil.

If every secret thing shall be judged, then the thought shall be judged. ^om.
2. 16.
Paul makes it a plain case saying: God shall judge the secrets of men by
Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel. That which he says thus else where
enforces as much: Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who
will lighten things that are hidden in darkness, and make the counsels of the
hearts manifest. Wherefore the thoughts of the ambitious which are as wide as
hell mouth, (as Pirhus his thoughts roued from Macedon to Greece, from Greece
to Italy) which e^alt themselves like Eagles, and say in the haughtine (...)
of their minds: Obi^. 4.
Who shall bring me down to the ground? who swel in their hearts with swelling
titles, as Sapor the King of Persia, who wrote himself king of kings, Brother
to the Sun and Moon, partner with the Star^es. (...) thoughts I say of the
proud shall be r^^led. So the thoughts of Epicureans companions of swaggering
swill bowls, who think it good to take their fill of pleasure in this life,
licking up these and such like sayings: Let us eat and drink to morrow we
shall die. 1. Cor. 15.


Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptat.
Here eat and drink, disport and play:
For after death all fade away.
Soul take thy rest, for thou have goods laid up for many years. Better is a
living Dog the^ a dead Lion; Luke 12.
The thoughts of these copesmates shall be said before them: the thoughts of
the malicious shall then come to light, Job. 31, 31.
who said to themselves, Who will give me of his flesh to eat? The cogitations
of the covetous shall be (...), and the cu^taine of secrecy that has ever yet
covered them shall be drawn aside, so that all the world shall see them: Iam
4, 13, 14
who conceive thus in the Closets of their thoughts, Luke. 12. 16. 17. 19.
Soul take thy rest, to day or to morrow we will go into such a City, and
there continue a year, and bay and sell and gain.

These supposalls shall be scatter^d like fenne, and shall be proclaimed on
the house top. ^ou^terous thoughts, theeuish thoughts, thoughts of all
natures shall be opened. As for deeds, there is no doubt but they shall have
their doom: of this Paul ascertaineth us, saying: Romans 2 5. 6.
Against this day of wrath and of the declaration of the just judgment of God,
he will reward every man according to his works. So he does in another
place: We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, 1. Cor. 5. 10.
that every man may receive the things which is done in his body be it good or
evil. Mat. 16. 1^.
So does Christ in Matthew. The son of man shall come in the glory of his
father, then shall he give to every man according to his deeds. The sentence
of judgment is formed according to our deeds. Mat 25. 41* 43. 46.
I was an hu^gred and ye fed me not. for this cause Christ says: And they
shall come forth that have done good unto the resurrection of life: John. 5. 2^.
but they that have done evil, to the resurrection of condemnation. It is also
as plain a point, that our words shall be ventilated and judged. A blasphemous
word belked against the spirit of God, is both accomptable and unpardonable*
according to this saying of our Savior? Whosoever shall speak against the
holy Ghost, Mat 12. 32.
it shall not be forgiven him neither in this world, Mar. 3. ^8. 29.
nor in the world to come. Yea every vain word shall be sentenced to
judgment, as Christ says: Matt. 12. 36. 37.
Of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof at
the day of judgment: For by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy
words thou shall be condemned. If not any idle word may be borne with, how
shall oaths and cursed speeches, which are as common as stones in the street be
borne with? Woe be to great dinners, whereat when we have been at our full
meals, we have full mouths, and power out wastful words of wind, as lustily
as we have powered in wine wantonly. Job ^umpeth with the former, declaring that
we shall have it fall by our words: Job. 20. 29.
This is the portion of the wicked man from God, and the heritage that he shall
have of God for his words Christ tells the wicked servant, Matt. 12. 34
that he will convict and condemn him by his own mouth* Cyprian is of that
mind, that the rich glutton was most tormented in his tongue, Cypr. li. 1. ep
1.
because in his tongue he most offended Wherefore set we a watch before our
tongue and ward we well the door of our lips, Luke 16. 24.
that no unbeseeming word may pass out of it here after to punish us. Psalm.
34. 13.
A godly man purposing to commit the whole Psalm to memory, and to meditate
well upon it: when he had weyed well the first verse of it in these words: I
said I will take heed to my ways, that I offend not in my tongue, found study
enough of that to last him all his life, so that he could go no further. I
would to God we could take out this lesson while we lived, and we should he
highly learned. The calling of our brother but Fool in malice of mind, Matt.
22. 4.
is culpable of hell fire, so Christ has concluded. Now who is not wrapped in
the judgment by this verdit? Thus great is the Harvest of sin, what with
thoughts, words, works, which by a sickle from Heaven shall be cut down
at the general judgment.

The twelfth Chapter.
Of the terror and horror of the judgment day.
THough already (as fit advantages have been offered) we have by diverse
inferences in some sort, illustrated the terror of the judgment: yet because
it bears matter of a tractate by it self, and it minisstreth much profitable
use unto us, we will take it in hand. 1 The terrible signs, the sorerunners of
the judgment, do signify sufficiently the outrage thereof. Hereupon Eusebius
Emissenus makes this deduction. Cum talis futurus sit terror venientis, quis
poterit terrorem sustinere iudicantis. If such be the terror of his coming,
who shall abide the terror of his judging? These signs have had a room by
themselves, and therefore we here lead them. 2 The matter we have in hand is
euicted by the number without number that is to be judged. Isai. 45. 23.
I have sworn by my self (says God) the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness, Matthew. 7. 23.
and shall not return, Luke 17. 30. and 22. 69.
that every knee shall bow unto me, etc. An host innumerable as the sands of
the sea, shall stand before him. They shall be called together as soon as an
arrow can be delivered out of a bow, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye,
at the last trumpet. Make this supposall (my brethren) that all the bodies of
men did lie upon one heap, what a ruthful sight would it make: therefore what
an object and spectacle will that be, when so many Myriads of men shall be
mustred together in the air at the judgment day? When the Kings writ is out
for the execution of a noble man, ye shall have huge heaps of people trudging
to the execution place: but in the great day of judgment, wherein so many
kings shall stand out in Chains, and so many Nobles in Linkes of Iron naked,
trembling, all their proud retinue cut from their heels* to receive a
sentence of a never dying death, what beholding will there be of that, and how
formidable will the face and fashion of the same be? 3 The greatness of Gods
anger which will be declared at that day, shows likewise the great
horriblenesse of that day. The whole pack of worldly calamities, as plagues,
bloodshed, famine, rage of waters, and such like, are but a spark of that fire
of fury that lies close in his breast, covered (as it were) with Ashes, which
will break out and climb like the Sun in the morning, and consume sin and
sinners like stubble at the dreadful judgment. The Lord sent this errant
unto Pharaoh: Exodus 9. 14.
I will at this time send all my plagues upon thine heart. etc. And indeed for
this cause have I appointed to show my power in thee, and to declare my name
throughout all the world. The obstinate sinner in the judgment shall be the
soul of this sentence, upon his vilde head shall be powered the full violl of the
red mixed wine of his wrath, God will get him a name by him, and by their
punishment make declaration of the greatness of his righteous judgments. The
stroke of Gods hand in this life, is but the stroke of a rod: but the
punishment laid up for the life to come, is a seething pot. The vision of
Jeremy, the allusian hereunto gives us this comparison. Iete. 1. 11*
The de^ection of the Angels from their first estate of Adam out of Paradise:
Genesis ^ 14. 15. 16, 17, 23, 24
the browning of the first world with rivers of water* Genesis 7. 20.
and of Sodom and Gomorr^a with rivers of Brimston: Genesis 19. 24.
the slaughter of the first borne of Egypt the plagues brought upon Pharaoh:
Exodus 12 29.
the blotting out of the memory of Amalek from among men: Exodus 14. 27.
the destruction brought upon the kings Og, Exodus 17 14.
and Schon, Number. 21. 24. 33.
and the kingdoms of Chanaan: the over whelming of the blasphemer with stones:
the leprosy wherewith Miriam the sister of Moses was smitte^: I^^^t. 24. 14.
the rupture of the earth which cauered Dathan and Abira^^ the fir^^ Serpents
that destroyed the Israelites: Number. 12. 10.
the judgments showed upon Achan for his sacrilege: Number. 16. 31.
the sudden and fearful death of Eli the high priest. Number. 21. 6.
Joshua. 5. 22. 25. 26.
who by a fall from his chair brake his neck: 1 Samuel 4. 18
the repudiation of Sa^^ the death that was inflicted upon Vzzah for putting
his hand to the Arc the judgment showed upon the disobedient Prophet sent to
Jeroboam, 1. Sam. 13. 13
who was torn by a lion: 2. Sam. 6. 7.
the overthrow of an 1 Kin. 13. 24.
hundred fourscore and five thousand in one night of y^ Assirians by the
stroke of an Angel. 2. Kin. 19. 2^.


The singular severity showed upon a sort of scoffing boys, that beardes the
good Prophet, 2. King. 2. 23.
torn in pieces by two Bears. 1. King. 5. 27.
The Leprosy of Gihezi for his Simonie: 1. Sam. 17. 49
The slaughter of Goliath the champion, Act. 5. 5. 10.
by a child, the strange death of Ananias and Zaphira his wife stricken to
death by the sword of Peter's lips: the most wretched end of Herod, Act. 12.
23.
over crowed and overcame in the height of his pride by the lowest creatures in
the earth, eaten up by worms alive: impatient to stay till he was laid in
his grave.

These, and whatsoever else besides these are to be named, are not worth the
naming, with those devised torments for the damned, which shall be denounced
against them in the judgment. For all these were but rods held over them:
Prou. 13. 14. 24. and 15. 5. 12 31. 32. and 17. 20.
If thou strikest with a rod (says Solomon) he shall not dye. Prou. 13. 24.
A rod is but for correction, Psalm. 23. 4.
it works not destruction: And a blow given by this, proceeds not from
hatred but from love. He that spares the rod hates the Child. It is David's
saying: Thy rod and thy staff comfort me. We are corrected in this world
that we might not be condemned in the world to come. These punishments are but
wandes to waken us, ouer-whelmed with a dead sleep of security, and to rouse
us up out of the pallet of o^r carnal pleasures. But there is a scalding
kettle for the cursed company set on the fire against the day of judgment,
which is the seething Pot the Prophet before spoke of. A seething Pot is to
boil flesh in: but God has a capable pot for the nonce to boil much flesh in
it. This Pot is Hell pit, and the fire under it is the fire of Hell, and the
seething is their perpetual burning. Hereunto alludeth Job, Job. 41. 10.
saying: Out of his mouth go lamps, and sparks of fire leap out. Out of his
Nostrels comes out smoke, as out of a boiling pot or Caldron. Thus much also
is insinuated by the Psalmist in this wise, Psalm. 50. 3.
Our God shall come and not keep silence, a fire shall devour before him, and a
mighty tempest shall be moved round about him. It is fearful to hea^e a
terrible thunder: but the thunder clappe at that time will shake and rend the
foundation of the heart, of which David says, At the voice of thy thunder they
are afraid. Psalm. ^04. 7.
The countenance of the judge will be then so grim, his lips will be so burning,
and his face so full of indignation, as the very Saints will shun his
looks: wherefore Job says, Who shall hide me till the anger of God passes
over? And why? because there is no sin, but God finds it out. An unskillful
Painter pleases himself with his picture and workmanship, but he that is
perfect in that trade finds many faults in it. 1 Pet. 4. 17 18
If therefore in that day, Prou. 2. 21. 22
which is a day of Justice, the elect tremble, what shall sinners do? how shall
they not be at their wits end? wherefore Malachi cries out of that day,
saying: M^l. 3. 2*
Who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall endure when he appears?
For he is like a purging fi^e, and like fullers soap. It is a fearful thing
(says the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews) To fall into the hands of the
living God. Heb^. 10. 31.
To fall into the hands of a dying God, if I may so term our crucified
redeemer, there is much hope of comfort to b^e had. For thou shall find his
hands fastened to the Cross, so as he cannot smite thee, The punishment of
this life laid to that which is laid out against the life to come, I can
liken no better then to the triyall that is made of a Bull before he is led
to the li^tes to be baited, who only is basted a little with a couple of
clubs or cudgels: but when he comes to the combat, then clubs. Swords,
spears are set against him. These days are days of dalliance, wherein a
waster or rod of l^uing correction is shaken against us, but at that dismal,
^irefull, dreadful day, Lances, swords, spears, and instruments of death,
will be prepared against the face of all his enemies. Then shall the ma^^cles
and fetters be brought forth to bind Kings in chains, Psalm. 150.
and Nobles with linckes of iron. Luke 3. 17. 2.
I Lictor ligam^nus, ^^es 1. 9.
Erecutioner, M^t 2^.
due thine office shall the judge say: Judge. 7. 14.
Bind him hand and foot and cast him into utter darkness. Now are our feet
free, and of liberty to run the way of Gods commandments, but then they
shall be shackled and be in the stocks, and the iron shall enter into our
soul. Now are our hands, the instrument of good works, loose: but then they
shall be pinnioned, and they shall not be suffered to work any longer Wherefore
Joel of this day thus says: Let all the inhabitants of the land tremble: for
the day of the Lord is come, for it is at hand. (...). 2^
A day of darkness, Mark. 13. 25.
and of blacknes a day of clouds and obscurity. As he showed his power i^ the
worlds creation* his wisdom in it is g^bernation, so his justice shall be
manifested in the correction of the wicked, in that day of the declaration of
his righteous judgments. Then shall a sinner stand tongue tide, and have not a
word to say, as the mute man that came to the marriage without his wedding
suite. For what should he say? Job 9. 2,
for it shall be as Job says, How should a man compared unto God be
justified? If he would dispute with him, he could not answer him one thing
of a thousand.

The discovery that Ham made of the nakedness of Noah his Father, Genesis 9. 22.
25
his irrision and insultation thereupon, the sleep of Noah in his tabernacle,
his answer when he awaked, answers notably the manner of Gods judgment,
with the event thereof. For here Christ their Father is derided by his wicked
Son Cham, (I mean the whole progeny of all profane people, who make a
mock of his Cross, and insult over his shame. The afflicted estate of the
Gospel is traduced by them and despised. In the mean while Christ who is thus
contemned, seems a sleep as Noah was, as though he saw not, and understood
not what a sinner does. For how many Fornicators, Adulterers, blasphemers has
he long suffered to escape unpunished. But will be always sleep? no he will
awake as one out of sleep, and like a Giant refreshed with wine, will finite the
enemies upon the hinder parts, and put them to a perpetual shame. Then as
Noah when he awoke and knew what Cham had done, denounced his judgment upon
Cham. Cursed shall thou be. So Christ when he arises and perceives what the
wicked has done, he shall wrap them in the great curse, and say: Go ye
cursed into hell fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels: Which is parcel
of the form of the latter sentence, of which we list now consequently to
entreat.

The 13. Chapter.
The form of the last sentence.
THe Coppye of the final judgment, Math. 25. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35. 36. 37. 38.
39 ^0.
which passes upon all, is cramplified by Math. in the 25. Chap. at the 34.
verse to the end of the Chapt. But before the promulgation of the sentence, the
parties to be sentenced are separated. The Church millitant, is like a field
wherein cockle, daruel, tares grow up with good grain. It is a draw-net that
contains and brings to shore, fishes of all sorts. It is compounded of
wise and foolish Virgins. It is a mixed flock of Sheep and Goats. But in the
latter day, a division shall be made between good and bad, Math. 25 1. ^. 3. 4
5* and 33.
between Came and Abel: Isaac and Ismael: Math. 13. 25. 47.
Esau and Jacob: Cephas and Caiphas: Simon Peter, and Simon Magus: Jude the
Apostle and Judas the Apostata: Paul from Elimas the true Christian professor,
and every hipocrite and persecutor. The Church is commonly taken for every
company, for the society of the wicked, as where David says: Psalm. 26 5.
Ecclesiam ^n^lignantium odi, I have hated the assembly of the evil. The
Scribe and Towne-Clarke of Ephesus who appeased the Garboile, that the silver
Smith with the Apprentises to that trade had raised, Act. 19. 41
is said to have dismissed the church: but the force of the word signifies a
company called out from the common company. And truly such as are of the
Church indeed, are called out of the world into one company and body, into a
holy common wealth by themselves. Wherefore God when he first founded his
Church here in earth, he did cast out Cain from the face of the earth: and
surrogated Se^h from whom lineally the Sons of God should have distent. G^n.
4. 12. 14
So Abraham was called out of Chaldea, Genesis 26 63. 1^.
and separated from among them: and the faithful Sons of Abraham are
peremptorily commanded to go out of Babylon. Gen 1^. ^. 3. 5
Thus was Paul called from the company of Pharisees, Isa^. 5. 2. 11. 12.
when he was to her a Church man, Revel. 18. 4 5. 6.
and he names such as are Saints, called as the Romans. To you that be at
Rome beloved of God, Act 9. ^. 15.
called to be Saints: The Corinthians: Romans 1. 7.
unto the Church of God, 1. Cor. 1. 2
which is at Corinthus, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, Math. 9. ^.
Saints by calling. And Christ says that he came not to call the righteous.
Wherefore such as are called, are of the Church and such as are not called are
not of the Church.

We will sift every word of the sentence one by one. But we will first mark
the difference that this Judicial proceeding shall have from the definitive
doomes of men. In the trybunals of earthly Judges, an enditement is put in, an
evidence upon the Indicement is given: witnesses are produced and sworn: the
guilty person has his advocate and Counselor to plead his cause: a Iurye is
pannelled against the Prisoner.

But here are none of these circumstances used: Revel 20 11. 12. 13 chap. 3. ^.
and 21. 27.
for here the conscience shall accuse and excuse all. Christ shall not need
witnesses, as knowing the very secrets of the heart, and understanding the
thoughts long before. Wh^ by his presence shall comfort the elect, and confound
the reprobate. Against whom the devil shall urge the Law, and call for
justice out of hand: thus yelling like a woolf against the damned ones, as
Eusebius Emissenus notably thus delivers: O thou just Judge, these were
thine by creation, but they are mine by corruption: thine by nature, but mine
by disobedience: who heeded more my seduction, then thy wholesome instruction:
thine by Law, mine by fact: thine by work, mine by will. Then the king
speaks. He calls himself a king, who before named himself the son of
man: to show that his incarnation, and humiliation, shall be nothing
derogatorie from his Divinity and Majesty, when he shall come in the form of
a man, true man to be King of glory, and Judge general of all men.

He divides his speech into two parts, Mat. 25. 34. 35. 36.
suting them to the two sorts of people that shall stand before him. Mat. 25.
41. 42. 43.
1 The elect. John 5. 29.
2 reprobate. To the first he reads sentence of Absolution: to the second the
sentence of Condemnation. In the first we will handle these points. 1 Their
calling. 2 Who are called. 3 To what they are called. 4 Wherefore they are so
called. The first which is their calling is abridged in this word. Come: He
gives us free access unto himself, Matt. 25. 34.
without the mediation of Saints and Angels, as the Church of Rome fancieth. He
is the same in heaven in the height of his Majesty, as he was in earth in the
height of his humility. This was his Proclaimation in earth: Come unto me all
ye that are weary, (...) 11. 28.
and laden, and I will refresh you. All ye that are thirsty, come unto the
waters: The same he will proclaim at the standard in the air: John. 5.
Come ye blessed: Matt 25. 34.
And why? Because his pleasure is, y^ we he where he is, according to that
which he says in John: I will that where I am, there my servants be also: John
12.
And after this saying: I go to prepare you a place: and when I shall go and
prepare you a place. I will come again and take you unto me, John 14. 2. 3.
that where I am, there may you be also. 2 The persons that are called, are
pricked out in these words: Mat. 25. 34.
Ye blessed of my father. By which title, we see the whole conueyance of our
heavenly inheritance, as descending unto us by the mere blessing of heavenly
grace. We being by Adams ungraciousness sentenced to a curse.

By Christ therefore the case is altered, Genesis 3. 16. 1^. 18. 15.
and a curse is turned into a blessing, he being that blessed promised seed
that should bruise the Serpents head, the original of our curse: he being the
^eed of Abraham in whom all the nations of the earth are blessed, Genesis 12. 3
Wherefore we sing the Apostle Paul's song, Blessed be God the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Ephe. 1. 3.
which has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in
Christ. 2. Cor. 1. 3.
Wherefore this blessing came not by the law, 1. Pet. 1. 3.
but by grace. If the law of Moses could not make us blessed; much less can
the laws of Mahomet or the Pope make us blessed. Wherefore by grace we are
only gracious. 3. Whether, and to what we are called, Mat. 25. 32.
is showed in these words: Gal. 2. 21.
Possess the Kingdom of Heaven prepared for you from the beginning of the
world. Ephe. 1. 6. and 2. 5. and 24.
The Greek word signifies not simply to possess but inherit, which word
inherit, does utterly vannish merit. For as the Infant is borne an heir
before he can merit the inheritance, so God has made us inheritors, before
we were able to do any thing, either good or evil, as Paul by the examples
of Jacob, and Esau plainly teaches us.

Again, Romans 9. 11.
the preparation and ordination of the Kingdom here spoken of, 2. Tim. 4. 22.
concludes that it was ours before we were our own, Tit. 1. 4. and. 2. 11.
and. 3. 7.
wherefore we come not to it by any worthiness of our own. 4. The answer
wherefore we are so called, is given in the sequel: I was a hungry and you
gave me meat. As if he should have said, I call you the blessed of my Father,
and joint heirs with me in his Kingdom, Because by effectual works and
liuelye fruits thereof ye have testified your faith.

The works that are here specified, are works of Charity not of vanity, as
monastical vows, and such as have foundation from humain traditions: These
contain all whatsoever else may be named. For they that perform these,
doubtless will by hurtful to none, use deceit toward none, and be negligent
toward none, who are commended to their charge by God.

In the next place follows the condemnatorie sentence pronounced against the
wicked which would make a man's blood cold and co^gealed within him. Math 25.
Verse. 41.
Depart from me. Hereupon shall the damned say, Lord seeing we must so do,
yet bless us, Genesis 27. 38.
before we depart, Heb. 12. 16. 17.
as Esau said to his Father Isaac But with their departure is the blessing
departed from them likewise. Genesis 27. 33.
Jacob have I blessed, Math. 25.
and he shall be blessed says Father Isaac to Esau: so the godly have I
blessed, and they shall be blessed says God our Father to the wicked:
therefore he adds this word Curssed. Verse. 34. 41.
But I imagine how they further join together in petition and say: Lord,
seeing we are cast out of thy presence, and accursed: yet give us some resting
place: to this he answers, into the fire. Yet Lord (say they) let us speak
once more though we are to 1. Depart, 2. Cursed, 3. Into fire. and all these
things come upon us, yet Quousque Domine, how long shall these punishments be
upon us? Truly this their end shall be without end, the worm dies not, and
the fire never goes out, all the waters of the South cannot quench this fire,
therefore the nature of this fire is set down in the soote of the sentence
everlasting fire. Yet it were some refection (like the drop of water, Luk 16.
19 23 14. 25. 26. 27. 28.
the Purple Glution called for to cool his flaming tongue) that they might
have any companion to comfort them, but they shall have no better friends
then the Fiendes, the black Guard of Devils, their tormentors, shall associate
them: and this is the binding and winding up of all in these words prepared
for the Devil and his Angels. Yet further to work upon these words, that
they may better work in our souls, we will diue more deeply into every
circumstance.

But to the unfolding of these mysteries to the full, we had need of a damned
Doctor out of another world that might speak with a feeling, to give us more
feeling, such a one as the Glutton entreated of Abraham might be sent out of
Hell to forewarne his Brethren. For albeit, the scripture is Schoolmaster
sufficient as Abraham told Dives saying: They have Moses and the Prophets. Yet
no Preacher is more pleasing to those that are toward hell, then one that
comes from hell according to this surioynder of that damned Epicure. Nay
father Abraham, but if one come unto them from the dead, they will amend their
lives. How is it possible that a piece of Timber, that takes up the room of a
whole house should be drawn out of the little wicket, and Portall door of
that house? Here are so many circumstances of wonder in this Judicial
sentence, which so fill all our senses and amaze them, as out of the narrow
doors of any man's ^^pes they cannot in their full bigness be delivered unto
you. For here the discension, 2. Malediction. 3. Exustion, and 4. their
eternal duration are to be spoken of, unto which the damned shall be delivered
up. Oh departure, Curse, fire, eternal fire, formidable to hear: but
intolerable to endure. We will take them as they come to the hand, and as the
hand of the Scripture lays them out. The first word Depart, strikes the
hearers dead. It is a plague of all plagues, and the very bottom of the ^ioll
of gods wrath to be driven from God. Ca^n took this inflicted punishment so
heavily, as he thought nothing could be added more unto it, wherefore he said
to God. Gen 4. 1. (...).
Behold thou have cast me out this day from the earth, and from thy face shall
I be hid, and shall be a vagabond and runnagate in the earth, and whose ever
finds me shall slay me: that is to say, death the vpshot of misery shall
come upon me. 2. Sam. 14. 32.
Absalon of the two, thought it the best choice rather to die, then to be in
that disgrace with his Father, as not to see his face, and so he told Ioab
plainelye saying: Let me see the Kings face, and if there be any trespass
in me let him kill me: Psalm. 29. 3. 4. 5
As in the presence of God (as says the royal Prophet) Is the fullness of
joy, Psalm. 5 5 6. and 34. 17
and at his right hand are abundance of pleasures for ever more So when any
depart from God, Math. 7 23. and 25. 12.
or God departs from him, all misfortnne and misery does fall upon him.

If a King keeps Court in a Country Town, all the Country is intitched by
his coming, and empourished again by his departure: Psalm. 4^ 2. and 1. 8. ^4.
So when God is among us we are rich and wealthye men: and when he leaves
us, a poor and woeful estate s^ndeth us. The more the Sun is with us, there
is more plenty among us, Psalm. 36. 1^. and 4. 2. 2.
and with the absence thereof is pe^^urye, therefore the Summer season is the
fruitful season, ^euen the Sun is of most power: and the winter time is
the ^^ren, and dead time when the Sun is weakest. The more (...) Sunshine
of Gods presence is upon us, the more fruitful we are in every good work:
but when this decays, all decays with it. Psalm. 80. 10. Psalm. 25. 9.
What a hard thing therefore it is for any to depart from the living God,
from his sweet Savior Christ, who is the life, hope, sollace salvation, the
beginning and end of all things, in whom are all things. But thou for a short
sinful pleasure bring this horrible evil upon thee, and make thy self
an aliant from the Israel of God, a stranger and bannished man from the
heavenly Jerusalem.

If the Apostles for that little while that Christ told them he was to be
absent from them, they were^o sad and sorrowful, as expouading unto them
these vis words: Ioh 16. 22.
A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, A little while and ye
shall see me, he said: ye shall weep and lament, and measures their mourning
by the mourning of a woman in her travel: In what case shall thou be thou
accursed sinner, when not for a white, but for all eternity thou shall be
sh^t from the sight of God? Ioh. 13. 8.
If Peter to whom Christ said: If I wash thee not thou shall have no part with
me, was so loath to part with Christ, as he said: Lord not my feet only, but
also the hands and the head: How shall it be with the wicked, who shall be put
away from God, without hope of seeing his sweet face any more? The name of
Father in the entry of the sentence read over the godly, Mat 25. 3^.
omitted in the tenor of Judgment against the wicked, has good consideration.
For in the saying to the Godly: 41. 34. 41.
Come ye blessed of my Father, and absolutely saying to the damned: Go ye
curssed: It is to insinuate, that the blessing of happiness is his fatherly
goodness and not of man's worthiness, that eternal life is of the father of
lights: Of the other side, that damnation is not of the Father, Os^. 13. 9
but of our folly according to this sentence of Oseas. Thy destruction O
Israel is of thy self, but thy salvation is of me. That the Godly are saved,
it is of grace: that the wicked perrish, Psalm. 62. 11. and ^16 5. and 119 and
145 156. ^8.
it is of ^^nne. Let no man therefore commence complaint against God that he
is cruel, for he carries that which condemns him about him, as naturally
sinful. God is the author of all that is good: it procee^eth from our corrupt
natures, whatsoever is evil. In dividing this truth aright in this sort, we
shall walk with an even fool, neither giving to our selves that which is
Gods, or to God that which is only ours.

Neither is the learning of Gods predestination laid down by (...), which
te^cheth that God in his free and righteous counsel, e^e^^een some and
reiect^^ othersome. For albeit of mere gracs he chooses whom be will: yet
against such as are decreed to death, he is neither cruel nor wrongful,
seeing God owes them nothing and they are so dealt with for their sins, they
not being able to plead for themselves, Math 25. 41. 46 and ^ ^3.
We have paid the debts that we never owed. Next to this they a^e abiudred to
H^il fire: what he^l ^^e is, we (...) not curio^^ye to search, but we are
rather to be careful how to avoid it, as when a man's house is on fire, be
stands not to enquire from whence that fire came, but all his care is to
quench it. The wicked are ^on pared to dry wood that the fire will soon take
hold on, as when Christ said to the woman of Jerusalem that wept for him:
Luke 23. 3^.
If they do these things to a green tree, what shall be done to the dry? Or
unto Cha^^e which is presently inflamed, Math. 3. 13.
in these words of John, He will burn up the Chasse with unquenchable fire:
or to tares, which the remie sowed among good wheat in these words of Christ:
Math. 23. 38.
The tares are the Children of the wicked. These are to be made up into
Faggots, and sheafes, to be ^^tted to the fire according to that which is in
the parable. Verse. 30.
Gather ye first the tares and bind them in sheafes to burn them. But how
shall they be shocked and bundled up? namely^ the Usurer with his Broker,
Badger, regrater and workmen of such things, shall be bound up together to make
an even f^ggot according to the Statute. The decei^efull Merchant with his
apprentises, that make ly^^, oaths, dece^tfulnesse the principal porters to
bring in their living. The whole brood of Lawyers that can set a good dye upon
a b^dde cloth, and call bad good and good badde, that eat up the people like
bread, and grind their noses to the faces between the Milstones of
oppression? Preathers y^ make merchandise of holy mysteries: Barter^ (...) of
the Bible, that with their tempor^s^ng, and lukewarm Religion, dawbe up the
mudde wall of all abomination: every of these companies make several shea^^,
seruisable for the (...) Ye may run through all the ranckes and Clas^ies of
sin, in th^^ manner to make up the wood stacke that must feed^ this ^re.

But it is more then admirable which is said of the nature of this (...), Mat.
25. 41. 49.
that it is everlasting. For the ^unishment ex^eedeth the offense for the
offense was but momentame, and the judgment is eternal, which seems not to
be answerable to Gods infinite mercy. We answer extraordinary transgression
has no proportion with ordinary correction. Again, what is the cause that
thy domestical and ordinary fire goes out? Is it not because thou feedest it
not with combustible matter? For let it have always stouer given to it, and it
will always continue. In hell the fire is maintained by fuel fit for it. For
there is every man's wicked will, and endless desire of sinning which can
never be done away, because there is no repentance in hell, which is the
nutriment and preservative of this fire. Therefore so long as the sin
remains, it is but equity and justice that the punishment should continue.
Sinners are like Card-players, who will not give over though the night be
never so much spent, unless their Candle sail them: so did not the light of
life fail them, and were not their Candle (as Job says) put out, and spent
to the Socket, they would not cease to sin. Wherefore the punishment is
agreeable with their sinful wishes. They wish to sin for ever: therefore
they are worthily plagued for ever.

Therewarde of the righteous is everlasting: therefore the wages of the wicked
is everlasting. May not the son is sin against the father, and the subject
against his sovereign, as in the rule of reason and justice the one may be
disinherited, and the other confined and banished for ever? If we admit these;
it holds by comparison, that our heavenly King and father may do so with his
degenerate children, and rebellious people. But yet it is very strange, that
this fire should burn, and not consume? But the answer hereof is, the will of
the Creator, who has given this condition and quality unto it. The beast
called the Salamander, is not burnt but nourished by the fire, and thou may
by anointing thy self with the lard and fat of it, walk upon the fire and not
be burned. The fish that is d^cocted in vinegar, remains whole, and will not
fall a pieces, because the vinegar hardn^th it, and fitteth it for the frying.
If these smaller matters of no moment are brought to pass by man: shall not
God give this ^^sposition to the damned creature, much more to live and never
(...) in this fire?

Thus death shall be a restauratiue to the damned, and dying they shall never
die. Who does not now shake and quake at the remembrance of such erquisite
judgment? In respect of this fire, our ordinary fire is but as painted fire,
yet it is so fierce, as to ga^e the world thou will not endure thy body in it
one quarter of an hour: how will thou therefore wrestle with eternal
burnings? If we be so delicate, as lying on our beds, we cannot abide the
biting of a Flea, or Gnat: how shall we endure the venomous mouths of so
many Serpents, Dragons, poisonable and stinging creatures, that will come
gnawing upon us round about? There is weeping with a witness, for the eyes
shall deliver out rivers of tears, and the chattering of teeth shall be like the
clattering of an army of armed men. Flaetus ex dolor, stridor dentium
exfurore: Weeping comes of the dolor and gnashing of sees, Bernard 9.
of the furor that we shall there be put unto. There no part of body or soul
shall be able to solace or succor one another, but all shall be intollerably
pained. The mind shall muze of nothing but a maze of miseries past her getting
out: the memory shall recount nothing but old odious sins: the fantasy shall
feed of nothing but f^aceful visions: the eyes shall behold nothing but legions
of soul flends: the ears shall be always grated with the direful discord
of the hoarse and hideous howlings of hell hounds: the nosthrils shall be
filled with sulphurous fumes, and fuliginous filthy odours: the hands shall
hold fast nothing but globes and balls of fire: their feet shall go no
further then their chains will let them.

Thus has every part of man perfection of misery. The Brains of men have
been curiously busied in inuenting strange torments for men. A Book has
been written, entitled, De torquendis Christianis: Of tortering Christians.
Some have been given up to the teeth of wild Beasts: Some have been burned
upon a Harth and soft fire: Other spitted and roasted upon Gredyrons: Others
cast into furious fires, into Furnaces, and Ouens of hot: burning coals:
Others into vessels of boiling Lead, or Oil Some into bul^ and engens of
burning Brass: some have been rowle^ and rocked up ad down in Barrels of
sharp nails: some have been boared with Aules: some punched and sobbed with
bodkins: some have had their nails pricked through with Needles: their flesh
plucked a pieces with Pincers: their skins drawn over their ears alive: but
all these are but flea-bitings to the torments of hell.

There is no order, but eternal horror. There is an end without end, a death
that dies not: fire inextinguishable: darkness more palpable then the
darkness of the Aegiptians, and blacker then blackness it self: torments
more terrible then the torments of men, Psalm. 60. Psalm. 40. Esai. vlt. Iere 8.
Ezech. 38. Revel. 14. Revel. 16.
by how much the reach of the wits of devils goes beyond the inventions and
excogitations of men. There is the cup of the deadlyest wine that ever was
drunk up: there be the deepest Graves that ever were made to keep us down,
that we rise not any more: there be the waters of Wormwood and Gall: there be
those malignant aspects, pestilence, blood, pillars of smoke, huge hailstones,
storms and terrible tempests, wherewith he will plead his righteous cause
against the damned. That is that capable, and wide Winepresse of the Lords
indignation, where the smoke goes up forever, and there is no rest day nor
night: there be the infinite and unmerciful plagues which the Angels of God
power out of their glass bottels when blood is given them to drink, and they
boil so with heat, as they eat their very tongues for grief. Who can
better make Chronicle of this place then the purple Glutton that is in it, L^ke
16. 19. 22, 23, 24, 25 26, 28.
that may say: Et quorum pars vno fui: who shared in these torments, and had
his ordinary allowance in that lake? For the torments of hell would have the
uttermost farthing of their due of him, and would not depart with a drop of
water for the ease-ment of his tongue.

As Esau could not ransom his morgaged birthright with all the moisture of
his body that gushed out of his eyes: Genesis 17 34. 38.
so that merciless man if he could have delivered such plenty of tears,
Hebr. ^2. 16. 17.
as the Ocean has of waters, his request unto Abraham in that little might not
be obtained. Give we that he had speeded in that slender suit: yet what good
had it done him, when as his other parts, as his heart, liver, lungs, bowe^^,
arms, feet, fried and were all in a light fire. The torments of hell are to
last for a time, and times, and when time shall be no more. For when thou have
lain rosting there so many thousands of years, as thou can possible name,
thou art as far from the end as at the first. As the Gates of Paradise were
guarded by the Cherubins and the blade of a Sword shaken: Genesis 3. 24.
so Hell gates are warded by Porters for purpose, Matt. 25. 41. Matt. 27. 63,
64, 65, 66.
by the Devil and his Angels, and a Seal set upon the door liddes, (as the
Tomb and graue-stone of Christ was sealed up by the Priests.) So that as Adam
was barred from ingresse into Eden: so the damned sort shall be kept from
egresse out of hell. The coueriant that God has made with the day and night,
that they shall come in their turns, may be reuersed, the Stars may finish
their course, the Elements shall melt away like Ware before the fire, Heaven
and earth shall be renewed, Summer and Winter shall cease, but the pains of
poor Prisoners in Hell shall be perpetual. Yet more to particularize of the
pains of Hell. 1 They shall first feel the anger of God upon them, as Christ
says in John: John. 3. 36. Matthew. 3. 7.
The wrath of God abides in him. And as John himself says to the Pharisees,
and Sadduces: Who has forewarned you to fly from the anger to come? How
horrible and insufferable this is, conceive by the description of the
Scriptures of it. The Poet passingly portrayeth out unto us in his colors the
fierce qualities of Achilles, Horat in ar^ Poet.
giving him these Titles.

Scriptor honoratum si forte reponi^ Ach^llem,
Impiger, iracundus, mexorabilis, acer.
But this is nothing to that linely description made by the Prophet David, of
the Lords anger thus: The earth trembled and quaked, Psalm. 18. (...) 10, 11,
12, 13 14, 15.
the mighty foundations of the hills shaked, and were removed because he was
wroth. It strikes of (...) one side with woe, and on the other side with woe,
as not ^epenting of y^ it does: wherefore the Philistims said: Woe unto us, 1.
Sam. 4. 7, 8.
woe unto us, who shall deliver us out of the hands of tnese mighty Gods? Job
26. 11.
Job aggrauateth it thus: The pillars of heaven tremble and quake at his
reproof. Isaiah lays it down with these notable circumstances of
amplification. At my rebuke I dry up the sea, Isai. 50. 2, 3.
I make the floods desert: their fish rotteth for want of water, and dies for
thirst. I cloth the heavens with darkness, and make a sack their covering.
The like plummets of Lead does Jeremy hang upon the heels of Gods wrath, Iere.
4. 23, 24, 25, 26, 28.
to make it most heavy to us. I have looked upon the earth, and lo, it was
without form and void: and to the heavens, and they had no light: I beheld the
mountains, and lo, they trembled, and all the hills shook. I beheld, and lo
there was no man, and all the birds of the heaven were departed. I beheld, and
lo the fruitful place was a wilderness, and all the Cities thereof were
broken down at the presence of the Lord, and by his fierce wrath. For thus
has the Lord said, The whole land shall be desolate: yet will I not make a
full end. As he said to Samuel, 2. Sam. 3. 12.
When I begin I will also make an end: or rather, he will make no end, his
indignation being endless.

The rage of the rankest euemie among men, may be qualifyed, if not, it must
dye with him. But Gods anger is everlasting, as he himself is everlasting.
The hostility of men may with counter-hostilitie be resisted, though his
Quiver be an open Sepulcher, Iere. 5. 16. 17. and 16, 10, 13, 14, 16, 18.
and all his army very strong: if not when he is in the extent of his
cruelty, and has done his worst, he has but eaten thine Harvest, and thy
bread, be has devoured but thy sons and thy daughters, he has but eaten
up thy sheep, and thy bullockes, thy Vines, and thy Figg-trees, and
destroyed with the Sword thy fenced Cities: But Gods wrath is vnappeaceable,
irremediable, incomprehensible. Of the anger of God Moses speaks thus: Deu^
32. 22, (...) 24, 25, 26.
Fire is kindled in my wrath, and shall burn unto the bottom of hell, and
shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire the foundations of
the Mountains. Father Chrysostom says, that it is far more sharp to see
the angry countenance of the Judge, then a thousand hell fires. 2 It is also
one degree of their punishment to be separated and divided from God according
as it is in the form of the sentence: Mat^ 25. 4^.
Depart from me ye cursed: of which we have formerly entreated. 3 Their third
plague shall be their hell^^h company, Verse. 41.
the Devil and his Darlings: for so it is laid out in the definitive
sentence, in these words: Prepared for the Devil and his Angels. 4 ^et the
eternity of their punishment have the next place noted^n this addition of the
sentence Everlasting fire, Ma^^, 25. 41.
which by all likelihoode shall not only be a spiritual, but a corporal fire
which the very Scripture language does insinuate, as in these places: Matt
(...) Luke. 3. 9. (...)
The chafe he shall burn up with unquenchable fire. It is better for thee to
go lame into life, then having two hands, and two feet, to go into hell
fire. The (...) mistances of 1 weeping. Man 9. 43. 44, 45, 4^. Matt. 8. 12.
Matt. 13. (...) Matt. 2^ (...) Matt. 25. 46. Luke 13. 2^ Matt. 8. 29. Mar^
(...) Luke 8. 26. Luke 18. 3^
2 Gnashing of teeth: the forcible effects of that fire do import so much in
so many places of the Gospel inserted. So does the phrase of utter darkness:
and that of the binding of hands and feet. 5 With these they shall also have
their tortures in the Iaile. The Devils look for no less, as it appears by
their stomachous words to Christ. Come thou to torment us before the time?
This prison is likewise spoken of by Christ in the Parable of the king and his
Steward: He delivered him to the Iailers, till ^e should pay all that was due
unto him. 6 It is also grievous judgment inflicted upon the damned, to see
the righteous translated into the Kingdom of God, and themselves excluded.
(...) 1^ 2^. Ma^^ ^3.
Wherefore Christ says: There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye
shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the kingdom
of God, Luke 1^ 23. 24, 25 26.
and your selves thrust out at doors. When the Gluttons eyes beheld Lazarus
his felicity, it was mighty augmentation of his nuserie, then he cried unto
Abraham, and said: Oh father Abraham, send Lazarus, etc. Wherefore Adam when
he was chased out of a Paradise, Genesis 3. 22, 2^ 24.
was placed in a ground over against it, that his eye seeing it, the heart of
him might rue it. Now good Christ^an, whilst then read these things, what
think thou of them? How do they work in thee? They are as true as any
thing may be, and as terrible, which thou should better perceive, If I had
the tongue of the learned which might minister words in due time to move you.
But if these thus delivered do not touch you, you have no reason in you.
Wherefore while we have time, and God gives grace, and the church admonishes,
and the judge yet expects and calls, and puts out his hand unto us, and
gives to every one that asks, Let us lay hold upon the shield of faith,
and let us not suffer such advantages, which make for our salvation, to slip.

The Sanguinarie Souldior at the preaching of Judgment was recalled from his
bloody ways, and he came to John to be lessoned of him, Luke 3. 12. 13. 14.
in the way that leads to a better life: what shall we do say they? And
this is the song of the Publicans and Harlots, who were battered with the
hammer of denounced Judgment. Wherefore it is well said of Caietan, this is
the best preseruatius that may be to keep us in Gods fear.

The 13. Chapter.
Of the blessed state of the Godly in the life to come.
ALL the blessings whatsoever of eternal life, may he drawn to these two
heads. 1. To those that belong unto the mind. 2. To those that appertain
unto the body. The state of the body shall be such as no labors or sorrows
shall seize any more upon it, according to that which the spirit in the
Revelation says: God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes: Revel. 21. 4.
5. 6. 7. 24. 10. 11 12. 13. etc. Revel. 22. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 14.
and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither
shall there be any more pain. The heavenly properties of our bodies are
liuelye shadowed and represented unto us in the conditions of the body of
Christ at his resurrection: there being nothing to the contrary, but that we
should hope that our bodies should be conformable to his body, and that we his
members should be suitable to him that is our head. This is that the Apostle
says, Who shall change our vile body, Phil. 3. 21.
that it may be facioned like his glorious body. 2. The mind and spirit shall
then be endowed with this gift, that the slanerie of sin shall no more take
hold of it, the flesh (the insolent yoak-fellow thereof,) shall no more
ouererowe it, it being then at quietness with the spirit. 2. We shall then
love God according to the exigence of his royal law, his felicity shall
affect us as our own. All motions and perturbations of the mind, as of envy,
self-love, and the like shall be voided. 3. That which is of most moment,
which every one that is godly most of all destreth, which is the knowledge of
God, shall then be in full and perfect manner given unto it. 1. Cor. 13 12.
Whecefore Paul says: Now we see through a glass darkelye: but then shall
we see face to face. Now I know in part: but then shall I know even as I am
known. All vales and curtains shall then be drawn aside, and we shall see
God indeed in his perfect beauty, which none here possibly could do and
live, according to that which God says to Moses: Exodus 33. 20.
There shall no man see me and live. In this knowledge chiefly eternal life
stands, as our Savior Christ testifies saying: Ioh. 17. 3.
This is life eternal, that they know thee to be the only very God, and
whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.

To which answers this other speech of his: Abraham rejoiced to see my day,
and he saw it, and was glad. And of the like agreement is that which is also
spoken by him in another place. Blessed are your eyes for they see, and your
ears for they hear: Ioh. 8 5. ^. Math. 13. 16.
For many Prophets and righteous men have desired to see those things which
ye see, and have not seen them and to hear those things which ye hear, and
have not heard them. By this let every man judge, whose happiness he may hope
for when it shall be given us to see him our first borne Brother in the state
of his glory: and not him only, but the eternal Father with him, for whom
he keeps a kingdom purchased by his blo^d.

A glimmering sight hereof, M^th 17. 4.
and as it were a shadow of this happiness was showed to Peter on mount Tabor:
which made him to wish y^ he might dwell always there. And Paul had some
probate thereof, when he was caught up to the third heaven, ^ Cor. 124. (...)
20. 18. 19. (...) 5. 24. and 18. 16. Ex. 19. 16. 17. 18 19. Exodus 24. 18. Exodus
33. 9. Exodus 34. 28. 29. 30. 33. 34. (...).
where he heard words which could not be spoken, which were not possible for
man to utter. The face of Moses was so bright by his being with God, as the
Israelites could not behold it. How glorious the^ shall our faces be, when we
shall be made the Sons of God and live for ever with him? If when we read
the Scriptures with any liuelye feeling of Gods spirit, if in our fervent
payers powered out to God, if in the deep groaninges of our spirits unto him
for the evil that betide us, or at the powerful operation of Gods word that
is preached in us, we are much in wardly moved, and the joy, delight, and
pleasure thereof far exceed all the delights of the Sons of men, all which
are but as it were the first fruits, and beginning of eternal life: gather
from hence what that pure, perfect complete joy will be which we shall be
owners of in the life to come. But these amplyfications I had rather leave to
thy faith good Reader, then to prosecute further all the pleasures of this world
compared to our future felicity, being but as a drop of water to the huge
Ocean Sea. For would y^ have riches? (...) 1^. 11.
Riches and plentionsnes are in his house. Psalm. 2^^.
Would thou have pleasures? In thy presence^s fullness of joy, at thy right
hand are pleasures for evermore. If thou assiest life of him, ^ King. 1. 10.
he gives thee a long life even for ever and ever. If the joy of the people
made the earth to ring when Solomon was crowned: how shall not the floods
clappe their hands, and the hills rejoice when he shall come to judge his
people? If the Eastern wisemen when they saw the Star that led unto
Christ, were wonderfullye glad: what joy shall be in the holy ones of God,
Math. 2. 2. Luke. 2. 9. 13. 1^.
when they shall see the Son of God in his kingdom? Therefore the glory of
the Godly to come is wonderful and unspeakable.

But whe^^ we shall all be dignified alike, and be copartners of equal glory,
it is a great question, and has no certain determination by Scriptures,
Testimonies thereof serving of both sides. Each part is probable, neither
makes it to the matter of salvation, or any wise mar^eth it the certain
knowledge hereof.

We will hear what is disputed to and fro, and leave the Christian Reader to
his choice. They that plead for paritie, and equality of reward, reason in
this for^e: Math. 20. 13. 14. 15.
1. Those that labored in the Vineyard, though their work differed; their
wages was all one: the last had his pennye as well as the first, and the first
had no more, though he murmured never so much against his Master, neither had
he any wrong done him as the covenant between him and his Master absolutely
concludes. 2. Their second reason is Christ's asseueration. Math. 13. 43. Dan.
12. 3.
Then shall the just men shine as the Sun in the kingdom of their Father. But
there can be no greater light then that the Sun gives. And none but the
just shall enter into this kingdom: therefore they shall all have the light of
this Sun, that is to say, they ioyntlye shall have the perfection of all
glory. 3. They also urge the case thus: Math. 22. 30 Make. 12. 25. Luke 20.
34. (...). 36
Christ disputing with the Pharisees about the resurection: likeneth our estate
in heaven to the condition of the Angels, without any mention of different
contribution. 4. Whereas in this life there are odds between us, they give
the cause thereof to the flesh, which they carry about them, being more or
less regenerate as they are more or less mortified in the flesh: Of which
burden we shall be eased in the other life, the infirmity of the fle^h being
to be done away, and so there shall be no disturbance why we should not all
receive the like recompense. 5. Christ promises to the twelve Apostles equal
glory in heaven, that they shall sit on twelve seats and Judge the twelve
Tribes of Israel. Luke. 22. 30. Math. 19. 28.
And doubtle^se Paul though he be the thirteenth cannot but be equal with
them in honor, being unequal, and above them in labor. 6. Paul seems to
shake hands with this side, 1. Cor. 15. 10.
making the Corinthians and with them all the faithful in the like estate of
glory, while he says: 1. Cor. 6. 2. 3.
Know you not that we shall judge the Angel?

7. Lastly it is written that the sufferings of these times have no proportion
with our future felicity. If God respects not our works in this work: from
whence say they do we draw this difference of the recompense? This our
dignity is meerelye Gods dignation: therefore we fetch the inequality
thereof not from our merrits, but his mercy: whereas they of the contrary
side seem to strengthen their opinion by distinguishing of works, as if by
the condignitie of them we did earne and work out this glories.

There be other reasons, but these are the chiefest that make for this matter.
The adverse part is as well provided to hold their assertion: Their arguments
are many and good, and they are these. 1. First they say, God will reward every
one according to his works, and as his work is so shall his wages be.

The Scriptures go with this: Romans 2. 6.
it is Paul's saying: Who will reward every man according to his works. 2.
Daniel foretelling the condition of the Saints after this life, is flat for
difference of rewards, saying: They that be wise shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament, Dan. 12. 3.
and they that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the Stars for
evermore. But there is manifest difference between the brightness of the
firmament, and the brightness of the Stars. 3. From the contraries they
conclude the case thus: There are diversities of punishments in Hell, therefore
the consequence holds by comparison that there is variety of rewards in
heaven. That the sufferings in Hell are sundry, it is apparent by Christ's
words: It shall be easier in that day for Tyrus and Sydon, Math. 11. 22.
Luke. 10, 13. 14.
then for Corozain, and Bethzaide and for Sodom, then for Capernaum: wherefore
degrees also of glory are divided. 4. That there is not only one reward for
all the righteous, but that there are many of them, it is plain by that which
Christ elsewhere says: John. 14. 1.
In my Fathers house are many dwelling places. 5. Further if our state must be
suitable (...) the Angels, Math. 22. 30. Mark. 22. 25. Luke 20. 36.
as Christ has let it down. In the resurrection we are as the Angels of God
in heaven: it must needs be that we have sun^^^ degrees of glory because
there are several degrees of Angels. Math. 13. 8.
6. The seed that was (...) upon the good ground, came not up like, but some
better then some: some gave an hundredth fold, some sixty fold, and another
thirtee fold.

This not obscurelie shadoweth disproportion of retribution of heavenly
glory. Math. 2 5.
7. So does the Parable of the talents, those that had them in ban^k were
rewarded more or less according to the improouement they made of ^h^m. In the
Revelation mention is made of a peculier fl^cke who follow the law whether
soever he goes, Revel. 14. 4.
agr^^^ which seems not to be given to others. Math. 5. 19.
8 This als^ ^^rength^eth the cause very much that Christ says, Whosoever
shall observe and teach them, the same shall be called great in the Kingdom
of heaven: Thereby insinuating that there are greater and lesser in that
Kingdom.

The like is enforced out of these his words, Math. 20. 27.
Whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant 9. (...) of the
^postle makes much to th^s purpose: 2. Cor. 9. 6.
He which seweth sparingly, shall reap also sparingly, and he that s^weth
liberally, shall reap also liberally. But most pregnant is this proof of
the same Ap^stle. 1, Cor. 15. 4^ 4. ^3, 44,
There is one glory of the Sun, and another glory of the Moon, an other
glory of the Stars: for one Star differs from another in glory. But the
reddition and answer heerev^to makes the case plain and palpable, So is the
resurrection of the dead. These differences of dignity in the creatures do
not abl^e illustrate the differences of glory, that shall be in men's bodies
after there surrection. Finally if we may measure this matter by the line of
very probable reason, it is very likely that the degrees of glory in the
life to come, shall answer the diuersiue of judgments and qualities given us
in this life. The more we have used our Talents by heavenly dispensation
committed unto us, to the glory of God, and the good of the church, the more
shall our felicity be in the day of retribution: wherefore the twelve
Apostles who were royallye embroatered and garnished with gifts, and were
Master workmen in the Primitive Church, shall have that stately pre-eminence
over others, Math. 19. 28. Luke. 22. 30. ^3.
as they shall sit in judgment over others* they should have twelve scaffolds
and Chaires placed for them, whereupon they shall fit to judge the twelve
Tribes of Israel. But it may be thought if some shall have so much, there will be
nothing for othersome: we answer that the Fountain of that felicity is
bottomless and can never be emptied.

It is with that as it is with the great Sea, Apo^. 22. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
to which if you carry never so capable vessels, yet there is more then enough
always to fill every ones tanckerd come he as often as he will: Revel. 21.
1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
so though we draw never so deepelye of the waters of life: it has a
welspring of ever living water, to give abundantly to all, abone all that we
are able to speak or think. The eye has not seen, the ear has not heard,
neither can the heart of man conceive the things that God has prepared for
those that love him. The latter I embrace as the cheerefullest and most
current opinion, let others be as they think good of contrary imagination
Being ^ooted in this persuasion, I am heartned to all zealous contrition in
Religion, that I may attain more heavenly benediction.

Another question would be touched though we will not undertake fully to
determine it: Whether we shall know one another in heaven? I am more careless
in this matter, because it is curious. Let our care be to know whether we
shall come to heaven, then to know whether we shall know one another in heaven.
But it is clear we shall know one another there, though we know them not
here. For doubtless Adams knowledge in his best estate must give place to that
knowledge which we shall have in our glorified estate. But Adam knew Eve whom
he never saw before, and said, Genesis 2. 2^
This is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh: Therefore what reason is
against it, why we should not know one another in heaven, though never known
here to us? Mark 9. 4. ^. Math. 17. 4. Luke. 9. 28. ^9 30. etc.
This is one argument in the cause. Again who does not know that the
clarification of Christ on Mount Tabor was a lively idea of our glorification:
But when Christ was clarified, and Moses and ^lias appeared, Peter presently
knew them though he never before knew them: this is another good argument in
the cause. Luc. 16. 22. ^3 24. etc.
Finally, it Dives knew (...) in hell, does it not necessarily follow that we
all know one another in heaven, where our knowledge shall be absolute and
perfect, whether we shall know one another, so as we shall say this was my
Father, Mother, Sister, Brother, etc. I can say nothing to it, but so I leave
it, and leave th^e to God. Now to the King numortall inusible, to God only
wise be all honor and glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

