THE ART OF WAR.

Being the only rare book of Myllitarie profession: drawn out of all our
late and foreign services, by William Garrard Gentleman, who served the King
of Spain in his wars fourteen years, and died Anno. Domini. 1587.

(*)

Which may he called, the true steps of war, the perfect path of knowledge,
and the plain plot of warlike exercises: as the Reader hereof shall plainly
see expressed.

()

Corrected and finished by Captain Hichcock. Anno. 1591.

AT LONDON, Printed for Roger Ward, dwelling at the sign of the Purse in the
Olde-balie. Anno. M. D. XCI.

To the right Honorable Robert Deuorax, Earl of Essex, etc. Knight of the
noble order of the Garter, and Master of her Majesty's horse. Health, honor,
and happiness, both in this world, and the world to come, heartily wished for.
Having been requested (right Honorable) by a dying Soldier, to publish in
his behalf, the xiiij. years fruits of his mercinarie travail, in the wars
of the Low Countries: I have thought fit for that the travail of well
deserving pains, shall not die together with the dead man, to publish his
industry, so worthy both of knowledge and practice, to the worlds view, for
the present and future benefit of our Nation (as his chiefest care was) that
they might with ease, reach into the knowledge of that, the knowing whereof,
had cost him time, toil, blood, and study. The work is commended by Captain
Robert Hichcock and others, such as experience has made able to judge in this
honorable profession: so that for me to bestow more praises, upon a thing so
praised, were but to lessen what I wish increased, and to seem to commend that
which does best commend it self. Only this aid I covet, to add for his
greatest grace, that it would please your Lordship, under the protection of
your honorable acceptance, to deigne the patronage of his painful endeavors,
and then the work may be assured of defense: as when a well deserving servant,
is supported by an able defending Master. Therefore only by your Lordshyppe I
wish this work may be pefected, whose humors and honors of mind, so well
suteth with the honorable matter it treats on, that as there cannot be (of
worldly things) a more worthy subject then this to write on, so can there not
be found a more worthy Patron, for a discourse of such worth, whose raze
assured him a Soldier whilst the flower was in the bud: and whose timely
years since, have witnessed that of his valor, which neither time nor years
can deface. I pray GOD raise up many such minds, to make our Country of all
Nations the most happy: and also that this work may stir up the hearts of
all Noble men, Gentlemen, and all other her Majesty's subjects that mind to
profess Arms, that by the exercise of the same they may be the better
instructed with greater skill, and so with their manly and valiant minds, to
the defense of our most gracious sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, and their
native Country. And thus in all humility I cease, wishing your Lordshippe
such fortunes and happiness, as do ever attend so honorable and virtuous
deserts.

Your Lordships devoted poor freende: Thomas Garrard.

Faults escaped.
IN the Epistle to the Reader, page 1. line 5. for four, read few. Page 28.
line 30. for espion, read espiall. Page 42. line 28. for lost, read loose.
Page 49. line 12. for be by what, read be punished. Page 52. line 36. for
them, read then. Page 68. line 7. for reserving, read receiving. Page 130.
line 12. for for, read but. Page 131. line 35. for the standerd bearer, read
the Ensign. Page 132. line 15. for where, read with. Page 133. line 36. for
it, read is. Page 143. line 1. for more bent, be more bent. Page 157. line 6.
for but in, read as in. Page 164. line 25. for reserving, read receiving.
Page 184. line 23. for be rest, read the rest. Page 191. line 12. for from
the, read from them the. Page 191. line 30. for rendies, read order. Page 215.
line 26. for commit, read commit error. Page 234. line 28. for would, read
would have. Page 239. line 22. for must yet, read must yet have. Page 253. line
13. for 10500. read 10000. Page 267. line 2. for out some, read out of some.
Page 272. line 7. for of, read at. Page 272. line 15. for the word, read the
wood. Page 276. line 17. for where, read unto. Page 304. line 7. for band,
read Proclamation. Page 317. line 12. for Chausse traps, read gall traps. Page
329. line 22. for Counscarpe, read Counterscarpe. Page 352. line 19. for
gracious, read glorious. Page 352. line 2^, for justice to, read justice is
to. Page 360. line 22. for service, read wars. Page 363. line 22. for of
this, read after this.
Captain Robert Hichcock, his commendations of this Book: who wishes to the
worthy Reader, great grace, good fortune, and everlasting felicity.
THis Book (courteous Reader) treats of all kinds of traynings of
Soldiers, marchings, encampings, orders and discipline of war, with all the
Offices belonging to a Camp Royal, and leaves four points of Martial
exercises untouched in the highest degree of knowledge, and playnest discourse,
wherein a number of rare and probable matters are set down, with great
study, diligence, and experience: as well of foreign and familiar examples
and proofs, drawn out from fatherly counsel and their grave admonition, as
also enlarged by new policies and practices of the greatest Soldiers in
Christendom, in these our present days, and compounded with the long
experience, toyling after the Cannon-wheele, and sharp services, pennury,
hunger, cold lying on the ground, and a hundred sorrows, hazards, dangers,
and hard adventures, the which he himself has sustained being the Author
hereof. This Book shall show and teach the order of the Field, the duty of
Officers, the charge of Generals, the art of War, and the whole discipline
belonging to the exercises of Arms, and marshalling of a Camp and Army, how
great soever: and to make manifest the orders, directions, dignities, and
princely powers that foreign Kings this day has devised, ordained and set
down, for the governing of their Camps, and leading of their people.

This Book also, is so necessary for this time, and so excellent a piece of
work, as cannot be spared, nor red too often, nor too much praised, and shall
be such a myrrour to look in, that every unlearned Soldier, beholding the
same with eyes of judgment, shall at the first sight behold his own
ignorance, and become a leader of the ignorant multitude, the which before
did it perhaps but with brave words, and bare speeches, that never bringes
forth any good knowledge.

This Book shall not with senseless imitation lead men amiss, but with
sweet persuasions, and probable matter, shall confute the errors of wilfulnes,
and confirm the ancient and old rules for the substantial order and
government of a Camp, and with deep aduisement to discuss and descide all
opinions of wars.

This Book does likewise plainly express the mystery and hid cunning of
fortifycation, and declare in ample and fine drawn plots. goodly plotformes,
needful inventions, and noble works of great surety and majesty, worth the
noting, and meet for men of war to have in everlasting memory.

And now, to tell you how this Book came to my hands, it is to be understood,
that a Gentleman called William Garrard, serving the King of Spain fourteen
years in his wars, drew and made this same Book, with great judgment and
good leisure, and coming into England, in short time after sickned, and before
his death, sent the said Book to Sir Thomas Garrard Knight, unto whom he was a
very near kinseman. Sir Thomas having regard to the service of her Majesty
and his Country, and seeing the time required the publishing of the same,
conferred with me about the same: praying me, to correct the faults of the
Book, the which I have done with good consideration. Confessing, though
somewhat I have seen and red, beside my experience in the wars, that never
to this day came such a Book into mine hands: for goodness, for plainenes, for
perfectnes, and true demonstrations, hoping that no man of judgment, but will
yield due commendations to the dead deviser of this large and worthy volume,
and that the reading of the same shall so please, and content, all that shall
behold it, that they shall give their common consent, that the Book is worthy
the embrasing to be red, to be known, and the directions therein to be
followed. The work it self is sufficient to win favor, and persuade more
good matter, then any Book that ever I saw touching the art of war, to the
reach of mine understanding, as knows Almighty GOD: who send you all
happiness. 1590.

Always yours in most humble manner, Robert Hichcock.

THE FIRST BOOK OF MILITARY DIRECTIONS, In the which is set out how a good
Soldier, Disnier, and Corporal, ought to behave themselves in vvarres:
Together with the Martial Laws of the field, and other necessary Notes and
Offices,
And first what is to be required, and necessary to be observed in a private
Soldier.
THE platform of a Fortress, by how much more it is planted upon a sure
foundation, by so much more it is perticipant of a firm and forceable
perfection: which reason duly considered it ought to lead every man so to
rule himself in all his affairs, as he may be both apt to receive, and able
to perform all virtuous and valerous actions. Therefore he that desires to
become a Soldier of assured good quality, to the intent he may be able to
persevere in each enterprise, bear out every brunt stoutly, and serve
sufficiently, he ought to have a strong body, sound, free from sickness, and
of a good complexion: So shall he be able to resist the continual to^le and
travail, which of necessity he must daily take, as continual and extreme
cold in the winter, immoderate heat in the Summer, in marching in the day,
keeping sentinel in the night, and in his cold Cabben, in secret ambushes, and
in Trenches, where perchance he shall stand a number of houers in the water
and mire up to the knees: and besides upon Bulwarks, breaches in espials, i^
Sentinels, perdues, and such like, when occasion requires and necessity
constraines: of all which exploits and discommodities he must perforce be
partaker.

Wherefore that man which is not of such sufficiency in body (to the end h^e
spend not his time in vain) it is very requisite he resolve himself to
exercise some other profession, for although some do hold that few men be
strong by nature, but many by exercise and industry: yet that notwithstanding
strength of body is first to be required, in respect that a Soldier must be
as well acquainted, and as ^ble to bear continual trauail, as a Bird can
endure to fl^e, yea and to put on a resolute mind to bear all the miserics
and ha^ardes of warlike affairs. A Soldier is generally i^ be chosen betwixt
18. and 4. 6. years.

Moreover I suppose it most necessary, that every man according to the nature
of his body, and the inclined motion of his mind, make election of his Arms
and weapons, as of pike, halberd, or (...): nevertheless respect ought to be
had to the p^oportion o^ his person, and to take such Arms as does best agree
with the same: to a tall man a Pike, to a (...) stature a halberd, and to a
little nimble person a Pe^ce. But if he prefer his proper disposition before
the quality of his person, it is very necessary he exercise that weapon he
makes choice of, to the intent he may attain unto a most perfect practice of
the same, for as no man at the first time when h^e takes any tool or
inst^ument in his hand, grows immediately at that instant to be a perfect
artificer: even so it is with a Sou^dier, (...) experience has instructed him:
touching which I mean to say somewhat.

He which seeks to attain and attribute to himself the honorable name of a
Soldier, must first employ his time in practice of those Arms wherewith he
means to serve, and so appl^e his time, that when any enterprise shall cast
him forth to make proof thereof, he may be able to handle his Piece with due
dex^eritie, and his pike with an assured (...): since these be she weapons
wherewith now Mars does most co^^ arm his warlike troop, and try each
doubtful fight of bloody (...) for in this our age experience and practice
makes apparent that Archers amongst forr^ine Nations be never used, and the
Halberd but either amongst few or few in number. The Archer serves to small
purpose, but when he is shadowed with some Trench or Bulwark free from
Hargabuse or Mushet shet: Or that lyning a band of Hargabusiers, he does second
them in any (...) onset, and then a whole flight of (...), so that they be
light and able to fly above twelve score, will meru^ilously gaul any maine
battle of footmen or Squadron of Horsemen, The Halberd likewise does only
serve in the sack of a Town, in a b^rach, in a Sallie or Can^isado, to enter
a house, or in the throng of a stricken battade to execute slaughter. Wherefore
touching these two weapons, unless necessity constrame, and that Hargabusiers
be wanting, Archers may well be spa^ed: and these great numbers of Halberdiers
and Bill men, which are and have bin in times past used in England, may well be
left off, save a sew to guard every Ensign, and to attend upon the Colonel,
or (...), which man Army will amount^d a (...) number to depresse (...)
overcome and flying enemy.

Therefore a Soldier must either (...) himself to bear a Piece or a Pyke:
(...) he bea^e a Piece, th^n must he first learn to hold the same, to (...)
h^s (...) his two foremost fingers and his th^mbe, and to plant the great (...)
on h^s breast with a gallant sou^dierlike grace: and being ignorant, to the
int^nt he may be more encouraged, let him (...) first with the firing of (...)
in his pa^, and so by ^egrees both to (...) off, to bow and bear v^ his body,
and so consiquently to attain to the level and practice of an assured and
serui^eable shot, readily change and with a (...) couch discharge, making
cho^se at the ^ame instant of his mark with a quick and vigy^ant eye.

His Fiaske and Tutchbaxe must keep his Powder, his purse and mouth his
bullets: in skyrmysh his left hand must hold his match and Piece, and the right
hand use the office of chargyng and dischargyng.

Being against he Enemy, why left with an (...) course he^ does trauerse his
p^layne ground, or else takes advantage of his place and i^uasion, as under the
safeguard of a Trench, the back of a Dytch, old wall, tree, or such lyk: let
him ever first load his Pe^ce with Powder out of his Flaske, then with her
Bullet, and last with amuring, and tutch Powder, (...) ever that the (...) be
el^ane, the cover (...), and the Tutch hole wide, or else wei (...): so that
still observing modest order t^ h^s trauerse, neither euerflow, nor over
speedy, to the (...) he become not each man's mark through his stuggish^es, nor
run himself out of breath through his own (...), for the most part (...) his
side toward his enemy: let him discharge going, bu^* ever standing: so shall
he the better (...) the enemies shot and choose his assu^ed aduant^ge.

A Soldier ought to be careful that his furniture be good, substantia^l, and
(...) from rain, the charge of his Flaske just for his Piece, and the Spring
quick and sharp: The P^pe of his Tuchboxe somewhat wide, that the Powder may
have free passage, which otherwise would choke up.

In time of marching and trauailyng by the way let him keep a paper in the pan
and tutch hoale, and in wet waether have a case for his Piece somewhat
portable, or else of necessity he must keep the same from wette under his
Arme-hoale or Cassocke, or by some other invention free from damage of the
weather, and his match in his pocket, only that except which he burns: and
that likewise so close in the hollow of his hand, or some artificial pipe of
Peuter hanging at his girdle, as the coal by wette or water go not out.

It is moreover requisite, that a Soldier keep his Cock with oil free in
falling, and his Piece bright without rusting, neither must he want his
necessary tools, as a Scowrer, Tyrebale and worm, having every one a vice to
turn into the end of the scouring stick, so that if through wet wether or
any other Accident, his piece will not be discharged, the careful Soldier may
with his Tyreball pull out his bullet, with the worm, the Paper and wet
Powder, and with his Scowrer make his Piece clean within: His Scowrer must be
trimmed on the end with a Lynnen cloth of a sufficient substance, therewith to
make clean the cannon of his Piece within. The one end of his Skouring stick
ought to have a round end of bone of just bigness with the mouth of his Piece,
therewithal at his pleasure to ram in Powder and Paper, or in steed of
paper, such soft hair as they stuff Saddles withal, the danger whereof is not
like: but this the Soldier must use when time permits. During the time of his
service let him ever have dilligent care to keep his Piece clean and bright
within, and once a fortnight, or at the least once a month take out the Breech
and thoroughly view and wash the Barrel within, to see whether it has any
flawes, brackes, chambers, frettinges, or ruptures, which would endanger the
breaky^g thereof, especially if before hand the end of his bare Scowrer have
given him any cause to suspect such faults, to the intent he may change the
same for a new for fear of spoiling himself*

He that loves the safety of his own person, and delights in the goodness and
beauty of a Piece, let him always make choice of one that is double breeched,
and if it be possible a Myllan Piece, for they be of a cough and perfect
temper, light, square, bygge of Breech, and very strong where the Powder does
lie, and where the vyolent force of the fire does consist, and notwithstanding
thynne at the end.

Our English Pieces approach very near unto them in goodness and beauty (their
heaviness only excepted) so that they be made of purpose, and not one of these
common sale Pieces with round Barrels, whereunto a beaten Soldier will have
great respect, and choose rather to pay double money for a good Piece, then to
spare his Purse and endanger himself.

But to return to my matter, let a Soldier have hangyng ever at the strings
of his Tutch box, or some other ready part of his garment, a couple of
proyning pri^es at the least, that if by fortune the tutch hole of his piece be
stopped or furred up, he may therewith both make his pan clean, and yield a
ready passage that the fire may have her course, by incorporating both the
tutch Powder without, and the corn Powder within together. But a ready
Soldier will always foresee that the toutch-hole be so wide, as the Powder
without in the Pan may have free concourse to that within the Piece, thereby to
hasten more speedy discharge, considering a Soldier can not have leisure and
commodity to proine his Piece at al times, but must of necessity use a great
dexterity.

But since I am fallen into the speech of a quick charge, and nimble
discharge, I will by the way declare the opinion of certain Nations therein.

Experience of late days has taught us, that those Nations which follow the
wars, invent every way how they may endomage the enemy in all their
enterprises, but especially in Skirmish, which for the most part consistes in
shot, and by such as can with the eye of his mind make an assured level, and
with a nimble discharge, both choose out and kill his enemy.

And therefore those Soldiers which in our time have been for the most part
levied in the low Countries, especially those of Artoyes and Henault, called
by the general name of Wallownes, have used to hang about their necks, upon
a Baudricke or border, or at their girdles certain Pypes which they call
Charges, of Copper and Tyn made with couers, which they think in skirmish to
be the most readiest way. But the Spaniard dispising that order, does
altogether use his flaske.

The French man, both charge and flaske. But some of our English nation, their
pocket, which in respect of the danger of the sparks of their Match, the
uncertain charge, the expense and spoil of Powder, the discommodity of wette,
I account more apt for the show of a triumph and wanton skirmish before Ladies
and Gentlewomen, then fit for the field, in a day of service in the face of the
Enemy: and in like sort the charge which either does shed and loose his Powder
whilst a Soldier does trauerse his ground, or else is so cloddered and rammed
together, that he shall be forced sometimes to fail of half his charge.
Therefore I conclude with the Spaniard, that a good Flaske is that which is
most warlike and ready in service without the curious help of any
extraordinary (...).

One of the greatest helps consistes in Powder and match: For a Souldyer must
ever ^uye his Powder sharp in ^ast, well incorporate with salt ^ceter, and not
(...) of Coal dust. Let him accustom to dry his P^der if he can in the
Sun, first sprinkled ever with Aqua vitae, o^ strong ^aret Wine etc. Let him
make his Tutch Powder, being finely (...) and (...), with quick pay, which is
to be bought at the Powder makers or (...), (...): and let his match be so
boiled in Ashes, Lie, and Powder, that it will both burn well, carry a long
Coal, and that will not break off with the hard tutch of your finger. The
preparations wist at the first tutch give fire and procure a violent, ^edy, and
thundering d^charge. Some use Brimstone finely powdered in their tutch Powder,
but that ^urres and stoppes up your breech and tutchhoale.

The Bullet of a Soldiers piece must be of a just bigness with the mouth of
the same, so that ^ng in smoothly, it may dry^e down, and close up the mouth
of the Powder. Some contrary to the laws of the field use Chain shot, and
quarter shot, which is good in the defense of a breach, to keep a Fortress, or
upon ^pboard: but being daily used, it will ga^e a piece within, and put it in
hazard to break, specially in a long skirmish when the Barrel is hot.

Note that after his piece is very heat, let the Souldyer if he can, give
somewhat a less charge for fear of bursting his piece, unless he have good
trial thereof. If the stock of his Piece be crooked, he ought to place the
end just before above his left Pappe: if long and straight, as the Spanyardes
use them, then upon the point of his right shoulder, using a stately upright
pace in discharge.

It is not in vain to advertise him, that in skirmish he must hold his Piece
betwixt his Thombe and the ends of his Fyngers, which I account asure mean,
betwyxt gryping of the Barrel, and laying the same only upon his foremost
Finger and Thombe, for the one is ou^r dangerous, and the other altogether
vnsteedy.

I judge it likewise most conuenyent for him, to take hold of his Piece with
his left hand in that part of the wood (wherein the Barrel lies) there as the
Piece is of most equal balance. Although some accustom themselves to hold it
just under the Cock, by reason whereof he shall be enforced to change his
hand if he charge out of a Flaske, into the myddest of the Piece, to bring
down the mouth to his Flaske, which is a great delay and hynderance in
skyrmysh. So to con^e, he that means to be accounted a forward and perfect
good that, by continual exercise must be so ready, that in all particular
points touching his Piece, Powder, Match, Bullets, and the use of them, that
he neither be to seek, nor grow amassed in the furyous rage of Bellmas fiery
skyrmyshes, her sudden surprises, and bloody staughter of dangerous assaults
of crueil battles.

The Musket is to be used in all respects like unto the Hargabuse, save that
in respect he carries a double Bullet, and is much more weighty. He uses a
staff breast high, in the one end a Pyke to pytch in the ground, and in the
other an Iron forke to rest his piece upon, and a hoale a little beneath the
same in the sta^e: whereunto he does add a string, which tied and wrapped about
his wrest, yields him commodity to tra^ his Forke or Staff after him whilst
he in skyrmish does charge his Musket a fresh with Powder and Bullet.

Now to speak somewhat of a Pykemans charge, a few words shall suffice,
because I will not be over t^dyous. Let him learn to toss his Pyke, ^ouch and
cross the same, to receive the vyolent charge of Horsemen, to front the su^us
shocke of Footmen, and be able to furnysh out his right both a far off and
near hand: which notes with the like will be sufficient, by reason that he
is for the most part put to stand in a mayn and square battle. Both the
Hargabusier and (...) must wear a short Ra^er and a small Poin^do: For if in
the midst of Encounters and Skirmishes, they be driven to use them, their
length is an occasion they cannot be drawn, unless he abandon his Piece or
Pike, whereby he shall either loose his Pike, or want his Rapier, which at the
Se^a and Close is very necessary both for Defense and Offense: contrary to
the careless custom of some, whom I have seen come into the Field without
Rapier or Dagger, which was an assured argument, that their heels should be
their Target, and their shameful st^ght their saftie, when their Powder was
spent.

Now as these careless persons far miss the mark with over great security,
so some bring in a custom of too much curiosity in arming Hargabusiers, for
besides a Piece, flask, Tutch box, Rapier and Dagger: they load them with a
heavy Shirt of Male, and a Burganet: so that by that time they have marched in
the heat of the Summer or deep of the Winter ten or twelve English miles, they
are more apt to rest, the^ ready to fight, whereby it comes to pass that
either the enterprise they go about, which requires celerity, shall become
frustrate by reason of the stay they make in refreshing themselves, or else
they are in danger to be repulsed for want of lustines, breath, and agilitie.

Wherefore in mine ^nion it is not necessary, that this extraordinary arming
of Shot should be used, but in surprises of Towns, Escalades, and assaults
of breaches, to defend the Soldiers heads from stones, and such stuff as
they besieged have prepared to drive them from their enterprise: Or else in
some special set battle against the cut and thrust of Weapons, which
exploits, for that they be not so ordinary as is the Skirmish, so are these
arms nothing so necessary, but rather a burden more beautiful then
beneficial, and of greater charge then commodity, specially a shirt of Male,
which is very dangerous for shot, if a number of those small pieces should be
driven into a man's body by a bullet.

The furniture due to a pikeman besides his pike, rapier and dagger, consisting
of a common Corselet, having a Collar, Curiat, Tases, backpart, Poldrowes,
Wambrases, and Burganets for the head, for that they be sufficiently known,
because I will not be over prolixe upon every particular point, I will only
say thus much more touching the pikeman, that he ought to have his Pyke at the
point and midst trimmed with handsome tassels, and a handle, not so much for
ornament as to defend the Soldiers body from water, which in rain does run
down along the wood.

Every Soldier ought to carry his Hargabuse, Pike or Halberde, upon that
Shoulder and side, which is outward in rank, for that side which is
discovered inward is more defended by the general order that is kept, then any
of the other. Which order of carrying Arms, is not only ready and commodious
to use at all occasions, but also does make a gallant show, and a general
form of good proportion, and true prospect: a thing most necessary for a man
of valor to use in all his doings.

He ought likewise ever to have good regard to wear his weapon of like length
the other Soldiers use, which in marching does make the rancks to be of one
just line, and in show of a seemly and straight proportion, causing the whole
band to carry a brave and singular grace.

A Soldier ought ever to retain and keep his Arms in safety and forth
coming, for he is more to be detested then a Coward, that will loose or play
away any part thereof, or refuse it for his ease, or to avoid pains: wherefore
such a one is to be dismissed with punishment, or made some abject Pyoner.
Therefore during his service and after his return home, let him still be
wedded to his weapons and armor, that when he is called upon again to serve
his Prince, he be not enforced to furnish himself again with new Arms,
sometimes old, of little value, and less goodness: as some Soldiers now a
days to their great discommendation do use. A custom altogether different
from the true exercise of Arms, and varying from the rule of other warlike
Nations, which make true profession of Arms: amongst the which the Spaniards
and Zuitzers at this day are to be commended, the one for observing an apt,
sumptuous, and warlike choice therein, and the other for that they bear all
sorts of Arms with great advantage, both in length and strength, the which
unto them becomes very familiar through the ability of body they possess.

Those Soldiers which can not endure the toil and travail to bear Arms of
defense, namely the Pikeman and Halberdier are made subject to receive both
blows and death by the hands of their Enemies, or through their disadvantage
to take a shameful flight, or at the first encounter to remain their
prisoners. Therefore it is very necessary for a Soldier to take pains in
daily practice, and to acquaint himself thoroughly in the exercise and carryage
of Arms, whereof he ought to use practice, specially of those that be
offensive, and in those which ordinarily we are accustomed to carry, as the
Rapier, and Dagger, Pyke, and Halberd, with such like, without making open and
apparent profession of the practice thereof, but secret and several from the
wide sight of the world, that afterward he may put the same in practice to
his greater advantage and commendation.

Finally the Halberdier, who is armed either with Brigandine or Corslet, ought
of duty to attend with his Halberd when his turn comes about his ensign, in
marching, and set Squares, in the Captains Lodging and Tent for his guard, and
at the entrance of a house etc. to be the foremost person to force the passage.

But in a day of battle the old Roman Shield and a short sharp pointed
sword, to execute in a throng of men, exceedes the Halberd and brown Bill.

Besides the pikeman which is armed all over with a Corslet, and is to perform
his duty in a maine Square, stand o^ Battle, to receive the shocke of horse
men, or charge of the enemies infanterie.

There be yet another sort of light armed Pikes, which only have the forepart
of a Corslet and a Headpeece, as is the Almaine Riuet, or a good light Jack,
or plate Coat: these sometimes may be sent amongst the forlorn hoope of
Hargabusiers, to defend them from the invasions of Horsemen.

But touching shot, I would wish our Nation, being men of strong constitution
of body, to bear a Piece betwixt the boar of a Caliuer and a Musket, the
which with small use they would be able to weeld very well at the arms end,
which would carry a great advantage in skirmish: the which like unto the
Hargabuse, they might (as I said before) exercise, and with a galant and
assured raising up the crooked end of the stock to his breast, having before
hand fitted the Coal of his match to give quick and just fire, whereof ever he
must take ye certain measure, must then discharge amidst his modest trauerse,
to his greatest advantage, and to endomage his enemies: which done, he must
first fold up again the ^lne match in a ready and convenient sort betwixt his
fingers, having both the ends of his match light at once, that whilst the one
is spent, and in kindling again, the other may serve his turn.

Besides these foresaid weapons I would not think it inconvenient, to have in
a band certain Targets of proof to march in ye front, which were very
necessary to defend a rank of men in a streit lane, passage, breach, or other
place from the enemies shot, they all closely and in a low order marching under
the favor and shade of them: as in askirmish I saw put in practice, when
Cassimire did march with the States Army under Louaine* 1578.

The Captain is to set down by the Generals appointment, the sum of all
their paies, and the difference therein, according to every man's weapon and
quality. But to speak of other directions, and Military observations.

A Footman that is a Soldier, ought above all things to be obedient to his
Captain, and Officers, and never abandon his Ensign, nor be absent from his
company without leave or special let. In his march he ought to be modest,
ready in his rank, observe a long distance in his Laumbande, and keep an
equal stay in his Alta.

If words of advertisement do pass over from rank to rank along the
marching band, let him deliver those words plainly and with diligence, which
the Captain gives over to be pronounced from mouth to mouth, as to Pass
Parole appertains.

If the enemy cause sudden Arm, let his Bale en ^ouche, and his match in the
Cock show his ready good will either to receive repulse, or give charge.

If either for pleasure in a Muster, or in any other show in sport or earnest,
his company be commanded to discharge certain volies of shot, or a Salua, he
must either hold his Piece sidelong the ranckes, whilst he does prepare the
same, or with the end higher then their heads, and discharge over the tops of
the foremost ranckes, for fear of hurting his companions: which rule they ought
to observe, and thereunto be constrained, upon pain of severe punishment.

If any enterprise be made in the night, let him not only keep his match close
from open show, or falling sparks, but be vigilant and keep silence, to the
intent that through his negligence and noise their actions be not discovered.

If he keep Sentinel, and have the watch word, let him give ^are diligently
to all rumors, noyses, and view warely all suspected places, to the intent if
he hear any trampling, neying of Horses, or approaching enemy (which he may
the more easily hear by making a hole in the ground, and laying his care to the
same) or that he does see the twinkling light of matches* or perceive any
other presumption of the enemy, he may either by discharging his Piece, and
crying S. George, Arm, Arm, give warning to the next Corpse of guard, that
the enemy does approach, or else if his suddeine invasion require not present
advertisement, he may defer the report thereof until the coming of the next
Round, unto whom he must from point to point declare what he has seen and
heard.

During the time of his Sentinel, he ought to keep him self very close,
wakefull, secret, and without noise or rumor, his match close and sure from
seeing, and his piece ready charged, laden with her Bullet, and proind with
tutch powder.

If the Round or any other Officer come to search the watch and Sentinels, when
he does first hear or see them approach, let him so soon as he does perceive
the^, demand with a loud voice, Qui vala? Who goes there? to which when answer
is made, Friends, and that they draw nearer, then let him call to them and
command that all the whole troop, but only one with the watchwoord, to make
present stay, until the word be given. And if at the same instant another
Round should come an other way, let him cause the one of them to pawse and
abide still, until he have received the word of the other, that thereby he may
avoid the inuironing snares of forrayne or privy enemies, which might by that
means surprise him.

Therefore in this respect let him take great care, especially before a Town
besieged, or about the circuit of a Camp, and that he always remember to
receive him that gives the word at the end of his Piece or Pike, and out of
danger, having his match ready in his Cock, ready to give fire, thereby to
reward him with a Bullet as an enemy, if he give a wrong word, or entertain
him as a friend if he give the right: for under color of giving the word,
many Sentinels have lost their lives, and sudden surprises and Canuisados
have bin given.

If in the night Arm be given in the Camp, he must make repair immediately
with his Piece and Furniture so his Ensign, where he shall be emploiedas
occasion does offer.

That he may be the more ready at any sudden Arm, lying in a Town in
Garrison, and being furrierd and lodged in a house, he ought to have all the
night burning in his Chamber by him a Candle or Lamp, or at the least his fire
so well raked up as he may light a Candle at the Coals with a match of
Brimstone, or otherwise: that thereby he may the more speedily not only find
his Arms (which of purpose he ought to lay readily in an ordinary place) but
also be better able to prepare himself, and kindle his match with all speed.

Note that a Soldier in garrison being furrierd in a house, is allowed the
best bed and chamber save one, fair sheets, board clothes, plates, napkins,
towels, dressing of his meat, service at the Table, oil, vinegar, salt,
mustard, candle light, fire, etc.

Whilst a Soldier is in the Camp, he ought never to lie out of his clothes,
his Piece ready charged must lie by his side, his furniture at his girdle,
which is his Flaske, Match and Tutchboxe, his Rapier very ready, and his
Poynado likewise at his Girdle, which if they should be so monstrous Daggers,
or such a Cutlers shop as our English Fe^sers are accustomed to wear, they
would be both combrous in carriage, and troublesome to his companions, and to
himself, specially when they lie in their Cabbines.

A Soldier in Camp must make choice of two, or three, or more Camerades, such
as for experience, fidelity, and conditions, do best agree with his nature,
that be tried Soldiers and trusty friends, to the intent that like loving
brethren, they may support one another in all adverse fortune, and supply each
others wants. As for example, having marched all day, and coming at night to
the place where they must encampe, one of them chooses out the dryest and
warmest plot of ground he can get in the quarter, which is appointed to his
band for lodging place, does keep all their Clokes, Arms and Baggage, whilst
another makes provision with one of their boys, in some adjoining Uillage (if
time and safety from the Enemy does permit) for long straw, both to cover
their Cabin, and make their bed of: during the time that an other with a
little Hatchet, which with a Lether Bottel for drink, a little Kettle to sees
meat in, and a bag of Salt, which are to be borne of the Boys amongst other
Baggage, and are most necessary things for encamping, does cut down forked
Bows and long Poales to frame and rear up their Cabin withal, and provide
timber or firewood, if it be in Winter, or when need requires, whilst an other
does visit Viuandiers and Uictualers (if any follow the Camp) for bread,
drink, and other eats, if otherwise they be not provided by forage or
Picoree, and makes a hole in the earth, wherein having made a fire, stricken two
forked stakes at either side, and hanged his Kettle to seath upon a cudgel of
wood upon the same* or that for roast meat he makes a spit, wooden Gawberds,
etc. And whilst thus every one is occupied about their necessary occasions at
one instant, they may in due time make provision for all their wantes, and by
means of this league of amity amongst them, enjoy a sufficient time to rest
their wearied bodies, which otherwise would be hard to be done.

Therefore I judge it very requisite, that the whole number under the charge of
a Desiner or chief of a chamber, should link themselves together in perfect
friendship, and as well in skirmish and fight aid one another, as in all other
actions, by which invincible knot they should receive wonderful commodity.

It importes much that a Soldier should be tractable, for a man cannot
imagine a thing either more ingenuqus or better, then due and convenient
ciuility. Therefore let him accustom himself rather to be of a Saturnine and
severe condition then a common skoffer, and an ordinary make sport, that he
may continue in friendship with his companions, and continually remain in
their amity.

Moreover, he is much to be commended, which aptly with facility and great
dexterity can be conversant with every one: wherein if a man do not with
great judgment very circumspectly govern himself, he shall for the most part
incur the evil will of those in whose company he remains. The which dealing
is of great importance, as well for the interest of his life, and proper honor
and credit, by which means the one and the other does hang in Balance, as
also for that he can not, being drawn away with debates, apply himself
diligently to follow the wars and service of his Captain: the which ought to
be his chiefest object and end. For discord amongst men of this Honorable
profession, does hasten, and occasion very much the destruction of their well
doing, and altogether hinder whatsoever they take in hand, by reason of the
suspicions, discordes, despite, and other respects, which of necessity are
commonly accustomed to grow and ensue.

Besides, he must be so moderate in spending his wages, that ^e be not
constrained before the midst of his pay, either to follow the spoil, or borrow
of others: whereof springs a naughty reputation and a great discredit: yet
notwithstanding he must not suffer himself to be noted for a covetous person,
or as some say, the enemy of himself: that is, by sparing nigardly, to find
a great want and extremity in necessary things appertaining to his apparel
and victuals, whose expenses ought chiefly to be in galant Armor and Furniture.

Note that the pay and wages which he receives of his Captain and Treasurer,
must not be taken or thought to serve or supply for any other use, but to
sustain life with victuals, keep him apparelled, and maintain his arms.
Therefore ought it to be governed discreetly and orderly at all times, in what
place so ever he shall remain, either in the camp, civil cities, or in his
proper house, as well to keep himself in health, as chiefly to make apparent
to his Captain the noble motion of his mind: So that pricked forward by this
spur of honor, and not for any other extraordinary and base occasion, a good
soldier is continually constrained to win credit, despising all other
dealing which arises for hope of commodity and greedy gain, the way to make
a man esteemed to carry a base mind, and almost not disagreeing from brute
beasts without reason. For these private soldiers which seek by such means
as be extraordinary, to advance themselves above their proper pay, without
doubt give an evil presage of themselves, and so evil, that it should be
better for them to apply their time in some other sort, as about merchandise
and other occupations, rather then follow the honorable exercise of Arms,
which is altogether grounded upon a noble mind, valiant courage, and extreme
travel of body.

He must dispose himself to be very diligent in what exercise or enterprise
soever he shall be put unto, as to make Sentinel: wherein it is convenient, as
I have touched before, that he be very vigilant when it is his lot to be
commanded thereunto, that in doing the contrary, there succeed not a most
rigorous chastisement by leaving his body dead behind him, as it may very
well fall out, and to whom it may be said, I left him as I found him, since
sleep is the image of death.

A good soldier ought continually to accompany the Ensign, and have special
regard, that the same fall not in danger of surprising by the enemy, and that
he endeavor himself by all means without any respect of danger to preserve
and recover the same: for the loss thereof is a perpetual shame to the whole
band. And therefore he ought at no time to abandon the same for any occasion,
but lodge himself so near it as he can, to the intent that amongst ye rest,
if it be possible, he may be one of the first at all rumors of arms, and
sudden alarums, as well by day as night. And being armed with the weapon he
caries, having conducted his ensign to the place appointed, by the head
officers, he may in the sight of his captain (showing a moderate forwardness
and desire) breed an opinion of his courage and valor: so that when occasion
does offer, his captain amongst the rest may make special choice of him.

He must for no occasion absent himself, or go to any far distant place about
any enterprise or booty of picoree, without the express license of his
captain: for he that is once become a soldier is now no more his own man, but
his under whose government he is paid: who desiring to serve his turn when
occasions be ministered in time of wars, not having his valiant and best
soldiers present and ready about him, shall not only be made frustrate of
that he would perform, but sometimes also suffer and sustain damage, and
only in respect of those which be absent abroad at their own pleasure,
contrary to the consent and knowledge of the captain.

He ought sufficiently to eat, rest, and sleep, whilst time does permit, to
the end he be not called for unprovided, and that he may the more readily
perform all enterprises needful, without any discommoditie or want of
ability, which commonly do fall out unlooked for, and upon the sudden, for in
ordinary and accustomed enterprises, it is an easy thing to find every
soldier provided, but in sudden surprises not. Besides, I think it
appertains and is proper to a good souldior, to follow the wars so long as he
possibly can, for the increase of his experience. But being constrained to
return into his country, or into any city, fortress or other place of
defense, by reason of some truce, seconded by peace, or through any other
accident, which does constrain him to abandon the wars: then it is
necessary he fall to exercise that art, wherein he chiefly has been brought
up, either in merchandise, handicraft, or husbandry, or else whatsoever,
thereby to supply his necessities, to exercise his body and to live honestly:
and by that means fly idleness, a thing most incident to youth: who being
altogether ignorant in treading the steps of a stayed life (through the small
experience he has of the world, which by tract of time is obtained, and by
long practice, specially in the exercise of Arms) persuades himself he shall
win credit and commodity through the means of insolent actions, which
altogether ought to be abhorred: through rash and prodigal bravery, which
oftentimes torments innocent families and poor parents: and through galant
garments and sumptuous attire, whereby they grow banckrout: so that they are
brought in time (being entangled in those sweet traps sauest with sharp
showers) to run headlong into a thousand and most miserable ruins. Therefore
good soldiers ought specially to endeavor themselves by some commendable
industry, to gain the good grace of valorous and valiant Captains, and
mighty Princes, the true possessors and fathers of war, through whose
authority and commendation they may be preferred: for the faith and assured
credit of all warlike and worthy soldiers does depend upon men of valor, and
not of the weak authority, small valor, and great abuse of the ignorant and
common people, called the beast with many heads. Therefore let them ever
observe the honor of the good and virtuous: for since that in time of wars
every soldier of good conditions does sharpen his wit, and willingly
adventure his life, not respecting toils or travel, expenses or danger, but
does employ his industry to prefer his princes profit, by great reason in
time of peace he ought to be advanced and maintained by them: and much the more
for himself, is to use all his endeavor to compass his own commodity, and
thereby make manifest his proper virtue, the which does not consist in outward
appearance of valor and discretion: but in the true action thereof, agreeable
to his honorable profession.

A soldier must apparel himself in the wars with cloth of fresh color,
profitable and commodious: amongst the rest, red, murrey, tauney, and scarlet
makes a galant show in the field, which he must wear to honor the Military
profession, and for his most fit and apt wearing, and not to hinder the
disposition of his members, as does our great bumbasted and bulstered hoose,
which not many years since has been used: but in steed of them a strait
brabantie and gascaine is to be we^ne, together with a close Cassocke, which
may shield both his (...), tuchboxe, his match and piece from rain if need
be, whereby he may be ready to execute any enterprise he is commanded to
perform, and that of necessity he ought to do: and so arm himself in other
respects, that he may redily do any service he is assigned unto.

He must be willing to put in proof all things commanded, without making
reply, or denying any one thing, or deferring ^ matter from one time to
another, either for fear of spoiling or spotting his apparel in foul way, or
foul weather, or yt he shall not be able to enjoy commodious lodging, store of
victuals, and such other respects, not to be esteemed of, but worthy great
reprehension. Therefore it is requisite he practice himself first of all to be
a perfect private soldier, before he be drawn to the desire of bearing
office, which were to set the cart before the horses, and work by contraries:
For first we must learn to guide, and then is it lawful to govern. But it is
no new thing, nor to be marvelled at, that some men are accustomed to obtain
charges by unlawful and indirect means, I will not say, that they use them
accordingly. Therefore to merit a charge, it is always far more excellent
and more convenient to win them by desert, then to enter thereinto by
intrusion: for those that do not beg them do feel in themselves their proper
sufficiency: where contrariwise they are a heavy burden to those that know
them not, although with great instance they have procured and sought for them.
Which want and unwary dealing in this our age, peradventure proceeds of the
small need the world seems to have of good soldiers at this day, and of the
little experience most men in our time have of the art of war, or at least
wise our superiors are blinded with the sweet baits of covetousness, chief
cause of such elections. Yet this notwithstanding we ought to retain with all
reverence, the honor and credit due to an expert and good soldier, who with
diligence being sought for and selected, as near as is possible, ought to have
the most chose^ charges, and expeditions given to their government. To the end
those affairs may fall out happily, to the honor of their nation and profit of
their Prince, whilst he does follow the wars, or is in Camp: let him carry
as little baggage with him as is possible, that he may be the more nimble and
light of body, speedy in his journey or marching, and the more apt for all
enterprises.

During the wars (or else not) he ought to wear in some convenient place of
his garments, that is most apparent to the view of ye band, a token, red
cross, or scarf, whereby in skirmishes and other attemps he is to be known
of what part he is. The Emperials use a red scarf, Englishmen saint Georges
cross, the French the white cross, (...). or such a sign as the General of
the field shall make choice of, which he ought to do willingly, thereby to
remove suspicion out of the mind of his Captain and Chieftaines, that they
need not to stand in doubt of him: and for diverse other worthy respects,
since that by these and like manifest means, the soldier shows inward faith
and loyalty to the officers and Captains which govern. But if otherwise they
carry the said token and mark loose at their neck, breast, arms, or any
other place, it gives matter and occasion of doubt touching their sidelitie:
specially being but newly entertained, since that not being made fast, they may
easily cast away or hide the same in time of peril or doubtful fight: which
suspicion ought diligently to be removed by him which carries an entire desire
and full intent to deal truly and loyally.

He ought likewise to beware, under pain of great punishment, for running from
one camp to another, for what occasion soever shall urge him to it, but is
bound to serve that party with which he does first place himself, even until
the end of the wars.

I have seen it likewise not lawful, that a captain should receive into his
service a soldier that is departed from another Captain of the same faction,
and this was observed, to the end that soldiers should be kept obedient and
steadfast under their Ensign, where first they have placed themselves. Provided
always, that their Captains entreat them honestly and well, which is to be
decided by the Marshall of the field. Nevertheless, so often as a soldier is
forced of necessity to leave the wars, he ought not to depart out of his
service, but by the special license of his captain, accompanied with an
autentike pasport of his good service, so shall he shun many co^fusions which
are great occasions of sca^dals and infinite troubles, by means whereof he may
freely make relation of the good service he has done, and boldly show himself
before any man's face.

He ought to take special care, that he be not the beginner and occasion of any
discordes and mutinies, neither consent thereunto, what reason soever should
lead him thereunto, since that such perverse proceeding does not agree with the
worthy, noble, and famous art of war, which is a dangerous discredit to such
malefactors, and for the most part without any recovery does procure the
general ruin of many valiant Captains and mighty armies. And therefore
ruffians and common hackers that live idle in the streets at home, and follow
the wars only for spoil* are most unfit to make soldiers, for experience
makes manifest, that they are the only cause of mutin^s, so that one such is
able to corrupt and disorder a whole band. Wherefore a good soldier ought
rather to apply himself to suffer things impossible, then commit so great an
error, for by the one great honor and praise shall redound unto him, and by
the other vile act, he shall gain manifest blame and assured death: for such
notable errors, without any remission, or any pity (as in part I have before
touched, and her easter in the marshal Laws shall set down) are severely to be
chastised.

When the company does disband, and every soldier is to go to his lodging or
cabin, it is very requisite he stay until such time as he see the Ensign
lapt up and lodged, to the intent, if he be of the guard about the same, that
night he may attend to do his duty, otherwise he may lawfully depart, and
thereby shun the shamful name of a stubborn, licentious and disobedient person.

He must learn to understand the assured sound of the drum, thereby to know
always whereunto he is appointed, and what thing is to be done and obeyed,
which of duty is accustomed to be done, since that with this instrument
soldiers are given to understand, during the wars, what things be necessary
to be executed. One thing besides is most necessary for a soldier, which is,
that he learn perfitly to swim, both for that waters cannot always be passed
with wading, neither at al times boats and bridges can be conveyed with the
camp, by reason of naughty passages, as also in diverse enterprises a man is
both more safe and more bold, knowing what he can do: whereof young Shelley
made a most famous proof, who at ye victualing of Midleborow, when their nanie
was assaulted by the Flushingers, having all his company slain, swam a shore
with his arms, being the last man left alive a shipbord: and as the Spaniards
at the passage of the arm of the sea, when they went to besiege Siricke seas.
Besides the notable attempt made at the great river of Alba in Saxony, the
year 1547. where the Imperialists had so famous and glorious a victory.

Now therefore let no man persuade himself, that the several and particular
experience which belongs to a perfect good soldier, can be perfectly and duly
obtained by any other way, but by a continual delight, exercise, and
observation: for no man does bring any work to perfection, whereof he has not
the art: every art does spring of experience and knowledge, and knowledge does
arise by means of study and continual practice. Military profession being
then more perfect and above all other arts, consequently it is necessary we
use in the same greater study, and more continual exercise then is to be used
in any other art: for so much as it is a most ancient and prudent sentence: All
arts do consist in exercise: and therefore continually at idle times it is very
fit and necessary for a soldier, to practice and exercise himself amongst
his companions in the camp, in running, leaping, throwing the bar, or such
like, to make him active, and to avoid such idle pastimes as soldiers commonly
now a days use, contrary to all good order.

Besides which, as I have partly touched before, every private soldier ought
not only to be well able to use the weapon he serves withal, but also
suddenly to understand all commandments of his governors, whether it be by
voice or sound of drum or otherwise, and to know how to maintein himself in
order without breaking array, not only marching, but also turning in a troop
or retyring. For that soldier which knows his duty how to behave himself
in the camp, in watch, scout, etc. and likewise in marching, turning,
retyring, and fighting or skirmishing to observe the order prescribed by his
captain, may be called a trained and old soldier: whereof if he be ignorant,
although he have been twenty years in the wars, he is not to be esteemed a
soldier. But in these exercises the sergeants and officers are daily and duly
to instruct generally and privately each soldier, which officers ought of
necessity to have knowledge in reading, that both what is written before, and
shall be written after in this book, specially touching the marshal laws of the
field, they may ever read as a lecture to their soldiers, being in corpse de
guard, or at other ^it and convenient times. For these be things so necessary to
be known and observed, that it does both import very much that each soldier
should have them by heart, and (...) were possible, sowed upon their garments
to be a perpetual glass to look into, whereby they might guide all their
actions, that thereby they might see what they ought to shun for fear of
punishment, and what to embrace to increase credit.

To knit up this our first discourse, he that finds himself sufficient and
well inclined to exercise this most excellent professision, ought with all
modest humility, and good intention, frame himself to a perfect obedience,
as well to observe order, a thing so conuement and necessary in this exercise, as
also to execute that which shall be commanded him by his captain.

Before a soldier bind himself to serve in a ^and, he ought advisedly to
consider, and expressly to persuade himself, yt under an expert, valorous, and
worthy captain, seldom or never our travail in well doing is forgotten or
lost: when as the contrary does chance under those that be vain, vicious, and
of small experience, who through want of perfection and practice, dee not know
the merit of the valiant and valorous acts of a good soldier: so that
consequently they neglect all toil and travail done in any honorable
enterprise. Therefore it behoues a soldier to make a good choice at the first,
for after whatsoever he be, he must still obey him: and likewise always have
respect, and carry a reverence to the justice of martial law, and the
ministers of the same, though they be of base condition, since both by the law
of nature and nations, they ought to be obeyed and observed, and particularly
known, and had in memory of every private soldier: for thereby both horesmen
and footmen are kept in perfect order.

But above all things a soldier ought not to forget his duty and devotion
toward the goodness of our Lord God, and toward the holy catholic Church and
our sacred christian religion, by which the true gift of virtue, valor and
fortitude, and all good things beside, we most certainly receive, and are
assured to attain whilst our determinations be lawful and honest. And for
that a soldier being subject to a thousand daily dangers, it behoues him
continually to live as he dare die, and oftentimes to reconcile himself to God
by confession, penance and satisfaction, and receive the benefit of the other
heavenly and most blessed sacrament.

I have been somewhat more copious in this first discourse touching a soldier,
then perchance I mean to be in any of the rest, by reason this is the first
step and degree a man ought to set his feet upon, before he mount the throne
of perfect government in martial affairs: for if a soldier can obtain tried
experience in this first point, he may with more ease ascend the other, since
this is only the groundwork of all the rest.

The office which appertains to a corporal, cape de squadre, disnier, or
chief of chamber.
IT is not to be doubted, but that al notable errors depend only of idleness,
and that all worthy and commendable acts spring of vigilant wariness:
Therefore a corporal, cape de squadre, disnier, or chief of chamber, or how
you list to term the^, ought to be no less prudent and careful over the
government of his people, then a father in ruling of his family, and as every
parent does pass in age his children, even so a corporal should be such, that
he may exceed an^ soldier, i^ not by experience and years, at leastwise with
diligence and sharpness of wit. Through which endeavor and exercise, joined
with a fervent desire and delight, to attain to the perfect tip of this
honorable profession, he shall every day become more cap^able, and of greater
experience: wherefore I would as near as is possible, not only have him
expressly acquainted with the aduertisements and martial laws following, but
also ind^ed with the best of th^se conditions which I have set out in my former
discourse of a private soldier, since yt ^o mount up to this second degree, it
is very necessary and requisite, that he have made long abode in the practice
and experience in ye first step of service appertaining to a private soldier.
The captain must select and choose sou^e of the most skillful soldiers, which
be honest, loyal, and perfect catholic Christians, out of every hundredth in
his ^and; whereof two are to have charge of the shot, the other two of the
pikes, every one guiding 24. a piece, the which ought all of them to be lodged
together, and the corporal himself in the midst of his charge, whereby when
any secret service is to be done, they may call and assemble by the
appointment of the superior officers, their whole squadron, or what less
number else, without the sound of any drum.

Now then a corporal with his squadron of 25. or more, according to the
discretion of the captain, lodging together with his company, must provide
generally for all their reasonable wants of wages, match, powder, and other
munition, and must instruct them how to handle their weapons. He must likewise
remember perfectly how every one is armed and furnished when he receives
them in charge, and to see that no part thereof be spoiled but preserved neat
and trim: and above all things to look well to the behavior of his
company, not suffering them to use unlawful and prohibited gaming, neither to
give themselves to drinking and surfeiting, but to spare of their pay to
furnish themselves bravely and surely against the enemy, wherein he ought to
use his chief endeavor. And if it happen that any fault is committed, his part
is not violently to punish the soldier himself, as hereafter is touched: but
to make it known to his captain, who must not neither, as some rashly do,
revenge himself, but communicate the same with the Marshall or his provost,
who only have under the general authority to punish: and this due course of
justice shall be more terrible to the soldier, and breed less cuill will in
them to ye captain and officers: generally in these respects, the corporal
must touching the foresaid causes or such like, or if any soldier be sick,
hurt or absent, by way of imprisonment or death, immediately make report
thereof, finding any thing worthy relation, and spare no man, but deliver over
the truth to the sergeant, the sergeant from him, or together with the
corporal to the lieutenant, and he or they all jointly to the captain, who is
to take order in the cause. Thus shall dignity of officers be maintained, and
officers and faults redressed, to the great example of the evil, and comfort
of the good. But somewhat more amply to set down the foresaid respects together
with certain other aduertisements. A corporal must always foresee and
examine, that the soldiers of his squadron keep their arms in order, clean
and intyre: and the Hargabusiers stored with match, bullets, and powder, and
such like necessaries: a thing worthy to be noted and observed in this
profession: the which makes show that the same is of a good soldier not only
used in time of war, but in all other times and places, being a known
difference betwixt the legitimate, and lewd professors of arms. He ought of
necessity still to instruct and exhort them, yt they live together friendly,
without discord: that they be modest and sparing in their victuals, profitable in
their apparel, and yt generally they do shun swearing, and blaspheming upon
grievous punishment, by which act of blaspheming and swearing by the holy name
of the sacred Trinity, they commit greater villainy and offense before God, then
if before the world they did commit most wicked acts, or infinite errors.
Likewise let him prohibit al unlawful games, for the performance whereof he
ought to proceed with as great dexterity and courtesy as he can, that always in
matters of importance, he may have that due obedience which is required, and
not through cruelty gain the hate and evil will of those persons, which in
many other things beside are to obey him: for to chastise them, lies neither
in his power, neither in the arbitriment of other officers, although they be of
degrees higher then he, but does justly appertayn to ye office of the master
of the camp, and marshal of ye field. The which point is to be noted and
observed, to ye discredit of some captains, which at this day delight to imbrew
their murdering hands in the blood of soldiers, and men perchance of honest
behauior, being moved thereunto through some hatred, toy, or beastly passion.

Therefore he must always be mindful to observe this honorable rule of
diverse good and discreet officers, who sometimes do ouersee and wink at light
faults, and proceed with a certain modesty and lenity, although in matters
of greater insolency, with severity.

Notwithstanding these and such like authorities, the corporal ought to be no
less obedient to every least point of the marshal laws: and in rank and
array, or in other places where those of greater government be, he must perform
and observe the part and duty of a private soldier, and retain like order and
obedience: for where our betters be, the less g^e place.

But when alone with his squadron he is conducted to ye ^ace where he is to
make watch and ward: then must he take upon him his office, and make provision
of wood or coals, that he may always have fire burning in his corpse of guard,
as well in the day as in the night, and as well in the summer as in the winter:
without which he ought never to keep watch, because it is a most necessary
munition for the Hargubusiers, to light their match withal, ^ for other
needful respects. Likewise he must provide for oil, for candles for the night
time, for lanterns and such like at the sergeant majors hands, or of some
others, who have charge to provide for those things, and are accustomed to
distribute the same. If he keep his corpse de guard in an open and plain place or
otherwise: he must conform the company of his squadron, according to the order
appointed by his betters: and with the most speedy and artificial manner that he
can, must arm and fortify with ditches, trenches, and Sentinels, the place
where he must make his abode with this his small band and troup of soldiers,
the better to resist ye enemies fury, or any surprise he might assault him
withal, considering that sometimes, yea and that very often, being set upon,
the Sentinels and corpse de guard be repulsed and have their throats cut, to the
great disturbance and universal damage of the whole camp. He must ordain his
watch in such a place, that in the same at all times he may remain wary and
vigilant, placing himself in the most high and eminent seat of all the corpse
de guard, to the intent that he may know and discern in due time every
particular accident that shall happen or succeed: and thereof immediately
advertise his captain of all, that he may provide remedy with speed,
according as the case requires. Warily and secretly, eue^ at the closing of the
night, until the bright spring of the Diana, and fair day light, he must
ordain and place Sentinels, and often search and visit them, with the aid of
two of the captains gentlemen of his company, called of the Italians Lanzze
Spezzate, or might be termed more aptly, extraordinary Lieutenants, that he may
always remain vigilant and assured, to the intent he be not assailed
unprovided, to his great damage, and before he can give warning of the enemy
to the camp, which does rest and lie in safety in that quarter where he is,
under his charge, care and diligence. In such cases he ought therefore to
employ the best men he has, that he never rest deceived in a matter of so
great importance, since that of those which be but mean soldiers, or as I may
well term them, negligent persons, nothing else is to be looked for at their
hands, but error, loss, and danger.

Moreover, he must at the least cause the third part of his squadron to remain
and stand continually armed at all points, both night and day, consisting of
greater or less quantity of people, according as the suspicion does argue the
need of them to be small or great: the Hargabusiers having their flaskes and
furniture tied to their girdles, and their pieces ready charged, that upon a
sudden they may contend by skirmish, according to needful occasion, and
readily resist the enemy without slacking or any remission of time, until all
the squadron be put in order.

He must be very circumspect, that the rest of the soldiers weapons, and
principally his own, be laid up and placed in such order, one kind being
divided from another, that in one instant they may be speedily and readily
armed: the which he must daily put in practice, and inure them withal, by
fained alarmes, by special commandment and of set purpose, which be most
necessary to be practiced beforehand for diverse honorable and important
respects, worthy to be had in good consideration.

Therefore let him have and carry a continual care, that their arms never
remain in any confused order, the which if he should suffer, he should find
no doubt to be a great want: but the same may be prevented, and made easy, by
accomodating the Hargabusies in rank one by one, upon a board or banck: ye
pikes and corslets, in order reared and hanged upon some wall or other apt
place in the corpse de guard, and upon each particular weapon and piece, every
soldier should have a proper and special mark beforehand made whereby to
know the same. He ought daily to instruct his squadron every one apart, how
to handle the weapon wherewith they serve: the Hargabusier to charge and
discharge nimbly, ye pikeman to toss his pike with great dexterity.

Sentinels ought with great reason to be placed about the corpse of guard, to the
intent the same may be defended and kept with more safety and security. He
himself at the closing of the night, must place the first Sentinel, and so
consequently the rest, instructing them orderly what manner they have to
obser^e, and how they ought to govern themselves in such accidents as might
ensue: who are to remain in Sentinel in winter and cold weather, but one
hour, or two at the most: but in summer, two or three hours before they be
changed: for which respect, that every one may be ^ed with equity, let him
first make a just division of his number* according to the number of the hours
in the night, and following that proportion, let him see the same performed,
without favoring or omitting any, the which he may the more certainly perform,
if the names of his soldiers be written in a roll, and when ye houre-glasse
has run their time (which is necessary for him to have in his corpse de guard*
then to prick their names, and place new in their rooms, so shall each
soldier be partaker of the travail, and rest marueilously well satisfied. But
for that in wars, Canuisados, Surprises, Sallies, such like casualties and
aduertisementes be infinite, I will leave the rest to his own vigilant
discretion, and suppose it needless to advertise him of every particular
point, more then that I have and will touch in this my first book of Military
directions, as cases most proper for private soldiers. I therefore at this
present think it sufficient for a corporal to know, yt it is necessary he
should so dispose the matter through his provident provision, that all his
people may be reduced into order, and already have taken their weapons in their
hands, before the enemy give charge upon them. And therefore in time and place
of suspicion and danger, he must place lost Sentinels without the watchword, a
good distance off, from the Corpse de guard, in places most suspect. But in
other places not needful so much to be suspected, and that be nearer him, he
ought to set Sentinels with the watchword, so far one from an other, as it
shall seem unto him reasonable or requisite, and that they may inu^ron the
ground one within ye sight of another, or so yt the enemy cannot enter, or any
espion issue without their knowledge. If great occasion so demand, let him
place together one hargabusier, and one armed pike, to the intent yt the one
may keep the enemy far off, and in a certain sort sustain his fury at the
point of his pike, whilst the Hargabusier with the discharge of his piece,
gives arm to the corpse de guard and camp: which exployt may be the better
performed, if a corporal ship of pikemen be joined together with another of
shot. Sometimes without making any noise or rumor, Arm is given to the camp,
for one of the two Sentinels may retire, and make relation to the corporal
what has appeared, bin seen, hard or happened, whereby he may speedily with
great silence give Arm to the guard, without leaving the place of the Sentinel
disarmed, which they ought never to abandon, but at such times as the enemy is
manifestly discovered. The occasion of the Alarm being certain, at which time
being retired, they must unite themselves together with the soldiers of the
guard, that they may all wholly in one company execute that which shall fall out
best for their purpose, which is, to retire fighting or skirmishing to the
Camp, according to ordinary custom, notwithstanding by the order and
appointment of those which have authority to command them, as their Captain,
Sergeant Mayor, etc. but never otherwise.

He ought moreover to be circumspect, that in the body of the watch a solemn
secret silence be kept, without singing, brawling, or any rumor or noise, and
specially in the night, both in respect of the enemy, to hear when the Alarm
is given, and to the intent that those which rest and sleep, and are not yet
in Sentinel, may be the more apt to resist and apply themselves to these
factions and exercises, which are required of them with vigilant watchfulnes,
since a man cannot without great difficulty remain without sleep or rest,
any much longer time then our nature is accustomed by ordinary course to
bear, and therefore at the entrance of the corpse de guard, he ought likewise to
keep a proper Sentinel appertaining to the guard, that neither friend nor
enemy coming out of the Camp or else where, shall be able to enter without
yielding the watchword: and in this sort must the Corporal proceed, even
until the Diana be sounded through all the Camp. For other respects, I
finally refer him to my following discourse, which together with that written
before, it is requisite he have in perfect memory as well as the private
soldier.

Six special points appertaining to soldiers of all sorts.
IT is written in the History of Pietro Bizari, touching the incredible and
marvelous obedience of the Turkish soldiers, that a certain Gentleman at his
return from Constantinople did declare unto the Earl of Salma, that he had
seen four miracles in the Turkish dominions: which was, first an infinite
army almost without number, consisting of more then four hundred thousand
men. Secondly, that amongst so many men, he saw not one woman. Thirdly, yt
there was no mention made of wine. And last, at night when they had cried with
a hye voice Alla, which is God: there continued so great a silence through the
whole camp, that even in the Pauilions they did not speak but with a low soft
voice, a thing worthy to be admired, to the great shame of the confusion of
Christians: therefore if the infidels observe such strict discipline, why
should not we that be Christians endeavor our selves to surpass them therein?
and begin with the Spaniard, the Salve and Auemaria, which they use thrice
throughout their whole camp, recommending themselves and their affairs to
God, with great reverence and silence, which I would wish to be continued
until the diana, when together with the sound of the drums, the same might
be with a cheerful cry renewed. But together with silence to set down
certain other virtues, take them here as I find them written.

Silence.
In all places of service such silence must be used, that soldiers may hear
friends, and not be heard of enemies, as well in watch, ward, ambush,
canuisado, or any other exploit: in which point consists oftentimes the
safety or perdition of the whole Camp.

Obedience.
Such obedience must be used, that none regard the persons but the office to
them appointed, diligently observing the same: any offending to the contrary,
runs into the danger of the law, for longer then obedience is used and
maintained, there is no hope of good success.

Secretnesse.
Soldiers must be secret, and have regard that they disclose nothing, though
sometimes they understand the pretense of the hier powers. The disclosers of
such, merit most cruel punishment.

Sobriety.
In Sobriety consists great praise to the soldiers, who using the same are
ever in state of preserment, such regard their duties, and reprove the rash
busibodies. Drunkerds, etc. are ever in danger of punishment.

Hardiness.
The Captains and soldiers that be hardy of courage, be much auailable in
service, specially such as will ponder what may be the end of their enterprise.
Some in times past have hardly given the onset, and after repented the same:
but the praise of the advised cannot be expressed.

Truth and Loyalty.
The virtue of loyalty and truth is far exceeding my capacity to write, the
practices of the contrary, are not worthy of life, but to be soon adjudged.
Subtle enemies approve to corrupt soldiers with gifts, and the devil to
entrap them with the sweet intising baits of lewd liberty. But since the
reward of truth is everlasting life, and the untrue and dissembler loses the
same in continual darkness, I trust none of our countrymen will learn the
one for the other, will be false to his sovereign, or flee from the assured
pillar of the Catholic faith: from which God keep all good soldiers.

How a soldier may maintain obedience, and keep himself in the favor and
good grace of his Captain and General.
A Good soldier ought to have consideration, that since due orders and laws
are the assured foundation and stay of every state: and contrariwise, discord
and disobedience the ruin of all Realms: so that above all things a well
governed General, and a careful Captain, ought prudently to foresee that
their Camp and soldiers be paid and punished with equal execution of
justice, not respecting person: yielding to the offenders punishment, and
reward to the virtuous: depressing vice, and exalting virtue: using
commendation to the good, and correction to the evil, joined with
admonishments of magnanimity, the which if they prevail not, to chastise
them: and as the good husband does pluck ye weeds out of the good corn, to
the intent that they by their wicked and pernicious example, do not infect the
rest, and consequently does provide yt no fault pass unpunished, nor no
valorous act unrewarded: by which means he becomes scared, favored, obeyed,
and beloved of all the army: even so on the other side, the good natured
soldier must ever have respect to keep the bonds of modesty toward his
superior, and yield many thanks to God, that he has given him so just and
virtuous a Captain and General, toward whom he must always yield like
obedience, that the son does to the father, being bound so to do by the
divine law, without showing himself opposite to the order of general justice,
nor ungrateful for his received benefits, but continually by his good guiding
in the one and the other, give his Captain just cause to love and like well of
him.

Soldiers be ever bound to obey the justice and commandments of their
superiors: and the superiors likewise to embrace the obedience of their
soldiers, whilst he does see himself honored and obeyed of them, either in
deeds or words, in earnest or dissembling.

Although the general or captain were a right Sardanapalus, so that his laws
be obeyed all things fall out well: wherefore a soldier ought with all his
endeavor to be obedient to the law, with his whole heart love his Captain, and
fear him with all his force.

Cyrus being cruel, covetous, miserable, and an cracter of taxes, through
justice was beloved and obeyed.

Cambyses, Marcus Cato, and Marcus Antonius, the two first being severe and
cruel, yet amongst the soldiers were maruellously favored: and the third,
although he was drowned in the deep and gaping gulf of Lechery, Gluttony,
and riotous gaming, yet was he so beloved of his army, that his soldiers
would have suffered themselves to be crucified, to have done any thing
grateful unto him, and that chiefly through his justice: and therefore it
behoues a soldier to keep inuiolate the ^artiall laws of the field. But to
touch the chiefest means whereby a soldier maybe drawn to obey, to scare,
and love the Captain, and altogether gain his good liking and favor, carry
in mind what insueth.

First, a soldier must presume and persuade himself, that whatsoever he does
in secret, that it shall come to the knowledge of the Captain, whether it be
good or evil: which fear, if he be wise, will restrain him from doing any
thing pernicious, or against ye marshal law, or to the misliking of ye Captain,
and so ought to rest in continual doubt, lest his evil deeds come to light,
and to the cares of the superior officers, that with the sword of justice, the
rod of revenge, and the scepter of rule, may and will chastise him. If he
remember this, no doubt he will live modestly, in observing those laws which
are commanded by the Captain and General: for it behooues a soldier still to
live in suspect, that spials and intelligencers be ever present at his elbow,
which no doubt will accuse him for his evil behavior: of which sort a
Captain and General have great store to keep the Camp and soldiers in
continual suspicion and fear.

A soldier must ever show himself grateful to his Captain in words and
deeds, by remaining patient in his actions, and not to use complaints in his
speeches, suffering with quiet contentation the penury of victuals, if the
Camp should want, either through fault of the General, bareness of the
country, or otherwise by his negligence, or through the malignitie of fortune,
that neither by water nor land corn and victuals can be brought to them in
safety: wherefore he must wear out this want patiently, and not with a
melancholic countenance, make appearance of a wrathful and furious person, by
charging of the chiefetaine openly with those wants: for which proceeding, let
him assure himself that he shall be esteemed of every man an insolent,
seditious, and impatient soldier.

Murmr not against thy Captain with thy tongue, but rather lament in thy
heart thy evil fortune, resting content with that portion of victuals his
sergeant shall give thee for that day. Seem joyful whilst thy Captain is
merry, and sorrowful when he is grieved, yielding comfort and consolation,
together with faithful counsel, as the cause requires.

Show not thy self full of wrath and malcontent, for want of thy wonted pay,
although thou manifestly perceive the same to proceed of the covetousness of
thy Captain: but dissemble and show him so grateful a countenance, that he
thereby may be moved to pay the band, if not all, at the least part. If these
delays proceed not by his fault, and that therefore he laments ^hy lingering
want: make free offer unto him to suffer all lack and discommoditie to
pleasure him withal, whereby he shall be maruellously moved, and much more bound
to love a courteous soldier.

Do not molest him with demanding more succor and pressed money, then thou have
need of, yea and that when needy force constraines.

Report not any thing but that which is profitable and beneficial for the
public state: for otherwise thou shall be accounted a malicious detractour,
insolent, and insupportable, making rehersall of every little trifle, whereby
hatred is gained in exchange of gaining favor. Fail never in the diligent
execution of thy duty, and make show of thy forwardnes, even purposelie with
the first, even in those things that appertain not to thy charge.

Disobey not the Captains or Generals precepts, nor withstand the martial
laws: neither affirm that any thing is evil wrought which is done, for it
appertains not to a soldier to reprehend: but to a counselor to admonish.

Do not importune thy Captain to reward thy travel and service, but attend
his liberality: for if thou become importunate, he will likewise become Marcus
Crassus, who at the first using great liberality, being continually and
overmuch craved, became at the last extreme covetous.

Present him never with any thing, specially with any thing of valor: for thy
Captain which has no need of that which is thine, and perceiving thee to
present him that which is not correspondent to the merit of his worthiness,
will esteem the same to be done in manner of merchandise, as proceeding of
craft: but if thy Captain demand any thing under show of praising and
commending the same, or the beauty thereof, it is then requisite that the same
be liberally bestowed upon him, it being a courteous demand, which he commonly
will magnificently recompense, as did Artaxerxes.

Accept never any thing of thy enemy soldier, neither re^eiue any letter, yea
if it should be from thy father, without license of thy Captain General, as a
thing which only appertains to counselors and chieftaines: for thy Captain
would become ielous over thy fidelity, suspecting that thou were corrupted.
There is another note, specially to advertise all soldiers of, that they do
not rashly, neither of purpose disdain to be governed and commanded of a
Captain, which is perchance of no ancient house, as an infinite number of fond
and presumptuous fellows do now adays: who being rude and rusticall clownes,
disdain to be guided by captains, whose valor and virtue, and not whose
ancient stock, has given them that degree, being ascended to so hye honor by
the steps of virtue: for I have seen some that but lately have left their
needles* their hammers, and their spades, having scarce seen a small skirmish,
but that they presume themselves to be expert soldiers, and will say, what is
my captains valor more then mine? Is not he of base degree as well as I? Not
considering that we be all sprung out of one stock, but that our valor and
virtue has made us noble, as has been verified in diverse Princes, kings and
Emperors, as Caius Marius, Lucius Quintus Cincinatus, Attilius Collatinus,
Valentinianus, Maximinianus, Francisco Carmognuolo, Julian Romero, and
Mondragon, besides diverse others more, which at this day do live, being exalted
by the degrees and way of virtue, to the tippe of such praise as is most
convenient to worthy Captains: and therefore no soldier ought to disdain to
be governed by such, whose virtue has made noble their minds.

And moreover, if any such a one that is become Captain, either by means of
favor or virtue, be blotted with some vice or defect, yet we ought not to
disobey him: for Caesar was ambitions, great Alexander a drunkard, Hanniball
unfaithful, cruel, and without Religion, Fabius Maximus by lingering esteemed
a coward, Marcellus rash and unadvised. And therefore although thy Captain be
accounted most vicious, yet if he know how to govern and guide his charge, a
soldier must obey him, and neither calumniously reprehend him, nor corruptly
imitate and observe his vices, but duly and directly fulfill his precepts: so
that no soldier or Gentleman, of what great house soever, ought to disdain to
be commanded of such as have risen by virtue, to the height of honor, neither
any man, how great of lineage soever he h^* to disdain to accept less degrees
then a Captain: for these be the steps by the which he must ascend unto
higher dignity, as many ancient and noble personages have done, who from
inferior degees by little and little have come to superior, whereof the great
Emperor Caius Julius Caesar may be example: who being borne of a noble house
amongst the Romans, was first chosen Praetor in Spain (a base office in respect
of his worthy parentage) as being reputed unworthy of any greater office, he
did bear the same with a joyful mind, accepting it as a mean and beginning
to make him ascend to the highest of Fortunes wheel, unto the which the valor
of his worthy mind did aspire. These things considered, let no man disdain,
how great and illustrous so ever he be, ye lowest degrees of service, for by
these steps he must ascend to the throne of stately government. In sum,
because I will not grow tedious, I conclude, that if any soldier would be
beloved of his Captain, let him still obey and reverence him, perform his
duty and office willingly, and never imagine to do any thing that is not
grateful to him, but fear and obey the law of arms, which he must imprint
perfectly in his heart, and have continually in memory, as here in order do
presently ensue.

Martial and Military laws, whereunto soldiers of all degrees must be
sworn, to keep and maintain inuiolated at all times and in all places,
whether they serve Emperor, King, or Prince.
1 FIrst, he yt contrary to the word of God (whom in all our actions we must
first have respect unto) does maintain, persuade, and favor any infidelity,
heresy, schism, strange or new religion whatsoever, and does not cleave to
the Christian faith, shall incur the law appertaining.

2 Item that those which without the fear of God despise and deride his holy
word, be punished accordingly.

3 Item that no man speak against the Christian catholic faith, neither write
against the same.

4 Item that no soldier of what soever degree or office he be, do break,
spoil, abuse, or profane any church.

5 Item that no soldier emit or absent himself from divine service, if his
Princes urgent affairs will admit him to be present.

6 Item that all soldiers observe and keep the precepts of the church.

7 Item that contrariwise, no man be so hardy to outrage any zealous man,
either in word, deed, or any other sinister means, but in liew thereof,
carry a reverent respect to all and every of them.

8 Item that in like sort no man go about to defloure, commit adultery or
fornication, with virgins, wives or widows, neither by force, neither by other
accident (unless the party were consenting, and the matter secret, which
nevertheless is not lawful before the face of God) upon pain of death without
mercy.

9 Item that no man shall destroy, ruinate, endomage, or set on fire any sacred
place, without license of ye Captain or General.

10 Item together with these foresaid religious cases, or any either, whosoever
shall blaspheme, reuie, and horribly swear by the almighty name of God, by his
divine word and sacraments, let such a perverse, impious, and blaspheming
person be punished openly, and to the terror of the rest let it be executed:
for no doubt the plague of the highest will not depart from the tents of
blasphemers and despisers of religion: for how should we use justice
indifferently unto men, when we are content with silence to suffer such injury
to be committed against God? Therefore first the offenses done against God must
be straightly punished, and he then will give thee wisdom to decide the rest,
and triumphant victory.

11 Item all soldiers in general, having taken their oath to serve God and
advance his word, they shall then next be sworn to be true, just, and dutiful
to their Lord and sovereign, and his graund General, or chief captain of the
field, to be tractable and obedient unto every officer placed and appointed to
rule over him, and to be ready both day and night to serve, whether it be by
land or by water, as occasion of service shall fall out and require: and
whosoever does repine or shows disobedience herein, of what degree or
condition soever he be, he must be duly punished by the judgment of the
superiors, appointed for that purpose.

12 Item that whenever any Chieftaine or Captain of any band, shall upon
urgent causes appoint in his absence any other whom he shall think good, to
supply and execute his room of captainship, every man ought to follow and
obey the said deputy with no less care and diligence, then they would the
captain himself, upon pain of such punishment as the General or his
assigns shall appoint.

13 Item that al soldiers must content themselves with their places appointed,
being joined together in ban^s, or several without resistance, whether it b^
in marching, watching, incamping, or bes^eging, being also commanded thereunto
by the Captain or other officers, upon such pain as shall be thought good by
the Captain.

14 Item that every soldier shall ^or his honor sake, gladly favor, and
mercifully forbear unto the uttermost of his power, all women lying in
childbed, or being with child, or lately delivered from child, to defend and
succor them from the rage of the cruel and rude soldiers, or others which
follow the camp for spoil. Also it behooves, as I said before, that all
soldiers defend all priests of godly calling, and all spiritual persons: but
now adays they be ye first to whom abuse is offered, of what opinion or
religion soever they be: but God no doubt will justly plague all such before
they be aware, and when they least suspect it.

15 Item that every soldier shall serve, and is by the law of arms bound by
long custom to serve thirty days for every month, and after that rate he
shall receive his months wages.

16 Item, if that any soldier have received his months wages aforehand, or
any part thereof, and departs without leave or pasport from his Captain, and
has not served for it, he or ^hey apprehended, shall for the said offense be
judged to die.

17 Item, if there be any soldier or soldiers in marching, break his or
their array without just occasion enforcing them, then the pro^ost marshall,
Lieutenant of the ^and, or sergeant, shall compel him or them with violence to
keep his or their ranks in order: and if so be that he or they so disordered,
do chance in this case to be sla^e, there shall no man be blamed by his or
their deaths, by the law of the field, for by such disordered people the whole
army may be in danger of ruinating by the enemy.

18 Item, if that by the appointment of the chief rulers of the army there be
a battle fought, and that by the mighty power o^ God, the victory be
obtained on your side, the law of arms is such, that if any soldier has
received his months wages aforehand, he shall be discharged of the same,
neither shall he serve any longer for the said wages, after the day of
victory, neither shall owe any thing for it, but he shall be set free from the
months service.

19 Item, if it chance that in time of skirmish, or in any other conflict with
the enemy, some one do adventure to ^lie and run away from his fellows, if in
the flying his Cap^aine or any other soldier by shooting at him, or by
striking at him do chance to kill him, they shall incur no danger for so
doing: and if such a flier chance to escape at that time, and afterward be
taken, let him according to the law of arms suffer death for the same: for one
such a recreant may be the overthrow of a great multitude.

20 Item, it stands with the law of arms, that each common soldier shall be
sworn, that they will not have amongst themselves any private counsels,
assemblies or conuenticles, upon pain of the loss of their lives.

21 Item, there shall no soldier, neither in time of marching, nor during the
time of their incamping, hold or keep any whispering or talk, or secretly
convey any letters unto their adversaries, without license from the chief
Captain, upon pain of the loss of his life.

22 Item, if there be any one, or a more number, that shall go about any
treason, or any other conspiracy to be committed against the Camp or
garrison, such a traitor or conspir^ur shall be accused unto the knight
marshall, and he that bewrays and accuses such an offender, shall have for
his reward a months wages or more, as the fact is heinous: so the reward is
to be increased unto the party that reue^leth the same, and the offender to
receive the reward of a false ^tour.

23 Item that no soldier shall be suffered to be of a ruffi^nlike behavior,
either to provoke or to give any blow or thrust, or otherwise wilfully strike
with his dagger, to injury any his fellow soldiers with any weapon, whereby
(...) times ensue, upon pain of the loss of his life.

24 Item, if any one bears hatred or malice, or any evil will ^or any
occasion done unto him, and so strikes him, he loses his hand, if otherwise
he seeks revenge, then by law he loses his life.

25 Item if any soldier be warned to watch and ward, and he do not come, he
shall be punished at the discretion of the captain: but if any soldier be
sommoned to watch, and he appear, and after the watchword given, and the
watch set, he departs and leaves the watch, such a one shall without mercy
be punished with the loss of his life: neither shall any man set an other to
watch in his place without the leave of the Captain, upon pain of his life.

26 Item yt no soldier or soldiers draw his or their swords, or use any other
kind of weapon, with violence to do hurt within or without the Camp, during
the time of the wars, upon pain of death. It has lately been used with
more favor of life, as such an offender to loose his hand: but it is the
discretion of the Lord chief General, in whose hands lies both the life and
death of the offenders after their arrainment and just condemnation.

27 Item, the like law is against the officer and officers of any band in the
camp, if he strike any soldier without such occasion, as is permitted him in
the articles to do, otherwise he may defend himself.

28 Item that no person or persons presume to be mustered, or to take wages
before he be sworn to be faithful, and truly to serve his Prince in those
wars present, upon pain of death.

29 Item that ye Harold at arms shall proclaim and publish all that the
General shall give him in charge, in the place and places where he is
commanded, and not to add or diminish any part or parcel thereof upon pain
of death.

30 Item, there shall no soldiers or other men, procure or stir up any quarrel
with any stranger, that is of any other nation and such as serve under one head
and Lord with them, neither in their gaming or otherwise, upon pain of the
loss of his life.

31 Item, there shall no soldier or other person, being in Camp or march,
take away any thing from any man being their friend, by violence or deceit, as
their victuals or other necessaries, upon pain of the loss of his life.

32 Item when that there are any victuals carried or brought unto the camp, no
man shall run out to take any part of them before they be brought to the
appointed place for the purpose: no though they offer for them more then they
be worth, upon pain of the loss of his life.

33 Item if that the provost martial have at any time taken an offender, and
according to his office, he carries him to be punished: and if that one or more
soldiers seek to rescew the said malefactor, and in this stir the offender
escape, he or they that are the occasion of this escape, shall be punished with
the like punishment as the malefactor should have been, whether it be by life
or otherwise, according as the weight of the crime requires.

34 Item if there be any sound, that has entered his name under two
captains, and has taken wages, armor and weapons beforehand: such a person
shall be taken for a perjured man, and by the law of arms, shall for the same
lose his life.

35 Item if any man that has a place appointed him by the harbinger or
officers for his tent or lodging, he must hold himself content withal:
neither shall he molest any man lodging within his tent or cabin, or other
lodging at any time, for any occasion upon pain of the chief captains
displeasure, and such punishment as he shall think most fit for the offense.

36 Item that no man shall sound and make any alarm, er^ept it be need, or
upon commandment from the higher officers, upon pain of the loss of his life.

37 Item when of necessity the alarm is made, each man must be stir him to
be ready for battle, upon pain of the loss of his life.

38 Item at the first warning of the drum or secretly, all soldiers must be in
a readiness, and resort to the place appointed, which commonly is the market
place (being first of all united with his ensign) and from thence in order of
array to the enemies, as they be commanded, upon the pain of the loss of his
life.

39 Item all soldiers, being horsemen or footmen, must diligently in order of
array by sound of drum or trumpet, accompany the ensig^e to watch, ward, or
relief of the same, being there silently in a readiness to withstand or
discover the enemies: and as occasion shall serve to brute the alarm, with the
usual word, arm, arm, or bows, bows, if ^n (...) or any bands be in
pay, upon pain of loss of their liu^. 5.

40 Item all soldiers must keep their armor and weapons fair, clean and
serviceable to a readiness at every sudden, none intermedling but with his
own, every one to help other to arm, and diligently to resort to the place
of service, at scrie, and larum upon pain.

41 Item all soldiers must honestly entreat, and truly pay victuallers and
artificers, allowed for the relief, being friends or enemies, and with
courteous words encourage such to victual, and relieve the companies or camp
upon pain.

42 Item all soldiers, in watch, ward, march, or otherwise, shall have special
regard, that if there be man or woman desirous to speak with the superiors, or
being thy enemies for fear do forsake his own power, and resort to thee: let
such secretly be conveyed to the Lord chief general, regarding that they view
no secrets, least they be double spies upon pain of the loss of their lives.

43 Item captains and officers, must often frequent and resort unto the
soldiers lodgings to see in what state their armor and inunitions be, and to
give great charge that their furniture be always in a readiness, their
corslets with all pieces belonging to the same, and their caliuers to be made
clean and oiled, to have match and powder dry, bullets fit for their pieces,
stringes whipped for their bows, their bills and halberdes to be kept sharp.
And often to view every particular, upon pain.

44 Item he that shall depart out of the place where he shall be put, by his head
or any officer whatsoever, for a lost Sentinel, spy, watchman, scout, or
warder, as well by day as by night, as it often happens, to discover some
dealings of the enemy, without attending and staying for him, that placed him
there, to take him away, except he should remove in have to advertise his head
of the success of the enemies assaulting or doing any outrage, shall be
punished with death.

45 Item whosoever should rashly offend or hurt, either in word or deeds, any
man belonging to the deputies or head officers of justice or captain, there
being in pay for sergeants. And they being appointed to carry no other weapon,
with sicles or staves, but bills or halberds, they may be known for men of
justice, and not for Soldiers.

46 Item whosoever stands within or without the camp or bars, to watch or
scout, and does his duty so evil, that through his negligence, the enemy
sets upon the camp at unawares, he shall die.

47 Item he that under color of doing the duty of a scout or spy,
perceiving the enemies have assaulted the camp, and he with such faining lies
still, shall die for it.

48 Item he that shall forsake the defense, in general or particular, of the
battery of the trench of the passage of a bridge, or other like to him
committed, but lightly, not forced goes away, shall be for so offending,
punished with death.

49 Item whosoever entering into a City taken by force, follows not his
ensign whither soever it shall go, until the General make proclamation, that
every man shall take booties: And if the general cause no such proclamation,
to be made, and that soldiers make spoil, he shall incur the pain of
death, and if proclamation be made that they shall cease from taking prays and
booties, and after license given if they give not over, they shall fall into
the same punishment.

50 Item whosoever seeing the ensign, under the which he warreth in fraies or
fight, by chance be fallen in the hands of the enemies, if he be there present,
and do not his endeavor to recover it, and when it is cowardly lost, to punish
the soldiers which have suffered it to be cowardly lost, with death.

51 Item, he that shall flee from the battle, being in the face and front of
the enemies, or shall go slowly and slackly to join, and a front with them, in
case it be to fight a field battle, or in any skirmish what soever, shall be
punished with death.

52 Item he that shall feign himself sick, to avoid the fighting of the
enemy, or because he would not go to any other enterprise to use his hands,
but (I mean) there for to rob, for to such affairs they will be ready enough,
shall be cruelly punished.

53 Item whosoever seeing his general, or his captain, or other coronell, and
officer of the camp, in the hand of the enemies, and succoureth him not with
all his power, and may do ^t, not respecting any danger, shall suffer death.

45 Item he that shall rob or spoil the people of the countri^ or subjects or
vassels of the prince (...) s^rueth, shall die.

55 Item he that by theft should sceale or rob the armor, weapons, or horses,
or other thing from any other, serving against the enemies, shall die.

56 Item he that should ransom or tax, or otherwise misuse the people of the
country, except they should be enemies or rebels to the prince, shall be greatly
punished.

57 Item he that shall play at any game for his armor, weapons or horses, which
are written upon the roll, or through his negligence shall lose them, or lend,
give away, or lay them to pawn, let him die.

58 Item he that goes further then two hundredth steps or paces from his
quarter, without license of his captain, specially when the camp looks or
staieth to be assaulted by the enemies, except he should be sent for by his
heads, shall be punished with death.

59 Item he that shall go longer then the hour appointed in the night abroad,
in the camp wandering, except he should be sent by his superiors for a matter
of weight, from head captain to head captain, by a counter-token, shall be
cruelly punished.

60 Item he that shall lodge strangers, whether he be of the camp or not,
without license of the general or of his captain, either in his lodging or
under a tent, except he be of his chamber or squadron, or by the captain
appointed for service forth of the camp, shall be punished. But every one
ought to be in the night with their Camerads and chamber-fellowes, and not to
be divided from their lodgings, that occasion serving, they may be ready with
their weapons in their hands: neither ought they to lodge watch, or scouts, or
of the search: for that the spies having no lodging, any excuse being found
out, may the better be apprehended. Also if the scout-watch be taken from their
quarter, faining to be a soldier of the camp when they are to spy in the
night: they for so offending shall be cruelly punished with death.

61 Item whosoever shall make any words, deeds, or questions in the ward, or
in an ambush, or in other place, where respect and silence is needful, shall be
punished.

62 Item he that should be revenged of any injury received, either newly or
before-time done, by an indirect way: that is, traitorously and not by way of
reason, or by way of combat, body to body, by the license of his General,
shall suffer death.

63 Item he that should dare be so bold as to play with false cards and dice,
or should use in play any privy falsehood, theft or deceit in any wise, shall be
punished.

64 Item he that of presumption should pass out of his place into another,
either before the battle or in marching, should out of order make have to go
before, to be the first that should come to the lodging of the camp, or in
marching should go out of his rank from one battle to an other, or he that
does not observe the order of marching, shall die.

65 Item he that shall task or ransom upon his host or lodger, or upon any
other that is not his lawful prisoner by good order of war, and that he is
lawfully taken, the ransom excel not the articles of agreement, that there be
a just ransom set, upon pain of punishment.

66 Item he that shall enter in, or go forth by any other gate, street or
way, then that which shall be accustomed, into the city, pales, or list or fort,
where the camp is lodged, that is going over the walls, or under some breach,
and not by the ordinary gate, let him fall into the pain of death.

67 Item whosoever does not immediately retire, when he shall hear the
trumpet or drum, sound the retreat, either of a set battle, or of a skirmishe
or battery, or of any other fight, or should go in or come forth of the
city, when the assault is given to the walls thereof, shall die.

68 Item he that speaks, or calls, or cries aloud, amongst the ordinance,
or in the battle, or in any place where silence needs, except he were a
head, or other officer, or sergeant, commanding some new order, shall die.

69 Item he that shall commit any thing whatsoever it be, whereby it may be
coniectured, that it is against the prince, and domageable to the general and
the camp, shall die.

70 Item drums and fifes must often sound and exercise their instruments,
warning as the mouth of man, to all points of service: so must soldiers
diligently learn and observe the meaning of the same, that none plead
ignorance, and neglecting their duties to service appertaining. Also sometimes
they shall receive from the higher officers or captains, secret commandementes
by word of mouth, the which must withal diligence be observed and truly
executed upon the loss of their lives.

71 Item no man in their marching through what place soever they shall pass,
shall set any thing on fire, no not their cabbins and i^camped place at their
departing, without commandment from the chief general, upon the pasue of the
loss of their lives.

72 Item i^ at any time, any man shall in the time of his drunkenness quarrel
and fight with his fellow, and in so doing, chance to kill him, he shall in so
doing receive as great punishment by death, as if he had been sober.

73 Item if any soldier do drink himself drunk, or be found drunk, within
the compass of the day and night of his watch, and specially if he be unable
to stand in Sentinel, or do his duty, such a one must be most severely
punished.

74 Item note that soldiers shall swear at their first entering into service
that they will faithfully and truly serve their captain for six months
together, and when the six months are expired, they shall swear to serve him
six months more, if he reed them: And if the captain needs them not so
long, but minds to discharge his band, the captain shall allow each of them
half a months wages at his departing, and so discharge them.

75 Item there shall no man make any showt, or other stirring noise in any
corner or open place of City, Town, Castle, Fort, or Camp, whereby any danger
or inconvenience may grow unto the company any manner of ways, on pain of the
loss of his life.

76 Item he that shall disclose the watchword to enemy or friends, except it
be to such a one as he shall be appointed by his governor: or shall be found a
sleep in the watch, scout, or ward, shall be punished with death.

77 Item if any captain for corruption sake, shall give license to his own
soldier, or to any other soldier without the license of the General to
depart the camp, shall receive the same punishment that the soldier should
receive.

78 Item that no soldier should go out of the camp in the night time without
the watchword, in danger of his life, for if he be slain so by the watch,
there is no blame to be laid upon them that kill him.

79 Item there shall no soldier go out of the camp without his armor and
other weapons, upon the pain of the loss of his life.

80 Item every captain shall be sworn, that he shall charge every corporal
upon his oath, that he shall denounce every soldier that is under his charge,
and that is not able and meet to serve.

81 Item in like case if the said corporal shall receive an^e new or strange
soldier into his band* his part and duty is, that he give unto the higher
captain knowledge thereof.

82 Item no man of what condition soever he be, shall ^ so bold as to convey
away any offender upon the pain of the loss of his life.

83 Item that every soldier shall have upon his outermost garment some
special sign or taken, whereby he may be known, such a one as the higher
captains shall agree upon. As for example, he shall have upon his garment a
red cross, and upon his armor, a red lace or such like, whereby he may the
better be known of his fellows: and if there be any shall be sound without
the said signs and tokens, he shall be used as an adversary, or enemy.

84 Item that all soldiers, entering into battle, assault, skirmish, or other
faction of arms, shall have for their common cry and word, S. George, S.
George, forward or upon them, S. George, whereby the soldier is much comforted,
and the enemy dismayed, by calling to mind the ancient vale^ of England, which
with that name has bin so often victorious, and therefore he that upon any
si^ster zeal, shall maliciously omit so fortunate a name, shall be severely
punished for his obs^ate erroneous heart, and perverse mind.

85 Item if any Captain or other Officers shall procure sk^mishe, or ^ight
the battle without commandment from the higher Officers, for so offending,
they shall (...) death.

86 Item if that any number of Soldiers be commanded, and placed by the head
Captains, to defend or keep any City. Tower, Castle or Fort, or any other
place, and they being sharply assaulted by the enemy, once, (...), or
thrice, or of^ner, in this case the law of ^irmes is, that the Lord General
shall allow, and pa^e unto such a number of soldiers but ordinary wages:
neither is there by law of arms any thing more due unto them: and if the said
Castles, Towers, or fortress, shall be sold or be betrayed by the said
captain, officers, or soldiers, or otherwise yielded, without the
commandment of the prince, or at the appointment of the general: shall be as
false traitors used.

87 Item if any Captain, Lieutenant, Sergeant, Corporal, or other officer, or
soldiers, give into the hands of the enemy, any city, fortress, tower, or
place of defense, does incur, as I have said, the danger of death, if he by
chance be not more then constrained to deliver up the same, or that it is like
a man of valor would have done so: and therefore they ought never to abandon
the place, for words or letters of the enemy, neither at the sight of the
inuironing camp: for it is not lawful for the ^astellane to leave his Castle,
if he have victuals, men, and munition, or does hope for succors. Therefore
respect is to be had, which must be holden as a maxim, that where the place
may be defended by assault without battery, that at least one assault is to be
abidden, and mo to be aspected if it be possible: and if it can suffer
battery, they must abide at ye least a volee of Canons: and if the place be so
weak that it cannot sustain, neither the one nor the other, and that it be
far distant from succors: to ^eeld does merit neither punishment of the
prince, nor of the enemy: but otherwise being of force, able to sustain the
enemies fury, and cowardly or traitorously to deliver the same, merits death
of the one and the other.

88 Item if there be any City, Castle, or other fort, yielded up by the
enemy, without expugnation: there shall no man be so bold to enter into the
said place, to spoil or otherwise to kill or do any outrage, without leave of
the general, upon pain of the loss of his life.

89 Item there shall no man depart out from the precinct of the camp, with any
booty or spoil, without leave of the chiefest officers or head captain, upon
the pain of the loss of his life.

90 Item if any man for fear forsakes the place appointed him to fight in,
and for fear throws down his weapon, the officers or soldiers may kill him
without any danger.

91 Item if any man saying that he has done some worthy thing in fight ^ be
proved contrary, should be punished by death.

92 Item if a Regiment, or band, shall by mutinies or otherwise incur the
laws of the field, it is requisite and necessary, for that all shall not be
put to death, that every man's name be taken and put into a bag, and that the
tenth lot should be executed: The which although every man do not feel, yet
nevertheless he shall fear the event.

93 Item at such times as the General or captain does muster, train, or feign
any battle, skirmish, assault, or other warlike encounter, if any soldier
does either negligently or wittingly, hurt, maime, or kill his companion with
powder, bullet, or means so ever, such a one shall severely, and exemplarly be
puby what nished accordingly.

94 Item that each corporal, and other officer, shall have either in written hand
or print, these martial laws, and this book, wherein a private soldier is
instructed, bought and provided at the charges of the whole squadron out of
their pay, to the end that it being continually repeated to the soldiers, no
man may plead ignorance, but receive condign punishment according to his
offense.

95 Item that every captain, lieutenant, ensigne-bearer, sergeant or corporal,
so often as their bands, squadrons, and soldiers enter into ward, shall
appoint the clarke of the band or some one that can read, once in the day or in
ye night, to read unto the company (that must attentively give ear) not only
these martial laws here set down, but also all the course of my directions
belonging to a private soldier, Corporal, etc* contained in this book, for
their instructions, under pain of open punishment by the General, or Marshall.

96 Item that the foresaid officers after one twelve months service, wherein
the soldier has had sufficient experience, and is inured in these precepts
and directions, they shall even as the schoolemaister does the children, call
every one particularly to account, and examine them severely herein, and to
esteem those for old and perfect soldiers, that know these laws and their
duty by heart, and at their fingers ends, and the rest Bisonians and
fresh water soldiers, that are ignorant, although they have served seven
years, yea and to place them in the most servile services. And if there be any
that maliciously or disdainfully persist in their blunt ignorance, either to
disarme them, and discharge them, or else to punish them with open shame and
infamy.

97 Item if there be any man that shall infringe, and not maintain, confirm,
and to his power diligently and dutifully keep and observe these articles
aforesaid, such shall as perjured persons with all severity be punished: And
if any soldier or soldiers shall offend in any manner of thing that does
belong and appertain to the duty of a soldier, whereof there is no mention
made in these articles, such an offender shall be punished at the discretion of
the Marshal of the field and General.

These articles must be openly read in the presence of the chief Captains, by
the notary or scribe of the Court, and after that they be read, the oath shall
be ministered unto every man by the praetor in this wise, or the like words, to
the same end and purpose: speaking unto the whole company, and saying: My
brethren and friends, that are here present, you have heard the articles of
our sovereign, containing the chief and principal points of our rights and
laws of the field, and of the oath, and the manner thereof, which every
soldier ought to take. All you therefore that do mean faithfully and
valiantly to observe, maintain, fulfill, confirm, and keep the foresaid
articles, let him here now either openly refuse to be a soldier, or with me
hold up his finger, and say after me.

All these articles which have been openly red unto us, we hold and allow as
sacred and good, and those will we truly and stoutly confirm, fulfill,
maintain, and keep so help us God, and his divine word, Amen.

These articles with others, which for tediousness I omit, would be published,
some upon pain of death, some with greater, and some with less punishment, to
every one that does offend, without any remission or forgiveness, or regard
of blood, degree, kindred, or friendship: specially at the beginning to lie in
camp, whereby the army may the better be set in good order, and to make it
fearful of God, of justice, and of the General, with love and fear.

The execution hereof only appertains to the Master of the Camp, for the
hearing, ordering, and determining of causes of justice under the General, as
the Lieutenant of a City or Town, deputy, for the prince. For the master of
the Camp is the chief of the orders, who has place in the field in many
things as principal next to the General, who has the chief government in
pitching the camp, and dislodging.

Briefly from the General downward, it is the greatest charge and burden that
is in the army, and therefore it is requisite that he have good knowledge and
remembrance of all the orders whereby the wars is to be governed, and that he
be of good practice and experience, and duly obeyed.

But such cases as are capital and of great importance, should be heard and
determined by the General and his judges: It suffices that God is the knower
and determiner, and next unto him his deputies upon earth: who failing to do
justice, either for zeal, love, or hatred, shall yield account thereof before
the divine judge, and this law cannot be avoided by us, but we shall be cited and
called by way of appeal.

Brief notes of other mean offices, as Drums, Fifes, Surgeans, and the Clarke
of the Band.
DRums and Fifes must be chosen of able qualities and personage, secret and
ingenious, skillful in the sound and using of their instruments, which must
warn as the mouth of a man to all intentes of service, diligent in times
convenient to instrust soldiers in the same, that none by ignorance neglect
their duties. These be oftentimes sent on messages, importing charge, which of
necessity require languages, sometimes to summon or command the enemies to
render, sometimes carry ransomes, or redeem, or conduct prisoners. Many other
things to them do appertain, as before is rehearsed, etc.

A chyrurgion is necessary to be had in every band, who ought to be an honest
man, sober, and of good counsel, skill in his science, able to heal and cure
all kind of sores, wounds, and griefs: to take a bullet out of the flesh and
bone, and to slake the fire of the same, and that he have all his tools and
instruments with other necessary stuff, as oils, balmes, salues, step^es,
roulers, bolsters, splenters, and all other things to the science belonging,
which also ought to have courage for his patient, and allowed stuff, he shall
readily employ his industry upon the so^e and wounded, and not intermedling
with others, to his own charge noisome. Such be placed with the ensign, and
lodged near to the captain, and near their bal^rickes in time of fight,
which by law of the field is their charter.

The Clarke of a band would be a man chosen of a discreet behavior, such a
one as has the use of his pen and skillful in Arithmaticke, who must have a
book in the which he must write all the names of the soldiers appertaining
to the band, dividing every weapon by themselves, that they may be the redier
to be mustred, and otherwise to be placed in order of march, at watch and ward
the clarke must be attentive with his book to call every man's name, to see who
is absent, and that certificate thereof be made unto the captain, who must as
before is rehearsed, without sickness or some license of the head officers see
him or them punished to the example of all others. He must sometimes in the
watch and ward, read unto the soldiers, the Military laws and directions,
causing first a solemn silence to be made, and then proceed in reading,
examining, and conferring with every particular and common soldier, touching
his memory of these things, for his full instruction. Also the Clarke is to
take charge of the captains munition, who seeing it delivered unto the
soldiers, must take note how much is delivered, unto whom, and what day of
the month it is delivered, with the prise. Likewise he must repair to the
Clarke of the victuals, and by the Captains warrant receive such bread, beer,
and other victuals, as is to be had, and to deliver it to those that shall be
thought by the Captain to be of credit, to victual the band by the princes
price, and to take tickates of them as well for that it is delivered unto them,
as what they do deliver unto soldiers. Also he must in the captains name and
by his warrant repair unto the merchantes and other artificers, and take such
wares as the officers and soldiers have need of, who must at the pay day by
the Captain be answered. Also provided that the victualler allows but the
Soldier six pence a day, the overplus goes to their payment of furniture and
apparel.

The Clarke must often peruse the tickates to see that no more be delivered them
their wages come to, that the captains thereby receive no loss. The clark ought
to inquire when any be departed this world, also when any be slain, and
discharged the band, and to make a just note thereof, whereby certificate may be
made to the muster master, that ye Prince in no ways may be hindered, neither
the Captains by the victuallers receive any detriment or loss. Finally, he
must upon the report of the Corporals or other officers, find and procure of
the Captains, relief for the sick and wounded soldiers and prisoners, which
ought to be redeemed out of the enemies hand.

The Prelates charge that takes care of soldiers of the Band.
TO knit up this first discourse of Military directions, and martial laws,
special care must be had to provide one man amongst the many scores of
soldiers, that may govern and direct in spiritual causes, who ought to be
wise, learned, honest, sober, patient, and of exemplare life: who must offer up
daily sacrifice of thanks for his whole company, must instruct them to be
penitent, confessant, and restore to every man his right: to communicate in
Catholic and Christian manner, so often as they can, chiefly at special times
appointed by the Church, and before any dangerous attempt, to feed them with
wholesome food of learned instructions, wherein they may learn how to live,
and so consequently to teach their companies their duties toward God and
their Prince, and to give ghostly counsel and spiritual relief unto the
sick, wounded, weak in body or in conscience, and that such be well armed
with spiritual armor, that is, with good knowledge and good living, ready to
persuade them manfully to withstand their enemies, the flesh, the devil, the
world and desperation, putting them in sure hope through ye equity of their
cause, their conformity to the church, and their firm faith in our savior
Jesus Christ, to enter into the camp of everlasting life, where they shall
ride amongst the soldiers on white horses, clothed in white and pure silk,
crowned with bright triumphant garlands, as the scriptures do witness. This
and such like belongs unto such personages as take care of the soldiers in a
warlike band.

Now then to conclude, and to make an end of my first discourse, I would wish
all valiant minded soldiers, carefully to carry in mind those precepts which
are proper and due unto a private soldier, which I partly have collected and
set down in this short pamphlet, that when he shall be called unto a hyer
office, he may deservedly ascend the third step of martial office, and so by
degrees rise to the height of supreme government.

How pikes are to be carried in array, march, or battle.
THose that are appointed to carry pikes in array of ranks or battle, must
know that pikes amongst all other weapons that belongs to soldiers, is of
greatest honor and credit: and truly, whosoever does carry and manage the
same weapon well and with good grace, does make a very beautiful and pleasant
show to the beholders, and chiefly when it is carried upon the shoulder,
sustained and supported with a good grace, and the hand that does sustain it
be on that side the shoulder where it is placed, and with il Gombedo alto.

They must likewise be advertised which march in the foremost ranckes, if they
be upon the right side, to hold their pikes continually in marching in the
right hand, and upon the right shoulder without ever changing it: and so
likewise being upon the left side of the rank, to hold it always upon ye left
shoulder: those that be in the midst of the ranckes have liberty to use that
side yt is best for their commodity, either upon the right or left hand, and
to move their pikes from shoulder to shoulder at their choice and pleasure: It
is true that the just carrying of the pike of those that march in the midst of
the ranckes, is to hold it upon the left shoulder, and to carry their right
hand behind upon their dagger, or upon their side, and so generally all, as
well they that be in the midst, as those that be in the head of the ranckes are
to observe this order, to carry that hand which is at liberty behind them, or
upon their sides. Let him march then with a good grace, holding up his head
galantly, his pace full of gravity and state, and such as is fit for his
person, and let his body be straight and as much upright as is possible, and
that which most imports, is that they have always their eyes upon their
companions which are in rank with them, and before them, going just one with
the other, and keeping perfect distance without committing error in the least
pace or step, and every pace and motion with one accord and consent, they
ought to make at one instant time. And in this sort all the ranckes entyrely
are to go, sometimes softly, sometimes fast, according to the stroke of the
drum. The heel and tippe of their pikes would be equally holden, both of
length and height, as near as is possible, to avoid that they fall not out to
be by bearing them otherwise, like unto Organ pipes, some long, some short. The
measure and proportion thereof, to hold the heel of the pike is this. It is
necessary for him to have an eye to the rank that does march before him, and
so carry the butte end or heel of his pike, that it may be just over against
the joint of the ham of the soldier, that in march shall be straight before
him: and so every one from hand to hand must observe the proportion of that
height, that is right behind upon the joint of the knee, for by doing so they
cannot commit error, carrying in their march that leg that is under that arm
that sustaines and carries the pike of just and even proportion, by moving
their pace right under the staff of the pike, going in their march, as I have
said before, just and even, with a galant, stately, and sumpteous pace: for by
doing so, they shall be esteemed, honored, and commended of the lookers on, who
shall take wonderful delight to behold them march in that order.

THE SECOND BOOK OF MILITARY DIRECTIONS, WHEREIN IS SET DOWN THE office of a
Sergeant, Ensign bearer, Lieutenant, and the Gentlemen of a band, how to
train, skirmish, and discover.
And first, the Office of the Sergeant of a Band.
SInce every officer through his continual exercise and daily diligence in
executing his charge, does attain unto perfect experience by daily practice,
which is as it were converted into nature: therefore he which determines with
himself to be accounted sufficient and of ability, to discharge the place of
a good Sergeant of a band, with a forward intent to learn and be thoroughly
instructed, ought first to be a soldier that has seen much, and a Corporal
of good experience, according to the direrections of my first book: In which
two rooms it is very convenient, that he have tasted and been present at
great diversity of service, and warlike enterprises, and to carry a resolute
mind to delight in ye exercise of this office, to the end he be not found
therein irresolute and ignorant: and that likewise he fail not in the ready
performing of any enterprise, when martial affairs do call him forth to put
the same in execution.

First of all it is very requisite that he have most perfitely in memory, the
number of all the soldiers of the band, and distinctly with what weapons they
are armed, what quantity of Cors^ets and pikes, how many armed and disarmed
carry short weapons, what number of hargabusiers with murrians and without,
how many musket-eares, how many light armed pikes and targets of proof, that
the better and more redily upon a sudden, he may put the company in order.

He must ever plant the best armed in places most necessary, as at the front
and back, the right and left side of a square. The first rank in ordinary
long marching, ye targets of proof must go in as a ready rouer and bulwark
against the enemies shot: next to them the musketyres, then the hargabuziers,
and after them the armed and light armed pykes: amidst whose ranckes he must at
al times place ye Ensign, guarded with halberds or bills* and then again the
light armed and armed pikes, hargabuse and musket-eares, and last of all
targets of proof: by this equality of division, ye whole band at one instant
shall be ready to receive any sudden surprise of the enemy. The sergeant
carrying these things in his mind, having laid a distinct plat, he may very
easily vary their form and order as he shall be appointed, and as the
situation of the place does require, or the accidents of war do constrain.

He must never work unwarily, or at al adventures, and tending to no
determined purpose, as those that do not remember the perfect rules and
reckonings of their office, whereof there be now adays over many, for when it
is necessary for them to alter their order, and that perforce they must quite
change the form and fashion that then they observe, they know not which way to
begin. Therefore to the end his order and ranckes may be to the purpose duly
and directly changed, and with facility disposed: let him ever disseuer and
divide one part of his weapons from another, causing every one to turn and
enter into their ranckes and order by themselves, so shall he proceed in taking
away, setting forward, and intermixing one sort of rancks within another very
orderly. And thereby the full proportion of his ba^d shall be framed, as he has
determined, or as it is devised by him that commands, either in marching
forward and backward, or in turning without disorder, by 3. 5. 7. or 9. in a
rank, as the Lieutenant, Captain, or Sergeant Mayor appoints.

He ought ever to beware that in ordering the rancks, and appointing the
soldiers their places, that they begin not to make debate or stomach one
another for dignity of place, the which does oftentimes fall out to their great
anoy and damage, and the officers tedious toil, for in enterprises of great
importance, even in the presence of the inuading enemy, some vain glorious
fellows are accustomed to strive for the chiefest places: the which rooms by
all reason and of duty appertain to the best armed, and not to any others,
whose vnrewly rashness may be the ruin of the whole band. Therefore fit and
convenient places are to be observed with humility, the naked in their places,
and the armed in theirs: but to touch one point which we have alredie spoken
of, I judge it most convenient that the armed (those for skirmish excepted)
must remain in Maine stands and battles, as some say, so abide by the stake,
who ought to be so well armed as they may bear and support the blows of their
enemies, and resist any furious charge, either of horsemen or sootemen. Whereas
besides their well ordered ranckes, by reason they be armed they make a more
galant show: giving courage to thy own people, and discourage to the enemy,
and in proof are more profitable then the disarmed, who remaining in their
rooms, the contrary succeeds.

The Sergeant of the company must have special regard when victuals cannot be
had for money, by forage or otherwise, to make repair together with the clarke
of the band, to the principal munitions, that his company ^ast not of famine:
and from thence procure to have so much as he well ca^, or as is convenient, and
according to his received order, so must he depart and distribute all manner of
munitions amongst the Corporals, that every one of them may give to their
soldier their portion.

The like ought he to use, touching powder for the Hargabusyres and Musketyres,
lead for bullets, match for them to burn, and each thing else whereof they have
need, to the end they may always remain in order, and be very well provided
and stored, as near as is possible, and as is most convenient and to persuade
the soldier that to gain a place of more account, he will spare his pay to
arm himself the more bravely. He must likewise have diligent eye, that the
said munition of match and powder be conserved warily from wetting, and kept
with a special spare from untimely spending: for this provident precept does
import very much in all enterprises, by reason that the negligence of the
Sergeant, touching this necessary foresight and care, has been the cause that
the shot have not been able readily to perform their duties according to the
appointed determinations, or as necessity did require, by reason of their
unwary keeping their munition in wet weather, or their general want through
vain mispence, by which means many and most notable ^rrors have succeeded of
great loss and moment, and to the hinderance, shame, and total ruin of a
whole company or camp. Therefore it is most expedient that the Sergeant,
together with the several corporals, do diligently and narrowly examine,
visit, search, and view the proper flaskes, tutch-boxes, pockets, and other
places where the soldiers are accustomed to carry and keep their powder and
match, and peruse diligently all those things without negligence, faining, or
favoring: diverse have received great ignomie and shame in their office, for
want of ye performance thereof: whereas by carrying a contrary care, they have
been universally well thought of, and commended of al good soldiers and valiant
Captains. Therefore as occasion does serve and offer, he may admonish, put in
mind, and reprehend with dexterity the soldiers under his charge and
guiding. To him it appertains to lay his helping hand about al things
necessary for his company, as well in providing for them, as dispencing, or
deferring necessary charges, except for the provision and dividing of
lodgings, which is the office of the Furrier or Harbinger, who ought to be very
tractable, diligent, and altogether officious, not being partial to any one for
peculiar profit or pleasure, and therefore it is necessary a Sergeant should
know how to write, for it is hard by memory to discharge his charge.

The Sergeant must be careful to accompany, at the hour appointed, the guard
to the place of the watch, in going up and down along their stanckes when he
has placed them in order, to see them keep due distance, make the Laumband,
march in straight line, with their ranckes carry their arms in conformable
proportion: and if upon pleasure they give a volee of shot in passing, to
advertise them to do it orderly with due form, one rank after another, as
they pass over against the General, or other great officer or personage, and
not in a confused sort altogether, or by pieces.

When he is arrived at the Corpse of guard, and has placed every one in order,
and provided for all things necessary for the watch of that night, he must
then give his advise and counsel to the Corporals, that they keep good order
in their Sentinels, yea sometimes and very often, it is good that he himself
aid them to choose out the most fit places for them to stand in, to the end
that the circuit of ground, which for all their safties is to be kept, may be
conveniently guarded.

At the joining of the day and the night, or somewhat later, he shall secretly
give the Corporals the watchword, with the which they are to govern the guard
as well by night as day: the which word by the commandment of his Captain, he
must procure the Sergeant mayor to give him, or of some other that shall have
the charge to give the same for want of his presence, or in place of this great
officer.

He must arm himself in such sort, that he be no less apt then any other
soldier to be able at time of need, both to defend himself, and offend the
enemy: touching which effect, Duke Octau^o Farnese in the expedition of 12000*
footmen and 600. horsemen, which Paulus the third Pope of Rome sent into
Germany against the Lutherans in aid of Charles the fifth, did dispose, that
all the Sergeants of his bands should arm themselves with hargabuzes and
murrians: saying, that so great a number of valiant men being Sergeants, as was
in so great an assembly and expedition of such importance, it was neither good
nor commendable, that they should only be armed with their halberds, and
therefore he ought to have his Page or Muchacho second him with those
furnitures: Neither seems it inconvenient, but having placed in order all
things pertaining to his office, that he place himself in rank with the rest
of the soldiers, yet in such a place as he may easily depart from thence when
necessity calls him away, to reform or use remedy to any disorder he
understands of.

He must with dexterity proceed in reprehending and exhorting the soldiers to
keep their due order, and not to disband and stray abroad, but upon needful
and lawful occasions, and to take order in all other particular points, which
are requisite to be observed for the honor and profit of the company, which
things are chiefly to be procured and observed by other officers.

Let him beware and abstain from beating of soldiers at any time, that
thereby he grow not odius: for it is not convenient nor comely for an officer
to strike a soldier, for thereby he so offends, that he does incur the pain
to receive punishment for so doing, of his Captain or the master of the Camp.

He must be diligent, careful, and vigilant in all his affairs, for in this
office, diligence and dexterity is both to the purpose and most necessary.

It is necessary he be always conformable unto the sergeant Mayor, by
imitation and obedience in action, and like his shadow, to second him in all
his doings: Of whom he may always receive information and order of all such
things as be necessary for service of his band. And of him he may learn to
proceed by conformity, in that which is convenient for his office. For he
that is in company with men of virtue and valor, that be of more excellent
quality then he himself, shall ever reap some profit, and the rather for
that he is bound to be in the sight, and near about the sergeant Mayor, at all
such times as any thing is to be done: where he ought with a good ^are, and
diligent eye, give ready attendance, to execute such commission as shall be
given him: specially those which appertains to the ordering of the ranckes,
and every thing else whatsoever without doing any thing upon his own
judgment, but confer with that great officer, toward whom he mus^ always
be courteous and conformable, and with an obedient and beneuolent mind,
diligently imitate him.

I suppose it moreover necessary as I said before, that he be able to write
and read, considering the infinite number of things which are to pass through
his hands, and which he ought to execute for the benefit of his company,
which cannot be always ordered, disposed, and guided only by memory: So
consquently the sergeant is to take diligent and care of all the foresaid
things to execute the points of his office speedily, and to rebuke and teach
such as do amiss with lenity, and although he cannot violently strike and
hurt any man, yet nevertheless no man can resist his authority, but observe
the same as to the Captains own person, if he were present.

He is not to hear any mutinous or rebellious words amongst the company,
but immediately to reveal the same, that speedy reformation may be had, and
faults amended. And thus must he be still occupied to reform men's manners,
mispence of munition, broken araies, and to be ready day and night to
service, by the captain or Lieutenants commandment, to instrust the company,
to march, train, and travail, as well by signs from him framed, as otherwise
by words spoken, and to have special regard to the company, to see that
their armor and weapons be in a readiness always for service, for the
diligent and skillful usage of this office, is of no small momentanie good
order throughout the whole band, no less then the Centurion amongst the
Romans, who was captain over a hundredth, and so likewise every hundredth in
each band ought to have a several sergeant to direct and govern.

The office of an Alsierus or ensign bearer.
IF it be a thing most requisite that a private soldier should have a special
zeal over his proper honor and credit, how much more is the same necessary
for a valiant Alfierus or Ensign bearer. Therefore he must with all careful
diligence, and due discretion, ascend the fourth degree of this honorable
discipline, being already trained up in the three first degrees, which is, of
a private soldier, a corporal, and a sergeant, whereby to his great
commendation he may sufficiently merit the swaie of this office.

Having solemnly received the Ensign of his Captain, like a noble and expert
Soldier, he ought carefully to keep the same, and bear a certain reverent
respect to it, as to a holy thing, yea and to be gelouse over the safety
thereof, no less then an amorous person over his loving mistress: Since that
only with the sacred shade of the ensign, being well guided, the general
reputation of all the band and company is conseruer.

Therefore the Alfierus ought to be endowed with such custom, and use himself
with such courtesy and civility, that he may not only procure the love of
his confederates, and friends, but of all the entire company.

Besides, it is necessary to have near unto him a couple of assistantes at
the least, that be practiced and good Soldiers, which may be of the number of
the Halbardyres that go next his Ensign, to the end that when he is
constrained to absent himself from the same, through some urgent and
necessary occasion (for otherwise it is not to be permitted) he may cause one
of them take care and charge of his Ensign, in what accident soever might fall
out during that time. For that thing ought never to be left alone or abandoned
to a slender and loose guard, which is of such a great importance, whereupon
every man's honor and estimation depends: wherefore it ought at all to be
carefully kept, and well accompanied.

Note that the Alsierus, to defend his ensign and himself at one instant,
must have in his one hand his drawn sword, and in the other the Ensign: which
thing is convenient of him particularly to be performed, when it is time to
assault the enemies upon a Wall, Trench, S^alade, Bulwarcke, Breach, or in any
strait passage, or enterprise, since that with the point of Iron of the Ensign
staff small defense can be made, as well for the weakness of the staff, as
through the trouble and continual wavering of the silk which is about it, so
that in bearing the same displayed, he ought rather to have regard where he
shall set his foot, then to the top of the staff, or any other place less
necessary, as well thereby to flee affectation, which in carrying thereof, is
made manifest, as also to conduct the same with more assured courage.

Moreover note that the most honorable place of the threde or rank is the
right hand, and the second the left hand, which degrees likewise be observed in
all the rancks of other soldiers, a^wel as when diverse ensigns do march
together in one rank, for amongst the hands and squares of soldiers, the
fiankes d^e always resist the assaults and fury of the enemy: as the sides
which be nearest to them, be always guarded of those that be most practiced,
and the middle part not, only except the first and last rank of the
ordinance or batta^le, wh^ the midst is the place of greatest estimation: for
the head or back of the square being assaulted they then withstand the
greatest fury. And by good reason, for this place of the midst is ever much
more broken and endomaged of the enemies arms and force, then any other part:
wherefore amongst expert and valiant soldiers, this room is of greatest
honor, and of most estimation, as the place that has greatest need of
defense, which being subject to more open and manifest peril then the rest be,
is of greatest dignity. For Captains are accustomed to show notable and
singular favor to that soldier which they prefer to an enterprise of peril
and danger: so that it be capeable of issue and altogether desperate.

Neither is this to be accounted for a marvel, for as this profession is
altogether different from others, so likewise the orders, and ceremonies are
diversely managed: if a man may term those things ceremonies, which of
necessity ought with diligence to be governed with great care, art, and
industry: It behooues the Alfierus, whilst he does march in ordinance amidst
the band, to go with a grave and stately pace, advisedly and courageously
joined with modesty, and without affectation or vain bravery: neither eught he
to bew or decline his body at any time to any person, that thereby he may
represent and maintain the reputation and excellency of arms, and the
ensign before his Prince, chief ruler, Lord General, Coronell, Captain,
Governor, etc. As he passes before them, he ought to abase the point and tip
of the ensign, or rather with his arm bow down neer-hand all the rest of the
ensign, and so much more, by how much he is of greater dignity and
authority. In this sort shall he make sign of reverence, and not pull off his
cap or hat, neither bend his knee, nor move any one part of his person,
thereby to retain that dignity due to the ensign and his office.

The Alfierus being in square, rank, or ordinance, with the ensign displaid,
does change (almost never) the place where he is planted to march, which is in
the midst of the footmen, as a place most safe and best defended. Therefore
those that otherwise would use it, do ground their opinion upon some ancient
order of the Romans or Grecians, wherein they are deceived, because at this
day we are constrained to vary our order, considering our arms be varied,
which do now fetch and vound much more and further off, and are more pearcing
then those of ancient time.

Neither is it expedient to put this officer, which is of such great respect,
always in hazard, as well for the good quality of his person, ye which we must
always presuppose him to be of, as also for the office of great importance he
supplies, si^ce he does sustain the displaid ensign wherein the reputation
and honor of all the company consists. But at such times as he shall march to a
Scalade, breach and battery: the valiant Alfierus with his ensign in one hand
and his sword in another, as is before said, ought to enforce himself to be
the first, and by all means to mount up, to enter amongst the enemies, and to
advance and inuit the rest forward, both his inferiors, companions, and
betters: for in effect at such times the particular guiding of the band
appertains to him. Now to the intent that the soldiers at the instant time of
a dangerous enterprise, andin a combersome and perilous time and place, may be
invited, and fervently stirred up to follow the ensign. He must therefore use
such courtesy to all men, that in all hazardes and great exployts, he being
beloved of the Soldiers, may be very much aided and defended by them, where
as otherwise they do either suffer open ignomie, or danger of death, when as
they be either abandoned at the point of extremity, or traitorously stain or
wounded by their own companions and followers: as at the assault of Dalahani,
and a skirmish of bravery at Louaine, chanced unto two several
Ensigne-bearers: of the Baron of Sheueran, Coronell over te^ne Ensigns of
shot. Therefore since he is the shadow of the valor and good condition of his
captain and company, let him be carfull of his duty.

The Ensign bearer may of his discretion and authority, espying the company
travail, or follow enemies to their discommoditie and peril, loosing the
wind, hill, or ground of advantage, disordering the array, may stand still, and
cause the drums and fifes to stand and sound the retreat, that the company may
resort and come to the Ensign, and order the array by the advantage of the
ground, rather then abide the coming of the enemy.

He ought always to have about him, and to lodge where he does himself, so
many good Drums as there be hundredth in his band: that at all times he may
make Raccolte, and gather his soldiers together, and for such like necessary
respects.

He ought never crave license to go to any enteprise whatsoever, for any
desire he has to make himself known, or to win fame, but ought to remain
steadfast and firm, when his turn of service comes, in respect of the great
charge he does carry in the manage of the ensign.

It is necssarie he have a horse for his own use, the which whilst he
marches ought to go near the Ensign, whether he be in square vattaile or
long march, for by taking his ease on horseback, he may keep himself
continually lus^y and fresh, and therewithal may accomodate his carriage, or
bagage, as some soldiers may likewise do among the ordinary carriage,
provided for by the captain.

Note that the Ensign which he received of his Captain, must by him be
res^ored again at such times as he is discharged out of the company: if during
the time of his service, there has not chanced a battle, assault, or other
enterprise, wherein the Alfierus being present, he has not made manifest
appearance, that he has merited and deserved the same. For in such cases it is
to be understood, that he has won and gained the same and not otherwise,
unless the captain of his free will does not give it him, which is a very
ancient custom, specally amongst the Italians.

It is very requisite the Alfierus have besides his two assistantes, a valiant
and courageous servant, who is a practiced soldier, and not a nouice or
yoongling, as some very fondly and unadvisedly do entertain now adays, that
continually being near him, as well in the maine square battle or elsewhere,
to second him with a piece, pike, or target of proof, and may have in such a
one that intyre faith and assured credit that he should have of a faithful
companion, whom he must not keep as an abject servant, but he ought to
maintain him, apparel him, and arm him with convenient arms of defense, for
sometimes it shall fall out in the day of a fought battle of a whole army,
that those deputed servants may have the custody of all the Ensigns in the
maine square battle, and the Alfierus of each company, as men well armed be
placed in the head of the battle, or in some other principal or necessary
places which are to be governed and defended by practiced and valiant
Soldiers: as particularly fell out at ^uch time as the Marquis of Vasto,
fought at Cresola in Lombardie against the Frenchmen, which journey was lost by
the Emperialistes, although that day they fought valiantly, and besides in
other enterprises, such men have executed gallant service.

He must always provide a sufficient corpse de guard about his ensign, as well
by day as night, in what place soever he shall be, although no suspicion were to
be had of the enemy, that thereby he may remain safe from all sudden
surprises, or unprovided casualties, and the rather to maintain the honor and
reputation due to the ensign, whereby all sinister inconvenience may be
avoided, and the majesty and office of the same generally well respected:
Specially when time and place of suspect ministers occasion. The Alfierus must
march to ye guard, either arme^ with a Curase of proof, or some other
convenient garment of defense, being still seconded with his servant, who is to
carry either target, halberd, piece or pike, or such weapon as he does delight
in, which at the seat of the guard, taking his Ensign in his hand, he must let
rest in the keeping of his servant. Neither is it requisite in going or
marching, that he unloose and display the ensign, without some special
occasion, but ought to reserve the advancing and displaying of the same at
full, until he come in the sight of chieftaine or prince, or in the sight of
the enemy, or other places of service.

It is necessary his ensign have certain special countersignes and marks,
that it may easily be known of his soldiers, both near hand and far off,
to the intent that in all exployts, and at unknown sodains, his soldiers may
perfectly perceive the same amongst the other ensigns, different from the
rest, wherein the Alfierus must use an exquisite manage, that by his wise and
valorous actions without any other man's relation, may discern his virtuous
actions and forward proceedinges, which he ought to make apparent by some
notable enterprise.

The Alfierus must be a man of good account, of a good race, honest and
virtuous, brave in apparel, thereby to honor his office, and continually armed
as well when no peril is feared, as in time of danger, to give example to the
rest of the soldiers not to think their armor burthenous, but by use to make
it as familiar to him as his skin.

Finally he must be a man skillful, hardy, and courageous, of able courage to
advance and bear up the Ensign in all extremities, secret, silent, and
zealous, able often to comfort, animate and encurage the company to take in
hand, and maintain such extremisies, enterprises, as they are appointed unto,
and never to retire, but when of noble policy the higher officers command the
same. Unto this officer there should be certain ceremonies used in delivery
of the Ensign, reserving it by oath in the presence of his hand, at which time
he must make vow and profess the same rather to be his winding sheet, and
therein to lose his life, then through his default to lose the same: whereunto
every private soldier should likewise be sworn, as among the Romans it was used
when he was not accounted a soldier, but a thief, or robber, ^ill he had
taken his oath. And therefore their wars was called Militia Sacrata.

The office of the Lieutenant of a company*
THat persons upon whom any charge does depend, and does deservedly manage
any affair, must frame himself to use due diligence, and with dexterity
suffer such tedious toil, as in these serious affairs succeed, since that
charge (as I have already said) signifies nothing else but a burden of
affairs.

Therefore that a soldier may deservedly mount up to this degree of worthy
honor and martial dignity, he must use all circumspect care to perform his
office like an expert Lieutenant, that the company be well governed, which he
must accomplish with a forward and willing mind (though of duty he is bound
to perform the same) as well to content the mind of his captain, as to
augment his own honor and reputation. He must never appropriat unto himself
any one point of authority, but diligently discipher and understand all
things, and make relation thereof to his captain, of whom it is necessary he
take all his commissions and directions. His part is to give willingly and
readily counsel and advise to his captain, as often as he is demanded, and
otherwise never, unless he see that the same may do manifest good, or in case
of present peril.

The Lieutenant ought to carry with him a diligent care of concord, for that
particularly the pacification of discords and difference amongst ye soldiers
of his company, appertains unto him, which must be done without choler or
passion, and must still handle them very indifferently and courteously. For his
indifferency, besides the gaining of him trusty credit, does make easy the
desciding of any difference or disagreement, and is one point which of
necessity is most convenient to an honorable peacemaker, although it be a
very difficile thing to pro^ure peace in points of honor, specially amongst
soldiers that stand much upon their Punctos, and for that respect is it very
hard to use a just balance: therefore in such causes it is most requisite that
every one of the interessed, show at the full his entire cause, the which is a
thing not vulgar, neither of small importance. And although the pacifier ought
never to hang more upon the one side then the other, yet it is convenient he
have some small respect to him that is wronged against reason, rather then to
him that is ye unlawful worker of ye injury. But if he find any difficulty
in resolving these differences, let him confer with the Captain, to the end
that he, who is known to be the occasion, and will not agree to an honest end,
may be immediately discharged: but if it be thought good that he remain to
serve a time, for the execution of some special enterprise, then the word both
of the one and the other ought to be taken, until the same be performed or the
pay past, and then may discharge him, as is said, to shun a greater scandale:
for to enter into unquiet quarrelling and discord, one equal with an other, and
with one that receives the like stipend, is not the part and quality of a
subject soldier, but of a free careless cutter, and band buckle^, and of an
insolent and importunate person, whose nature does argue in him that his doings
tend to an other end, then to become excellent in the honorable exercise of
arms. P^t the case that one of them should valiantly overcome the other, yet
unto the Captain does arise no other then want, loss, and evil satisfaction:
for when first he did receive them into his service, he did presume that they
were both of them equally to be esteemed, men of good credit and behamour, and
that for such they were conducted, and received stipend. So that quarelling and
^illing one the other, as often it falls out in resolute persons o^ putting him
so a dishonor or open foil: such a one does not only deprive the Captain of
a soldier, but also of himself likewise: For the law of reason does bind the
Captain not to maintain an importunate person, a malefactor, and an homecide,
in one band no less then a well ordered city: Considering it is requisite and
convenient his soldiers, rather then to employ themselves in such quarrels,
should endeavor and adventure their bodies so overthrow and kill the enemy,
thereby to procure his own proper praise and peculier profit. Always
provided, that the occasion of ye wars be concluded and published to be lawful
and honest, which easily in this respect does remove all difficulties, whilst
a man does place himself in the service of a prince that is religious,
prudent, and just, and that have express and lawful power to louie arms, and
not with those which are of small authority, or tyrannous usurpers of other
men's states, and wicked blood suckers.

Therefore when the Lieutenant cannot by his own dealings supply these wants,
or pacify and accord them, in such causes he may remit the care thereof unto
his superior and Captain: And thus let him have special care that by his
means no quarrels do grow, neither that he suffer any faction or disce^tion to
take deep root, for fear of banding and mutinies.

He ought to have special respect that the Corporals and Sergeants be able
duly to execute their office with due diligence, for the better performance of
service, and personally aid them in setting the watch.

Likewise, to the intent that the Sergeant persist not ignorantly, or fall in
any one point of his office: it behooues the Lieutenant in many particular
points to aid him, both in respect of his own credit, and for the general
benefit of the whole band: as in using diverse directions, disciplines,
inue^tions, putting the band in order, rank, square, in accompanying them to
the watch, and in executing such like enterprises which commonly are to be
performed.

So ought he likewise to delight himself extraordenarily (besides the other
necessary parts of his office) in taking view of the Corpse de guard, and the
Sentinels of his proper company, to the intent they may remain continually
vigilant and ready, and each man's duty duly executed, the martial laws read
and examined, and a solemn silence generally maintained.

He must observe great affability and fraternity with the Alfierus, and
friendly consult with him (specially if the Lieutenant does not manage both the
one and the other office, as the Spaniards and other nations do use, and might
very well be used of us, if the General or Coronell think good, (...)* for
avoiding of emulation and charge of pay,) but if they (...) particular
officers, and bear distinct sway in the hand, then (...) the Lieutenant be
very careful (as he that is the chief) to avoid all stomaking and strife
that might arise ^etwixt him and the Alsierus, for thereby oftentimes great
scandales have fa^ne out, and the division of the company, a thing above all
other to be carefully forseene and shunned. He ought to use a gracious iesture,
and a courteous entertainment to all his soldiers, countenance every one
joyfully, and solicit their causes carefully toward the captain and the
other officers, as the treasurers, pay-masters, co^missaries and such like, yet
ever by the captains consent, yea and to the captain himself, by whose
friendly favor inferior officers may be relieved for their pay or other
wantes. Besides he ought to give order and direction to all the company,
dividing and distributing the Squadres indifferently and discreetly, to the
intent the Corporals and other officers may be obeyed, and that each enterprise
may be performed without reply or contradiction.

It is necessary that he put in every Squadre an equal number of every sort
of arms, and that each weapon be sorted in a readiness, to the intent ye in
what place and time soever occasion does require, every one of them may to his
great advantage, proceed and front the inuading enemy with a forceable
strength.

Like wise it is good sometimes not to suffer a Squadre or rather a whole Corpse
de guard to consist of soldiers al of one country and nation, but ought rather
to be artificially mixed, and to separate them, thereby to avoid quarrel and
generality of factions, which by reason of their being together may the rather
arise amongst consorts of one native country, and that more commodiously then
if they were separated.

The Captain being absent, the Lieutenant possesses ye principal and chief
place, and ought to be obeyed as captain. Nevertheless in his presence, it is
requisite he use a certain br^therly friendship and familiarity toward al,
yet that notwithstanding, he must proceed in all things with such modesty and
gravity, as he may retain such authority and reputation, as the office he
does hold, does most worthily inuest him withal.

There ought to be in him a reasonable good knowledge and fa^ in expressing his
conceit and meaning sensibly, that the (...) may understand what they have to
do, to the intent he may (...) m^re easily imprint in the hearts and minds of
his (...). (...), all such things as he determines, and that be necessary for
the better (...) of his Prince, and the benefit of his country and company,
whereunto he ought to apply himself with all possible diligence, since that of
the Prince he is liberally paid, has his being of his country, and is
diligently obeyed of his band, where he swayes his present office and charge,
which is truly of great credit and no less commodity.

Let him provide himself of a horse to bear him, to ye intent he may be lusty
and fresh in all enterprises* and that he may continually take the view and
diligently survey the order which they are to keep in marching, or in making
Alta, and at al other times besides in what enterprise soever.

He must take order that his baggage or carriage, which ought to be as little
as may be, (which rule ye common soldiers ought likewise observe) be borne and
conuaide amongst the common carriage, which the Captain has ordained and
provided for the use of the whole band.

He must take diligent care to the redeeming of pressed or lent money, which the
Captain shall make according to occasion or need amongst the company, and to
distribute the same conveniently amongst ye soldiers, and thereof to render and
yield good account to the Captain, by doing whereof he shall pleasure the
soldiers much, in which time of pay he has very good opertunitie to put the
soldiers in mind, and to teach them to proceed in well doing, and to desist
from evil.

It appertains generally to every Lieutenant of a band to be of great
experience and ripeness of service, whose authority in the absence of the
Captain (as partly I touched before) extends to examine, try, reform,
correct, and amend any offense committed within the band, and also day and
night to bring the company with the Ensign to the place of assembly, there
in order train and exercise the same, as to the necessity of service does
appertain, and being commanded by the higher powers to march toward the
enemy, must encounter and fight with them, as if the Captain were in
presence, who upon impediment, must sometimes be absent.

Finally, it appertains to the Lieutenant to watch, ward, approach, conduct,
advance against the enemies, and to encounter, animate^, comfort, and also to
encourage the company by
word and deed as need serves: to retire continually, maintaining skirmish,
until he have recovered some place of safeguard.

The office and duty that appertains to the Lanze-spezzate, volentarie
Lieutenants, the Gentlemen of a Band, or Caualliere of S. Georges squadrons.
THe sundry degrees whereunto valiant soldiers with aspiring minds seek to
ascend, for that they be many, and for that those which have attained and
served in those rooms and other great offices, by diverse sinister means and
accidents, be now and then disseuered and made frustrate from their charge, as
experience has made many times apparent, who yet nevertheless being naturally
desirous to continue in service, and perchance through foreign necessity are
driven to remain in pay, in attending further preferment: Therefore this place
was first invented for such persons, as a special seat wherein the flower of
warlike soldiers do sit, like a green Laurel garland that does enuiron the
martial head of a mighty army, whose order for warlike force or fame, gives
not place to the Grecian Falanges, the chiefest of the Roman legions, or to
the knightly co^stitution or courageous enterprises of those of Arthurs round
table. For there neither has been, nor can be found any place of such honor
or reputation, as to be a Gentleman of a Band, whether we serve for pleasure or
for profit, or have attained thereunto by merit: or whether we have been
Corporal, Sergeant, Alfierus or Lieutenant, wherein Captains sometimes ^o plant
themselves, specially in the Colonels Squadre, and temporise the time, until
preferment do fall: for thereby their former reputation is nothing disgraced,
nor their charge had, in or of any other company, nothing derogated:
Considering that those in these Squadrons either are, or ought to be soldiers
of such policy and perfect experence, that they be capeable of any office
under the degree of a Collonell, and may supply any of those foresaid offices,
or perform any other enterprise of great importance, commanded by the Captain,
Colonel, or General.

And for that many youths of (...) parentage, and Gentlemen of ancient houses
do likewise follow the wars, I would that upon due trial of their merit,
they should enter into these
Squadrons, which the Prince or General is to confirm, and make a distinct
order of valiant aduenturous soldiers, and call them Caualliers of S. Georges
Squadrons, at whose entrance thereinto, they shall take a solemn oath
appertaining to their order, and their Corporal shall inuest them with some
Band^oll, Medall or Scarf, whereu^on is portrayed S. George his arms, which
they must be bound to wear openly at all times and in all places, enterprises,
skirmishes, battles and assaults.

It is requisite that a singular good soldier, being the Gentleman of a band,
and Cauallier of S. George his Squadron, if he mean to gain the grace and
favor of his Captain and Colonel, that not only he be sufficiently valiant
and wise, as of necessity is required at his hands: but it is also convenient
for him to be reasonable well horsed, and to have in store all sorts of arms,
as a Halberd, Hargabuse for the match or firelocke, Armor and Target of
proof, his Lance and case of Pistolets, his Pike, his Pertisan or Epieu to go
the Round withal, that he may both day and night vary and change his arms at
the offer of all enterprises is requisite, and as change of service does call
him forth.

He must always of necessity have more then one servant, and ought to apparel
him in galant order: these are to be near his elbow to follow him with his
arms. He ought always to lodge himself as near as is possible, to the
lodging of his Colonel or captain, to the intent ye either armed, or without
arms, he may always, according as ye cause does require, be about his person,
either on horseback or on foot, for that the principal guard of this singular
personage, yt is to say, the Colonel or Captain, does consist in the
diligence and custody of the Caualliers of S. George his Squadrons. These
things notwithstanding, day and night when it falls to his lot, or that he
shall be commanded by his Corporal to watch, he must dispose himself to be able
to make particular guard, and that after a most exquisite order: wherein he must
have a special care (without making refusal at any time) to perform that
which shall be appointed him by his Corporal, or by any other that shall command
in the name of his Collonell or Captain. His office in time of watch, for the
most part consistes in going the Round, searching the watch, keeping good order
in the Corpse of Guard, in being a coadiutour to ye officer that guides the
company or rules the watch, and is for the most part exempted from standing
Sentinel, and such like duties of a common soldier, unless great necessity
or special service co^strain.

It appertains to him to have good experience in going the Round, that in
performing the same, he may discreetely govern in the oversight of the watch,
called the Sopraguardia, for in this point does very much consist the provident
good order and form that is to be observed, in avoiding the stratagems,
surprises, Sallies and disceits of the enemy. Approaching near to ye Sentinel,
he must give eye and diligent regard in what order and sort he does find him
vigilant, how ready he is in demanding and taking the word, and after coming
nearer him, he must examine all that has passed or fallen out whilst he has
been in Sentinel, and the order he does observe, and what has been appointed
him to do: the which if it be good he must confirm, and when he does find it
to be otherwise, he must rehearse and refer the same to the Corporal of the
Sentinel, that he may use diligent redress.

Arriving in any Corpse de guard, he must above all things advertise them, that
they always keep fire light for the necessary commodity of Hargabusiers, and
for light in the night, taking order with the soldiers that they and their
arms may remain in a forceable readiness: through which his good instruction,
there may grow to be no want, and so consequently he must in like cases proceed
with like provident diligence.

After this he must with great consideration and modesty, examine every
particular thing, carrying a mind with himself to continue and increase the
same from better to better, and both in himself and to them use necessary
aduertiseme^ts, and in such sort shall he pass through all the Corpse de gards
and Sentinels.

If it chance him to encounter another Sopraguardia or round, to shun the
occasion of dangerous difference, which sometimes is accustomed to follow: or
for policy, in fearing to give ye watch word to him that purposely comes to
rob the same, that coming from the enemy secretly, counterfaits the
Sentinel, or by some other practice, as it sometimes has caused damage to the
grievous loss and total prejudice of the army, to prevent such inconvenience,
let that Sopraguardia which shall be nearest to the next adjoining Sentinel,
turn back, giving the word after a due accustomed sort unto the said
Sentinel, to the intent the foresaid Sopraguardia may do the like* and when
they are of accord, every one may follow his own path, but if otherwise they
do disagree, the disceit remains discovered: not only in that counterfeit
round, but also in the sained Sentinel, whom the Sopraguardia must examine and
demand at his hand some special countersigne or double word, that thereby he
may know him for an assured friend, or find him an enemy or negligent person,
the which of all men is very well known to merit sharp and extreme
chastisement, which at no time, so near as is possible, is to be omitted.

This former rule is to be observed of those soldiers that be of one self
nation: but when the Rounds or Sopraguardes be many and of sundry nations, and
the Corpse of Gards likewise: then the Sopraguard coming into a quarter that is
stranger unto him, is bound to give the word to the Sopraguard of that nation,
and of that quarter: so that by such means as well ye suspicion of disceit, as
the occasion of discord shall be avoided.

And if in case the said ordinary Round or Sopraguard, do encounter in their
own quarter, with the extraordinary, those that be ordinary shall endeavor
themselves to take the word of those that be extraordinary. For so is it
convenient and most conformable to that order beforesaid, wherein I have set
down what is necessary for a Sopraguard or Round to do in a strange quarter.
And for that it is requisite, as I have alredie touched, that the Caualliers be
always about the person of his chief captain, without either being bound to
Standerd, Guidon, or other Ensign whatsoever, he must endeavor himself, when
any enterprise or warlike affairs is committed to his charge, to be apt and
ready to use practiced experience in directing and guiding a skirmish, in
taking the view of a battery, in discovering of the enemy, in marching or
making Alta, in Passa parde in the valia^nt repulse of a sudden inuading
enemy by Bawll en bouche, in taking view of the situation of a place, in
guiding a Road or troop of Horsemen, in giving Alarome to the enemy, in
plucking aduertisementes from the enemy, in placing Imbas^ades, in giving
Canuasados, and to know very well how to execute with sound judgment these
and such like important affairs, the which for the most part appertain to the
Cauallieres of this Squadrone to perform. As likewise it has bin the custom
to give the^ the charge to plant Gabiones for the defense of the Artillarie, to
batter and endomage the walls, the Trenches, the lodinges, and the enemies
Squadrones.

Let him remember when he has bin at any exploite, to bring back again into
his Quarter, those soldiers he has led forth to any enterprise, united and
in rank, marching together behind him, and never suffer them to return
disbanded one by one out of order, which is an occasion of great confusion, and
brings but small reputation to the Captain and conductor of them.

Moreover it is very necessary he know how to make a road and distroie the
enemies country, the which likewise does oftentimes appertain to him to
perform: in which exploite he must beware above all things, that no soldier
in those enterprises disperse or disband themselves, but with an assured good
order, for the most part conformable to my following discourse, wherein I set
down directions, how to conduct Soldiers to the skirmish. And particularly
where I declare that he ought to keep and maintain for his people the
strongest place of situation, wherein he must skirmish, for that commonly
soldiers being in disorder, wearied and laden with spoil, may be easily
put to flight, broken and oppressed of the enemies, unless they be seconded
or shaded by some forceable succor.

I suppose it likewise most necessary, that he endeavor himself to be apt
and sufficient at all times, and in all places to solicit and negociate for
his Prince or Chieftaine, any cause of what weight or moment soever,
considering that most men are not fit to attempt the performance of such
doubtful and difficile causes: for although many make great estimation of
them selves, and presume much by their daily reading and Theoricke of those
weighty affairs, yet do they want and come far short of that bold and
ready practice, which plainly appears, that the worthy professors of Arms
possess: and specially in the presence of great Princes, whose Majesty and
reverence for the most part, does make cold and bring out of countenance the
hoatest and most resolute determination. As Demosthenes before Philip of
Macedone made apparent, when he was not able to pronounce three words of a
long premeditate Oration, in behalf of the Athenians.

This worthy gentleman of a band, this Caualliere of Saint Georges squadre,
and likewise all other professors of warlike arms, ought to carry in mind,
that of him and his equals the exercise of Arms is to be applied, and
diligently to practice the same, to the intent he be not for want of
knowledge despised of others: and not ignorantly to despise them that deserve
due commendations, but rather to carry and use the countenance of authority to
those persons that merit not to bear swaie and government, then toward
forward soldiers. Yet for all that toward the rest in ^some other respects,
he ought to gratify them and help them to his power, and so courteously win
the good wills and friendly favor of all soldiers his equals, to instruct and
courteously to admonish every soldier privately and apart, what appertains
to his duty.

This Caualliere must be able also to train soldiers, to make them march in
orderly proporcions, to cast them in Ringes, Esses, Snailes, Hearses, Squadres,
to receive and give charge, to feign skirmishes, onsets, retraites, and how to
order any number of Soldiers, from a hundredth to five hundredth, for so many
may be in a band, and under one Ensign, as the Swi^ers and Germains yet use at
this day, and as in former ages our Countriemen have used, which in some
respects may pass without reprehension. If a Captain be disposed to have so
many under his Ensign, when he is not able to bring the number unto a whole
Collonelship, together with the knowledge of the order how to train, he must
endeavor himself to be perfect in drawing platformes, in the Mathematickes, in
the martial Laws, in besieging of towns, batteries, mines, and each thing
else belonging to Martial discipline.

Let this worthy Caualliere of Saint Georges squadre have then before his eyes
such like precepts, and manage of martial affairs, that he may increase his
own credit, win his country fame, favor of his Prince, and honor of his
house and friends, rather then for the regard of riches, stately houses,
livings, and such like, but rather prefer prudent policy, courage, valor and
approved experience before such base benefits, whereby he may attain to the
laurel Crown, wherewith diverse mighty conquerors have their heads adorned:
That he may be an example to the reproach of such as lewdlie spend their days
in idleness, prodigality, lust and obloquie.

The order of trayning Footmen, necessary to be observed of all Sergeants,
Lieutenants, and Cauallieres of the band.
FOr that the ignorance and decay of Arms in the beginning of this age, and in
these parts of Europe have brought great confusion to diverse, which have
rawlie and rashly professed the same, to the hazard of their lives and
country: And for that Mustering and trayning of soldiers to make them expert
to service is one of the greatest errors has bin committed: therefore I have
thought good to borrow out of Master Stywards Book of Martial discipline, his
manner and form of trayning, which I find in him set down in more plain and
exquisite manner, according to the modern use, then of any that has hitherto
written so particularly either in our own tongue, or in any other foreign
language, wherein the Author does merit great commendations, whether the same
proceeds of his own experience, or that he has drawn it out of other men's
travails.

But first before I enter into particulars, I think it good to set down, what
Charecters I mean to use in these discriptions, that they may be the better
understood, together with other notes appertaining to these present directions.

The Letters and Charecters.
C for Captains. L for Lieutenants. S for Sergeants. D for Drums. F for
Fiftes. s for Hargabusiers. a for Archers. b for Halberdiers. p for Pikes. h
for Horsemen.
The Orders which are to be observed for the furnishing of the foresaid weapons.
Caliuers or Hargabuzieres, or Mu^ketieres
SUch must have either of them a good and sufficient piece, flask, tutch-boxe,
powder, shot, iron, mold, worm, tyrebale, rammer, sword and dagger, and a
morrion. The like must the Muskete are have, with a forked staff breast hye,
with a stringe to fasten to his wrest. Such as serve with shot in rain, mistes
and winds, must have their pieces chardged and primed: They must carry the
tutch hoale of their pieces under their armehoales, match light in their hands
covertly and dry, their pieces fair and clean within and without, so be
they serviceable at all times, having regard they keep their march and retire
of good distance in sunder, their match and powder very dry, and their pieces
often chardged and discharged.

Archers or long Bows.
Necessary it is that every man have a good and meet bow, according to his
draught and strength, light and easy, a light side jack hanging loose to his
knee, with a skul, sword and dagger, nothing upon his arms, whereby in time of
service he may easily draw the arrow to the head, that they may deliver the
same with strength and art, as Englishmen be accustomed. They must have also a
bracer and shooting glove, their stringes whipped and waxed over with glue,
their feathers dry: and so is h^ serviceable.

Pykemen.
THose bearing that warlike weapons, especially the fronts, where sometimes
Captains, Lieutenants, Sergeants, and Cauallieres of bands, be oftentimes
planted with Pikes, and is the place for Gentlemen to serve in, must have a
fair Millan corsse^, with all pieces appertaining to the same: that is, the
curats, the collers, the paldrons, with the vambraces, also the long taces with
the burganet, with sword and dagger, their pykes of the usual length (for the
strength of the battle does consist in the same) bearing the pykes on their
sholders, setting their thumbes under the same, whereby it is ruled. They must
oftentimes practice to trayle, push, ward, couch, cross, etc. as for the
necessity of the skirmish or battle appertains.

Halberdeares or Bill-men.
THese be gards unto Captains and Ensigns, which be most times chosen
gentlemen of experience, or Cauallieres of the squadre, who as occasion
serves, give orders to the numbers in array, and the enemy approaching to give
an onset, certain of them be appointed to advance and maintain the receipt of
them: whose discreet leading and valiant courage does much comfort the rest to
follow the same. These Cauallieres be armed with corselets, and be placed in
the heart of the battle, usually called the slaughter of the field, or
execution of the same, who commonly do not fight but in very great
extremity.

Because there is great alteration and division of weapons, I mean to note
unto you the just numbers to every hundredth at this present used, which shall
greatly profit to the making of your battles, from 100. unto 1500.

Men. Pikes. Halberds and Targets of proof. Shot. 100 Men. 40 P. 10 H. 50
Shot. 200 Men. 80 P. 20 H. 100 Shot. 300 Men. 120 P. 30 H. 150 Shot. 400 Men.
160 P. 40 H. 200 Shot. 500 Men. 200 P. 50 H. 250 Shot. 600 Men. 240 P. 60 H.
300 Shot. 700 Men. 280 P. 70 H. 350 Shot. 800 Men. 320 P. 80 H. 400 Shot. 900
Men. 340 P. 90 H. 450 Shot. 1000 Men. 400 P. 100 H. 500 Shot. 1100 Men. 440 P.
110 H. 550 Shot. 1200 Men. 480 P. 120 H. 600 Shot. 1300 Men. 520 P. 130 H. 650
Shot. 1400 Men. 560 P. 140 H. 700 Shot. 1500 Men. 600 P. 150 H. 750 Shot.

Of Mustering and Training.
A Band or Company being furnished with Officers, Soldiers, Armor, Weapons
and Munitions, as aforesaid: In times connenient resort wholly together, to
some ground necessary, to must^r, march and train, exercise and instruct such
as are not perfect in feats of war, which be ordered sometimes by words
and deeds, and sometimes by framed signs from the officers, that soldiers
may learn and observe the meaning of the same. At such times of assembly, as
at watch or ward, the Clerk ought to read the bill, and to call every
soldier by his name, that every man may answer for himself, and none to be
absent upon pain, without sickness or license. The Sergeant (as they be
called) puts them in Array, that every man follow his loadesman, keeping his
ranck-fellowes justly on both sides, placing the shot in voward and rerewarde:
the Ensign and Halberds in the midst of the Pikes, so be they placed in
beauty and strength, as is accustomed: sometimes to stand and advance their
weapons, turn their faces, and march any way assigned: and sometimes to
receive a word that shall pass from man to man, from the one end to the
other, with such silence, that none hear the same, but those in array assembled.

Certain words to be used of the Officer that traynes.
When any Officer determines to exercise his company to train them, he must
cast them into a King or such like necessary form, and use these or like
words.

My loving friends, fellows, and companions in Arms, we be gathered
together for the service of God, his holy Church, our Prince and Country, and
for that none through ignorance shall perish or run in danger of the laws of
the field, you shall from time to time by me or other Officers of the band be
instructed by words or deeds in such points, as to your calling and the
necessity of service shall require, the which you must diligently observe and
follow, though the same shall seem unto you many times both dangerous and
paynfull. Also if any of you my follows shall find an occasion convenient to
declare to (...) or any other officer, his mind and opinion in any thing
touching service, w^ shall diligently hear, and gratify the party the
double value thereof, and (God willing) equity and justice shall be ministered.
Also regard that all soldiers know and obey their (...) in their place,
according to their calling.

To teach and train Soldiers to march
in Ranckes, Squares, battles, etc.
FIrst, for that one hundredth is the least number that a Captain can have in
charge, I will therefore begin with 100. setting your weapons in this order
following: that is, twenty five shot, next your shot twenty Pykes, then ten
Halberds to guard the Ensign, and next your Halberds other twenty Pykes, and
then your other five and twenty shot, the which being thus placed may be
brought to those proportions here set down, greatly auailable to diverse
services.

When the soldiers are taught to march three in a rank right forth, you
shall bring them in this proportion of a ring, otherwise called a Limasson: and
although it is not of any force, it is necessary to train ye imperfect, also
by bringing them in close compass together, they may better hear and
understand any precepts touching their charge, spoken by the Captain or any
other officers, as often as is meet. This figure following of the ring is not of
force, because the Ensign lies open to the enemies without guard of Pikes.

The Ring.


Sometimes upon good occasion you shall bring your Pykes in order of an S. your
Halberds planted in the midst with the Ensign, whereby it may be environed
with Pykes for defense of horse, your shot placed between every rank of
Pikes, so that they may serve to the skirmish, either rescuing other within
guard, the which retyring into the void place, the Pikes couched every way for
defense, the overplus of the shot with the Captain and Lieutenant with other
officers to be placed in the midst of the S. with the Ensign.

An S.


SOmetimes upon the sudden bring them into this order of a D. otherwise
called a Snaile: Place your Halberds and Ensign in the Rereward of your Pikes,
and cast your self round, so that you may enuiron your Ensign, having first
placed your shot amongst the ranckes of Pikes, every Captain, Lieutenant, and
other officer together with the overplus of shot, to be placed within the
circuit of the weapons. This is a strength at need, but in this order they
cannot march or retire.

A D. or a Snaile.


How to train soldiers and bring them to the use of their weapon.
AFter you have taught your company to martch three in a rank right forth,
likewise to keep their order in Limasson or Ring, in S. or D. you shall
command your officers to teach them how to use their weapons. First divide your
shot from your pikes and Halberds, causing a mark to be set upon the water,
whereby you shall the better perceive where the bullet falls or strikes.
Then cause your drum to go before, and your shot to follow single, teaching
the^ how to hold their pieces, and to put powder in the pan, the match in the
cock, how to couch and give fire the better to bolden them: and that those
have experience to discharge at the mark, and every one for to follow his
loadsman. This done, cast them all about round, and bring them to the place
where they began, then afterward teach them to charge with bullet.

Sometimes divide your pikes and halberds in
two parts, commanding your officers that they turn their broad sides, as if
they should encounter the enemy, causing your drums to sound. Then charge your
officers to go in ye front of your pikes, to show them how that they should use
their weapons, as first, to cause your pikes to sarie close together, then to
traile their pikes with the sharp end toward the enemy, two yards from the
end of the blade, and to offer the push one at another. This being done, cause
your drums to sound retrait, that is, to retire with your faces on the enemy.
Then must you teach them to ward with their pikes when the push is offered
against them: also to couch and cross, for defense of horse. Likewise to
advance, etc.

How to train or place an hundredth men.
THis figure here placed does show how the hundred men before mentioned cast in
a ring, may march three in a rank, the which may be brought unto these
proportions of strength following.

SOmetimes marching in the ray before said, you shall divide the same into
three parts by ^1. ranks in each part, dividing your shot into four parts, and
your pikes into four parts also, placing your halberds to guard the Ensign, so
be they ready at the sudden in quadrant as appears following.



LIkewise you must instruct them from three to march five in rank, to the
intent when need serves to join unto other bands. In thus marching, place
half your shot before the other in the rereward.

ALso you may practice them to march seven in rank, placing your halberds in
the Rereward with your Ensign, the which makes a just quad^ant, placing your
shot in the wings and rereward as appears following. To augment from three
unto five.




YOu may likewise by placing seven in rank, the which is the greatest force
that 100. men may be brought into, place 21. shot in the front, and fifteen in
^ch wing, the which service being very apt to skirmish, is greatly unto the
anoying of the enemy: also it is ready to retire to serve round about the
battle of pikes, as before.



IF in marching you understand or perceive that horsemen will assault you, then
place five pikes in rank, and betwixt every pike a shot, so marching forward,
they fall to be ten rank quadrant, placing your halbe^ds and Ensign in the
midst

A quadrant mixed with shot.


LIkewise you may for ye defense of horsemen, place ten ranks of pikes every
way, your shot next unto the^, your halberds and Ensign in the midst, the
pikes ends couched on the ground the better to defend the enemy.

A quadrant defending the shot.


THis proportion shows the march or quadrant order at large of a hundredth
men, very necessary to be used in show to the enemies, when thou
understand their ^umbers to exceed thine: Placing 7. Pikes in the Uoward,
also 7. pikes in the Rereward, next unto them 6. pikes in the second ranks,
your Bills or Halberds together with your Ensign in the midst with the Drum
and Fifte, as is before mentioned, the which number (when thou perceiuest the
enemy to take view of thine) thou shall alter and cause the second ranks of
the Uoward and Rereward to step forward to furnish the void spaces, the
which shall make of 7. thirteen in a rank. Also if thou perceiuest the enemy
pretending to encounter thee, having no place of refuge, shall cause the ranks
that stepped forward to retire to their places, and to sarrie close together,
removing out of the second ranks into the wings, the Halberds to step forward
in their places, will be 7. every way quadra^t, as in the order before is
mentioned, your shot to be placed in the Uoward and rereward, may skirmish and
retire as occasion serves,

The March at large,


Practices of training, appertaining to the
charge of two hundredth Men.
FIrst marching five in Rank, 40. ranks contain two hundredth men, suting
their weapons, as before, they may be brought to these orders following,
auailable for diverse intents, although the same for a time seem painful, and
although Archers be not as heretofore they have bin, yet is it good in some of
my figures following, to show you when you have Archers how to place them.

SOmetimes divide the Pikes and the Halberds into three parts, by 1^. ranks,
7, to a rank, placing your Ensign in the midst, so ioining them together
makes a Hearse battle, ready at the sudden against the enemy, placing in
the Uoward 40. Hargabuzers, and 20. Archers, and in the Rereward 10.
Hargabuzers and 30. Archers.



LIkewise according to your ground you shall place your uttermost ranks with
your best and fairest Corselets, the which serves not only to the show, but
otherwise to the strength of the battle, commanding your Officers to place
10. in a rank, the rest to follow on their march 10. in a rank. Likewise your
Halberds and Ensign in the midst, which falls to be 10. every way quadrant,
the which is a just hundreth^ your Hargabuzers placed in the Uoward and
Rereward, and your Archers in the flanks, the which is a just 100. also, as
here follows*



SOmetimes by commandment of the General or head Officers, you are to
accomplish some exploit by night, the which being led by your guides through
straites, wrong ground, woods etc. It is needful that every pikeman and
bilman take hold of his loadsmans weapon, placing your shot betwixt your
Pikes, and your Ensign in the midst, your Pykes to march five in a rank, 16.
ranks is just 80. Pikes beside your Halberds. The overplus of your shot to be
placed in the Rereward.



SOmetimes occasion scrueth to march through long broom, corn, fearne, etc.
so that soldiers must traile their pikes from the ground, close together at
the half pikes, in the Uoward the sharp ends of the pikes forward, and in the
Rereward the sharp ends of the pikes to the ground, who may at the sudden
being assailed with Horsemen, presently advance and couch their pikes every
way for defense from the Horse, your Hargabuzers in the front and Rereward, the
Archers in the flanks.



ALso when you shall be called to the assaults of Towns, Fortes, trenches,
etc. you must endure the great shot, if it be not dismounted, wherefore the
Officers must cause the soldiers to march a good distance a sunder, and every
man close to his loadsman, march with expedition, the shot making way to the
hand weapons, and all jointly together to employ themselves unto victory, your
Hargabuzers unto the Uoward, your Archers next to your Pikes, as this example
shows.



Certain points to exercise and train 300. men to service.
A Captain having charge of 300. men that be expert in service, may
oftentimes victoriously accomplish exploites and points of service to them
committed, which great numbers imperfect may not attain unto. The better to
instruct the same, here follow certain Orders and strengthes in array, which
practiced in time convenient, may bring perfection of service at need.

Sometime placing such numbers by 5. in rank, may be brought to diverse
points of service convenient, 60. ranks contain 300. men, 5. in rank.



TO bring the first march of 5. in a rank into a quadrant proportion, you must
divide your long weapons into three parts, placing sour in rank, your halbers
and Ensign in the midst, and joined close together fall out to be 12. quadrant
every way, your shot placed in the wings ready to skirmish, in the body of
the battle are 120. pikes, thirty halberds, and in the wings 140. shot, in
the rereward thirty shot, thus is the number at the sudden brought to
strength.



SOmetimes augment your ranks from five to seven* ^o (...)* ranks contains
300. men, which are to be joined unto other numbers, and to be brought to force.



SOmetimes augment these 7. ranks here adjoining to 9. the long weapons of the
same contain 18. ranks, your shot placed in the voward and rereward, as the
ground may serve, is a hearse or broad square.

By these exercises of augmenting ranks as do appear, soldiers may be
brought to perfection of order in array, and by the same be brought in quadrant
or hearse battle, according as numbers and ground will serve.

Orders of training three hundred men.


Sometimes the Captains with their bands aforesaid, be appointed to some
e^polits with such silence that Drums sound not, nor clap weapons, neither use
any noise until they have recovered the place convenient for their
enterprises. Also sometimes the Officers in Rereward sends a woor^ passing
from man to (...) until it come to the voward, from one rank to an other,
which may be said Sar^a, advance, Bullet in the mouth* etc. or such like,
appointing two or three ranks of Gentlemen* of the (...) of S. Georges
Squa^ie, to lead the voward, who know the encounter and how to join, and
thereby that way by order of the officers, the shot does issue to skirmish
betwixt the skillful (...) beforesaid. The battle may join close together if
o^casion requires: also the rest of the shot may wa^e through to help the
voward.

Even as presently you have placed 12. in rank, with your halberds and Ensign
in the midst, so may they likewise fall out to be 12. in rank in breadth, and
13. in length, if you place your shot in the front and rereward, the which as
occasion serves, may be brought to skirmish any ways. This battle as the
ground serves is very strong against the enemy.



Sometimes marching in straights, and especially having some guard in the
rereward for the safety of the Ensign, you may send certain ranks of pikes
in the front toward the enemy, which shall wade through to strengthen the
battle, placing the one half of your shot to skirmish in the front, the
other half in the rereward.



Sometimes having scope of ground, standing in doubt of horsemen, cause the
numbers to march 12* in a rank at large, a good distance a sunder, and so to
stand still, every man toward their quarters, placing their shot on al sides
betwixt the pikes, which after they have discharged, being charged with horse,
may retire to the halberds, and your outward fronts farrie close together until
the shot have charged, and at the repulse of the horsemen to open your pikes at
large, and the shot to be commanded to issue and to skirmish as they were in
the fronts. This battle is of great force.



To order and imbattell 400. in quadrant proportion.
Four hundredth men, whether they serve in one band or under two several
Ensigns, may be brought to this quadrant proportion against the defense of the
enemy by placing 15. in the front, joining four ranks of pikes in the
voward, and four in the rereward, and four in the flanks, your halberds and
Ensign in the midst, placing your shot in six wings for the rescuing of each
other, the rest of your shot in the voward and rereward in Diamond wise. This
battle for so small a number is of great force.



THe ground may be such as it shall be necessary to place the same number in
manner of a hearse, or twofold battle, placing ten in rank in length, and 20.
in breadth, placing your halberds and Ensign in the midst, encountering the
enemy on your broad side, so shall you occupy more hands then the quadrant
battle does, taking up less ground in marching, then the other battle. You
must cause them to sarrie close together, trailing their pikes on the ground,
being ready to offer the push to the footmen, and to cross for the defense
of horsemen, your shot to be placed as before you appears. This is of great
strength, so that the enemy cannot enuiron you.



To embattaile 500. men in a quadrant proportion.
ACcording to the worthiness of the Captain, the greater is his charge, as
one Captain to have charge of 500. men under one Ensign, the which if any
Caualliere of the order would bring into quadrant battle, he must place 16
Pikes in front, making 4. ranks quadrant, placing his halberds in the midst
with the Ensign, so has he in the body of the battle 250. men, his shot
to be placed in the front and Rereward 110. and in the flanks of the battle
in the 8. wings 140. the which being discharged may discharge and retire,
whereby to be rescued by the rest. They may in this proportion March any way
unto them needful, be it either to travail, or else to win grounds by any
advantage.



SOmetimes by reason of the ground it is necessary to bring such a number into
an hearse or twofold battle, which may be more auailable then the Quadrant
battle. To bring them into this proportion, you must place 13. Pikes in
breadth, and 21. in length, your Halberds and Ensign in the midst, your shot
in the f^onts and wings. Thus in order they may turn their faces, and march
any way to them needful, which practice may greatly avail at time of need,
as unto great numbers appertains.



In what sort Hargabuziers and Archers are to be guided to skirmish.
FOr that in all skirmishes shot is the first that begins the fight, I have
thought good in some few figures to set down how they may March, skirmish,
invade, and retire in politik^ manner, and how by ranks to rescue one another,
whereof the practice in this small number will give a light to greater knowledge,
which still may increase as the devises of new inventions do spring, wherein I
would wish all worthy Gentlemen and courageous minds to whet their politic
industry, that thereby they may shun diverse discommodities and unknown
dangers, and attain to the tipe of true valiancie: but to proceed.

This number following upon the sight of the enemies, must march three in a
rank, casting themselves in the proportion of a Ring, so to abide there,
appointing themselves to approach still in array, there to discharge by ranks,
and so in the Rereward to charge again, being ready for service, still
marching round and wheeling about like unto the Rutters.



THis number encou^tring the Ring must discharge by ranks, and after the first
rank has discharged, to retire betwixt the ranks until they come to the
Rereward, there to charge and to follow his loadsman to service again. Thus
may you continually maintain skirmish, how little or great soever your number
be, it gives great encouragement to the Soldiers standing but one shot and
retireth.



THese two bands of Hargabuzers set to encounter the enemy on their broad
sides, the fronts discharge and turn their faces, retyring betwixt the other,
which advance in like manner for their rescue. These retire and charge again to
service, by practicing the skirmish in this sort, you may bring bands of
Archers to service, to the great anoying and discomfiting of the enemy.



These two bands change ranks, and place on their broad sides.

These bands of Archers be brought to service by the Callieuers before them.
THese bands of Archers being brought to service by the Hargabuziers, although
the hargabuziers be accounted to be of greater force then they be of, and the
Archers not now so much used in the field as they have bin, yet having light
shaftes made to shot 12. or 14. scoore, may keep their place, shooting al
together over the heads of the hargabuziers, to the gauling, blemishing, and
great annoy of the enemy.



THese two bands following discharge by ranks and return to the Rereward, and
charge again, who being placed five in a rank like to two horns, are to be
brought to skirmish in like proportion to this figure. The fronts or voward
having discharged, the one retyreth on the left hand, the other on the right
hand unto the Rereward, and there to charge again every one a fresh, following
his loadsman to service.



Orders of shot very necessary for diverse intents of service auailable.
ACcording to the number of the enemies, you must answers them with like
proportion and numbers, having great regard to obtain the hill, wind, water,
wood, marish, strength of vitch, coppes, etc. the which greatly avails.
Sometimes the advantage of ground is such, that small numbers may repulse
greater numbers. The grounds large and plain, make your main-ward of shot
large and strong, the better to answer the enemy, the fronts to discharge and
retire to the Rereward, there to charge again, and being thus joined in
skirmish with the enemy, the Officer or he that guides, must foresee the best
way to repulse and overthrow the enemy, sending two wings to slanke the
enemies and to encounter them, the which being wisely foreseen will greatly
profit.



Soldiers likewise in marching, charging or discharging, inuading and
skirmishing, may from the first ranks and front of the square, return and
wind himself through the rank, being seconded by his companions, following
this example.



THese three bands marching at large may wade thorough in skirmish, or retire
betwixt the ranks, as occasion serves, either band rescuing other, to charge
in the Rereward, and to advance to service again. Thus may you continually
maintain skirmish or volles of whole shot.



These practices and others of better invention, together with such like
warlike exercises in times conuentent, may bring perfection to service with
shot at need, the rather through the good industry and painful travail of
the Officers and the Soldiers, by whose gentle patience it is sooner obtained.

The order of skirmish, how it is to be governed, when it is to be accepted,
and when to be avoided.
IT being necessary for every Sergeant, Lieutenant and Caual liere of the
band, to know when, where, and in what order a skirmish is to be governed,
when to be avoided, and when to be accepted to the benefit of the whole
band, regiment, or Army, I thought good to join to those proportions of
training, somewhat touching the same: wherein for that there be sundry
occasions which move and constrain men to enter into skirmish, I will amongst
the rest choose out three which I judge most principal and of greatest
importance.

The first is, when we will give the enemy experience and trial of our
valor and force, and cunningly to persuade him (by a soldier that yields of
purpose, or alter sides) to give credit to some thing which may arise to our
commodity and his damage. Likewise by taking some of his soldiers prisoners,
to understand the state of our enemies, the which may be more aptly termed the
winning of aduertisements, the which things is most expedient we put in
practice.

The second is, when we determine to gain any passage, or any fortress or
strength, which is in the enemies possession, or like to fall into his hands if
prevention be not used, and having occupied and gained the same, to retain it
for the service of our Camp.

The third is, when we are of mind to keep the enemy so occupied as he
march not at his pleasure, or that when we do march our selves he become not
domageable to our own people, or to the bagage, or any thing that is ours being
of importance.

When therefore we will give trial or experience of our selves to the enemy,
and gain intelligences, or win aduertisements of him: it is requisite there be
election made of a leader, some worthy Caualliere, that is endued with prudent
policy and noble valor, who must govern this skirmish: which leader, must
take with him a quantity of chosen soldiers, and according as the accustomed
use is, must have culled out of every band so many as will amount to the number
of 10. out of each hundredth, a hundredth out of a thousand, and a thousand out of
ten thousand, or some such like reasonable portion.

When the leader of the skirmish has made choice of the place and ground (fit
for his purpose) wherein he means to meet with the enemies (the which will
not be difficile for that he is the chooser, inuentor, and author thereof,) he
must then conduct thither a quantity of good soldiers, with an assured array
and order. Having first and beforehand exhorted the^ to due obedience, and
opened and conferred with them ye chief circumstance of his meaning, both how
long, and in what manner the enterprise is to be performed, to the intent that
when he has accomplished and erecuted so much as he was determined, it do not
seem strange unto them to make retire. For the which there did arise great
quarrel and bloody issue in Germany, betwixt two Italian captains, Giouan
Dominico Napolello of Naples, and captain Loatello of Cremen^, both valiant
gentlemen, the one of them persuading the other to retire from a skirmish,
begin to the purpose before mentioned, by appointment of their superiors, but
by reason the one would not obey, it was the cause of great disorder. He must
likewise have a provident foresight and be very circumspect, that like a good
soldier he go very warily and considerately into the fight and skirmish, ever
watching and attending for his continual advantage, to the end that retyring
himself upon a sudden, the enemy may remain and rest repulsed, amazed, and
oppressed, that the whole army may conceive and be kept in a good impression,
and opinion of victory.

Now this foresaid leader being arrived with the people in the sight of the
enemy, he must immediately with his soldiers, occupy and take possession of
the ground, which does best please him, which is most apt for his purpose, and
in effect is ye strongest* He must take order yt these hargabussers be
accompanied with armed pikes and corselets, without whose fellowship
hargab^siers ought never to be sent about any enterprise, specially when they
suspect they shall meet with the enemy, or with horsemen.

Whenever soldiers are to enter into skirmi^h, their leader must divide them
into so many parts as he shall think expedient, which division must be used
according as the quantity of the people will bear, so that in every part
their ought to be at the least 50. soldiers, and 5. or 6. several parts and
companies: Nevertheless always foreseeing and providing, that as well all the
parts together, as the number of the soldiers of ever to part by themselves,
be like in proportion to the quality and force of the enemy, and equal to the
quantity of their number, the which may be known very well, there by view
and discovered by means of spies, or by manifest and assured fame. To every
which part he must appoint a sufficient head and guide, a noble Cauallier of
Saint Georges squadre.

Then must he send out certain soldiers that be most nimble and ready to
provoke the enemy, and when they be joined in skirmish, he must suddenly
increase the fight with sending forth the second part: and then rest a little
to behold, to the intent the skirmish may begin to grow whotter: at which time
he must likewise send the third troop for a new supply, and so consequently
^ne after another* continue on the encounter.

The most fit and apt time when the soldiers must enter the skirmish, make
retire, and give a fresh onset, ought to be showed and made manifest by the
sound of trumpets to horsemen, and stroke or battery of drums to the
footmen, from the maine stand, which is placed in some plot of ground, resting
vigilant in a forceable squadron, for the sure defense and retrait of those
that skirmish: to the end they may both courageously fight, and the enemy rest
confounded and despair of his victory, when he does perceive so perfect and
pollitike an order. The which for ye most part makes every hard difficulty to
be performed with great facility, specially in ye discreet and famous exercise
of arms.

To give more light to some new inventions of skirmish, I cannot omit to
declare in what sort I have seen skirmish a guidon of horsemen Rutters, who
coming to the fight in their accustomed squadres, and from thence pricking
forward some of the first ranks and threads provoke the enemy*, and when these
of the first ranks have discharged their Pistolets, making Carier and being
charged, they place themselves again at the back of their own squadre, from
whence at the same instant time others of the first ranks do disband
themselves, and give charge upon the enemy: but being charged themselves of
the enemy, retyring, they convey themselves behind their own people, which
already before them are ranged for their saftie in their square, so that as
many more immediately giving a fresh onset, by breaking out of the squadre,
which is maintained and renewed by this special order, do with marvelous
fury force the enemy, and in this order skirmishing in a winding ring, in
round, as is before set down by figure, do still maintain themselves lusty
and fresh, the which form of fight may in some respects serve in this place
for an example.

But to return to my former matter, I say, when the skirmish and fight has
been maintained valiantly in the front and face of the enemy an hour and a
half, or else two hours, and that he has taken some of his enemies
prisoners, for the obtaining whereof he must very courageously and whotly
proceed, which is to be understood, the winning of aduertisements and
intelligences from the enemy: since by that means he may have of them choice
and contentation, he may then at his pleasure make retraite and take up the
skirmish.

Moreover, to the intent he may retire with advantage and with safety, he must
send to sustain the fight, a fresh band of soldiers that with greater
facility he may front the surie of the enemy, if there rise desire in them to
urge or pursue him in his retire.

There is one note most necessary to be observed in an army, regiment or band,
that neither any famous General or prince, any pollitike personage, or worthy
soldier of estimation, enter into the faction of a skirmish, but rather that
the same be guided and governed prudently by others of meaner calling. For
although the enterprise did fall out to the advantage of the same party, yet
if there should follow the loss of any famous and notable person, the same
has not only been of great damage, but also has been oftentimes of such
force, that it has stricken a terror and fear in the minds of the soldiers,
specially amongst those that were not at the enterprise, neither in like cases
will it satisfy or suffice them to declare or solemnly express unto them the
truth, but that upon such special loss, they will grow into unadvised
judgments and timorous dispositions.

If in case the enemy take the charge and malte retire, it is good to have
taken order with the Caualliers, heads and guids of the skirmish, that as near
as possible they can, they force their people to make stay, and that they
follow the enemy no further, since that in this point they do not contend to
any other end, then to breed a certain impression and good opinion in the
minds of our own soldiers, to the confusion of the contrary part, and to
win aduertisements, if it be possible, the which is all the effect they have
to perform, the which was the only motion that moved them to attempt this
enterprise.

Now when he determines to gain a passage, or any other strong place against
the enemy, which will arise to their disprofite and our own commodity, and
having won it, to sustain and defend the same: first choice must be made of
a vigilant and valiant leader, although it has often fallen out that without
entering into skirmish a diligent captain or leader, has with his people taken
possession of such passages or strong places. And by this providence, it
arises to be neither difficile nor hard to be defended against the enemy,
considering that all such suspected extremities and bands, be accustomed to be
strong by nature, whereunto afterward joining some little Art, for the most
part they become expugnable. But nevertheless if by incountring with the
enemy it is requisite he should skirmish, I judge it very good that he should
rashly go no further, then so far as the soldiers which he has sent to the
skirmish have gained.

To observe perfect government, it is never good to depart from the order
before rehearsed, save only when he does see the enemy bend and shrink away,
in place of advised stay and pollitike retention in proceeding, I the^ judge it
worthy commendation to follow the victory, but for all that, with such
consideration and so advisedly, that their ouer-great courage and careless joy
be not the occasion of disorder and confusion, together with the which
prosperity, he must diligently procure his people to gain the passage or
strong place, to the end if the enemy should go about to succor his flying and
broken people, he become not a let and hinderance to his determination.

It is very requisite he likewise note, that when the enemy is so fresh and
of such force, that it is impossible to overthrow or repulse him face to face:
then shall it be to the purpose to moderate the same even until night, at
which time he must use all the policies and stratagems he can possible to
perform his determination: for the only mark whereat this leader must
shoot, must only be to work such means as he may gain the passage, and
take possession of the strong place, and not to pass the time in skirmish and
fight: having won the same, he must endeavor himself to defend and repair
it, that they may be able to resist all the fury and force that the enemy is
able to make, until such time as succors come to him from his camp.

When he is of mind to entertain and keep the enemy occupied, to the intent
he march nor journey not at his pleasure, or that if your army do march, he
work not any damage to your people, to your baggage, to your munitions and
other things of importance: It is very expedient that the leader of this
skirmish be valiant and wise: who must determine to keep occupied the enemy,
that by the practice thereof it may arise to be profitable to the performance
of some other his purposed enterprise.

After he has made choice amongst his soldiers of those which must skirmish,
he must divide them as is before rehearsed: and he with the rest of the people
to him united, as near as is possible, must march along the strongest
situation of the ground, and then must send those that are deputed and
appointed to the skirmish, one after another to the tail of the enemies
battle, against whom they must skirmish and fight, even as an old beaten dog
about some Bull or furious beast does here and there snatch, bite and turn
about him, that in the end he does keep him occupied and weary him, if not
overcome. When he has put these things in execution, he must gather together
his people in the best sort he can, in the aforesaid order.

If in marching his own camp do fear to be assaulted at the back, or that
he has suspicion of his baggage, or doubts some impediments on the flanks:
then must the leader of the skirmish make repair with his people to that
place, where he suspects the enemy will take advantage: and march far off,
and with such distance from his camp and his battles, as he shall think
convenient, and as the nature of the place does require, to the intent he may
bring to effect his determination, and prosecute the same to a good end, the
which is to avoid the inconvenience, that the enemy neither hurt nor hinder his
baggage and munition. And in this sort with good order he must follow and
accompany his own people, and with those that be appointed for the fight, must
keep occupied and intertaine the enemy still skirmishing, retyring, and
marching as it always falls out and chances to him that valiantly defends
himself.

Concluding then, I say, that it seems good and very requisite that the
skirmish for the most part should be fled and shunned, except it be in respect
of some of the three foresaid occasions, or some such like, which thereunto may
be adjoined, proceeding of a practiced and advised judgment, for it is a very
rash and unadvised thing to loose men of valor to no purpose, as of necessity
in skirmishes does succeed. And besides the loss of such persons of
estimation, which arises by reason of rash disorder: Moreover it has been
oftentimes seen, that whilst he goes about to succor one band presently
enclosed by the enemy and put to flight (by reason it has been negligently
governed, as for the most part it falls out, when men go to skirmish moved by a
fantastical rage, vain ambition, and to small purpose without a sufficient
appointed chief or head, or rather without special commission from the
captain General, the which advertisement is principally to be noted) there
has such inconvenience succeeded, that an army has sometimes been
constrained to hazard and come to the fight of a maine battle upon a sudden,
a thing marvelous perilous, and that ought of necessity to be fled, without
manifest advantage of a perfect and a well practiced General.

Sundry aduertisements fit for a worthy Cauallier to observe.
1 First in the view of a battery. 2 Secondly in describing the condition of a
situation of any place. 3 And thirdly in disclosing the order the enemy
observes, either encamping or marching.
Although an excellent and prudent captain General in all his affairs must
use the service of practiced soldiers, such as may be supposed to have
sufficient knowledge in these aforesaid respects: yet do I conjecture it very
necessary to make choice of a man that besides his sufficient experience in
diverse warlike practices of training, ordering, directing, and leading
soldiers, yet would I wish the said worthy Cauallier to carry a hautie and
hardy heart, a bold and valiant body, and moreover that he be accompanied
with an excellent judgment in matters appertaining to the exercise of Arms:
specially in those causes convenient to be accomplished by him or his equals.
Who after he has received commission to view any battery, and that he is
sufficiently armed, able to defend himself (which as near as is possible he
must find the means to be) he ought to take with him some one hargabusier, a
man of valor, to repulse and annoy the enemies which are at the defense, if
he should stand in need or be discovered, and to the intent he may aid him in
other accidents that might fall out: but after he is guided and entered into the
action of his enterprise, he must advisedly inform himself, and take the view
how great the breach is, and how hye the entrance is of ruinated earth, and
both what and how great the difficulty is to ascend thereupon, considering
well what effect the fall of the wall has made, and being ascended or at
leastwise so near as is possible, having done his endeavor to mount up the
breach, he must go about to view secreatly and sufficiently the largeness
within, which is betwixt the battered wall and the houses, and how much the fall
of the battery is in that place: and together with this he must endeavor
himself to see if the said battery be flancked within or not, if it be safe
or secure, if the place be plain, easy, or hard and headlong to ascend: and
in sum, he must consider by what means and which is the best way, that they
within may defend themselves. All the which, so near as is possible, he ought
to do with great diligence and wisdom, as well in perfect discovery of all
these important difficulties, as in speedy return, taking view and making
choice at the same instant of the most close and covert way, wherein the
soldiers may with greatest commodity approach to give assault to the breach
and battery. Over which troops it does for the most part appertain to this
Cauallier to be the guide: Now upon his return, he must make full discourse of
every particular to him that has sent him, to the intent that his prince or
General may with all speed appoint the order of the assault, that the less time
may be given the enemy to make contermures, bulwarks, and trenches to defend
himself.

I am of opinion likewise, that that soldier or worthy Cauallier ought to be
no less then the foresaid, of a practiced and pregnant wit, to whom charge is
given to discover the quality and condition of the situation of the enemies
country, or the place where he remains: who after he has considered of the
same, although he that sent him has not expressly declared him his meaning and
intention touching the same, or his full meaning: yet being conducted to the
place, he must with the least show, rumor or noise possible, cause the people
that go with him to enter into ambush, to the intent he be not discovered or
disturbed by the enemy, which done, he must warily and discreetly view and
ouerview, search and go through every place, noting out the quantity of the
waters which run through the country, the capacity of ye plains, if therein
be marish grounds or not, the depth and breadth of the vales, the roughness of
the mountains, their height and capacity, if they be naked, clothed with hye
or low wood, or else plowed and pasture ground: and if there be towns and
habitations, whether they be placed upon plains, mountains, or near the
water, whether they be enclosed with walls and fortified or not, and of what
bigness and quality of form they be: and so consequently he shall make note
of every particular point, as I have written in a special discourse hereunto
adjoined, considering that some of these and like particulars, may very often
help and do good service, and arise to be of great importance. In this self
sort and order he may very well discover all the passages and ways from the
time he does depart, even until he ariue again, always marking and making
advised choice of the best and shortest: so that he may give to his prince or
General a true information and full relation of every thing, to the intent
his General may with great reason and to his most advantage, determine of that
which shall arise to his greatest profit, and to the enemies disadvantage: as
was by Charles the fifth observed at the river Alba, by the Spaniards at Sirick
sea, and by that famous Prince Don John D'austria at sundry times, specially
when in person the day after he returned from Luxemburge to Namures, he made
discovery of the ground about the prince of Orange and States Camp, lying at
Templo, where by the commandment of my Collonell the Baron of Cherau, I
amongst the rest of his own squadrons lay in Ambascade, for the safety of our
Generals retire, by whose prudent discovery and valiant courage, the next day
with two thousand five hundred footmen and nine hundred horsemen, we
overthrew eighteen thousand of the enemies, slew 12000 * took all their
bagage and Artillarie.

Now lastly when it is requisite to disclose and discover the order and manner
which the enemy observes, either being encamped or in marching, it behooues a
good soldier advisedly to take the view and knowledge thereof, in as good
order as time and occasion will permit. And if in case the enemy remain firm
and encamped, I judge it very requisite if it be possible, to take view of
the Camp round about, at leastwise as much as he can well, taking notice how
many Corpse de guard they keep without their Camp, and so likewise what part
of the situation thereof does make it most weak, what part is strongest, and
which part is betwixt both, being able to render account with good reason of
all these things in discourse like a politic and practiced soldier: The
performance whereof sometimes is with more assurance and better brought to
pass in the night then in the day.

If in case the enemy be in his journey and do march, I suppose it very
necessary to discover in what order they march, and in what manner and form
they have planted their squadrons, set in order and armed the Rereward, the
battle and vantgard, and both the one flank and the other, if they have
Artillarie, or that they be without, and together with this he must discover
the condition and situation of the ground where they march, and which way they
bend their course to encamp, where they make alta and stay. He must likewise
search out and diligently discipher, whether they march with fear, whether
they keep good order, whether they make have: all this as near as is possible
he must discern, and with speed endeavor himself to give information of each
particular thing unto his Prince or General, to the intent when the first
occasion does offer, (which is commonly when they make stay at their lodging)
he may determine to molest them by sudden Alarums, Canuasados, and other
such like surprises or attemptes. And that in this second and last discovery
which is of marching, to the end (being informed of their quality) he may
determine what to do, if not than, at least^ wise when occasion does offer:
wherefore I am of opinion, that together with approved practice, and the due
consideration of these Rules and aduertisements, it makes much to the purpose
that a good soldier should have some knowledge of drawing and painting
proportions of Cities, fortresses, bulwarks, etc. together with some
understanding in the art prospectiue and of proportion: for it often chances
to be a thing very difficile to give directions, and drive him that gouernes
or is General to understand some particularities, like to these only by
plain words, although they were ample and manifest, whereof the description
by draught being well known, accompanied with the lively voice of the
Relator, it makes the Prince more capable to determine what is to be executed
for performance of his important enterprises.

Diverse notes due for a singular good Soldier and Caualliere to observe, when
he must give to his Captain General or Prince, a true description and full
relation of the Countries, Cities, and Castles of a whole state or kingdom.
IT is the opinion of all men that be of perfect experience in Arms, that it
particularly appertains to the Captain General, to have a perfect
description, and diligent relation of the fortified places, and the particular
state in every point of all the Province that is committed to the Generals
custody, whether generally or particularly.

Therefore a worthy soldier and noble Caualliere may always increase in his
Princes savor: he must be ever ready to prefer his important affairs,
chiefly in this special service of advertisement and discovery: (Touching
which Guichardines discriptions of the low Countries may be a pattern), for
the performance whereof, having received his full Commission of authority, it
is most convenient for him, both particularly and in general, to examine,
discover, view, take notice, the prospectiue and plot of every place with
advised judgment, and not by fortune as many are accustomed, for that they
cannot otherwise do, not having sufficient knowledge of the Bussola, which with
great industry has bin to this end found out and made more ample by the Conte
Iulio de Tiene.

For which respect it is convenient he take the platform of every walled town
in that state, and with due measured distance therein, must note and make the
proportion of the walls, bulwarks, the mounts, rocks, gates, ditches, the
market places with their bigness, the principal streets with their
circumstances, specially whether there be any hanging or high hill or ground,
that upon any side is opposite of a just space and reasonable distance, from
whence according to sufficient consideration and examination therein,
artillarie or any other engine may offend and endomage the same.

He must set out likewise, whether the bulwarks, walls or rocks be weak or
strong, old or new, repaired or ruinous, rampires, or otherwise, if their
situation lie hie or low, on marish ground, sand, gravel, or rocks, or upon
ancient buildings or ruins. Likewise let him discribe toward what part of
the world they stand, whether East, West, South or North: If they will suffer
or be in danger to be mined, to be battered, to be assaulted with ladders,
or with any other manifest or secret er^ pugnation, and upon what side and
place.

He must set down notice if there be fountains or cesternes, if great ryuers
or floodes, and if the said water be possible to be taken away, stopped, or
infected of the enemy: and must advertise what remedy may be used to the
contrary.

Moreover he must consider in what air those Cities stand, if in whoat or
cold, dry or moist, or rather mirt and temperate, and if the places be apt to
be kept and defended: If the air will suffer that victuales, munitions, and
soldiers will be conserved, or otherwise.

What store of victuales is in each Town or Fortress, or the country
adioining, and whether there be fit commodity to carry and recarie the same
by water or by land. And if the place be upon the sea coast, whether it be a
haven Town or fisher town, what depth the bar is of at the ebb and full,
the capacity of the harbor, and what s^oare of vessels belong to the same,
together with the disposition of the sea faring men, the goodness of the
ships, both for swift sail and fight, how they are stoar^ with ordinance and
munitions, and armde with netting, grates and feightes etc*

Let him diligently observe how many households and houses be in every town,
how many persons, how many able men for soldiers upon foot, how many for
horsemen, and how many for pioners, how many oxen, how many horses to dra^
carts or artillarie, how many beasts of burden to carry victuales each place
is able to keep or make, what artillarie, what munition and victuales be
found in each Town or fortress, from whence every place may be succored and
victualed, and from whence victuales may be had to sustain those places which
are apt to be defended and kept.

How many soldiers there be of the infantarie, and how many of the
Cauallarie, if they oftentimes use exercise of Arms, and make shows or
Musters, whether they be well or evil armed, coragious or cowards, politic
or rash, obedient or mutinous, expert or ignorant, old or new bands, and shall
in effect consider what is to be looked for at their hands, or what their
ability is apt to perform.

This done, he may with all other requisite diligence, set down notice of any
other particular or necessary thing. If the Rivers and floodes be nauegable,
if they ebb or flow, if they be easy to be kept, and their bridges, foords,
and passages be defended, where they be weak or strong, ebb or deep, the
which is easy to be known: for where the water is most ebb or shallow and
most fit for a foard, there does appear a rigge or stream caused of the
substance and matter which does run by the depth and does make stay there, the
which for that it has oftentimes bin experimented, is most true as diverse have
tried.

He must discrie the condition of the hills, of the valleys, the quality of
the confines, of the waters, of the fennes, of the myres and lakes and other
things worthy to be noted, and in what part of the province the ground is
fertile or barraine, if abundantly it bringes forth grain, grapes, fruits,
oils, seeds, flax or hemp: what store of cattle and beasts there be, and
of what sorts: If that there be woods, and toward what part: If therein grow
wood for building or for fire.

Let him likewise advertise whether the entrance of the country be difficile,
and the issue easy: or contrary.

And amongst other things to be considered, it is a thing of great importance,
to understand perfectly whether the people be industrious or idle, if warlike
or laborers, if quiet or disquiet, if friendly or factious. If the footmen
for weapons use the hargabuze, musket, halberd and pike, or the bow, the dart,
and brown bill, if short swords and poynaldes, or long swords and great
daggers. If the horsemen use firelocke pieces, or snaphaunces, if pistolets,
lances, and long chasing staves: or else what manner of weapon they use, their
nature and order in feight: and what policies and stratagemes they are
accustomed to use. And to conclude, he must thus in writing, in notes, in
plain draughts and painting, let him with good deliberation and aduisement,
and not rashly make manifest and apparent every small particular thing, to the
intent that his Prince, General, Collonell, or Captain, beeginning at the one
end, may with the eye of his mind, run over and peruse the whole, one by one in
due proportion, briefly and plainly in a table, as ye view of a gallant
Theater, from whence the veil of the shading curtain is suddenly drawn,
and make apparent to the eyes of all the beholders, the sight of some sumpteous
show, or that taking hold at the one end, he may draw altogether like a well
linked chain: so that any one which has not seen the place, beholding the
portrature thereof, may think he does view the same with his eyes, whereby
all these discriptions of the said country in general, or any parcel in
particular, may very well serve, and with great aid direct him that must enter
into or govern a Province, to the great increase of the honor of any noble
Prince or worthy Captain.

These and such like be the qualities I would wish to be in a valiant
Caualliere of Saint Georges squadre, in a Lieutenant, Sergeant, or any other
good soldiers, that he may know how to direct, guide, govern, train,
skirmish, view, discover, and discribe the proportion and situation of
Countries. And for the better performance thereof, to have good knowledge in
the Mathematikes, specially in Algarosme, Algebra, and Geometry, whereby he
may worthily merit a good Soldiers name.

A rule to set any number of Soldiers in array.
THe footmen being brought into the place where they are to be put in array:
First you must foresee, that it be fit for the purpose, and so capable, that
the array may commodiously turn on the right and the left hand, as much as may
be: nevertheless according to the number of the soldiers you have,
afterward proceed in this fort.

First the Pikes must be drawn by themselves on one side together with the
Ensigns, and upon the other side all the Hargabuziers, somewhat aloof off
distant from the pikes, beeginning to make the hargabuziers march, so many in a
rank as you list, parting them nevertheless according to their number: You
may put them from 3. to 12. in a rank, for it is not often seen that more
then a leven is put in a rank, how great soever the number of the footmen be,
neither in troath ought they to be more then a leven, for when they pass a
leven or twelve they are not to be accounted an array, but rather a battle.

Having then placed the number of the Hargabuziers you shall think good of, to
be in a rank, you shall cause them to march in good proportion, sending
forth one rank after another, the Sergeant standing still on one side,
causing them to pass before him, judging by eyesight from rank to rank of
all the Soldiers one by one, whether they be right in line, observe distance,
and whether they do move forth of their order and array, for this is the
beauty and importance of an array.

Moreover, the Sergeant having special respect to accommodate and place at the
head of the array, all the Corporals or Lancia Spezzata which carry Calliuers,
placing next unto them the best and the best furnished Soldiers, putting a
Drum behind the second rank, that is to say, before the third, placing at
the tail of the array the best and best armed, to the intent the array may show
the better, forasmuch as when they are divided into array, the hargabuziers from
the Pikes, and that they turn their faces, then the back part is made the
front, therefore the back ought to be as well furnished as the front, or the
head of the array, as you will please to term it: The which if you desire to
do, it is necessary you put in the midst of the ranks the weakest and worst
furnished, aduertising the Sergeant that the soldiers are best furnished, when
they have all sorts of arms and furniments that be necessary for them, and
appertains to a Hargabuzier, good match, fire, coall, powder and bullet, and
moreover L'azzino: And this is to be observed with that speed and diligence,
that the time or occasion does carry, and the suspicion of the enemy does
import.

And in one present time, if the Sergeant have commission, he must distribute
munition to the Hargabuziers, as bullet, match, or powder, and to have a man
about him to carry the munition, and he afterward go about dispersing of
it, and in giving the powder, he must have a Tunnell with a small and narrow
pipe, to the intent it may enter into the pipe of every one of their flaskes,
and with a measure that does hold so much powder, as he will give unto every
Hargabuzier at one time, or at twice: and so to every rank one by one as they
go passing forwards, the Sergeant causing to march forward his array before
him, fair and softly rank by rank, by which means he shall not confound
them.

If it chance that he do not distribute munition at one self time, he shall
cause the Pikes on an other side to put themselves in array, as many in a rank
as the Hargabuziers shall be, dividing the best armed with Corselets, the one
half to the head, and the other half to the back, and the disarmed pikes in
the midst, and in the midst of them place the Ensigns with their guard of
Halberdes, with certain Drums about the said Ensigns, that is, in the
Piazza or void place, where the Ensign is to be managed: those Drums and
Fiftes that you have, shall march before the Standerd bearers:

And the Sergeant causing the Pikes to march foreward, shall number how many
ranks they be, and shall keep them in memory, to the intent that if he be
to make a battillion, he may know how to govern himself, and so cause the
said Pikes to march and turn once again, and having then well accommodated
the array of the Pikes, with the Ensigns placed just in the midst, with the
Drumm^s and Fiftes before them, as I have said, causing the Ensigns to have an
ample and large room and P^azzo, from the two ranks that be about him, that
is, from that which is before, and from the other that does march right behind
him, to the intent the Ensigns may be well showed and managed.

When they be well set in order, it is necessary to cause the Pikes to stay
and stand, and the Sergeant having stayed them, he shall then go where he
has first accommodated the Hargabuziers, and shall cause them to march
forward, near where the Pikes are in order of array. And the Sergeant having
first numbered likewise the ranks of the Hargabuziers, and being stayed where
the Pikes, after the one half of the Hargabuziers is past, that is, if they
be in all 50. ranks, when 25. be past, the Sergeant shall enter with his
Halberd overthwart them, and staying and pressing back the other 25. ranks,
he shall cause to enter after a goodly and ready manner, all the Pikes and
Ensigns, causing them ever to march forward, and when they be all past away,
upon the approaching of the last ranks of Pikes, he shall cause the rest of
the Hargabuziers to enter into array, the which being done, the array shall be
fair and perfect, and it will be good that he cause them to march and turn
three or sower times, to the intent they may settle themselves the better, and
that they may enter into their pace, their array, and the understanding of the
Drum, for that makes them more apt to go just, learning one of an other a
stately and convenient pace, and to bear their weapons of all sorts with a
good grace, and specially the Pikes.

A good Sergeant must take care to make stay in every discommodious place, or
streit passage, as when they go down or descend from some Mountain, at the
passage of a foarde or streit bridge, or at a ditch, or a water, or some such
other uneasy and streit passage, that he judges would break the array, as
oftentimes is found in marching. And orderly without confusion cause them to
pass rank after rank fair and easily, holding back with the end of his
Halberd the rank next to that which is in passing, until it be thoroughly over
and placed in array as before, to the intent the order of array be not
confounded in any rank, neither let him depart from that place until such
time as all the ranks be past, for so the array will not be disordered, but
shall march right and just, which is a thing of great importance, specially in
marching in doubt of the enemy: and therefore having caused them all first to
make Alta, he shall command them to observe array, distance and ranks, without
thrusting or crouding until all be past the strait passage.

A rule how to make the array of the Bissa.
SInce there be sundry soldiers and persons, which presuppose they know much
more then others, who discommend the making of the Bissa or Caraguolo, as a
thing not necessary amongst the orders of array: saying that the same is
superfluous and of small moment. I am of a contrary opinion, and make answer
that they are much deceived, and have small knowledge and less judgment in
the benefit and use thereof: for it seems to me according to the opinion of
diverse expert persons, that they are not only commendable, but also most
profitable, and do help those soldiers much that do learn and exercise
them: and the reason is this, That those soldiers which have not as yet had
discipline, and be little practiced in the managing of s^reite array, and in
turning themselves in their array, and in managing all sorts of weapons, as
pikes, and specially the hargabusiers, with the which it is requisite to cause
them make certain salutations in shooting of the Bissa, and also in opening of
the same, in such sort as the hargabusiers may stand in continual motion and
readiness to charge and discharge their pieces, always marching in array,
sometimes large, sometimes strait, and sometimes softly, and sometimes fast,
it makes them very disposed, nimble and ready, as well in managing their
weapons as in marching justly, and with a good grace in their array and in the
battle, whereby it may appear that the making of the Bissa and Caraguolo, it
of great profit and of importance, and those are to be reprehended that
despi^e and forgo them, as I have said before, Therefore all good soldiers
are to command the judgment of him that was first the inuentor thereof, and we
are to search with all diligence to imitate the same rule, which I will here
God willing go about succinctly and at large to declare, because in my former
proportions of a King, an S, a D and a Snaite, I have not done, neither touched
the manner of this Bissa or Caraguolo, the which I the rather think
necessary, to the intent every soldier may see with his eyes a perfect
example and way how to make it, and to the end his error in this his
wilfulness arise not to be his discredit in greater causes, and to those that
hold them mere trifles, and fear to fail therein, with a little exercise shall
find it easy. I have seen some Captains that has made the same most
gallantly to their great commendation by men of the greatest authorite in the
field. If therefore you would make a single Bissa, observe the order set down
in this proportion.



Presupposing that the figure of this Bissa here set down, is the plain or
ground where the muster is made, you must begin to enter with your array, where
the tail of this Bissa is, turning first on the right hand, and afterward on
the left hand, winding your array about another time on the right hand and on
the left, until such time as you see the Ensign be come just into the midst of
the Bissa, and that you think it be well: issuing forth after out of the head
of the Bissa, as here is set down, causing them to make a goodly salutation,
your Hargabusiers at the opening and disclosing of the array: aduertising you
that these three and three in the Bissa, are the ranks of the footmen and the
D signifying the Drums, and the E the Ensign, so that beginning this order and
well observing it, you cannot err.

The double Bissa.


Desiring to make a double Bissa that is more environed and closed then the
single, as here appears, you must note that the ranks ought not to be past
five in a rank, or six, or seven at the most: for when they are over large,
they make the array over broad, taking care likewise that the place be
commodious and capeable, that the footmen may be spread, that they may march
without peril of entangling: aduertising them that are at the front of the
array, when they march in their entering into the place of arms, where they are
to make the said Bissa to take so much space in the same, as is convenient to
do that which in your mind you have determined. Always in turning and
doubling the array, holding the path and way large, and marching as streit as is
possible, if you desire that the same shall fall out well, beginning the entry
at the tail, as in the single is declared: turning always as you may perceive
is set down by the figure before. And after that you have made an end, to
double it sufficiently in the last doubling, as in the single Bissa, you must
issue forth making large: So in this double having ended all your turning, you
must go compassing and making a circuit: after issuing forth, you must make a
general Salua with your pieces, and this will be easy, and to the beholders
shall appear intricate fiery.

A plain rule to set the Ring in array.
IT is requisite if you desire to make the King a Caraguolo, to hold the same
order that is set down in making of the Bissa, which is, that the ranks do not
pass the number of six or 7. footmen, to the intent they do not confound
them in going out, although they may be made of a greater number, but the^ it
is requisite that those yt guide the^ at the front of ye maine be well
practiced, for that it is perilous to entangle themselves. Therefore you must
take care to use greater diligence in the ring and Caraguolo, then you do in
the Bissa, and the guider thereof must stand at the front of the array, and
conduct them into the market place or where the assembly of Arms is.



Presuppose therefore in your mind, having in charge to make this ring or
Caraguolo, that here you see set down in portrature, to be likewise figured in
your mind upon the earth and upon the place where you are to make it, entering
first where you see the cross, and go forward marching at large, and frame a
round circle, always turning upon the right hand, leaving betwixt one circle
and another a large way, so great that at your return you may come within the
said way, where this word the issue out is set down, which does note the
turning back when you are in the midst of the King or Caraguolo: that is, when
you do see you have closed and shut them together sufficiently, having left
betwixt the one circle and the other of the array, so much space that in the
same you may return back, so the one do not touch another: Then shall you
cause a goodly Salua to be made of all the Hargabusiers generally at one
instant. Afterward returning back by the left hand, you shall issue forth by
that way that you have left betwixt the one circle and the other, as it is
drawn in the plat where this word The issue out is: marching always right
forth, and as equally as you can: and cause to be made at your issue forth
another general Salua by the Hargabusiers. You may begin the said Caraguolo
upon what side ye list, either upon the right or upon the left hand, having
care that if you begin it upon your right, in your issue forth to turn toward
the left hand. And so likewise if you begin upon the left, in your issuing
forth to turn to the right, for so you shall find the way to issue without
any impediment. But it is very needful for you in the beginning to make large
and take room enough.

THE THIRD BOOK OF MILITARY DIRECTIONS, ENTREATING OF OBSERVATIONS in
governing of Bands, of Squadrons and battles, of Captains, Colonels, and
Sergeant Majors general.
And first, the office of a Captain which has the guiding of a Band of men.
THat person which has the charge to govern other men, specially in matters
of weight and of great importance, the lives of men being committed to his
hands, under whose conduct if any quail through rashness or want of
knowledge, he is bound to render account before God: and therefore he ought to
be of notable capacity, experience, and exemplare in all his actions and
enterprises, since it is a general note that the eyes of all those that be
subjects, be turned toward their principal head and chief, in whom as it
were in a glass, they retain an assured hope to behold most ready rules and
perfect examples, whereby they may guide and govern themselves.

In this particular charge of a Captain, the quality of his officers, make
almost a manifest show of his valor and experience: Therefore like an old and
expert soldier, as one that has past through all those degrees and offices
set down in my two former books, he must use a circumspect care in leuying
and making choice of his company, that is, to make election of a pollitike and
practiced Lieutenant, of a courageous Alfierus, of a careful Sergeant, of
gallant and valiant Caualliers of his squadre, of valiant Corporals, of a
diligent Chancellor, secretary, or cleark of ye band, of a faithful furrier or
Harbinger, being of good judgment and consideration, and of a Surgian provided
of all things necessary to minister according to his Act. But above all things
let him pro^ide to retain in his band a preacher, or such a person which may
take care to minister the Communion to the soldiers, and specially to root
obedience in their hearts: who likewise every day may celebrate that sacred
sacrifice of thanks, which even from the beginning has bin used of the church.
And finally must have for every hundredth a practiced drummer of good
understanding.

When he has gathered and united his company, the whole band being present,
his Minister must devoutly read certain prayers, and afterward the Ensign
shall be publicly placed in the hands, and recommended to the custody of the
Alfierus, and as in my former discourse of this point, command him to have as
much care thereof, as of his proper life, honor and credit, which he ought
courageously to advance and display, to prefer his party in a rightful quarrel,
according to my speech where I set down his duty. This done he must privately
make election amongst his chiefest soldiers of so many Caualliers or Lancia
Spezzata, that is to say, Gentlemen of his band, as may amount to the number of
two out of every squadre. Some nations use 50. to a squadre, as the Suitzers
and Germans, some others less, according to their discretion: but in my
opinion 2^. is a more convenient number, both for that the Corporal may the
more often and with greater diligent car^ instruct and see to his charge, the^
if they were 50* Besides 25. soldiers divided into 5. ranks makes a just
square, so that by the same account 300. may contain 12. squadres, and every
one have a Corporal of the same number: whereof 10. Corporals have the leading
of mixed weapons, the 1^* charge over the Halb^rdiers, and the 12. to consist of
Gentlemen, old and expert soldiers, amongst whom the targets of proof ought
to be in number. The Captain at the same time, when he consecrates his
Ensign, must likewise solemnly constitute and confirm a Corporal over the
Caualliers of his squadre, which he must dedicate to S. George, and enrol their
names by this title, The Corporal and Caualliers of S. George his squadre. He
must inuest and bestow upon the corporal a scarf of red and white sar^net, and
a Medall or jewel of gold or silver double gilt, wherein the portrature of S.
George is lively wrought, to hang about his neck, at his skarfe or otherwise:
and moreover to him and all the rest of the squadre, must give a little Phane or
Penon of silk upon a wyre, whereof the Cross must be of red, and the rest of
the square white, the other part of the sarsenet of the Captains colors, or
with what words or devise therein shall please him best: They must wear this
behind, either upon their burganets, or upon their hats if they will in a plume
of red and white feathers, specially in all enterprises and warlike attempts:
Besides this upon their Casseckes or Mandillions toward their right breast a
red Cross of velvet, satin or scarlet, imbrothered or comlie stitched, that
they may appear manifestly and be known from the rest of the soldiers, like
worthy guides and leaders, whose courage and valor may incite others to ascend
to their dignity and degree.

They must solemnlie promise, vow and swear to their possibility, not only
to be the first to force the breach of a battered town, trench, or fortress,
to give the first coragious onset upon the maine battle, or the enemies
squadrons, to pearce a passage, and gallantly guide the soldiers to the
skirmish, to sudden sallies, surprises, escalados, canuasados, and such like,
but also to observe, maintain, and instruct the ignorant in all Military
directions; observations and martial laws of the field.

In respect hereof those that be Cauallieres and Gentlemen of this squadre,
must be entertained with a stipend and greater pay then the common soldier,
and with other notable signs of manifest difference, by reason they either are
or ought to be the best and most practiced soldiers in his whole band: for
this word Lancia spezzata amongst the Italians, is of no other signification,
then a tried experience in the wars. To which Cauallieres he may freely and
faithfully with great confidence and trust, commit the charge of any office in
his company that is vacant* or the performan^e of any other enterprise or
accident, and may if he will term them extraordinary Lieutenants, which he
must always have about him upon any sudden to execute his commandment, and
supply other Offices when time shall serve.

A Captain ought to have special and particular knowledge of al those things
that appertain to the office of a Lieutenant, and the office of an Alfierus,
which if he think good he may link both in one, for amongst diverse nations
now a days, one man commonly supplies both their Offices.

The office and duty of the Sergeants of the Cauallieres of Saint Georges
squadre, whom he must esteem as extraordinary Lieutenants of the Corporals,
Clerk of the band, Harbinger, Drums and Fiftes: and finally, the duty of
every particular and common soldier, that he may presently redress any thing
a miss, and upon any new accident to instruct them either in marching,
encamping or feighting, so that he may ^ee able to command them, according as
time, place, and reason does require, without contradiction or appointing that
to be done of one Officer, which ought to be done of an other: or that he
does command them to do things not convenient, and much less that which is
not lawful or not honorable. Which order of proceeding does very much
displease and bring m^n of war in mislike of such indirect dealings; Since
the principal point and practice whereunto* their exercise in Arms does
tend, is to attain Reputation, Honor and Credit, he must continually court
his Colonel and chieftain, forceing himself to be one of the first that does
salute him in the morning, and of the last to depart from him in the evening,
that thereby he may be sufficiently instructed and informed in every
particular act and practice, which is to be put in execution, touching the
performance of any enterprise or warlike act, since that in those cases a wary
man may best take hold of occasion, whereof he ought to make trial in time of
war* the which he is likewise to accomplish, as well for the service of his
chief and Prince, as also for his own satisfaction, and the honor, benefit,
and reputation of his soldiers.

Let him in some sort provide with as much advantage, and commodity as he can,
that his soldiers baggage be always conducted from place to place, always
prohibiting superfluity, and in long voiages, their corslets and arme^ of
heavy burden: provided that he march not in suspected places, and in the
enemies country, but not otherwise.

Let him take order that his soldiers be light in apparel* so that it be
warm, and have as little baggage and otherwise loade^ as may be, to the intent
they may use all their diligence about their weapons, and not to hale back for
fear of loosing the same, but rather have respect to the wary keeping of
their Arms, and that they may rather, more ^ent and determined to feight, in
hope of gain and honor, then suspected through the doubt of loosing that which
they already possess.

He must not be covetous, neither retain one penie of pay from his
soldiers, but rather distribute amongst them, all the advantages, dead paies,
and Capisoldi: to the intent they may be well pa^ed and rewarded which merit
the same, so shall he gain honor and make them assured in perilous service.

Let him restrain soldiers from having horses, thereby to avoid confusion,
for that commonly every one must march about the Ensign, to the intent the
ranks be not broken and disturbed by horses: And that soldiers be not
occupied in going abroad for forage for their horses, as of necessity they
must, which is proper to horsemen and not to footmen, but only those which are
to be permitted with the Lieutenant, the Alsierus, and some of the Cauallieres
of Saint Georges squadre, that are Gentlemen of greatest experience, for that
they may serve in steed and place of light horsemen, to view, discover,
conduct and carry a (...) or commandment with great speed, when and where
need ^oth require.

It is necessary for him to have some knowledge and sight in making bulwarks,
trenches, platformes, skonces, fortresses, and such like, and to know the
nature and quality of them, as well that with advantage he may be able to know
how to assault, as also to make them with facil^tie, in times and places most
necessary: which understanding and art, is particularly convenient for him,
considering the defense of men of war in the field, for the most part
consistes as well in trenches, bulwarks, and perfect platformes, as in a good
and well governed squadre and maine battle.

He must have with him a p^ire of Lanternes for the camp, some cressets,
linkes, or torches that blow not out with the wind, and such like to use in
the night, and in storms and tempests for service of the company, as in
Roundes, Alar^nis etc.

And for his proper commodity and ornament a Pauillion or Lent of sufficient
capacity, vessels to accommodate his victuals and furniment for the fire and
kitchen, of small weight and disturbance in carriage, and certain household
stuff necessary for himself and his train, to the intent he may so near
as is possible commodiously make supply to the continuation of things
requisite for victuals.

He ought always to lodge with his band, and remain with the same both in
good and evil, and continually show himself loving and courteous, and take
such part as the soldiers do: for contrariwise, taking his ease, and suffering
them to be lodged or fed miserably, breeds him hatred or contempt.

Neither ought he to shun toil and travail, but carefully take delight and
liking to be always the first, that with provident prudence does lay his hand
to any work, or perform any enterprise which is convenient to be done: for
that for the most part the rude stubborn multitude of soldiers is not
constrained and forced so much, to do his duty by compulsion, as they be
voluntary moved thereunto through shame, and a reverent respect they have to
the example of their superior: Neither let the practice of the same be
painful unto him, for that to live at ease and to be curious of his own
commodious being, and suffer his soldiers taste the toiles of travail, is
rather the order of a delicate Prince, then of a careful and coragious
Captain.

Let him not fail every night that he is of the watch, to send his Sergeant
to take the word secretly of the Sergeant mayor, (where with the watch of that
night ought to be governed) or of some other that shall be appointed to give
it, which he must use wisely and warely, since that negligence in like cases
may be the ruin of him and his company, and consequently of a whole army.

He must have tried experience, and full practice in all the points noted of
me in my two first Books, and be perfect in the conduct of Martial
affairs, that with great facility he may be able to know, and with great
advise to deal in all the particulars belonging to all the degrees of
soldiers under his estate, and of less estimation then a Captain.

It behooues him to carry a valiant and coragious heart, that upon all suddaines
he may be able to execute all enterprises, and that having over viewed,
ordered and disposed those things that be necessary, he may be able to
execute the same with such prompt and ready dexterity, as appertains to the
terrible and bloody accidents of arms. And although there be very few who
have such happy success, as they may be accounted fortunate and politic
both together: Nevertheless it is requisite he be prudent, and discypher and
look before hand into such things as are like to fall out, that he may with
discreet modesty use either good or evil fortune, whether soever shall
arise: for the life of man is to be compared to the play at Tables, in the
which the p^er may desire and devise which is his best cast, but yet which way
soever the dyce turn, either good or evil, he ought with as great discretion
and art as he can, accommodate himself and serve his turn withal.

He should possess and be endued with a noble mind, that he may always
have the same inclined to discreet liberality, and (...) to nigardl^ (...),
by which vice we see many (...) and fall into most opprobrious chances, into
treasons and pernicious rebellions, which are men worthy of most shameful
corrections.

I judge it likewise very necessary for him to be eloquent, ^nce that
quality has great efficacy in persuading of men's ^nds, which often times
have much need to be wakened and pricked forward with a spu^re, specially in
those terrible accidents that fall out in the exercise of arms, which in
painful perilous actions, would otherwise languish, faint, and become
fearful: Therefore let the love toward God, the care of their Country,
their present peril, the example of magnanimity in their forefathers, the
quarrel, cause, and benefits to soul and body, be means to make them
valiantly accomplish their acts.

He ought never to make conference, concerning that which he is to put in
execution, neither of any one thought, imagination, or invention appertaining
to the state of these warlike attempts and affairs, but with those persons of
whom he may assuredly reserve faithful and friendly counsel, for that the
importance of such and so great dealings, ought ever to be had in suspicion of
discovery. Therefore a wise and careful man will ever have a wary and
jealous eye over such weighty affairs.

Now the order for him to punish his soldiers in cases wherein they are not
guilty of death, I think the most important punishment which appertains to
the Captain to give them, is openly amidst the whole company and band,
shamefully to disarme them, to take away their money and chiefest garments, and
so to banish them and send them packing: for to put them to death, or furiously
to beat them, belonges to the office of ye Master of the camp and Marshal of
the field, and not to the Captain, for if he should beat his soldiers, he
should make himself hated and embase him self, and bring his soldiers either
to become mutinous or abiects.

Note, that it is not sufficient only for a Captain to have ordained his
company discreetely, and therein to have great numbers of good men, which is to
say, in warlike affairs valiant men, but above all thnigs it is very necessary
when he shall come to blows and fight, he should adventure and perform the
same to his manifest advantage, or else constrained thereunto by pure necessity,
although he ought to fly the last so much as he is able, observing this for
a general rule, not to fight either by chance, either for pleasure or for
ambition, as many times we see done by rash and ambitious chiefes and
Captains.

Moreover, he must work in such sort, that his soldiers have very good
occasion and apt means to win the victory, and that they be fresh and lusty,
to the intent that in fighting they may overcome: for without these and like
aduertisements by tempting fortune, men for the most part both loose, and are
overthrown.

It is very convenient he procure the having of an ample and autentike Patent
of his Colonel, with as large words of favor as may be, wherein must be
declared at the instance and appointment of what Prince the expedition is made,
and so with modesty and prudence he shall use the aucthority that is given
him, but nevertheless there, as it behooues him so to do.

It is not requisite that in all places he suffer his Ensign to be
displayed: the manner and doing whereof shows force and authority, the which
many times is not to be used, neither in each place. When a man is inferior to
others, he ought to use great dexterity and modesty, which ever falls out both
to be commodious and commendable. And moreover according to ye order of passa
parole, of aduertisements from mouth to mouth, he ought ever to observe a
silent and assured plain information to his* whole band, whereby they may upon
the sudden alter array, make alta, march slow or fast, close or in wide ranks,
or prepare their piece, match and ^ullet for a sudden Alarm, invasion,
skirmish or defense*

A Captain that must leauy a band, is to make his election and choice of his
officers and soldiers, not only approved and sufficiently, but also use such
speedy march in his expedition and journey, that he may join his company to
the rest of the army, at or before the appointed day and place.

When he may march by land with his company, let him never have desire to go
by sea, hoping to spare cost and shorten time, for by becoming subject to the
indiscretion of the wind, either through long abode, or some accident by
shipwreck or tempests, there has risen many times great disturbance and
ruin without remedy, since by this defect many good occasions and of great
importance has bin lost and made frustrate.

He ought never to take journey in hand without a guide, the which he must
procure to be given him by the chief that does command him, to the intent he
may always remain execused and faultles from those errors, that by such
defects may or do commonly arise, which diligence is not only particularly to
be used, when any journey of small length is to be guided: but if any long
journey is to be made (not being able to do better) he must circumspectly
have him always by his side, neither ought to have him slip away from him or
absent, since that every small error or going out of ye way in a journey and
marching, does displease soldiers and warlik persons, and yields less
reputation to the Captain, who ought always to march with them, and to provide
and procure through his aucthority all things necessary, with the greatest
favor and advantage possible. He ought always to keep his soldiers
exercised, by often taking view and muster of them, marching sometimes along in
ranks by 3. 5. 7. and 9. etc. in a rank: sometimes in training them in Kings,
esses, dees, battles, squadrons, turning one rank through an other, in
leading them to skirmish, and in such sort as I have set down in my second
book, practice them daily. And sometimes he must cause his soldiers to shoot
vollees of shot, sometimes all at once, sometimes by ranks, and sometimes
mixed. The which vollees upon ye sign or sound of drum or word of mouth by the
Captain must be accomplished with celeritie, and closely together and
cunningly, and not out of disorder or by pieces, a great while one after
another, but upon their discharge, jointly together, without rumor, noise or
tumult they must all charge again, and upon a sign given by the Captain, give
a fresh vollee etc.

He must likewise delight to see them well armed with all sorts of arms,
every one according to the weapon he bears: and sometimes likewise exercise
them in running, leaping, wrestling, throwing the bar, and ordinarily cause
them to be wakened in the morning betimes, charging the Drums to strike the
Diana through out all the quarter.

A Captain may at all times accompany his band with the sound of Drum and
Fifth, which must give order to their continual March and directes: all their
other enterprises, unless to accompany prisoner, to entrench, make plain the
way, to make and carry fagots, baskets, or gabions from the wood, and such like
servile and peasantly service, hardly digested of honorable soldiers.

He to the intent he may be both loved and obeyed of his soldiers, must
apply himself to be provident and politic in pacifiyng discordes, and al
such difference as shall arise amongst them, wherein if he find any obstinate,
so soon as he has performed his endeavor, and that thereby they will not
agree and become friends, so soon as their pay is ended, he ought to
discharge them. In times past it has bin used of notable Colonels to permit
the combat, and cause them fight it out, thereby to extinguish their
obstination, to bridle their fury, and give notable example to the rest: the
which order although it has bin tried to avail very much for their good
government, yet it is not to be used amongst Christians, the general Counsel
having forbidden the same: unless to fear the parties he feign that the same
shall be performed of them to the uttermost, and at the joining in fight to
cause them stay, and take other order of punishment, except they accord, and to
discharge them.

A Captain ought to use all art and industry to invade, endomage, and
overthrow the enemy, specially infidels: and above all things to be frank of
mind, and to fear nothing but dishonest fame. Likewise that he purchase
authority amongst his soldiers by the means of virtue and valor, let him
procure by practice and effectual experience to be accounted a wise and a
worthy valiant Captain, rather then to bear the name of a simple, weak, and
indiscreet Colonel, for the name of a Captain is a type and title of
special honor.

He must likewise in respect of a certain inward desire of emulation, not
carry a base and abject mind, but still aspiring with great subtlety, by good
invention and industry, of a firm and faithful disposition, and never
subject to forgetfulness, to the intent he may retain in memory those things
that be well done, and all commendable enterprises, the which do marvelous and
incredibly delight and feed men's minds and dispositions.

A Captain must ever take care that his whole charge be still furnished with
men, armor, weapons and munitions, with all things needful, and distributed
at convenient times.

He must suffer none through idleness to neglect his armor, weapons, and
other furniture, whereby he shall grow unready to service at need, but give
his officers commandment circumspectly to look to the same.

Soldiers should be prohibited from overmuch liberty, neither to use
whoorehunting, drunkenness, common swearing, quarelling, feighting, cosining, or
such like, but that speedy correction is to be used.

Provision of victuals, armor and munition being made, it must discreetely be
used in due time by victuallers appointed, and to be distributed unto the
soldiers, and to see that the victuallers and other artificiers, lending unto
soldiers upon their credit at need, until their pay day, may be truly
satisfied.

If any soldiers be taken prisoners, to be ransomed home in due time that his
hands remain not unfurnished.

Diverse points of service are committed to ye Captain, wherein great discretion
and service is to be used, as in a Conuoy, Canuisado, Ambush, skirmish,
approach, assault, retrait, surprise, passage of rivers, streights, sudden
fortifications, discoueries, etc. As in these and such like occurrences, it is
necessary to use the advice of expert soldiers, whose opinions are worthy to
be observed, gratifying and rewarding them according to the value of their
counsels. So likewise a Captain must sometimes prove and circumspectly try by
fained pretenses, affirming that he means to perform certain exploites, and
will march to some place nothing pretending the same, to the intent to
discipher those that be busy bodies, rash and vnsecreat in counsel, and such
as presume without knowledge or experience: afterward revealing the same, may
try the truth and punish the offenders, as to his duty and office is
convenient.

The office of a Colonel.
A Ualiant and worthy Colonel, after he has a lawful dispatch of his
Prince, and has obtained his patent and pressed money, to conduct that number of
soldiers his charge and expedition shall contain, with all convenient
diligence, and according as he is appointed, he must make election of as many
captains as be needful, distributing to every one 300. for a band, which
number is of most convenient quantity: for by reducing companies to a less
number, as in our time is used, specially amongst the Spaniards and Italions,
and well followed by the French and our English, they may rather carry the
name of Lieutenants and centurions, then bear the title of Captains. Besides
a band being made of a small number, the treasurers consume much more money
amongst the great store of officers, the which ought to be by all means
possible avoided of a pollitike General, and of a prudent Prince, to avoid
extraordinary expense and confusion, which does easily arise amongst the
multitude of officers.

He must be provident to entertain those that be old captains, practiced, and
bear a good port, and that be loved and desired of the soldiers, whom he
ought to accompany and prefer with the greatest authority he can give, with
ample, sealed, and autentike Patents, thereby more speedily and more easily he
may accomplish his affairs.

It is requisite he equally depart to every one, the quantity of that pressed
money he has received, to the intent the Captain and the officers arise not
to be burdened, taxed, and consumed by ordinary and extraordinary means, and
other manifest ways in spending about those affairs. And to the intent the
soldiers may taste of the benevolence of their Colonel, for by that means
credit is sustained, and his train augmented, a thing most necessary to
personages that supply so great a place. For it is requisite that men in the
beginning be not discouraged for want of necessary provision, yea rather to
lend of his own (considering he is to be paid again) then his soldiers
should be brought to any extremity.

The distribution of the pressed money ought to be preferred with great prudence,
for afterward at the bancke, the same otherwise may be retained, and
substraction made of all the whole money, either in the first pay or those that
follow, more or less as it seems expedient, principally for the use and
commodity of the soldiers, considering (that according to the proverb) A man
can hardly at any time serve two masters, and therefore he must stand upon this
special point, to be more careful not to do any thing prejudicial to the
honorable exercise of Arms, then to please the covetous and insatiable humor
of some Captains, whom in effect it pleasures but little, in respect their
greedy desire is never satisfied: Nevertheless it falls out to be a marvelous
loss and hinderance to the enterprise, specially to men of valor and
soldiers, without whose aid a Colonel is but of small force and value: and to
conclude, money must always be procured, dispersed, and spent with great
discretion, order, and consideration, since the same is so necessary to man,
as it is called the sine was of wars.

It is a thing most requisite that he carry with him at the least, one
Minister, a man of good life, who exemplarly attend about the care of
Ecclesiastical matters, wherein above al other things we ought thoroughly to be
staid and instructed.

He must likewise have in his Regiment besides the ordinary Surgeans, an
excellent and tried Physician, well provided of all drugs and spiceries, and of
other things necessary to be ministered to those that be sick.

His Lieutenant for his Regiment must be of a singular quality and excellent
experience, who not only must particularly govern his own band and company,
but also with great prudence and policy take care and charge over all the
people which are in the bands under his Collonell, wherein the Lieutenant must
proceed according to my rules for the Lieutenant of a private band, and the
notes in my second and third book. His own Alfierus as General and superior
to the rest of the Ensign bearers under his Collonnelship, must be guided and
governed by a singular and substanciall soldier, a Gentleman of an ancient
house, courteous, wise and endewed with good conditions.

The same order he ought likewise to observe, in the election of his Caualliers
of S. Georges squadre, of his Sergeants, of his Corporals, of his drummers, and
every other officer.

It is a thing most necessary and convenient, as in my second book, and the
office of a Captain I have touched, That a Colonel should retain in his
regiment, and specially in his own band about him, a number of wise and worthy
soldiers, to be the Gentlemen of his Company, Lance Spezzate, or serve for
extraordinary Lieutenants, whom I in the memory of the ancient valor of our
nation, entitle by the name of the Caualliers of S. Georges squadre, whom the
Collonell must not only use and entreat well with an advantage in their pay,
but also feast them, cherish them, and set them oftentimes by course at his
own table, and always show them a courteous countenance, with which show of
friendly courtisie, soldiers be incredibly fed, and contrariwise
maruellously displeased with the hautie looks of proud disdain. For all those
that make profession of this worthy art, are of great curiosity and courage,
and therefore men of war ought never (against right) be villanously handled,
either in word, deed, or countenance.

He must create a Sergeant Mayor, that is a soldier of great experience, and
that particularly is a professor of that office, to the end he know precisely
what is to be preferred in every practice: such a one as can yield thereof a
perfect account and discourse, and that consequently can much better by deed
then by word execute any enterprise. And for that in his office it is
necessary for him to vary and change purpose, with infinite aduertisements
and considerations, as the shortness of time now and then requires, the
discommoditie of the place and seat thereof does enforce, the order of the
enemies does constrain, or according to his own proper policy, or the
provident prudence of his Colonel: but for that this place does not permit to
speak particularly of every point, I will pass over the same, and only
refer all to the providence of his long and approved experience, which of
necessity is required unto him, which I further refer to my following
discourse of the Sergeant Mayor general.

He ought to make a Marshall of his lodgings, who must be his principal
Furrier and Harbinger, that must attend with great diligence, to procure
lodging for all, without pleasing any one particular person for any private
commodity whatsoever, but must equally distribute, and depart the quarters and
lodgings according as need requires: neither is it to be borne withal, that
he do make free any houses or lodgings, neither go about any such like gain, a
most dishonest and unlawful robbery, which oftentimes does cause great loss
and discommoditie to men of war, small reputation to their conductour, and
great vexation and disturbance to the poor people, who for the most part are
innocent. The Colonels harbinger having allotted out lodgings to every band,
he must prefer the particular disturbation to the under harbingers.

A general Drummer ought likewise to be created and appoited, who may take
charge and care over all the rest of the Drummers, whose office and custom
amongst them is to conserve and keep orders, to the intent they may be
obeyed, and that every one perform his duty appertaining to his office, as to
strike the battery in marching in battle, or disseuered, to make general
bands and cries, to strike the Diana in the morning, and the Salve or Aue maria
in the euining at ye closing of the night, and in sounding the march, the call,
the charge, the battle, the retrait, with such other like observations and
necessary things to be done.

He must procure to have part of every munition for his regiment, out of the
principal and general munition, as Corstets, Pikes, Halberds, Hargabuses with
their furniture, match, lead, powder, of all sort of victual, and each thing
else as occasion and necessity requires, which he must cause his Sergeant
Mayor to distribute amongst his bands, that his soldiers be not exacted on in
the prise. The like division he must cause him to make by money it self, but
never more then that which rests as due to them, as many very maliciously
have accustomed to do, making merchandise thereof to the loss and ruin of
their soldiers: toward whom they are bound continually to procure manifest
commodity and profit. The like is to be observed in all other things
necessary and conformable to this before said, without selling of furniture to
them of excessive prise, for nothing is more dishonorable or more miserable,
then to extort upon soldiers.

It is very requisite that he examine the election and choice, that every
Captain has made of his officers in every band, and whether they do thoroughly
possess or approach very near to the perfect experience they ought to do, of
whom and not otherwise he shall like and allow. Note that these aduertisements,
make manifest appearance, and sets forth to the view of the world, the inward
valor of the conductour and Colonel: for if he neglect these observations,
the contrary does easily ensue.

I judge it a thing not out of square, but rather most expedient that the one
half of the Caualliers of S. Georges squadre should be Hargabusiers on
horseback, specially when wars be made in large and open countries, or else
howsoever it be situate, for being men of valor, they may both on horseback
and foot do great service, as often has been tried by manifest experience in
our time, specially in the late wars of Flanders, under my Colonel the Baron
of Sheuerau, in service of Don John of Austria, and the Prince of Parma, where
I being of the number of the Gentlemen of his own band, have seen daily
excellent good service done by them, as well by discovering the enemies
ambuscades, as to draw them into the danger of our footmen. And likewise in
the speedy taking and keeping a passage of importance, in winning
aduertisements and the watch word from the enemy, in taking prisoners, in
breaking the way for free passage, in clearing and beating the hye ways, and
scowring them free from the enemy and fleebooters, in making roades, courses
and incursions, in discovering the country and taking view there of like to
light horsemen, specially in the absence of the Cauallerie of the Camp. And
therefore I conclude that they shall be found to be a knot and kind of
necessary soldiers, provided that they be practiced, and above al full of
valor and aspiring minds, and not to be common soldiers, taken at unawares
out of ordinary bands of footmen, neither such as carry a dull* base and
abject mind or disposition.

If the Collonell had the authority to be able to keep together a band with a
standerd or Guidon, and a trumpet to them, would do singular good service,
which nevertheless when service on foot did call them forth, might deliver up
their horses, Lances, and Hargabushes with firelocks unto their servants, kept
and maintained for that purpose, and enter into rank or battle amongst the
rest of the Caualliers squadre, and so should the ordinary and common custom
of having horses amongst private soldiers be avoided, save such as are
permitted and granted to some officers, as in my former discourses I have
alredie declared. The which observation shall bring to pass that the soldiers
in marching and in other enterprises shall go togithers, and be united about
the Ensign, which is a thing most convenient and necessary, and ought greatly
to be shunned, for that horses by overthwart traversing are accustomed to
deface the squares, and break the ranks of the footemens battles, which
truly is very odious and of great disturbance and discommoditie: but that
which I speak of this extraordinary band is to be understood and taken, when
there is no ordinary bands of horsemen joined to a Colonels Regiment.

He ought to take vigilant care that the Gentlemen of his band and Caualliers
of his squadre, being continually about his person do diligently perform, that
which they are appointed of him to do by commission or otherwise, and that they
make faithful and true relation to him of every particular thing, that he
may be ever fully informed of all things, and chiefly of that which does pass
in the watch worthy and necessary to be noted, as well by day as by night*
since that by going the Round, which does appertain principally to these
Caualliers, many things of moment and importance may very well be observed,
being able to execute any of the inferior offices, and both quickly conceive
and sensibly utter any new accident.

The Colonel must most carefully with humble courtisie court his captain
general, use great respect toward him, obey him, and give him faithful
counsel: and to the end he may perform this thoroughly well, he must never
refuse toil or travel, since that to take pain about matters of like
importance, is agreeable and convenient to honorable personages his equals,
whereas easy delicacie and curiosity appertains to women, or other
effeminate persons, who esteem more of belly cheer, gallant attire and
riches, then of the peerless prise of valor and virtue, and that prefer a
frail body before an immortal soul.

Some hold opinion that a Colonel having to allot ou^ what number of pikes,
short weapons, and shot is to be in every band, that it is far better to have
but one sort of weapons, so shall the Captain ever accompany his own
soldiers, whereas otherwise they being disseuered in a stand battle, he must
either loose the company of his shot or pykes, the one of them being committed
to a second, and the short weapons to a third, which does nothing so much
encourage the soldier, as to see his Captain companion of his perils, and the
contrary no less dismaieth him: but for that foughten fields chance seldom
in our time, I cease to wade further therein, only aduertising that amongst the
rest of his soldiers, the armed pikes must be gently used, showing them a
cheerful and good countenance, who must be chosen men, very hardy and
valiant.

He must procure that his officers diligently perform his comissions, and that
faithfully they make relation of every particular thing, that he may be
informed of all, and in specially that which happens in wards, as well in the
day as in the night, for they going in circuit as appertains unto them, may
well perceive what chances of any great importance. So that by observing these
aduertisements, the industry of the Leader does appear, whereas not being well
looked unto great ruin does arise.

To conclude, when his Regiment is discharged, either at the end of the wars
or otherwise, he ought to take care that he in any wise procure, that they may
be conducted wholly together, and afterward disband them in such a place, as
from thence every soldier may easily and without fear transport himself
into his own country, and if it be possible, having his health, his arms,
and his apparel entyre: for otherwise if soldiers be disseuered in far
countries, they suffer great inconvenience, in hard and difficile passages, in
victuals and lodgings, the which does cause their destruction, the discredit
and dishonor of their conductour, and is a great blot in the fame of our
nation, as those that have seen Holland and the Lowcountries can witness:
wherefore it is a thing to be reformed for the increase of our credit and old
natural valor.

The election, office and duty of the four Corporals of the field.
GReat regard would be had to the choosing of these, as well for their calling,
years, and valiantnes, as otherwise for their experience, lenity and wisdom.

Whereby these warlike affairs may be the readier and sooner executed,
otherwise it may be prejudicial to the whole army.

These 4. be under the Sergeant Mayor general, to appoint, set order, and
make battle and battles, and to guide every particular person therein*
according to their degree and office, and as the necessity of the same shall
require, to instruct and reform, whose commandments all Captains and
soldiers with their officers must obey, but in march, approach, Canuisado,
skirmish, retraite, watch, ward, or what other service by them shall be
commanded, whose authority likewise is such, as if any resist, they shall by
the Provost Martial be punished as Rebels, of what calling or degree soever
they be.

Two of these are appointed to the placing and ordering of shot, and the other
two for the ^mbattelling of the Pikes and Halberdes, who according to their
worthiness if death happens, are to succeed the Sergeant Mayor.

The Office appertaining to the Sergeant Mayor general.
DEw order and politic proportion, by how much they be necessary in all
humane affairs, by so much more the weighty office of the Sergeant Mayor
general is to be had in estimation, for upon his charge and authority does
depend only the good ordering of all causes, but also the form, fashion, and
execution of the most principal matters, for the ready and expedient service
of the army. And likewise of each other assembly that is made, through
occasion of defense or offense, of wha^ number of soldiers soever, the which
if this worthy Office^ should want, can never be brought to pass and
performed, in such requisite sort as is convenient: Since that he is that
person neutrall, who does keep together in accord the Captains, other
Officers and soldiers, many times abused by their particular company,
charge, and offices, more then is honest o^ convenient. And in effect it is he
that holds a just and equal balance amongst the soldiers of every in the
Army. Provided always that it be in those warlike affairs that are subject
^o order, how to keep and observe the same, and such like matters, and not in
those things that appertain to justice, and the rest of the office of the
Marshal general of the field, as I mean to touch in the discourse of his
Office.

Therefore this great Officer ought to have certain sufficient and old trained
soldiers about him to be his continual aid, that is, four Corporals which
may be his consorts and coadiutors, and in absence succeed him both in office
and aucthority: So that the Sergeant Mayor by means of the aucthority given
him by his Prince, and through that which of custom he does carry by his
office: It is necessary he observe diligent, artificial, and ready means,
not only to maintain the said authority, but requisitely to augment the same,
in the minds and hearts of the Captains, of the officers and soldiers
contained under his charge and expedition, to the end that in those orders and
fashions of squadrons and battles, which he has determined with him self
to use, or in those he is to execute by the commandment of his Captain
general, he may have such entire and ready obedience as is requisite, without
the which what great diligence soever he can use, is not sufficient to make
any affairs or enterprises come to good issue in this important office, the
which might be proved by many examples passed, if we would examine them.

It is most necessary for him in his office, to presuppose with himself,
consider of, and foresee al chances and causes before the event thereof
succeed, and before hand to foretell and take order with others what is
requisite to be executed, considering the time wherein he is to work, is for ye
most part very short, since ordinarily it does fall in sudden rumors of
Alarums, so that in this hasty occasion of brevity it is convenient he
proceed expediently, orderly, and readily, not being dismayed of the enemies
presence, for the most part of all his actions, are to be performed even in
the face of the enemy: Wherefore if he did not govern himself warely,
politikely, and provided with good consideration, and if he had not ordained
before hand what is to be done, never any thing amongst so many things, which
he ought to perform with perfection, would succeed with happy felicity,
for particularly in that time that Alarm is given to the soldiers,
universally entire attention is not given unto that which is commanded: for the
ears of all are occupied, part with the rumor and noise, and part through the
clashing and clattering of the armor and weapons they wear, and with other
confusions that arise, but being of a quick invention he may suddenly
perceive and conceive, the nature, situation, and order of the enemies array,
altering and disposing accordingly his own.

Besides, this it is very convenient for him to know distinctly how many
Colonels and private Captains there be in the army, and of what quality and
kind their conduct and guiding is, and what gross number of armed pikes and
halberds he has to command, how many light armed or disarmed, both of the one
sort and the other: the number of the Musket and hargabuziers on foot, and the
quantity of horsemen, how many lances, how many light horsemen, and how many
Argoloteares, and what number of other soldiers, and of what valor or moment
they are able to prevail: to the end that he may afterward order them about
any exploit, these to make the front, these to be the back, others for the
wings, flanks and sleeves, others to empale the squadrons, others to enuiron
the enemy, and others for the fit convenient places to execute a slaughter, and
such like, others to defend the bagage, artillarie, and munition, others to
entertain and skirmish with the enemy, and for the forlorn hope, others to
guide and Ascolt or conuoy, and others to perform such other like service. And
for his better instruction must likewise accordingly have a Roll of all the
bands, from the Lord high Marshal, with their difference of weapon, which
having always about him may reprehend the want, and inform the muster Master
and Treasorer. He shall likewise take order with every Colonel, Captain, and
chieftain, that in the day upon any Alarm, they conduct their bands into ye
market or place appointed for ye main battle, near where the artillary or
munition is kept, that they come not in a fond sort straggling ordispersed, or
upon heaps, as in disorder they are sometimes accustomed, but orderly and
warely about ye ensign, that they may make a forceable front and gallant
resistance where occasion offers, and give a valiant onset where need requires:
for it has bin oftentimes seen that this place of arms has bin assaulted
and possessed of the enemy, it being a common custom, that the munition of the
Artillary is hoatly assaulted by the enemies, the more to disseuer, to break,
to deceive, and disperse the army with more assurance and ease, yt thereby they
may force the fort, or break in where ye munition is guarded. When they be
entered into the place of arms, every band with the ensign must attend to follow
the sergeant Mayor, and the Corporals in obedience and silence, and after every
particular company is placed together in ye order, appointed by ye Corporals
and sergeant Mayor general: the main and real square battle of earth must be
made, and not of number of men, or of a few combatants and pikemen: to the
intent the head and the back may be of sufficient strength to shoulder down
the enemy, by presenting a greater number of soldiers in one threede of a
rank, both to fight and give the enemy the shocke: The which thing does not
fall out in many other battails, and that likewise does embrace and occupy in
every respect less compass of ground, both the one and the other
advertisement is very substanciall, and for the most part of greatest
advantage, for every man of experience does know how much it does profit, so
near as is possible, to be planted and placed in one united order, and to take
on hand to defend a small circuit of ground, as by this form does very well
ensue and succeed.

He must set both in the one and the other of these places, that is to say, at
the head and back of the battle, the only choice soldiers and best armed
men, which order he ought likewise to observe in those which must impale the
rest, the face, the back and flanks of the battle consisting of well armed
Pikes, specially if the situation of the ground and cariages do want, as by
reason is requisite and convenient, and place the Ensigns being accompanied
with good Halberds, and men of valor in their accustomed standing of the
footmens ranks. He must make to his battle two wings of Hargabuziers, the
one less, and the other greater, as the situation of the ground will bear or
suffer, the which wings are to defend and flank the maine square, even in the
same sort, as curtains or bulwarks with their casamates, do flank a
fortress.

It is very necessary for him to have certain soldiers, besides the
battle and wings in the front, under the name of the forlorn hoope, and an
other part that readily and courageously being keept behind the battle, may
be employed in diverse needful enterprises, without discovering or
disseuering the wings, or any other body of battle ordained to other effect,
and flanking himself with these wings, he may sometimes fight with great
advantage on all sides, although the flanks of the said battle be weaker,
and contain a less quantity of soldiers then the head or the back: and
therefore with great judgments these flanks ought to be placed toward the
strongest part of the situation, and aided with the wings of Hargabuziers, and
the ^eregard, for that sometimes one of the ^ankes being forced to b^ecome the
front, the said hargabuziers by good reason and very advisedly, may retire and
thrust themselves into the threede of the ranks of the Pikemen, from whence
they may shoot and wound the enemy, and defend their own party. The forlorn
hope in the front of the battle, must be succored with n^w supplies from
behind, and if need require from the wings, that the front of the armed men
be never left naked and uncovered, till the battles be so near that they
be ready to cross their pikes, then must the other retire into the wings, or
behind the battle to the cariages.

To form and set in order this battle with facillitie, which in my opinion
is the best founded, firm, profitable, and most expedient, and if necessity
did require, more apt to journey then many other form of battles be: I
therefore say it is convenient for the Sergeant to have a long practice in
Millitarie profession, or else very good Theoricke, or that which is better,
both the one and the other together, for if a man do but only possess^
practiced experience, he does not always direct and bring his enterprises to
perfection, but does work with more speed and facillitie, which is a thing
very necessary and altogether requisite by Theorick only, matters be wrought
with perfection, but much more coldly, slow, and with longer time: The which
defects and imperfections ought to be fled of men that be of valor: It is an
accustomed saying, that practice, for that it is a thing more material, is said
to be the body, and Theoricke the mind, for that the same looking into ye
matter does first dispose and set in order, and the other execute, whereby it
follows that the one and the other joined together, does make us aptly to
conceive and readily to execute this office, and every other enterprise, so
that we cannot desire any further direction.

And for that every man ought to apply himself in all his actions to attain
to full perfection, for the absolute performance thereof, he ought to join
practice with Theoricke, which is reading, specially in Algorisme, Algebra, and
the platformes of battles, the which in forming the order of this square
battle both instruct, that you must divide the whole number, placing the
soldiers which are to be bestowed in this battle by 21. taking from the
quotient ye root of the quadrant number, placing it in some part a side, then
multiplying the said quadrant root by 7. you shall have the number of
soldiers, which does enter by ranks, then multiplying the same root by 3.
you may find the number of the ranks, which being done, if you multiply the
number of that which amounts by 21. and the product shall show the number of
those soldiers which are not to be placed in main battle, which may serve in
many profitable uses, and thus this quadrant battle may be formed.

Tartaglie Bresciano in his book of Martial inventions, gives rule to form
the same perfectly in other sort. In the which it is necessary to make
quadrate the number 49. that is to multiply it in it self, which will make
2401. and this 2401. he shall multiply by the number of soldiers he would put
in battle, and shall divide the product by the number of 100. and of the
product he shall after take the square root, the which root will be the
number of soldiers which shall enter into ranks, and shall divide with the said
root the quotient already mentioned, which ought to be put in battle, and
that which shall arise is the number of the ranks and the surpluse which does
arise in this last quotient, are the soldiers which remain out of the square,
the which are otherwise to be employed. But to frame the square of men, there
is nothing to be done, but to take the square root from the number of
soldiers, and the same root will be the number of soldiers which must enter
into rank, and the self same root will be the number of the ranks, this
being done he must force himself to maintain and keep them in due order
and just square.

To observe good order, having made proclamation that every one shall keep his
place, being assisted by the 4. Corporals and the Sergeant Majors of the
Regiments in their quarters: He must diligently ride here and there about the
squadrons, using certain manifest and known signs, wherein order must be
taken openly and not privily, to the intent they may be credited and obeyed of
those that know the manner of this observation: for by declaring the same
secreetly and privately, it is vneasilie and very hardly executed of certain
ambitious and ignorant persons, which are accustomed to make profession that
they are not to be commanded more of this man then of that, and do reply in
contraries, whereas they ought to employ themselves to nothing more then
obedience, without having respect to any other particular profit or commodity.

He must take order and command expressly al Colonels, Captains and Officers,
that continually they remain firm, and keep their appointed places, the which
places ought to be such as be feared to be of greatest danger and importance,
as the front, the back, the flank, and the sleeves, and wings of the
Hargabuziers, the like whereof may be observed in the other battles, when it
is necessary to form more then one, as oftentimes it falls out.

Let him observe diligently to proceed in all these respects, with a modest
and low voice, not with rough words to soldiers, but with sweet and smooth
speech, and if it be possible with signs and tokens rather then with words,
for by that manner of proceeding soldiers remain more attentive, and better
instructed, then with crying and calling, which for the most part procures
disobedience, and causes contempt of aucthority, and moreover in matters of
importance procures small effect. And so every Captain having his place, some in
the front, some in the rereward, some to lead shot in the wings, others to
guide the forlorn hope, each one must carefully, as I have said, execute and
obey the Sergeant Majors commandment, whether it be by sign or by voice, by
Drum or trumpet, or by any other manifest token and advertisement.

These observations be of great force, wherwithall amongst other his good
qualities, in nature and custom requisite for this person to possess, it is
most necessary that he be well given to Religion, that he be charitable,
courteous and loving toward the soldiers, and use exquisite example for their
better instruction, which above all things must not be villanously entreated,
neither otherwise despised, but as much as may be corrected with a gentle hand,
and always with lenity favored.

If in the night by reason of Alarums he be to set the army in order, he
must before hand have appointed the Captains, that their lanternes, quarieres,
torches or cressets be in a readiness, upon any sudden to be light up, the
which they must do: provided always that it be necessary and expedient, and
that particularly it has bin of purpose ordained and commanded, that then
they guide behind them, every band by themselves into the place of Arms, but
the Hargabuziers of every company disseuered from the Pikes and other weapons,
which Pikemen shall gather within them* their Ensigns in safety, and the
Hargabuziers shall march just after them and before them, as shall be appointed
or seem most expedient. And to the intent the same may be more speedely
performed, the four Corporats, and Sergeant Majors of the regiments, shall
very advisedly go to the assigned places and quarters of the lodgings, for
this respect if it be possible, that all the people may arise, may arm
themselves, may join in one, and ariue at the same instant at the place of
arms; where they are of this worthy Officer to be received, and put in
squadre in the form of a half Moon or cressant, and within the compass of
the horns of the said Moon, every Alfierus as he ariueth, must compass and
plant himself in the form of a crown, one by one with their Ensigns in
their hands, and amongst them those that be armed with rondels and targets if
there be any; as for a small competent number it is requisite there should be
(unless those of proof which must lead ye shot,) then behind them the armed
with halberds, and after these that be light armed pikes, and about the utmost
compass of the said circle, and in both the tippes and horns of the moon the
armed pikes are to be planted, and the Sergeants and Lieutenants must attend to
apply themselves for the conservation and keeping of the order of these last
Kings without: Now the rest of the Colonels and Captains; with the person of
the Captain general, and the Cauallieres of his own squadre, and a great part
of the lights and Drums, must stand in the void place betwixt both the horns
before the Ensigns, where reserving the messages and ambassages of
aduertisements that go and come in such cases, they may consult and determine
upon such things as are to be done. The entrance of this void place ought to
be turned toward ye strongest situation of the said ground, and if it be
convenient, and the ground will permit* let it be guarded with certain field
pieces and shot. The hargabuziers in the self same time are to be disposed and
placed by the Sergeant Mayor, so far distant from the foresaid squadre, and in
so many places and so many proportions, as the situation of the ground, parts
and qualities does require, being conformable to that present service, thereby
the better to flank, fortify and assure the foresaid principal battle. And to
every troop of hargabuziers he shall appoint the other half and moity of the
Officers, Drums and lights, if it be convenient, to the intent that in fight
or otherwise in all causes they may readily work and perform exploits,
neither do I think it good that in these affairs of the night, Geometrical
measures be necessary, and much less Arithmetical numbers: but the careful
diligence of valiant and discreet officers, is most expedient and necessary,
who must ever frame themselves conformable, and be in these actions altogether
obedient to the Sergeant Mayor, particularly putting in execution his order and
pleasure: The proportion of this foresaid Cressant was used of Alexander
Vitellus in the night upon the top of a mountain, against the mightis
Lutheran League.

In the day time the army rising and setting forward to march and standing in
doubt of the enemy, the Sergeant Mayor must form the ordinance and battle
of the armed and disarmed Pikes, of the Halberds and other weapons, in such
sort, that having to double the ranks to make them greater, the battails may
fall out in due proportion, that is to say, that the front and the back way
divide equally the armed Corslets and. Pikes, always provided that the flanks
be not left disarmed and void of Pikes, so shall he bring to pass that the
short weapons shall enclose the Ensigns just in the midst amongst them, keeping
defended betwixt them and the armed Corslets and Pikes, as well on the front as
on the back, the disarmed Pikes, ye which to make number and to fill up room,
ought not to be refused amongst a great number of footmen in the field, since
it is very hard for all men to arm themselves, they being armed only with a
breast plate and burganet, or with a coat of plate or jack and a scul, are good
to turn on amongst shot. And as the quantity and number of Pikes, principally
together with other short weapons, is the very strength and force of the armed
footmen: So the musketeares and hargabusiers, serve to no other end but to
flank, to raise ruin and deface all defenses, to make imbuscades, to skirmish
diligently to execute such like enterprises: and finally to pursue ye enemy,
defending or expugning some strong place, fortress, passage, or breach, or
what other condition soever. When he has put the ordenance and march in this
foresaid form and manner, and that he does carry in mind ye Theorick and Rules
which before are mentioned, he may so ingrosse and double the ranks, specially
when he aspects and stays for the enemy, that he may frame* the square
battle of ground or of number and of men, both the one and the other, without
any difficulty.

He may likewise cause every particular Sergeant place all the Pikes armed and
disarmed, with the other weapons they have in charge, and also the Ensign, in
so many li^es and ranks as the people of the other bands likewise armed by
their Sergeant are formed and fashioned. Besides it would be very good for the
Sergeant Mayor, first of all, advisedly to consider with the Sergeants, how
many lines or ranks they are to be by company: provided always that one band
be like unto another in quantity of lines and ranks, that their proportion
may answer and be correspondent. These bodies so ordained, are of many called
maniples or scales, as thus.

which very easily may be engrossed thus, And in this sort shall he cause one
band to march behind another, being annexed and joined near together, and that
every one of the^ be guided by an officer into a place and ground able to
receive them, causing the first company and maniple to march somewhat disseuered
from the other, and to make space and stay, he may ordain that the second
coming forward it may be placed upon his flank: so in like sort shall the
third to the second, the 4. to the 3. and the 5. to the 4. and so consequently
continuing this order, he shall by and by form a gross square and gallant
battle, that with advantage may be able to contend with the enemy. And it is
true yt some have affirmed, that the fewer number of maniples there be, the
case is so much better, but in this case it is very hard to observe the just
order of so many men by rank, and of such number of ranks as the perfect rules
of Theorick does assign, by reason that many times all the companies and bands
are not of equal number, neither are they all armed alike one to another.

Marching in this order he may cause all the Alfieres of every Regiment to
march in rank united together, without mixing themselves with others that
pertain to other Colonels, or with other private captains, and when the
maniple be doubled and the battle is complet and engrossed, every Alfierus may
go to his own band, and remain with the same, for the more satisfaction of his
company and his greater saftie. And returning with the said order of maniples
to march in long ordinance as before, every Alfierus shall turn amongst the
other Alfierus or Ensign bearers where he remained first. The Hargabusiers
must march disseuered from the battle, the one half in Uantgard, and the
other half in reargard, or somewhat distant of, upon ye right hand, and upon the
left hand, as the way shall serve with most commodity, or as shall be thought
most necessary, if suspect be had of the enemy, so that according as need
does require, redoubling the ranks, and causing one to enter into another, or
knit and join together, he may engrosse them and put them in order with good
aduisement, to flank this foresaid principal battle in as good form as he
possible may.

It is a most necessary note to be had in memory, that as well the two wings
or sleeves of Hargabusiers, as also the front or back part of the ordained
battle or general square, are always recommended, as before I said, to the
worthy Colonels and Captains, and honorable officers and soldiers, to the
intent they may always give remedy, by discourse consider, and by courage
determine of al matters, making choice of the chiefest part in those affairs
of importance, without attending or aspecting for counsel* if in case such
counsel be not present and ready at hand.

Neither is it to be misliked or out of course, but as I judge a thing very
necessary to send for Uantgard and Reargard, and on both sides some what far
off from the battle, squadrons, troops or horns of Hargabusiers out of the
forlorn hope: the which without moving the soldiers of the battle, the
ordained square and flanks may very sufficiently perform all enterprises,
discoueries, and do great service of marvelous importance and profit, and in
effect may assure the way and passage to the squadrons that come behind or go
before from surprises, etc. Marching out of danger or suspicion of the enemy,
the Sergeant Mayor dividing every arms by themselves, must form the
accustomed ordinance, and marching with this, he may accept the companies
which ariue, as they come, and send the Hargabusiers of the front of this
company to the Uantgard of the Hargabusiers of the foresaid formed ranks, and
those of the back to the reargard: the Ensigns to the place of the Ensigns
and the forepart of the Pikes and Halberds to the front, and the hindermost
part to the back of this square battle and ordinance: in the midst of the
day when the Army makes Al^ to rest, in the morning when they dislodge, and at
night when they encampe, let the Sergeant Mayor accompanied with the Marshall
of the field, range the army into sundry forms of battles and squares,
that each one may be well acquainted with every sort of battle, the which
although part of them be not to march withal, and not in use, yet for exercise
sake, and for that sometimes they are found to be profitable, when they are
diligently ordained and disposed, being conformable to the situation of the
ground, and correspondent to that present enterprise, specially when they be
contained and framed of a great number of people, I have thought good in my
figures hereunto annexed, to set down some of old and some of new inventions,
hoping that some of them may satisfy our curious conceited Captains. But to
delate further of these foresaid particulars, the Sergeant Mayor must every
day repair to the Lord high marshal, or the Lieutenant general, to receive
direction in what sort that day the army is to march, whose pleasures known,
he must, as ^ said before, sort every kind of weapon by it self, and then dra^
them forth in maniples or sleeves, in 3. 5. 02 7. in a rank, or more as
occasion serves, and so to place every band that their Cap taines may be with
them to direct and animate them, which i^ these our days is almost impossible
to be done, every small ban^ being divided into several weapons, so that he
cannot in time of such general service accompany his own band, which surely
is repugnant to antique Discipline.

Some hold opinion, unless the soldiers be raw and untrained men, that it
is not good to adventure the brunt, in one maine square battle, but rather in
diverse squadrons and sundry battillions, specially if by the continuance of
many years service they be trained in such sort, as in the fury of the fight
they can both march forward if they prevail, or retire upon disadvantage, and
yet maintain perfectly their arayes: then by no means the battle is to be
committed to one hazard of fortune, but imitating the Romans ancient warlike
discipline, to place themselves in three or four several fronts, with
convenient spaces for the first to retire and unite himself with the second,
and both these (if occasion need) to serve with the 3. the shot having
convenient issues and lanes, continually during the fight, to discharge their
pieces, which will make an incredible spoil of the enemy, so that upon the
charge of horsemen retyring within the squadrons, who joining together may bend
and cross their pikes to receive the shocke, and repulse them, upon whose
retire, vnclosing their thorowfares, lanes, and galleries again, the shot and
musketeares may issue out upon their backs, and either follow with the heat
shore of their bullets, or he employed upon some other enterprises: but these
things cannot be accomplished without long abode in wars and 7. years
service at the least of an army in sundry hazards of fights and battles.

Therefore it is necessary for the Sergeant Mayor, in time of rest when the
enemy is absent, to cause the bands to assemble, and to put them in sundry
sorts of standing and marching battles, to reduce them sometimes into small
squadrons of 400. 500. 600. 700. 800. 900. 1000. in a battle, more or less
at his pleasure, and to cause these battles to march forwards swiftly or
slowly, to sarrie, open, shut, close and disclose their squadrons, some times
in sundry battaillons, reduce themselves upon a sudden into one maine square,
and from that again to have passages and galleries for the shot through diverse
places of the same, marching forwards and backward according to the stroke of
the drum, to stay and retire in perfect measore, with no less facility then
Gentlemen dance their Measures by a noise of vyolens, as hereafter ensues.
When the army can perfitely do this, then cause them suddenly to make any
flacke or front, or turn entirely together, as if it were one body without
breaking array, for it is a cunning point to make a squadre to march upon one
corner, maintaining his square form. This and such like variety in marching,
brings the soldier to be very ready, so that although he never saw the enemy
in the face, yet he may be rather accounted a trained soldier, then he which
has been 20, years in service, and in 20. battles, if this skill be wanting
in him, and merits the name of a raw soldier and Bisognia.

Note that there is no battle apt to march but only the square battle or
the compound of squares, all others as the Lunule, the Triangle, the
Pentagonall and the Hexagonall, the circular and ouall battles, and others
which easily may be invented, never serve to any use, but only in fixed and
immovable battles, for presently and by and by in marching they disorder.
Therefore great consideration is to be had betwixt a marching and standing
battle, which kind of immovable battles, though of themselves they are
smally serviceable, considering that in all encounters continual motion is
required, it being impossible to train men to that perfection, but that in
marching they shall break their array, yet for exercise sake, and for some
special service, it is most convenient for the Sergeant Mayor, oftentimes to
plant his soldiers into those fashions of imbattelling, that appear hereafter
by figures: suddenly changing them from a triangle to a square, and from one
shape to another, and thereby bring them into such perfection in these less
necessary and hard cunning toys, that the other plain serviceable forms may
seem most plain and easy.

He must beforehand premeditate, as partly I have touched, and cast in his
mind in what sort with most facility he may bring his men to order of
battle, committing to the peculiar Sergeant of every band, the charge to draw
the^ forth in sleeves and maniples, and so cause one to march close up by
another till all the battles be furnished, placing always the Ensigns and
drums in the middle ranks of the battle.

There need no such curious order to be used in placing the shot in any form
of battle, but only to put them into certain wings and flanks for the
battles, and if he think good, every wing to be divided into sundry petty
troops, of 25. 50. or 100. men a piece, and every of these troops to have a
leader, which is either Corporal, Sergeant, or Cauallier of Saint Georges
squadre: so that to maintain a skirmish, first one Corporal or leader
marches forth and brings to the face of the enemy his troop, who presently
discharging retire themselves, and in his place another leader with his
company presents himself, continuing this order of supply, succouring,
seconding, shadowing and increasing the skirmish, continually maintaining the
same without any intermission, either inuading, retyring, or in any charge or
enterprise, a requisite observation for the forlorn hope. But the place being
large, it shall be requisite to present oftentimes many of these troops at
once to the face of the enemy, who having delivered their volee of shot, may
if it be thought good, march about and give place to those that shall supply
their place, and so relieve and succor one another by turns. And this kind of
discharging and supplying, may in the open field be very well maintained in
the ring march, as the rutters do, so that in wheeling about, the head shall be
sure always to have charged before the tail have discharged: and thus in a
circular march the skirmish all day shall continue.

In plain ground he shall never turn out any shot to the skirmish, without
certain sleeves of pikes to guard them upon the retraite from the charge of
horses, and also troops of short weapons, as swords and targets, Halberds or
such like to back them, if at any time they should come to the sword, or join
pell mell with the enemy, and such were called of the Romans vindices, but
if every shot had likewise at his back a light leather or Uenecian target, to
use with his sword when he saw occasion, they would do great good service. Our
English bows for want of shot and fornecessitie, to gall and disorder a troop
of horsemen, drawing near to them, may ^erue to very good purpose, but they
must be guarded with Pikes or shadowed with shot etc.

The Sergeant Mayor must likewise have knowledge in Arithmetike, Algebra, and
of those proportions which are set out by M. Digges in his Stratioticos,
whereby he may suddenly for all form of battles, resolve how many ranks,
and how many in a rank, to frame battles, what number of Pikes, of Halberds,
of Musket and Hargabuse shot is requisite, how many maniples or sleeves every
battle may be resolved into, how many ranks of pikes in the front, back and
flanks, how many ranks of Halberds to guard the Ensign, upon sight of the
ground to judge whether it be capable of such a multitude, and what form of
imbattelling may best agree unto it, etc.

When he does cause any squadron or battle to turn his face or front, he
must take order that the soldiers turn only their body and face, but not
their arms and weapons, whose points they ought to keep in their hands,
thereby to shun the noise that by linking and striking together they will
make, and to avoid confusion, which oftentimes in such cases does fallow, since
that in this sort more readily and with greater silence this act is executed,
all the weapons remain ready and fast in the soldiers hands: the which order
makes a very stately show, and after brings great commodity, when they must
of new accommodate themselves, and make large in the flanckes to march at
large. Let all that which he determines and appoints to be done, be commanded
and ordained from the back of the ranks and squadron, and not from the front
or from any other place: for in marching more attentively, and with less
occasion of tumult and turning, those things be better understood and are more
capable which are spoken and proceed from behind the back, then from the
front and flanks, and with greater facility does run all along the ranks,
and as they say, according to the word Passa Parola, aduan^ the word.

The Sergeant Mayor, when his squadrons ariue at any strait passage or bridge,
or other narrow or di^icile place that might disorder him, must cause them
pass rank by rank one after another, so that the rank being a little
disseuered or broken, let him frame ye rank a new, and so taking like order in
every rank, he shall immediately form behind the strait and bridge in the
fashion of the first appointed squadron: and in this ^ort may he proceed with
good consideration, with as many squadrons and battles as there be.

When he gives a volee of shot, or makes a Salua of Musket and Hargabussers, it
is much better for him to begin at the head, the^ in any other place, that he
may in due order rank by rank cause one to follow another, even to the back
and last rank, so that how much more it yields a gallant and ready grace, so
much more makes it show that those soldiers be practiced, and argues the
sufficiency of him that guides them.

When nothing e^e of importance remains behind to be done, and that the forward
and maine battle has stood in squadrons to attend and receive the reregard,
le^ him, the same being ari^ed, disband the battle, having beforehand taken
order with the Herbingers of the bands, that every one guide the Alfierus of
his own company to his proper quarter.

In disbanding the battle let him guide the Ensigns into such a place of
advantage in height, as from thence all the squadron, consisting of the
vantgard, battle, and Rereward, may with commodity behold and see them, to
the intent that every soldier following his proper Ensign, may go therewith
to his lodging and appointed quarter.

The order which is accustomed to be observed in assaulting the enemy, as well
in the day as in the night, I suppose it cannot expressly and particularly from
point to point be declared, considering it must be conformable to the
stratagemes of the Prince or Captain general that gouernes: But I have
oftentimes seen them p^t in practice, and resolutely wrought with Incamisados,
with assured and secreat roots, and with imbuscades placed in a convenient and
apt covert, such as grows to be of advantage to them that lies in ambush, who
ought to attend the time, to assault silently and secretly, having his
Sentinels, vedettes, countersignes and voices, such as be plain, manifest and
able to be understood, and not double, doubtful and obscure: The which
sometimes with great error and infinite loss, has caused one thing to be
taken for an other. And this is to be done, to the end that with good order and
in perfect sort each thing that is hurtful to the enemy may be performed and
put in practice.

Likewise the Sergeant Mayor by his office must take ^are to provide for the
munition, principally al sorts of arms and armor, victuals, and other
munition necessary for his people: Likewise to distribute the same, to
perform his office always in the company of the Master of the camp, or
Marshall of the field, in planting the guard round about the camp, and ever to
procure the watchword, with the which the said gards are to be governed, and
after discharged, if such like causes still proceed in government in one self
order: but because they vary according to the custom of him that gouernes
principally, and sometimes as occasion ^oth best require, therefore I pass
over the same with silence, and it is sufficient that at this time I have
inferred, that such like actions and operations app^rtain to his office, to the
intent he may always remain in a readiness, to accomp^ them gallantly, and
according to the rules and observations, that shall be appointed him by his
Prince.

He must take order that the bodies of the watch or Corpse d^gard, be full
stoared with soldiers, according to the proportion of their capacity, and
that at the least there he as many for every Corpse de guard, as may
commodiously supply and maintain all the Sentinels, necessary to be made
during the night, allotting at the least one hour of the clock to every
Sentinel, and chiefly in the unseasonable time of winter, an hour and a half,
at such time as the season is mean betwixt two, and two hours at the most at
any other time that is serene and hot time of the Summer: forseeing always
the Corpse de guard consist of so many soldiers, that they may be able,
together with the commodious situation of the ground, by the perfect proportion
and placing of the Corpse de guard, or by means of the trenches or other
defenses already made, they may in such sort sustain the fury of any surprise
at unawares that the enemy is able to come or assault him withal.

Those Commissions of any importance that depend upon his charge, and are of
other Officers to be performed, ought to be committed to writing, whereof
they must have a copy, to the intent that they be made void of using
contradictions, if in case they do not obey. If there should arise any error of
moment, by this means he shall not be charged to fail in his duty, or be
occasion of such casualties.

He must take order with the Sergeants, with each Alfierus, with the
Lieutenants, with all leaders, Captains and Colonels, to the intent that all that which is to be done of them may be willingly executed, thereby with
facility to shun the strife and emulation which oftentimes does arise amongst
them, and that every one of them may enjoy that which justly appertains unto
him.

But when for any occasion he cannot in like causes orderly govern them, and
that it shall not be good absolutely to command them, let him then permit that
there may be lots cast amongst them, and this manner is to be used in case of
very extraordinary service: which sort of proceeding does not diminish or
pluck away any of his authority, since he commits to chance, that which was
in his choice expressly to command. Finally, it is requisite for a Sergeant
Mayor, to be so studious in theorik reading, practice and invention, that
through his industry he may invent new Artificial forms of Battles,
squadrons marching, and such things as appertain to this important office.
For no man without invention, can be accounted excellent in his art and
profession.

Necessary practices set out in proportions and figures, for Captains,
Colonels, and Sergeant Majors to use in squadrons, battles, and maine
exploits in marching, skirmishing, retyring, rescewing and such like.
THe curious conceits of sundry ouerweening warriors and superficial
Captains is such at these days, as nothing can please their fantasy but such
as does best agree to their own humors and inventions, specially in ordering
and imbattelling soldiers: wherein even as the sundry use of diverse nations
at this day do differ, so do the minds of many new leaders alter, change,
embrace, despise, invent and set down manifold ways to plant an army in
ranged battle in the field, which I well considering, have thought good in
part to make collection out of diverse Authors, Italian, Spanish, French, Latin
and English, and part such as of my own experience I have seen put in
practice of the Spaniards, and other warlike nations, under Don John D'austria
and the Prince of Parma, out of both which Callenders I have chosen the
greatest number that seem any thing to the purpose, that thereby at leastwise
the dainty tasted months of our age may light upon some apt for their
digestion. But before I wade into great numbers, M. Stewards forms shall serve
my turn to satisfy the private Captains, Lieutenants of Regiments, and
Colonels, as fit for their peculiar offices, and will first begin with a table
of discovery of all marches within the compass of 1500. men.

A Table to discover numbers by hundreds, placed by 3. 5. 7. 9. etc. in rank
and array, assembled from one hundredth unto a 1500. As thus, marching 3. in
rank, 34. ranks contain 102. men, by which example you may plainly perceive
the method following, and discover like numbers.
Ranks. Men. 3. in Rank. 34 is 102 67 is 201 100 is 300 5. in rank 20 is 100
40 is 200 60 is 300 80 is 400 100 is 500 7. in rank. 15 is 105 29 is 203 43 is
301 57 is 399 72 is 504 86 is 600 100 is 700 9. in rank. 11 is 99 22 is 198 33
is 296 45 is 405 56 is 504 67 is 603 78 is 702 89 is 801 100 is 900 11. in
rank. 9 is 99 18 is 198 27 is 297 37 is 406 46 is 506 56 is 616 64 is 715 74
is 820 81 is 897 91 is 1017 100 is 1100 13. in rank 8 is 104 16 is 208 2^ is
299 31 is 404 39 is 507 46 is 70^ 54 is (...) 62 is (...) 69 is 1014 78 is 1105
8^ is 1196 92 is 1230 100 is 1300 15. in rank 7 is 10^ 14 is 210 20 is 300 27
is 404 34 is 510 40 is 600 47 is 707 54 is 810 60 is 900 67 is 1005 74 is 1110
80 is 1200 87 is 1305 94 is 1410 100 is 1500

An order to imbattell 600. men at the sudden against horsemen and footmen.
IT is appointed unto the Lieutenant of a Regiment, or unto two or three
Captains to bring 600. men to convey, charge, or do exploits, as the
commandment of the higher officers shall appoint them. The Leader or Captains
advertised of straites, passages, and situations of the countries: also on what
part the enemies be most like to assault them, must give order unto your
officers to place 13* in front, as here is set down by proportion of figure,
your Ensign in the midst with the halberds, your shot placed in the wings as
appears. At such times as the enemies shall assault you, join both your
bands and become one strength as the ground does serve. This order is very
necessary to do many exploits.



How the like number may be brought into the manner of a hearse to defend
horsemen.
SOmetimes marching by 10. in rank, upon the fight of the enemies, divide into
two parts and join their broad sides divided together, and become in one
strength, which bring thus placed, is in length 24 and in breadth 10. Against
horsemen they must pitch their pikes on the ground, and cross them, against
footmen bear above hand. They must sarri^ close together, and not disseuer to
follow or fly, le^t their disorders make place for the enemies to enter, as by
this proportion does appear. Sometimes for the saftie of your shot you must
receive them within the guard of your pikes. This H signifies horsemen
galloping the field to break upon you, where they may best enter and most
easily, as by the void space appears, the overplus of your shot to be placed
in 4. wings without ye battle. This proportion to disseuer is very perilous.



How to imbattell 900. soldiers at the sudden.
MArching with 900. men, and understanding by scout or spy that the enemy
pretends to skirmish with them, or otherwise to join battle, you may divide
your bands in three parts, marching 9. in a rank, placing officers betwixt
every band, that being assaulted may join the Uoward and the Rereward to the
middleward, so fall they out to be an hearse battle, placing your shot in the
wings that they may the better resort to the skirmish, likewise to retire as
occasion scrueth: this is a singular good order for the obtaining of any
grounds or doing of exploites.

An order how to imbattell 900. men at the sudden.


An order to imbattell the like number in Quadrant proportion.
WHen battles are to be made, if the Sergeant Mayor should chance to be absent,
give commandment unto the Sergeants of the bands to bring their companies
several, and then join your bands and sorted weapons the broad sides
together, as your number serves, your Captains, drums and (...), with your
Ensign placed in the midst of the execution, as well for the saftie of the
same, as for the comforting of the soldiers: nevertheless, such order is
taken, that Lieutenants and Sergeants of bands with other serviceable Gentlemen
of S. Georges squadre, be placed to lead the Uoward and Rereward of the
battle, where onsets be uncertain, whose beautiful Armours, pollitike and
courageous charge is a great terror to the enemy, and a great comfort to
their own company: the shot to be placed in four froupes, with two wings in
the Rereward, for that they may easier maintain skirmish round about the
battle, on which side soever they be assaulted.



An order to imbattell 1200. men quadrantly at the sudden.
THe four Quarters joined in one, seem to be 1200. men under 4. Ensigns
every way, who at the enemies sight must place 13. in rank, which fall to be
a quadrant every way, which ^odainly may join their long weapons together,
making one Quadrant of the four: your drums and fiffes with the Captain
placed next to the Ensign, the Lieutenants in the wings, and the Sergeants in
the Uoward and Rereward, whereby they may the better give intelligence by sign
or word what is best to be done, 300. men being shot in the wings, and the 300.
in Demie Diamondwise, after the Almaine manner in the midst, the which being
discharged, the musket and hargabus shot will greatly prevail.



This ways they may march wholly together, or retire any ways to service
needful, ready with their shot to encounter the enemy any ways in skirmish,
either wing rescuing other, as need shall require. And although the Sergeants
mayor appoints order for the same, yet the Sergeants of every band having
experience, only rules and gives order to their own charge, and appoint and
place such in the fronts, Rereward and wings, as to them seem most convenient.

This proportion is after the Almaine manner of imbattelling, much like unto
the order of the Romans: who divided their Legions into diverse Cohorts, to
this intent, that when the fronts were wearied, the Mainward and Rereward
succeeded, which the late experience of the Frenchmen has tried, that the
dividing of the battle into many bands, so that they have pikes sufficient to
impale the Halberds or Bills, and to every Band their number of shot and Horse,
is more available then any battle being made of a whole body, or as the
Greeks term it, a Phalange: for they are to be drawn out in length or breadth
as the ground or occasion serves, to charge and encounter the enemy placed in
one battle, upon every quarter to their detriment, and overthrowing of any so
placed, being of sufficient strength for defense of horse: and though the first
or second, or third should be overthrown, yet be rest keeping their order are
to succeed. Whereas the battle being one, after the frontes be overthrown,
the Rereward is ready to run, the which being disordered, can hardly recover
to place them in order again.

An order to imbattell a Colonels charge.
Colonels and Chieftaines, who oftentimes according to their experience and
worthiness of service, have the charge and leading of 1500. men more or less,
to whom is committed diverse sundry exploits and points of service in the
field, whereof they discrie any multitude of horsemen, pretending for to
charge them, and to enuiron your battle, having no waghon, borough, or pale of
carriages, water, hedge, ditch, or other succors, but only ye strength of
their manual weapons, and policy of defense upon the sight of the enemies,
must cast in this sort the Uoward and Rereward to become one strength, and to
serve and sarrie close together, to couch, to cross and defend, as by this
order may appear. The three utmost ranks must consist of fair armed and
skillful Gentlemen, and Caualliers and others, pitching their pikes on the
ground, couching and crossing them, the two ranks next giving the push at the
length of the pikes, the shot placed within the pikes for safeguard, stand
ready to shoot and charge still in their places. This order to encounter with
footmen, if it be possible, will recover the advantage of wind, hill, and full,
in good order, on the one side of the hill, to join in fight, where God gives
the victory before these same encounters. An excellent order to repulse
horsemen. Revive your soldiers with meat, drink, and good counsel, and with
comfortable words, to animate and encourage them withal.

How to imbattell 1500. men in quadrant proportion.
AS before I have set forth the order or imbattelling of 1500. men in two fold
wise, the which in some ground is much available, for that it occupies more
hands then the just square in fight at one instant, notwithstanding such must
be assured that the enemy can approach but one way, which else may be
prejudicial, therefore in the plain field, the just square or quadrant is the
strongest order that may be: nevertheless it is convenient that at such times as
you purpose to join battle with the enemy, having Ordinance and other
carriage, to place the same on the wings and Rereward, thereby to impale the
squadron to the intent ye enemy enter not but in the fronts. Also the expert
Captains must foresee to obtain hill, wind, sun, or any other advantage, the
which diverse ways greatly profits. If your battle be assaulted with
horsemen and lances, then couch and cross your pikes, as appears in the last
figure, and against footmen sarrie close, trailing your pikes until the
encounter, and then to offer the push till repulse be given, and God give
victory. In the fronts you must place your best armed and most valiant men, as
well to encourage the rest, as to be a terror to the enemies, your shot to be
placed in the wings and rereward, for being placed in the fronts, they cannot
well retire, but upon their own pikes, or else upon the shot in the wings. To
bring 1500. men to this proportion, you must place six ranks of pikes 59. in
rank every ways, which comes to 500. and 12. the shot to be placed in 4.
troops in the wings 10. in rank, which is 400. And 300. ten in rank, and 29.
in breadth in the Rereward, the which are to succeed ye other troops after they
have discharged, the 50. shot and 48. pikes are to be placed about the
Artillarie, or otherwise at the discretion of the Collonell, the Captains and
Lieutenants with the Sergeants to be placed about the battle, to give order as
may best prevail: The Chieftaine and Colonel to be placed within the battle,
as appears in this figure.



The Characters to be used in proportions of greater Squadrons.
BUt to touch more at large greater numbers, both how they are ranged and
battelled, wherein the Sergeant Mayor general of an army is called to use his
office, I do here according to my promise set down sundry proportions of
diverse kinds, for the better understanding whereof, it is requisite to carry
in mind the signification of these Characters.

These Characters
S Signify Shot. or this P Signify Pikes. or this H Signify Halberds. E
Signify Ensigns. Signify Lances. Signify Light horsemen. * Signify
Argoletteares.
A Quadrant or twofold battle of 2000. men.
THe form of this battle following which represe^ts a quadra^t, has been often
used as very profitable of many Italians, well experienced and of great
authority in the field: it is as it does appear, flanked and environed with
two great bodies or sleeves of Hargabusiers, the which contain in number for
each flank 380. men, and in the Uoward 100. and in the Rereward 140. which shot
are to be carried about the battle very commodiously for service, and as they
shall seem otherwise to be employed by ye Sergeant Mayor. In the body of the
battle are 800. pikes, 200. Halberds or Bills, and ten Ensigns, having to
every Ensign 200. men, ye which to be brought to this form, you must place
45. in rank for the breadth, and 22. in rank for the length. The Captains,
Lieutenants and Sergeants, as appears by this figure in the heart of ye
battle, and although this manner or form gives scope to move which way they
list, yet I hold it best not to suffer the^ to stir much: and ye little moving
which is to be granted to them, must not be over hasty but in pace, ^loe,
sober and well measured, unless he has to set again the like battle of the
enemy, for then the last ranks must be somewhat quicker in stirring. And to
bring ten thousand or twenty thousand to this order readily, they must in
setting forward, march with maniples, well severed and divided, having a
Sergeant, Lieutenant or Cauallier at the head and back, the better to discern
them one from another. This manner, as I have already touched, is very easy:
So that placing them in length doubling their ranks, it brings them likewise to
a very formal order of battle, as I have sufficiently touched beforehand.

A Battle in form of a cross, very necessary to be used, as well in the
night as by day, because all the weapons are divided by themselves.
THis battle following in form of a full Cross, consists of 10. Ensigns,
every Ensign having under it two hundredth soldiers, so that the whole number
contains 2000. me^. It has 4. fronts or faces, whereof every one is
accompanied with hargabusiers, which may in time of necessity be covered and
defended by the armed pikes, so yt the foremost ranks be moved forwards all
along the flanks and sides of the shot. This form has been used of
Spaniards and Italians. It is a gallant battle, and of force sufficient to
resist the enemy in open field, although they should set upon you at unawares,
and besides superior both against horsemen and footmen, the hargabusiers are
1000. the which are the half of the number. These hargabusiers being divided
into 4. parts, must be in every flank 200. placing 14 in rank every way, the
halberds and Ensigns placed in the midst of ye cross, are 200. and the whole
number of pikes are 800. the which are to be placed on every quarter of the
halberds 200. placing 14. every way, which make a just quadrant of people, so
that there remain to be placed by the Sergeant mayor 16. pikes, 4. halberds
and 200. shot. This rule may serve in proportion for any number being very
excellent for the night, because each weapon being divided by themselves, may be
ready at the sudden for any service, either to give battle, or for defense
of the Camp, the horsemen and the field pieces to be placed as shall seem
best by the Chieftaines or the Sergeant Mayor.

The body of a battle to be made in the night.
THe proportion of this Cressant or Moon, is very convenient and fit to be
executed in the night, there being a round ring drawn with a cord and a stake,
so that the Sergeant Mayor according to my description in his office, may place
the companies that come to him, and from hand to hand part them into several
companies, according to this proportion: for this form does require that it be
done with expedition, and it is no great labor to divide ye weapons without
confusion, either to march or otherwise to use themselves severally from the
rest, in great or small companies as shall be needful: for that every weapon
does stand at his own defense by it self, the general artillery, Ensigns
and short weapons being safely environed with the armed pikes, which may upon
the sudden by the Sergeant mayor, or the Corporals of the field, be brought to
any other form of battle. Also the Sergeant general may place the
Hargabusiers in so many companies, and so many forms, and so far distant
one from an other, as the situation of the place or the service the^ present
does require, to the intent that the maine body of the battle may be flanked
and defended. But for that I have more largely touched this in the Sergeant
majors office, I refer the Reader to the same: aduertising him withal, that
all squadrons and battles in the night, must have every sort of weapons
several by themselves, whereby confusion may both be avoided, and the troops
of soldiers remain ready, when they shall be called forth to execute any
service, what necessity or sudden assault soever befall. Provided always
that good watch and scout be kept on horseback and on soote, as near the
enemy as is possible, by whose aduertiseme^ts you may know what is best to be
accomplished.

The order of imbattelling before the fight.
THe Oration being made by the General, and prayers finished to the immortal
God, it is requisite that thou have care to bring forth thy army to ye field
with bright and shining armor, which easily may be done, by giving charge in
time to the Captains, and so to the officers, that their burgonets, (...),
caleeuers, halberds, swords, and every other piece of (...) be made clean and
bright, forasmuch as the cleannes and brightness of the weapons, makes the
army seem terrible, and puts fear and travel in ye minds of the enemies.
Then call forth thy bands, the which being set in araie, the General being
expert, having seen the preparation of the enemies, gives in charge to the
Sergeant mayor and the principal Corporalles to accommodate and ordain his
Soldiers in battle according to the army, the men, and the manners of them.
And if the enemy be more puissent of Horsemen: thou having the commodity,
choose thee straight and difficult places, or at the foot of mountains and
where the horse cannot easily serve. If in footmen he exceeds, then it is
requisite to get the hills and places of advantage, as the Sun and wind,
etc. and that with diligence to choose such fit places, which either be near
Rocks or Rivers: and above all things, where thou may put in araie thy
battles, and by the quality of thy place be able to let thy enemies, that
they neither compass thee about nor enclose thee, the which requires not only
the counsel and prudence of a wise Captain, but the counsel of the most
expert in the Camp: because oftentimes an Army happens upon such places. And
notwithstanding the Captain is ignorant how to choose such situation of ground
as is best for him, but of those that are present it is good to choose the
best, and to foresee which may be most profitable, is surely a sign of a wise
Captain: Caius Sulpitius, to fear his enemies got a great many of Mules and
other beasts unprofitable for the wars, causing a great number of sackes to
be gotten, which were so ordered upon the backs of the beasts as they seemed
men at arms, giving in charge whiles he was a fighting they should appear
upon a hill, whereby grew his victory against the Frenchmen. The Spaniards to
overcome Amilcar, set in the fronts of their battles, Carts full of Towe,
drawn with Oxen, that being ready for the encounter, they set it on fire,
causing the Oxen vehemently to thrust forwards into the army of the enemy,
dividing the same. Thy number small, and the fields large and open, it is good
to make ditches, the which being filled with boughs, and slightly covered with
earth, leaving void spaces for thy horse and shot to procure skirmish, the
which being of the enemy encountered may feign a running away, and being
prosecuted by the enemy, shall be overthrown in the ditches, where they are
easily slain, many such notable devises by wise Captains has been
practiced, the which upon the sudden put in use, will greatly profit. Thy
Battles being made and set in order, it is requisite that thou leave the ward
within the trenches of the Camp for the defense of thy lodgings, munition, and
carriages, least the enemy understanding the place to be left void, send his
Soldiers to take the Camp, and so to spoil all: upon occasion some Captains
will destroy their own lodgings, or else pass rivers, or leave behind them
hills and deep places, to the end that the Soldiers standing constantly, may
overcome the adversary and obtain the victory, or otherwise altogether to
perish, for that if they should think to save themselves by running away, they
shall see by all manner of means taken from the possibility to escape.

Now being come to join battle with thy enemy, cause thy Soldiers
somewhat before, to flourishe often their naked Swords and Halberds against the
Sun, for that the glistering of the weapons, and their shining points,
through the brightness now of the one and now of the other, against the
resplendant Beams of the Sun, does show a certain horrible terror of
war, the which will strike a dread and fear into the minds of the enemies.
Likewise it is sometimes requisite that thy battles go forwards with
rumors and showtings, sometimes running with violence, forasmuch as the
semblaunce of such things with the noise of Trumpets, Drums, and great
Ordinance, woonderfully troubles and fears the hearts of the adversaries:
also it is great wisdom in a Captain, not with desire to be drawn to be
the first to give the onset, but to stay thee near thy trench till thou have
viewed thy self and the Rendies of the enemies: that is, how many battles,
how they are placed, of what condition, and where they are disposed to fight,
for after this manner thou may more commodiouslie see to thine affairs:
considering which of thine thou have to set against those of thy enemies, and
in what manner thy men are to be ordained and placed, doing in like sort to a
good Physician, the which considering first the infirmity, and knowing the
cause, comes afterward to give remedy, therefore ordeine thy men so as may
turn most utility to thy business.

The manner of ordering of battles lately used, I cannot greatly command, for
the army being 20. 30 or 40. thousand, they are divided but into 3. battles,
whereby ensues many perils and discommodities, because the Pike being but five
yards three quarters long, every man occupying a yard and half a quarter of
pike, can occupy but four or five ranks at the most, so that the rest are
superfluous and lost: besides, they are easily to be compassed and to be
charged on every side: wherefore I have set down an order of one of the
battles in figure, according to my opinion, the which if it may turn profit
to my country I would be most glad. The occasion of the prosperous success of
the Romans, was only through their good orders, by dividing their Legions
into cohorts, the which were bands of 400. and 50. the 50. were shot, the 400.
were armed, their weapons, pikes, swords and targets, the which were placed in
quadrant manner, 20. every ways, being 10. battles in front, leaving a
certain space between every battle for their retrait upon occasion unto the
next order, which were but six battles, and the rereward four battles, all in
like number, keeping one breadth, the voward were called Hastatie, their battles
thick and close, the Maineward were called Principie, who had such space
between their ranks as they might receive the Hastatie: the rereward were
called Triarij, whose spaces between their ranks were such, as they might
receive the Principie and Hastatie, on the wings were placed seven ranks of
Pikes of strangers, which did distend in length from the voward to the
rereward: through these good orders they became conquerours of many countries.
Now because of the diversity of the weapons, having 20000. footmen, I would
divide them into ten battles, to every one of the battles shall be according
to my proportion set down 1000. shot, 800. pikes, and 200. Bills, the which
placed in twofold wise, according to my proportion set down in figure, will be
in breadth 45. and in length 22. and ten overplus, the which are to be placed at
the discretion of the Sergeant Mayor, the shot placed in the wings and rereward
in maniples for the readier service, who must be placed a good distance from
thy battle, thy men at arms upon ye wings of the shot, thy Lances as two
horns in the front of the battle, the light horse in the fronts of thy
Lances, the hargulaters in the fronts of thy light horse, who with the
pistoleters are the first that begins the battle: thy great ordinance to be
placed in the fronts of the battles, or in such convenient place as may most
terrify the enemy: there would be appointed certain troops of Lances, whose
guidons would be contrary to the rest, the which the German calls their
Forlorn hope, the French Infants perdus, who must at such time and instant as
shall be thought good by the General, give the charge upon the enemies battles,
whatsoever shall happen: who are for the same to receive double pay. The second
battle not to be placed in the front with the first battle, as the Romans
did, but in the rereward of the first so far wide and with such distance, as
the horsemen and shot a foot giving the first charge may retire themselves
without disturbance to the battles, having thy shot placed as in the voward
with the lances and shot on horseback: the third battle to be placed in the
rereward of the second, with like distance with shot and horse: and so to the
fourth, fifth, and the tenth, in the rereward of the which, if occasion require,
thou may as in the rereward of the battle, place for the defense certain of
thy carriages. Thy battles being thus ordered, thou shall be sure no ways to
be compassed by the enemies, whereas thou may easily compass in him, not
ordered in the like manner, and thy battles being but little, yet as strong as
the greater, being strongly fortified every way with pikes, and when a sign
is given, your hargolateares, pistolateares and lances, may at the sudden be
with the foremost, or ready for any other place of service. Also your second
battle may join with the first, and the third with the second, and so to
strengthen your battles at pleasure, as otherwise two or three of thy battles
to give the charge to one of his battles, and if it should so happen that thy
first and second battles should be overthrown, thy battle placed in this
order, thou may retire thy self and leave of the field, maugre the head of
thy enemy, who in prosecuting thee, disorder themselves, as many times
happens, may be easily conquered, using thy battles in this order, I hold to be
of greatest force and most auailable.

THese 4. foresaid battles were taken by M. T. Steward out of his second book,
Captain Francesco Ferretti della Osseruan^a Militare, out of whom he has
likewise borrowed the greatest part of his Pathway to Military Discipline,
wherein he has followed the steps of Leonard and Thomas Digges Gentlemen, in
their Stratioticos, for the which they merit great commendations, by the
benefit our country may reap by their travels. But nevertheless, because I
will not attribute that unto my self, which is none of my own, I have thought
good to deal more directly, and not to reap the fruits of other men's toils,
and therefore in following my determination in setting down diverse battles,
this battle following I borrow out of M. Digges his Stratioticos.

The proportion of a battle out of M. Digges Strat^oticos.
MAster Digges in his third book, entitled Stratioticos, has imbattelled an
army of 30000. footmen and 6000. horsemen* which h^ for an excellent form of
imbattelling figures thus.



First as you may behold, he has divided the Army into two Fronts or faces,
and has separated them into 8. battaillons, every of them having 30. in a
rank, and 33. ranks: They are armed in the front with 7. ranks of pikes, all
the rest of the short weapons, as swords and targets, halberds, bills, or such
like. Every battaillon contains 1000. men lacking 10. and are placed 3. or ^.
paces one from another.

The second front is divided into five great battaillons, every one of them
being of 2000. men, 40. in rank, and 50. ranks: every battaillon armed in
the front with 6. ranks of pikes* These battaillons ought to be one from
another at the least 25* paces, and the one front of battles from the other at
least 60. paces: in or nigh the middle battaillon of this second front shall be
the General himself, when he sees time.

These battaillons are impaled on either side with 100. ranks of pikes 7. in a
rank, and on the back with 6. ranks of pikes: without these has he placed
the shot in 24. troops, every troup containing 100. There is also the forlorn
hope before the face of the battle: likewise 18. troops of shot 100. a piece,
who after they come to the face of the enemy, disband and maintain s^ir* mish.

Last of all the wings of horsemen which M. Digges has placed in a preposterous
order, by placing the Argolat^ares last, but I both altering their course and
names, say that two of the first are Argolateares 50. in a rank, 25. ranks:
the second light horsemen, 30. in a rank, 33. ranks, and the last Demie
lances 30. in a rank 25. ranks. Thus there is in the first front of pikes 1680
In the second front 1200. In the impalement 3800. These in all amount to 6680
so is there left 320. pikes to be employed in loose fleeues to accompany such
that and short weapon, as shall remain for the guard of the Ordinance.

Likewise in the first front there are of short weapons 6240. in the second
front 8800. so there do remain 960. short weapons to be employed together with
the remnant of the pikes for guard of the Artillery or carriages, or else to
mingle with the shot in the forlorn hope, the which when they shall grow to
pell mell with the enemy, will do great service.

Also after ye battles approach, they may retire with the forlor^e hope to
assist their horsemen. The shot you may behold sorted in troops 1800. in the
front and in either wing 2400. so do there remain 400. shot more to join
with the pikes and short weapons extraordinary in any service. Thus after the
great Ordinance on either side have discharged, the Forlorn hope is
continually to be supplied with new troops of shot from the flanks and wings,
and these troops of the Forlorn hope that have discharged, should retire
between the battle and the troops of horse to the back of the wings, so
maintaining the flanckes always furnished: and thus skirmish may continually
be maintained with fresh men, and the battle always impaled. But after the
battle begins to approach, the forlorn hope must withdraw themselves: then is
your first battle strongly fronted, and impaled with pikes to abide any charge
of horsemen, and after their pikes are broken, are together with the rest of
the short weapon, to deal with the enemy, and during the continuance of the
fight, between these battailons the shot may continually discharge in the face
of the enemy. Likewise there may be certain small carriages, some laden with
muskets, some with Calabashes, others with murdering fire balls: and these
cariages may during the battle continually spoil the enemies front, being
safely guarded between the battaillons: but if fortune should abandon them in
the first encounter, and that they be broken by the enemies, yet have they
those ample spaces between the battaillons of the second front to retire unto,
there to make head, and give the enemy battle again. And these spaces or
lanes between the battaillons, serve not only to receive the skirmishers or
other that shall retire, but also for the messengers, which among the Romans
were called M^ndatores, to pass to and fro, and to signify unto all parts
from time to time the Generals pleasure.

The Argolateares are to gallop the field and scale the side of a squadron, the
light horsemen to charge upon the skirmishers, and the lances to break upon
the scaled battle, and one to help an others course, as need does require.

Thus far M. Digges prefers this battle, which he would have used when no
advantage is gained by the nature of the place, but that the General must
trust to the strength of his good order, wherein he does wish such perfection
in ou^ souldiorie, as was in the Roman, that they might be able to fight and
retire in order, and so make many sundry heads upon the enemy, if fortune did
abandon them in the first or second encounter: the which is far better, in
respect of our common brute maine battle, or 3 battles in one front,
committing the whole field to one brunt of service, which is a barbarous order,
therefore it were good the soldiers of our time did apply, practice, and
reform diverse errors.

The figure of a Battle out of Monsieur de Bellay his instructions in the Art
of war.
MOnsieur de Bellay in his first book of Military discipline, sets down this
proportion of a battle.



This battle even as the other before, consists of receipts one into an other,
so that the front being broken, they must retire into the void spaces of the
second front, and they both consequently being repulsed, to plant themselves
within the third and last succors, the pikes of both flanks ought to retire,
as the battles retire, that is to say: the first rank ought to retire within
the 2, and the 2 within the 3, the 3 within the 4, the 4 within the 5, the 5
within the 6, and so consequently the rest. The Hargabusiers and horsemen must
likewise do their duty according to all warlike order. But for your further
and perfect instruction, how this battle and all other of like quality are
to be directed, read the Chapter following, which is entitled A notable
discourse of sundry observations to be had in memory of Captains, Colonels,
Sergeant Majors, etc. whereby a discreet leader may' learn what he has to
accomplish in all sorts of battles and encounters whatsoever.

Diverse proportions of new invented squadrons.
THis battle following has been used of the Spaniards, marching along the
side of a river, two squares, and a triangle battle of pikes, flanked with
shot, empaled on the front, rereward and left flank with 7 ranks of pikes,
the forlorn hope in the front, and their horsemen on the left wing, in this
sort.



The proportion of this battle was carried by the Almains into Italy against
the Zwitzers, being environed round about with a rail, fastened with iron
hooks, to be taken in sunder and carried with them, planted with musket and
base shot, to resist horsemen, and the squares of footmen.



This figure ensuing consists of a square battle of Pikes flanked by shot,
seconded by sleeves of Halberdeares, for execution and relief, or deffence in
skirmish when it comes to pell mell, with 4 small squadrons of musketeres at ye
corners of the maine battle, all the whole being environed and impaled with
pikes, before whose vaward and front are placed the forlorn hope, and two
wings of horsemen, marching along the sides of the battle.



THe proportion of this battle next following is only for the safe retire of
shot, being repulsed by horsemen, or otherwise, who may at eight places retire
into this squadron, which stands in the proportion of a fortress, which upon
the charge of the enemy may join close in one maine square, by causing the
flanks to march up to the corners of the square, which upon occasion disclosing
again may let out the shot, which may enter into skirmish in circular wise as
follows.



THe manner of this battle next adjoining which is to be used of a great
army, does somewhat resemble a cressant, consisting of battaillons, the
General in the midst of the 4 chief squadrons, the whole impaled with pikes,
flanked with shot, fronted with the forlorn hope, and winged with horsemen.



This battle following is both strong and ready for the safety of the shot,
for that either the forlorn hope in the forward or rereward, 'may succor one
another, retire or issue out upon any side, through the lanes and galleries
betwixt every battaillon, and yet upon the enemies onset may sarrie close
together, and make one firm and sole battle, the shot being before hand
drawn in, out of the enemies danger. This squadron is likewise flanked with
Musket and Hargabuziers, and winged with horsemen.

A notable discourse of sundry observations to be had in memory, of
Captains, Colonels, and Sergeant Majors, in directing, training, exercising,
imbattelling and instructing of soldiors, for the better planting of any of the
foresaid Battles or proportions.


EAch Captain, Collonell, and Sergeant Mayor, must in his degree, take care of
his charge. The Captains must see that his officers do acquaint and teach his
soldiers all the particulars in my first book, and that his other officers be
able to execute so much as I have set down in my second Book of Military
directions, whereby together with some notes written presently, they may learn
such particular knowledge, as when they come to put general matters in
execution, the same seem not strange unto them, for in the exercise of arms
we ought to endeavor our selves to be perfect in such things as belong to a
band when it is by it self, and that which a band is to perform when it is
joined with others in camp, so that those soldiers which be cunning in the
first, may easily observe all occurrences and commandments in the second.
Therefore a band is to learn by it self, to keep rank in each kind of
motion, that is to say, in marching slowly, softly and fast, and to learn
all the sounds, all the signs, and all the blasts, voices and cries, wherewith
the officers command in a battle: and that every one know perfectly the
signification thereof, no less then the Mariners the whistle of the master of
the ship, in which soldiers must be ready and diligent to obey incontinently
and aptly at the stroke and battery of the drums, whether it be to march
forward, to stay, or to recoile, or to turn their faces and weapons toward
any place. To this end all Colonels must ordain, that all the drums have one
kind and manner of battery, and that they do use al one form of sounding to the
field, of sounding ye alarm, and to use one proper sound, to plant themselves
in battle, to advance themselves, to recoyle, to turn in battle themselves
from one side to another, to make retraite, and in sum to signify all other
points, that the voice of one person alone cannot make so easily to be
understood, as does the sound of many drums, the which make themselves to be
hard in the greatest tumults and throngs. The soldiers also ought to be so
attentive, to hearken and give ear to that which is spoken and commanded, that
they need never to be deceived: the drums likewise ought to be ready to batter
their caisses according to ye sound of the colonels trumpets, by the which
they must altogether direct and govern their batteries. The Colonels trumpet
ought to be expert in all these sounds, and that he be able to utter them so
plainly, that the drums take not one thing for an other, but that he know how
to expres the same according to his Colonels commandment, near unto whose
person he ought to be ever, and not to abandon him: and to yield a reason what
mooues me to appoint trumpets for footmen, it is in respect yt they may be more
clearly understood then drums can be if any great tumult should arise, and that
the drums should alter and change their sound: for they are to be directed by
trumpets, the sound whereof is hier the^ the battery of drums, the which y^
Zwizers who first invented drums have very well ^ried: therefore let collo^ls
provide yt they have tru^pets before their battaillo^s that ye Chieftains may
signify and admonish the^ what they have to do. All these things together with
each several sound, must be taught and showed from point to point to each
particular band apart, before they be ranged together in battle, to ye intent
they may have the full art to maintain their order and ranks, without that any
place how difficile soever, be able to disband or disseuer them. And also that
the sound of the trumpet be so familiar unto them, that they cannot err,
neither take one thing for another, but that the Colonels bands be each one
privately and fully instructed in all that which the battaillons ought to do,
being assembled with the army. And for that arms are brought to several
kinds of battles, either in respect of the enemies in sight, or for fear of
some sudden assault, each band ought to be exercised in such sort and so
instructed, that they may with great assurance march through ye enemies
country and fight if need require, the officers instructing and showing the
soldiers, that which they have to do, if they were assaulted on one side or
other at unawares.

And that they be taught the order to resist the enemy in a day of battle, or
when the enemy does approach in sight, they ought to learn how a battle must
begin, and how one battaillon does abord another battaillon of the enemies: and
to show them the place where they ought to retire if they be repulsed: and who
must enter into and supply their places: and to what signs, to what sounds, to
what voices they ought to obey: and that which they must do when they hear
these voices and sounds, and see those tokens and signs: and to accustom them
with the sundry sorts of battles and fained assaults, in such sort, that
afterward they may not only dare to abide, but also desire the fight in good
earnest: the which assurance shall so much the rather increase, by how much they
see themselves well instructed, ordered, and ranged, rather then by their proper
hardines, chiefly if these battailons be ranged in such sort that they may
easily succor one another, which is of no small importance to encourage and
assure the soldiers: For admit that I should be of the first combatants, and
that I know into what part I ought to retire my self, being ouermatched, and
likewise who he is that must come in my place, I shall always fight with a
better heart, beholding my succors near at hand, rather then if I neither
knew them nor saw the^. Likewise if I be in the second place (although the
first be repulsed, and that I behold them to recoile) yet the same shall not
astonish nor appale me, for that I alredie know what this recoile does
signify: a thing which beforehand I shall desire to come to pass, to the
intent that I may be he that shall gain the victory, and that the first do
not carry away the honor of the field alone to themselves.

These exercises therefore be most necessary both for young and old
soldiers, for it appears, that although the Romans knew perfitely what were
to be accomplished in a particular band, and so consequently in a whole army,
and that they did learn all these things in their youth in C^mpo Martio, yet
nevertheless they were afterward continually exercised, as well in the time of
peace, as when their enemies did front them. Joseph in his history says, that
the continual exercise of the Roman army, did make the common multitude of
those that followed the camp, serve in a day of battle as well as the
soldiers: for both the one and the other knew how to keep their ranks, and in
keeping them how to fight in them. But an army of new soldiers, whether they
be levied to serve presently, or that an order be taken to have them in
readiness to be employed in time to come, they will arise to prove unprofitable
without these practices and exercises. Therefore order being so necessary, all
Captains, Colonels, and Sergeant Majors, must with double industry and
travel instruct or cause to be instructed, those which be ignorant, and to
continue and maintain the same in those which are perfect, imitating the steps
of those excellent Captains which have traveled to maintain this discipline.

The soldiers therefore in private bands being instructed to keep their
ranks by 3. and 3. five and 5. or 8. and 8. without having respect to the
number, even or odd, for that it is a thing of no importance, but an
observation brought up without foundation, and specially Vegetius can yield no
reason therefore, but only use. They must then in marching softly or in have,
learn to multiply, as two ranks of five to make 10. and two of 10. to make
20. and by and by at one instant to bring them from the same ranks and to
place them in their first and simple order of array.

And to the end they may assure and accustom themselves the better, it is
necessary they make Lymassons when they are in simple and single array, and to
advertise them that the second person in rank, do keep always just behind
the first without loosing him, and the 3. right behind the second, and so of
the rest.

This done together with the directions of my second book, e^h band must apart
be set in order, and in the estate that is required and requisite to range
them, when a whole battle is planted together. To perform which the Pikes of
the flanks and the Hargabusiers shall come out of array, and shall place
themselves on the one side and the Corporals of the Pikes shall make head, one
of the Corporals and his people first, and another of the Corporals and his
people next, the Corporal of the Halberdeares shall follow, having the
Alfierus with his Ensign in the midst of the Halberds. Then the other
Corporals with their Pikes, shall make the reregard with their people.

It must be showed to every Corporal the place which he ought to keep at all
times, who likewise must declare the same plainly and particularly to every
private soldier of his squadre.

The Captain must be at the head of the array, and the Lieutenant at the back,
the Sergeant has no staying place, unless the Captain do appoint him one,
but must always trot here and there all along the ranks, to see good order
kept, and to command the performance of his Captains pleasure.

Let continual use accustom the soldiers, to know of themselves, how to
range themselves in battle: for the better learning whereof, they must be made
to march forward and backward, and to pass difficile places without troubling
and breaking their array, the which if they be not able to do, they are not to
be esteemed old soldiers, although they have served twenty years.

The difficulty likewise is great, to cause them place themselves upon a
sudden in their first array being broken or dispersed, by reason of uneasy
passages, or that the enemies have disseuered them, for in this it is requisite
to have had good and great exercise of a long continuance. Therefore that the
same may be accomplished, it is necessary to have two things observed and
maintained, the one that the Ensigns may be easily known by colors and
figures of number, and that the chief members and officers have certain
cognisances or marks upon their arms and apparel: and the other is, that one
self band be ranged always in one certain and known place of the
battaillon, without causing the same to alter rooms: and that the Corporals
know the places that they must enter into, without shifting at any time, but if
that one Corporal be accustomed to be in the foremost rank, that he remain
there always, and the soldiers in the places which has been ordained them
from the beginning. And if that any one band has been taught to be in the
right corner of the battle, that the same do not stir from thence, and so
consequently that which is used to the left shall go to the left. By this
means if the soldiers be accustomed to know their places (put case they
should be out of order) yet should they be able to place themselves again
easily. For the Ensigns do know alredie the place where they are accustomed to
be planted in the battle: and the Corporals knowing likewise their place, may
judge also by rank of eye upon what part it is that they should place
themselves: so that those of the front shall step forwards to the front, and
those of the back shall in like sort retire to their places.

Therefore the Corporals knowing in how many and what ranks they have to
arrange themselves, it will follow that the soldiers, not having any thing
else to do, but to imitate their Leaders and heads, will readily range
themselves every one in his own place, without having need of any sergeant
of a band, nor any other to place them, provided that use and practice has
made them perfect masters. These things are instructed and learned speedily, so
that diligence be used, and that me^ accustom themselves by little and little
and often, the which after they have once well learned, they shall hardly
forget. It is moreover necessary to teach them to turn al at one time, for it
is sometimes requisite to make of the rereward the front, or of one of the
flanks the rereward, according to the enemies face, and according to the place
of assault. Now to answer toward the place needful, you have no more to do,
but to turn your person toward the place appointed, and so shall that part
toward which the soldiers have turned their faces be the front. But he that
would have a whole battaillon turn all in one piece, and as if it were a
massy body, in this it were necessary to have great practice and discretion,
for to turn it upon the left hand, it is requisite to have the left corner
stay, and that those which be near adjoining unto the same, do advance
themselves so slowly, that those upon ye right corner, be not constrained to
run: otherwise al will be confounded, but this may better be made apparent by
experience then words.

The forlorn hope, and the light armed and armed pikes, are to be ranged in ye
front, flanks and rereward, according to the proportion of the battle, or as
the service requires, for these are to execute particular functions, in
co^uoyes, forrages, invasions and such like, when it is not requisite to send
great numbers of people. The forlorn hope, the pikemen and hargabusiers, are
to begin ye battle, to fight amongst the horsemen without keeping any order:
and therefore being lightly armed, their office is to fight without standing
still or firm, and in running and traversing here and there, whether they
pursue the enemies, or be followed of them, in which the pikemen will do good
service in backing and sustaining the hargabusiers, and may be able to make
front to these that charge upon them, whether they be on horseback or foot, or
to follow those that be in flight, and to make entrance and to thrust in
amongst the enemies, when they begin to stagger or sway. Therefore al soldiers,
whether they be in maine battle, in flank, forlorn hope, in the impale or
rereward, have need to be well exercised, that being disbanded, they may
immediately find again their places and rang themselves in the same array they
kept before, wherein it is necessary that all officers become more vigilant in
execution then heretofore, and the soldiers more obedient and expert in
performing, then at this day they be. Our age brings forth Captains more
curious of gain then of conseruing good order, and troops of officers rather
to supply number then sufficient to instruct: The Ensigns themselves are more
in use for a gallant show, then for any Military direction, whereas the
ancient Romans did use them for a guide: whereby they knew how to put
themselves in order, for every one after the Ensign did stay, knew
incontinently ye place where they were to plant themselves, they knew yt if the
same did remove or stand still, yt they likewise ought to march or stay.
Therefore it is necessary that a camp have diverse bands, and every band his
Ensign, wherein figures of number are to be portraited, to show what room and
place the same is of in every regiment or army, and so consequently where the
same is accustomed to be ranged. And also necessary Leaders and officers, that
the camp may have diverse souls, and so likewise diverse lives: all soldiers
then ought to govern themselves according to their Ensigns and according to
the sounds the which being ordained and set down according as they ought, do
command and govern a whole regiment and army. The which, so that it march in
such sort as answers to the battery of the drums: they shall easily keep
their order and array. And to this end were the Flutes and fiffes found out, and
sounds of perfect accord: for even as men that dance by the measures of Music
do not err, so likewise a whole battaillon, which in march obeys the sound of
the drum cannot break array, and therefore the Romans, when they would change
their pace, when they would inflame, appcase, or assure the soldiers they did
change sounds, and as the sounds did vary, so likewise used they variety of
names to them, for they had the Dorike, and the Phrigien sound: the one did
inflame ye hearts of ye soldiers, the other did make meek and appease them.
They had likewise other kinds of sounds as the Aeolien, Iasien, Lydien and
others, the which did al serve to incite or cool the courage of men, which
diversity of batteries, the Spaniards do presently very well imitate, a thing
to be observed of all good soldiers. An army that consists of diverse
battaillons and two or three fronts, when they are constrained to break and are
repulsed, must retire one within another into the ranks of the next squadrons,
which of purpose are planted more thin, and so the first retyring enters into
the 2. and ye second into the 3. Note that in the first front of a square upon
ye fall of any wounded or slain soldier, he ye is next behind him in rank, and
is his follower must enter and step into his room, and fill up the void place,
that the front of the battle may still be maintained, and so observing the
retire of the battaillons, and the renewing of their ranks, we may accomplish
both the Romain and Greek discipline. Those battaillons which are most
necessary to be had in use, ought to consist of pikes marching before the
Ensign, behind it and on ye flanks, carrying light Uenecian rundels and
targets on their backs: and in the midst about the Ensign the halberdeares
must stand, provided always that the notable personages and good soldiers for
service be dispersed as well in the flanks and behind as before, and not to put
them all to one brunt in the front, as though they were immortal and not able
to be overcome. By this order a battle shall be able to sustain a charge of
horsemen or footmen to repulse them, and after enter into the enemies throng:
for experience declares that the pikes are made void of service when the
ranks be closed pell mell together, for then the soldiers are almost one upon
the body and back of another. Wherefore if the pikemen should have no other
weapons but their pikes and swords, they should remain naked, which does move
me to commend the rondell to receive the blows: and to fight withal in any
press or throng whatsoever. The halberdeares may very well fight in a press
likewise with their halberds, rather then the pikemen with their pikes: The
which halberdeares are expressly appointed for execution: and so consequenly to
follow the said rondels at the heels, to free them from the charge of those
that be armed, through the great and heavy blows which they shall give with
their halberds. But touching the rondels, I would have them always to thrust
with the point of their swords, although it were but at the face, the legs
and feet, if the enemy be not disarmed in other parts.

The ground that every soldier does occupy at large in marching in simple and
single array, is three pace, and being in battle two, and when they fight one.
The distance of one rank from another, in simple and single ordinance and
array, is four, and being ranged in battle two, and in fight one.

The first sound of the Colonels trumpet is to enter into the rank and march,
the second to alter the single array into form of battle, and the third is to
advance and plant the battle. The Colonel being in such a place as from
thence he may see his whole Regiment, having the Caualliers of his squadre of
S. George about him, being such expert soldiers as I have set down in my
second book of directions, together with the Sergeant Mayor and such as can
execute any commission of importance, his drum and trumpet mayor about him to
sound and cause his pleasure to be suddenly and speedily understood. The
Colonel must command the sound to be made of his trumpet, which is appointed
for the ordinary march, and soon after to sound that which is to trot, and
then at the self time that which commands and appoints the fight and combat.

When a battle does consist of diverse battaillons, he must not forget to
exercise ye first to retire within ye battaillons of the second, and the second
to retire within the battaillons of the third. And to accomplish the same
without breaking or disordering the squadrons. The pikes in the flanks must
retire as the battaillons retire, the first into the second, the 3. within the
4. the fourth within the 5. the fifth into the 6. of the ranks, and so
consequently to the end. The forlorn hope and horsemen shall likewise do their
duty. These things done, the retrait must sound, and every Ensign must
recoile his people apart, to put them again in a new and single ordinance of
array for the march.

The enemy advancing to fight in triangular battle with the point forward,
frame the battle of sheares to receive, enuiron and fight with the said
pointed battaillon. If the enemy march with a front stretched out in length,
make a triangle or pointed battle to pearce the same. The baggage of an army
ought either to be in a place strong by nature, or well defended by art and
industry, together with the followers of the camp, pages and muchachos, who
must be chosen able to fight in a day of service, for the defense of themselves
and their masters baggage.

The spaces, interualles, galeries and passages, which are amongst the ranks,
amongst the bands, and amongst the battaillons, do serve not only to receive
one another, either in retire, or when the first rank does retire through the
midst of the second, and the 2. 3. 4. and 5. etc. following him like a
Laborinthus mase, going forward to the last ranks and turning back again, or
that his next follower steps a side and lets him pass and enter into rank
again, but also those spaces betwixt the battaillons serve the Caualliers and
such like that come and go, which carry and bring directions of ye
Chieftaines, Colonels or Generals.

The forlorn hope and extraordinary pikes must invade the enemy with
continual and great cries, the battaillons or maine battle likewise at the
first must give a cheerful shout, when encounter is given in the beginning
and joining of the battles, but afterward maintain a solemn silence, yt they
may ye better understand what commandments and directions proceeds from their
chieftain, either for ye altering of order or otherwise, which cannot be heard
or understood, if they continue a barbarous cry. Squadrons and battaillons
must sometimes assault in great have, chiefly if the enemies artillery do
endomage them very much, and sometimes must abide the charge without
remoouing, when the place is uneasy, and that they shall be in danger to
dismember, specially if they be such as be not accustomed to the march and
manner of battles. Therefore in conclusion, these 4 things ought to be observed
of all armies: first that all soldiors and private bands be exercised a part in
all things belonging to the wars: secondly, that they know how to range
themselves in battle, how to vary, exercise, and march in the same, softly,
apace, and in full course, keeping their araic. Thirdly to learn that which
appertains to the exercise which they must accomplish in a day of battle, and
how to draw forward and retire the artillarie, to give way and cause the
Hargabuziers to issue out of the flanks, having shot six or 7 Hargabusades a
piece in running here and there, and without keeping order, so that they know
how to join and agree with the pikemen and horsemen, to whom the care over
their safety belongs. They shall retire by the flanks and by the interuals and
passages, each one into his place: that is to say, the hargabuziers of the
flanks into the flanks, the forlorn hope to the reregard, there to range
themselves according to the Colonels appointment, and as the day of service
requires, for if they should remain and continue before the squadre or battle,
they shall hinder the maine battaillons in their fight, and bring confusion.
The light armed pikes and horsemen must likewise retire to their places upon
the joining of the battles. The fourth exercise is, as partly I have touched
before, that every one apply himself to understand the commandment of the
Cheeftains, the signification of the sounds and trumpets, and the battery of
the drums: by which be signified all that which is generally to be understood:
that is to say, when it shall be time to plant themselves in battle, when they
ought to march, when to stay or go forward, when to turn visage to one part or
other, to cross the ground, sarrie close, and fight. In like sort the sound of
the said trumpets shall signify, when it is time for the artillary to
discharge, when to retire, when the Musket and Hargabusiers, the forlorn hope,
and others, are to set forward, and when they are to retire, and also when the
first battles ought to retire to the second fronts and battaillons, and when
both together they are to arange themselves with those of the third, and
finally at what time they must all retire from the battle, the which things
must in a plain and known vulgar sort, be al set down by the colonel and
Chieftaine, and suddenlye be signified by his trumpet, the noise whereof shall
give sufficient intelligence to the other trumpets, which are nearest him, that
it may so go from hand to hand, to the furthest trumpet of the army. It should
be good to use a Cornet or a hunts man's horn, for the retraite, etc. and a
trumpet to begin the battle, or contrariwise: for it is a most difficile
thing, that the trumpetor should signify so many diverse things with one
instrument, considering that the sound of a retraite, does approach very near
unto the sounding to the standard, in such sort that then when as all men be
troubled, and as it were besides themselves, they shall very hardly be able to
discern whether of these two things the trumpet sounds.

What the Sergeant Mayor is to observe touching the length of Pikes.
A Pike ought never to want in length any thing of fifteen foot, for this
respect, when the footmen are straightened and settled in order of battle, they
may for the advantage and profit of the said army, in respect that the
assaults of the enemy is to give to the said battle, couching and bending
their pikes against them, work so that the greatest number of ranks that is
possible for the defense of the battle, may endamage and offend the said
enemies, and therefore their pikes being shorter then fifteen foot, it
proves that no more of the ranks can fight, but the first, second and third,
standing all in order in their places, and yet can the third rank fight but
discommodiously, and not advance forward his pike to succor and defend the
first rank, for so much as the distance of the ground, from one rank to
another, in any battle, how straight and close soever it be, would be
nevertheless so much, that men may manage and handle their weapons and stir
themselves, without being a hinderance or trouble one to another. Therefore it
is to be considered, that the distance of the ground, which is betwixt one
rank and an other, does take away a good portion of length, in such sort that
by reason we may see, that a pike ought to be in length fifteen foot, and no
less, for being so long, footmen standing in order of battle in their
places, the third and fourth rank may commodiouslye abasing themselves, come
in aright to succor with their pikes, the first and foremost ranks, and this
is as much as I can imagine to be necessary, touching the length of pikes, by
reason of the succor, the third and fourth rank may give to them before.

How pikes are to be raised up and abased, in closing and opening of a battle.
I Will not omit to put those in memory, that know not of the particular of
those things that is required in making a battle of footmen. Therefore those
which would make a battle of footmen, must be advertised, that in shutting up
of the said battle, the ranks of the pikes, as well armed as unarmed, must not
raise them up confusedly, but with order, that is, when the Sergeant, Captain,
or Sergeant Mayor shall say, raise or right up your pikes, then it is requisite
that the first and foremost rank must begin to raise up it self, and that the
second do not move to raise up it self, until the first be all raised up,
and so the third, and fourth. And finally the same order is to be observed in
all other ranks, not to raise up their pikes until such time that the ranks
that are before them have raised them up: and so from one to another, all the
ranks of the footmen must observe this order, as well in battle as in array.
The like order is to be observed in battle and array, in laying down their
pikes upon their shoulders, for so much as rank by rank, in order and without
confusion, they ought to let fall their pikes, letting the first fall after the
second, the third and fourth, following from one to another, in the self same
manner as has been declared in the raising up of their pikes, for by observing
this order they cannot commit, but rather make a gallant show, and prevent
many confusions.

How the Sergeant Mayor, Captain, or simple Sergeant are to govern
themselves, when their battle shall chance to be assaulted, on foot and on
horseback.
IN sundry and diverse manners, and moreover in diverse places and grounds
battles are fought, according to the occasions, and the accidents that in
Military occurrences do chance at unawares, in time of warrefare, abroad in
Campania, in Towns and in Fortresses: for which causes it is necessary, that
the wit of those that have ye managing thereof, be prompt and ready, as well in
this, as moreover in finding out a good party for himself, all for the honor
and safety of the prince whom he serves, ioining to his courageous heart, wit,
experience, policy, and each advantage that is possible to be used against his
enemy, therefore in two sorts do arise the means to fight: one is when he does
seek to fight with his enemy, and the other when he is sought of the enemy,
in such sort that it is needful he defend himself, and therefore I say, when
the first occasion doothrise, and that the seeks the enemy, speaking here of
striking battle in Campania: it is requisite first he consider how the enemies
army is furnished with horsemen and footmen, and if he look to fight with
horsemen that are to come to break his battle, in this case he is to be
advertised, that he suffer himself not to be found (if it be possible) in
Campania Rasa, in ye open fields, or in plains, but rather must accomodate his
battle in some place of a hill or a mountain, or upon some seat of ground
which has upon one side either river or ditch, or some other impediment,
against the enemies horsemen, which on some side may be a difference, as in
some places be, trees, vines, and diverse other such like, as nature brings
forth in diverse places, which are of great impediment unto the enemies
horsemen, and unto foot battles are very profitable, and although the number
of the soldiers are very small, yet oftentimes by much advantage remain
victorious: but advertisement is to be had, that in such cases it is requisite,
that there be accomodated many hargabusiers in the battle, and many pikes, for
they be good against the enemies horsemen: having to fight with footmen, the
open fields is the best, with a square battle, and many pikes, placing
hargabuziers according to his discretion. Since I have spoken of the first
manner of fight, I will speak of the second, which is, when the enemy does
assault at unawares, it is necessary then courageously not to loose any point
of courage, to place his people in square battle, for that it is the most
ready and most sure way, that is, making himself good flanks with the
Hargabuziers of the band, afterward expecting the assault, cause his battle
to shut and close it self well, causing them to couche and abase, 4 or 5 or
sometimes 6 ranks of pikes in that case, round about all the sides of the
battle, and the others to stand upright until time of need: and the
Hargabuziers are to hold their pikes upon their thighs, with their matches in
their cocks, a morce in their pan, and all vigilant in a readiness. And the
captain before the battle, valiantly giving courage to his soldiers, to
perform the duty of a leader: aduertising, that when the assault is given by
horsemen, that the pikemen couching and abasing themselves, do hold the great
end of their pikes fastened hard in strong earth, to the end the pike may have
greater force.

What distance is used in Battle betwixt man and man, rank and rank.
IN this present chapter, you shall perceive the order and manner that is to be
observed in the distance and space of ground betwixt rank and rank of
soldiers in battle, and how much space the soldiers do occupy, from
shoulder to shoulder, as well armed with Corslet as unarmed. Note that it is to
be understood of a pikeman, I will first advertise all Sergeant Majors, and all
good Captains and Sergeants, and others, that delight in profession of
battles, that there be two reasons, wherefore the understanding of these
distances, be of importance: the one is to know how much ground is necessary to
manage a battle, and how much space the circumference of the battle will take
round about it, according to the quantity of the soldiers, that are to be in
the said battle. And the other is, that it is needful to know, how much space
is limited to a souldior from shoulder to shoulder, and from one rank to
another. And this proportion has bin found out and limited, of great practiced
and cunning men, to the intent that the said distance from one rank to
another, may in a certain space of time be accomodated, that the soldiers
may comodiously manage their pikes, may fight, and in such sort that one rank
of soldiers may succor an other that stand before them, and deal in such
sort that all the battle may work good effect, forasmuch as when they do
accommodate themselves ouerstraite and narrow, they can neither fight nor yet
hardlye move themselves. And the same inconvenience would chance, if soldiers
were placed in battle one over far from another, or one rank too much
distant from an other. Therefore it is a most convenient thing, to use in this
case those limited rules, that the ancient and modern soldiers have set
down, and such as our Captains have observed. The space therefore of ground,
that one Soldier with his necessaries does hold from shoulder to shoulder
shall be of three foot, and nothing less, in such sort, that when any battle
is to be made, let us put this example, that if there be a rank of 25
soldiers in a battle, it is needful to imagine, that the length of the said
25. footmen shall contain the space of 75. foot, which is fifteen pace.

Speaking of the Venetian pace, which is five foot for the pace, whereof I
mean always to speak. The space moreover of the ground that is to be
observed for the overthwart of a battle, that is, from one rank to another,
that they may be able to manage themselves with their pikes as well in marching
as in fighting in maine battle, no less then seven foot is observed from
one rank to another. Moreover to the intent he may more commodiously march
with his pike on his shoulder, the ground would be no less then of ten foot,
which is two pace, but after when they are to close and join more strait, as
I have said before, of 7. foot: in such sort, that a man in rank with his
space before him, will amount to held unto the other rank, ten foot, which is
two pace, accounting three foot of ground which he holds with his person, and
the other 7 foot, the space unto the other rank, make 10 foot. Let us then
presuppose this figure or example: That he is to make a battle that is a
perfect square of twenty every way, we must count how much ground the said
battle will take in circuit, and see if the same be capable of the number of
Soldiers, which are appointed to be put and set in battle.

Our rule therefore shall hold upon two fides, that is, upon the front and
the back, and tail of the battle, where the Soldiers stand shoulder to
shoulder, in 60. foot, which is 12. pace, for both sides and both the foresaid
sides be 24. pace. The other two sides which be the flanks of the said
battle, where the space is left betwixt one rank and an other of seven
foot, and therefore the person of the soldier which is seen one with an
other, in such sort that the battle which is to be made of 20 Soldiers for
every side, a perfect square of people, but not a perfect square of ground:
forasmuch as two sides will be 12. pace on a side, which in both comes to 24.
pace: the other two will be for every side 40. pace, which is 80 pace, and so
having joined unto the same 24. pace, it will be round about the said battle
of 20 Soldiers on a side 104. pace, which is 520. foot of circumference of
ground, and so always this order is to be observed, not that you are to take a
cord or a rod, or pace, to measure the distance of the said battle, but by
rack of eye by your wit and discretion consider this measure, for whether it
be more or less, it little imports. It does suffice that you observe a
certain discretion, that may come to the mark I have written, if it do not
light just at leastwise near the bounds and measure I have set down. Now
since we have put this figure and example of a perfect square battle of people,
but not of ground for 20. soldiers, we will speak of an other form or figure,
somewhat differing or disagreeing from such like battles, and yet for all that
of the same number of twenty Soldiers, for every side in perfect square, the
which is square of people and of ground, as some do use to make, as may
appear in a battle of 400. Soldiers, square in ground and people: the which
being in this form, has for space of ground about in circumference 800.
foot, which is 160. pace. This is sufficient to remember you of the manner
that is observed in the distance and measure in the circumference of the
battle.

And now returning to my discourse of one rank from another, when the
Soldiers are joined and closed in battle with their pikes, and when they
stand in term to fight, to me it seems, that then in that accident, the
battle is to close and join as straight together as is possible, in such sort
as they may manage and bestir themselves with their weapons, without being an
impediment one to another, to the intent that the ranks being strait in
fighting, or that the soldiers be invaded by their enemies, or that they
recoile by force of an onset, they need not to fall to the ground, but rather
that they may by those ranks that be behind their backs receive help, that
vndersetting them with their breasts, they may hold them straight up upon their
feet. And this is not only my opinion, but of diverse other mos^ excellent
wits.

The other rule of the distance of seven foot from rank to ^anke, which we
have spoken of, is meant of marching and the managing and exercising of a
battle, to the intent the soldiors may receive exercise and discipline in the
said battle, in the which always the foresaid order of measure and distance
is to be observed, to the intent that the Sergeant and the other heads which do
govern them, may the more comodiously manage and enter in and out through the
space of the said ranks.

How battles of every number of footmen are compounded and placed together in
order.
MAny and sundry be the ways which be observed in compounding together the
battles of footme^, but I verily think that the most expedient and short way
amongst practiced soldiors is in these two sorts: that is the one to join
together the battle with divided maniples, and the other to double the ranks of
the array. The sergeant Mayor, Captain, or other Sergeant, having first
determined in his mind of how many men in a rank he will make his battle,
knowing first the number of the pikes that are to be had: so making of one
company, as he may do of many one only battle: and proceeding to make the
battle in which of the ^ ways he list, either by parting it into maniples, or
by doubling the ranks. It is therefore first requisite, to set the footmen in
array that are to be found there present, numbering all the pikes, and
accomodating the array in such sort that the battle may afterward be made
withal speed, and that it may serve the turn, for either of those two ways,
as I have said. It is necessary therefore to know the place where the battle
is to be set, and to take care that there be so much space as may be capable
thereof, knowing the rules of distance, which is used in warfare that is, how
much ground the Soldiers hold from shoulder to shoulder, and how much
distance is left betwixt rank and rank of pikes. But touching the measure I
need to speak no more, for that the officer may measure the ground by pases:
yet I would commend a Soldier that is of such discretion, that of himself
can accomodate those things by rack of eye, without such precise trouble in
measuring the ground. And if a battle require 300. paces in circumference,
he by rack of his eye may see whether the place be capable or no, noting
that the rules to put the distance of ranckes, is made for this other respect,
which is of much more importance, that the ranks of the battle may fight
without any impediment of the Soldiers, foreseeing that every third rank may
succor the first with their pikes: and speaking of battles you must ever
think that I speak of pikes, for battles are never made of hargabusiers: it
is very true that having made the battles of pikes, you may accommodate them
afterward as you list about the battles, by the flanks in ye corners and
horns, or betwixt one pike and another of the foremost ranks of the battle,
or in such other sundry ways as may best aid and help the battle: let i^
suffice that of Hargabusiers there is never any certain rule set down, but
ever is to be understood of the order of pikes in battle: of the which two
ways, where I speak how a battle must be made well and speedily, I will
endeavor my self to let you understand the way the best I can. Desiring
therefore to work by the first way I have spoken of: that is, to make any
battle by maniples, if it be to be made of any one company alone, let it be of
what number soever of footmen, it is first requisite to set the array with
intent to divide it into three parts, that is to say, into 3. maniples, which
may be just of as many ranks one as another, in the which maniples, you ought
by numbering the ranks of the pikes, cause the Ensigns of the said array to
keep one rank like unto the pikes, and this is observed when the three
maniples be uneven: that is to say, that two of them should chance to be of 20.
ranks, and the 3. of 19. or 18. ranks, and then the Ensigns shall be numbered
for one rank: but always the other two maniples are to be of just number, as
for example. There is a company of 300. pikes, the which if you desire to put
in array before you make your battle, consider how many ranks they will be 5.
in a rank, and you shall find them to be 60. ranks: divide the array into 3.
parts, cutting them off at every 20. ranks, and after draw up to the first
rank the second part, that is, the maniple of the midst, and join in order
the first rank to the head of the first maniple, the which being on the right
hand of the maniple with the Ensigns, you shall draw then the 3. maniple to the
left side, joining the first ranks to the head of the other two maniples: so
that the array having been of five for a rank, the battle shall be one way 15.
and the other way of 20. pikes. Now desiring to have the battle to be more
large in the front, then in the flanks, the which I commend, of what number
soever the pikes are of, he shall cause ye Sergeant to go to y^ flank where he
would make the front, and standing still a little distance forth of the battle,
he shall cry aloud, Turn your faces this way, the which being heard of the
soldiers, suddenly they shall turn them selves toward that side which he
shall give them notice of. Observe then this order at all times: when you have
made a battle, let the pikes be of what number soever, let it suffice yt I
advertise you, yt at al times when you list to make the front where the flank
is, so that the place where you would make it be capable and commodious, that
you may frame and make the battle according to your determination, you must
cause them to turn their faces toward that side where you would have the
front of the battle to be. I judge it good likewise to advertise you, that
desiring to make any battle with maniples, for that it oftentimes falls out,
that some ranks in the array do remain imperfect, which are called broken
ranks: these are taken out and are accommodated about at the sides of the
Ensigns, so divided nevertheless that they may remain in good order. The
which Ensigns, always when you make any battle, you must have respect that
they may have a large room and space, that they may accommodate themselves
with the soldiers, which make the broken number, as for example in array of
five and five in a rank, in the last ranks there remains 3. or 4. soldiers,
which do not furnish out the full rank. And the like is to be observed when
you are to part your array into 3. maniples, and that they have some ranks more
then the entire and full array. As would fall out having to make an array of 500.
pikes, and put the case that you would place them 7. and 7. in a rank, they
would fall out to be 71. ranks, and 3. pikes more: and dividing into three
parts these 71. pikes and 3. pikes, they amount to 23. ranks, doubling the 3.
maniples, as I have said, so that 3. times 23. makes 69. ranks, and there is
over and besides two ranks of the array and 3. pikes, which is in all the
broken number 17. pikes, which in making of ye battle, must be set aside by
themselves, until the 3. maniples be joined in battle, the which on one side
will be 23. pikes, and on the other 21. The 17. pikes then that are taken out,
shall be accommodated, divided here and there where the Ensigns stand. And when
it falls out that there does arise to be pikes or broken ranks, that are so
many as were able to make a whole rank in the battle, then it is to be made,
joining it either before or behind the Ensigns, or at the flanks of the
battle, or where it shall fall out to be best, for it imports not much: and so
you work by this rule of maniples, in one company alone as well as with many.
And having to make a battle of sundry companies, the true rule is to work by
these maniples, and you must proceed in this sort. First take order with all
the heads of the companies, that they frame all their order of array in one
manner and sort, and if any of the said heads have any greater number of pikes
then his commission does allow, let him take them forth and give them in
supply to those Captains that are found to have less then he has appointed
for their array. Let us then use this example in this sort, that is, that if
there be found in company or in any other place, under the government of ten
Captains, to the number of 3. thousand soldiers in array, that is to say, only
pikes, after the rate of three hundred under every Captain, being just 3000.
of which the Sergeant Mayor having to make a battaillon must do in this sort.
He must give order to all the Sergeants of the bands, that they make all their
araies after one sort, and after one number, and the one head or front being
distant from the other a little, he shall cause their arayes to march, and let
us put the case that the Sergeant Mayor have given them order, that they place
themselves six and six, there will be in every company 50. ranks, and so
it is needful that every one have put their array 6. and 6. in 50. ranks, and
desiring to join and close these battles, he shall cause these companies to
march one after an other, and shall close them together, joining the first
ranks to the head of the array one of another, knitting the maniples to their
portion: and this battle will fall out to be on one side 50. pikes, which will
be flanks, and the other which will be the front, will be of 60. pikes, for so
much as being 10. maniples, 6. in a rank, it will fall out to be just, as I have
said before: to make it a right square, it will be of 54. on every side
remaining out of ye battle 84, which at pleasure may be put in rank, and so
taking 54. out of 84, there remains 30. pikes, which being not able to make a
rank, are to be placed about the Ensigns, as I have said before.

There be othersome, that hold this other manner in making of battles, to
double the ranks, that is, having set his araie, and marching with them, they
begin at the head of the array, where the Sergeant staying, does cause them to
march forward, and the first beginning to pass, does appoint the second that
it join it self with the first, and so the third with the fourth. And finally
the ray going forward, does cause the ranks to double two by two: so that if
first the rank were 9. and 9. they arise to be 18. in a rank. And desiring to
make them more large, he may put 3. ranks in one, which will be 27. in a
rank, and so he may double them to what number he will, and of as many ranks as
he will, but it is requisite before he make his array, to consider well how many
pikes he has, and afterward accommodating his array to his appointed number,
that by doubling it by two or three ranks, it may become as square as is
possible, neither is he to do it without this consideration, for otherwise
working by haphazard, it falls out to be evil favored, to be by half more
long then large, and sometimes double: But it is first necessary for him to
number the ranks of the array, and consider if doubling two ranks at a time,
it will fall out to be well, or better to double it three at a time. And this
must be well considered, for otherwise he shall make and unmake to his great
disgrace. Therefore now I conclude, that the first way is ever best and most
ready without toil or trouble in doubling and redoubling: So that helping
your memory with certain Tablei or Tariffas made of purpose to know the
numbers of the soldiers that are to enter into rank, and what number of
ranks will perform the just square, you can never err, but upon any sudden,
set in battle any number of soldiers whatsoever.

THE FOVRTH BOOK OF MILITARY DIRECTIONS, ENTREATING OF THE OFFICES
APpertaining to the General of Horsemen, the Scout master, and the office of
the Marshall of the Field.
And first of the office of the Lieutenat or General of the Horsemen.
THe Maine squares of all sorts of battles receive great safety and accomplish
worthy service by the companies of the courageous Cauallarie, chie^ie when
their bands be guided by those that be of perfect experience and of approved
practice in arms, whereas the contrary effect does follow, being directed by
light heads, and such as only make profession, but of clean and gallant
riding, or to run in comely order with a Lance upon the even gravel and sand.
And therefore this officer, that has under his charge all the horsemen of the
field, as the Hargalateares, Lighthorsemen, Lances, and men at Arms, or
barded horses serving to break into a battallion of Pikes, or to back other
horsemen being repulsed, must be a personage of singular courage, industry and
experience, that he may be able worthily to perform his Lieutenant and
Generalship.

And albeit I mean not in this place particularly to entreat of the several
charges of every Captains duty, yet thus much I thought good to note that a
Captain of a hundredth men at arms, may be compared with a Colonel of
footmen, and other Captains of lightorsemen, with the Captains of footmen,
subject to the Colonel: and as it is the part of the Collonell, to have a
special regard to the arming, lodging and training of his footmen, so is it
the duty of the Captain of men at Arms to foresee, that neither they be
disfurnished of their horse and armor, with other necessary, nor yet
untrained in all such Military exercises, as to their profession is agreeable.

This Lieutenant must discypher the election of the appointed captains,
whether they be meet for such a charge, or usurp the same by favor, and to
advertise the General of the army thereof, that he may remove the one and
place others of sufficient experience. He must likewise ouersee ye actions of
these captains, and give them great charge for the training of their bands,
and set down an order in what sort, in what place and time they shall practice
and exercise their companies: amongst whom if he find any default of furniture
or otherwise, let him make certificate thereof to the General or high
marshall, that the same may be redressed. For the better performance whereof,
immediately after he enters into his charge, let him keep a book and roll of
all the bands committed to his government, with the names of their Captains
and officers, and to examine and peruse whether they contain their full number
of men, and be sufficiently furnished with horse, armor, cassocks, pieces,
lances, with their Pennons of their Captains colors, guidons, trumpets, and
such like necessaries as appertains to their warlike profession, otherwise to
procure supply. Let him dispose his several sorts of weapons and horsemen into
several troops by themselves, ye barbed horses in one part, the lances in
another, the light horsemen in another: the hargabusiers likewise several from
the rest, and herein he does resemble the Sergeant mayor, for yt he is to be
directed from ye General or high marshal, eue^ as he, to dispose these bands
according to their order and resolution. The Lieutenant must appoint which
ba^ds of horse shall go to ye watch, to be vantcouriers, and to scour the
passages, and must accordingly provide that they which watch ye night may rest
the next day and night, and others that have rested supply their places, in
such sort, that fresh men may always be supplied in their places, and the
wearied to take their rest, for neither man nor horse, without their convenient
rest ca^ continue any long time. So soon as ye trumpet shall sound in the
morning, to make ready to horse, he shall forth with repair to the Generals
tent to know his pleasure, and then immediately to set forth his Generals
Standerd, and cause all the horsemen forth with to repair to yt place, and as
every captain shall come, he shall cause them to put their bands every one after
his standard or guidon, into a certain number of ranks, that the said
Lieutenant may redily at any sudden draw forth any number of any sort of
horsemen that he shall be required by the General or high marshall. In the
morning he must give notice and warning to such horsemen as he entendeth shall
watch ye night ensuing, to ye intent they may feed and spare their horses yt
day, and likewise rest themselves, that they may the better be able to do such
service, as they shall the night following be enjoined. When the high marshal
goes to view the ground to encampe upon, it is this Lieutenants duty to
select a convenient band to attend upon his person, and to appoint such a
company as may afterward take their rest, and feed their horses til such time
as he shall deliver them to the scout master at night, who then shall enjoin
them what to do all the night after, and shall also deliver them the watchword.
This Lieutenant, as a coadiutour to the lord Marshall and Sergeant mayor, ought
all the day whiles the battles march, diligently to note the orders of every
band, and if he see any disorder, forth with to send for the Captain, and
cause him immediately to see it redressed. At night when the army enters into
the camp, the Litutenant shall still cause the horsemen to keep the field,
until all the footmen be encamped, then may he enter with his bands of horse
orderly, causing first one band to enter and all the rest to keep the field,
and when they have their convenient place, then another band to enter, and so
orderly to place themselves, wherein the Lieutenant is to foresee yt the last
bands be not worst lodged, but such convenient place left, as they have no just
cause to complain: and this is to be observed in places of suspect, otherwise
they may lodge abroad amongst ye Uillages for their greater ease. Let him give
order that ye Couriers and scourers come not out of the field, till ye trumpet
sound to ye watch at night, nor the^ neither, until such time as they shall
perceive the scout and Sentinel, to be come from the camp, and to have taken
their places in the field: then may they return into the Camp. It is his part
likewise to assign a sufficient number of horse to attend on the forage
master, to guard and defend the forragiers, which horsemen must not come out of
the field until al ye forragers be returned to the camp with the forage
master. Then shall these horsemen rest and not watch, neither that night, nor go
forth for vauntcourrier all the next day. He must appoint a reasonable conuoy of
horsemen, for the saftie of such as bring victuals to the camp, to see that no
violence or injury be offered them, and so order the change of his horse in
these several services, that some be not over burdened, and others spared
overmuch, but the matter so indifferently used, that men have no cause to
murmr or repine.

In making of Roads with horsemen only, or in a day of battle, he must send
out the Hargolateares, light horsemen and such like to discover, or to begin
the service first, then to divide the Lances and men at arms into diverse
troops and squadrons, and with such distance following one another, as one may
rescue an other. The sides of these massy squadrons should have one rank of
Argolateares, a pretty distance off. In this sort if one squadron happen to be
broken, yet shall another make head upon the enemy, while they may retire and
troop again, which is the only safety as well of Horsemen as footmen: And
albeit in the day of service it is the part of the high marshall himself, to
give order in what sort, and with what troops the charges shall be given or
received: it is also the Lieutenants part as well to give his advise, as also
to be a leader in all these actions.

He ought therefore to take great regard to the ground where he means to give
the charge, for if he charge in troop, the falling of a few horse in the for
most ranks may disorder and foil the whole troop. Before the front of his
own footmen let him never give charge, for it has bin seen that horsemen
being repulsed, have been foreed in upon their own footmen, and disordered
them. Let the horse therefore charge upon the flank of the enemy, and
diligently attend if by any accident they can perceive any breaking or opening
in the side of his enemies battle, and then suddenly to charge that breach:
for as horsemen are inferiors to well ordered footmen, so upon any small
disorder, they carry with them victory. And for that in our age there has
arisen diverse and fodaine effects not looked for, wrought by the good and well
guiding of horsemen, I think it good somewhat more amply to delate upon this
point: specially, as I said before, in appointing out a place, apart from the
battle and ranks, wherein the Cauallarie may be ranged: to ye intent they may
with good scope freely and fitly turn and run with their squadrons and ranks
in charging the enemy, in taking charge likewise of them, and in all other
enterprises, considering that the troops of horsemen in retyring or turning
round, do often disorder and break their own infanterie, either through the
discommoditie of the place, or through the want of the good and wary guiding
of them.

Contrariwise at other times, by their advised and speedy ser^, a small number
of horsemen, well bent and better guided, have been seen to enter very
courageously into a great battaite of the enemies footmen, and either for that
they were slenderly flanked with Hargabuziers, or by the disadvantage of the
ground, or being disordered by means of some error, or through some other
sinister chance, or by means the said battle was guided by unequal or
uncertain pase, or through the naughty endeavor and diligence of raw and
unpracticed soldiers, or in going through a straight place or passage of water
or otherwise, horsemen have easily disordered and broken their battles, and
all the rest of a whole army. But yet are they not able to encounter with a
well ordered and square battle of pikes, if their courageous and well ranged
ranks keep their araie, and when the horsemen charge do clinge and sarrie
very near together in the fore rank, and set shoulder to shoulder with
their pikes well couched and crossed, bending them in both their hands
straight before them, and their followers at their backs, laying their pikes
over their foregoers shouldiers, and so stand at the push, besides the
shouldering of the foreranks together, having pitched their pikes under one of
their feet in the ground, they stoop and bow down so lo with their bodies,
that their followers may easily come to service behind their backs, where
some do use to place the light armed pikes, who amongst some nations for want
of breast plates of Iron, use tand lether, paper, platecoates, iackets, etc. For
a gorget, thick folded kerchefes about their neck, a scull of Iron for a head
piece, and a Uenetian or lether Sheeld and Target at their backs, to use with
their short Swords at the close of a battle, and in a throng. The squadron
of pikemen, having couched and crossed their pikes breast high, closely sarred
together, are as hard to be pearst with horsemen, as an angry Porcapine or
Hedgehog with the end of a bare finger. Wherefore to overthrow a maine square
battle planted in that order, it is good to use the aid of Hargolateares,
who must first scale the front and ranks of the battles, and then being
seconded by the lances and men at arms, break their araie and whole battle.
In the erecution whereof it is good to use the Rutters order, which somewhat
differs from the French man's fight, for he encountering the enemy cannot endure
any troop to be near his long stretched ranckes, because of breaking his
course; but the retire fights in this sort.

When the retire is approached near enough unto the enemy, the first rank
does advance upon them, and when he has discharged his Pistolet, he does run
still in forward (as does the French, who does still pursue his point) but
more short on the right hand or on the left, according unto the place where he
is, and so is also speedely followed by the second rank which does the same.
Then the third follows the second, to give the charge as soon as ever he
sees him departed that stood before him: all the ranks following one another
in such manner, even unto the last, the hindermost runs, (they fighting with
Pistolets only) for to come unto their foreriders, they standing all along one
at another back. And for so much as it is impossible, but that when they do
present themselves, some of them or else their horses be slain: Therefore so
soon as ever one of the foremost rank is seen to fall down, he that is in
the second rank, directly behind him that is departed, or else disabled, must
take his place, and the next behind him in the third rank, must furnish the
same void rank wherein he was in the second, and so the rest in like order,
so that they always make their foremost ranks of the most assured: for in all
things, namely in ^eates of arms) the beginning is of greatest moment: some to
break the front of armed pikes do use to cause the men at arms dismount, and
in their complet armor, to charge them with their lances.

Some others hold an opinion, that the manner of the Germans is best, who keep
always their maine troops standing, and cause only one rank from the front
to charge, and the same being repulsed, to retire to the tail and back of the
standing troop, and then an other to charge and retire to the tail and back,
as the former, whereby they maintain the whole troop in full strength, until
they see the footmen sway or break, and that their horsemen enter. Then
presently they back them with an other rank, and those again with an other,
until they see cause either to follow with the whole troop, or to stay: and
this is thought to be the surest and most orderly form of charging of all
others: notwithstanding the accustomed wheeling about of the rutters, which
they use with their whole troops, every one after an other, giving the enemy
a volee of their Pistolets.

For execution of justice on such as are offenders in any bands of horsemen:
albeit in some country it be used, that every Captain of an hundred men at
arms, may call unto him certain of the chief of his band, and hear and
determine all causes and offenses by any of his band committed, yet surely I
hold it more convenient, that all matters concerning life be hard by the Lord
high marshall, who may cause to sit with him the said Captain, whose souldior
is to be adjudged, and such other of the said band as to him shall seem meet,
and the soldier condemned to death, to be executed by the said band, even as
the footmen are: and by the same kind of weapons that the offenders used. In
conclusion it is therefore requisite, that the Cauallerie be still paid,
punished, (...) kept in good order: that they have sufficient horses, armor,
weapons, piece, and lance: that they be ready in all exploits, both in
Sentinels, Couriers, forrages, marching upon their guard in time of suspect, and
without suspect, in skirmish and in fight. But for that my only meaning was to
set down a discourse for footmen, I therefore say that the infantery be the
veins for wars, and the Cauallerie the flesh. Horsemen be likewise good to
make couriers or roades to discover, to charge with speed upon the enemies back
or flank: to make an imbuscade in a road or otherwise, (which are rather to
consist of ge^dings, the^ of stoned horses, for doubt of naying.) To make way
and force a passage through the midst of the enemies with money or munition
behind them, for the succor of a fortress besieged, for the passage of
waters, in breaking the course of the water, for the more easy wading through
of the footmen, to pursue the enemy that is put to flight, to carry and convey
secretly behind them footmen, both with pieces and pikes, who ought to carry
their pikes low, and their matches close, until in this sort undiscovered,
they become unto the place appointed: For these and such like exploits horsemen
be necessary in a Camp, being a great commodity and reputation to a Prince,
and sharp spurs to a well ordered army.

The office of the Scoute master, or Master of the watch.
THis Officer must take a solemn oath to be true and just in his office, and
nightly to attend upon the General, to receive the watch word, the which at the
setting of the watch he shall (...) deliver unto the Captains, conferring first
with the Sergeant Mayor General, and shall diverse times prove the same watch,
as well to see if they sleep not, as if he find them in such fault to accuse
the^ to the higher officers, who ought to appoint their punishment according to
the tenor of the articles of martial laws.

He ought diligently to view and note round about the Camp, all the places of
suspect, where the enemies in the night time might approach, that he may
accordingly afterward dispose of his Scoutes, and therefore he should attend
upon the high marshall, at such time as he goes to make choice of a meet plat
to incampe on, and then to speak his fancy touching the conuenience or
inconvenience of the seat, in respect of due place for the scouts. So soon as
the Trumpet sounds to the watch at night, he must immediately repair to the
Lieutenant of the horsemen, requesting him to assign a compotent number of
horsemen to attend upon the scoute that night, and then m^st he give them
charge upon pain of death, that none of them abandon their places, until the
discouerers be come into the field, and have taken their places.

For the setting of the watch and order how to plant the same, peruse my two
first books of directions, specially in the Corporals, Sergeants, Lieutenants,
and Caualliers of S. Georges squadrons orders: nevertheless if it shall be
thought good of those that govern, this manner ensuing may now and then be used.

First he shall set the ring watch round about the impalement of the Camp,
viz. a Halberd or Bill, a Bow, Hargabushe or Musket, and a Pike, and every
one a pike length from an other: then without them, certain little troops,
five or six in a troop, of footmen of different weapons, vi. shot, pikemen,
and short weapons, and these troops always to send forth a couple, whereof a
Hargubuzier always to be one, and these to pry and harken what they can
discern. Again without this foot scout, other small troops of horsemen,
five or six in a company, and these likewise to disperse themselves abroad,
to discover what they can. And if they happen to see or hear any thing,
presently to report the same to the foot scoute, and one or two of the foot
scoutes to repair to the Scoutmaster, who must (if it be matter of importance)
open the same presently to the high Marshall. Besides all this in time of
suspect it were requisite that a stand watch be maintained within and about the
ordinance, but because that appertains not to the scoutmaster, I let it
pass. It is requisite in the long cold winter nights to change and relieve the
watch at every hours end, in autumn and the spring, at ye end of an hour
and a half: and in the hoate season of summer at two hours end, but these
things must be ordered more or less as the scoute master and other principal
officers shall think meet, for the better preservation of the people, and the
accomplishment of the service, sending forth rounds every hour. In the
morning so soon as the trumpet sounds to the relief of the watch, he must
repair to the said Liuetenants tent, there to receive by his assignement, a
convenient number of horsemen to scour that day, and then shall he give order
unto some, to ride to the highest hills to view round about what they can epsy,
and others to the valleys and other obscure passages, woods, or such like, and
to ride one from another a good distance: so as if one chance to be surprised
by the enemy, yet the rest may escape, and bring intelligence thereof: and so
soon as the scoutmaister shall receive any aduertisment by the Courriers, he
shall forthwith repair to the high Marshall, and inform him of every
particularitie.

In the placing of his night watches and sentinels, he must use great
consideration, first in setting his little troops or bodies of the watch, in
some places of strength, so as they may be able, when the enemy shall
approach, to make resistance, and defend themselves, until such time as the
camp may put themselves in arms: and besides these troops, he shall give
order that two or three shall walk forth one way, and as many another way,
and if they happen to see any matches light, or hear any noise, forthwith one
to repair to the body of the watch, and so to the scoutemaister, and the other
to stay till they can more plainly perceive what ye matter is. And it shall be
always good to match some Hargabuse or Musketeare, together with pikemen, as
well that they may be the better able to defend themselves, as also by the
discharge of their hargabuze, to give warning to the rest, if any of them
should happen to be surprised by the enemy.

This officer ought to be both diligent and painful, considering how great a
charge depends upon these scouts, no less the^ the preservation or
destruction of the whole camp, and therefore he ought continually both day and
night, either himself in person, or by some other of great trust in his
absence, from time to time, to peruse and examine the order and demeanor of
these Scoutes and courriers, giving order for reformation of all that he shall
find amiss, and so soon as he shall receive any intelligence, forthwith to
advertise the Lord High Marshall. This officer in the ancient Roman wars
was never in use, for they would never admit any watch without the trenches of
their camp, but observed this order, that every night one third part of the
army remained armed, the other two thirds took their rest: and this armed
part they divided into 4 quarters, and appointed to every watch of the night
one quarter, which went and walked continually about the trenches of the Camp,
to hear and see if they could discern any noise or stirring near the Camp:
the other three quarters resting in the mean time returned to the place of
assembly. And when the first watch of the night was ended, then departed an
other quarter to the relief of the watch, and the quarter that had watched
returned to the place of assembly. And thus they continued releeuing the watch
until day: so that the enemy could never approach their camp, but they found
one third part in arms, who were able to keep them play, until the rest had
put themselves in order. But after that Military discipline grew to
corruption, and that soldiers neglecting honor and security, would no longer
abide the hardness and the severity of the ancient discipline, they invented
this kind of foreign scoute, that the pains of a few might leave the rest at
ease. But what mischief has and may thereby ensue, histories will show us,
and common reason may soon teach us. Therefore in time of danger and suspect
of the enemy, I would notwithstanding the foreign scoutes and left sentinels,
use this Roman division and strong order of watch.

The office of the high Marshall of the field, or master of the Camp.
SUndry famous writers affirm, that a Prince does no less execute his kingly
authority and dignity, when with a sinceere judgment and equal balance, he
does chastise offenders, and oppress malefactors: then when by good government
and clemency herewardes the meritorious, and exalts and raises up those that
be good. Therefore the Knight Marshall of the field, being created with entire
and full authority in his office, ought to provide, that assured justice be
ministered in the army, and that he hear and determine controversies, and
punish disorders no less then is used in the government of a well ordered
city, state or kingdom, since that in an army there commonly be such men of
excellent quality, that they for the most part merit the government of great
kingdoms and monarchies. For this respect he ought to provide himself of
Auditors and Pret^res of sufficient excellency, and that they be of good
practice, learned and such as be resolute in the knowledge and rules of
justice, Nevertheless conformable to the style and order used in the laws and
exercise of arms, and that can thereby understand, decide, and give sentence,
touching all causes and martial laws: since that men of war are not bound of
duty to observe any thing, but that which is ordained them of their Captain
general, being principally grounded upon natural reason, and the same to be
published by open proclamation, that the whole camp may have notice thereof:
and to observe and have in reverence the holy Cannons of the Catholic
Christian laws, the which in respect of the cause, and casualties of death, is
chiefly to be respected.

He must provide himself of a provost, which has knowledge and skill in that
profession: and that he have about him a convenient number of coadiutors, and
amongst them one to be the executor of justice. It is very requisite he take
order, that the said provost with his folowers and family, yea even he that
does execute justice, that is to say, the hangman, go in their apparel
ciuilly and not abiectly, as some in sundry countries are accustomed, to the
end that they may be accounted of reputation in their office, and obeyed as of
duty is convenient: for the civility of habit and apparel amongst the
greatest part of people, carries and procures a certain credit and respect,
although besides their office ought publicly to be pronounced with a general
proclamation under pain of life to be obeyed.

He ought to prohibit all soldiers, except the sergeants (who for diverse
respects ought to have their weapons at hand) that they do not carry their
weapons in the camp, at what time so^uer as pikes, halberds, muskets, or
caliuers, or any others, thereby to prevent and avoid as much as may be, the
slaughters and treasons which in like places men of naughty nature are
accustomed to work one against another. In respect whereof it is necessary for
him to banish all quarrels, and by all possible means to bar the rehearsal
and pursuites of discords in time of war, the which carries with it great
disquiet and hinderance to the principal intent and duty, which a discreet
and practiced soldier is bound unto: for there has bin found many which have
departed from their own nations, cities and houses, and followed the wars,
not with minds to do service, nor to become expert in the exercise of arms,
neither to become of account amongst other men of valor, whereby they might
afterward merit a conformable recompense equal to their virtue and valiancie:
but they are carried thither with a determination to live as near as they can
licentiously: or rather to kill their fathers enemies, to revenge some private
quarrel, etc. and so execute traitorous slaughters, in place of obeying and
susteining justice, whereas it is the part of all good soldiers, to maintain
the due execution thereof, and to punish the contemners.

Merchants, victualers, artificers, and such others, as bring wares to the
camp, he must take order that they be courteously and favorably used, to the
intent that they may utter their wares willingly and safely, foreseeing that
they be paid with good money, using toward them a loving countenance, and
procuring them a conuoy and sufficient guard, as well for their coming as for
their departing, to the intent they may with good wills, be occasioned to
return the more speedely, and so remain altogether satisfied, without suspect
of being robbed or spoiled of thieves and flibutors, for which he ought
diligently and sufficiently to provide, since that by their means an army is
made abundant of all things propre, commodious and necessary. Furthermore he
must make and set reasonable prises upon the victuals, in such sort as the
soldiers be not taxed and pinched, neither the victuallers so used but that
they may be honest gainers (which I mean of things necessary) as bread,
beer, corn and wine, with such like: but touching other things less
necessary, he must suffer them to sell as they can, that is to say, all sort
of stuff and cloth for garments, sadles, and furniture for horses, spicerie,
armor, and such like merchandise.

After that he has very well consulted, and taken advise (being accompanied
with worthy Caualliers and old soldiers of sound judgment) and has visited,
oueruewed, well discovered and considered of al plots and places where the camp
is to lodge or be planted, he must with great reason and judgment depart the
lodgings and quarters, as I have seen duly observed under Do^ John of Austria
and the Prince of Parma. When the camp is to make long abode in any place, he
ought with a capable and convenient division measure the same, either by view
of eye, by cord or other ingenious order, after an experimented sort and good
judgment, as partly appears by figure hereafter ensuing.

The Artilerie, munition and victuals must be lodged in the strongest and
safest place of the camp, every one of them having their ordinary guard. Let
him have a vigilant respect that about the munition and powder, there be no
fire made, neither any hargabusiers or light matches approach near unto the
same, but such soldiers as are armed with other sorts of weapons, as pikes,
halberds etc. to avoid the perilous scandale of fire.

Then must he appoint out and ordain quarter by quarter, and specially that
every Nation may have a commodious plot of ground for an assembly or an
Alarm, the which continually ought to be void, and not occupied of any
quality of person, but guarded both day and night with a good Corpse de guard,
for their security. Note that the said place of arms be so lotted out in
^uerie quarter, that from thence the front toward the enemy, may be
commodiously succored, and that soldiers may convey themselves thither with
all expedition, together with their Ensigns, and there to range themselves in
battle: and therefore this place ought principally to be capable of such
effects, and either by nature or art, to be repaired and strengthened with
trenches, toward the face and front of ye enemy, provided that ye soldiers
be not pest^red for want of room, nor by euerlarge space, ye camp not
sufficiently fortified: and therefore must he have a note of all the names and
numbers of bands of horsemen and footmen, and according to tha^ proportion,
cast their ground and scope of encamping together with all their munition,
provision and carriages.

Encamping with an army in the field, at the siege of a town^ etc. I have
seen quarters for every nation first appointed out, and then severally every
band lodged in form of battle, the pikes in the midst, and the shot in the
flanks, and at the head of every band and lodging of every company, the
Ensign planted and stuck in the ground, toward the face of the enemy or
city, having an equal and just propotion of ground before the Ensigns and
betwixt them and the trenches, to range themselves in battle, which must be
betwixt the Corpse de guard of the private Ensigns, and betwixt the other
general Corpse de guard for the whole camp, whether they be placed in trenches,
or otherwise for the saftie of the whole camp, and that plot of ground wherein
the assembly of arms is to be: but these directions I will hereafter set down
with greater diversity, that each man may make choice according to his fancy.
Moreover he must appoint out the market place for victuallers and merchants, in
a large, safe and commodious place for all the camp. He must likewise appoint
out for every quarter in some place out of the way, a place for men to
disburthe^ nature, and to kill cattle and beasts, and for victuallers to roast
meat in, to the intent that the rest of lodgings may be kept clean, and
infection of air avoided, a general benefit for health.

In most manner of encampings, he must so divide ye quarters as every nation
may be placed by it self, and every Colonel by himself, and dispose the
horsemen and footmen distinctly in sunder, that every quarter may have his place
of arms, and market place for victuals: touching which, he ought to take great
care of equal distribution, that he may entertain and gratify with special
commodity, every nation that serves in the army. And that not only every sort
of weapon have their several streets, but also yt every quarter and company in
the camp, have his several charge of Artillery. It is most necessary yt he
take great respect to lodge the army in a strong situation, whereunto he must
principally have a vigilant eye, as a thing that consists in great practice,
long experience and in many considerations. He must likewise have respect that
the place be of good air, and that above al things there be good store of
water and springs, and specially of wood in time of winter. Likewise that in
the country adjoining, free from the enemies invasion and danger, there be
forage for horses and straw for ye soldiers to lie upon and make their
cabbines withal, and that the ground be sandy or dry where they encampe, etc.
Touching all the conditions belonging to encamping, he must take a very special
^ circumspect care, taking view of the same diverse and many times with great
consideration. It belongs unto him likewise to learn out and know the most
commodious way, that is most fit and expedient for the army to march and be
conducted through, whether it be in the ordinary and high way, or overthwart
and a trauerse the country, and that they do march that way whereas the
passage is most commodious, and must assign to every battle a guide or two to
conduct them the best and most easy ways.

Let him provide that the Pioners accommodate and make easy, every foul way,
strait passage and encombrance, and to clear the ways before the great
ordenance: whereupon one party must attend, and therein to perform so much as
is convenient, without having respect to the commodity or loss of any
particular person, or to the prejudice or discommoditie of ye country wherein
you march: which things do less import, then the peril, the hinderance and
reputation of an army being an assembly of me^ of so great valor and
importance, for whom the Marshall ought always to procure with all possible
diligence, al commodities and advantage to keep the army in reputation, and
to maintain it sound and lusty, to the intent that with an undoubted presage
the General may promise himself victory in due time and place.

Together with the other aduertisements, for the commodity and enjoying of
victuals and merchandise, he must yet further care to lodge his army in such a
place, that as near as is possible, it may be an impediment to the enemies
provision or commodity.

He must ordain that the footmen and horsemen of every nation be placed and
divided in such sort, that by their orderly lodging, the seat of the camp may
be well guarded, easily and frankly defended.

Besides this, it is necessary to dispose and plant the Corpse de guard, and the
body of the watch about the Camp in places most suspected, and best for the
purpose, which in the day must consist of horsemen, and in the night of
footmen, to ye intent the army may at all times remain without fear of
sudden surprises, or be assaulted unprovided: which thing as it is of
marvelous molestation, so sometimes it may be incrediblie prejudicial.

When the strength and force of the soldiers and all the camp following, are
constrained to take arms, and to put themselves in squadrons either in the day
or night, by occasion of the enemy or any other necessary acccident that may
happen,

The high marshall of the field ought diligently to provide, that the
Artillery, the munition, and the victuals be safely kept with their ordinary
appointed guard.

The like care ought he to have, that upon any sudden surprise, Camisado, or
sally out of a besieged town, the guard about the camp and in the trenches be
strengthened and renforced with a new supply for the more saftie of the
munition, tents, cabbens, and other baggage: and therefore the said guard ought
at the first to be planted in places strong by nature, or else fortified by
art. These things he must perf^rme with a certain diligent modesty, thereby
not to displease any person, that either particularly or principally, either is
or has bin invested with ye like charge, as the Sergeant Mayor, the general of
ye Artillery, or the Lieutenant of the whole army, besides other private
Colonels and Captains, etc. which advertisement I only give by the way, for
that he may endeavor himself to please every one, although the authority of
his office does expressly extend resolutely to command in things pertaining to
the saftie of the field and camp.

Let him moreover call continually to memory, that the art of war does
require a sharp and exemplar manner and condition of chastisement, thereby to
remain the better obeyed, ye which thing is of principal and great
importance: for since that in that place his Prince does not only fight for the
dearest thing he has, but also for the health of his proper person, and all
his subjects, it behooues him to be ready and perfect in such causes.

Besides, it is a most necessary thing for him to note, that there is gathered
together in the Army, great numbers of people of diverse customs, of sundry
ages, and of mind and disposition not always correspondent. Therefore he that
through insolency will not observe the laws of arms, so important as nothing
more in the honorable exercise of Military profession, let him be constrained
to observe due obedience, through horror and fear of punishment.

To the Marshal of the field, it appertains to take order every day, soon
after the Diana, that the Conuoyes, Ascoltes, and safegards do appear before
and come to his lodging to receive their Commission, not only for the safeguard
and assurance of the merchants and victuallers, which come and go from the
camp, but also as well for the baggage of ye footmen, as the horsemen, who are
of custom enforced to provide both for forage, from time to time, and for
many things necessary for provision for their horses and other beasts,
cabbins and things needful to be used in the camp. These connoyes, safgards
and Ascoltes ought to be of horsemen, and guided by a Captain of great
discretion and experience.

When the army shall remove, the high marshall must first give order to the
master of the Ordinance, that he set forth the Artillery, with all the
carriages, munition, etc. then the master of the victuals and cariages
afterward.

He must after give order to the Sergeant Mayor, in what sort he will have the
battle to march that day: and to the scoutmaster which way he will send his
vauntcurrours to discover if all be clear, who must from time to time give
intelligence what occurrence he discovers. The high Marshall when he goes to
view the ground where he intends to incampe, may by his authority take such
number of horsemen, as he shall think convenient, and then is he to consider that
there be nigh at hand, as I said before, wood, water, and forage enough for
the Army: and if he intend long to lodge in that place, then must he make his
camp the larger, and prouidently consider, that every Regiment have his
convenient place, that the tents and cabbins be not pitched and made nigh the
ring of the camp: that there be large places of assembly within the camp:
that it be well entrenched and fortified, for which respects it is requisite
that the Martial have knowledge in Geometry and Arithmetike, and that he have
in a readiness sundry plats, models and forms, as partly I have annexed
hereunto, whereby he may be able to resolve for any number or situation, what
form or quantity of Camp is most convenient, and presently stake it out,
assigning ^ue place for every Regiment of footme^ and horsemen, carriages,
Ordinance, Munition and every particularitie, as hereafter shall more plainly be
declared. For lodging of footmen, especially in a running camp, I have partly
in this chapter touched, but for lodging of horsemen it is not amiss to
imitate the Rutters, who commonly always lodge in such closes as they find
environed with trees or quick set hedges and ditches, placing their horses in
due order round about the field, two paces one from another, with railes
between them, leaving all the void ground in the middle for the Captains tents
and cabbines for the horsemen. So that in that sort in a field of two or three
acres, I have seen a guydon of Rutters very well lodged and commodiously, with
railes or poles between their horses, and bows about them for the wind or
heat, some with hales over them to keep them from the rain: their saddels,
bridels, and al other their furniture, hanging upon poles ready by them,
neatly kept and blacked, their mangers also before them: for all such
necessaries the Ruiters carry with the^ in their wagons and carriages, besides
little wheel barrowes to carry away their doung, so that their camp is no
less clean and orderly, then a princes stable. A fair street they always
leave between their own cabbines and their horses: They have certain troops
of their servants, whom they call their knights, and these troops always
attend, that so soon as the Marshall has limited their quarters, they depart
immediately to the next woods, for poles, bows, stakes and other necessaries to
build their camp, stables, and cabbines: other go for forage, that before the
army approach, the lodgings always are in a readiness. To every 12. Ruiters
commonly there is allowed a wagon with 4 horses, or to six a cart with two
horses, and their knights are about one third part of the number of their
horsemen. The Lance knights also encampe always in the field very strongly,
two or three to a cabinet, their pikes and armor standing up by them in a
redines, and so orderly placed with streets, so convenient and cleanly
preserved, that their camp is no less wholesome then strong: I have seen six
thousand of them lodge in six or seven acre of ground, which proportion
differs not much from that of the old Romans.

The high Marshall, as well for the ordering of sconts, as all other matters of
importance in the camp, is to give order, and at the setting of the watch his
trumpets ought first to sound, and then all the residue of the trumpets in
order to answer every one to his several quarter, and in the morning all the
trumpets should assemble before the Lord Lieutenants tent, and there to sound
the relief of the watch, but no man must upon pain of death remove from his
charge, until the warders be come out, then may every man depart to his rest.

In the field at a day of service, though there be a General of the horsemen,
yet is it the place of the high Marshall to serve there as chief, and to
appoint in how many troops the horsemen shall divide themselves, and which
shall charge, and which stand for their rescue, and to prohibit, that upon
every cry amongst the footmen, of march Cauallarie, or forward horsemen,
they do^ not remove, disband or give charge, but only by known counter signs
and watch words from the General, that invasions may be made at due times and
when necessity requires, and not for every trifle or private danger of some
persons, for otherwise their disbanding out of time may arise to be ruin and
loss of an army in a day of battle.

If any prisoners be taken in the field, they ought forthwith to be enrold in
the Marshals book, and then if any make claim to any other man's prisoner, the
Marshal as judge to determine who shall have him, and for every prisoner
brought into the Marshall sea and enrolled in the Marshals book, his fee is
eight pence: he is also to have of al booties taken in the field and brought
into the camp the third part: but as well for this as other his fees, they are
by the General to be limited at the beginning, as shall be thought reasonable.
Finally the high Marshal ought to be a man of such perfection, that he know the
duty of every inferior officer, and be able to reform their misdeeds, and
that of his own knowledge. The handling of small matters must be committed to
his Provost, who ought to be a chosen person, always retaining the greater
causes, and such as concern life to be heard by himself, who for his greater
reputation, and to be known from other officers, he should have a Cornet or
guidon borne before him in the field, as I have seen the pages, servants,
wives and women in Don John of Austria his camp, attend in no less good
order, then any well governed band.

And for as much as it appertains chiefly to the high Mashal to govern the
execution of the Military laws, I therein refer him to my first book,
wherein I thought it more necessary to be set down then in this place, to the
intent the soldiers may daily hear their duties, and not to offend through
ignorance: unto which laws some think it necessary, that not only every
Captain and Colonel should be sworn, but also after the old Roman manner,
every particular soldier at his entering into pay, or at the consecration of
the Ensign, to make his oath jointly unto them both, for which cause the
Roman warfare was termed Militia Sacrata.

The oaths that every officer ought to take of what office soever he be.
Of the Praetor.
THe Praetor, Advocate or Coadiutor to the Marshall, being learned in the
Martial, Civil and commmon Laws, shall take his oath given him by the
General, and shall swear by almighty God, that whatsoever he shall judge,
ordain, or determine in court or out of court, that he shall keep it close and
secreat to his lives end, and that he shall be true and just to the Lords, and
that he shall execute justice to his utmost power, and that he shall not during
the wars take any gift of any man, for any matter in controversy to be tried
before him, but shall use indifferent justice to al me^, without respect of
persons, friendship or malice, as God shall help him at the dreadful day of
judgment.

Of the Provost Marshall.
HIs oath is likewise given by the General, that he shall see al faults duly
and according to the laws punished in all offenders, without regard or respect
of persons. That he shall in the market place set up a pair of gallows, as
well for the terror of the wicked, as to do execution upon them that offend ye
laws. Also that he shall set on al victuals brought to the market a reasonable
price, that the seller and the buyer may reasonably live by it, and that he
exact nothing behind his duty of any man, that he neither use extorcion or
briberie, that he let no prisoner taken of the enemy, or offender otherwise to
his witting escape, with other Articles contained in his office, at the
discretion of the General, the which he must be sworn unto. The master of ye
watch, the Purueyor for victuals and the fire master, must likewise take their
oaths as it is here set down in the 4. 5. and sixth book of these Directions.

The Clarke or Notarie of the Court.
THe Notarie shall be sworn before the twelve Judges of the court, that he
shall truly and without fraud exercise his office, not adding or diminishing,
for friendship, malice or briberie, any thing delivered to him in court or
elsewhere, to the hinderance of equity and justice, and that he precisely
keep undefaced and uncancelled all the records, and the whole acts and
dealings of all men hanging in the court, whether they be tried or untried in
controversy, and not determined, and that he keep and conceal all things
which he hears in the court, either said or done, as ended or determined,
secret and close to his lives end, and if he do otherwise, he shall have the
law, provided for such an offendour.

Of the common Crier of the court.
HE shall take the like oath before the Judge, to do truly and faithfully his
office, at all times, and in all places, according as the Judge shall command
him, so that through his diligence there be no fault found in him at the court
day, and that he keep close and secret all such matters as he shall hear
handled by the Judges until his lives end, as God help him.

Directions for the marching of an army, whether it be inferior or equal to
the enemy.
When an army does march near unto the enemies battles, the high marshall,
Sergeant Mayor, and Colonels, ought to use diverse considerations. First a
Prince or his General, not being of like force to the enemy, or that he is
not willing to give battle, because he will not hazard all his state and army
in one day into the hands of fortune, he must provide (specially if he be
inferior in Caualarie) that he march through a country that is rough, full of
hills, and where the situation of the ground is of such aduautage, that the
enemy have not any motion to assault him. But when he cannot shun the same,
then must he provide at leastwise, to enter into the action thereof, to his
great advantage, and almost with a certain hope of victory, the which will not
arise to be difficile, if he can apply the advantage of situations to serve his
turn.

In marching, I would wish him to have one part of his light horsemen so near
the enemy, that every hour he may have notice what way he does march,
notwithstanding in a country where mounts and hills be not favorable, but that
of necessity you must march through plains and champaine countries, and that
the enemy is near at hand, and that it is very hard to shun the battle, I
judge it not far amiss, to accept the battle, so that you be of greater
strength in horsemen, for being the stronger, the journey in no respect is to
be fled, for so much as horsemen yield the greatest part of the victory, when
they be well guided.

Charles the fifth in Germany against the protestants army, by reason of the
commodity of the ground, for the most part, did not lodge his army further off
from his enemies, then commonly the shot of a Coluerine, although he was far
inferior in number. Nevertheless that order cannot be always used when an
army is in the champaine country, for he that is in plains and is not
desirous to fight, he must march from the enemy 9 or 10 miles, and must
determine to fortify himself at each lodging, in such sort that neither the
enemies Cauallarie or infanterie, may be able in battle to enter into his
camp, if not with great difficulty.

A mean fortification is sufficient in a champaine country, chiefly when it
is to be made with speed, which beginning of fortification, when you mean to
continue, may increase and be made as strong as you see the case does require.
When an army does march inplaines and champaine countries, and that it comes
to that point, ye it is able to have any little river or wood which may cover
one flank of the said army, you must go about with all diligence to take this
advantage, for that the same will arise to be of great importance. Provide ever
that the bagage and the artillarie go continually on the contrary side to the
enemy, or at leastwise in the midst of the army. The squadrons of men at
arms must as appertains, flank the battles and ranks of footmen toward
the enemy.

It is a laudable custom to divide an army into three squadrons, that is to
say, into the auantgard battle, and arreargard, and that every day they do
exchange, making of the auantgard the battle, and of the battle the reargard,
and it is requisite, that every one of them have his necessary number of
horsemen and Hargaloteares, and that each one be disposed and placed in his due
rank. Order must be carefully taken, that amongst the ranks of the footmen,
unprofitable people be not intermedled, but that all the baggage be in a place
deputed for the same, under the Prouosts guidon. Also that amongst the
squadrons of the horsemen, there be no unprofitable horses nor other
impediments. The Rutters Cauallaries use herein a marvelous strict order, and
extreme diligence, which verily does merit to be imitated. It is a
commendable thing also, when the light horsemen be in such sort divided and
dispersed for discovery of the country, and espying the actions of the
enemies army, as that they may continually return and give intelligences of
the enemies demeanor, whereby if need require, commodity and leisure may be
had to provide for fight.

If the marshall of the field have no experience of the country himself, it
is requisite that he carry such a personage, or worthy Cauallier with him, as
he knows to have experience, that with them he may consider well of the
situation and place, whether he is to march with his army through plains, by
or near hills, or in valleys that have hills ou both sides, or by or near to
woods, or along or near a river. It is also requisite ye the light horse,
as well for the discovery of the enemy, as otherwise to take the breadth of the
straits and passages go before, and to make certificate, that according to the
breadth the host may march.

And put case that one part of the way be 15. foot brood, the host shall be
made to march by five in a rank, because every footman will have three foot
in breadth from shoulder to shoulder, and six foot in rank betwixt rank and
rank, and one foot for every person, so that 21 foot in breadth and 2 miles
in length, will contain an army of ten thousand. After the same reason,
whether there be 20 or 30 thousand footmen, according to the measuring of
ground by the foot, they may be set in order very easily, neither can the
leader be deceived, when he knows how many armed men every place can
contain: and after the same order as the place does enlarge, he must enlarge
the ranks, causing part of the shot to go before the array, and part behind,
and others to go in succoures of the horsemen, that go in viewing the passages,
and the ambushments, with the whole doings of the enemy: and let an other
part be for vantgard and retrogard to the array, to be able to serve them at
need, and an other part to go always at the flanks of the raie, the which if
there be ditches, shall serve as a countermure against the enemies horsemen. And
if they be men at arms, they must march on both the sides of the battle, and
also of the Hargabuzies that do march by the flanks of the battle, and the
light horsemen to serve for scoutes both before and behind the array.

There must be likewise abundance of Pyoners and laborers to make places
plain, and to cast down ditches and bridges, and to make defenses and other
necessary things that are required in marching, the which must be guarded by
your light horse and shot, and when you depart to feign to go to some other
place, then that you go so, and if there be no men at arms to appoint to every
regiment certain Hargabuziers to serve on horseback, the which may serve in
steed of men at arms, and when occasion serves to serve on foot again,
wherein the Caualiers of S. Georges squadre, may very well be employed. It is
requisite that all soldiers follow their leaders, and carry a great care and
diligence in marching, to the intent that by sudden assaults they be not at
every step to arise in a rumor, and confusedly to run here and there, and
the one to go contrary to the other, and finally coming about them, not to be
able to do any thing of any profit.

For which cause thou ought to march with thine army through every place in
battle ray, whereby the soldiers may be made more apt and speedy to make a
voyage, and quick and ready to resist if need shall be. The Soldiers
according to my former directions, being trained to follow the Ensigns, and
apt to obey commandments, and to behave themselves valiantly according to
their place and order, if thou march in a plain country, it is requisite that
thy pikes march in battle ray, retiring thine army into a little space, so
that by the straightnes and facility of enlarging, thou be not constrained to
extend thy self into too much length, which fashion of marching seems to give
occasion and power to the enemy, to assault commodiously their adversaries,
and according to the occasion to endomage them, he beholding the commodity to
defend themselves to be taken away, forasmuch either with more largeness
coming against thee, the which is wont to happen both the horns being
compassed, it is like that he shall easily disorder thee, and put thee to
flight, or else giving charge on the flank in the midst of the battle, having
already broken thine order, suddenly stop thy men from being able to go forward,
being closed in the arayes of the enemies. Wherefore minding to retire in a
maine battle, and to return to resist, they shall be able to do little good,
as those that have used such a maine battle, which for want of thicknes is
nothing strong, but altogether weak. Also if the enemy should charge thee on
the rearward, thou shall be brought to the very same necessity, because thou
shall be so compassed, as thy fronts shall not be able to succor the last, or
the last to succor the first. For the which thing it is always better and
more sure and easier to govern the bands that march close and square, the^
thin and long: especially, forasmuch as to an army that marches long,
oftentimes happens that of some thing seem doubtful and uncertain, there
grows suddenly fear and terror, because sometimes it has chanced, that men
discending from high and hilly places into the plain, to places expedient and
open, and the foremost seeing the last of the same band by a great distance to
come after, supposing themselves to be assaulted of some ambush of enemies, it
has been seen that they have suddenly turned to fight, and afterward no
otherwise the^ enemies gone together by the ears with their own companions.
If, as I said before, the victuales, carriages, and munition, be not conducted
in the midst of the army, but if otherwise the hindermost part would be guarded
and defended of the most valiant soldiers, as in the fronts, because that at
unawares may happen many things, thy light horsemen going before, disciphering
and espying where they may pass, having occasion to pass by mountains,
woods, places closed with hills, and most great deserts, because the enemy
many times will lay an ambush privily by the passage to assault his
adversary, who taking little heed thereof, have been easily broken and
brought to utter decay. The which ambush, if the conductor by way of
exploratoures shall foresee, with a little pain, having prevented the suares
of the enemy, may win a worthy name of politic prudence, and likewise save
his army from imminent ruin. And as for the plains, thou with thine own
eyes may see a far of, forasmuch as in the day dust moved and lifted up into
the air, does show the moving and stirring of the enemy, and in the night
the fires and flames signifies the camp to be there. When thy men are to be
conducted, and not fight, thou ought to remove by day, if peradventure some
thing do not constrain thee, for the which thou think it good to go in have
to come before thine enemy, where in deed for such occasion thou must remove
in the night, so that thou know it may safely be done to fight with the
enemy. Lead the me^ not in have, but softly, and enforce them not to make two
long a journey, forasmuch as labor taken before a man come to fight, is se^ne
very often vainly to consume and waste the strength of their hobies. And
marching in the country of thy friends, it is needful to command thy
soldiers, that in no manner of wise they touch or spoil any thing, but rather
altogether to refrain, considering that soldiers having weapons and liberty
to do what shall please them, will favor nothing, especially for that the
^ight of things that please men, out of doubt is woo^t most dangerously to lead
ignorant and unwary men to desire them, and with the sweetness of robbing to
eutice them to all manner of mischief: whereunto if thou provide not, thy
friends and thy confederates, for very small occasions will become enemies:
notwithstanding, the country of thy enemies, thou shall suffer thy soldiers
openly to destroy, bur^e and consume, because by ye dearth of victuals and lack
of money, wars are wont to deminish and be extinguished, and contrariwise
through abundance and riches, they are nourished and maint^ined: but first
before thou suffer thine enemies country to be destroyed, thou should give
advise to thy enemies, threatening them what thou will do, if they will not
yield unto thee, for ye the perril of the misery prepared, and the fear of the
ruin looked for, oftentimes constraines men to grant many things, the which at
the first by no manner of means had bin possible to have brought the^ to pass:
but after they have once received the hurt, they will make little account of
thee, and despise all other things, as though thou could do them no more
harm. Albeit i^ thou know surely that in the country of thine enemies thou
must tarry long with thine army, suffer to be taken and spoiled those things
only, which thou see will not be greatly profitable unto thee: but the same
which is to be thought may be preserved for thy commodity, command openly to
thy soldiers, that they for bear. Having made ready and set in order thy men,
tarry not long in thy own country, nor yet in thy confederates, least that
consuming all thy provision, it seem not that thou art of greater hurt to thy
friends the^ to thy enemies, but rather conduct thy army speedily into thy
enemies country, whereby if it be fertile and abundant, there may be taken at
thy need most plentiously those things that thou list: but if it be otherwise,
thou shall cause to be known, yt thou seek to provide most lovingly both
for ye wealth and profit of thy friends. Besides this thou ought to care
with all diligence, that marching or incamping by sea or land, victuals may
safely be brought, for so much as by such means the merchants with all diligence
will bring all things, which for ye use of an army will be necessary. Moreover
when thou most pass by straights, or march through rough and hilly ways, the^
is it convenient, principally for ye preservation of thy things, to send before
shot on horseback and on foot, for the keeping of those places, rocks, or
enclosed ways, least the enemy taking it before thee, may both let thy passage
to thy great hinderance and loss: the contrary thou ought enforce thy self to
do, when thou understand the enemy to pass, the like thou have not only to
take heed for receiving harm, but to enforce thy self to turn against the
enemy those deceits whereby he thought to deceive thee. And when thou purposest
to go against him, it is requisite to provide before him, and at unawares
oppress him: so diligently thou must find means to let and endomage him every
way, if thou understand that he intends to pursue thee. The marshall of the
field must foresee, ye whether soever ye army does retire, or use an ordinary
march and journey, that the captains that lead distinct and several bands,
must with mutual diligence by horsemen, riding to and fro, measure the march
of the army, neither suffer the Ensigns to go any thing out of sight. The
auantgard to observe with what pace the middle battle marches, and so
likewise the middle battle the rereward, that every battle may be ready at
hand for all sudden incursions of the enemy, and to succor ye battle which is
circumuented, and finally fight if a man be forced, or advantage does serve,
with all ye power of the army united together.

Of the order of the march in figure, and of the placing of the weapons.
For So Much as there are diverse forms of marching, according to the ground and
diversities of men's minds, I have only thought it good to set down this
figure ensuing, as very necessary, and of great force for an army, with his
whole carriages to march withal: Wherein I partly imitate the antiquity, as
otherwise the order now used, as for example. Let there be an army of 40000.
footmen, and 14000. horsemen, according to the proportion set down, there is
allowed to every 100 footmen 40. pikes, 50 shot, and 10 halberds, the which
falls out to be 20000 shot, 16000 pikes, and 4000 halberds, the which with the
horsemen are to be divided into three battles. The voward, the mainward and the
rearward battle: In the voward shall be placed 10000 footmen, whereof 4000
pikes, 1000 halberds, and 5000 shot: In the front of the voward battle are to
be placed 2000 argolateares on horseback, 1000 lances: Then there are to be
placed the pioners, who are to be guarded with 500 shot of each wing. The
Sergeaat Mayor must give in charge, that these pioners beat down and make
plain the ground before them in their march, in such breadth as occasion shall
serve to make your battles, or necessity procure, or the straightnes of the
place permit. Also the Sergeant has to appoint these pioners, that if they be
charged by the enemies, having their weapons to defend themselves amongst the
shot, or otherwise to retire themselves by the wings of the battle, and to be
placed at the discretion of the Sergeant Mayor in the battle: Next after these
Pioners shall follow 2000 shot, next unto the shot the carriages of the first
battle, with all the impediments: Then follows 2000 pikes, and 1000
halberdeares, with the Chiefetaine in the midst, then follows the other 2000
pikes, after the pikes the carriages of the merchants and purueyours, who must
by the appointment of the General march armed, for the defense of their
charge: the^ follow the other 2000 shot, and if you pass through any dangerous
places, it is requisite so to march, as you may suddenly bring them to a
quadrant battle, sending always before 100 Hargaloteares on horseback, and
100 lighthorsmen, for vauntcurriers, to discover and view the straights and
passages, as otherwise to take their breadth, and to give certificate to the
officers, whereby they may make their march thereafter, and to view that all
places be free from ^mbushes and trains of the enemy, whereby the army may
the more safelier and quietlier pass, sending from the frontes as necessity
requires, aid to assist the Curriers: Then must follow your maine battle of
footmen, the which is 20000. footmen, whereof 10000. shot, 8000. pikes, and
2000 Halberds, the which are to be divided in this manner: next unto the shot
of the voward battle, must be placed the carriages of the maine battle with
bag and baggage, who must be placed by quarter: then 4000 pikes, next the
pikes 2000 halberds with the General in the midst, then the other 4000 pikes,
after the pikes the carriages of the merchants, as appears by this figure.

The weapons of the rearward battle to be divided as in the voward, who must
send forth courriers from the rearward, to epsy whether the enemy does
prosecute thee to take advantage to thy hinderance or no, and you must place
next your shot in the rearward one thousand Lances, and 2000 Hargolateares,
your 10500 shot of the maine battle are to be placed as wings in all your
battles, who must be placed 16 paces from the sides of the battles: Next unto
the shot must go the Artillery of the field with their carriages, with like
distance on both the sides of the battles: then must be placed 1000 men at
arms, of each side of the battles: Likewise 1000 Lances of each side, and 2000
Hargolateares, as appears by the foresaid figure.

The high marshal must give in charge that in all dangers ontill ye footmen may
be brought to form of battle, that the Ordenance and Artillery may be
readily and equally divided into the two horns of the battle, to terrify the
enemy to the uttermost: and if so be that the enemy will attempt the battle on
the wings, let the Hargolateares with the rest of the horse and shot in the
wings make the like difference: thus every part shall be of like sort defended,
until thou have made thy battle as pleases thee. If this order cannot please
the march withal, through a suspected place, you may practice that which is
thought of the General and his wise counselors and Captains to be most
expedient: nevertheless I thought it not amiss to set down this order in
figure, with the division of the weapons, for that being well considered, and
with advise well ordered, you may make presently as many battles as you will,
and in what order you please, even by hand without any great trouble or toil.

THe proportion of this march ensuing, was used of the Lantgraue of Hesson, and
the buke of Saxony, in their wars against the Emperor Charles the fifth, their
maine square battle of pikes being flanked; fronted and backed with shot, was
empaled with Lances and men at arms, with a bat^aillon of Argolat^ares on
horseback in the ^auntgard. The whole battle (...) with Artillery, and the
carriages of the camp and munition on the side from the emperialists, guarded
with a squadron of (...)* shot, and lances. The victuallers betwixt the
rearward and the main battle, empaled with horsemen, bring backed with (...)
and Argolateares.



The order how to encampe an army, and to accommodate the same according to
the situation of the ground.
IN respo^t (...) no resolu^e rule can be given to the (...) an (...)* since
that the same so often alters and changes, according to the quality of the
ground, the quantity for distance, o^ (...) of the enemy, and diuersiti^ in
mind of the Marshall or General. I will therefore proceed to speak of the
(...) of the ^ampe, of his situation, form, compass, and fortification, and
the commodities and orders which be thereunto necessary. First touching the
situation, I say, that being in a plain far from hills, it is necessary to
have a river or such quantity of water, as the same may commodiously nourish a
whole army, and the Cauallarie: and provide that from the adjoining woods, if
there be any, you may fetch al sort of wood and fuel for the necessity of
the army: and that likewise provision he had of hay and straw for the
horsemen, for these be the things that an army cannot carry about with it.
When provision is made of these necessaries, the army must be so well
fortified as the enemy cannot ^aise the same.

The greatness and circuit of the lodgings must not be so great, that the same
may be an impediment, that a man cannot at all times use succor and defense
when need does require: neither ought it to be so little that the army cannot
have al his commodities and necessary places for victuals, and for merchants
which follow the army. Touching the form and fashion of the camp, ye same
must be such as these portratures following make show, acco^modating ye same
nevertheless to the situation of ye ground.

In the portrature is described and drawn all the quarters, with their places,
the lodgings for the General, and the ways to issue out, where in for further
instruction, I will somewhat delate, but he that is more curious, let him read
Ieronemo Cataneo his example, out of whom I took this.

If it chance that an army must lodge amongst mountains in a ground full of
hills, and diversely situated, as in vales, croupes of mountains, rivers, woods,
caves, and such inequalities: If the Marshal be a man of experience in the
wars, and know how to lodge an army, he may serve his turn therewith greatly,
and with small labor fortify his camp and lodgings. But above all things he
must be careful ye he do not pla^t himself in such a place, ye the same be
subject to any hills or other height of ground that does command over him, from
whence the enemy might look into his lodgings, and so batter the cortines of
his rempares: For if the enemies army occupy this mountain or hill, the
General of the camp shall be constrained to dislodge his army, and so be
forced to fight to his great disadvantage.

To lodge an army in the field, with his due measures being of good
proportion, according to the situation of the ground, you must know how much
space of ground must be had for the quarters of the Cauallarie, and how much
for the Infanterie, with their places of arms, streets, and other necessaries
for the service of their lodgings.

For example, suppose there is a camp of 60000 fighting men, that is to say,
2000 men at arms, 10000 light horsemen, and 48000 hargabusiers, Corslets,
light armed pikes and halberds. To every man of arms I give 7 lodgings, and
to every light horseman 4, and every lodging as well of men at arms, as
light horsemen, shall contain 50 foot of earth, that is to say, five foot
large, and 10 foot long, as this figure declares.



To every soldier on foot, with a servant or a page, I will give 64 foot of
earth for his lodging, which shall be 8 foot in square, as this figure
declares.



This done, you must accommodate the place for the General, from 200 to 250
foot, even in the midst of the camp, and from that place shall be drawn two
straight streets, which shall cross overthwart with two straight angles, right
in the midst of the place for the General, which two streets shall be called
the principal streets, and shall serve for a Corpse de guard toward the enemy.

Suppose that next of all I will lodge 500 brave soldiers, or gallant warlike
Caualliers next to the Generals lodging, to every one of these I will give two
lodgings, that shall be of the same circuit that the men at arms are.

Besides this, about the Generals plot, I will draw two plots, the one for the
market and the other for victuals, which two shall contain as much ground as
the lodging of the volentarie Caualliers of the Generals train, or Caualliers
of S. Georges squadre to the General, which terms does best fit all such
Gentlemen, as volentarily follow the camp, to see service and to court the
General.

About the plots and lodgings of these Caualliers, I will draw out a street of
25. foot, about the which shall be the quarters of men at Arms and light
horsemen, with their streets and void places in the midst.

About the horsemens quarters shall be drawn a street of 50. foot large, round
about which is to be compast out the quarters for the footmen, with their
streets and void places.

At the end of one of the principal streets toward the enemy, you must draw
out the general place of arms, which must contain as much at the least, as
half the lodgings for the footmen do contain. In one of my figures I have
not drawn this void place, for that I have set the trench so far from the
lodgings, that going about the camp within the circuit of the said trench, you
may easily make a general place for arms.

At one corner of the camp toward the enemy, must be appointed a place for
the munition of the Artillarie, and at the back of the camp must be drawn
out the lodgings for the pioners, and for the cattle that is killed for the
nourishment of the camp, with other necessary things.

The victuallers must lodge in the void places of the quarters, and all along
the streets. The trench must be made far distant from the lodging, from 200 to
250 foot.

The place of Artillery is comprehended in the Calcull of the footmens
quarters, and would be distant from the trenches that enuirons the lodgings,
from 200 pace to 250 at the least, as in my description it is drawn 250 foot
distant. The places necessary to be accommodated for quarters for soldiers to
do their natural business in, and to lodge other persons which are lodged in
the said quarters, may be taken in that which is supersl^ous in the place of
Arms: for in drawing the circuit of the said place, I have allotted out
sufficient substance of ground.

In my draughts I have set down 50 foot for the largeness of the streets, by
reason this largenes ought not to pass the board of the largenes of the place
of arms. This 50* is not so much to form and frame the largenes of the
streets, as to make large by the said 50 foot, the length and largenes of the
place of arms for the quarters, whereby they be enlarged. The cattle for
victual for the camp, the pioners and other unprofitable things shall lodge at
the back of the camp, as I said before.

The victuallers lodge in the place of Arms in the Quarters, and all along the
principal streets.

The whole portrature hereof may be more apparent by my figures following, for
the better understanding whereof, these Characters shall direct.

A. Signifies the place of Arms in the quarters both of horsemen and
footmen, and the place for the General which is in the midst, together with
their streets and the space which is betwixt the trenches and the lodgings.

* Signifies the quarters of the light horsemen. Signifies for the Lances and
men at Arms. earth Signifies the quarters for the footmen. M Signifies the
place sor Munition. C Signifies the Caualhers lodgings near the General*
Mar. Signifies the Market place. V Signifies the place of Munition for
victuals* P Signifies the lodgings for the pioners and for cattle, which is
killed for the nourishing of the Camp, and other things unprofitable that follow
the Army. F Signifies the Fort upon the hill; for the defense of ye Camp.
The portrature of these three Camps following, may seru^ for example to draw
any other by, in what situation or of what number of men so ever they be, so
that it be well practiced.

The Marshall for the most part must by rack of eye, and by quick judgment,
allot out and readily set down and impart the lodgings of the Camp, and
sticking down a little rod with a paper fastened in the nocke or clift of ye
same, thereby in every due place allot and appoint to al Colonels and their
Quarters, whose Marshals for lodging shall in like sort by billet limit out the
place for every band, and thus shall the arriving army find the quarters,
places, streets and other things always in readiness, but if you will more
Arithmetically work, read Cataneo.

The situation of a Camp adjoining to a river near a mountain.


The situation of a Camp in a vale betwixt two mountains, the one is capable
of a Camp, the other not,


The situation of a Camp aioyning upon a wood and a Ri^er.


The manner of encamping, where the situation yields no advantage.
TO encampe an army strongly and commodiously: The Lord high Marshall is first
to find such a place to encampe upon, as may be conveniently woodded and
watered, not subject to any hill within Cul^erine shot, and to apply the form
of his camp to the nature of the situation. But this plat following I have
drawn out of M. Digges Stratioticos, which he has prescribed, where the
natural helps fail, and that the general is to trust only to his own
order and artificial strength. When any army is therefore in such place to be
encamped, you shall first in the most commodious place about the midst of the
ground, where you mean to encampe, set up the general standard or Guidon, and
about the same, stake out a square plot of ground 40 pace square for the
Generals pauillion. Directly from this toward the North, runs one maine
street 40 pace broad, that deuideth the horse camp from the foot camp: and
on either side of the Generals tent runs two other cross ways, 30 pace in
breadth, which divide the armed from the unarmed, as hereafter appears. These
two ways embrace two long squares of ground 40 pace broad, and 550 pace long a
piece. These may be either of them divided into 5 lodgings of 100 pace in
length, and 40 in breadth, leaving between them certain passages of ten pace
in breadth, that soldiers upon every sudden may the more readily repair to
the place of assembly. One of these lodgings next the Generals tent, may serve
for the high marshall himself and his retinue, and the other on the other side
for the treasurer: the rest may be assigned at the marshals discretion to the
other officers of the field, and for Ambassadors, and such Noblemen and
Gentlemen as follow the wars on their own charge, and such like. In the
Northeast quarter of the camp are the horsemen lodged, in the northwest the
footmen, either of these camps are divided into three parts by streets
running East and West. These streets are 20 pace in breadth, and 580 pace in
length. In every one of these three spaces of the foot camp, there are
lodged a regiment of 10000 men: and in the horsecampe the middlemost of them
shall serve for 1500 men at arms: the northen space may serve for the 2500
light horsemen, and the other for 2000 lances. On the other side of this maine
street are the lodgings assigned for the leaders or governors of every
regiment, and their officers: every space being 30 pace broad and 170 long. A
is for the Captain of the lances, B for the Captain of men at arms, and C
for the Captain of the lighthorsmen. Likewise D E F for the leaders of the
three principal regiments of footmen, the which you may distinguish with the
usual names, vaward, battle, and reregarde, calling the vaward that which
lies next the Generals tent, and answers to the Lances: the battle that
which answers to the men at arms: and the rereward the other against the
light horsemen.

Every of these principal Regiments you may again divide into five smaller
Regiments by streets of ten pace broad, running North and South, so have you
15 less Regiments in the foot Camp, and 5 a piece in every of the horse
Camp, and every of these Regiments are 100 pace broad, and 170 pace in
length, and shall contain every of them of footmen 2000. of men at Arms
300. of Lances 400. of light horsemen 500. with their Colonels, Captains,
Officers, etc.

These Colonels and Captains of men at arms, may be lodged at the head of
their Regiments, as you may behold in the camp: These marked with G are for the
Colonel of footmen, H for ye Captain of light horsemen, I for the Captain of
men at arms, and K for the Captain of the Lances. So remain their Regiments
of 100 pace broad, and 150 pace long for lodging of the soldiers, which may by
small streets of five pace broad, be divided into as many spaces as there are
several bands in every Regiment, and then the harbinger of every band must
set down the officers and soldiers of their bands.

These last division of bonds I have omitted, because in so small a plat it
would breed but confusion, and the thing being of it self most plain, it
should be tedious to rest longer thereupon This only I would wish the Marshal
or campemaster to observe, that his shot be lodged toward the outside of ye
camp, yt they may be always ready at yt ring of ye camp upon any alarm, ye
which he may do by dividing ye uttermost seven regime^ts into half, as you see
by ye pricked lines, leaving the seven spaces marked with L for ye 7000 shot,
and the other noted with M for 7000 pikes, al ye other regime^ts marked with N,
shall be ye lodgings of ye 16000 short weapons* Thus in the north moity of your
camp, are al your armed, both horsemen and footmen lodged. Now the other moity
must serve for the lodgings of the unarmed, as Pioners, Carters, Carpenters,
Smithes, Butchers, Uictuallers, and all other sorts of Mecanicall artificers,
together with a large place of assembly for ye soldiers to retire unto, to put
themselves in order upon any alarm, and also to exercise themselves in sundry
sorts of actiuitie. You shall therefore from the southside of the Generals
pauilion 600 pace southward, extend out your first maine street of 40. pace
broad, and cross him again with an other street, running east and weast 360
pace distant from the southside of the Generals pauilion. This street need to
be but 300 pace in breadth. Again extend out the second narrow streets, that
run parallel to the first maine street, till you come to the cross street
last made: so have you O your place of assembly 330 pace broad, and 540 pace
long. P shall be appointed for the munition, and officers attendant on the
artillarie, Q the market place: round about this market place may be lodged the
Butchers, Bakers, Cooks, and victualers of all sorts. About the munition
quarter, besides the officers and Gunners, may the Smithes, Carpenters, Wheel
wrights, and laborers, attendant on the ordinance be placed. About the place
of assembly may be the tents of all such as furnish the camp with things
needful for the soldiers, as Armorers, Taylers, Shoomakers, and all such like
artificers. Yet remain there two long swares of earth, either of them 540 pace
long, and 190 pace broad: here you may settle the Carters and Wagoners with
their horse and Oxen, for the carriages themselves must always impale that
part of the camp, that is not otherwise by nature and art fortified. In these
two quarters also may be lodged the pioners and all other sort of laborers,
that aptly cannot or ought not be placed in or about the former courts or
quarters of assembly. Last of all, you shall discribe 60 pace distant, from
all those regiments, and their quarters already set down. The ring of the
camp, causing some pretty trenche and vaumure to be thrown up, placing your
ordinance upon the same, as in this figure is described, and between the
ordinance your carriages: and this may suffice, if the enemy be not very
puissant, or near at hand: but if you suspect the ariual of the enemy, or that
you know him stronger in the field then your self, and would therefore encampe
surely, until further aid come unto you: then shall you without this ring 100
pace distant, cause your pioners and soldiers (for upon such an occasion he is
not worthy to bear the name of a soldier that will not set his hand to the
Spade) you shall cause them, I say, throw up another rampire with certain
bulwarks at every corner, and likewise in the middle of the Curtain, that
Musket shot may play between them, or if time would permit, it were convenient
every 12 score to have of these circular platformes with a Uamure to defend
the small shot, for in so short time it is impossible to make any sufficient
rampire to abide a battery, neither can a camp be furnished of victuals to
abide any long time, and that is the cause why I have discribed those plain
circular forms, which in fortification of a fowne or for were more ridiculous,
and in a camp to make them more exquisite, were no less foolish curious.

The form and proportion of the Camp.


The form of another Camp.
IN the second book of Marshall discipline, Master Steward, as I take it out
some Italian translation sets down this manner of Camp, which I will breefely
touch. After the return of the discouerers and espials, he must according to
their relation, march to such a place where he may encampe, to store himself,
and hinder the passage of victuals to his enemies, wherein he must confer
with the chief Purueyour, and with the Sergeant Majors and others, whether it
be fit for the fight, well defenced, wholesome in air, dry under foot,
plenty in water, wood, and medowe, and have free passage for forage,
victuals, munitions, etc. If there be any palace, hall, or house, the same is
to be allotted for the General, otherwise a sit proportion of encamping, so as
the men at arms may lodge about the General, which I note thus.. The Lances
and light horse about them thus noted.. Then next Merchants and victualers,
thus M. V. The pikemen thus,. being next about the^. The Hargabuziers in the
square about them thus S. The^ have you the lodgings for the artillarie, thus
DD, or a Gun. Then next the Bulwarks and the trenches 80 pace in breadth. The
cross broad ways to the camp 30 pace, wherein Merchants, artificers, and
victualers may lodge, but his special drift is, that upon any sudden
Camisado, whilst the shot, pikes, and light Hargolateares, make resistance, the
light horsemen, Lances, with the men at arms, may have leisure to arm
themselves, and repair to the Generals Pauillion or palace, where with their
Lances and chasing staves in front on foot, they are in the manner of
Pikemen to try the uttermost of their strength, to save their General and the
army, together with their own honor, and with their Lances encounter
courageously with the enemies Pikemen, who being already wearied with their
former encounter, shall be able to maintain the fight until the footmen of
their part being refreshed, give a new onset and put their enemies to flight.
Thus would he have the footmen, the horsemen, the merchants and purueyours, the
craftsmen, soldier to soldier, back to back, and ridge to ridge, making the
lodgings double, upon the bank of the ditche, and in the curtains he may
place artillarie round about, and before it for safety, or else with the
carriage of the Munition, and the carriage of the whole army, enuiron it for his
defense, in which he shall immitate the Turk, who with his carriage with
Cammels, and the artillarie, does e^chaine and fortify the Camp, which we in
liew thereof plant Gabions, Baskets and Barrels full of earth, if the camp make
continuance: near unto the artillarie the Gunners must lodge who have charge
thereof, and then the Hargabuziers, etc. as before, and as this figure sets out.

Here place the Plat of incamping, at this mark *******
An other proportion of Encamping.
MEssire Guillaume du Bellay Seigneur de Langeay, Knight of the Order, and
Lientenant to the king of France at Turin, in his first book of Millitarie
Discipline, does in this sort following lodge one of his legions of footmen,
consisting of 12 bands, with two bands of horsemen, containing every one 100
men at arms, 100 light horse, 50 Estradiots, and 50 Hargolateares.

The Collonell is placed in the miost, two cross streets of 300 pace long,
and 60 large, for merchants, artificers, and victualers, the place before the
trenches 60 pace, to set the watch, to exercise arms, and to range the
soldiers in battle. There be two quarters for footmen, 6 bands a piece, and
two quarters for horsemen, the which their vallets are to entrench with a small
french, for to avoid the stealing of their horses, which the footmen often
do, the ends of the 4 streets are to be shut with railes or gates.



The proportion of a twofold camp.
IN this proportion the greatest part of the army is placed in the one half,
with the Generals lodging: The market place noted thus. M. The place for
munition at the one side, and that for victuals at the other. The place for
cattle is thus marked. C The place for artificers is thus, A. As by this figure
appears, being environed with soldiers lodgings.



The manner how to dislodge and march away from the enemies Army.
Having, as I suppose, sufficiently declared what an Army ought to observe, as
well in marching as in camping, I have thought good in brief sort to show what
is to be done in the dislodging of an army, presupposing that the two armies
being enemies, are lodged in the view one of another, or at the leastwise but
small distance betwixt them. And for that it is a thing which imports the high
Marshall very much, to know how he ought to govern himself in such an
affair, he must therein have special considerations.

To retire in the night and so to get away from the enemy, seems to be the
only and most assured way that can be chosen, nevertheless that way is not
sufficient to accomplish his determinations, if he which means to retire, be
not aided by the situation of the ground, and other qualities of the place and
country, whether he means to retire*

To touch particulars I say, when you dislodge in the night, it behoones you to
use the greatest diligence you can, which nevertheless, as I said, is no ways
sufficient, unless you be aided by ye situation of the ground: for he that is
to march through plains and open places, without having any wood or vallie to
retire his army unto: when the enemy does perceive his retrait, very hardly
(as I have said) shall he be able to procure his saftie. For when ye enemies
Cauallarie have attained him, they will easily constrain him to stay, and
force him to fight against his will with great disorder, and specially if he
conduct Artillery and other impediments appertaining to an army, which no
reason would that he should leave in pray and spoil to the enemies. Moreover
an army must not be made to march faster then his ordinary pace: for if it
should be hastened with an extraordinary speedy pace, the same would augment
the evil opinion the souldier^ have had to conceive by reason of their retire,
which is a very dangerous thing, for thereby may arise a disorder without
redress, as oftentimes has been experimented. The army which pursues has
not these difficulties, besides she may leave behind all her bagage: and if
their soldiers be pressed to march fast, their army thereby shall become so
much the more courageous, specially if the General, Colonels and Captains
use magnificent speeches, and words of advantage, as is convenient should be
used in such cases. Therefore howsoever it ^all out, the retraite made in the
night, seems to me not (...) assured, if the same be not accompanied with the
situation of the place: the which was very well foreseen and put in practi^e
by Frauncis the French king of Cambrasis, when in the night he did march away
from Charles the fifth, for by the succor of a great wood, he put all his army
in safety, the which had entire past the said wood, before the enemies
Cauallarie could overtake them: and then having made Alta by reason of the
advantage they had, and through the commodity of the situation of the ground
where he was encamped, he was able to fight with the emperialists.
Contrariwise, they having over hastily followed the French army, at the issue
of the word setting upon them, remained for the most part either taken, or
slain, or repulsed. The Protestants in Germany did use the same pollici^,
when they retired away from the Emperor, who was so (...) ^ (...) unto them,
that they could not, no not in the night (...), but the empecialists did follow
them, for whilst the Protestants did enter into a valley, in the which they
could not (...) out great disadvantage, they did speedely seize upon a hill,
where they placed a good troop of horsemen and footmen, with certain field
pieces, by means of this hill, and of a (...) hand, which they had filled full
of Hargabuziers, they did bar the Emperors camp from following them, even
accordingly as they had determined: when as the Emperor being approached* and
perceiving them to be retired into so strange a place, both by nature and art,
he suffered them to pass. Therefore I say, by the (...) of the situation of
the ground and country, a man may assure his retraite, as by these examples
appears. And so the retraite made by night is always best, for then you may
with greater opportunity and leisure win or attain to any place of
advantage: whereas the retire made by day, without assurance of some place of
advantage, is most dangerous, unless it be that he which makes the retraite,
be much more stronger in horsemen. Therefore the army which is the weakest,
ought to keep himself as far off from the enemy, as he can: to the intent
that when he will retire, he be not constrained to fall into some notable
disorder.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF MILITARY DIRECTIONS, ENtreating of the great Master of the
Attillarie, of the Master Gunner, of general Notes of Fortification, of the
besieging, expugning, and defending of a Portresse, etc.
And first, The Office of the great Master of the Artillarie.
THIS great Officer, and man of singular estimation, after he is by his Prince
or General Captain, appointed to take charge of ye Artillarie, he must make
an inuentory of every small and particular persell, that accompany the pieces
of Ordenance: for that they be almost infinite in number, to the intent the
same may always remain ready, at time of need, and that thereof he may make
good account, as appertains to him that does possess an office of such
importance.

When he is to march in Campania, (as it is to be presupposed he shall) it is
requisite that he make provision, that every piece have his sufficient number
of draught-Horses and Oxen, apt to carry the same according to the nature of
the Country, with convenient speed and great facility.

The said Horses or Oxen, ought always to have men for the purpose to govern
them, who at all times in all places, ought every one to lodge near his own
Piece day and night, that they may always be ready to do their office, thereby
to avoid confusion, that unawares in such cases do oftentimes fall, when
things be not well placed in order.

Likewise it is convenient that every heavy Piece, as the Cannon, Culuerine,
Demiculuerine, or Demicanno^, have a Gunner to attend thereupon: and every
Gunner have his Coadiutor or (...), and they both a man to serve them and to
aid them to (...), dischardge, mount, wadde, cleanse, scour, and cool the
(...), (...) they are ouerheated: For which there must be always (...), (...),
Uineger, cold water, etc. Besides that, eu^rie heavy Piece in some certain
respect, must have alone by himself, a Master of the wood and a Smyth, that
together they may aptly supply the needful force and strength, for the
weelding of so huge and heavy a Machine as is a Cannon.

It is necessary that h^ create a sufficient Corporal or C^nstable over the
Gunners, who may take care and charge over them, and that he may maintain and
keep order amongst them: yea, and continually ouerviewe, examine, and search
the Instruments to charge, to sp^nge, make clean the Pieces, cool them, with
vinegar and cold water, and such like.

This Corporal or Cunstable, must likewise look to the life and behavior of
the Gunners, their government and customs, their committed and convenient
orders, their obedience and actions: and it is convenient, that he praise and
confirm the good doings of them, and reprehend and disprayse the evil use of
others, making report thereof to his chief Captain and master, for that he
may readily, by his means, who has authority, use remedy against such
inconvenience as would arise, the which sometimes is occasion of great
disturbance and of errors of importance.

For the better performance of this great Officers service, he ought to be
very curious and careful for the safe-keeping of the Munition of powder, which
is allotted for the service of Artillary, Musket and Hargabuziers, and fire
works: so likewise he must have regard to the Bulletes, to the Lead, to the
Match, whether it be of Cotton, Hemp or Flex: to the Ladders, ye Iron work,
the wood work, the Saltpeter, the Coals and Brimstone. For sometimes, every
one of these things is carried by it self, for more safty against burning and
artificial fyres, which are accustomed to be carried for the service of the
army, and to furnish and suffice, during the wars: and therefore he must
take care, that he have good provision of Carts or Wagons, or some other
sufficient mean, apt to carry these Munitions and necessary preparations,
together with the whole quantity of Ropes, of wood, fit and com modious to
serve for the use of his office: Of tables, apt to make Bridges over ditches,
and in all other places where ye passage of the Artillarie or Army is stauled.
And so consequently of many other things, that be committed to his government
to conduct: since that the Ordenance with the impediments belonging thereunto,
be of greater travail and toil then the rest of the Camp.

To this Officer therefore appertaynes a Cunstable or Lieuetenant, as I said
before, and certain Clerks in wages, who are to have regard unto the
foresaid causes, and to attend upon inferior matters, rendering account of
all their doings to the Master of the Ordenance. From time to time he must
foresee, as I said before, to provide that there remain stuff enough in
store, for all kind of necessaries, belonging to the Artillarie: as wheels for
Ordenance, Axeltrees, Ladles, Spunges, bullets, chain shot, cross bars,
corn powder, and serpentine powder, Mattockes, shouelles, Crows of yro^, hand
Axes, Engines for the mounting of Ordenance, Graund Maundes or Gabions, little
hand basketes, Ropes, and all other Carte ware.

To have the Gunners not only skilful in the ready managing of their pieces,
but also in the making of Trunckes Balls, Arrows, and all other sorts of
wild fire and fire work: and for the continual supply of them, they ought to
have in a readiness, great store of Sulphur, Saltpeter, Rosine, Calx viue,
Quick peall, Lintesede oil and common Lamp oil, Pitch, Tar, Camfere,
Wax, Tutia, Arsenicke, Quick silver, and Aqua vite. Hereof let him frame
balls of fire, to burn in the water: Cressets and Torches that storms or
winds canont extinguish: murdering buullets, to be shot out of great mortar
pieces, and such like.

If any band in the Camp, want Powder, or Match, or shot: the Master of the
Ordenance, upon request of the Captain, is to give order, that his Clerks
deliver the same, taking a bill of the Captains hand for their discharge. The
which bill must at the pay day, be delivered to the Treasurer, who is to
stop so much upon the pay of the Captain and his band.

Let him provide that there be of wheele-wrights, Carpenters, Coopers, Smithes,
Bowyers, Fletchers, Masons, and such other skilful Artisans, with all tools
and necessary needful, to preserve, repair and make all such things, as to
the Artillarie and munition appertains.

To him likewise it appertains, to cast bridges over waters, Rivers, and
Ditches, for the commodity of the army: and consequently for that respect,
must take great care to carry with him, men apt, sufficient, and fit for
that kind of service: as Shipwrightes, Wagon-wrightes, Makers of Cables, and
such as be practiced in sailing, to the intent that at time of neeede, they may
be the better able to perform any enterprise.

So likewise he must cause certain boats or barks to be made, somewhat
massiue, with fit and apt pieces of plancks and boords in square form, for a
bridge to be fastened and nailed upon the said Bark, in such sort, that being
joined piece to piece, with a great Rope or Cable, thrust through and turned
double, through certain ringes of iron, which are fastened upon the extreme
parts of the points or corners of every piece of the bridge, and for every
piece four Kings, one at every corner, which being prepared, the bridge may
be put together entyre and whole. Upon that side the River your Army does
remain, where two stakes, two pillars, or two Trees stiffly planted, one end
of the bridge must be tied and accommodated, with ropes of sufficient
strength: the which end being already turned toward the fall of the Water,
and the other toward the running of ye stream, must afterward be set free
and loose, and thrust forth and disseuered from ye bancke, by certain of the
foresaid men practiced in sailing, who ought at due time cast Anckers into the
River, which are of force to sustain the bridge, from being carried down
further then his prefixed and limited bonds of the other bancke, by the
violent course of the running of the water. The which bounds and marks ought to
be foreseen, and the largenes of the River artificially measured, if the same
be desired to be done exactly: that justly and at the same instant when need
does require he may serve his turn, neither with more nor less number of
barks or boats, then so many as is necessary for the breadth of the River:
for if there should be more or less, there would arise great confusion or
disturbance.

This arteficiall bridge, is an instrument very much used amongst great Armies
in the wars at these days, as was manifest by the preparation of one made at
Namures, for Don John of Austria, and this figure following is the form
thereof.



It shall be sometimes good to plant Soldiers upon this bridge, who may be
able to withstand, and repulse the enemies upon the other shore, that they do
not displant the same, but that you may be able to recover the shore, and
sustain the bridge. The Anckers being cast, and Cables ready to let at large,
it is necessary to let the head of the bridge slyppe down slackly, and be
disseuered from the banckside where it was joined together* and which you are
determined to leave, and to aspect the running of the water, carry the bridge
to the otherside of the River, aided by the industry of those men that be upon
it, to make the passage more easy.

The Army being passed the River, and the bridge being disseuered piece from
piece, and drawn on land, the boords nailed to the boats even as they be,
must be laid upon a broad Waine or Wagon, made of purpose for the carriage
of them after the Army, so shall the boat remain with the bottom turned up
toward the skies, and the boordes joined together, lie flat upon the wagon
underneath, ready for any other action.

Provision of Horses and Oxen, will easily conduct these Engines after the
Camp, whilst the boat and the boords be nailed together, and laid upon a
carriage prepared of purpose for the same, as before appears.

He must make means to have a sufficient number of people, and of apt
proportion to make guard and watch about ye Artillary, munition, arteficiall
fire, waines, wagons, and other things necessary for ye siege of the enemy,
with diverse other accidents: the which people must go with him continually day
and night, to keep good and perfect watch.

Besides this he must have a band of Pyoners, of convenient and sufficient
quantity, who ought to have a careful and vigilant Captayn, that may always
guide them under an Ensign, that they may be the more united together, and the
better conducted and governed. He must moreover foresee, that likewise they
be defended and assured from invasion of the enemies, with a good number of
soldiers, whilst they make the ways even and perfect, where the impediments
thereunto appertayning and all the Camp must pass.

The said Pyoners, must be provided o^ Spades, Pickeares, some with Leauers,
Crows of Iron, Baskets, Wheel barrows, and other Instruments apt to such use
and affairs: ^o plant Artillarie, and to entrench the place in the Camp, that
shall be by the prouest Martial assigned for Munition.

It shall be very convenient if it were possible, to pay the^ their wages every
night: for since they are not men of estimation and honor, such as men of
war be, and right soldiers, they oftentimes will depart without license at
their own pleasure. Neither have they respect of incurring danger of
punishment, or hazard of life, no nor to bring great discommoditie to an
Army. The which through the benefit of their work is very well accommodate
and strengthened in diverse respects, not only touchching the foresaid causes,
but also to make Trenches, Gabions, Mines, Ditches, straight and crooked, and
all other platformes convenient and necessary for the Army.

The great Master of the Artillarie, must have about him a Squadron, which may
be called the Gentlemen of the Artillarie, Lanze spezzate, or Caualiers of the
Cannon, such as I have described in my second Book to be of S. George his
squadron, in which book they may read special notes about their duties,
specially in the Chapters of discoueries. These Caualieres, every one having
the oversight of a Piece, especially at a battery, when they must see
continually that the Gunners do their duty, I would wish to be very
sufficient personages, to the intent they may be able to know how to execute
the great Masters ordinances, in things necessary to be performed in so great
actions: and that particulerlie they desire to be accounted discreet and
modest soldiers, whose office is, continually to solicit and keep in order
such men as be indiscreet and rude.

Not only the great Master, and his other Officers, but also these worthy
Caualieres, ought to be of sufficient understanding and experience, to know
how to charge every Piece, and afterward be able to perceive (as near as is
possible) what effects the shot of every Cannon will work, the shot of
every Culuerine, the demie of them both, and likewise what every Piece is able
to perform, to the intent he be not always ouer-ruled by the judgment of
every Gunner: which his experience, is both profitable to his Prince, and
commendable to his proper credit and reputation.

It is a special note for them to observe, that Wine and Uineger, be apt to
cool and refresh the Artillarie when it is over hot through often shooting.
In these and such like matters, he must delight himself, that he may be of
perfect experience, and be fully provided for all exployts that may fall, and
for any other notable respect, worthy of great consideration.

He must take assured order, that the Pieces of Artillarie, be well planted
upon their cariages, forcibly and substantially, and in respect of the
performance of this service, he must carry with him more then the ordinary
store of Spades, Shouels, Barrels, Salt, Spokes, Plates, Naues, Ax^ltrees,
broad Nails, Spykings, and other ordinary iron work, that he may upon a
sudden, with the help of a Smith and Carpenter, and other like Artificers,
which are appointed in cases of such need, yield a supply to all such things,
which shall be lost, broken, and destroyed in a long voyage, or else by many
volles of shot.

Note that the great Master ought to have good understanding and experience,
how to prepare with great advantage, with Gabions and Rampires of earth, or
with wool packs, the place where the battery must be planted, to the intent
the said battery may take effect, that the flankers and curtine may speedily
and with little charge be battered and ruinate, that all things may succeed
according to his determination, in as perfect order as is possible, and that it
may take away and make frustrate all the enemies defenses, bursting and
displanting their Pieces, and tormenting them in as terrible sort as he can
devise, procuring, and always foreseeing, that there be a sufficient battery
made, and that it be easy for the soldiers to ascend up upon their assault,
that they be not forced to make a shameful retire, to their great dyscredite
and destruction.

Therefore it is most necessary, and altogether requisite, that in battery,
or in any other natural form of assault, not only the breach be sufficient,
large, and easy, to mount upon and ascend, but also that he use diligence
to dismount the enemies defenses, that is to say, such Pieces as annoy the
Camp, and that the flankers be cut off before any assault be given, as I shall
more at large hereafter declare, to the intent the meaning of their assault
take effect, which is, to enter the Town, that the slaughter and great
destruction of many notable Captains and soldiers may be avoided.

He must endeavor himself to have knowledge in making of Mines, Ouens, and
Caves, and to know how to order and use them: the which things, if they be
made conformable to their due as they ought, are of marvelous aid to those ye
besiedge a Fortress: but above all things, he must be very wary and
circumspect in making them, that the besieged do not perceive they are mined,
to the intent they prevent not the same by making countermines: the which sort
of working does easily hinder Mines, or otherwise by sincking of deep wels,
or profound holes and pits, the which choke up the Mines when they encounter
with them. And if by Mines he perform any thing, to give order that the
Captain of the Minors and Pyoners, accomplish his directions.

He should likewise take delight, to cause powder be made, and arteficiall fire
of all sorts, and to the intent he may commodiously perform these things, and
make them with greater facility, he must carry with him necessary instruments
for the same, as Morters, pestles, troughes, Cribles to sift, tables to dry
upon, iron work to refyne saltpeter, Cawdrons, Coullanders, or strayners, and
such like.

He ought to be learned in ancient and modern hystories, and to consider and
compare the manifold stratagems that other notable Soldiers have heretofore
used. To devise sundry Engines for assaults defenses, and to be cunning in
framing sundry sorts of bridges for passage of waters, to divert the course of
waters, or to drown any Country or Fort subject thereunto, to convey great
Ordenaunce over Marshes, and other ingenious inventions.

He must likewise have exquisite knowledge in the Mathematicals, considering
thereby he shall be able, certainly to shoot at all randons, to convey Mines
under earth, to any Curtine, Bulwark, or other place, that he determines by
violence of powder to rent in pieces. To make a conjecture and forecast, what
quantity of shot, powder, etc. shall be requisite to serve the Camp, to
suffice a battery, mine, or any other exployt. To set out in due proportion
every particular fortification, of Camp, Town or Fort, where Ordenaunce is to
be used, which cannot possibly without knowledge in these Sciences be
sufficiently discharged. And that Master of the Ordenaunce that is ignorant
herein himself, and trusts to the skyll of others, shall be abused by
audacious presumptuous persons, that taking upon them the knowledge they
utterly want, will shame themselves, dishonor him, and foil the enterprise.

In the field, when soever any day of service is, it is the office of the
great Master of the Orednaunce, to select a convenient place to plant his
Ordenaunce, as well to annoy the enemy, as also to be in such sort guarded and
fortified, that it be not surprised of the enemy.

In the Camp he only ought to give order for the planting of the Artillarie,
and fortification of the flanks. And that the Ordenaunce be planted to the
best advantage, and also to foresee that the Master Gunner, and ye other
Gunners do their duties, which do appertain to their office.

Finally, this office is of great reputation in the field, upon the execution
whereof great service depends. And therefore the great Master of the
Ordenance, ought to be a man of great learning and experience: whereby he may
be able to conceive and perform many particular actions. Since he is one of
the principal Officers of the field, having (as I have already said) charge of
the Artillary, munition, and fortification, in which exployts, a very good
wit, without trayning and experience, shall stagger and be amazed. But because
it is neither possible nor convenient, that the Master of the Ordenaunce,
should attend upon all the premises himself, he may commit (as I have
said) inferior causes to the execution of his Lieuetenant or Constable, and to
the Gentlemen of the Artillarie, Caualieres of the Canon, or voluntary
Lieuetenants, reserving always to himself the disposition of the great and
most important.

The Office of the Master Gunner.
The Master Gunner is but an Officer appertaining to the great Master of the
Artillarie, and his Office is, to see all the inferior Gunners to do their
duties, to be skillful and ready in their charging, discharging, cooling,
leueling, and mounting of the Ordenance, and to have in readiness, bullets,
powder, ladles, and spunges, to wadde, ram, cool, and charge the pieces,
also to peruse the cariages and wheels, that they be strong, and the Pieces
themselves, that they have no honie-combes or flawes in them, whereby they
should be in danger of breaking.

To have in store crosse-barres, chaynshot, cases of haileshot, in manner of
Cartages, trunckes and bals of wild fire, with artificial barrels of preble
stones charged with powder, to throw into Ditches, or to defend a breach upon
any sudden attempt. These and such like, are matters for the Master Gunner
to occupy himself in, and to make proofs of them in the presence of the
Master of the Ordenance, that he may see the effect and violence of them.

The Office of the fire Master.
This Officer, the better to perform his duty, at the entrance into his
Office, must take his oath, to be true and just in his Office, and that without
special commandment of the General, not to adventure to set any thing on
fire, unless that the enemy be invaded and encountered withal, and then
without delay, all matters laid apart, to annoy the enemy by hysskill what he
may. And that he do not burn or wast any Corne-houses or other thing that may
any ways profit the Camp. And that to his knowledge he shall not hurt or
hinder any poor creature or aged person that he may well spare, but extend
mercy and pity on them.

His Office is, to make and carry with the Camp all sorts of arteficiall
fireworks, and Engines of fire to endomage the enemy.

Certain general notes of fortification, necessary for a singular soldier
or ingenior to know.
ALthough many Authors have in long discourses written of fortifications,
nevertheless, for that it seems unto me a thing necessary to be understood of
a Soldier, at leastwise of him, which by way of merit, means to obtain
recompense of such Captain Generals, as be famous professors of this
honorable discipline, I therefore resolve with my self, to declare my
opinion, but only in general and not in particular, which I leave to those
that be Masters of this warlike Architecture.

This art for the most part, is grounded upon the knowledge how to accomodate
all things with a requisite form, agreeable to the situation of the ground
where one determines to fortify. The which ought to be made with Trenches, and
convenient workmanshyp, well flanked, and the circute of the ground within, as
near as is possible, large on every side, and so toward the manifest
oppositions of the enemies, there ought to be planted and made round and sharp
corners. The means how to do the same, is to leave them beneath in the Ditch
as they be, and from the midst upward rounded or pared, for above where they
be most easily battered, they be round, to the intent they may be the stronger,
and beneath sharp, which may be very well defended from the shot, which the
enemy cannot lay so low, as if the angle were round beneath, and this is the
best order that may be used touching the sharp corners of Bulwarks.

Toward the opposition of the enemy, these foresaid angles, or corners,
curtines, couers, or other such like works of bulwarks ought to be turned,
with their defense of Casamatte, with their cou^tercouers, that is to say,
shadowed in such sort as they cannot be battered or choked, of the foresaid
platformes placed opposite by the enemy, and much less be seen or discerned
if it be possible.

Neither let him put his confidence in counterscarpes, or else in adjoined
platformes, bulwarks, or Caualieres, sholdered and arteficially made, which do
cover or shadow the^, neither in deep Ditches that do incompasse them: for
that the oppositions being manifest, the one may be scaled and the other
broken down with Pickaxe and Spade, for by the favorable cover of close and
crooked Ditches and Trenches, Pyoners may very easily be guided, with those and
such like instruments unto them, being ever accompanied with a good guard of
Soldiers.

Note that the Bastillions be massiue, the Parapettes gross, the Gabions
strong and stiffly radled, and full of good matter of earth, purged from stones,
apt to be incorporated, and cleave together: and above all, it is requisite,
the Fortress be compassed with strong Ditches, that is to say, cut out of
firm and natural ground, and not forced up of heaped earth, which is
remooueable, and that they be large, profound and deep, in the which the
fortification may remain covered, and closely hid, even to the height of the
Scarpe, and edge of the same, to the intent the Parapettes be only seen and
no other.

Take special care that the Scarpe of the wall or the Trenches, do not so
much decline, that by their overmuch declination, the circuit of the Forte,
the which is in making, be not devoured and made straighter then was
determined, and the work did require: the want of the observation whereof, has
brought many fortifications to great defects.

When these fortifications be redused, into a reasonable condition and perfect
form: it is an easy thing for a Mason to mantle the same with a wall of
stone, sand, and chalk, being a mortar more firm and stable, done by the
aid nevertheless, of those that have knowledge in Architecture. For that in
the greatest part of this work it is not necessary, that the wall thereof
cause any other effect, the^ only to sustain, with his counterforts and other
arteficiall devises, the weight of the earth, and to provide in the one and in
the other of them, as near as it is possible, Countermines, lyghtes,
breathings, hoales or windows, and pittes, wrought in their right places, and
in due sort: thereby to avoid and make frustrate, the Mines, hoales and Ouens,
that the enemy shall cause to be made. By ye comoditie of which Countermines,
is understood and known very comodiously, when the enemy does secretly labor
underneath the earth, to annoy the besieged.

To be advertised thereof, place within these Caves upon the plain ground, a
Drum, on the one end, and lay certain dice upon the skin, which dice, the
enemy laboring under the earth, near unto the wall, cannot lie still and
quiet: but by reason of their work under the earth, (although not seen of the
Defendants) do remove and leap. Otherwise placing within the said
Countermynes, and upon the plain ground, a basin of Copper, Tin, or Brass,
or of such like metal, full of Water, the enemy laboring under the earth,
near unto the wall, by reason of the said strokes and working, although the
same remain unseen of the eye, nevertheless the water shall be seen to
remove and tremble, a manifest show of their myning, which may suddaynly be
prevented, by means of these Countermynes, or such like preparation as does
serve for that purpose.

Some use to lay a sack of Wool in the Countermines, and upon the same a
basin of Copper wherein is put three or 4. round hard pease, the which will
move and ring against the side of the bottom of the basin, at the strokes of
the Miners of the enemy.

These walled Countermines, seem to be sufficient to find out any other
hidden or secret deceit of ye enemy, neither ought they in my judgment, to
be dispraysed, as some do, which cause them not to be made in their
fortifications, alleging for their ercuse, the avoiding of expense, which
presumption, perchance in the end, will become the cause of their ruin.

Note that the firm and real deefnce, consistes more in the thick and gross
platformes of earth, being well compounded and made of good matter, rather
then in stone walls, although they be marvelous massiue, and of extreme
thicknes, considering that against the force and violent fury of Artillarie,
that substance does most resist, and receive less damage by their blows,
giving place with an arteficiall yielding, rather then by the force of
stubborn resistaunce.

It is manifest, that to ruinate or make that wall to fall, which does lightly
give place to the blows of the Artillarie, and suffers the bullets to enter
and pearse the same with small difficulty, that the same be shaken, cut and
loosed with the often blows of Artillarie, and by the often reiterating of
vollees of shot, (as of necessity you must) to break and beat down the
same: yet notwithstanding there follows very small effect, for that sometimes
the same is battered less, and with less fury then is requisite. But the
massiue wall of stone, greater ruin is made by the enemy the^ sometimes he
desires, and with small labor, which only comes to pass by the stubborn
resistance of the firm and massiue dead wall: the which the Artillarie for
the most part, as well far of the battery, as near it, only by ye forceable
shaking thereof, brings great confusion to the defenders.

Therefore besides these foresaid aduertisements, it is convenient a good
Soldier, have long practice of the effects, and extreme force of the
Artillarie, and of the diligent art and infinite policies, used of soldiers
of valor, the which is far more then any wit of small practice can
imagine, since that he is not capable of any thing, but that his simple
judgment does behold.

And for this respect, besides a particular profession in this art, it behoues
him of necessity to be able to draw proportions. That he have knowledge in the
art prospectiue, in numbers, in measure, in making of Gabions, in making of
Lotte, compounde and simple, to nail them dispearse and sow them, to
compounde Fagote of good boughs, to know how to join and mayle with wood,
these kind of works, to dispearse and distribute the earth with sufficiency,
and that it be well divided or sifted amongst the Fagots and cliftes, to the
end that they may be easyly endomaged with fire, and thereby to make them
steadfast.

To beat well down and fasten the labor with maules of wood, to give
reasonable and easy issue to the course of water, that might chance to make
corruption, and to make cloach large and walled, and not otherwise: for that by
means of water, such like works are accustomed to receive great ruins and
hinderance. And it is necessary moreover for him to know: how with due
measures to form Bulwarks, Caualieres, Platformes, straight and crooked,
Casemates, Couers, Canoneres, Merlones, Curtines Scarpes, false Ports, secret
issues for footmen and horse men, Counterditches, Ditches, Sholders and
Counterscarpes, and he must beware that in his parapettes, he make no windows
nor loope holes neither small nor great, to the intent they be not choked,
neither strooken by leuill, nor displanted of the Enimye, with his Artillarie.
But he must provide that the said Parapettes be so placed, that very
commodiously the Artillarie, the Muskets, the Hargabuziers, and all other
sorts of offensive weapons, may play and trouble the Enemy, without being (as
is afforesayde) manifestly disturbed and displanted by the enemy.

Touching the entryes or Gates which be made to enter into Fortresses: they
ought to be made in the midst of the Curtine, or rather near adjoining to the
flank of the Bulwark: with a bridge of wood, to the intent that in time of
siege, the same may be cut down or burnt. The Port ought to be so low, that
being on the Counterscarpe without, the same remain discouerd. It is requisite
also, that at the entry of the said Port, there be a safe place for diverse
respects: and specially to keep assured the Soldiers Arms.

In the bottom of the Merlone, or rather near adjoining to the flancke of the
Bulwark, an issue must be made, which may serve for the Soldiers (whilst the
battery is in making) to issue forth: to the intent also they may defend the
Dytch, and take away the ruins of the battery, because they would hinder the
Cannoniers, and be a means that the enemy might approach the nearer.

There be many which require that the Curtines should compass, or be bended
inward toward the Fortress, with a platform either within or without, or a
Caualiere upon the brinke of the said Curtine. They allege for their reason,
that the enemy thereby is much more endomaged, and that his battery is more
crooked, and therefore procures less danger to the Fortress then if it were
straight. But I am of an opinion, that if a man work in that sort, the
bulwarks cannot have their ample places, and thick sholders, to be able to
sustain the blows of the Artillarie, and even so it should be likewise
difficile to make retraites.

Therefore I think it is not good to have the Curtines folded compass wise or
crooked, if the situation of the place do not require the same. But I would
rather they should be straight from one Bulwark to another.

And furthermore, it were good that they were of such length, that not only the
great Cannons of the first place, but also the small Pieces may cleanse the front
of ye Bulwark. Some perchance will affirm, that the Curtyne being short, the
great Cannons would become hurtful to the Bulwarks of the Fortress. For
answer whereof, I say: That in the first place when the enemy does assault
the Forte, the great Cannons ought not to be charged with bullets, for defense
of the said Forte: but rather filde with pieces of iron, or of some other
Metal, or with stones or chains, for these things work a marvelous
effect, against the assaults and Escalades which the Enemy does give.

To shoot bullets in great Cannons were good, when the Ditch is full of Rocks
and heaps of stones: for the said Bullet striking amidst the said he apes of
stones, dispearsing and sparkeling them, will make a great slaughter of those
which give the assault. Bullets in the great Cannons be good also to break the
Trenches and Engines, which the enemies make within the Dith: Moreover the
length of the Curtine being correspondent to the carrying of the small Pieces,
is cause that the shot of the said Pieces, becomes the dispatch and mortality
of the Enemies, and the defense and sustentation of the Fortress: for almost
against all Fortresses, the Enemy works under the Curtine with Trenches, in
cutting through the Counterscarpe, or rather by filling of y^ ditch, thereby
the more commodiously to cut the said Curtine or Bulwark, and so make steps
or degrees, to ascend to give assault to the Fortress: as I saw performed at
the siege of Limbourgh, the head City of that Duchy, where the Prince of
Parma being Lieuete^ant of the Army, in Don John d'austria his absence,
betwixt the battery and the breach in bottom of the dry Ditch, certain close
couerts were made, from whence the Soldiers might ascend up to give the
assault, by certain steps cut out of the hill and Bulwark it self, by
which the town was entered, although in end it yielded.

It is profitable to have water in the ditch, when a Fortress is situate in
such a place, that it borders upon diverse Enemies: for water brings with it
this comodity, that unawares in the night, it cannot be assaulted by Escalade.
Water likewise is profitable to small Fortresses, wherein there is not such
great numbers of people, as one may be able to make issue for the defense
thereof.

But for a great Fortress where it is necessary to make sallies, it is
requisite the ditch be dry, for that in the same a man has space to make
retraites, and is far more commodious to make issues and sallies, to defend
the said Ditch, specially if the bancke descending from the Curtine, be cut
round with covert and close Trenches, even with the Counterscarpe: as was
about the dry Ditch of Louayne, under the government of my Collonell the Baron
of Cheuerau, when we did daily attend the siege of 60000. men in Camp by
Machlin, guided by Casamire and the Count Bossu. 1578.

Like wise a Ditch being dry, one may comodiously take away the ruins, which
the Enimyes make with their batteries: to the intent the said ruins, do not
serve the Enemy for a Ladder or steps, to mount up to the Fortress, and for
a Trench.

A dry Ditch has likewise this good commodity, that when the Enemy would fill
it with Fagotes, they may be the more easily burnt, the which would not come
to pass, if water were in the same, which does extinguish fire, and make the
Ditch more easy to be filde.

Water is likewise more dangerous in the time of Frost: for that being frosen,
it makes the walls more apt and easy to be scaled and surprised. The dry
Ditch is in this to be commended, that when the Soldiers sallie out to
skirmishe, or do any other action, and would retire by reason of the violent
charge the Enimye gives them, they may save themselves in the dry Ditch, if the
draw bridge of the Fortress were forced to be drawn up.

A dry Ditch is likewise good, that upon any suddayne affair or invasion in
time of war, one may save the Cattle of the adjoining Country, within the
said Ditches.

Notwithstanding all these devises for ye defending of a Fortres being
considered, yet am I of a grounded opinion, that it is no wisdom to put such
assured repose and trust in a Fortress, how strong soever it be, and how well
victualled and furnished with all necessary things, that it is able of it
self continually or any long time, to resist the force of a Royal Army: For
either the Defendours become weary, or by warlike sallies devoured, wasted, and
so by little and little, remain consumed, or else the munition and the
victualles, the which consists of infinite things, do fail, if not in all
respects, at leastwise in some particulers: the which, although it seem to
have been very little, yet has it been many times the occasion of a
general loss: so that it does much more ensue when the principal things do
want, as water, wood, bread, wine, bear, vinegar, salt, dried flesh, and such
like particularities, necessary for man's life.

Moreover, these things following, may procure the loss and ruin of a
Fortress, fyring of the Munition, the vain consuming of the same, or by the
means of Mutinies, secret treasons, the death of some principal person, or
else the devouring damage which the sundry shots of the Artillary has made: and
chiefly where sometimes does want matter to repair ye ruin of a breach, and
to stop up ye battered wall. Sometimes the careless diligence of the
Captains and soldiers defendants, suffer the Town to be won by Mines. And
others have been gained by only spade and pickaxe, as was attempted by Duke
Charles at Metz, and performed by the great Turk before Famagosta in Cypres,
the which they perform in this sort. With five or six thousand Pyoners, they
begin a rolling Trench, somewhat far from the Ditches, and never cease day nor
night, until they have performed their enterprise, wherefore they place their
Pyoners by guard and course, that one part works whilst another rests, and
when the earth is at the beginning raised the height of a man, and of the
largenes that the same Trenches is to be made, there do some of the Pyoners
stand aloft, to cast up the earth that those beneath cast unto them, and so
they always continue, even until such time as they have made a Mountain,
near to the Ditch. And when they be there, they make Bastillions, to withstand
the sallies that those of the Town might make upon the Pyoners, and so always
with great numbers of Pyoners, they cast this Mountain into the Ditch, the
which consequently being as high or higher then the wall, they enter with the
same into the Fortress, and so at their pleasure expugne the same, against
which, it seems that neither men nor Artillary can prevail to use defense,
but that time will eat them out.

Yet this notwithstanding, every Fortress in a Frontire, or upon the border of
any Country of importance, ought to be made as strong as is possible, without
sparing of any cost, who although they cannot as is aforesaid, resist the real
force of an Army, nevertheless they may entertain and defer time after
time, until such time as the part assaulted do resolve to entreat of peace,
truce, or accord: or else procure such provision, as shall be sufficient for his
defense until succor arrive to relieve the besi^ged. As in the year 1565.
when the I Will of Malta was succourd against the mighty Turkish Army, a thing
no less wisely then courageously performed: the same being galantly defended
4. Months against continual assaults, infinite fury, and innumerable shot
of Artillarie, to the eternal memory of the defenders. Yet for all this their
brave disposition, if they had not been succored, the strong Fortress had
been lost, a thing to be noted of such as be Opiniatro.

Therefore all the foresaid aduertisements and many others, which appertain to
like matter, that I here for breuities sake omit to write, ought to be well
understood, searched and disciphered, and with the practice and right judgment
of a notable Soldier, not only conceive and carry in mind every perfect
subject and discourse, but also have at his fingers ends, all that either he
has seen or may be seen, or any thing able to be put in execution touching
such important affairs.

Likewise he must be of profound knowledge, and apt to yield aid and give
counsel when need requires, or when he is called thereunto by his Prince.
For by such virtuous means, more then by other that be less lawful, idle and
vicious, he may undoubtedly make himself acceptable, and become grateful to
every great personage: to which good disposition and sufficiency it follows,
that of them he shall be very much employed and esteemed, and so consequently
shall come to merit the honor, profit, and recompense due for so great
travail.

The which, although it do not succeed and fall out speedily, yet time does
bring forth the same, who being the father of truth, does faithfully in the
end, manifest the merit or demerite of the man, to the confusion of the wicked
and vicious worldlings, who by vile iniquity work to blind the excellency of
other men's virtues and valor.

Two things therefore there be that time can not devour, although that
entirely it discover the same, neither can Fortune destroy them, and they be:
The virtue of those men which be written in Books: And the known truth. The
which although for a time they may be hydd^n, yet in the end they appear to be
clear and manifest. And therefore the worthy actions of a good man, is the
occasion that we should have him in great estimation: for which respect, in the
end he arises to be wonderfully rewarded.

The order that is to be observed, when a Fortress is not able to be won by
Battery, Assault, Escalade, Mines or Rolling Trench, but by Famine.
WHen a General that has taken the charge of a siege, shall assuredly know,
that the City or Fortress that he shall besiege, cannot be taken by force
in any sort whatsoever, but that he must gain the same by a long siege. First
he must with all diligence and good counsel, oftentimes discover and view the
situation of the place, and choose the seat where he may Encampe and lodge
his Soldiers. Above all things he must beware that he plant himself in such
a place, as that the air become not corrupted, taking for example Mounsieur de
Law^rec at the siege of Naples, who by his occasion, besides the overthrow of
his enterprise, lost both all his Army and his own life, with the ruin of a
great part of the Nobility of France.

That he choose likewise a place that is proper for his purpose, through the
commodity of wood and water, and other necessary things for man's sustenaunce,
and covert and safe from danger of the enemies Artillary, as much as is
possible. If the place that he does besiege be great, and furnished with
great number of Footmen and Horsemen, which be able to make sallies and come
to skyrmish, he must incontinently take order, that his Camp be fortifyed in
such sort, as he shall think most convenient to front the force of the enemy.

This done, he must take from the enemies, all the commodities he can, as
water and all other things, which may yield them sustenaunce or relief, and to
reduse them to the greatest necessity he can.

Moreover, it has been seen by experience, that to divide an Army, and to
make it ouerweake when it is near a City, is a very dangerous thing,
principally when there is great force of brave and valiant Soldiers within
the Town. As fell out at the siege of Florence, where two Chiefes were
elected, the one on this side the River Arno toward the North, which were the
Almaines, and the other toward the South, where was the person of the General
with the greatest force of the Army. Florence therefore to deliver it self
from such continual toil, did sallie out by night, and assault the Almaine
Army with such fury, that had there not been great disorder amongst the
assailants, the Almaine Army had entirely been overthrown, and Florence had
been delivered from siege on that side.

Wherefore I think the most assured and the easiest way is, to enclose and
restrain the besieged Town by means of Forts, as was practiced in the wars
at Mirandell and Sienna.

Uisite dilligently all the ways and passages, by the which succors may be
given to the Town besieged. At every such place you ought to make a Forte, and
to approoch so near, as with four Forts or more you may enuiron all the
City. I would not have these Forts for that they be little, to be feeble,
neither that they should be situate in such a place, but that they might aid
one another. The form which I would wish them to be of, I have here set
forth.



Afterward, with the rest of his Army, he must plant him self in such a
place, as from thence at time of need, he may succor his Forts, or at the
least with one part thereof, having first sounded the force of the enemy: then
taking the Artillary which he shall think most necessary, he shall endeavor
himself to become the Master of the Country round about him: specially of
such places as he is able to force. Hereby he may reap great commodity, as
well by victualles, whereby he may nourish his Army, as that thereby he shall
take away from the besieged all hope of succor, and likewise by that means,
cause his Army to be feared: so that the Country either through love or
fear, shall neither take occasion to rebel, or yield him any resistance.

What is to be observed, when any City or Fortress is able to be expugned by
battery etc. to approach and besiege the same.
^ Presently have declared, how much it imports to choose for encamping a
plotte of ground, commodious, healthful and assured: now I will speak of the
order which is to be used, and necessary to be observed, when a General
supposes himself able to gain a Fortress or City by maine force of Arms.

First the Marshall of the field must go with practiced soldiers, and of
tried experience in the wars, well accompanied, to the intent they may safely
view and consider the circuit and situation of the Town, and to see upon
what side Trenches may be made for the planting of the Artillarie.

Above all he must be careful and provident, that the earth be of such nature
and quality, that it will receive the Spade and Pickaxe, and be apt to make
Trenches in, and other necessary things to cover themselves against the enemy.

To think that a man may perfectly discover and view a Town or Fortress
either in the day or in the night, it is impossible: for in the day, the enemy
will not give a man leave or leisure, at leastwise if they be men of courage.
In the night one cannot directly and thoroughly, neither discover the flanks,
Bulwarks and Ditches, neither behold many particularities, which be necessary
to him, which will aptly and in good order prepare himself to make an assault.

But the same discovery may be well and commodiously done, when the Trenches
shall be made, the which may bring him even to the Ditches. There the General
himself may at his ease, behold and discern all that he desires to know.

Touching the manner and fashion to make the Trenches, although there be diverse
opinions, nevertheless for the greater satis-faction of the Reader, I have
drawn out diverse fashions, which seem to be most commodious, most sure, and
most easy, as in the sundry portratures of this Book does appear.

But above all he must provide, that in the Trenches there be places to plant
the body of the watch assured: and in such sort as they may be able to give
succoure one to another.

Likewise there ought to be issues or passages to go out of them, as you may
behold by this figure.



This done, you must choose a place to plant your Artillarie, with Gabions,
Wooll-packs, and other Engines proper to those affairs, and carefully take
order and foresee, that the Master Gunner, and Cunstable of the Artillarie,
and other inferior Officers, have experience and good knowledge herein.

Accomodate thick boardes or timber close together, where the battery is
planted, for the Artillarie to run upon: and foresee that those planckes,
yield a certain fall and discending to toward the Cannones, to the intent
that after they be recueled, they may be the more easily brought again into
their places. By this means the pieces shall remain assured from running and
sincking into the ground in wette and rainie weather.

Diverse are of opinion, that the Artillarie ought not to be planted any
further distance of from the Fortress, more then one hundred and fyftie pases,
if the situation of the ground will permit.

I will omit to speak of the quality of the Artillarie. Only I say, that
according to the use in this age, the Cannons ought to be of threescore,
renforced in such sort, that a man need not to fear that they shall not
remain firm and just, although they be shot from the morning even unto the
evening.

The greater the battery is made, and with the greater number of pieces, the
more shall he astonish the enemy, and make easy his enterprise: specially if
the battarie may be crossed and trauersed.

If you can have the commodity to raise up a Caualier or Mount, so that
thereby the Curtine may be discovered, the same shall remain of great
advantage.

Note that you must continually shoot without ceasing if it be possible, for
it imports very much, when ye give the besieged no leisure to take breath or
make repair. Cease not likewise to shoot in the night, for the performaunce
whereof there is many good means, as hereafter (if leisure will permit) I
mean to write of.

You shall make your Trenches near to the Ditch, principally on that side
where the battery is made, and there you shall place a good troop of
Hargubuziers, and those of the most expert and brauest Soldiers in the Army,
who likewise must have their Corpse de guard, with their issue and passage,
their Corpse de guard, may behave themselves in that order as you may behold,
in such sort, as they may likewise serve for the flancks, the enemies Artillary
first displanted.

These Hargabuziers or rather Musketeares, must have Pieces of two ounces of
Calibre, for by such like ye besieged are greatly troubled, principally when
the walls and Bulwarks begin to ruinate. This figure next following makes my
former words more apparent.



By reason that for the most part, the (...) cover the flanckes, so that a man
cannot easily endomage them, the said Counterscarpes must be cut and opened
in such sort, that the flanckes may be battered

But touching the filling up of the Ditches, and to cover and choke them, is a
work both difficile and long, if they within the Fortress be men of courage
and experience, unless it be a rolling Trench. If the fortification be of
earth, the ruin thereof may be attempted, by entering into the Ditch, and cut
it down, as oftentimes it has been experienced.

Now rests it to speak somewhat of Mines and Ca^es, for that they be
matters of great effect, as has been often tried, as well in times past as in
these days. And although sometimes they have not fallen out according to man's
pretense, the same did arise rather, because they were not well made, then for
any other respect. Herein diverse reasons may be alleged. Amongst others it
has been tried, that going about to mine walls or Platformes, the fire has
burst out, and forced that part toward the mouth, which was artificially
stopped, rather then to overthrow and ruin the Bulwark as was determined.

The same might easily fall out, by reason there was small height given to the
Cave or vaute, and that by that means, she could not take her accustomed
force, to rise upward and work the effect: but contrariwise she bursteth out,
by that part which is most feeble, without working very little or any damage
at all to the Fortress.

To confirm this saying, I will speak that which has been seen by
experience, that is, having put powder not in great quan titie within Caves and
Chambers, which have not been entyrely stopped: but have diverse issues, as
doors and windows, the same has procured great ruins, and much more then a
man would think.

Therefore in mine opinion, the same has come to pass, for that the fire has
had both space and height to work his forces: the which has been such, as
there has been no obstacle or encounter, which would have been sufficient
to have repressed the same, and sent it to the open places, but it has wrought
and performed his course, according to the effect of his nature. Therefore when
these Caves or Uautes are made, as does appertain, gyuing them such form, as
this Element may work his force and effect, certaynely they bring forth
marvelous effects.

But for that these things are necessary to be entreated of in particulers, I
will begin a fresh to d^late somewhat more largely thereof. Therefore when an
Army does march to besiege any City: It is necessary before hand, to examine
the intelligences of such persons, as perfectly know the situation thereof,
the strength, and all the ways and passages unto the same. And having together
with the principal Captains, made full discourse thereof, for their perfect
instruction: determination must be made, what is to be done upon their approach
to the Town, and what lodgings must be ceased upon at the first, whether one,
two, or more according to the situation of the place, and as is most
convenient. For it is ever much better, for two reasons, to lodge even at the
first, as near unto the Ports and Gates as it is possible.

The one is, that the enemy thereby shall be much abashed and discouraged: the
other is, that they shall have no leisure to burn, the adjoining houses, where
the Army may lodge, if before it be not already done: neither shall these be
hindered, to take their Lodgings, or mount their Artillarie, to go to that
lodging a fresh upon an other day. Sometime it has been seen, that the Army
has planted and lodged it self, before 3 or 4 gates at one instant, one part
of the Camp as soon as an other, the which has been tried very good, so
that there were people enough in the Army. The Marshall of the host must be
accompanied, with so forcible and strong a band of horsemen and footmen, that
he may ouermatch those of the Town: who, if they chance to sallie forth either
on foot or on horseback, to repulse them as furiously as is possible, even
within the Gates: for sometimes there falls out such disorder and confusion,
that either they may enter Pesle Mesle, or kill some Chiestana, or make such a
slaughter of Soldiers, that the Town shall be much the sooner taken: at the
leastwise upon the repulse, the Master Gunner or Ingeniour, following the great
Marshall, may have commodity to view and discover the places and plottes, where
the Artillarie is to be planted, etc. Which being accomplished, the Marshall
is to sound the retraite, and to lodge as near the Town as is possible, so
that it be without the battery.

The approches be made by Trenches, and Maunds, and Wool sackes, as before I
have declared, and as hereafter may appear by figures, in the defense of a
Town. Nevertheless, they must be accommodated according to the situation of
the ground, and turned and compassed according to the opposite Bulwarks of
the enemy, the which are to be begun^e in the night, specially the planting of
the battery.

The Trenches are to be made, high, great, large, and deep, for the safety of
the Soldiers, and such men of account as use to come into them: in respect
that the Prince himself, may sometimes go into them, nevertheless very
seldom.

The Trenches being begun where the Artillarie is, they must be continued on
even to the Gates, thereby to cut of sallies. And against all the Ports, make
a Bulwark of Gabions, one upon an other, and if it be possible, nearer the
Town then the Trenches, both to stop their battery along the Trenches, and
to bar their sallies.

Upon that side toward the Camp, must be made Ditches and little Trenches,
for ye Corpse de Guard, of those that must guard the Trenches, wherein must
remain such number of Combattants, as they may be able to repulse the enemy
until succor arrive, which must be upon great necessity: and then being aided
with some main squadrone, to repulse them with great fury.

For the better prohibiting and knowledge of which issues and sallies, it is not
only requisite, to advance the Trenches even to the Counterscarpe and brincke
of the Ditch, but also to have lost Sentinelles every night betwixt the Town
and the Trenches, within the said Ditch, if it be dry. Wherein likewise a good
Ingeniour, may work many good devises.

The Marshall must if occasion serve, fortify toward the Champayne, place
the Princes or Generals lodging in the midst of the Camp, that he may give
order to all mutinies, sallies, allarums, and disorders. And if the Town be
well peopled, to make certain such Fortes as before I have set down, governed
with valiant Captains, and good bands of Soldiers, to keep short the
enemy. And those lodgings or Camps so well distributed, that they may remain
safe from invasion, yet so apt to come together, that upon the ariuall of any
Army, they may at one instant issue out, and be ranged together in battle to
fight: and therefore if a River pass through the Town, a bridge must be
placed to pass over, guarded at both ends with bands of Soldiers, that
thereby victualles and succors may be barred from the enemy. It is rather to
be placed above, then beneath upon the River, in respect to avoid burning by
artificial fire, or else to be planted where they look cheefely for succors.

Observations for an assault, and the sack of a City.
WHen the battery of the Cannous have made sufficient breach, and that the
same is saultable, great diligence and celeritie is to be used, for that diverse
things at one instant are to be done. The Camp must be all in arms, and in
battayles: the Assaylants ready in the Trenches to give assault, and the
Pyoners to carry Ladders, or such Engines as are invented for the safety of the
Soldiers. If the Ditch be full of water, and that the same has neither been
cut down, nor drawn dry by artificial Milles, and buckets, such as beer
Brewers use. Then must the Pyoners roll forward the artificial Bridge, made
upon Barrels of purpose for that respect, having before cut the Counterscarpe
to put the same into the ditch: the which must be done nimbly, and at one
instant. During which time, the Artillarie must beat toward that place, to
bar the besieged from endomaging the action.

Also when the great Master of the Artillarie, shall perceive the battery to
have made large, easy, and sufficient breach, and to have displaced the
flankers. He must give advertisement, that the Assailants may proceed, if the
assault be first determined upon. Which being concluded: the assailants must
remain ready and in order to advance, when the last blow of the Cannon is
given, and that they behold the ruinous fall, of that which was determined to
be battered, and then shall all the Artillarie discharge, great and small. And
when the Soldiers begin to march forwards to the assault, each one shall
shoot to break the remparts and other strengthes, which it may be the enemy
has made, and thereby to amaze them the more. But then must the great
Artillarie cease to shoot at the battery, for fear of hurting your own
people: but they shall shoot at the defenses which shall be somewhat further
of, and the which might arise to be hurtefull to the said Assailantes.

But the less Pieces shall always shoot at the breach, until such time, as
they see their people past the Ditch, and that they be mounted as high as the
sa^d breach, and so cease there.

It has been used of some, to put all the Camp in Arms, (having determined
in what place they will assault, which is in the greater number the better, but
in two at the least) for policy to make show with inuaston, cries and noise
of Drums, toward that place where he means not to give the ass^ult, to amaze
those within the Forte, and also to seperat the^ into diverse places, to the
intent, they may have less at the breach: and accordingly put his people in
order, that is to say, at the two places where he means to make the assault in
good earnest, consisting of strong and puissant bands: all which companies
must march close and sacried together in this order following.

First if need should require, there must be certain people ready to carry
Ladders and such Engines, to address and rear them to the breach. After them
must follow, the men at Arms, and other Soldiers well armed, which must go
jointly together with them that carry the Ladders.

The shot, as well Musket as Hargabuziers, ought to be within the Trenches,
and so every band which is to assault, is to remain in order, and must march
aflote and in troop: for whether it be to ascend the breach, or Ladders, the
last must thrust the foremost forwards and vpwardes. And from the time they
begin to march, the Artillarie must shoot: to the end, the enemies have no
leisure, to shoot at them that march in the Ditches.

And when they are within the said Ditches, the small Artillarie must always
batter at the defenses and breach, until such time as thy come hand to hand.
And likewise the shot, as well Musket as Hargabuziers, must be upon the
brincke of the Ditch, always shooting and defending, that not one of the town
do so much as appear at their defenses or loope-holes.

The high Marshall of the field, must stand with the rest of the Army ranged
in battle, and placed in such convenient sort as is needful. And this for
three reasons.

First, if the enemies should give charge upon the Army, during the assault:
he must be of sufficient power to defend the Camp, which must be so well
fortified, that he may resist any force or invasion.

Secondly, if it be necessary a fresh supply, for the assault: he must culle
out such and so many, as will serve the turn, and send them immediately.

Thirdly, if the Assailants should be repulsed, and that they did retire,
which is to be presupposed, will be in disorder and confusedly, neither is it
otherwise possible, and that those of the town thereupon do make a sallie, it
being not like that those should be brought to make front, that were so lately
forced to retire. The high Marshall must then march in order, with some maine
Battillion to succor his people, and to repulse the enemies, and so may it
appear, to what end the order and battles ranged in the Camp do serve.

If as I said before, it chance that the Assaylants be repulsed, as great
store of shot as is possible, must be retained upon the brinckes of the
Ditches within the Trenches, to shoot always at the defenses. And likewise
the Cannoniers ought to be ready at that instant to do their duty, if it so
chance. For it is the custom of the besieged, at the repulse of an Assault,
the soldiers more willingly do show themselves, and appear carelessly at the
breaches then at the beginning, through the heart and courage they have taken to
see their enemies repulsed, and likewise at the loope holes, and over the
Rampires, for they think the^ that no man can hurt them. So that if the shot
be plied, it shall greatly endomage them, benefit the retraite very much, and
shall save many good Soldiers.

If the Army be lodged in three or four several Camps, and fortefyed lodgings
as before I have touched, every one in their quar ter must thus be guided. And
during the assault, the General, Sergiant Majors, and other Counselors of the
war, must have an eye to all things, and specially to the nature and quality
of the assaults, ayding them with all artificial and warlike inventions. And
if there be any that linger behind at the tail of the rest, there must be
Officers appointed of purpose (without sparing of any) to chase them forwards,
with naked swords, and pe^force them with blows to accompany the Assaylants.

The General, or the great Master of the Artillarie, (as I have already said)
must use diligence, to cause the Gunners and the other shot to aid the
assault, but so as they hurt not their own companions. Neither must the
General ever rest in any one place, but ride here and there, and direct all
things, unless he have the commodity to see all the assaults and affairs of
the Camp, from some place or platform: from whence he must by some worthy
Caualieres give order what is to be done.

If any alarm chance in the Army, toward the Champaigne during the
assault, those which be at the assault, must not leave nor slack their duty:
for the Marshall and those Colonels appointed for that purpose, are to resist
the same.

It has been sometimes likewise seen (although very seldom) that a number of
Soldiers have sallied out of the Town, during the assault, to be an
impediment to the Assailants, and to affright them behind. And therefore the
Marshall of the Field, having several Squares by themselves for such like
accidents, must send one of them, that may incontinently march to give them a
furious repulse, and to enter pesle-mesle with them if it be possible. It is a
thing almost never accomplished, yet nevertheless they must do their deuoire.

Now if it chance that the Town be taken by assault, a public band or cry
must be made, that the booty and sack, shall be given as well to them that
have stood in battle, as to those that were at the Assault. Other wise, it
were almost impossible to constrain any one to keep order, but that every one
would be at the spoil.

Immediately upon the taking of the Town, the Prince or General, being
accompanied with 20. or 30. Caualieres, and other of his Guard, must enter into
the Town, with his sword naked in his hand, and must go to the principal
Church to give God thanks for his victory, and also to defend, that the
ornaments which appertain to the Church be not pylled nor robbed, and must
leave people to guard the same. And if the enemy do not stand to their
defense in the Churches, he must prohibit and hinder to his power that no
blood be shed in them, for the house of God ought to be pure and free from
slaughters.

And from thence he must go to other Churches, and by and in the streets
likewise, hinder such evils. Incontinently he must make cry through the City,
that none upon pain of hanging, neither take nor spoil any Churches.

Also that upon this pain, none do violate, nor use force to any religious
woman, and that not any also do violate Maids, or married women, or any
others against their wills, which laws must be strongly kept, and those
severely punished that offends therein. etc.

This done, he must send for his Marshall of lodgings, and cause him to
divide the Quarters, for those people he would have lodged in the Town:
wherein there is always some trouble, and many debates do arise. For those
which have pilled and taken the houses, will not avoid by their good wills,
and therefore he must have a good eye, that these dissentions and debates do
not arise. For oftentimes whole bands do trouble themselves with these
particulers.

Some to avoid these dissentions, do swear certain substantial persons of
every Band, to make booties for all the rest, and to become accountable that
equal distribution may be used, it being brought to the Ensign, which thing
I judge impossible to be observed in our age.

It has been the use in some Armies, that after the winning of a Town, to
retire to the Camp. And of some, that they did all withdraw themselves within
the Town, and lodge there. Which two contrarieties, I leave to the discretion
of the Chiefetaines: unless the Camp being very well fortefyed and
accomodated, and contrariwise the Town small and straight of lodging: in this
case I would wish them to retire to the Camp, especially if you mean to put a
Garrison in the Town, thereby to avoid the spoil of victuals, and other
confusions.

But if the Camp be not well fortefied, and that you do fear the coming of
the Enemy, and that the Town be wide and great, sufficient to lodge your
Army: then shall it be good to enter the Town, for it shall be hard upon
occasion when necessity requires, to cause all the Soldiers to retire out of
the Town to the field, but that a great part will remain behind, unless a
man will set the whole Town on fire, which is the only way to cause them
abandon the Town, and otherwise not, but with great labor and length of time.

Thus have I partly touched what is to be done at the assault of a Town, at
the sack thereof, and after the spoil. Only I have omitted, that the great
Master of the Artillary, to procure a speedy battery, must now and then, to
harten and encourage the Gunners, give them severally and upon occasion,
certain pieces of money or gold, to make them apply a pace the battery.

And likewise that the General, when the soldiers stand ready to give the
assault, and that they be in order to march, that he cause to be published
before the Assailants, that the first which foreseth the breach and enters the
Town, shall have such a sum of money by him limited, and the second so much,
which is less, and the third not so much as the other two. The which shall make
them more courageously to kiss the ground, and to advance them selves
forward, to repulse the Enemy valiantly, and to enter tryumphantly.

What is to be observed of those, which have charge given them to keep and
defend a Fortress, and what remedies they have to save themselves at a siege,
battery, and assault.
Having presently declared, how to besiege and expugne a hold, I will now
declare the order of the keeping of a Fortress, and the means wherewith the
besieged are to defend themselves, an action to be performed, as well with the
quicknes of the spirit, as the prowess of the body.

Now for that the defense of a City or any Fortress, is one of the most
important affairs, that can in the wars be committed to any man's charge, it
is very necessary for him that is to carry such a burden, that he be very
hardy, of good experience, very vigilant, and exceeding rich in inventions, to
the intent he may be able, redily to resolve upon all sudden chances, as
well to repair the ruin the Artillary makes, as to furnish himself against
diverse accidents that do fall out, not only through the want of courage in
the Soldiers, but also by reason of the cowardice and clamours of the people,
whereby many inconveniences do arise.

Wherefore he must with his prudent and haughty courage, resist and strive
against the fear and ignorance of his people, carrying in his countenance
such a majesty and gravity, that his commandments may be of every one
reverenced, approved for good and performed.

But he cannot enjoy these qualities, if he be not a person of experience, and
that in times past has yielded good account, and honorable effects of
himself in his actions.

Moreover, it is necessary that he show himself most forward of all men, each
where, as greatest dangers of importance do principally fall out. He must
likewise be able with his speech to encourage his people, for in great affairs
and dangers, if a Chiefetaine cannot serve turn by these means, fear will
easily slide into the hearts of his Soldiers, which afterward can not be
plucked out but with great pain.

It is likewise requisite he be of such a nature, that he willingly suffer to
speak, and give ear to those which would give him advise and counsel, yea
even of the simple Soldiers, for often times very profitable things be
learned of such persons: and many good counsels have been found hid in a man
of base condition. I do not mean that he should always follow every advise
that is given him, but serve his turn with those that are for his purpose, and
reject the rest.

Let him with dexterity procure himself to be obeyed, as well by his
Soldiers, as by the inhabitants of the place, for obedience is one of the
principal things which is necessary to be had in the wars, without the
which, all enterprises are made frustrate and turn to nothing. But as the
nature of many people is different, so I think it not always convenient, to
use lenetie and courtesy, principally toward soldiers: Neither also is it
always expedient, to use terror and threatenings. Wherefore it shall be very
good, yea and most necessary, to mix severity with courtesy, and to change
nature according to occurrences, and to accomodate himself to the quality of
the fortune whereinto a man does fall.

I must not omit to advertise the Captain that shall chance to be in such a
faction, specially to defend, upon pain of grievous punishment, that his
people make no speech with others, neither amongst themselves, of any
composition whatsoever with the Enemy: for if this opinion should spring up
amongst a multitude, it behooues him to quench the same with as great
diligence as is possible: by reason it is a thing which of ordinary does
happen in Towns that are battered, and that be redused to an extreme perrill.
For if these rumors or opinions should once take root, it shall be afterward
very difficile to stop the Soldiers from Mutintes. Let him therefore
foresee, that he prevent the following of these and all other dangerous
events. Wherefore every Chiefetaine, ought to have this point in singular
recommendation, for that it touches him particulerly, and is of great
importance for the conservation of his credit and honor. And according to my
judgment, he shall much more content his Prince, if he loose the same
entirely, with magnanimity of courage, rather then he should yield the same
with most honorable conditions. For in those conditions does not consist the
entire satis-faction of his Prince, if it be not that he be thereunto expressly
commanded, and in that case must accept the condition appointed him.

He must not have regard to the saving of his soldiers, neither to their
desire: for when the Chiefetaine does commit any fault more then his duty,
the soldiers bear not the blame. It is he upon whom every one has his eyes
fixed, and to him it only appertains to yield account to his Prince, and to
all ye world, both of his own actions and of his honor, considering that it
is a great grief for a worthy Captain, to have his honor come in doubt and
in question.

But now, to descend to the particulers of keeping and defending of a
Fortress. He must have such number and store of Artillarie, as is sufficient
to garnish the Bulwarks, Platformes, Caualieres, and other places where need
requires.

It shall be hard to give any special particular rule touching the places where
they are to be planted: for according as occasion does offer, men are
constrained to change advise, sometimes planting many, and sometimes very few,
in respect as well of the small number of the assailants, as of his small store
of Munition.

It is requisite that every Piece have his instruments and necessary
furnitures, with sufficient store of bullets and powder.

Besides, a Fortress must be stored with all sorts of instruments, which are
known by experience, fit and propper for the defense thereof.

Iron work of all sorts be likewise necessary, coals in great quantity, with
other Munition, which serve for the making of arteficiall fires.

Likewise there must be all provisions and necessary matters to make powder,
and chiefly Milnes of all sorts. Furthermore, instruments for the Pyoners, as
Pickaxes, Spades, Shouels, Mattocks, Baskets for the hand, Wheelebarrowes, and
other such like Instruments, to carry earth, wood, fagots, and in sum, all
other matters propper to make Ramparts, and to repair the ruin the Artillary
makes.

That there be likewise great numbers of Gabions, to cover and defend
themselves from the Artillary, in the which nevertheless it is not good to
trust overmuch, although they be great and very well filled: for experience has
made proof, that it is not good to put assured confidence in them: but yet
they be altogether necessary, when a man will use them to cover his people,
when he begins to repair or make any other work.

Likewise he must have all sorts of Artificers, as Carpenters, Smithes, Masons,
Cutters of stone, and Quarrels, and such like.

The Fortress must likewise be well furnished, with all sorts of Arms and
weapons, that they may be distributed to the soldiers, people, servants,
prentises, and great Mnchaches when occasion does require: for it is as great a
praise to co^serue a place as to conquer it.

It behooues him moreover to be very circumspect and careful, against
Camisades and sudden surprises, cheefely when the Enemy is so near, that in
one night he may come thither and give a scalade, as Alba, Casall, and diverse
other Fortresses have felt. The Corpse de gardes and the Sentinels, be not
sufficient, when a man has to deal with an hardy Enemy, which willingly
does try fortune, and delights in actions of the night, the which when they be
well conducted grow to marvelous issue.

Besides, the diligence used in the placing of the bodies of the watch and
Sentinels, I think it very requisite, there should be sent forth of the
City or Fortress, eight or ten Horsemen, to skoure the way on that side
that the Enemy might come to give the scalade and assault: for by this means
you shall remain assured, that there can nothing fall out, whereof you shall
not be advertised in due time to prepare your self for defense. For want of
Horsemen, use some Footmen, for lost Sentinels, a Culuerine shot from the
Town.

To prevent the dangers which a man may receive by his own proper Soldiers,
let not any of them know what Quarter they have to keep, neither in what place
they must be set in Sentinel, but every night change Quarter, and send out
continual Rounds by the Gentlemen Caualiers of S. Georges Squadron, and
Soldiers appointed for that purpose, who carefully may visit both the
bodies of the watch, the general places of Arms in the Town, and the
Sentinels upon the walls and in the streets, according to the duty of their
Office prescribed them in my second Book.

I judge it likewise requisite, that he which is Chief, which does command,
and has the keeping of a Fortress, must not in any case, permit his
Soldiers to practice, devise and become familiar with the Enemy, as has
been oftentimes seen, and principally of the Italians and our Nation: but
contrariwise ought to defend them the ^ame, and altogether behave themselves
like Enemies.

Suffer not often to enter into ye Town the Enemies Drums and Trumpets, for
they may be of such crafty and practiced quality as might become very
hurtful, and as by experience was seen in the wars of Parma, at the taking
of Torchaira, where, by the practice of a Drummer, which had the commodity to
view, discern, the measure and height of the Ramparts, the Town was taken,
and the Prince of Macedonia the Governor thereof slain. Therefore to avoid
such inconvenience, some have used to blindfield the Enemies Drum and
Trumpetter, with a scarf, upon his first coming to the Sentinel without the
Gates, and from thence to send a Sergiant or other trusty Officer with him, to
the Governor, who accompanying him until his return, may disband his eyes, a
Hargabuze shot from the walls.

I cannot here pass over with silence, one note amongst other great travels
and toils in warfare, which falls out in the defense of a Fortress. In that
sometimes a Prince or General will command thee to go into a Town or
Castle, which before hand you know by effect, to be of small defense:
wherefore considering it is a difficile thing, for a Soldier of approved
experience, to yield account of his honor, together with the loss of a
Fortress, many have thought it good to refuse such a charge, by means
whereof, they have lost the good grace of their Prince, and have been diffamed
of him and of the people, and accounted as cowards and dastards. Wherefore in
my judgment, a Soldier of honor, ought rather to accept such a charge then
to refuse it, yea, if it were to run headlong into manifest danger, doing
his duty nevertheless, with as great diligence and valor as he can possible.

It is good for all that, he give his Prince or General to understand, that
the same place is of no defense, nevertheless, to do him service, he is
resolutly determined to hazard his life therein. Now if his Chiefetaine be of
discretion, as it is to be presupposed he is, and one that will not show
himself ungrateful toward his Soldiers, he will honor this Soldier,
and recompense him for his valor and loyalty.

To come to the defense of a siege, I would first require the Chiefetaine, to
read my general notes of fortification, wherein and in the other parts of this
Book, he shall find many good aduertisements and observations.

Moreover, let him above all things, victual his Fortress well, for though it
be otherwise inuinsible, yet for want of the same it may be lost: for a Town
being once besieged, it is hard to victual the same, or to discharge it of
improffitable mouths, for the one is very hard and uncertain, the other does
profit smally, touching which, Florence and Sienna in the wars of Italy may be
an example, who going about to use this remedy, were in the end smally
discharged. But alas, with what difficulty and incredible compassion did they
obtain the least part of their intent, a thing more miserable then is
necessary to be rehearsed, and therefore according to the place and persons,
requisite provision ought in due time to be made, and to be kept in Storehouses
for the siege time.

The number of Soldiers to defend a Fortress, ought to be greater then
those for the ordinary defense of the same when it is not besieged, to the
intent there may be store to make sallies and issues: and besides, in the time
of a siege many be destroyed and fail, either by sword or sickness. It is
accounted most necessary for the defense of a City or Fortress, to have a
thousand Soldiers for every thousand pase, yea and a far greater number
according to the bigness of the Bulwarks and circuit of other places.

When the Enemy has environed the Town, and begun his approches, it is
requisite the Soldiers should likewise enuiron the walls, and lodge and make
their Cabbens at the foot of the Curtines and Ramparts, that according to
their due appointed Quarter, they may be ready upon all occasions of service,
keeping nevertheless, sufficient Corpse de guard in the Marketplace,
Towne-house, and other strength, to bridle the mutinous minds of the Towns
men.

He must with all diligence, use all possible means to guard and keep the
Ditch, with the way which is made in the Counterscarpe, which commonly is
called the covert way. The same does very much import for his defense, and the
better does he travail the Enemy, if he can hinder the said Enemy from
approaching: for if he make approach, he may easily enter within the Ditch, and
open the Counterscarpe, to batter afterward the Casemates, and to Mine and
dig down the Ramparts. He must not fail whilst the battery is in making,
oftentimes to send out to discover and view the Ditch, and to cleanse the
ruins which the Artillarie has made: for these ruins do hinder the
Cannoniers.

But if the force of the Enemy be such, that by the means of his Trenches, he
take away the use of the Ditch, make frustrate the flanks and defenses, it is
then very necessary, that you retire so much inward, that you have the
commodity to make Trenches to enuiron the batteries.

Moreover, if you have time, and that the situation be convenient, you may make
new Ramparts and defenses, as Counterditches, Flanckes, Caualieres, and other
Ramparts, such as shall be necessary to furnish himself against the batteries
and assaults the Enemy shall make.

Note likewise that in so terrible an accident, being so dangerous, and
specially when the walls be ruinate, you must not fail to keep your people
in battle, so near the battery as is possible, with a good number of people
Armed on the head. And for that it falls out oftentimes, that certain companies
of m^n at Arms, and Lances, be in a Town or Fortress be ^ieged, these
Horsemen being Armed and set on foot, are of great utility and profit, if
they be put in (...) head of the battle, with a troop of Hargabuziers by the
flanck of the Trench, to flanck the battery withal. The Soldiers, both
Hargabuziers and Pikemen, must accomodate themselves round about the Trench,
as appears by these two figures following.



It has oftentimes come to pass, that near adjoining to the place where the
battery is made, there has been found certain houses, that the said battery
for the most part has battered and ruinate, nevertheless, there does remain
as yet, some height of wall out of the earth, where there may be placed under
covert of the same, a good number of Musket and Hargabuziers, that flancking
the Fortress and breach, has been the safeguard and the defense of the place,
as appears by this figure following. Therefore these things before considered,
it is very necessary, that he which does govern a Fortress, be of good
understanding and experience, and yt he perfectly know and be able to choose
all his parties and advantages.



It falls likewise out oftentimes, that Towns and Fortresses be subject to
Mountains and unto Caualiers, and Mounts made of purpose, in such sort as they
be battered along the Curtine, by reason whereof they are with great difficulty
defended, principally when they be of little circuit, for that there remains
no place, wherein Trauerses may be made. But if the Fortress or place be great,
and that leisure does permit, very good Trauerses may be wrought, to resist
the battery of the Enemy, as appears by this figure following.



If it fall so out that you cannot make Trauerses upon the Terreplaine, for
that the Enemy does hinder it, either by ye means of Mountains, or by the
means of Caualiers raised up of purpose, the same will fall out to be very
hurtful; being constrained to leave and abandon the height of the
Terreplaine, or top of the Curtine to the Enemy, and to become far distant
off from the battery, nevertheless, you may accommodate your battery with
Trenches by flancking it, and abase downward your self so low as is possible:
this is one of the best means that may be used.

For preparations against the assault, you must not be destitute of all sorts
of arteficial fire, as Trompes, Granades, Bullets and other such like, neither
omit to cast Chausse traps, and Tables full of nails which will give great
impediment to the Enemy. But when such things do fail, place great store of
dry wood and straw upon the battery, which being kindled with a train of
powder, gives some leisure and opportunity to the besieged, to provide for
their affairs.

Some have spredde a netting, such as is used upon shyps over the battery, and
by the Mast of a ship, a pole and a pullie arteficially made, have taken
Soldiers being entered upon the same to give assault, like Conies in a
Pursnet, by hoysing it up suddenly, as was put in practice at Harlen in
Holland. Some use to bloe up the breach with powder, when the Soldiers
assailants do swarm most thickest upon it. But finally, the most part defend
it by trenches, plan^ed full of Muskets, murdering Pieces and Chambers, filled
full of nails, old iron, and such like. And lastly, by ye valiant and maine
force of courageous (...), (...), and soldiers, that rather chose to die
amongst the (...) of the breach, for the safety of their says, Christianity
and Country; then enjoy a shameful life, and die with infamy upon a bed of
Down, and be buried in the pit of ignominy and dark oblivion.

Upon what occasion it is lawful to yield up a Fortress into the Enemies
hands.
BErnardin Rocca in his second Book of Millitarie stratagemes, and in his
eight Impresa, upon this note. That a Captain ought not to give into his
Enemies hands any Fortress, unless he were more then constrained thereunto,
has these words.

The orders of antiquity are run so far out of course, specially in the art of
wars, that a Soldier does not know how to resolve himself, whether he
do well or evil in the affairs of his Prince, and whether in one sortor
another, he ought to govern himself in his profession. And that the same is
so, I find amongst other things in the art of war, an order or statute of this
tenoure. That whosoever does give into the hands of the Enemy, any Town in
his keeping, does incur the danger of death, if by chance, he be not more
then constrained to yield the same, and that it is likely a man of valor
would have done the like. By this ordinance therefore is comprehended, that
when a man of valor, shall be appointed to the guard of a City, of a Castle,
or any other place, he ought never to depart and give over his enterprise, for
any words spoken, sent, or written unto him by the Enemy, neither for that he
does enuiron him round about with his Camp, and proceeds no fu^ther: for
neither by words, neither by seeing the enemy encamped round about him, it can
never be judged, that a Castellane issuing forth of his Castle, which is
stored of all sorts of victuals, or looks for succor, that therefore he was
forced to do so, or that he has issued forth like a man of valor, or that
every man of valeur would have done the like.

Therefore he ought to have respect, that when the place it self may be
defended against an assault, without battery, that at leastwise he ought to
aspect and ^arry one assault, and more, if he be able to sustain more. And if
a battery were necessary for the taking of the same, for that it is apt to
defend it self from some shot of Artillarie, some shot likewise it ought to
abide.

But if the defendants did find themselves in such state and terms, that they
could not, or did doubt themselves not to be able to resist, neither the one
nor the other, I am of opinion, that not being promised assured succors, at a
certain limited time, in yielding afterward, that the defendants do not
merit any punishment, by law of Arms, neither of their Superiors, nor at the
hands of the Enemy.

Thus far Rocca writes, touching the terms of yielding up a hold, in which
Chapter he declares, that certain soldiers yielding themselves upon this
foresaid necessity, upon conditions to issue and depart without Arms, either
offensive or defensive, the Enemy upon their coming forth, searching the
soldiers upon the words of this paction, finding only their hangers and
buckles upon their gyrdles, whereat they did hang their Rapiers, took occasion
upon the same to hang them up. Wherefore the Articles of yielding up a Fort,
(if it be lawful at all to do so,) is to be scanned thoroughly, and every doubt
to be well discyphered, that neither he that is Captain, nor his Soldiers,
incur the displeasure of his Prince, or the danger of the Enemy.

But when it imports the general safety, commodity, and advancement of his
Prince, his Country, his Camp and Confederates, he must then persist even to
the loss of the last man, as of late has been a great policy of sundry
Generals, to stawle the fury of the Enemy, and by those blocks of delay, to
linger the time, thereby to prefer his own safegarde, and the common
commodity of the whole Camp.

Necessary aduertisements for the Captain that expects besieging.
THat Captain which has the government of any Garrison, and looks to be
besteged, must have respect to diverse things, as to expel certain suspected
housholdes, which seem to draw with the contrary part, likewise all
unprofitable persons, as old men that are not able to keep watch, nor of
strength to work at repayres. To provide necessary victuals, Surgions,
Physicians, drugges, spiceries, likewise all Munition for powder and
Artillarie, wood and fagots for repayres, wood to bake bread, Smithes,
Armourers, Carpenters, for making repayres, and all sorts of handy crafts,
necessary.

Likewise when a Captain does enter into Garrison, he must go twice or
thrice about the Town, both within and without the walls, to behold and
discern where the Enemy might most endomage, as well by scalade as by
battery, and diverse times thoroughly consider of the same, and use requisite
fortifications, with repayres, bulwarks, Bastillions, Caualieres, Casemates,
Counterscarpes, Countergardes, half Moons, Trenches, Mounts. etc. aided
therein by the industry of good Ingeniours.

When wood and Fagots do want for repayres, use great numbers of round
Gabions, with a space betwixt each one, for Artillary. For want of these, use
empty Barrels and Pypes, filled with earth and well fastened, but when these
want, in great extreme^y, bring forth flock-beds, Mattresses, Fetherbe^s, yea
tapasary, etc. having ever great care yt no stones be mixed in any of these
Bastiones, Bulwarks, or Fortifications, by reason they are more hurtful to the
soldiers within, then the Enemies Artillarie without, and therefore Muddie or
mossie walls, is ever better then the thickest stone wall.

Provide that by Geometrical observations, one Bulwark defend another, that
likewise he have store of arteficiall fire, and such like instruments for the
defense of the walls. Neither must he forget, sometimes to feign the loss of
some Bulwark, so that the Enemy being entered upon the same, either he may be
blown up with powder, or caught in a Net of cords, laid secretly under
loose dust, and hoysed up at the end of a Mast, as was at Harlen, where diverse
of the assailants were caught, like to Conies in a purse-net.

The Town gates must be made low, the ^oppe thereof appearing very little
above the Counterscarpe, from whence the ground must descend down wards, with
^ crooked bending, even to the Gates, which must but be only capable to
receive ^ (...) or wagon, laden with Hay or Corn.

The proportion of a Plat for fortification.


A new invention, and almost invincible form of fortification, against the
furious battery of Artillarie.
IT has been the common use in all fortifications heretofore, to place the
earth behind the walls of the Fortress, and thereof to make Bulwarks and
Ramparts, but in the construction of this invincible fortress, against the
infernal fury of Artillarie, it is necessary to use a new invention to
fo^tefie. For the said earth being placed in form of Rampart behindthe wall,
cannot serve to resist the blows of the Cannon, but then only when the said
wall is ruinated: which is quite contrary to the proportion I mean to
prefer. For in steed that ye wall does cover the earth, and does serve for
defense unto the same, I mean to make the earth to supply this Office, and
that it do not only hinder the Artillary from being able to batter the same
wall, but also that it become a cover thereunto, to the intent the sight
thereof may be wholly taken away from the Enemy.

To perform which, it is necessary to plant and place the earth before the
wall, and not as of ordinary is accustomed, to join it close to the wall, but
distant thirty or thirty five foot, in making a dry Ditch without water
betwixt them both.

This earth shall be sustained upon that side, which does behold the Fortress,
with a little wall of four foot thicknes in the foundation, arising to be two
foot thick in the height. Upon that side which does look toward the
fields, it shall likewise be sustained with a little wall of six foot height
from the top of the water, which is in the great Ditch, and does separate
this mass of earth from the Counterscarpe.

The plain of this earth shall be in thickness where it is most narrow,
which toward the corners of the Flankers and Curtines, or more or less large
as the proportion requires. And the largest, which is at the Angles, as well of
the Curtines as Bulwarks 150. foot thick, which does arise to be 25. fadome,
and for the guard of the sholders he shall have 60. foot mounting to ten
fadome. In sum, that the sholders in comprehending all the space, which is from
the walls yt the flanck makes, unto the little wall, which does sustain the
mass of earth upon the side of the great Ditch, shall be 150. foot. That is to
say, the earth shall have in this place 60. foot, the ditch betwixt the earth
and the sholder of the wall 30. foot or more, and the sholder of the Bulwark
^0. foot.

Here I would demand of those which have searched out so many inventions, to
find the means to fortify and make a Fortress inexpugnable, wherein they
have thought to have attained thereunto. If to find means to preserve it
against the blows of Artillary, be the conservation of Towns of war, I
persuade iny self that this my invention, does approach very near to that
which they in vain of long sought for, and so in part I doubt not I shall
satisfy their desire. For what store of Munition, what length of time, must be
employed, to batter this by the blows of the Cannon, first 60. foot of the
defense of the earth, and as much of the should^r made to the wall: this mass
of earth being a matter soft, which cannot be disseuered or dispersed, as I
presuppose it should be, shall it not defend the sholder that stands behind
from rece^uing any damage. And if the case be thus, what fear is to be had, ye
Towns being fortified by this means, but that they shall be able to defend
themselves from any violence or fury of Artillary. For whilst the defenses
remain whole and entire, the which serve unto Fortresses, in like case as
arms, legs, and other members do unto the body, it is certain that they may
assure themselves, from falling into the hands of the Enemy. Now this mass of
earth, being placed as I have said, may be named a Countergarde, ye which may
be so placed, that it shall not any thing hinder the flankers or defenses of
every Bulwark, but that they shall be able to behold, and freely to discover,
all that whatsoever shall show and present it self along the same, as may be
more plainly judged, by the view of ye draughts and platforms of this
invention, which I have set out at the end of this discourse.

But to the end every thing may be the more plainly understood, I will
particulerly thus set down all the parts. First, betwixt the Countergard, and
the Counterscarpe, the which is the bounds and space of the ditch, the said
ditch shall be at the least 80. foot large, and 25. or 30. deep, as is showed
in this figure following, by the place marked with A. In the bothome of the
said ditch, must be made another little ditch, which shall be made 20. foot
large, and 20. deep, made in form of this letter V. and marked with B. This
little ditch shall be distant, and stretched out from the Countergard 10. or 12.
foot, which space is marked C. At the foot of the said Countergard, the
little wall must be placed, surmounting ye brinke of the water, as I have made
mention of here before, coated with D. Betwixt this litt^e wall and the
Countergard, a little Allie shall be left, or spare of 4. foot large, marked
with this letter. E. The mass of earth called Countergard, must be made in the
fashion of a Kampart, but quite contrary to those which have been accus^omed,
to be placed behind and against the walls of Fortresses For in steed that the
Ramparts ordinarily have their access toward the body of the City, this
shall have his back turned toward the Champaine, and the Front toward the
City, the which back shall be made in the form of a ridge, slyding and
leaning down all along, from the top even to the bothome, as does the side
of a roof of a house, except that in the very top and height of the
Countergar^, there must be 8. or 10. foot of explanade or flat ground, marked
thus with F. And for that I have before made mention of the wall, which must
sustain the Countergarde, also of the second dry ditch, which must be betwixt
the Countergarde and the w^ll, that does enclose the Fortress. Let this figure
following suf^ for the understanding both of this and the rest.



But to the intent the Reader may understand the perfection of this work the
better. I will in part expound the properties and circumstances thereof, and
whereunto every one does particularly serve.

Touching the proportion and body of the fortification, as Curtins, bulwarks,
sholders, flanckes, and Caualieres, I presuppose that they are made in such due
form and order as has been accustomed to be used, of those ye be perfect
Masters in this art, save that I would have the Curtines from the (...) bend
inward in Angle like a pair of tongues or forke, whereby it shall be very hard to
place any Artillary to batter the^, and if it should be so that they were
battered, yet might they be well defended by the opposite sides, whereby an
infinite number of Assailants should lose their lives, being so well defended
on all sides, and do moreover make this fortification, more forceably and
longer time, to resist and continue against the Mattocke and Spade and such
row^ing Trenches, as were made by the great Turk, at the expugnation of Rodes,
and Famagosta.

But to proceed to my former promise, first the circute of the wall, and the
enclosure of this Fortress, is not needful to be made so great, and so thick
as has been accustomed to fashion them, that is to say, from 12. to 15.
foot, but it will suffi^e to give them 7. or 8. foot in the foundation. For
by this invention, the wall is not subject at all to the battery, neither to be
thrust down and laden by the Rampart, because there shall need to be none, (if
it to seem good) as a thing not very necessary.

But if any Ramparts of earth be made, let them not with their massiue heaviness
thrust down the standing wall, to auoy^e the which, in clothing the (...) and
Curtines with walls, after you have planted the foundations, which may be of
the largeness of 5. or 6. foot, or more strait, the wall on the outside must
be made according to the ordinary custom: but within, you (...) from 25. to
25. foot, apply thereunto Counterforts, other wise called Spurs, which are in
length 15. foot, and large 2. or 3. foot, at the discretion of the workman,
betwixt the which Spurs, the wall must not stand bolt upright within
according to the ordinary fashion, whether it be in height or in largenes, but
the height must be like unto a renuersed heel leaning, or as if it would fall
reeling, and bend groueling upon the Rampart. And if necessity require, to give
it more strength at the foot, to the intent it may ye better support the heavy
burden of earth. Moreover, the space betwixt the one Counterfort and the other,
must be made in round, like unto a vaute, making the Spurs to serve for
proppes and stays.

The commodity which this wall bringes, is, that it is exempt from great
charge, from the violent thronging and thrusting of the earth. The stones
thereof being battered in by the Cannon, will close and knit together with ye
earth* and so make great resistance, besides, they will not very much fill the
Ditch when they are abated, rather falling toward the Rampart then otherwise.
And the said Rampart having taken the proportion of a renuersed wall, will make
a strait shape, like unto the first face of the wall. And for this respect,
although the wall were taken away, and ruinated, it can neither fall nor slide,
and will make Front receiving any damage.

But to continue on my first discourse, having begun with the wall which does
enuiron the circuit of the Fortress or City, I will go on, and presuppose
that the Ditch, which is made betwixt the wall and Countergarde, has 36. foot
in largenes, and is dry without water thereby to have commodity to go and come
all along. The entry thereunto, must be by the Cannoniers of the Flancks,
which defend ye same, which will serve to be of no small commodity to the
Soldiers, having the mean to transport themselves easily and without danger,
into all places where necessity does call them.

The Countergard must be sustained on that side toward the City, with a
little wall, which must be of less height then the earth, by three or four
foot, to the intent you may easily discover, (being before the Counterscarpe)
five or six foot of the Wall, which does enclose and shut up the Fortress.

This earth must be spread uniformly, and couched betwixt the two walls,
according to the (...) before prescribed, to the intent that there may be
nothing but it may discover, and defend on all sides, and that no hinderaunce
may be given to the Flankers and Caualiers to shoot and behold each place.

This proportion shall be very little able to be battered, and least before the
Angles of the Bulwarks, and the midst of ye Curtines, by reason of their
thickness; and if it should receive any battery, it should be only but upon
the height and top of the same. And in the space betwixt the one wall and the
other, certain herbs for the nourishment of Cattle may be sown, amongst
which, to join the earth more fast together, it is good to sow a certain
Herb, called Medica, for that it was brought from Mede, which does bring
forth a very long root, specially when the ground has been plowed and
labored much before, which will procure it to be able to be defended, against
the injury of the air, and of men, neither needs it to be sown but from ten
years to ten. Sheep that feed hereupon, become more fat, and more sauerie
then others, those that are nourished therewith, bring forth Lambs for the most
part twice a year, as those of Brabant, Holland, and Lombardie have tried by
experience, specially in France, where it is vulgarly called Sainctfoin, and
so it yeeldes two commodities, for the root does so bind the earth, that it
will not easily dismember by the blows of the Cannon, and the herb is good
for the Cattle enclosed in the Town, during the siege.

The little space or Allie, which is at the foot of the Countergard, of 4.
foot large shall serve, to the intent you may have the mean to place therein
diverse Soldiers, which may come and go, as well before the Bulwarks, as
before the Cur^ines. And the little wall which is before the same, shall no^ be
unprofitable, for first it will hide and serve for Parallel to cover the
Soldiers, which are behind it, that they cannot be end^maged: but shall have
the mean and leisure, to be in such a readiness, and apt order to offend the
Enemy, during the siege, that no man shall be able to show himself upon the
brinke of the ditch, but shall be in ^anger of his person. And secondly, if it
should fall out, that the Enemy should assay, to break down and ^uinate any
part of the Countergard by the blow of the Cannon, this little wall would
(...), to stay that portion of earth, which might roll and (...) ^own beneath.
It would likewise prohibit the beating waves of the water in the Ditch, from
washing or wearing away the (...) of (...) Mass of earth. The little ditch
(...) the Countergard, (...) form of this letter V. will likewise carry this
good (...), that (...) the great ditch were drawn dry, this should always
remain (...), and would stop the passage of those that would pass to endo^age
the little wall, which does cloth and compass the Countergard.

And if means were made to (...) all the water, the (...) might defend
themselves with arteficiall fires, made for that efect: the which by reason of
the form of this little Ditch, made poynted at the bothome like a Roman V.
will do great execution. For the enemy entering into the same, and not finding
any place where to make stay, but in the extremity of the depth, not being
able to proceed, as in an uniform and flat both^m, shall be burnt, wounded,
and murdered most cruelly.

The great ditch, within the which the small one is comprehended, shall
contain the foresaid largenes, from the foot of the little wall, which does
sustain the earth of the Countergarde, unto the opposite foot of the
Counterscarpe, at the which there shall be an Allie of 6. foot large, to
receive the Soldiers which shall pass the great Ditch, to mount upon the
Corridor of ye Counterscarpe, the which Allie shall be nothing seen of the
enemy in any siege, but contrariwise, it shall be discovered and defended by
the defenses of the Fortress, that it shall not be possible for the Enemy to
possess if any long time, although he had employed himself to gain the same.

To say something touching the commodious largenes of the ditch, I judge the
mean to be observed, which in respect of the other two extremes, of great and
narrow, does carry these commodities, which in the other be hurtful and
contrary. First it hydes and couers the sight of the foot of the wall: the
Counterscarpe thereof, does prohibit the flanks or Cannonieres, which defend
the bothome of the ditch, that they cannot be battered. The said ditch is free
and secret, and does greatly favor the soldiers in a Fortress, being
environed with a Camp, for they may enter and issue, without receiving any
damage by the Enemy, during the siege. True it is that it may be the sooner
filled up, but that imperfection may be succored, neither shall the same have
such force in the strait ditch, as in that which is so large and very broad,
in the which the Soldiers being easily discovered, and not having any great
liberty to make residence therein* without danger, they must always stand
upon the guard of their persons. The which will not fall out, if they be within
a more strait ditch, exempt from all fear: for being covered by the bancks
of the ditch, they only have nothing to do, but to apply themselves to make
frustrate the Enemies attempts. The which kind of defense, is one of the best
that can be invented for the besieged, and most endomageable to the assaylants.
For the enemy entering resolutely into the Ditch, and marching forward to
assault, he must have regard to three sides, the one, to the Front, which is
the body of the Fortress, and the two other, to the soldiers which are
within the ditch, and may offend the Enemy by the sides, and specially upon the
banck, if he presume to march far forward, and to pass further on then the
Counterscarpe.

Now to give this Ditch his competent largenes, to the intent it may accomplish
these foresaid good qualities, it ought but to be 100. foot broad at the
most, and in depth if it be plain, but 18. or 20. foot, giving to the wall of
the Counterscarpe such a convenient enclyning, (as for 5. or 6. foot 1.
foot,) to ye intent it may be strong, and repulse the matter wherewith the
Counterscarpe is to be filled. And for ye the Counterscarpe is one of ye most
principal parts of the ditch, I will finally dilate somewhat thereof, thereby to
make manifest the faults of Counterscarps now in use. Until this present day,
this part and member of the Fortress has been made small account of,
although it be one of the principal, and the which is as necessary to be
valiantly defended, as any other part of the Fort, being the first which is
assaulted, and possessed by the Enemy. The negligence and sioth used herein,
falls out as I take it, either in respect of dispising the same, or through
the covetousness of the owners, which either thinking the same not commodious
for defense, or for fear of disbursing overmuch money in making it
substantially, neglect the same. But before I pass any further, I think it
necessary to set down, which are the most defencible and principal parts of
this warlike Architecture.

The whole body of this work, is compounded of diverse members being united
together, for the particular service and defense one of another, even as the
members of a well proportioned man.

Those parts which by the Architectes are named principal, be first the
Flancks, within the which are made certain Cannonlers, which do view and
behold the circute round about the Fortress.

Secondly the sholders which do hide and cover the flanks, and defend them,
from being ruinated and displanted by the Enemy.

Thirdly the Ditch which enuironeth all the Fortress, bringing safety against
sudden Surprises, Camisades, Escalades. etc.

The fourth and last is the Counterscarpe, which serves for a Bulwark and
bancke to cover the Ditch.

These things considered, the Enemy to expugne such a Fortress, does proceed
by degrees, (not daring to bring their Soldiers to the butchery, by a
desperate assault at ye first,) and therefore they seek to invade and occupy
the Counterscarpe, whereupon the Enemy, not having made his approches before
hand, and entr^nched upon the same, can perform nothing to the purpose, for
by lodging far from the Ditch, they are not able to discover and endomage any
of these foresaid defenses, by reason of the impediment which the height of the
Counterscarpe yeeldes, the which before they are able to possess, being duly
made, oftentimes whilst the approches are in making, there does ensue the death
of many valiant and worthy persons, the which are continually stayne by the
succors which the other defenses, that be in the body of the Fortress do
give unto the Counterscarpe.

The manner which at this day is used of the Assaylants, when they possess the
Counterscarpe, to make it serve their turn, is thus.

First they do pearse and break the Counterscarpe, even unto the bottom, and
to the brincke of the water, to the intent that by this way, they may have
means to batter the Forte of the wall about the Fortress, with certain Pieces
which are conveyed through the Trenches, unto that place, the which shall not
be able to suffer any damage by the defenses of the Fortress, in so much, as
the sides of these opening, serve for sholders and couers to those within the
Trenche. This Trench does likewise bring an other comoditie, which is, that the
entry into the Ditch thereby, shall be more easy and less painful for the
soldiers, then from the height of the Counterscarpe. And although this
policy does not serve to any great purpose, by reason it is impossible in any
small time, to make such way in ye Counterscarpe, that comodiously it maybe
capable therein to plant sufficient number of Pieces, to make a convenient
breach, thereby in the end to give assault: nevertheless; it is good to invent
some means to hinder and delay the enemy from lodging there, so speedily as
they are accustomed.

To accomplish the which, it is not the way to make the Counscarpe with the
earth of the Ditch, mixing among the same one bed of Faggots, and an other of
earth and so from rank to rank to raise it up, neither with logs of wood
and great piles of Timber^ these things being matter that in time corrupts,
and wastes away, not being indurable: touching which point, I would wish the
wise Ingeniour to consider^, that the mean to ruinate the Bulwark of a
Fortress, and to pearse a Counterscarpe, is not all one: for the one is cut
down and mined by the many hundredth hands and force of men, and the other
ruinated by the blows of the Cannon, earth being proper to resist the fury of
Artillarie, where it is not able to aid against the handie work of man, as by
experience is daily proved, that a man will make a greater hole and opening
in any mass of earth, in two hours, then a Cannon in four. The cause is,
that a man by his industry does mine the earth, and does displace the
foundation thereof, and so makes it to disseuer and dismember: but the blow of
the Artillarie, does but only pearse it, and makes a hole according to the
bigness of the Bullet, leaving the mass of the earth entyre and whole.

These reasons received, we may conclude, that all soft matter, which does
suffer it self easily to be managed by ye Pyoners, and which does carry a
body able to sustain it self, gyuing by this means leisure and time to the
enemy, to be able to execute his enterprise, (as by the nature of the earth
does appear) such matters I say, be not able to serve for the conservation of
the Counterscarpe.

Being desirous therefore, to exempt and make it free, from the dangers which
the enemy does ordinarily use, by reason he finds it comodious. And being
willing to have it firm and stable, and that the more older it grows, the
more strong it shall wexe, and that when the enemy would pearse the same
having won it, that he shall suffer infinite pains and trauails to entrench.
That the matter raised up for his Trench, in place of defending and saving his
Soldiers, shall become their hurt and destruction, being battered and
dispearsed with those bulletes which come from the Fortress.

It is necessary to compound and fill the same, with hard and solid matter,
the which in tract of time, may incorpora^ and be redused into a hard and
difficile body, scarce able to be dismembered. That the enemy assaying to break
it, it may crumble and fall in to small pieces and powder: the which shall come
to pass, if all these matters following be mixed together: as all broken
pieces of stones, that matter which is found in the ruin of the walls, all
rubbish, sheards of pottes, Tiles, Brick battes, old Mortar, etc. and all the
fragments of stones, as well hard as soft, and so accommodating and filling
the void holes with Mortar and other stuff that is hard, as Flint, Pible
stones, dross of Smithes etc. ioining one within another, by the choice and
difference of the matter, and powdered with gravel, rubbish, dust, etc. and
left to the injury of the watrie heavens a certain time, the matter cannot
continue so entyre, but that the work being eaten into, by the falling
showers of rain, and dissolved with frost and heat will intermixe and so
incorporate together, that it will be impossible to be separated without great
labor. By these observations and the direction of Geometrical proportions,
this new kind of fortefication may be brought to great perfection.

The proportion of the Fortress, which may be divided into 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10.
or more Bulwarks at the Ingeniours discretion.
Form of the Canonieres.


The Diametre of 5. Bulwarks, is 360. fadome, of 6. 439. of 7. 518. of 8. 597.
of 9. 676. of 10. 755. which being enuyroned with three circles one within
another, distant 36. fadome each from other, and that of 5. Bulwarks divided
into 10. equal parts, that of 6. into 12. 7. into 14. 8. into 16. 9. into 18.
10. into 20. the 1. 3. 5. 7. 9. etc. is the angle of the Bulwark, the 2. 4. 6.
8. 10. the corner of the innerward bending of the Curtine, the first circle
allots out the Canonieres and points of the Sholders, the 2. the angles of the
Bulwarks, the 3. the angles or points of the Countergarde, and so proceeding
Geometrically, bring the Bulwarks, sholders, Curtines, dry ditch,
Countergarde, wet Ditch, and Counterscarpe, in like form to this forefa^d
Figure.

THE SIXTH BOOK OF MILITARY DIRECTIONS, ENTREATING OF the office of the high
Treasurer, the Master of the victualles and Purueyour, of the muster Master, of
the warlike Counselors, and of the general Captain or Lieuetenant of an
Army, etc.
And first, Of the office of the high Treasurer.
THE office of the high Treasurer is of great reputation, and has committed to
his charge, the payment of the Collonelles, Captains, and all other Officers.
He ought in the beginning, to receive from the General, the true number both
of horsemen and footmen within the Camp or Army, and by perfect compunction
to make a book, how much is due every month, to every Collonell, Captain, and
other officers, as well for themselves as their bands.

The Treasurer ought to make his proportion of pay well known to ye General,
whereby ye General may accordingly make provision, that money be not wanting to
pay the Soldiers. He ought in like sort to make allowance (when need shall
be) to the Master of the Ordenance, for supplying his store of Municion as he
shall see cause, by reason of consuming the old, or any important service to be
done.

He must confer with the muster Master, to see how the hande^ be furnished,
what Soldiers be slain, when and how many, and how and when supplied:
delivering pay to every Collonell or Captain accordingly, keeping their
warrants or notes of their hands for his discharge.

At the pay day he must confer with the master of the Ordenance, to se
whether he have any bills from the Captains or Col lonels, for any powder or
other Municion received, and to deduct so much in their wages.

Greatly may this Officer be aided by Arithmaticke, without the which it shall
be an extreme toil, to make true compunctio^ of such variety of payments, or
before hand, to preconiecture of all sorts of provision and Municion, what
shall be necessary: but by aid of that art the most difficult doubts that can
therein arise, shall with facility be resolved and dispatched.

This Officer ought also to be a man of great wisdom, and well experienced in
Military affairs: because he is used in Counsel, where he is to speak his
opinion in all exployts of importance, although they concern not directly his
office.

The office of the Master of the victualles and Purueyour.
THe master of the victuals, seems to be an Officer altogether dependant on
the Treasurer, having nothing else to do but to provide and take charge of the
provision in the Camp, and as corn or other victualles shall grow scant, to
make the Treasurer privy, that order may be taken for further supply, either
by money or sending forth the forage Master ^o take it by force. And against
the pay day, he must bring in his book of accounts to the Treasurer, and there
receive allowance acordingly.

The Purueyours ^ath is to be true and just in his office, and not to be flacke
any time, in procuring in his office, good, fit, and wholesome victualles, as
well for those Soldiers in extraordinary, as for those which are in
ordinary service pressed. Not to weary or drive away from the victualling of
the Camp, any victualler, by giving him a more or less su^me then he is
worthy, to procure as many to serve the Camp with good victualles as he can:
both in gyuing them good and fair language, as also now and then to give them
some piece of money, to encourage the said victuallers to take pains with the
like.

And that he shall with diligence faithfully shun all things, that shall any
ways be unprofitable unto the Prince and his Soldiers. And to devise as
far as his wit and judgment will serve him, to profit his Lord and Master,
and his Soldiers, as well for wholesome victualles, beer and wine for their
bodies, as for good sweet and wholesome meat for their horses, as well for such
as serve in the field, as such that travel and work in the wago^, Cart, or
otherwise, which follow for the relief of the Camp: and that of al these
doings, he keep a true and perfect book of accounts and recconings for the
Treasurer, when and as often as it shall please him to call for it, that the
high Marshall, the rest of the Council, and the General, may be privy to it,
to make trial of his dealings.

The office of the Muster Master.
THe Muster master also may be accounted an Officer as it were dependant on the
Treasurer, for that his duty is nothing else, but by often reuiewing of the
bands, to see how every Captains band is furnished, noting the defaults from
time to time, and the supplies: and thereof to make a perfect book, exhibiting
the same at the pay day to the Treasurer, that allowance may be made to the
Colonels and Captains accordingly. When he first takes the view and Muster
of any band, he must not only write down the name of the Soldier and his
weapon, but also of what Country he is, the towns name where he was borne
and his Fathers name, and what years he is of: and finally, shall take
special care to set down, some special mark or cicatric^ upon his face,
together with the color of his hair and beard. To the intent, his Prince be
not charged with paying of dead pays, to such as be hired but for that day, as
many Captains use to fill their Purses with unlawful gaynes.

The office of the Master of the intelligences.
THe Master of the intelligences, must receive his office and oath secretly at
the hands of the General and his Council, so that his office be not known to
any but to the General, and to those of the Counsel. To the intent, he may
have access unto them at all times, under the color of some other office,
thereby to remain unknown to the common sort, and to avoid the discovery and
dischyphering, of such as hunte and search after secrecies, and the rather, to
the intent the enemy knowing the spies, by reason of their recourse unto him,
do not intercept them. It is requisite that he both be a man, wise, serete,
of quick and deep insight, and well languaged, faithful, and aduenturous. A
cunning Colourer of his Princes affairs of importance, and of a singular and
good invention. That he delight in receiving seeret occurrents from all
places. That he diligently direct the privy Spies of the Camp, not
acquainting them together. That he have a stipend for himself, and allowance
to yield reward to all sorts of Spies That he bring them upon urgent
occasion, to the presence of the General. That they generally receive of him,
a countersigne or watchword, thereby to be known assured. That he dispearse
abroad Espyes, as well for his own part, both for the Camp and Garrisons, as
for the enemies Country and Camp, both to know privy practices and foreign
determinations. That he have some secret friends, or stipendarie
intelligences, in all Courts, Countries, Cities, and places of the enemy and
his Collegates, whether they be apparent or privy favorers: from whom he may
daily receive letters, Ciphers, or countersignes, and secret aduertisements
of all occurrents, out of the enemies bosom.

That he have knowledge in all secret sort of wrytings, specially in that part
of Polographia which serves best for his turn, and if it be possible, in
Steganographia, and that part thereof which is lawful for a Christian to use.
Neither let him neglect the secret sorts of writing by ye ioyse of Lemmons,
Orenges, Cream, dissolved Allome. etc. betwixt the lines of a Letter of common
occurrence, and such other receipts for writing, as be set out in Naturalis
Magia, Cardane Allexis, and others.

That he be cunning in sending secret aduertisements, where need does
require, by some of these foresaid kind of Letters, enclosed in the scaberd of
a sword, shoe-sole, fold of a gyrdle, or dogs collar, and so worn, or waiting
upon him, pass with greater security. Some have used to hide Letters in a
loaf, being baken therein, and carried the same for victuals. Some have
enclosed the same in a compounde and arteficiall stone. Some in sweet bals.
Some in the secret parts of their body, and such innumerable like devises,
which are to be chosen out according as they shall seem convenient to the
Intelligencers turn. That he know the art how to talk a far off with
lights, twincklings of Match for the night; and by smokes, fire, flags, of
black, white, red, etc. for the day: with perfect known countersignes, whereby
they may know one another meaning. And when any is secretly to be sent into a
besieged City with directions, that he make provision for the secret choice
and conueiance of such a one.

Finally, that chiefly he be very expert, and ready in the art of
disciphering, that at all times, when any Letters be sent him by his General,
he may discipher them, and satis-fie his Superior therein.

The Office of the warlike Counselors.
THere must twelve warlike Counselors be appointed out by the General of the
Army, being chosen, honest, wise, and grave men, the which said 12. he shall
appoint to be his Judges, and together with the high Marshall, be partners in
determining all Martial discipline and correction. He may make his choice
amongst Captains, or otherwise at his pleasure, so that he be of stayed
judgment and honest sobriety. The which said Counselors or Judges, being so
elected and chosen, shall have their wages accordingly appointed them: who
except in great extremity shall be watch free.

These shall swear and protest, solemnly unto the said General, that they
will serve their Prince by the Month, in that place which they are chosen and
called to: that they will be trusty, faithful, and obedient, and dutiful unto
the General, in all needful and lawful affairs, and at all times uprightly
and indifferently to judge all causes coming before them, and to be obedient
to the commandment of the General, standing with equity and the Laws of
the field. That they will to their uttermost power endenour themselves, to give
counsel and advise to the General, to the welfare and commodity of the
Prince and his subjects, and justly to judge the rich as well as the poor, not
regarding freendshyp, kindred, or any other corrupting cause, which may lead
affection to the hinderaunce of justice: but to their knowledge to minister
equity according to the tenor of the Laws, as they will that GOD help them,
at the last and dreadful day of judgment.

Also that in mustering they do dilligently foresee to their uttermost power,
that the Prince their Master be not deceived, in gyuing double pay to such as
are not worthy: and that they shall also deliver the names of the Soldiers
unto the General as they mustered them, with a note of their allowance and
wages under their hands and seals, faithfully without any deceit.

The Office of the General and Lieuetenant of the Army.
THat man which is careful to carry the name of wise and prudent, when he
enters into the execution of any serious affair, will not so wed himself to
his own will and fancy, as that he will put assured confidence in his own
proper counsel, (which for the most part is fallible, by reason of the
infectious humor of self willie passion, which oftentimes is cause of great
errors, ruins, calamities, and confusions,) but rather will lean to the
assured advise of sound and mature counsel.

Therefore a worthy and excellent Captain General, since the greatness of his
valor does not make him capable of so important a charge, in respect that
neither high titles, neither favors of the Prince, can make a man wise that is
not: it is very requisite, that he like a prudent person, make election of
certain Counselors, of great understanding, and long experience in the
wars, to follow the Camp, and accompany his own person, to whom it is
needful he propound matters of importance, and confer with them such
accidents, as are with remedies to be prevented, or otherwise to be executed,
and gathering and selecting the best portion of many good parts, with his ripe
and advised judgment, he must frame and form, a sound and grounded
resolution: with the which he must execute all his enterprises, expediently and
courageously.

For there was never man of so great prudence, and of such singular experience,
that he was able to discide and discypher all things of himself: but it has
been often seen, that by the help of others, many things have been
performed, wherein of himself alone, he has not had full experience. It is most
necessary for him, to be able to determine and take resolution of any thing in
himself, that thereby he need not to hinder nor disturb the execution of any
enterprise, neither to make so many heads and commanders in an Army, which
would grow to be manifest damage. Neither can wars of importance without
good counsel be perfectly governed: wherein the victorious Emperor Charles
the fifth did prudently proceed in time of war, specially in Germany, where
ordinarily he did serve his turn, with six honorable and principal men of
experience being Italians, with six of the Spanish Nation in like sort, with
six of the Germans, and six of Flaunders and the Low Countries, by whose
advise, and his own sound resoultion, there afterward ensued so notable and
famous a victory.

He must take good order that the Ministers and Priests of his Army do apply
themselves exemplarely to the service of God, not only at all times by the
action of their Office, conformable to the use of the sacred Catholic Church,
and to preach to the consolation of those that be in health, but also to
communicate and give good counsel to those that be sick, and bury those that
be dead.

It seems likewise very convenient for the General, that as he is supreme
head over the rest, that even so accordingly he take care, that the soldiers
honors and Millitary orders be not diffrauded. He therefore must carefully take
the custody of the Soldiers honor, praising and rewarding by extraordinary
means, those that be good, virtuous full of valor, and valiant, and dyscommend
and depresse those that be vicious, wicked, and naughty persons, thereby to
inflame every one to aspire to virtuous actions: since that the hope of
recompense and reward, and the fear of reprehension and punishment, both
draws and drives those that be Soldiers, to work wonderful things.

To the intent the Millitary orders become not diffrauded, let him show
himself curious and careful, to take resolute order, that the Treasurers and
Pagaclores Colatorally, and the Secretaries, publicly at the Bancke, make
their pay just and entirely, to the Officers and those that be of estimation:
as to the Collonell, and the Caualieres of his Squadre, to ye Captains and
they Caualieres, to the Lieuetenants, Alfieres, Sergiants, and Corporalles of
Squadres, etc. Fully so much as is concluded and capitulated to be convenient,
and thought requisite of the Common wealth, ye Prince, or other Potentate or
General. The which capitulations, and conclusions, ought to be set down in
autentike writing and real form, to the intent they may be observed, being
things as necessary to be performed as though they were sacred. Since that
many times, through like wants and defects in the evil observing thereof, many
mighty Nations have been confounded, by loosing their soldiers of greatest
valor, the most manifest and most mightiest occasion of the ruin of Arms.
Considering that men are scarce able to grow perfect and practiced within the
compass of a whole age, or in that time gain a perfect habit in the
profession of Arms, which is a thing of most necessary and great importance,
for the safe sustaining of our Christian Religion, against the Turks tyranny,
and barbarous Moors, which from age to age, spring up like the Hydraes against
ye Militant Catholic Church.

But to come again to our former speech, these pays ought not to be reckoned
and placed amongst the advantages, or Capi soldi, and to give them afterward
privately and in Groppo, into the hands of the Captain, whereby does oftentimes
proceed inconvenience of great importance, which comes to pass by the
covetousness of some insatiable persons, where otherwise they ought to keep the
same carefully, and to disburst liberally: since he received it to keep the
same safely, and to distribute it discreetly, not as his own, but as his
Princes, not given to him, but to his Soldiers. Over whom, a Captain ought
to take no less care, then a father does over his children, or a brother
toward his brother: or to speak more properly, a faithful companion toward
his friend, in respect that he ought to term those that be his followers, and
are guided by him, his companions in Arms.

It is good the General make election of a fat and freendly Country, which so
near as is possible is abundant in all things, large, commodious, and of
sound and open air, for the respect of gathering together and making the
Amasse of the people, and for ye conueiance of provision for the Army. In
which place he must make stay, for the uniting of victual, Munition, and
Artillary, which is before hand ordained and provided, with all other
preparations necessary and expedient for the wars.

Having by his high Marshall, as well as is possible, divided the Quarters and
lodgings, he must attend to receive with joyful cheer the Bands and Companies,
which shall arrive from day to day, as well Horsemen as Footmen. He must never
permit the Captains to depart from the place, where he made the Amasse and
collection of the Companies, with their bands out of order or disseuered,
although they should depart to some place near adjoining, unless he were
forced by some occasion of great necessity and importance: but ought rather,
having placed the Ensigns together, to march in Squadrons, and in good order
and in perfect form, both for the respect of his reputation and their
exercise, and the better to maintain the whole body of his Camp in assurance.

It is convenient for him to make election of an ingenious Master of the
Artillarie: of a Master or Marshall of the Camp, of great experience: of a
Sergiant Mayor general, perfect and ready in that Office of great importance:
of Colonels and other Captains and Officers, of entire minds, and as near
as is possible, such as be exercised in warlike affairs: to the intent they
may be better able to execute their offices with the more efficacy, such as
can perform rather in action, then promise by words. And so consequently, that
the election of other Officers and Soldiers, depending upon their choice, be
of good quality, as by all reason they ought to be, for we must persuade our
selves, that, that number is far less, which truly and exactly knows, the
importaunt and high secrets of the honorable art of Arms, then those that
are reputed mean and common. Therefore wise men affirm, that, that Prince,
does most worthily merit the rule of a Monarchy, that can make a good
election of wise Counselors and warlike Captains.

After this, he must make choice of a sufficient Comessarie General, who
cheefely may have charge, to give careful order, that all the people and
Soldiers may be conducted, to the main Amasse and assembly, with special
politic speed, to the end they may journey without working damage to the
Country where they pass: and that ye soldiers do not fall to the spoil,
through the over great pennury and want of necessary things.

Besides, this great Comessary, obeyed by the particular Purueyours, being of
accord with the Marshall of the Field: must use his endeavor toward the
provision of ordinary victuals, that it may be well conducted, and better kept,
sometimes if it be possible renewing the same, specially in a Country that is
abundant, and distribute the old amongst the soldiers: but for all that, this
must be done, when as it cannot otherwise be spent or kept good, that he may
draw the money disbursed at the Officers and Colonels hands. Amongst these
sufficient store of victuals, provided by this Comessarie and his followers, I
have seen it thought very necessary, to conduct with the Army, flocks and
droues of beasts, great and small, the which is of little hinderance or
impediment, because they are not of burden, and for that by themselves they may
be kept in good disposition: and the rather being aided by the Princes strong
arm of authority.

This Comessary may usually send out safe-gards or sealed Patents, that there
may be respect had unto Towns and other places, abundant in scraw, Corn,
Meal, Beer, Wine, Oil, Cattle, Powder, Flesh, Salt, Wood, Fruit, and such
other necessary things, specially where such places be taken and comen upon at
unawares by the Army.

These commodities and Munitions, he must cause to be kept with good order, to
the intent they may the longer serve, and with one of the Generals Trumpets,
which may accompany the said safegards or patents, or with some small Troops
of soldiers, and nail them upon the gates of the Towns, Cattles, or houses:
these and the presence of the Trumpet, with a small ga^de of men of war, is of
sufficient force to cause the said place to be respected so much as it ought or
as is necessary: the which Office was very well executed in the years 1578.
1579. 1580. under Don John and the Prince of Parma.

The General of the Army, ought to examine often and very narrowly the
principal Officers, that good orders may always with great diligence be
executed, and continually with circumspect care, always keep open the
vigilant eyes of the mind, and those of the body, wary and still waking, as
well in aspecting occasion, as also in accepting and executing the^, with rare
providence and valor. It is very requisite, that he always carry with him a
good and faithful Guide, and to the intent he may not by craft or treachery be
deceived, such Guides ought always to go under a sure guard, given in charge
and recommended to good Captains, to good Officers and tried Soldiers, and
sometimes it shall be good to carry them bound, and specially in a suspected
Country, or that they be of a strange language and unknown to them. For
sometimes, either of perverse purpose, or fainting heart, in sudden assaults
which at unawares arise by means of the Enemy, and by the sudden noise of
Allarmes, they do flee away and save themselves. Sometimes either through the
commodious darkness of the night, or else through the knowledge of the Country,
unknown to those they have guided.

But to satis-fie both Guides and Spies, instruments so necessary and
profitable to the honorable profession of Arms, a man must never appoint or
limit any certain bound to expenses, but rather largely and liberally, pay and
recompense them, without making any spare. For as it is a thing most manifest
and clear, that having such as be good and faithful, the victory remains as
it were certain, so the contrary does easily succeed, when his continual
and wakefull eye has not respect to these substantial aduertisements.

Neither can any Captains execute or command with more assurance or better to
the purpose, then those which are well conducted and led by Guides, and
instructed so near as is possible of all the Enemies determinations, and in
what manner and form he will work by the intelligences of his Espyals. But
he must beware he take careful pains to examine all things himself,
without trusting to the indirect endeavor of any other person. And therefore it
is a most necessary and excellent quality, to understand and speak many
languages by imitating that most famous and victorious Emperor Charles the
fist, since that he himself did understand the speech of every Nation
accustomed to practice with him, and to the most part of them sententicusly and
pithilie could answer: by reason that not only for this respect the
benevolence of diverse Nations and particular persons is gained, which is a
thing that much imports, but also moreover deceit is avoided, which through
the defect and natural vice of diverse malignent Interpreters might ensue:
wherefore it is ever good to be doubtful.

He must of necessity have with him, such persons as be professed in
Soldiers Architecture, for the most part properly called by the name of
Ingeniors, who must have knowledge to cause and cast out the proportion of
Trenches, to make them of sufficient defense, and to frame massiue Bulwarks,
large and real Ditches, Gabions radled round about, to form great Parapets,
and not only to be good inuentors with just proportions, but also more
studious of the plots and forms, and those things that be thereunto
correspondent, and how to accomodate himself to the reasonable situation which
is to be fortefied: and ye in effect they have greater knowledge in warlike
then in domestical Architecture, of which I have in a particular discourse
entreated in my fist Book.

Likewise it is very good, he take delight chiefly in cases of suspect (although
he have lodged his Army, in a place that is of a good and strong situation) to
compass the most weak places thereof, with ditches and Trenches of good
proportion, and reasonable well flancked. That he take care to keep and repair
those places that be strong by nature, with all dilligent and arteficiall
means. For so much as from those places that appear most assured, many great
^uines are received, either through the negligence of the wearied watch, or
through the secret policy and the aspiring minds of the enemy: neither ought
he to omit or flee any toil or travel, for good Soldiers in urgent
necessities by examplare encouragement, do more willingly and readily work,
then the Pyoners themselves, as was very well performed in enuironing the
Camp, against the Lanzgraue, and the rest of the Lutheran sect, in that
trouble some time of Charles the fifth, Emperor, and as succeeded specially in
Inglistate, one of the francke towns, where upon the sudden was made a
wonderful work of Trenches, of sufficient force to resist the incredible
fury of the enemies mighty Army, who had the advantage both in horsemen,
footmen, and Artillarie, with the which three days continually, they did
batter, assault, and made wonderful slaughter amongst the Imperial Squadrons,
placed with great disadvantage in a discovered and open ground, by reason of
the low situation, determining to force the Imperial Army to dislodge: the
better after, either to conquer, or drive them the Country. The which through
this great work of Trenches, and together with many Carres planted upon the
one side, and upon the other the great River Danubie, and in front with
certain Pondes and Ditches of water, and upon the back, the town of
Inglistate, it was altogether compassed and environed of sufficient force. But
touching these respects, look in my fourth book, where I have particularly
touched this matter.

Moreover, it is necessary that the Captain General, do sometimes ride by
night about the Camp, and admonish the watch that they remain ready and
vigilant, since that in the eyes and ears of so few, the health and sauegarde
of all the Camp does consist. As little as may be, he must suffer alarums to
be given to his people, either by day or by night, or at any time whatsoever:
but if thereunto he be constrained, let him make it secretly, and without
striking up the Drums, or sounding Trompets, but rather use Drum sticks and
Surdines. Or otherwise in respect and place of those Instruments, which in such
cases are accustomed to be sounded. It is very convenient he send some persons
of authority, of purpose thereunto appointed, to pass round about and through
the Camp, to advertise and appoint speedily, such things as are to be
performed, having before hand, had perfect discovery of the enemy, and given
resolute commission to make the alarm. Which quiet kind of proceeding, shall
afterward cause less traueyle, and much more reputation to his people and to
himself: and to his enemy great confusion and disconragement, perceiving that
by their pollitike and valiant proceeding, they do smally esteem or fear
them. Which at sundry alarums in the Camp, surprises of Towns, Camisadoes,
etc. I have in the low Countries, under Don John, seen pollitikely put in
practice.

He ought when any alarm shall chance to be given, to take order with the
high Marshall, with as great diligence as he ^anne, to double the Corpse de
guard and watch: which ought before hand to be placed with great Judgment, in
places that be strong by nature, or otherwise fortefied by art. Besides, he
must carry a special care, and use a singular diligence, not to give occasion
of Mutinies, the which are accustomed for the most part, to bring forth
extreme ruin: chiefly when they be of naughty nature, although the
dignity, authority, and power of the Captain General be very great, for
there is almost never any remedy used against such vprores, without great loss
of reputation and authority, so great is the terrible fury of this frantic
encounter.

He never ought to suffer his Collonelles, neither his Captains, to have any
dead pays, or supply their rooms by others, that pass under their names in
Muster: for in time of important need, many times the Captain General, shall
find his Forces very much weakened, contrary to his expectation. A thing
very dangerous for the total ruin of the whole Army. Together with this
advertisement, he ought to be always courteous and liberal toward those
that do follow him, to the intent his Chieftaine may courteously entertayne
those that be good Soldiers. A thing worthy to be noted.

He must search by all means possible, to keep his Army continually,
couragions and with aspiring minds, by arteficiall functions, to the enemies
confusion. Sometimes dispearsing a rumor, that he has intercepted and taken,
certain aduertisements of importance. Sometimes to ^aigne, that he has the
commodity to aid himself, with the succors of many Princes and common
Princes, although there be no such matter. To make joyful Triumphs and shows
with Artillarie, arteficial fyres and bondfyres, in the euenings, and sometimes
making show that he has a desire to assault and invade the enemy by night, by
Camisado, they being unprovided: as did Charles the fifth against the
Lantzgraue, upon the arrival of Count de Bure with succors out of
Flaunders: or as did Julian Romero, under the Duke of Alua, when the Prince of
Orange was repulsed from before Mountes in he nault.

Besides this, he may use like functions, arts, or Stratagemes, to advance
his warlike affairs: for, it is a virtue to use deceit in Military actions,
thereby to further the proceedings of justice, against manifest enemies, when
it is lawful to assault, either with craft or force, either openly or
covertly, for that which does succeed, whether it fall out by deceit or
valor, is comendable in warlike actions. As did Don John, in suprising the
Castle of Namures, a thing which fell out to be the safty of himself and the
whole Country, and the cause whereby he had means to revenge himself of his
enemies, at such times as we gave the^ that famous overthrow, betwixt Namures
and Gibloe.

Let the General have great care to such chances and accidents, as have need
of present remedy, repayring them with careful providence, by reason that the
most occasions which fall out in wars, can suffer no delays: for whilst some
have been in consulting, and deferring the matter but a little moment of time,
they have at that instant received loss not able to be recovered, and therefore
to proceed with a wise and speedy policy, is of infinite advantage, yea and
altogether necessary. He must always have in memory, ye not by reason he is
Superior, in number and multitude of soldiers, he may make assured account of
victory: but rather through the good order he does observe, in disposing and
framing a ready obedience, and the exercise of a true and approved practice in
warlike actions, is the only means to perform the same, and does cause the
difference thoroughly to be discerned, betwixt one Captain General and an
other. For the art of Military profession does nourish in the breasts of men
which follow this exercise, a valiant and aspiring mind to fight. Therefore as
from thence safty and victory does proceed: so contrariwise, by not possessing
the same, loss and total ruin does follow: Since that practice, does make a
man abound with exquisite qualities, whereby courage is kindled in our hearts:
and contrariwise quenched in him that is a Nouice and fresh water soldier, in
the exercise of these causes, which in every respect is grounded upon long
experience, conference and reading, and not by proud and presumptuous rashness.

He must likewise remember, that many times in new begun wars, specially
against strange nations, a new form of fight is requisite. The election of
new arms is necessary, the varying of order, and the study of a new art.
Likewise it is good to Camp and discampe often, when it may be done without
manifest peril, and without suspicion or danger of the enemy: for thereby the
infection of the air is avoided, and soldiers keept exercised, who by lying
still become flouthfull and negligent. Moreover, the Marshal of the field
having at every lodging, either planted or entrenched the Camp: it is most
necessary for the General, being accompanied with some Caualieres of his own
Court and guarde, having before him his general Trumpet, and his Guidon or
Cornet displayde (without which he ought never to go abroad) to ride up and
down to visit the quarters, places of arms, Munitions, and Trenches. And to
the intent he may keep the Soldiers in their Lodgings, and in their proper
quarters, when it is expedient that they should not wander about the army, for
some good and special purpose. Let him cause some small stamp or countersigne
to be given or dis^rsed to ye Captains, to the end, that they gyuing them to
the Officers or soldiers, they may accomplish all their necessary business,
without being hindered or stayed of the provost: who must carry a vigilant
respect, touching this charg, so that those which have not such countersignes
or stampes, and be found forth of their quarter, may be chastised without
remission, according to the proclamation and band, made to that effect.

When the General cannot in time, readily pay his Soldiers, as many times
it falls out through want of money, or by reason of some other accident, it is
needful for him to make provision, that the Country where he remaynes may
bear them: or else let him carry them into a barraine place, smally inhabited,
to the intent, that not being able to live but with great spare, through the
want of many delicate things, they may be more patient in attending their
pay.

He must permit, that the baggage of all sort of people, the victuals, the
Munitions, with the other impediments, and finally all the disarmed, may have a
several Captain, Chief, and Ensign, every one apart, if their number will
bear the same, for that they must march united together, and in order, as shall
be most expedient and convenient, to the intent they do not cause great
disturbance and confusion, through their s^oe or ouer-hasty going, which is an
ordinary thing amongst them, being unruly people.

Let the General, as before I said, carry a special care to the choice of
his principal Officers, and that in the election, he have more respect to the
valor and virtue of the person, then to any particular favor, otherwise he
may in time be brought to repent his choice, and hardly redress his
calamities* Therefore let him often and unlooked for, resort unto the Captains
and Colonels Tents, to see what towardly readiness they are or may be in of a
sudden, and that he cause the Captains make often like resort unto the
soldiers and under Officers, to see if they be in the like orderly readiness
for any sudden service: and by degrees discending from one to another, to
make special proof of every man's sufficiency. For ye better performance
whereof, he must receive into his hands, the order of all Offices in writing,
together with all the names of the soldiers in the Band, whereby he may
likewise see whether he have his just number. And consequently examine every
Officer, whether they have a sufficient proportion of Armor, weapon, shot,
powder, artillary, fireworks, boats to make bridges to pass Rivers, spades,
mattocks, and every other particularity, before the Army march.

The General having received his whole Army entirely, he must assemble his
Counsel, and to ordain stai^ts and laws for the government of his
soldiers, first communicating the same with his Colonels and Captains,
causing them also to impart them to their Bands, suffering every man franckly
with due reverence to speak, object, and by writing (if they list) to offer
unto the Counsel what they can against any of them, which objections
considered, they shall resolve upon such like Laws and Penalties as I have
adjoined to the duty of a soldier in my first Book, beginning always with
Laws for the fear of God, and the Christian faith, and so follow on for the
Prince, Country, and Camp. And then cause every Colonel and Captain to take
his oath, and they likewise to cause every soldier at his Ensign to take his
oath, to observe, and as much as in them shall lie, to cause to be observed
every of those laws and Edicts so agreed upon.

He must not only cause the foresaid laws to be written or imprinted in
several Books, given to the Colonels, Captains, other Officers and
Corporals thereby to instruct every private soldier perfectly in the^, but
also to provide, that the Provost General do prosecute ye offenders and
breakers of these Edicts, who with his followers must be specially respected,
as before is set down.

The General is by good, special and perfect plots, Maps, and Models, to know
the situation, nature, and property of the Country, and his parts where he is
to pass with his Army, whether it be plain and champion, or woody and full of
waters, furnished with strong Towns, or no: and to proportion the Horsemen and
Footmen of his Army accordingly. For if it be most part champion and full of
forage, it is meet to have the more Horsemen: if it stand upon straits and
fortefyed places, he is to have the more Footmen.

Light Horsemen are in all places for discovery, fetching in of booties, and
pursuing of victory, very serviceable, and not to be spared.

The General ought also to learn by good espial how his enemy is appointed:
for against the French, who abound with shot, and have few pikes, the Lance
and Light-horsmans staff of the North is singular good, especially in the
plain: but against the Switzers and Lance Knights, the Lance avails little,
but ye Argoleteares and Pistoleteares shall much more anoy them. It shall be
likewise very commodious to have some cariages allowed in pay, to attend on
every Band of footmen, as well as on horsemen, who besides the carriage of
necessaries for use, may also in time of Skirmish, and other encounters, serve
to carry hurt men out of the field. They be very good to empale the Army,
specially if the cartages and horses be arteficially flancked and shadowed
with boordes filled with quires of paper.

Whilst fair wether is, the General must acquaint his Soldiers to sleep on
bare ground, and though the Enemy be far absent, yet duly to maintain their
Scoutes to watch and ward, and perform all Millitary orders, as curiously as
if the Enemy were present, so shall it not seem grievous when necessity
requires it.

If he have many horse, he must see that the Marshall of the field plant his
Camp, where good store of forage is near, otherwise, in forraging far off,
he may greatly hazard his companies, if good Conuoyes be not sent with his
Forragers, and their iourneyes discreetly directed. Good regard must also be
had, that the Camp be not subject to any hill, from whence the enemy may beat
with great Artillary, nor so disioyned from water, as the enemy may easily cut
you from it, neither yet so low, as the Enemy cutting the bancks of any River,
may drown the Camp. If there be no great Rivers, but only small Fountains or
Wels to water your Army, then must good watch be kept, that they be not by the
enemy poisoned and infected.

The General should not so much seek to place his Camp in seats strong by
nature, as to fortify them by art, as well to keep his Soldiers from idleness,
(the only ruin of Armies) as also that due order in Camps may be maintained:
let him therefore imitate the ancient Romans, the very Masters of the art of
war, who never coueted other then y^ plain to camp upon: entrenching
themselves nightly in as strong and sure manner, as if the enemy had encamped
by them, and that even in places utterly void of all suspicion, to make these
millitary trauails familiar unto them, and to avoid those idle, or rather
dissolute effrenate pastimes, that our Christian Camps are bewitched withal,
to the utter ruin of all good Millitary discipline, and confusion of our
Armies.

In a running Camp, the readiest fortification is, to impale it round with the
cariages chayned together, the sides of the carriages and horses shaded with
thin boords, with certain quires of paper betwixt, cunningly compacted
together, which being accommodated to make sides, bottoms, and doors to the
Carts and carriages, will serve wonderfully to empale an Army, to make
approches, or to hold out Caliuer and Musket shot. Then let them bend the
Artillary that way where most suspicion is the enemy shall approach, and if
time will permit, to cast some Trench also without the carriages against
Artillarie. He must keep his soldiers in continual millitary exercise: and
by fained allarmes, to see in what readiness his bands would be if necessity
required, to show them all manner of ways how ye enemy may attempt them,
discovering also to the^ the remedy, and how they are to answer to those
attempts: for no man is borne a Soldier, but by exercise and trayning it is
attained, and by discontinuance again it is lost, as all other Arts and
Sciences be.

In settling of a Camp, beside the commodities of wood, water, and forage, the
General must also consider how victuals may safely come unto him, and to leave
no Castles at his back to anoy them, but that he seek to possess them ere he
march forward, for great is the anoyance that a little pyle at the back of an
Army may do, as well against forragers and straglers, as to cut off victuals
from the Camp.

The General is also by good plots to consider, the situation of the Country,
how both friend and enemy Towns lie from the Camp, the hyls and valleys,
ways, straits, passages, lakes, rivers and bridges, their number, quantity,
distance, and every particularity, which may be done by conference with his
Discouerers-Guides, Espyals, and other persons that know ye Country, conferring
their assertions with his plots. And so to consider whether ye enemy may
conveniently cut off his victuals, or by Ambush anoy him in his march, and for
prevention thereof, to send abroad Light-horsemen and Hargabuzers to guard the
passages toward the enemies Garrisons. Before the Army discampe, all passages
and ways for the soldiers and Artillary. etc. to pass; should be
discovered, and skilful men appointed to lead them.

He ought not to suffer any band to march scattered, but in battails order, or
at least in straits and narrow passages enforce to draw them forth in Herses,
and so soon as place serves, to reduce them again into the order of battle:
and this is to be used in places of security for exercise, as in places of
suspect for safety. He ought to have with him good Guides, that perfecty know
all passages, hills, valleys, etc. for of the Country in generallitie, the
General himself ought perfectly to be informed by Plots and Models, whereby he
shall the better conceive any information that shall be brought him by espiall.
If the General have sundry Nations under his government, it is not meet to
give always to any one Nation the Uaward, considering the same, being in
marching toward the enemy the place of greatest honor, the others will much
repine against it, and not without good cause. The order therefore in marching,
should so be framed, that every Nation have his turn, without partial favor to
any one. And if the number be great of any one Mercinary Nation, it is not
amiss to divide the^, both in marching and imbattelling, for sundry respects,
which in this place I omit to show. If any strait be kept by the enemy, it is
not meet first to charge them upon the very front, but to send Light-horsmen
and shot to skyrmish with them on either flancke, and then with Targets of
proof to enter upon them.

The General should before he bring his Soldiers to deal with the enemy,
first in some champion place, cause them to be ranged in form of battle,
making of his footmen sundry Battillions, and of these Battillions, sundry
Fronts, to divide his Horsemen also into sundry Troops, placing the men at
Arms, Demilances, Light horsemen, and Argoleteares every Fort in several
Troops by themselves, to cause the forlorn to issue out, and skirmish the^
before the Battillions, as if the enemy were indeed present, and upon a sign
given, suddenly to retire. The horsemen to charge and return again to their
place, upon their retire, to cause certain sleues of pykes and light Armed, to
run out to their reskew, as though the enemy did pursue them. Then the
Battillions of the first front to march forward, and bend their pikes, and
suddenly after the sound of the retrait, to retire themselves orderly, between
the Battillions of the second front: then ye second front to march forward, and
bend their pikes, and ye other that first retired, to make head again upon the
enemy. Last of all, the Light-horsmen and light Armed footmen again to break
forth, as it were to do execution upon the enemy fleeing, which form of
trayning, does answer Ma. Digs his proportion of imbattelling. These things,
if in pastime the soldiers be able orderly to perform, there is good hope
they will honorably put it in execution upon the enemy. Otherwise, to bring them
without trayning to deal with the enemy, is nothing else but to lead them to
the butcherie.

As there is nothing more perrillous in giving of battle, then to lay before
ye soldiers eyes any place of refuge to flee unto, but that the General
should declare unto them, that there is no hope to escape but only by victory,
and heerin to imitate Hanniball: so there is nothing more dangerous, then to
give ye enemy battle in such a place, where in troth he has no refuge or
possibility to escape, for that necessity makes men desperate, it unites them
together, and it has often been seen, that very small companies, by such like
occasions, being reduced to desperation, thereupon resolving to sell their
lives dearly, have contrary to all expectation attained victory upon their
enemies, in number far greater.

The General must have special care, that the soldiers have not in their
faces, the dust to blind them, the wind to disturb them, or the sun beams to
anoy them, before they enter into any maine encounter: the which impediments,
not only altogether, but each one by him self alone, does bring great toil,
trouble, and disadvantage* Neither let him lead his soldiers to perform any
enterprise of importance, if before hand he have not had great and manifest
experience of them. Note that it is much better to overcome the enemy, by
weariing him with delays, then by furious fight put himself to ye hazard of
doubtful fortune, which oftentimes has in battle greater puissance then
valor or virtue it self, therefore always proceed in these uncertain ends of
Arms, rather assuredly then perrillously. The order which the enemies hold,
ought first of all ever to be discovered.

The General being a man of judgment, does attend and take respect with
prudence and with carefulnes, both to his affairs, and to the enemies, and
does that is good, or that which is pernicious in the one and in the other, and
does prevent his traps and deceits, neither suffers any thing negligently about
himself, nor assured about them. In wars, for the most part, the victory
comes by nothing else, but the evil counsel and base mind of his adversary,
therefore very hardly can he be overcome, that can measure and know, both his
own, and his enemies forces and order.

When a Prince or his General, has fortefyed himself with Confederates, with
good and experienced Captains with valiant Soldiers, with Municion and
weapons, with money and strong places: it follows that he endeavors himself
to weaken the force, interrupt and break in sunder the adversaries
determinations, the which thing may be performed speedily or late, according as
occasion shall offer it self, which is the fountain and original of all
gracious acts.

To conclude, the General, the high Officers of the Army, Colonels, Captains,
and Soldiers, must daily serve God, for Religion causes good orders, good
orders brings good fortune, good fortune makes good success to arise in all
enterprises. The Army well paid, discipline must be used without respect of
persons. Justice to do every man right, makes the General of great majesty
and reputation, beloved and feared, because he does and is able to advance
the virtuous, and correct the wicked. For money is the flesh and sinews of the
wars, and ordained for the same. That war is just, which a Prince
commands, for to recover that is lost, or to defend injuries and wrongs
offered to him by others.

FINIS.
FOR that there has somewhat been said touching Towns of war and
fortifications, Soldiers of judgment does know, that a place besieged by the
power of a mighty Prince, cannot long endure, without there be within the same,
a sufficient number of men, Munition, and victuals: when any of these three
things lack, the enemy will soon have the place besieged. Therefore the said
Captain Hychcocke, who has been the cause of printing this Book of war,
do think it good, to join to the same work, this short discourse, which
declares what proportion of victuals, will serve one thousand Soldiers in a
Garrison, where the victuals must be provided by her Majesty's Victualer. As
for example, we will make our proportion for Barwicke, wherein I will show how
the chief Victualer and the petty Victualers gains and profits shall rise,
that men may look therein, whereby all doubts and questions that may grow for
that service shall be avoided, and the Garrison at all times well furnished
with things necessary and needful, for victualing of one thousand Soldiers,
and after that proportion, as the number shall fall out, more or less. Within
this general proportion hereafter, I do declare first for Bread and Beer,
the Bakehouse and Brewhouse, the Grayners for store, the Windmilles, the
Horsemylles, with their implements: the caske and other necessary things, the
charges of men, horses, and carryages to the same belonging, with their wages
and allowance for their travail and service. How this proportion is to be
provided, used, delivered and spent, in reading over this little work
following, you shall find very short and plain. Robert Hichcock.

A general proportion and order of provision, for a year of three hundred,
threescore and five days, to victual a Garrison of one thousand Soldiers.
The order for the Bakehouse.
THe Soldiers having one pound and a half of good wheaten bread for one
penny, or one pound and a half of good white bread for j. d'. ob. the Bakers
to answer for every quarter of wheat, being sweet, good, and marchantable,
delivered at Barwicke, xx. s^. Clear of all charges and was^e, which happens
afterward by keeping the grayners or any other, except casualtie of the Enemy
after the delivery thereof.

Necessaries and implements, wood, wages of Clerks, Bakers, Myllers, Carters,
Laborers or any other, for the Bakehouses, Windmils, Grayners, or carriage of
provision, and for horse and Carts for the same are to be found by this rate
and size of bread, without any other allowance to be demanded, saving for wast
and charges of as much wheat, as the use of baking shall be otherwise
employed, then to be delivered in bread by the^ who were charged with the
receite from the ships, and keeping the grayners of the same.

The Bakehouses, Windmils, and Graynars, being furnished with implements and
necessaries at the entrance into service, and in good order of repracion, are
so to be maintained and kept, in and by all things, except casualtie of the
Enemy. And are to be delivered at the departure from service, in as good order
and furniture of all things as they were first received.

And considering the charge to maintain the Bakehouse, with the appurtenaunces
and allowance to the petty victualers of the Garrison, after xxj. loves of
bread for xx. A quarter of good wheat will make in good bread, by order of this
Book xxv. s^. so have ye of every quarter for charges v. s^. and after four
quarters ye day, for the whole year iij. C. lxv. l. That is to say, for wood
to bake a quarter of meal in loaf bread, xvj. d'. and after four quarters
the day, for a year, sum lxxx. xvij. l. vj. s^. viij. d'. and for this
repracion of the Bakehouse and the appurtenances yearly. l. l.

Wages and victual of two Clerks, two Myllers, four Bakers, and four
Laborers yearly, one hundred and fifty pound.

Maintenance of horse for carriage in this charge yearly, lxij. l. xiij. s^.
iiij. d'. All these allowances are found in the size of bread beside the branne.

The whole Garrison being as before one thousand Soldiers, will spend four
quarters of wheat a day, and for ye whole year xiiij. C. lxiiij. quarters.
Although by order this number will serve, yet the provision to be at the least
in Wheat for bread, xx. C. quarters for the provision.

I account good wheat may be bought with ready money by former bargains for
seven years together, for xiij. s^. iiij. d'. the quarter, in Yorkshire,
Notinghamshire, and Lincolnshire. I account the charges of a quarter, from the
place it was bought, to Barwick, at iij. s^. iiij. d'. that is to say, where
they send it down in Keeles, to give for keeling of a quarter iiij. d'. for
freight of a quarter to Barwicke, xvj. d'. and for the Purueyors charges for
matts, or any other, of a quarter, xx. d'. And in other meet place where the
freight is greater, the other charges are the less, so as it may be done for
the price.

I have made no mention of waste, which is to be borne by the over measure,
being bought for ready money by former bargains, except shipwreck and
casualtie of the Enemy. So I account wheat to be delivered at Barwicke,
clear of all charges and freight, at xvj. s^. viij. d'. the quarter, one time
with another, as before.

And where the Baker allows to deliver in Bread for every quarter of good
wheat, xx. s^. clear of all charges and wast after the delivery there of at
Barwicke, by this order of provision, the freight, wast, and all other charges
allowed, except casualtie of the Enemy and shypwracke, there remains profit
in every quarter, iij. s. iiij. d'. Sum ij. C. xliij. l. vj. s. viij. d'.

These may suffice for the order of the Bakehouse, for Bread, and provision of
corn for the same: saving there is to be considered, to have in store at all
times, in wood ij. C. load, every three Months to be renewed: to every Mill,
a pair of spare stones, and timber for repration. All implements and
necessaries to be double furnished for the said charge, and for the horse and
carts of the same.

Certain notes for wheate-meale and bread.
A bushel of good wheat meal, as it comes from the Myll, and weying lvj.
l. will make in household bread lxxij. l. so that it will take in liquour,
beside that is dried in baking, being weyed within xxiiij. hours after the
baking, xvj. l. that is, for vij. l. of meal, ix. l. of bread.

Take vij. l. of bran out of a bushel of good meal, weying lvj. l. and the
xlix. l. remaining, will make in good wheaten bread, lxiij. l. and that paste,
will make in ordinary biscuit, being converted to that use, xlij. l. and taking
three pound and a half more of bran from the said meal, the forty five
pound and a half remaining, will make in white bread, xlij. l. or in white
biskette, twenty eight pound.

A bushel of wheat weying but fifty two pound to the Myll, if you will make
it equal with good meal, take out of the same ten pound of bran, and the
forty two pound remaining will make in wheat n bread, fifty four pound, or
in ordinary biscuit thirty six pound, that is, of a quarter of such wheat,
two hundred and two quarters, viij. l. taken out of the same for grinding, and
it will make but two hundred, one quarter ordinary biskette, except ye take out
less branne, and make courser bread then the ordinary use of the same. The
lighter wheat, the courser, and more bran, and there is worse wheat then is
here mentioned. The heavier wheat, the finer meal, and less branne, and
there is better also then is here declared.

Some wheat will wey more then weight in a quarter fourteen pound, and some
twenty eight pound. So of light wheat the Baker makes course bread, and to
small profit: and of good weighty wheat fair bread, to the Bakers honesty and
profit.

Because diversity of measures should be avoided, there is considered for wast
in provision, the ouermeasure: and for waste in the Graynars, the Mylles to be
parcel of the Bakehouse, so that the Baker to answer that wast as before.
Thus much is declared for wheat, and the Bakers in their charge.

The order for the Brewhouse.
THE Brewer delivering double beer at thirty shyllings the Tun, the
Soldier to have a wine quarte for a half penie, and delivering strong beer
at forty eight shillings the tun, the Soldier to have a wine quart for ob.
q. And the Brewers to allow the Officers for every quarter of Malt xiij. s^.
iiij. d'. and for every quarter of wheat, xx. shyllings, clear of all
charges, and waste in the garners after the delivery of the same at Barwicke,
from aboorde the shyps there, except casualty of the Enemy.

Necessaries and implements, wood and coal, wages of Clarks, Brewers, Myllers,
Coopers, Carters, and Laborers for the Brewhouse, the appurtenaunces and
carriage of provision, with horse and carts for the same, Hoppes, and
Beerecorne, caske, and hoopes, or any other necessaries are to be found by
this rate and price of Beer, without any other allowance, saving waste and
charges, of as much Maulte, wheat, Beerecorne or caske, as shall be otherwise
employed then with beer, to be delivered by those which were charged with the
receite and carryage from the shyps, and keeping the garners of the same.

The Brew houses, horse myls, Garners, and store houses for this charge, being
furnished with implements and necessaries, and in good order of repration at
the entrance into service, are so to be maintained and kept, in and by all
things, except casualtie of the Enemy. And to be delivered at the departure
from service, in as good order and furniture of all things, as they were
received, without any other allowance then for carryage of Beer to the petty
Uictuallers, as has been, and is at Barwicke accustomed.

If there should be demanded any greater price for Maulte, then must the Beer
be smaller, and the water the Brewers freende for gain to maintain this
charge.

And for that I have considered, the great charges of the appurtenances before
declared, I have rated both kinds of Beer by the Tun in proporcion, and
how allowance is found for the maintenance of the same.

Double Beer in proporcion by the Tun.
TO every Tun in Malt, x. Bushelles and a half allowance, for waste in the
Garners, at xiij shillings iiij. pence the quarter. xvij s^. vj d'. In Wheat
one Bushel, ij s^. vj d'. In Dates half a Bushel, v d'. In Hoppes vij pound,
at xx s^. for a hundredth. xv d'. Wood and Coals, to every Tun xx d'
Repration of the Houses, implements, necessaries, and waste of Caske, ij s^. ij
d'. Mayntenaunce of men for the said charge, allowed of every Tun. iij s^.
iiij d. Maintenance of horse to the Mylles, and Carts for carriage of
provision, xiiij d'. So have ye the Tun of double Beer at xxx s.
Strong Beer in proportion by the Tun.
To every Tun in Malt, two quarters and three peckes allowance for waste in
the Garners xxviij s. In Wheat two Bushels, v s. In Oats one Bushel, x d'. In
Hoppes viij po^nd and a half, xviij d'. Wood and Coal to every Tun. ij s.
vj. Reprations of the Houses, implements, necessaries, and waste of Caske, iij
s. iiij d'. Mayntenance of men for the said charge, allowed of every Tun, v
s. Mayntenaunce of Horse to the Mylles, and Carts for carriage of provision,
xxij d'.
So ye have the Tun of strong Beer as appears, at xlviij s.

The proportion for 600, common soldiers a year in double Beer, after the
order of this book, 456, Tun in hegsheades.

The proportion for four hundred, greater allowance a year in strong Beer
after the order of this book, three hundred four Tun Barrel, Summa 760.
Tunn in Hogshead Barrel.

By these proportions of Beer* is considered for Wood and coal, three score
sixteen pound ten pence. Repration of the appurtenaunces, and the waste of the
Caske, C l. ij s. iiij d'. ob. For mayntenaunce of ii, Clerks, iiii. Brewers,
one Mylller, ii. Cooperes, and iiii Laborers, one hundred Lii. pound, i. s.
viii d' Mayntenance of Horse to the Mylles, and Carts for carriage of
provision: beside, yeeste and graynes. Liiij. pound, ix s. vij d'. ob. So have
ye for mayntenaunce of the said charge; three hundereth four score two
pound, fourteen shillings six pence, found in the rate and price of Beer.

And more by the petty victuallers, for carriage of Beer at xvj, d' the Tun,
used of custom, L. pound, xiij shillings x, d'.

Summa for maintenance of the Brew-houses, and the appurtenances, as appears,
four hundredth xxxiij l. viij s. iiij d'

And there appears also by the said proportions, wheat, store of Corn and
Hoppes, will serve the same as follows.

In Malt for double Beer, at ten bushelles the Tunnne, six hundereth three
score and ten quarters, two bushelles and a half: allowance for waste, xxviij
quarters and a half. In Malt for strong beer at two quarters the Tun, vi,
hundereth viij. quarters two bushelles and a half: allowance for waste xxx
quarters iij bushels.

Summa in Malt 1237. quarters and a half.

In Wheat to both proportions as appears, 133. quarters and half a bushel.
In Oats, Lxvi, quarters, four bushelles. In Hops, five thousand four
hundredth two quarters, xi. pound, beside the weight of the Hoppe sackes.

And not withstanding, this proportion of Malt, Wheat* and Hoppes, will serve
the like Garrison: yet considering the place, the provision to be yearly in
Malt, two thousand quarters. In Wheat for Beer two hundred fyftie quarters.
In Oats, one hundred and fifty quarters. And in good Hoppes eight thousand
weight.

In Cole as a continual store every three months, to be renewed two hundredth
Chadron.

Spare stones to the Horse myls. Double furniture of necessaries for the Brew
houses, horse myls, and Garnars. Double furniture of necessaries for the horse
and Carts.

To have in store of good Caske, serviceable for beer, beside that is daily
occupied, one hundred Tun.

In good Clapboord, two great hundred.

In Wainescots, two hundred.

In Spruce deals, two hundred.

In seasoned Tunstaues, two hundred.

In hoopes, as a continual store to be renewed, 30. or 40000.

In good iron, four Tun.

Although some of these are of small value, yet are they not to be spared, nor
easily to be had in time of service, and therefore to be considered.

All such provision, with Brewe house, Bake house, and Grayners, I have seen
in the Palace at Barwicke, the fifth year of King Edward the sixth, I then
having the charge of two hundred Pyonars, in the fortification there.

For provision.
I count good Maulte may be bought in Cambridgshire, and such part of Norfolk
where the Maulte is very good, and in Lincolnshyre for seven years together,
by former bargains, for ready money, at six shyllings, and eight pence the
quarter.

As for Wheat for this charge, is to be had in all places, and Oats also.
Course wheat will serve for Beer, so that the best be reserved for bread. And
wheat that has taken heat, in the carriage, not being wette with salt
water, will serve for this charge to be occupied with other that is good.

I rate the charges of provision, freight, waste, and all other, except
casualtie of the Enemy, at iij. s. iiij. d'. the quarter: as before in the
charge of the Bakehouse, so that Malt may be delivered at Barwicke, clear of
all charges one time with another, at ten shillings the quarter.

There appears to be allowed by ye Brewer for every quarter of Malt, xiij.
s. iiij. d'. and for every quarter of Wheat xx s. clear of all charges and
waste, after the delivery thereof from aboorde the shyps at Barwick, except
casualtie of the Enemy, being employed for Beer delivered in service.

And by the order of provision, the freight, waste, and all other charges
cleared, to be profit in every quarter of Malt and wheat employed as before,
except casualtie of the Enemy and shipwreck, iij. s. iiij. d'. Sum ij. C.
xxviij. l. viij. s. iiij. d'.

As I have declared great difference in the goodness of Wheat, so is there in
Malt much more: for the common Malt of Norfolk, is not to be compared to
good Maulte, by four quarters in every xx. quarters. And Malt that is full of
wyeuels, and wood dried Malt, will make unsavory drink, to those that are
used to drink Beer or Ale made with straw dried Malt, yet in time of great
service, both Norfolk Maulte and wood dried Maulte will serve with other good
Maulte, and make good drink also to serve the time.

Thus for causes of service of Bread and Beer, I have sufficiently proved in
these few lines declared, and the charges of the same in all points considered:
adding thereunto a proportion for the rest of the victualing of such a Garrison.

Provision of Beef by proportion.
THat is to say, the whole Garrison by this order, will spend in Beef xij. C.
weight a day, for j. C. days. iij. C. Oxen, containing iiij. C. weight every
Ox. And for the said service there, they may be bought in Yorkshyre,
Darbishire, Lankeshire, the Bishopric of Durham, and delivered at Barwick
alive, clear of all charges, for three pound every Ox, those that are good
fat, and so large, that the carkas do wey every quarter round, fifteen stone,
at viij. l. the stone the one with the other, whereof to be allowed for the
hyde, offall and tallow xv. shillings. And so of all other Oxen after the rate
the fourth part the same did cost alive, either of small or great. Having
license to transport the hydes over sea to be sold to most advantage: and
rating allowance for looking to the Pastures, for killing, dres^ing, and
cutting out of every such Ox, xxiij. d'. and yet remains profit in the Ox
by this order, six shyllings eight pence a piece.

Sum for the whole proportion, ^. C. pound.

Provision of Mutton by proportion
IN Mutton also for fifty days xij. C. weight a day, rating the carkas of a
sheep about xlv. pound the one with the other, that is, thirty sheep a day,
in all xv. C. sheep. Such sheep being ^at and good, are to be bought in
Lincolnshire, Yorkshire, and D^rbishire, and delivered at Barwick alive, for
vj. s. viij. pence a sheep, clear of all charges, whereof to be allowed xx.
^. for the skin, (...) and tallowe. Having license to transport the felles to
be sold as before, to most advantage: and rating allowance for looking to the
pastures, kylling and dressing of every such sheep, ^oure pence, and yet
remains profit in every of the like sheep, sixteen pence. Sum for the whole
proportion. j. C. l.

Provision of Porke by Proportion.
IN Porke also for thirty two days, xv. C. weight a day, the which I rate at
xv. hogs, and in all iiij. C. lxxxiiij. hogs, whereof the two sides of every
hog to wey besides the offal one hundred weight: such hogs are to be bought in
Nottinghamshire, Darbishire, and Yorkshire, and delivered at Barwick alive,
being good, cleene, and fat, for viij. s^. iiij. d'. a hog clear of all
charges, 00.

Whereof to be allowed for the offall of every such hog. xij. d'. And rating
allowance for looking to them, kylling, scalding, and dressing of every hog,
viij. d'. and yet remains profit in every such hog. ij. s^. Sum for the whole
proportion. xlviij l.

Notwithstanding this proportion, yet the store of Oxen to be iiij. C. xx. C.
sheep, and viij. C. hogs, whereof three C. to be made Bacon, as parcel of a
good store. And always to have at Barwick j. C. Oxen, and v. C. sheep, and
the rest in good pas^ure within xxx. or xl. mile, ready to serve at all times:
and the hogs also in convenient place for the same.

Provision of Fish by proportion.
In stockfish for fifty two Wednesdaies, two meals and half service, fifty
two Fridaies, one meal and whole service, iij. C. stockfishes a day, in all
the whole, xxvi. last xij. C. after v. score the hundred to every last. The
same are to be delivered at Barwick, clear of all charges, for xiij. l. vj.
s^. viij. d'. the last. And rating allowance for beating, and keeping the store
of every last, xxx. shillings, and yet remains profit in every last, by order
of this book, as in a proportion for the xx. part of the Garrison hereafter
following may appear, v. l. iij. s^. iiij. d'.

Sum for the whole proportion. j. C. xxxiij. l. iij. s^. iiij. d'.

In shotland lyng, every lyng rated at two stockfishes, for xxvi. Saterdayes,
thirteen days in Lent, and one day in Rogation week, half service forty
days, one C. and fifty a day, which makes after six score to the hundred,
and 4. lynges to the pay, 5000. Lynges, which are to be delivered at Barwick,
clear of all charges for l. s. the C. and rating allowance to the keepers of
the store, of every C. three shillings. four pence, and yet remains profit of
every C. by order of this book, as in the soldiers proportion at large
appears, sixteen shillings, eyghtpence.

Sum for the whole proportion. xli. l. xiii. s. iiii. d'.

In shotland Cod, rated at a stockfish and a half, for xxvi. Saterdaies,
twelve days in Lent, and one day in Rogation week, half service 39. days,
225. fishes a day, which makes after 6 score to the hundred, and 4. pay
fishes, 7. M. 3. C. 15. fishes: which are to be delivered at Barwicke, clear
of all charges for thirty shillings the C. And rating allowance to the keepers
of the store of every C. two shyllings. And yet remains profit in every
hundred, by this order, eight shillings.

Sum for the whole proportion. xxix. l. iiij. s. j. d'. ob.

And where these proportions of fish, by the order of this book allowed to the
Soldiers, will serve: yet the yearly provision with the remain, to be in
stockfish xl. last, vij. M. v. C. Lynges, x. M. Codde.

Provision of Butter and Cheese.
In Butter, for fifty two Wednesdaies, half service, iii. C. l. a day, fifty
two Saterdaies, xxv. days in Lent, and two days in Rogation week, quarter
service, 79. days, 150. pound a day, in all 27000. 300. 50. l. which makes in
Barrels, after 52. l. and a half, to every Firken, 130. barrels. The same may
be bought in Holdernes, in Yorkshire, and in Suffolk once a year, for xl.
s. the barrel: and rating the charges of provision and carriage to the water
side at xx. d'. the barrel, for freight to Barwick, every barrel xx. d'. and
rating allowance to the keepers of the store of every Barrel xx. d'. and yet
remains profit of every barrel twenty five shillings.

Sum for the whole proportion. 162. l. 16. s. 3. d'.

In Cheese for fifty two Saterdaies, twenty five days in Lent, and two days
in Rogation week, quarter service, 300. l. a day, in all 23000. 700. l. and
makes in weyes, considering the allowance of 16. l. to the petty victualers
for the Soldiers, 98. wey, and three quarters: and rating allowance for
waste, one wey in every load, that is for waste, 15. wey, and the odd quarter
to go in allowance of waste with the rest, which I am sure is sufficient: so
that the provision to be by this order, 113. wey of Cheese, with the waste.

The same may be bought in Suffolk once a year, for 20. s. the wey, and
rating the provision and carriage to the water side of a wey, 20. d'. for
freight to Barwicke of a wey, 20. d'. and yet remains profit of this order of
a wey, allowing other 20. d'. to the keepers of the store, nine shillings,
seven pence, farthing.

And in the whole, fifty four pound, five shillings.

Notwithstanding that the said proportion of Butter and Cheese will serve,
according to the order of this book: yet the yeerelie provision to be with the
remain in Butter two hundred Barrels, and in Cheese two hundred Wey.

And to have in store of bay salt upon consideration of service, if it should
so happen to occupy the same, one hundred wey.

By this general proportion of provision, appears to be maintained
sufficient number of men, and also the repracion of ye houses, necessaries, and
all other charges for the said service at Barwicke, without the Queens
highness charge. And also for the provision and charges off eight and other
before it come to Barwicke, and to stop the mouths of those who delight to
find fault in that they understand not. Here follows how the allowance is
found to maintain the same.

That is to say, for repracion of the bake houses, brew houses, wind mils,
horse myls, Garners, with the appurtenaunces, and waste of caske in the said
charge by this proportion, one hundred fifty pound, two shyllings, four pence.

Wood and Coal to bake and brewe the said proportion, one hundred seauenty
four pound, seven shillings, six pence.

For horse and carts for the myls, and carrying of provision with the allowance
by the petty victualers, for carrying of their beer, as is accustomed. one
hundred seauenty two pound, sixteen shyllings, nine pence.

For maintenance of twenty five men, for the bake houses, brew houses, wind
myls, horse mils, Garners, and carrying of provision in the said charge, three
hundred two pound, one shylling, eight pence.

For maintenance of men in the charge of Beef, Mutton, and Porke, sixty nine
pound, sixteen shyllings.

In the charge of stockfish, Ling, and Cod, fifty four pound, twelve
shillings, and eleven pence.

In charge of Butter and Cheese as appears, xx. l. v. s.

Sum ix. C. xliij. l. ix. d'.

All these are found beside the provision and freight, before it come to
Barwick, as by the same may appear.

And the better to maintain ye cheese Officer of trust, the charges before
rehearsed, and other unknown charges, which happens oftentimes in service:
as also that all his said ministers and servant, be not any of the number
allowed for soldiers, there is considered for profit in wheat for bread, as
in the charge of the bake house appears, two hundred forty three pound,
six shyllings, eight pence.

In Malt and wheat for beer, as in the charge of the brewe house appears.
228. l. 8. s. 4. d'.

In Beef, Mutton, and Porke* 248. l.

In stockfish, ling, and Cod, 204. l. 4. s. 1. d'.

In Butter and Cheese, 217. l. 1. s. 3. d'.

Sum xi. C. xli. l. iiij. d'.

All these allowances are found, beside maintenance of the petty victualers,
and their charge, as appears by proportion hereafter following. And for the
sum of viii. M. iii. C. xlii. l. x. s. the Officers fee: and the soldiers
scores paid every six Months, this service is to be done in every point of
the same.

The Garrison being one thousand Soldiers as afforesaid, whereof account six
hundred common Soldiers, and four hundred more of greater pay, or such as
make more account of themselves: and for that the Soldiers shall not be
troubled with dressing of their victualles, neither the Captain in delivering
the proportion, appointed within the Town of Garrison: I do appoint twenty
petty Uictuallers, and to every petty Uictualler, thirty common Soldiers, and
twenty more of bigger pay, whose proportion of victuals for a year, shall
hereafter appear.

The common Soldier shall pay two shillings eight pence by the week, for his
diet, lodging, and washing: the Soldier of bigger pay, at four shillings the
week, for his diet, lodging, and washing, as hereafter follows: wherein it
does also appear, how the petty Uictuallers are considered for their charges
and travel in the same, for a year of 365 days.

The thyrtie common Soldiers, to have every man a day in wheaten bread, one
pound and a half, rated at a penny. And the twenty greater allowance in
white bread, every man a day one pound and a half, rated at three half
pence. And in allowance to the petty Uictuallers, xxj. Loves for twenty. These
L. Soldiers charge, Summa Xcj. pound, v. s. The petty Uictuallers allowance
found in the same, in vantage bread. Sum. four pound, eleauen shillings, three
pence.

The xxx. common Soldiers, to every man a Wine pottle of double Beer a day,
rated at a penny, their proportion for a year, xxij. Tun, iij. Hogsheads, xv.
Gallons, delivered the petty Uictuallers at xxx. s. the Tun. The xx. greater
allowance, every man a Wine pottle of strong Beer a day, rated at j d'. ob.
Their proportion for a year, xv. Tun. j. Barrel, x. gallons, delivered the
petty Uictuallers at xlviij. s. the Tun. These L. Soldiers charge, Sum.
Xci. pound, v. shillings.

The petty Uictuallers, sum xx l. x. s. i. d'. ob.

The 30. common Soldiers, in Beef every man one pound a day, rated at j. d'.
ob. For 100. days, 3000. pound, and the petty Uictuallers allowance of every
hundredth, twelve pound: so is the proportion 3000, weight, at 12. s. 6. d'.
the hundredth, in charge, Summa 18, l. 15. s. The 20, greater allowance, every
man one pound and a half a day, rated as before, with like allowance: to the
petty Uictuallers the proportion is 30. hundred weight, at 12. s. 6. d'. the
hundredth. Summa 18. l. 15. shillinges. The petty Uictuallers allowance in both.
4. l. 4. d'.

The 30, common Soldiers, in Mutton, every man one pound a day, rated at two
pence the pound: for 50* days 1500. weight, and the petty Uictuallers
allowance, of every hundred twelve pound. So is the proporcion 15. hundred
weight, at 16. s. 8, d'. the hundred, in charge, Summa, 12. l. 10, s. The 20.
greater allowance, every man one pound and a half a day, rated as before, with
like allowance to the petty Uictuallers: the proportion is 15. hundredth weight,
at 16. s. 8 d'. the hundred, in charge, Sum 12. l. 10. s. The petty Uictuallers
allowa^ce in both, 53. s. 8. d'.

The 30. common Soldiers in Porke, every man one pound f. quarter a day,
rated at j. d'. ob. For 32. days 12 hundred, and the petty Uictuallers of
every hundred 12. pound. The proportion is 12, hundred weight, at 10. shillings
the hundred. Summa 6. l. The 20. greater allowance, every man one pound 3
quarters and a half a day, rated as before after the rate, with li^e allowance
to the petty Uictuallers. The proportion is 12 hundred weight at 10. shillings
the hundred in charge. Sum 6. pound. The petty Uictuallers allowance, 25
shillings 9, pence.

The 30 common soldiers in Stockfish, to every four men one Stockfish a
day, for 52. wednesdaies, two meals a day, half service, and the like
allowance to every four men one Stockfish for a meal, for 52. frydayes, whole
service, in all 7. Fishes and a half a day, one hundred and four days, 780
Fishes, rated at 4, pence the Fish in charge. Sum 13. l. The 20 greater
allowance, to have for the like days, to every 4 men one stockfish and a half
a day, as well for the half as whole service, every day 7. Fyshes and a half,
780 Fyshes at 4 pence the Fysh in charge. Summa 13, pound

The 30 common Soldiers, to have in shotland Linges, for 26 saterdayes, 13.
days in Lent, and 1. day in Ragation week, in all 40 days: to every 8, men,
one Ling a dayhalfe service, rated at 7. d'. the Ling. Sum. 150 And the
allowance for pay Fish, to the petty Uictuallers, 5 Linges. Sum 4. l. 7. s. 6
d'. The 20. greater allowance, for the like days, to every 8 men ^ne Ling and
a half, rated as before at 7, pence the Linge, 150, and to the petty
Uictualler, 5. Linges, 4. pound, 7. shillings 6 pence. The petty Uictuallers
allowance, five shillings ten pence.

The 30, common Soldiers to have in shotland Codde, for 26 Saterdayes, 12
days in Lent, and one day in Rogation week, to every 8. men one Fysh and a
half a day, half service, at 4, d'. the Fysh: and the petty Uictuallers in
allowance, as before in Lings. The proportion is 219, Fyshes, one quarter and a
half. The petty Uictuallers allowance, 7, Fyshes and a quarter, in charge for
the same. Summa 3. pound, 13, shillings 3. half pence. The 20 greater
allowance for the like days, to every 8, men 2, Fishes one quarter a day, for
half service, with like allowance to the petty Uictuallers, as before at 4
pence the Fysh. The pro portion is 219 Fishes, one quarter and a half. The
petty Uictuallers allowance, 7 Fishes one quarter, in charge for the same, Sum
3. pound, 13. shillinges, j. d'. ob. The petty Uictuallers allowance, 4.
shillings, 10. pence.

The 30 common Soldiers, to have in Butter to every four men one pound a
day, half service, for 52 wednesdayes, two meals a day: and to every 8 men
one pound a day, quarter service, for 52, Saterdaies, 25, days in Lent, and
two days in Rogation week, at 4. pence the pound, 686, pound and a quarter,
and is in charge, Summa 11. pound, 8. shillinges, 9. pence. The 20. greater
allowance, for the like of 52. wednesdayes, half service, to every four men
one pound and a half a day: and to every eight men one pound and a half a
day, for 52. Saterdaies, 25. days in Lent, and two days in Rogation week,
quarter service, at four pence the pound. Summa 686 pound, 1. quarter, and is
in charge. Summa 11 pound, 8 shillings, 9 pence.

The 30 common Soldiers, in Cheese for 52 Saterdaies, 25 days in Lent, and
two days in Rogation week, to every four men one pound a day quarter
service, and allowance to the petty Uictuallers, 16. pound of a Wey, at two
pence the pound. Sum. five hundred, four score, twelve pound and a half.

In charge, summa 4 pound, 13 shillings, 9 pence.

The petty Uictuallers allowance, thirty nine pound and a half.

The 20, greater allowance, for the like Satterdayes, the days in Lent an^
Rogation week, to every four men, one pound and a half a day, quarter
service.

Sum, 592. l. and a half, at 2 d'. the pound.

In charge, sum 4. l. 18. s. 9. d'.

The petty Uictualers allowance, 39. l. and a half. In money for both the
parcels, thirteen shyllings, two pence.

Sum. 417. l. 2. s. 6. d'.

Every petty Uictualers allowance, that men may be well ordered, sum. 119. l.
11. s. 3. d'.

The whole Garrison at twenty petty Uictualers a year, in charge, 8342. l. 10.
s.

The twenty petty Uictualers allowance, beside that in the general proportion
found out of the same. Sum. two thousand, three hundred, 91. l. 6. s. 8. d'.

Some Soldiers there are married, and keep house, whose proporcion of
victuals must be to the^ delivered accordingly, with the like allowance, as to
the Petty Uictualer in every thing.

Captains and Gentlemen with their ordinary Servant, keeping house of
themselves, no proporcion delivered, but with like allowance.

FINIS.
A Colonels charge in twofold wise, the pikes crossed for the defense of horse.


Place this battle at 184 folio, at this mark *

A twofold battle of 2000 men.


Place this battle at 187 folio, at this mark **

These Characters are to used in the place of the other, where this letter H
was placed for B as here you may see.

These Characters
S Signify Shot. or this P Signify Pikes. or this B Signify Halberds. E
Signify Ensigns. Signify Lances. Signify Light horsemen. * Signify
Argoletteares.
The Battle called a Cross, very excellent both for night and day
The Battle in form of a Moon, being of great force for the night.


Place this battle at 189 folio, at this mark ****

The Battle in Figure, showing how every Weapon should be placed to fight


Place this battle at 193 folio, at this mark *****

A way to march, and to conduct forth the army.
The plat for incamping.


Place this battle 168 follio at this mark*******


