A PROCLAMATION GIVEN BY THE DISCREET LORDS AND STATES, against the slanders
laid upon the Evangelical and Reformed Religion, by the ARMINIANS and
SEPARATISTS: Containing all the Points, Accusations, Declarations and
Confessions, taken out of the last Provincial Synod holden at Arnhem, the 15.
day of September last past. 1618.

Together with the several Examinations and Confessions (at Vtrecht and the
Hage) of one Leydenberg, Pentioner of Leyden, and Taurinus; with their sudden
and fearful ends.

Printed according to the Dutch Originals, AT LONDON, By G. E. for T^: TH: and
RICHARD CHAMBERS, and are to be sold at the sign of the black Bear in
Paul's Churchyard. 1618.

The Governor, Chancellor, and Council, in the name of the Lords and Estates
of the Dukedom of Gelderlandt, and County of Zutphen, do give to understand:
THAT whereas, not only out of these Provinces, the Evangelical Reformed
Christian Religion, and the Teachers thereof (through public Writings and
published Books, by the Arminians and Separatists) but also within these
Provinces, (as well amongst the common people, as by written Remonstrations
delivered over to the discreet Lords and States and their Deputies) is brought
in question; about sundry terrible and blasphemous Points of Doctrine: whereby
the Evangelical Doctrine and the Teachers thereof are defamed and made causers
of the oppression of the Truth, disturbation of the Policy of Government,
lamentation and grief of many zealous Souls and Consciences, departing and
seducing of others, and the augmentation of the enemies of the Truth. The
discreet Lords and Estates, out of sundry and manifest Reasons heretofore given
by the Separatists in Church Matters, are moved to command the said Points
deliberately to be examined, and in a respective Class, whether any of the
Teachers might be found guilty therein. Which done, they of the Class, which
were most suspected and guilty therein, have declared, first, in their
Assemblies, and afterward in presence of the Deputies in the Provincial
Synod, for themselves, and in the name of their Committees, that they never
held or acknowledged, nor yet hereafter will hold or acknowledge that the same
Points are the opinions of the Reformed Church. Also, that they know not, that
ever the same was intended in such sense and meaning by any of the Teachers in
the Reformed Church, but much rather, that they had an horror and trembling to
think the same, detesting and renouncing the same in the highest degree.
Whereupon also, those that were any ways affected to the Remonstrants,
commonly called Arminians, and authors of the foresaid objected Points, to be
the old Reformed opinion; have acknowledged and confessed (in the aforesaid
Provincial Synod) that they had penned some of the same through ill report,
some out of a wicked presumption, and some out of vainglory, acquitting and
holding their fellow-Brethren free and guiltless therein, being heartily sorry
that they ever did lay the same to their charge, promising hereafter never to
charge any body with any such like Accusations either publicly or privately.
But much more to do their uttermost endeavor to moderate the same, and to set
them in peace and quietness, who therewith were any ways troubled or
molested, and to help to defend and take away all further slanders and
accusations one of another.

We therefore considering that the aforesaid slanders and calumnies of the
Doctrine and Teachers of the Evangelical Reformed Churches, (as well at home
as abroad) is rumored both far and near, and desiring to exalt and extol
the same, to the maintayning of the Truth have found it fit and convenient to
extract and publish the aforesaid Points and Accusations, Declarations and
Confessions, out of the Acts of the last Provincial Synod: So that every one
having knowledge thereof, may hereafter hold themselves quiet in Conscience,
remain and continue in the truth of the Evangelical Reformed Religion, give
no credit to the slanders and objections of their enemies, and that thereby the
Churches and Commonalty being established in the accustomed unity, Gods glory
may be furthered, and the Subjects may live in peace, tranquillity, and
prosperity under their lawful Magistrates.

Given in the Council of Gelderlandt at Arnhem, the 15. of September, 1618.
Subsigned E. Engelen.

An Extract of the Acts of the Synod of Gelderlandt, held at Arnhem in July,
1618.
THE Acts of the Superiors of the Synod being related, the first separation or
division of these Countries was also declared, and the writings and
Controversies which followed there upon* and how the Ministers about the Town
and Country of Nymegam, in their first Letters and Writings (sent and
delivered unto the Country) had objected ten Points or Positions, like as
follows.

1 Th^^ God from all eternity has reprobated the most part of mankind, and
ineuitably ordained them to damnation, without any respect of their unbelief
and sins, which they might or should commit, or of the sin of Adam: only
according to his delight and pleasure, the which he takes in the revealing of
the glory of his power and might.

2 Or if that God in the aforesaid Reprobation in any wise has regarded the
sin of Adam, or the original sin thereout proceeding, but not any actual
sin or unbelief, whereby the Reprobates could deserve this Reprobation more
then others.

3 That amongst these Reprobates are an infinite number of young Children of
the faithful, which dying in their Infancy without any actual sin, poor
innocent Sucklings are taken away and cast into the fire of Hell; so that it
avails them not to have received the holy Baptism, nor that any man should
pray unto God Almighty for them.

4 That God from all eternity has elected, and inresistably or dayned to
salvation the lesser part of mankind, without respect of their belief, as a
condition necessary to salvation; yea, also without any motion of Christ, as
the meriting cause of salvation, only by mere chance and good luck in some
men, without any respect of qualities: so that Christ is only the executor of
the said Decree: and Belief a fruit of the Election.

5 That God toward the fulfilling of his eternal immutable Decree, has
created the most part of mankind for damnation, and with this intention made
them that they should be damned.

6 That God forces and provoke men to sin, yea, and that he is the cause
of sin.

7 That God has given his Son to be an Advocate for the relapsed humane
generation, whose sacrifice would be sufficient to satisfy for all men's
sins, yet that his intention was not that Christ should dye for all, but
only for a few: and that the Reprobates, whenever the Gospel is preached
unto them, must also believe that Christ dyed for them; and if they did not
believe so, were therefore justly damned.

8 That God sends his holy Word unto many Reprobates, and inuites them to his
communion, not that they should thereby be converted and believe in Christ,
but expressly with such an intention that their hearts should be hardened, and
therefore more grievously punished: And that those Reprobates must acknowledge
the aforesaid vocation and inuitation of the Lord (through his holy Word) a
work of Grace and Mercy, for the which they are obliged to thank the LORD.

9* That the Elect are converted, and Faith and Belief infused into them with
an inresistable strength, in such sort that they cannot choose but be converted
and believe in Christ* like as (on the contrary) it is impossible for the
reprobates to attain true Faith, what means soever they use, although they
did do all the works of the Saints.

10 That he that once believes in Christ, cannot wholly nor finally loose the
same, nor fall from Grace through carelessness, nor through the greatest and
highest deadly sin, as Adultry, Murder and the like* that he being fallen
into most heinous sins, must of necessity be converted before his death, by
virtue of the aforesaid absolute and in euitable Decree.

Maintayning that some Teachers in these Provinces do teach and hold the same,
and do undertake to thrust them in for the opinions of the Reformed Churches.
In consideration whereof the four Classes, Teil, Zuophen, Over, and Neder
veluwen, have solicited, that considering they have declared, and do by these
presents declare, never to have acknowledged the same, nor now to acknowledge
the same to be the opinions and sentences of the Reformed Churches: nor to know
that the said Points were ever maintained by any of the Teachers of the
reformed Churches, in that sense and meaning: but that they were much more
abashed and astonished thereat, detesting and ^^nouncing the same in the highest
degree: That those persons might be specified by their particular names which
ever intended or maintained the same, and did their uttermost to make them
pass for Points of Belief in these Provinces, whereof they in their first and
second writings have so often made mention, leaving them that are not of us to
answer for themselves* In the name of them of South- Holland, Doctor Henricus
Arnoldi has declared, in presence of the aforesaid Classes, to detest and
renounce the same, and if so be they could charge any body therewith* that they
would make means that he should appear in this present place, to the end he
might clear himself before this Assembly, or if he were found guilty,
acknowledge his ^ault*

Also the Commissaries of both the Countries, in the name thereof, and of the
Honorable Lord* have earnestly besought and solicited, that the same might
be published in these Provinces to the end the Lords and Magistrates might
proceed according to Justice and equity* to def^nd these Provinces from such
blasphemies.

That o^^ sentences and opinions are that God Almighty will eternally torment
in the pit of Hell, innumerable young Children: Notwithstanding that they were
of believing parents, and that only because of original sin, so that the
aforesaid Children have no more hope of salvation then the wicked Angels.

That we do hold the opinion of Churches, and not Gods Word the rule of our
Belief: and that we are therein much like to the Papists, as if the holy
Church could not err.

That the Confession and Catechism is Norma secundaria Fidei, a secondary rule
of Faith, as if we said that the holy Scripture becomes to be a rule of our
Beleiefe, when she is expounded according to the sense and meaning contained
in the Confession and Catechism.

Unto these and such like accusations, as also to the ten foresaid Points or
Positions, the Brethren of Nymegam and Bommel, for themselves, and in the name
of their fellow-Brethren of the Arminian opinion in the same quarter; have for
their answer declared: That they had satisfied themselves, and with alacrity
listened to the Declarations of the Brethren of the four Classes, as also to
that which Doctor Henricus Arnoldi had annexed thereunto out of the name of the
contra-Remonstrants or old Reformed in Holland. And do acknowledge that they
did place some of the said Accusations through evil report, some out of a
naughty presumption, and some out of vainglory, and do acquit and discharge
all and every of the assembled Brethren, and are heartily sorry that ever they
accused them therewith, and desired that they would not be so highly offended,
but to pardon them, and to bury it in the fire of love, and place it in
oblivion, and promised hereafter not to charge any man with such accusations,
either publicly or privately: but rather to do their uttermost endeavor to
moderate the same, and to set them in peace and quietness that therewith are
any ways molested, and help to take away all occasion of discord and
dissension one with another.

Also, that if so be in time to come they were found to have committed any
thing here-against, they do willingly submit themselves unto all censures of
National or particular Synodes, and also upon pain of banishment.

All this being witnessed with words, the Assembly was confirmed with shaking
of hands with the President.

Ledenberch his Confession both at Vtrecht and the Hage: Also, the death of
Taurinus, and how the said Ledenberch murdered himself.
FIrst, to break the Union and to ordain another form or kind of
Government, and that through the help and assistance of the Provinces of
Holland, Vtrecht, and Oueryssell.

Secondly, to depose his Princely Excellency.

Thirdly, to make the Religion common.

Fourthly, to maintain and assist one another therein with life and goods.

Fifthly, that they have communicated the same with some of the Council of
France, and thereunto desired advice and counsel.

Further, some seven or eight Months since, that Taurinus had made a Book
called the Waech-Schael or Balance, and that the same was corrected and
amended by Vtenbogaert, and that the Original was delivered into the hands of
some of the States of Vtrecht.

Their Confessions in the Hage.
FIrst, that they would renounce and break the generality and unity of the
State.

Secondly, change and alter the Religion.

Thirdly, to degrade the Prince of* Orange.

Fourthly, to massacre the people of the Towns which were their greatest
enemies, or offered resistance.

Fifthly, if that failed, to take in assistance of some foreign Potentates, as
Spain or Brabant, delivering unto them Vtrecht, Nimwegen, Berghen op Zoom, and
the Briel.

The 23. of September (being Sunday) Taurinus dyed at Bockhouen, a mile from
Heusden, and was buried the Friday after at Scheidam.

The 27. of the foresaid Month, Ledenberch was examined, acknowledging the
abouesaid, and thereafter said to his Son, I have confessed that which will
cost life and goods, and having two days before conveyed a table-knife into
some secret place, commanded to lay his breeches by his Bed: which being done,
he said to his Son, If chance thou hear any noise to night, be still, for I
have not been at stool these two days: and then between one and two of the
clock in the night he rose, and taking a penknife out of his penner, he
thrust it into his belly to the haft not far from his Navel, and feeling
that he was not sped, he took the tableknife, and therewith cut his throat,
and stabd himself with the same knife into his short ribs, and lastly into the
breast: his son awaking, it was alas too late for his poor soul.

FINIS.

